decorative border VIRTVTE DOCTRINA PARIT

DE PACE REGIS ET REGNI. viz. A Treatise declaring which be the great and
general Offenses of the Realm, and the chief impediments of the peace of the
King and the Kingdom, as Menaces, Assaults, Batteries, Treasons, Homicides,
and Felonies, Ryots, Routs, Unlawful assemblies, Forcible entries, Forgeries,
Periuries, Maintenance, Deceit, Extortion, Oppression: And how many and what
sorts of them there be, and by whom, and what means the said Offenses, and the
Offenders therein are to be restrained, repressed, or punished.

Which being reformed or duly checked, Florebit pax Regis and Regni.

Collected out of the Reports of the Common Laws of this Realm, and of the
Statutes in force, and out of the painful works of the Reverend Judges Sir
Anthony Fitzharbert, Sir Robert Brook, Sir William Stanford, Sir James Dyer,
Sir Edward Coke, Knights, and other learned Writers of our Laws, By FERDINANDO
PVLRON of Lincolnes Inn, Esquier.

LONDON, Printed for the Company of Stationers. An. Dom. 1609.

Cum Priuilegio.

The Preface to the Reader.
SEeing we all have received, and allow it for truth, That the ignorance of
the Law does excuse none of offense; and also, That the Law does help the
watchful, and not the slothful man: therefore it behooves each person, first
to seek the knowledge of those Laws under which he does live, and whereby he
is to receive benefit, or to sustain peril, and next, with all industry to
frame his obedience unto them, or humbly to submit himself to the censure of
them. And though we find by experience, that some men by the sluggishnesse of
their natures, others by the carelessness of their own welfares, and a third
sort wholly given over to pleasures and vanities, do little respect to know,
and less to obey our criminal and capital Laws, being things of great moment
and importance, and therefore do ofttimes taste the smart of them, and repent
their follies when it is too late: Notwithstanding, for that there be many
others which do endeavor to read them, and employ their industry to conceive
them; some for the increase of their knowledge, others, in their actions to be
directed by them, and many for the eschewing of the penalties of them, and yet
do not wholly addict themselves to the study of the Law: therefore, as near
as I can, to satisfy the desires, and to give contentment to all the persons
aforesaid, I have done my endeavor in this Treatise, to lay open to all them
that are willing to read, and thereby to know, which be the offenses that the
Law does in general terms condemn, and do most tend to the breach or
blemish of the peace of the Realm, and to the dislike of all the good members
thereof, and what punishments she has imposed upon the transgressors therein,
and by whom, and in what manner to be inflicted. If one man do pretend title
unto, and sue to recover any land, lease, or goods of another, all strangers
stand indifferent, and meddle no further, but only wish well to him that has
the best title, and desire that justice may be done, and right may prevail:
but if a Treason, Murder, Burglarie, Robbery, Theft, notorious Riot, Forgerie,
Perjury, Extortion, or Oppression be committed, then each man in conceit
makes it his own case, and does in a sort take it to be done to himself;
and all persons generally do find fault with the transgressors therein, they
exclaim of them, condemn the^, and in their hearts cry Crucifige upon them.
And therefore the crimes aforesaid, and such like, may be termed general
offenses, partly, for that they do redownd to the general dislike of all the
good members of the realm; and partly for that they tend to the breach or
blemish of the peace, being a thing generally embraced or wished for, and which
the king and all his good subjects are bound, and in a sort have undertaken to
maintain: and therefore as the king has an interest in them, or jurisdiction
over them all, to punish the offenders in them, as transgressors of his laws,
and disquieters of his peace, and people, so has every other well governed
member of the Commonweal, a care and regard of them, foreseeing that he may
receive the like wrong, and taste the same abuse, by the said, or other such
malefactors means; and for that cause does proclaim open war against them,
and is as desirous to root them out, as the husbandman his thistles out of his
good corn, or the gardner his nettles from his sweet flowers. Wherefore,
seeing a guilty person in any of the crimes aforesaid, is persecuted, in deed,
or consent, by all wishing well to the Weale-publique, or their own private
estates: it is requisite that good men which eschew to offend for the love of
virtue; and evil men, which fear to offend for the dread of punishment,
should both know those laws which they are to make use of, and the penalties
which be threatened to the infringers thereof, to the intent that the good man
having a will to stand, may trust to his feet, remain firm, and continue his
integrity; and the evil minded man beginning to stagger, may bend his
endeavor to stay, and slide no further. All which by this work (good Reader) I
labor to perform, to the intent, that the well meaning man being made the
better, and he that before was lewdly disposed, the less hurtful, may both at
the last meet and join in seeking and furtherance of that peace which will be
comfortable to the King and Realm, and pleasing both to God and man. The
question may be asked me, Wherefore I entitle my Book, De pace Regis and
Regni, and yet do chiefly make mention therein, of those crimes which do most
disturb the peace of the King and the kingdom, and so make the Book and the
title as it were oppositum in subiecto? Whereunto I answer, That the peace
whereof I do write, is not obtained by the said offenses committed, but by the
laws that do punish or restrain them, which laws also I have set down at
large in this Treatise, being the principal mark that I desire the Reader to
behold: As, many Physicians have written large volumes of several infirmities
in man's body, and then expressed which be the Medicines to cure them; not to
the intent to allure the Reader to seek the disease, but how to prevent it
before he has it; or how to be rid of it when he has taken it. And several
Divines have composed whole Tomes, of Pride, Malice, Covetousness, and such
like offenses, not to the intent to entice the frail man to fall into them,
but to show the enormities of them, how grievous they be in Gods sight, and
how he has threatened deeply to plague the offenders therein, to the end they
might dehort and discourage transgressors from them, and might allure and win
them to humility, forgiveness, patience, charity, repentance, and other
virtues. And so I name my Book of the quiet event, and not of the persecuting
cause; of the patient cured, and not diseased; of the sinner reclaimed, and not
persisting in vice; of that peace which I would have, and wish might flourish,
and not of those Laws that by awe do work it. For these Laws whereof I do
write, and some others, How the Laws do preserve the peace of the King.
do preserve the peace of the King, in that they do assure us who is our
King, do settle and continue the Crown on his head, do put the Sword and
Scepter in his hand, do attribute to him several Regal Titles, Honors, and
Prerogatives, do bind his Subjects to perform all loyalty, duty, and
obedience unto him, and lay heavy punishments upon the withstanders or deniers
thereof. These Laws be as his Privy Counselors, incessantly respecting the
preservation of his person, peace, Crown, and dignity: These be as his
Gentlemen Pentioners, attending daily in his presence, to do him all princely
honor and service: These be as the Yeomen of his guard, waiting day and night
to protect his person in peace, from all forcible assaults, and other perils:
These be as his great and goodly Ships, which lie houering on the Seas, and
his strong castles and forts of defense, which stand firmly upon the land,
wherewith he does prevent foreign hostility, repress inward tumults, and so
keep himself and his people in peace: These be as the Judges, Justices,
Sherifes, Constables, and other Officers, watching every hour and moment in
all the Shires, places, corners, and creekes of the Realm, to repress
outrages, and to maintain his peace: And lastly, these be to him as his mynt,
by which he does coin gold and silver to defend himself and his people in the
time of war, and to support his honor and royal estate in the time of
peace. How the Laws do preserve every person in peace.
And also by the protection of these Laws every good member of the whole
kingdom does receive the like benefit of peace: for in fear of them each
person does enjoy his life and limbs in peace, and is defended from the
bloody minded murderer, and manqueller, and the rage of the furious quareller
and fighter: And in fear of them the housekeeper rests in peace, with his
wife and family under his own roof, without being assaulted by burglers: And
in fear of them the traveler iournieth in peace from one country to another,
without being spoiled by robbers: And in fear of them the Grasiers cattle do
feed quietly in his pasture, without being stolen by thieves. The terror of
the Laws do ofttimes restrain choleric or contentious spirits from
Batteries, Riots, Routs, Forcible entries, and other outrages; and covetous and
greedy persons, from practicing or procuring of forgeries; and godless and
irreligious people, from persuading or committing of periuries; and false and
guilefull persons, from putting in ure of frauds and deceits; and impudent and
shameless men, to wrest from others by briberie, extortion, or oppression. And
diverse there be, who neither by the laws of God, of nature, or reason, will be
bridled and reduced to virtue, yet by the penalties and fear of some of our
capital and criminal laws, do yield to be curbed, and refrain from the practice
of their vicious lives, of whom the saying of the Poet may be verified, Oderunt
peccare mali formidine poenae. And so I may truly verify, that the Laws
whereof I do write, be the means of the peace of the K. and the kingdom: And
so long as the offenses in this Treatise specified shall be reformed, or duly
checked by these Laws, Florebit pax Regis and Regni. But though peace be mine
end, and peace the mark that I roue at, yet there be some that think, that
the diuulging of our criminal and capital Laws, in our mother tongue, will
not be a mean of that peace which I do so much aim at, for that, as they
surmise, the same Laws may then be misconstrued by every ignorant and
unlearned person, that can read English, and the sense and meaning thereof may
be mistaken, the reader himself may be led into error, and others may be
misinformed by his imbecilitie of judgment, seeing the same reader is able
only to look into the letter of the law, and not to discern of the intent of
the makers, or of the true sense thereof: And do allege for their reason, the
same that was objected at the making of the Statute of Ann^ 34. H. 8. St. 34.
H. 8.
ordained for the restraint of several persons to read the Scriptures in the
English tongue, for fear of raising of heresies and schisms in Gods church,
surmising then, that ignorance was the mother of devotion, as these men now
would make her of obedience: But if the same parties will look back, they
shall find the said Statute repealed, St. 1. E. 6. 12
and by the learning and practice of the former, and our present age, the
reason aforesaid refelled. Men may not surcease to read the Scriptures, because
the devil misconstruing the Psalm, Psalm. 90. Math. 4.
would have persuaded thereby Jesus Christ the son of God, to cast himself
down headlong from the pynacle of the Temple: Nor for that the Saduces being
deceived in a place of Deutronomie, Deuteronomy. 25. Math 22.
would have inferred by the woman which married seven brethren, that there is no
resurrection of the dead: Nor for that S. Paul in his Epistles did write
certain obscure things to be understood, 2. Pet. 3.
which unlearned and unconstant men depraved as they did other Scriptures, to
their own destruction: For this deprauing, misconstruing, or wresting of the
laws of God, or man, out of their true meaning, and proper sense, does
convince the reader of ignorance, pride, self love, or folly, and does nothing
impeach the credit of the same laws, nor the necessity or conueniencie of
them, nor the considerat judgment of the lawmakers. We perceive by the
questions, demurrers, and arguments, which often do arise amongst the reverent
Judges, and learned men in the laws of our Realm, touching the construction
and true meaning of diverse of our Statutes and common laws, that the old
Proverb is true, Nemo nascitur artifex, viz. No man is borne unto, or at the
first can obtain the perfect understanding of any learning, science, or art
whatsoever, but every person begins in ignorance, and then increases in
knowledge by little and little, according to his capacity and diligence: For,
as the Pomander does give a pleasant savor only when it is rubbed, and the
flint does yield fire only when it is beaten; so knowledge in all laws and
other learnings, is obtained only by much study, due consideration, and deep
digestion thereof, as an hole is made in the hard stone, by the often dropping
of the soft and liquid water. And therefore, if the busy searcher of other men's
knowledge, and carper at their ignorance, will with the eyes of his mind look
into the old and new Testament, and every book, place, and particle thereof,
and into the works of every Rabbie, Counsel, Father, Doctor, and other
Expositor of the same, thereby to learn which parts of the said Testament be
written Hystorically, which prophetically, which metaphorically, which
hyperbolically, and which literally, and how every of them are to be construed
and taken: and into all the books of controversies in religion, which have bin
written in all former ages, and this our present time, and all the reasons
produced for the maintenance of each several persons opinion, and then will
bend his care upon the church of God, and learn by the report of the
Ecclesiastical Hystoriographers, related from the first creation of man until
this day, when, where, by whom, and whose means she has flourished and
increased, and again, when, where, and by what means she has bin obscured and
blemished: And also will have respect to the Cosmographers and Chroniclers of
the several kingdoms and provinces of the world, who did describe the
situation of them, the nature and disposition of the people of each country,
their form of government, their several laws and customs, the fertility and
barrenness of their soyls, and how in times they have flourished and decayed:
And further, will reuolue in his mind the hundreds of volumes which have bin
written of the Common and Civil Laws, and of the rites of other kingdoms,
nations, and cities: And also will take notice of the infinite number of
singular men, which in several ages have written learnedly and profoundly, of
Grammar, Logic, Rhetoric, Philosophy, Physic, Arithmetic, Geometry,
Music, and Astronomy, and published to all posterity the several grounds,
principles, and maxims of every of them: And moreover, will diligently
hearken unto the number of volumes collected in several ages, of the
procreation, nature, and course of life, of all the beasts of the field, the
worms of the earth, the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea: and of
the beginning, increase, and virtue of all trees, herbs, roots, plants, and
things vegetative: and of the operation of all stones, mines, quarreyes,
metals, and other things which grow upon the face of the earth, or lie hidden
in the ground: And further, will take a view in his memory of the millions of
books which have been written in the Syriake, Chaldie, Hebrew, Greek, and
Latin tongues, for the increase of all sorts of learning and knowledge: And
lastly, will give his heart leave to think of the huge multitude of Treatises,
which have been composed in verse, mytre and rhyme, in a sweet and harmonicall
tune: and then if the same curious carper at other men's ignorance, after his
said due consideration had of all the writings and writers aforesaid, and of
their several deep wisedoms, knowledges, and understandings in the arts,
sciences, and things aforesaid, and how necessary, beneficial, or comfortable
they be to man, will return home again, and look into his own breast and
bosom, and examine himself seriously what he does lack of all the arts and
sciences aforesaid, and also how far from perfection he is in his own
profession, I doubt not but whatsoever before he thought of himself, he will
now find that he has but a small drop, spark or particle of learning or
knowledge, in respect of that he wants, and which he may perceive to have
been in some others, and that he has no cause to malign the ignorance of
others, but rather to pity his own, and to say with the old Philosopher, Hoc
solum scio quod nihil scio. Cratippus.
Many wholly devoted to their own opinions, do desire to maintain Paradoxes,
and to strain all their wits to defend them, though their assertions seem
never so improbable, and their arguments never so weak to others: as appears
by Rodolphus Agricola, who did write a book De vanitate scientiaru^, which the
whole wisdom of the world in all ages has so much admired and honored: and
by Erasmus Roterodamus, who compiled a Treatise Of the praise of folly,
attempting therein, to prove by a far fetched argument, that the folly of man
and woman together, is the only cause of the propagation and continuance of
mankind upon the face of the earth, and that the fault and folly of Adam in
eating of the forbidden apple, contrary to Gods commandment, being the
breach of the peace between God and man, was the cause that moved Jesus Christ
the son of God, to descend from the bosom of his father, to take flesh of the
blessed virgin Marie, to suffer his passion for the sins of man, and so to
renew peace between God and man. And therefore we must not insist upon the
private conceits, or particular fantasies of a few opinatiue persons, but shall
do well rather to observe what care our fathers from one age to another, did
take, and what ordinances they established in Parliament, that several penal,
criminal, and capital laws and statutes should be read or proclaimed in
Churches, St. 25. E. 1. 3 St. 7. R. 2. 6 St. 33. H. 8. 9. St. 5. El. 1.
in Faires, in Markets, at the general Assizes, and Quarter Sessions of every
county, at Leets, and Lawdayes, and in the Halls of every Inn of Court, and
Chauncerie, and how the same is continued, and duly put in practice at this
day, to the intent that the same laws, and the penalties thereof, should be
heard, learned, known, and understood by all sorts of persons willing to
perceive and apprehend the same. But if there be any, who persuading themselves
that they do search further into the bowels of reason or experience, than all
our foresaid lawmakers and others have done, and will by disputes encounter
the publishing or reading of our foresaid laws in the English tongue, I must
and will patiently content my self, suffer them to affirm what they please,
and say with mine old Schoolmaster Cato, Arbitrij nostri non est quid quisque
loquatur.

OF MENACES, ASsaults, Batteries, Imprisonments, Maihems.
1 Undertaking to write of the peace of the King, and the Kingdom, and the
chief impediments thereof, and to declare which be the great and general
offenses of the Realm, I have thought it good to begin with the very root and
principal cause of the same, which are menaces, threatenings, and other bitter
words, being as streams gushing out of contentious spirits, and venomous
tongues, The evil fruits of menaces.
their natural fountains and spring heads, from whence do ensue sometimes
assaults, batteries, riots, routs, unlawful assemblies, forces, and forcible
entries; some other times forgeries, periuries, and oppressions; and ofttimes
maihems, manslaughters, and murders. And therefore king David, having felt the
sting of the bitter curses, opprobrious slanders, and sharp menaces of king
Saul, Shemei, Nabol, and others, did very aptly and effectually decipher evil
tongued persons by these words: Psalm. 13.
Sepulchrum patens est guttur eorum; linguis suis dolose agebant, venenum
aspidum sub labijs eorum: Quorum os maledictione and amaritudine plenum est:
Veloces pedes eorum ad effundendum sanguinem: Contricio and infoelicitas in
vijs eorum, and viam pacis non cognouerunt. And again, speaking in their
persons, Psalm. 11.
he says, Qui dixerunt, linguam nostram magnificabimus, labia nostra a nobis
sunt, quis noster dominus est? And for that case the same king, well observing
the sea of mischiefs, miseries, and calamities, which daily do flow from
evil tongues, made his humble prayer unto God, to grant him power to be
watchful of his own tongue, Psalm. 140.
saying, Pone custodiam ori meo, et ostium circumstantiae labijs meis. And when
he perceived that God had heard his prayer, Psalm. 38.
he said joyfully, Dixi, custodiam vias meas vt non delinquam in lingua mea,
viz. I have made a full resolution, and promise to my self, that I will so use
and govern my speech, that I will never offend in my tongue. And the said king
tells us plainly, that there is no other means to have the comfort of this
life, Psalm. 33.
and to enjoy good days in this world, but to restrain the tongue from speaking
of evil, the lips from pouring out mischief, and to seek peace and follow
it. Prou. 18.
And his son, king Solomon, confirmed the same, saying, Vita est mors in
manibus linguae. And though slanderous speeches, and menaces, be but words,
and may be taken but only as a smoke, a breath, or blast of wind and so to
vanish and be dispersed in the air like dust; yet experience does teach us,
that by the imbecilitie of man's judgment, and the corruptionn of his nature,
they be used as firebrands of private and open grudges, quarrels, conspiracies,
and most other tragical and turbulent stratagems: and thereby a verbis ad
verbera peruentum est. And we seldom hear of any ye said enormities effected,
but they took their beginnings of menaces, threats, slanders, or other evil
words: which offenses growing by menaces, and other speeches tending to
contention, and the breach of the peace, the whole body of this realm having
deeply tasted the smart thereof, and desirous to prevent the like, by a stat.
made an^ 18. Stat. 18. E. 3.
E. 3. did ordain, that the K. Justices, amongst other articles, shall be sworn,
in case any of what estate or condition they be come before the^ in their
Sessions with force and arms, or otherwise, against the peace, Sta. 2. E. 3. 3.
or against the form of the statute thereof made, or disturb execution of ye
common law, or to menace the people yt they may not pursue the law, they shall
cause their bodies to be arrested and put in prison. Menacers shall be imprisoned.
And in case they be such, yt they cannot arrest them, the same Justices shall
certify the K. of their names, and of their offense speedily, so yt he may
thereof provide convenient remedy. There is another foul puddle that ouzeth
from the same corrupt gogmire, and distilleth out of a heart likewise infected
with malice and envy, but is devised and practiced by another mean tha^ the
former, which is by libelling, secret slandering, or defaming of another: for
this privy backebiter does not by words impeach his adversary in so manifest
and turbulent manner, as the choleric menacer in his fury does, but seeming to
sit quietly in his study, he does more deeply pinch him, and infixeth a more
durable wound into his fame, and credit, than the other boistrous fellow does
into his body, who in a moment threatens to do more, than peradventure he
after is willing, or dares to perform in an age. The menacer lays open his
name, and his grief, and stands in the face of his enemy, and discovers the
corasiue of his mind, and does thereby give a forewarning to his adversary to
provide for, and defend himself: But this secret canker the libeller,
concealeth his name, hides himself in a corner, and privily stingeth him in
fame, reputation, and credit, who then neither knows from whom, or upon what
cause he receives his blows, nor yet has means therein to defend himself. And
whether this libelling, Co. li. 5.125
secret slandering or defaming, The enormities of privy defaming and libelling.
be against a public magistrate, or a private person, yet it may tend to the
breach of the peace, to the raising of quarrels, and effusion of blood, and so
may be a special impediment of that peace which all good policy endeuoreth to
maintain. For if it be against a public magistrate, it is a great scandal and
offense to the king, his chief magistrates, and the whole government of the
realm, to assign such an officer to rule and govern others, who himself is
void of government, and shall deserve to be impeached with such crimes as he
shall be taxed with, or shall be imputed unto him by such an infamous libell. And
if it be but against a private person, yet seeing that a libel, or other note of
infamy, is invented to defame him, to tread his honor and estimation in the
dust, to extirpate and root out his reputation and credit from the face of the
earth, to make him a scorn to his enemies, and to be derided and despised by
his neighbors, it does greatly kindle the wrath of him, and of such as be of
his kindred, alliance, and true friendship, and urge them to revenge: whereupon
do ofttimes ensue grudges, quarrels, fraies, combats, and manslaughters.
Sometimes the malicious defamor powers out his venim in writing, by a
scandalous book, ballad, epigram, or rhyme, either in mitre or prose: some
other times by sons, scofs, jests, or taunts: and diverse times by hanging of
pictures of reproach, signs of shame, or tokens of disgrace, near ye place
where the party thereby traduced does most converse: as the picture of the
gallows, pillorie, cucking stool, horns, or other such like. In which cases
the law has provided, that the party delinquent, when he is found out and
discovered, shall be sharply punished: for he may either be indicted for the same
offense by the ordinary course of the common Law: Or else a Bill may be
exhibited against him in the Star chamber, The punishment of a secret Defamor.
where he shall be punished according to the quality of his demerits, by fine
and imprisonment; and if it be an exorbitant offense, then by Pillorie, loss
of his ears, whipping, or etc. or the party grieved may have an Action upon
the case against the offender, and recover his damages. Lib. Intr. fol. 13.
And in this case it is not material whether the Libel be true or false, or the
party scandalized thereby be living or dead, or be of good name, or evil: for
though the libell be true, and the party defamed be evil, yet our good Laws
be devised to punish him, and such like evil men by a due course of justice,
after his offense is presented, inquired of, tried, and proved to his face
before lawful magistrates thereunto assigned, and he is not to be carped at,
accused, and condemned in a corner behind his back by any other private person,
who intrudeth himself without warrant to be a censor of manners, and rather
seeks the discredit of the party, then the reformation of his faults: for
this secreat searching into, and sifting of other men's conditions, dyuing into
their offenses, and divulging them to their discredites, does convince the
offender to be a man of lewd disposition, to have made shipwreck of his
conscience, and does brand him during his life with the name of an infamous
Libeller, or slanderous backbiter. And therefore by Gods own commandment it
is specially given in charge to every of his people: Non maledices principi
populi tui. Non fasias calumniam proximo tuo. Psalm. 100.
And king David says, Detrahentem secreto proximo suo, hunc persequebar. And
God does threaten, that he himself will take revenge of the slaunderer, Psalm.
49.
saying: Sedens aduersus fratrem tuum loquebaris, and aduersus filium matris
tuae ponebas scandalum, haec fecisti, and tacui, exictimasti inique quod ero
tui similis, sed arguam te, et statuam contra faciem tuam. And as infamous
libelling, and secret defaming, be often times the causes of grudges, seeking of
revenge, and thereby of quarrels, in like sort words of slander, or speeches
of disgrace, openly published to the face of an other, or behind his back, be
also firebrands of variance, dissension, fighting, and the shedding of blood,
and so be special means of the breach of the peace. Action upon the case for
slander is contra pacem.
As it may partly appear by the words of the kings writ always inserted in an
action upon the case, brought by one person against an other for speaking of
slanderous words, in which writ it is supposed that the words were spoken, Ad
grave damnum ipsius querentis, and contra pacem nostram. And the same is
further proved by the words of the statute of An^ 2. St. 2. R. 2. 5.
R. 2. whereby it is ordained, That because publishing of false news, tales,
and lies of Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, Slaundering of Noble men or great
Officers.
and other noble and great men of the Realm, or of the Chauncellor, Treasorer,
Clerk of the privy Seal, Steward of the Kings house, Justice of the one
Bench, or of the other, or of other great Officers of the Realm, debate,
discord, or matter of discord or slander may rise between the Lords and
commons, whereof great peril may come to the Realm, and speedy subversion and
destruction of the same: therefore it was enacted by the said statute, That if
any do commit the before specified offense, he shall be taken and imprisoned
(according to the statute of Westminster 1. St. 3. E. 1. 34.
) until he has brought forth him which did speak the same. St. 12. R. 2. 41.
And further by an other statute made An^ 2. R. 2. it was moreover enacted,
That when the said offender is taken and imprisoned, and can not find him that
spoke the words, then he shall be punished by the advice of the Council. And
to the intent that such evil disposed persons, which by their lewd speeches
and slanderous words or reports, do endeavor to break or disquiet the peace of
the Realm, Sta. 1. and 2. P. and M. 3.
might the sooner be inquired of, found out, and punished, By a stat. made An^
1. and 2. P. and M. it was further established, That the Justices of peace in
every shire, city, and town corporat, within the limits of their several
commissions shall have full power to examine hear and determine the causes
abouesaid in the said 2. acts of 3. E. 1. and 2. R. 2. specified, and to put
the said 2. stat. and every branch in them contained in due execution that
condign punishment be not deferred from such offenders. And besides the before
mentioned penalties assigned to be inflicted upon transgressors by the foresaid
stat. every noble man, or great officer of the realm, against whom any
scandalous words, 11. El. Die. 285. Co. li. 4. 12.
false news or lies be spoken, may prosecute against the offender an action De
scandalis magnatu^, and recover damages against him. And in like sort may every
inferior person for any such like words of infamy spoken against him pursue an
action upon his case against ye offe^dor and recover his damages. And further
if one person shall exhibit a bill in the Star chamber against an other, and
amongst other things charge him with murder, piracy, robbery, or other felony,
or to be a procurer thereof, or accessory thereunto, or with any other offense
which is not examinable in the said court, the defenda^t in the said bil may
prosecute against the complainant therein an action upon the case and recover
his damages; for this bil was exhibited of malice by the complainant to remain
of record in the said court, to the infamy and slander of the defendant, and
not to punish him for the said offenses suggested in the sa^e bil by a course
of justice, seeing the court of Star chamber has no authority to inquire
of, or punish the same offenses. But if the complainant does suggest in his
said bill of complaint any matter against the defendant which is examinable in
the said court, then no action upon the case is maintenable against him by the
defendant therefore, though the matter surmised be merely false, for it is
done in a course of justice: Et sub iudice lis est, whether the matters
suggested be true or false, until they be proved. And in former ages speeches
te^ding to the reproach of others were so odious that K. Edgar ordained that his
tongue should be cut out which did speak any infamous or slanderous words of
an other. Edg. Lex. 4.
But though it be true (as is aforesaid) that infamous libels, secret
defamations, or public slanders, or reproaches, be often times more offensive to
the party taxed thereby, then open menaces and threats of violence are: Yet
seeing for the most part menaces springing out of distemperat and choleric
humors do more hastily break forth into further fury and extremities tending
to the breach of the peace, then libelling and secret defamation do, which
must have a breathing time to be inquired of, bolted forth, and then to be
punished, Therefore I will omit to write any further of libelling or defamation
and go forward with menaces etc. and tota sequela sua.

2 Menaces, assaults and batteries be things of several natures, and yet for
the most part they tend to one effect, viz. to hurt him against whom they are
bent, menacing is a threatening of some hurt to be done or procured by the
speaker or some other by his means to the person of the hearer, or his wife,
servant, tenant or other, The difference of menace, assault and battery.
whereby he receives loss, or hurt. Assault is an attempt to execute the
thing menaced by force and violence. Battery is the performing of the thing
before threatened, viz. the beating of him that was first menaced, and then
assaulted. Menacing begins the quarrel, assaulting does increase it, and
battery acco^plisheth it: menacing lays together fire and coals in the house
of peace, assault blows it and makes it burn. And battery does endeavor to
consume the whole building to ye ground. And therefore because some sorts of
menacing, assaulting, and battery be professed enemies to the peace whereof I do
write, I will endeavor plainly to expres which be those menaces, etc. that ye
law does inhibit, and in what sort, and by what means she does restrain, and
punish ye offe^dors therein.

3 The law has always had that special regard to the preservation of the
peace of the Realm, and of every member thereof, that she could not endure,
neither would suffer one person so much as to menace or threaten another of
life, or member, or of any thing tending to the breach of the peace: And
therefore she has not only assigned in all countries and places of this realm,
Sherifes, Justices of peace, Constables, Thirdboroughs, and diverse other
officers, to be as watchmen, continually attending, and bending their cares and
industries, to preserve the peace, and to defend each person from the violent
sting of menace, assault, or battery: but also she has given and provided for
him who is only menaced, 40. E. 3. 40.
an action of Trespass (as she has done for him who is assaulted or beaten)
whereby he shall recover his damages: so that the same menacing do tend to the
hurt of him who was menaced, his servant, tenant, or any other person, by whom
he lives, or receives benefit. And therefore the plaintiff in an action of
Trespass of menace, may declare, That he is an Attorney, The declaration in
Trespass of Menace.
and that in respect of the defendants menace, he durst not attend his clients
suites, from such a day in M. until such a day in O. or that he is a
husbandman, and could not attend or ouersee his husbandry: or that he is a
bailife, or collector of rents, and could not in respect of such menace, 37. H.
6. 3.
by the space of many months, attend his bailiwick, collection of rents, or
other businesses: or that in regard of such menacing, 30. Ass. p. 14.
he was not able, nor durst travel abroad, to apply his trade, or get his
living, without such force and defense, as his estate was not able to
maintain. As the collector of a fifteen brought an action of trespass for the
king and himself, 27. Ass. p. 14.
against one, and declared, That the defendant did so rebuke him, Rebuke in
Assault.
that he durst not tarry in the town to gather up the fifteen, for fear
least the defendant would have beaten him. And though the defendant did not
beat him, yet this rebuke was adjudged an assault, and the plaintiff recovered
an C. s^. in damages. And in like sort one brought a bill of trespass in the
Common pleas, for the king and himself, 30. Ass. p. 14.
and declared, That whereas he was coming toward the Common pleas, to answer
in a plea of land, the defendant came, and did so beat, assault, and menace
him, that he durst not bring his writings, or come thither, without great
charges, in contempt of the king, contrary to his peace, and to the damages of
the plaintiff etc. Whereunto the defendant pleaded not guilty. And the
defendant was compelled to find pledges of his good behauior, and for the
peace, and yt he should not meddle with the plaintiff, by himself, nor by any
others, Fitz. Trespass 159.
openly nor secretly. In an action of Trespass the plaintiff declared, That the
defendant so menaced him in one county, yt he could not do his business in
another county: and this was adjudged a good declaration, and it was ordered,
37. H. 6. 2.
yt the issue should be tried in the county where the menace was, for there was
all the trespass committed, and ye other county was put in only to increase the
damages.

Li. Intr. 592 22. Ass. p. 76. 20. H. 7. 5.
4 And in like sort, if one man do menace or threaten the servant of another,
Menacing a servant, whereby he departs,
of life or member, in such sort as the same servant does depart from his
master, whereby ye master does for a time lose the service of his said servant:
in this case the master shall have an action of trespass, and declare against him
yt did so menace his servant, That he made assault upon his servant, did beat
him, wound him, and evil entreat him, and so often menaced to kill and
disme^ber him, and did him so many injuries and wrongs, yt his said servant
durst not for such menaces, and for fear of being killed or maimed, attend his
business ( viz. the bailiwike of his husba^dry, his service in husba^dry, or
keeping of his horses, beasts, sheep, etc.) And so his said business and service
lay undone, and ye said pl. lost the service of his said servant, from ye 20.
day of M. until ye 20. day of N. the^ next following, to his great damage, and
against ye K. peace, whereof he co^plaineth, that he is endamaged 20. l. And so
note, 7. E. 4. 24. 27. Ass. p. 11.
that a man shall not have an Action of Trespass for menace only, unless he
has also thereby some other loss or hurt: for the menace and the hurt which
the party does sustain thereby, do make the Trespass, and do give cause of
the action of Trespass. But it is otherwise, 20. H. 7. 5.
if a man beat the wife or villain of another, for in those cases, the party
wronged, viz. the husband, or Lord, shall have an action of Trespass, though
he has received no loss, nor hindrance in commodity: For he must join in
suit with his wife, to recover recompense for the battery and wrong done unto
her by the trespassor: and also he may punish him by action of Trespass, who
beats his villain, as he may do him who beats his horse, cow, ox etc.

Menacing a tenant, whereby he departs.
5 And the same law is, if one man do so menace of life and member, Li. Intr.
592 20. H. 7. 5. 9. H. 7. 7.
the tenants of another, which do hold of him certain lands and tenements at
will, paying to him therefore certain yearly rent and services; in respect of
which menace, the same tenants do depart from their said tenements, and leave
the said rents unpaid, and the same services undone: In this case the Lord, or
owner of the same tenements, may have an action of Trespass against such
menacer, in the Kings Bench, or Common Pleas, and declare of the said menacing
of his tenants at will, of their departure from his tenancies thereby, and the
loss and prejudice that he has sustained by his rents unpaid, and services
undone, and he shall recover damages accordingly. And in this case it is a good
plea for the defendant, Menacing a Lords freeholder.
to plead, That those tenants of the plaintifes, which departed from their
tenancies, were the freeholders, and the freehold tenants of the plaintifes,
and not his tenants at will: For if it be so, the plaintiff shall recover
nothing against the defendant, because he has other sufficient remedy to
recover the services of his freeholders, or the land in stead of the^. And so
it is, to plead, that the tenants which departed, 21. H. 6. 31.
were tenants for term of years.

6 In the cases aforesaid, he that is wronged in his own person, his servants,
or tenants, by the menace of another, whereby he sustaineth loss, shall have
his action of Trespass against the offender, for the said menace, and the hurt
which he receives thereby; and the king also shall have a fine of the
offender, for that the menace was of life and member, and suggested to be done
vi and armis, and so tended to the breach of the peace. But if it be such a
menace as does not tend to the breach of the peace, Menace which is iustifyable.
then the law is otherwise: for then the party menaced, shall neither have an
action of Trespass, or other remedy against the menacer, neither shall the
king have a fine of him. As, if a man dye seized of certain lands, and a
stranger will abate, 22. H. 6. 48 21. H. 6. 26. 9. H. 7. 7.
and then the heir of him who dyed seized, will enter upon the stranger, and
menace and threaten him, That if he will not depart from the possession of the
same land, that then he shall repent it, as the law will allow: this is menace
justifiable, for that he has said no more, than the law will allow him to
perform. And in like sort, if A. be disseised of his freehold, eiected out of
his term of years, Li. Intr. 555
dispossessed of his goods, beaten, assaulted, or evil entreated by B. if in
this case A. will say unto B. That he will not endure those wrongs, nor put
them up at his hands, but will prosecute suit according to the law of the
Realm, in the sharpest manner that he can, for the redress of those injuries,
and for the due punishment of B. this is menace justifiable, and nothing
tending to the breach of the peace: for A. has said nothing, but that the law
will permit him to do. And in these cases the menacer does yield to make the
law judge of his wrongs, and that also in peaceable manner: but in the former
cases, the menacer does threaten to be the revenger of his own injuries, and
so to be his own judge, and that also in a forcible and unlawful sort. And so
it is, if one man owe money to another, and at the time assigned does not pay,
if the creditor do say to the debtor, that he will sue him according to the
course of law, 16. E. 4. 7.
and imprison him for his debt, this is menace justifiable, for the law does
allow him to do it.

7 As menace in words is accounted in many cases to be a mean of the breach of
the peace, and so punishable by the laws of the realm: so menace by deeds, by
behavior, gesture, wearing of armor, or unusual and extraordinary number of
servants or attendants, is accounted to be in affraie and fear of the people,
a mean of the breach of the peace, and so punishable: for the law does intend,
that he which in a peaceable time does ride or go armed, without sufficient
warrant or authority so to do, does mean to break the peace, and to do
some outrage: seeing she is able, and will be always ready to defend every
member of the common weal, from taking or receiving of force or violence from
others, if himself do not give cause to the contrary: Whereupon by a Statute
made at Northhampton, St. 2. E. 3. 3.
anno 2. Ed. 3. it was enacted: That no man great nor small of what condition
soever he be (except the kings servants in his presence, and his ministers in
executing of the kings precepts, or of their office, and such as be in their
company assisting them, and also upon a Cry made for arms to keep the
peace, and the same in such places, where such acts happen) be so hardy to
come before the kings Justices, or other the kings ministers in doing their
offices, with force and arms: nor bring no force in affraie of the peace, nor
to go nor ride armed by day nor by night in faires, markets, Menace by going
or riding armed.
nor in the presence of the Justices, or other ministers, nor in no part
elsewhere, upon pain to forfeit their armor to the king, and their bodies to
prison, at the kings pleasure. And that the kings Justices in their presence,
Sherifes, and other ministers in their bailiwicks, Lords of franchises, and
their bailifs in the same, and mayors and bailifs of cities and boroughs within
the same cities and boroughs, and borough-holders, and wardens of the peace
within their wards, shall have power to execute this act. And that the Just.
assigned, at their coming down into the country shall have power to inquire,
how such officers and Lords have executed their offices in this case, and to
punish them whom they find have not done that which pertained to their office.
St. 7. R. 2. 13 20. R. 2. 1.
And after by a statute made anno 7. R. 2. it was ordained, That no Lord,
Knight, nor other, little, or great, shall go nor ride by night or by day
armed, nor bear sallet or skull of iron, nor other armor, upon the pain of
forfeiture thereof to the king (except the kings officers and ministers in
doing their offices:) And by the same statute it was also assented, that none
should ride or go with Launcegaies Launcegaies.
(being an armor defensive then used) in affraie of the people, but that the
same Launcegaies should be for ever put out.

8 And shortly after, the same Statute of 2. Ed. 3. was put in execution:
Wearing of a privy coat.
for a knight was attached and arraigned in the kings Bench, for that he did
wear armor under his upper garment in the kings palace, 24. E. 3. 33.
and in Westminster hall: who pleaded that there was debate between him and
another knight, who did that week strike him, and yet did menace him, and that
for fear of further peril, and to save his life he did wear the same
armor: But this was adjudged no plea, for the court did award, that he should
forfeit his armor, and be committed to the marshalsey. And though he desired
to be let to mainprise, he was not admitted thereunto until the kings pleasure
was known. And the other knight his adversary, was sent for into the kings
Bench, and there commanded upon pain of all that he could forfeit, that he
should not meddle, nor do any thing but that which was good to his said
adversary.

Laborers shall wear no weapons.
9 And because servants in husbandry, laborers, artificers, and other persons
of mean degree, should take no encouragement nor occasion to break the peace,
nor wear any weapons therewith to menace, threaten, or terrify others:
Therefore by a Statute made anno 12. R. 2. it was ordained, St. 12. R. 2. 12.
That no servant in husbandry, or labourer, nor servant of artificer, or
victualler, shall bear any Buckler, Dagger, or Sword, upon pain of forfeiting
of the same (except it be for the defense of the realm in the time of war,
and then by the survey of Arraiers for the time being, or in traveling with
their masters, or on their masters business.) And Sherifes, Mayors, Baylifes,
and Constables shall have power to arrest all offenders against this Statute,
and seize the said Bucklers, Swords, and Daggers, and keep them until the
Sessions of the Justices of peace, and the same shall present before the same
Justices in their Sessions, together with the names of them that did bear the
same. But this shall not be prejudicial to the franchises of Lords touching
forfeitures due to them. By the foresaid two Statutes of 2. Ed. 3. and 12. R.
2. it does appear, that the meaning of the makers of those laws was, not
only to preserve peace, and to eschew quarrels, but also to take away the
instruments of fighting and battery, and to cut off all means that may tend
in affraie or fear of the people.

Assurances made by menace.
10 As menace of life and member gives cause of an action of trespass, to him
that receives loss or hurt thereby, and intituleth the king to a fine: 20.
Ass. p. 14 28. H. 6. 8.
in like sort an obligation, a release, or deed of annuitie made, and granted
by menace, are voidable by the law, so that the same menace be of life, member,
or liberty: viz. of some hurt to be done to his body by death, maiheming, or
imprisonment, and not to his lands or goods: for if A. will menace B. that if
he will not make him an obligation of xx. l, that then he will disseise him of
such land, 7. Ed. 4. 21. 4. H. 4. 2. 39. H. 6. 51.
or dispossess or take from him such goods: in this case if B. do make and
deliver ye said obligation of xx. l to A. in an action of debt brought by A.
against B, upon the said obligation, B. shall not avoid this obligation, in
respect of this menace, because this menace did not tend to the hurt of the
person of B. but to prejudice him in his lands, or goods: for the redress and
recovery whereof, the law would have given B. a sufficient remedy, if A.
should have done him ye wrong which he menaced. And he that will take an
advantage to avoid his deed by menace, must in this plea express, Fitz. Dures
13.
how and in what sort the other party did menace him: viz. that he drew his
sword against him, and threatened to kill him, if he would not seal and
deliver such an obligation, release, annuitie, etc. If A. do menace B. in one
county, that he will kill or maihem him, 33. H. 6. 24. 2. H. 5. 10.
if he do not seal him an obligation of xx. l, or stand to the arbitrament
of C. in a cause depending in question between them: And after B. being at
liberty in another county does seal the same obligation, or does stand to
the arbitrament of C. this obligation or arbitrament is void, for it shall be
intended to be done by force of the first menace. And if A. do menace B. that
he will kill him, imprison, maihem, or beat him, if he do not make an
obligation of xx. l to C. 39. H. 6. 36. Co. li. 2. 9.
if in this case B. do become bound by obligation to pay unto C.xx. l. in an
action of debt brought upon this obligation by C. against B. the same B. may
avoid this Obligation which he made by this menace of A. though the menace was
made by one man, and the Obligation was made to an other; for that the menace
was the cause of the making of this Obligation, which the law does respect and
punish, and not only the party to whom the Obligation was made.

11 Assault and battery be for the most part an accomplishment of that which
menace did threaten, and a performance by deeds of that, What is assault and
battery.
which the other forewarned by words: that is to say, a violent and forcible
abusing, or attempting to abuse by blows and stripes the person of an other,
contrary to the peace of the Realm, and the law of the same; which has
ordained, that no person shall be Judge or revenger of his own wrong, but leave
that to the censure of the law, that is always ready to hear and redress
every man's just complaints: for he that does attempt to assault or beat an
other, to satisfy his own turbulent spirit, or to revenge his own private
injury, does as much as in him lies to wrest the sword of government out of
the K. hands, to take from the law her equal censure in justice, and to make
himself both Judge, and executioner in his own cause; and because this
disordered person contemning the justice of the Law, has assaulted or beaten
an other without warrant of law, and broken thereby the peace of the realm; the
law has devised a quiet and peaceable course, to reduce him again to order, in
punishing him by an action of Trespass of assault and battery, wherein being
convicted, he shall satisfy the party grieved his damages, and pay to the K. a
fine, and his body shall be committed to prison, until he has satisfied it.
Though the party menaced shall not have his remedy by action of Trespass,
unless the same menace was of life and member, and also that the party menaced
received some loss or prejudice thereby in his liuelyhood, or estate; for that
the menace, and the hurt which the party does receive thereby, being joined
together do make the trespass, and give cause of the action of Trespass: Yet in
an action of Trespass of Assault and battery, where it is proved and found, that
the offender did make an assault only (as one did strike at an other with a
hatchet) but did make no battery, or hurt the person of any other, it is
otherwise: for seeing assaulting does tend to the breach of the peace, 22. Ass.
p. 60 42. Ed. 3. 7. 40. Ed. 3. 40. 6. H. 7. 1.
and he that makes an assault, does his endeavor to hurt, the law does give to
him that is assaulted an action of Trespass to recover his damages, and to the
K. a fine: for by the assault, the party assaulted is put in fear, evil
handled, and hindered of his business. And if he be diverse times assaulted, 45.
E. 3. 24.
he may have one action of Trespass for all those assaults, and shall recover
damages, according to the number and grieuousnes of them. And for an assault
made to the wife, 22. Ass. p. 60
the husband and the wife shall have an action of Trespass against him that made
the assault, 46. Ed. 3. 6.
and the declaration shall be ad damnu^ ipsorum, though the husband only shall
recover the damages.

12 But as he that is assaulted or beaten, Justifying of beating in his own
defense.
shall have his remedy by action of Trespass against him that did assault or
beat him, and also the K. shall have a fine therefore, if he that made the
assault or battery did it without cause, and offered therein injury to the
party assaulted; 16. Ed. 4. 11. 19. H. 6. 47. 6. H. 7. 1. 34. H. 6. 15. 43. Ed.
3. 23.
because the kings peace is broken, and one member of the common weal has
abused and done wrong to an other: So on the other side, if he that was so
assaulted or beaten, did first make an assault upon him that after did beat
him, and would have beaten, wounded, or etc. and in his said assault did
receive from the other some stripes or blows, the def. may justify his said
assault and battery, as a thing done in defense of his own person from
imminent and present peril, and wherein the Law will protect and defend him:
And therefore in yt case the def. does answer the pl declaration, and pledeth in
bar, that ye pl did assault him, and would have beaten him, and he defended
himself, and the hurt which the pl received was by his own assault. And ye pl
in his replication does plead, that the defendant did with force and arms, and
of his own wrong, make assault upon him, beat him, and evil entreat him,
contrary to the Kings peace, without any such cause, as the defendant has
alleged; And so the issue is joined, whether the assault was begun and made by
the plaintiff upon the defendant, or by the defendant upon the plaintiff: for
if the assault and battery, 38. Ed. 3. 6.
or assault only was first made and begun by the defendant upon the plaintiff;
Then the defendant did it with force and arms, and against the kings peace,
and is to answer damages to the plaintiff, according to the hurt which he
received, and to pay a fine to the K. for using force and violence, and
breaking his peace: for at all times in an action of Trespass vi and armis
brought against any person, 19. H. 6. 8.
if the defendant be convict, he shall pay a fine to the King. 8. Ed. 4. 15.
But if the plaintiff made the first assault, and the defendant in his own
defense (and rather then he would be beaten or wounded) did beat, strike, or
wound the plaintiff, Then the plaintiff shall recover no damages against the
defendant, but shall be amerced to the King for his false suit: Neither shall the
defendant be charged to pay to the king any fine. And if one man will assault,
and offer to beat two, three, 12. Ed. 4. 6.
or more persons, and they in their own defense do beat or wound him, he
shall have no action of Trespass or other remedy against them, and one of them
may defend and help the other. But it is to be observed in this case, that if
one man do assault an other, if he which is assaulted may escape with his
life, 2 H. 4. 8. 33. H. 6. 18.
or without being wounded or maihemed, it is not lawful for him to beat or
wound the other who made the assault.

13 As the law does account it no breach of the peace for one man to beat an
other in the defense of his own person from killing, Justifying of beating in
defense of others
wounding, or beating, but a thing justifiable: So does she impute it no fault
punishable for the husband to beat him, that does assault, and would beat,
wound, 19. H. 6. 31. 66. Lib. intur 553.
or evil entreat his wife, being both one flesh: or for the wife to beat him,
that does assault, and would beat, wound, or evil entreat her husband: Or for
the son or daughter to beat him that does assault, and would beat, wound or
evil entreat his or her father or mother: Or for the father or mother to beat
him that does assault, Lib. intur 554
and would beat, wound, or evil entreat his or her son or daughter, being
then within age, and not able to defend him or her self: Or for the Lord to
beat him that does assault, and would beat, wound or evil entreat his
villain: Or for the servant to beat, him that does assault, and would beat,
wound, 35. H. 6. 51. 11. H. 6. 19. 12. Ed. 4. 6.
or evil entreat his master or mistress; or to take any weapons wherewith the
assailant would beat, wound, or evil entreat his master, and to keep them
until his rage be swaged; for the servant is bound to perform unto his master
and mistress protection and duty, and he may kill a man in defense of his
master, if his said master cannot otherwise escape. But the servant cannot
justify the beating of him, 21. H. 8. 39.
that does assault, and attempteth to beat, wound, or evil entreat the
father, mother, brother, sister, son, 9. Ed. 4. 48.
or daughter of his master or mistress for he owes no obedience or duty to any
of them. Neither can the master justify the beating of him, that does assault,
and would beat, wound, or evil entreat his servant. Fitz. Justification 3. 19.
H. 6. 30. 66.
But though the master cannot assault and beat an other that does assault, and
would beat, wound, or otherwise evil entreat his servant; Yet he may with a
sword, staff, or other weapon aid and defend his servant assaulted, from
being beaten, and that in respect of the loss of his service. And also after
his servant is beaten, 22. H. 6. 43. 21. H. 6. 9. Fitz. Trespass 46. 20. H. 7.
5. Cook. lib. 5. 108.
he may have an actio^ of Trespass against him that did beat, wound or evil
entreat his said servant (unless it were upon ye same servants own assault) and
recover so much in damages against the offe^dor, The masters remedy for the
bea^ing of his servant.
as he received prejudice, or hinderance by ye loss of his said servants
service: for if the servant be but so beaten, that he is able to do his
service, as well as he was before, the master shall recover no damages for that
beating. And as the master may have an action of trespass against the offender,
and recover so much in damages as he does loose by the want of his said
servants service: so likewise the same servant may have another action of
trespass against the offender, and recover so much in damages, as he shall
receive hurt on his body, Fitz Trespass. 210. 21. H. 6. 8. 3. H. 6. 54. 34. H.
6. 28. 43.
by ye said assault and beating. In an action of trespass brought by ye master
for beating of his servant, whereby he did loose his service, it is a good plea
for the defendant to say, that he was not the plaintifs servant, or that he was
the defendants servant, and not the plaintifs: or that he was farmor, tenant,
neighbor, or soiourner with the plaintiff, and not his servant: or that the
party beaten was the plaintifs wife. And in the said action of trespass of
assault and battery for the beating of his servant, 22. H. 6. 43.
he need not declare of the retainer of the same servant, for if he did but
serve his master at his pleasure, yet the master shall have an action of
trespass for the loss of his service.

14 As the law does allow a man to beat another in defense of his person,
Battery in defense of his goods.
from extreme peril: so does she tolerate one man to beat another for the
preservation of his goods from rapine and spoil: for as it stands not with
the peace of the realm, that one man without some lawful cause should beat
another: so it stands not with the justice of the realm, that one man should
take another goods injuriously from him. And he that will attempt by force and
violence to take away another man's goods wrongfully from him, 9. E. 4. 28. 19.
H. 6. 31. 65. Kel. p. 92.
may justly by force and strong hand be resisted: And if in that case he that
shall make an assault to take those goods, be in the encounter beaten by the
owner of the same goods, the law will excuse the owner therein, and protect him
to defend those goods, whereof he has a lawful property. And the same law is,
if a man has no property in goods, but only a possession by the bailement of
another, to be redeliuered when they shall be required: if in this case a
stranger will assay by force to take the same away, Lib. Intr. 553.
he that has the possession of the same goods (though it be but a bloodhound)
may defend the same by force: And if the said stranger shall be hurt or beaten in
that assault, he shall have no remedy by action of trespass, or otherwise,
against him that had the said possession, for he may justify the defense of
the goods so bailed unto him, in respect that he has the lawful possession of
the^, and stands chargeable to redeliuer them, or the very value of them to
him, ye bailed them unto him, whenever he shall be required. Battery in
defense of his land, lease, or way.
And so it is if one has a mill whereunto a river or spring of water does run,
3. H. 4. 9.
and has run time out of the remembrance of man, and another would stop the
course of that water, and turn it another way, and the owner of the mill does
disturb him therein, whereupon that other does assault and attempt to beat him:
In this case, if the owner of the mill for his own safeguard, and for the
defense of his ancient water course, does beat him again, it is justifiable:
for this beating was not an intended breach of the peace, but to defend him
from violence offered to his person, Lib. Intr. 554. 11. H. 6. 33. 10. E. 4. 6.
and injury to his freehold or term. And the same law is in every case of
battery of another, who does menace or assault the right owner, and attempt to
beat him for the lawful defense of his own freehold, or term, or from his
lawful high way.

9. E. 4. 3.
15 If one man do make assault upon another attempting to beat him, Battery
inresisting a Justice of peace.
and so to break ye peace, if a Iu. of peace do command him yt makes ye
assault to keep ye peace, and to surcease his assault, and he will not do it, or
will answer yt he will not: ye Just. of peace may lay his hands upon the
offender, and arrest him to find sureties of his good behavior: and if the
offender do make rescue, and resist the arrest by force, and then be beaten,
he shall have no remedy against the same Justice of peace, who has done
nothing but that which belonged to his office, and duty: and the offender
first in breaking the peace, and after in resisting the Justice of the Law,
being beaten by the Justice of Peace, or any other in his company, has
worthily tasted the due reward of his own disobedience. And also the Justice
of peace may in this case commit the offender to prison, until he has found
sureties to keep the peace: A Justice of peace may arrest one to find surety
of peace, 21. H. 7. 22. 9. E. 4. 3.
and though he does let the same party after to go at liberty, without
finding surety of peace, yet he shall have no action or other remedy to punish
the same Justice, because he is Justice of Record.

A schoolmaster beats his scholar.
16 In an action of trespass of assault and battery, 21. E. 4. 6. Li. Intr.
555
it is a good plea for the defendant to plead, that he is a schoolmaster, and
a teacher and instructor of children, and that the plaintiff put himself to be
scholar with him, and to be taught and instructed in his book; and because
the plaintiff was careless and negligent in learning of that whereof he was
instructed, or did beat and abuse other scholars his schoole-fellows, the
defandant did beat him with a rod, as it was lawful for him to do.

A master beats his prentice.
17 And likewise in an action of trespass of assault and battery, it is a
good plea for the defendant to plead, that he is a free man of the city of
London, 21. E. 4. 6. and 53.
occupying the trade of a draper: and that the plaintiff being above the age
of xiiij. years, put himself apprentise unto him, to serve him in that trade,
by ye space of vij. years: And because the plaintiff was negligent in learning
his trade, he did strip him, and beat him with a rod, as it was lawful for him
to do: and if he did not sufficiently beat him for his offense at one time, he
may beat him again: And in like sort, if a villain will not be justified by
his Lord, nor obedient unto him, it is lawful for the Lord to chastise and
beat him, or to imprison him, or to inflict any reasonable punishment upon him,
so that he do not maihem or kill him: for in the foresaid cases, the
schoolmaster, master, and Lord have a civil power and authority over the
scholar, servant, and villain. Some do hold that if an apprentice or servant
be above the age of xxj. years, and then do his service negligently, that his
master ought not to beat him therefore, but to have an action of covenant
against him. But note the form of the Indenture of an apprentice touching
chastising him: And it appears by the Statute of 33. H. 8. 12. that the
master may strike his servant with his hand, fist, Stat. 33. H. 8. 12.
small staff, or stick for correction, and though he do draw blood. S. Br. 28.

Beating of a man that is frantic.
18 If a man be frantic, furious, or mad, 22. Assise p. 56. 22. E. 4. 45.
and attempteth being at liberty to burn an house, or to do some other
mischief, or to hurt himself, or others: it is lawful for his parents,
kinsmen, and other friends, to take him, put him into an house, to bind him,
and to beat him with rods, and to do any other forcible act to reclaim him,
or to keep him in a house or place alone, where he shall do no hurt: And he
shall have not action of trespass of assault and battery, action of false
imprisonment, nor other remedy against them: for in this case, and the others
before rehearsed, the peace of the realm was not broken, but a lawful
punishment was inflicted upon those who had deserved it, to the end they should
be reformed, and hereafter do their duties the better.

Beating of one that will not yield to arrest.
19 If one man do enter a plaint against another in a court having jurisdiction
to hold plea of that suit, 2. E. 4. 6. 21. H. 7. 39.
and the Sergeant of the court does arrest the defendant, and the defendant
will draw his sword to defend himself, and after does run away, with intent to
escape from the Sergeant, if in this case, the Sergeant and he that did enter
the plaint, do pursue him, beat, and hurt him, if he will not be apprehended
and yield to the arrest, they may justify the same in an action of Trespass of
assault and battery; for they have not broken the peace, nor offended the Law,
in seeking to justify him, who does attempt to fly from the justice and
indifferent trial of the law. But if the party had not been arrested, the
Sergeant, nor any other with him could have justified the beating of him.

38. H. 6. 25.
20 In an action of Trespass of assault and battery, the defendant pleaded,
Beating of a servant departing out of his service.
that the plaintiff was his servant retained, and departed out of his service,
and that he laid hold upon him, and led him home to his house to do his
service: But this was adjudged no plea; for it is not lawful for the Master in
this case to beat, or forciblie to compel his servant against his will to
return and do his service; but to require him to do it, and if he will not,
then the Master may have an action of Covenant against his servant, and recover
so much in damages, as he has received hinderance by the loss of his
service. But by the statute made An^ 5. Sta. 5. El. 4.
Eliz. it is ordained, That if any servant retained to serve in husbandry,
shall depart from his master, mistress, or dames service, before the end of
his term, unless it be for some reasonable and sufficient cause to be allowed
by a Justice of peace of the County, or the Mayor, or other head officer of
the City, borough, or town corporat, wherein the said Master, mistress, or
dame inhabiteth: Or if any servant at the end of his term depart from his
master, mistress, or dames service, without one quarters warning given before
the end of his term, and before two lawful witnesses; Then upon complaint
made by the said Master, etc. to two Justices of peace of the County, or to
the Mayor, or head officer of the city, borough, etc. they or any of them
shall have power to hear and examine the matter, and finding the said servant,
or the party so refusing, faulty in the premises, upon such proofs and good
matter, as to their discretions shall be thought sufficient, to commit him
toward, there to remain without bail or mainprise, until he shall be bound
to the party to whom the offense shall be made, to continue with him for the
wages limited by this statute, and then to be discharged upon his delivery,
without paying any fee to the Jailer where he shall be so imprisoned. And as
the Master cannot by beating, nor by force compel his servant, 38. H. 6. 25.
21. Ass. p. 85
to serve him against his will: No more can a Lord compel his ward, A Guardian
may not beat his ward.
by beating, or by force to come unto him, or to tarry with him against his
will: But if he do depart from him, then his Lord is to have his action
against him.

22. Ass. pla. 59. 27. Ass. p. 4. Fitz Trespass 238. 21 H. 6. 39.
21 If A. command, procure, or hyre B. to smite, Commandment of battery.
or beat C. and he does assault and beat C. in the presence of A. In this
case, C. may have an action of Trespass of assault and battery against A. and
recover damages against him, or against A. and B. together; for here the peace
was broken, and wrong done to C. by the means and persuasion of A. And B. had
not stricken with his weapon, if A. had not first stricken with his tongue. And
the same law is, if A. go to fight with C. and desires B. to go with him, and
after does meet with C. and does assault and beat him; In this case C. may
have an action of Trespass against A. and B. together, or against B. alone,
though B. did not assault C. nor give him any blow, and recover damages
against him, because he came in company with one, that intended to break the
peace, and to do an unlawful act.

Hurting at some exercise.
22 If two or more do agree together to run at tilt, just, barriers, Fitz.
bar 244.
or to play at backsword, bucklers, footebal, or such like, and one of them
does beat, bruise, or wound an other; the party grieved shall not have an action
of Trespass of assault and battery against the other: for that it was a combat
by consent, and put in practice to try their strength, valor, or agilitie, and
not to break the peace. But if the same day or some other after that the
pastime is at an end, and they departed a sunder, one will assault or beat an
other, in respect of some wrong conceived to be received in the time of the
said play; then an action of Trespass of assault and battery may be pursued by
him that is so beaten against the trespassor.

Whipping of a Vagabond.
23 In an action of Trespass of assault and battery, it is a good plea for the
defendant, to plead, that the plaintiff was by the stat. made An. 39. St. 39.
El. 4.
El. (entitled an Act for punishment of Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy beggars)
declared to be a Rogue, Vagabond, or sturdy beggar, and that he was taken
begging, vagrant, and misordering himself at L. in the County of N. and that
upon his apprehension, by the appointment of A. B. one of the Justices of peace
of the said County of N. or of the Constable, Headborough, or Tithingman of the
same parish of L. he was by this defendant stripped naked from the middle
upward, and openly whipped until his body was bloody. And the same law is if
any Justice of peace, Mayor, Bailife, or other head officer shall commit any
offender which shall cut or unlawfully take away any corn or grain growing,
or rob any orchards or gardens, or break or cut any hedge, pales, railes, or
fence, or dig, pull up, or take up any fruit trees, or trees in any orchard,
garden, or elsewhere, to the intent to take and carry the same away; Or shall
cut or spoil any woods, or underwoods, poles, or trees standing, not being
felony by the laws of this Realm: Or shall be a procuror or receiuor knowing
the same (contrary to the statute therefore made An. 43. El. entitled, Sta.
43. El. 7.
an act to avoid and prevent diverse misdemeanors in lewd and idle persons)
shall be committed by a I. of Peace, or by a head officer of a city, borough etc.
to some Constable or other inferior officer of the city, borough, Town, or
Hamlet, where the offense shall be committed, or the party apprehended, to be
whipped. If in this case the said Constable, or other inferior officer shall
whip the same offender until his body shall be bloody; the same offender shall
neither have an action of Trespass of assault and battery, nor other remedy
against the said Constable or officer: for in the foresaid cases, Punishments
by the order of law.
and in all other cases, where an offender is punished for petit Larceny by
whipping, and for other offenses by the pillorie, the stocks, the tumbrell, or
otherwise, for any offense committed by him contrary to any of the* laws or
statutes of the Realm, there is no peace broken, nor blame to be imputed to
him or them which do execute that punishment; for it is the justice of the law,
which does inflict those punishments upon offenders for transgressing the law,
and the executioners of those punishments be but the instruments of the law; as
the axe is in the Carpenters hand.

Battery for disobeying of a writ or warrant.
24 In an action of Trespass of assault and battery, 21. H. 7. 39. Fitz. Trespass
108.
it is a good plea for the def. to plead, that he had a warrant to arrest the
plaintiff, and that by force of that warrant he did arrest him, and then the
plaintiff made assault upon him, and therefore ye hurt which he received, was
by his own assault: for every subject is bound to obey the K. writs, and all
mandates, precepts, and warrants awarded by his Justices, shirifes and officers
sufficiently authorized: And he that does resist them, or denies to obey them,
encountreth the justice of the law; and therefore the beating of him who
refuses to submit himself to the obedience of the Law, is no breach of the
peace, but a mean to perform the law.

25 Though the Law has a regard to preserve peace between all persons, and in
all places, and caryeth a vigilant eye, that one person shall not menace,
assault, beat, maihem, or imprison an other (but in certain cases, and for
some special causes) and imposes an heavy burden upon such as shall break
that peace by any of the means aforesaid: Yet she has a more special respect
to some ceraine places, to some times, and to some persons; and caryeth that
reverend and due care and consideration of them; that she inflicteth a more
sharp and bitter punishment upon such as shall violate the peace in them, or
to the offense of them. And therefore for the avoiding of the disturbance of
the peace in the Church (where God is to be honored and all peace to be
preserved) and to continue peace to priests, clerks, and others, whilst they
are doing divine service; There was a statute made Anno 50. E. 3. and after
rehearsed and continued Anno 1. Sta. 50. E. 3. 1. 1. R. 2. 15.
R. 2. whereby it was enacted; That if any of the Kings officers, or other
person, do arrest any priest, clerk, or other, Arresting one in a Church
doing divine service.
which is doing any divine service in the Church, Churchyard, or other place
dedicated to God, he shall be imprisoned, and punished at the Kings pleasure,
and further shall recompense the party arrested. But no people of the Church,
shall keep them within the Church, or Sanctuary by fraud or ^ellusion.

26 And because it is most necessary in every Christian common weal to
provide that peace and tranquillity may be preserved and continued among the
people, and specially in holy Church in the time of divine service, and
preaching, and that all things being contrary thereunto, or that are or may be
in disturbance thereof may by forsight be eschewed and avoided, and remedy
therefore provided: Sta. 1. M. 3.
By a like statute made Anno 1. Reg. M. it was ordained, That if any person of
his own authority, Disturbance of a preacher in his sermon.
shall willingly and of purpose by open words or deeds, maliciously or
contemtuously disturb, or by any other unlawful ways disquiet or misuse any
Preacher allowed to preach by the Queen, or by any Archbishop or Bishop of
this realm, or by any other lawful Ordinary, or by any of the Universities of
Oxford and Cambridge, or otherwise lawfully authorized, or charged by reason of
his cure, benefice, or spiritual promotion, or charge, in his open sermon,
preaching, or collation, that he shall preach or pronounce in any Church,
Chapel, or Churchyard, or in any other place used or appointed: then every
such offender, his aydors, procurors, or abbettors, immediately after any of the
said misdemeanors committed, or at any time after, shall be arrested by any
Constable or Churchwarden of the said parish, town, or place where the said
offense shall be so committed, or by any other officer, or by any other person
then being present at the time of the said offense, and carried to any Justice
of peace within the said shire, or within any City, borough, Liberty or town
corporat, wherein Just. of P. be, where the said offense shall be so committed:
And the said Justices upon due accusations thereupon made by the apprehendor,
or other person, of the offender, forthwith shall commit him to safe keeping:
and within 6. days immediately after the said accusation so made, the said Just.
with one other Just. of P. within the shire, city, borough, liberty, or town
corporat shall diligently examine the offense aforesaid. And if the said two
Justices shall upon their examination find the person so accused guilty of any
of the said offenses, whereof he shall be accused, and that by two sufficient
witnesses, or by his confession; then they shall commit him to the Jail of the
said Shire, City, Borough etc. where the offense was committed; there to
remain without bail or mainprise by the space of three months then next
ensuing, and further to the next quarter sessions etc. at which sessions the
said person upon his reconciliation and repentance before the said Justices at
the said sessions, shall be delivered out of prison upon sufficient surety of
his good abearing, and behavior, to be then and there taken by the said
Justices for one whole year then next ensuing, as by the discretion of the
said Justices then and there being, or of the more part of them shall be
thought convenient. And if the said person will not be reconciled, and repent
at the said quarter sessions, then he shall be further committed to the said
Jail by the said Justices; there to remain without bail or mainprise,
Rescuing the offender, or disturbing the arrest.
until he shall be reconciled and be penitent etc. And if any person or
persons of their own authority willingly and unlawfully do rescue any
offender so apprehended, or will disturb the said offender to be apprehended;
then every of the said Rescuers or disturbers shall suffer like imprisonment as
is aforesaid, and further shall pay for every of his offenses v. l. to the
Queen. The punishment of the Town where the offender does escape.
If any of the offenders aforesaid be not apprehended in time convenient but
do escape, then the said escape shall be lawfully presented before the
Justices of peace at the next quarter sessions etc. and the Inhabitants of the
parish where the said escape was suffered, shall forfeite to the Queen etc. for
every such offense v. l. to be levied and taken as other like amerciaments and
fines be levied upon any village, hundred, or town, for the escape of any
murderer, or other felon, for not making pursuit upon huy and cry, according to
the Statute of Winchester, and the statute of 3. Punishment by Ecclesiastical
laws.
H. 7. 1. This Act shall not extend to take away the authority and punishment
of the Ecclesiastical laws standing in force, for the punishment of any of
the offenses aforesaid: But they shall be used in every thing, as though this
act had never ben made. Whatsoever person offending in the premises, shall for
any the offenses before recited, receive punishment of the Ordinary, having
Testimonial thereof under the said Ordinaries seal, shall not for the said
offense eftsoons be convicted before the Justices: Ete conuerso.

27 To the intent utterly to take away all quarreling, brawling, fraying, and
fighting openly in Churches and Churchyards, by a statute made An. 5. and 6. E.
6. it was ordained; Sta. 5. and 6. E. 6. 4
That if any person whatsoever do by words only quarrel, Chiding in a Church
or Churchyard.
chide, or brawle in any Church or Churchyard; Then it shall be lawful to the
Ordinary of the place, where the offense is done, and proved by two lawful
witnesses, to suspend him being a Layman ab ingressu Ecclesiae, and being a
clerk from the Ministration of his office, so long as he thinks meet,
Smiting in a Church or Churchyard.
according to the fault. And if any person or persons shall smite or lay any
violent hands upon any other, either in any Church, or Churchyard; then ipso
facto every person so offending shall be deemed excommunicat, and be excluded
from the fellowship and company of Christ's congregation. And if any person
shall maliciously strike any person with any weapon in any Church or
Churchyard, Drawing or smiting with a weapon in a Church.
or shall draw any weapon in any Church or Churchyard, to the intent to strike
an other with the same weapon; then every person so offending, and thereof
being convicted by verdict of xij. men, or by his own confession, or by two
lawful witnesses before the Justices of assise, Justices of oyer and
determiner, or Justices of peace in their sessions, shall be adjudged by the
same Justices before whom such person shall be convicted, to have one of his
ears cut off. And if the person or persons so offending have none ears,
whereby they should receive such punishment, as is aforesaid; Then he or they
to be marked and burned in the cheek with an hot iron having the letter F.
whereby he or they may be known and taken for fray makers, and fighters; and
besides that, every such person to be and stand ipso facto excommunicated as is
aforesaid.

28 As the law has always had a principal and most special regard, that
there should be no breach, or disturbance of the peace, to those persons,
places, and times, which be dedicated and devoted to the service of God, to the
Ministration of his Sacraments, and preaching of his word: So has she a
secondarie respect, that the King the head of the Realm and chief fountain
of peace, may have tranquillity and peace, at the time, and in the place,
where he does rest, and in person make his aboade: whereupon by a Statute made
Anno 33. H. 8. it was enacted, Drawing of blood within the Kings palace.
That if any person shall maliciously strike any other person, Stat. 33. H. 8.
12.
whereby blood shall be shed in any of the Kings houses or palaces, or in any
other house, where the Kings Majesty his heirs etc. ^^^t be at that time
abiding in his royal person, (viz. within any edifices, courts, places,
gardens, orchards, or houses within the Porters ward of any the houses above
rehearsed, or within any gardens, privy walks, orchards, tiltyards, woodyards,
tennis plays, cockfights, bowling allies, near adjoining to any of the houses
aforesaid, and being part of the same, or within 200. foot of the standard of
any outward gate, or gates of any of the said houses, commonly used for passage
from any of the houses etc. and shall be thereof indicted, arraigned, and
attainted according to the Statute in that case provided, he shall have his
right hand stricken off, be imprisoned during his life, and make fine to the
King at his pleasure. But this act, nor the pains and forfaitures before
rehearsed, shall not extend to any Noble man, or other person that shall strike
his servant within the said palaces or houses, or the limits of the same, with
his hand, or fist, or any small staff, or stick for correction for any
offense committed; Nor to any of the Kings officers, that in executing his
office shall strike any person with his hand or fist, or small staff, stick,
or tipstaffe; Nor to any other person, that in doing service at any triumph,
or any other time of service, by the King, or any of his Council, or other his
head officers commandment, shall for the executing of his said service,
strike any person, with his hand, fist, small staff, or stick, or any
tipstaffe within the same palace, house etc. although by reason of the same
stroke or strokes there happen to be any blood shead of such person as shall
be so stricken, except the person so stricken dye of the same stroke within one
year next after. Long time before the making of this statute King Alured
ordained a law, Leges Aluredi cap. 7.
That if any man did strike or draw a weapon of iron to strike in the Kings
palace, the King might, it he pleased, put him to death.

29 Because they which upon the Kings commandment do come to his council, or
upon his summons do resort to his Parliament, do make their repair thitherto
further the wealth and peace of the Realm; it has been therefore thought
reason that during the time of the said council and Parliament they should not
be deprived of that peace which they endeaour to procure to others and
themselves. Assault upon one which comes to the Parliament.
Wherefore by a Statute made Anno 11. H. 6. Stat. 11. H. 6. 11.
it was ordained: That if any assault or fray be made upon any Lord Spiritual,
or Temporal, Knight of the Shire, Citizen, or Burgess, which comes to the
Parliament, or to the Kings Council by his commandment, and there being and
attending; then Proclamation shall be made in the most open place of the Town
where the fray was made by three several days, that the party which made
such affraye or assault shall yield himself in the Kings Bench within a
quarter of a year next after the Proclamation made, if it be in the Term
time, or otherwise at the first day of the Term following the said quarter.
And if he do not, he shall be attainted of the deed, and pay to the party
grieved his double damages, to be taxed by the discretion of the Justices of
the same bench, or by the inquest if it be needful, and shall make fine and
ransom at the Kings pleasure. And if he come, and be found guilty by inquest,
by examination, or otherwise, of such affray or assault, then he shall pay to
the party grieved his double damages found by the inquest, or to be taxed by
the discretion of the said Justices, and make fine and ransom at the Kings
pleasure. Assaulting the servant of a Parliament man.
And by the Statute made Anno 5. H. 4. it was enacted, St. 5. H. 4. 6.
That he shall have the like punishment which makes assault or fray, in the
Parliament time, upon any meniall servant of any Knight of the Parliament,
Citizen, Burgess etc. which does come to the Parliament with his master. The
liberty of the Clergy as a convocation.
And by the Statute of Anno 8. H. 6. it was provided, St. 8. H. 6. 1.
That all the Clergy, which be called to the convocation by the Kings writ, and
all their servants, and familiars, shall fully use, and enjoy such liberty, or
defense, in coming, tarying, and returning, as the great men and Commons of
the Realm have, or are wont, or ought to enjoy, which are called to the
Parliament.

30 Seeing the wealth and peace of the Realm does chiefly consist in the due
execution of Justice, which cannot be ministered without meet persons, and
places ordained therefore; for that cause the Law has specially provided, that
those persons and places which be designed to the same Administration of
Justice, shall be so guarded and protected from force and violence offered unto
them, or in them, that she has inflicted deeper and more greiuous punishments
to those who shall break or disturb the peace, in the presence of those
Magistrates, or in those places, than to them who shall break the peace in the
Kings own palace, where he is in person abiding, or in the Parliament time
ordained for the making of Laws. Assaulting a Judge or Iuror.
And therefore it has been adjudged; 22. Ed. 3. 13.
That if one draw his sword to strike a Justice assigned sitting in place of
judgment, and be thereof found guilty, he shall forfeite his lands and
chattels, and have his right hand cut off. And likewise if one in the presence
of the Justices do strike a Iuror, he shall forfeite his lands and goods, have
his right hand stricken off, and be committed to perpetual prison. And the same
Law is, if one of the Kings Justices assigned does arrest any person, which
has made a fray before him, and a stranger will rescue that prisoner, whereby
he does escape, in this case, as well the prisoner, as he that made the rescous
shall be disherited, and be perpetually imprisoned, for that the attachment of
such a Justice is the Kings own attachment in the construction of the Law.
Striking in time or place of Justice.
And if one do strike an other in Westminster Hall, Fitz: Cor. 280. 2. and 3.
P. and. M. Die. 188.
during the time that the Kings Courts do sit, he shall forfeite to the King
his lands and goods, have his right hand cut off, and be committed to
perpetual prison.

4. H. 7. 2.
31 In an action of Trespass of assault and battery, the defendant pleaded,
Arresting by watchmen.
that there were diverse felonies committed in those parts where he dwelt, and
he being watching in his house, came into the high Street, where the plaintiff
was at eleven of the clock in the night, and the defendant came unto him, and
laid his hands in peaceable manner upon him to see his face, and when he
perceived that he was a true man, he left him and departed, which was the same
assault and battery: And this was allowed to be a good justification; for by
the statute of Winchester, watchmen may arrest Nightwalkers, and also may
appose them from whence they come, and what they be; but they must be such
watchmen, as be appointed by the Town: And so every man may arrest
Nightwalkers, for it is for the good of the Common wealth. The same law is in
an action of Trespass brought of the assault and battery of his servant, 4. H.
7. 18. 5. H. 7. 5. 2. Ed. 4. 8.
whereby he did loose his service 3. days, and the defendant pleaded, that A.
was robbed at midnight, of goods to the value of xl. s^. whereupon the said A.
came to the Constable, and prayed him to search for suspicious persons, and to
apprehend and arrest them, and accordingly he did search, and found the same
servant walking suspiciously in the street in the night, and therefore he
would have arrested him, but the said servant fled, and would not yield to the
arrest, and the defendant by the Constables commandment pursued and took
him: This was adjudged a good plea in bar; for when a felony is committed,
the Constable, or any others may arrest suspicious persons: and if any that is
arrested will not yield, but assault him or them that do arrest him, they may
justify the beating of him, for that he does resist the peace, and justice of
the Realm, when he does forciblie strive to fly, and not to be justified by
it.

30. Ed. 3. 4. 29. Ass. p. 63. 28. Ed. 3. 92. 6. H. 4. 7.
32 If a man be assaulted and beaten, Trespass for battery before outlawrie.
and then be outlawed in an action of Trespass, and after does purchase his
Charter of pardon, which is allowed; he may have an action of Trespass against
the offender, for the assault and battery made before the Outlawrie, for the
said outlawrie shall not extinguish his action, nor cause that offense, which
before was punishable to be unpunished: And if the party beaten should not
have his Action, the injury done unto him should be unpunished: for the King
shall have no remedy to recover damages for this battery done to the person of
him that was outlawed, 29. Ass. p. 47 63.
as he might have had, if any debt had been owing, or any goods had been taken
from the outlaw before his outlawrie: And the Law does expect, that for the
peace broken, and the wrong done to the party grieved, the same party shall
upon his action of Trespass brought, be recompensed by the recovery of his
damages, and the king satisfied for his peace broken by a fine.

11. H. 4. 65. 9. H. 6. 60. 27. Ass. p. 57
33 In an action of Trespass of assault and battery, A man first indicted of
battery, and after sued for the same trespass.
the defendant pleaded not guilty, the plaintiff replied, that the defendant
was before that time indicted before the Justices of Peace of the same County,
of the said assault and battery, and thereupon process was awarded against him
for the kings fine, who then appeared, and pleaded, that the hurt which the
plaintiff received was by his own assault, and thereupon they were at issue,
and before the verdict, the defendant appeared, and confessed the Trespass, and
submitted himself to the Kings favor, and made his fine; and demanded
judgment, if he should be allowed to plead not guilty, contrary to his own
confession: and this was adjudged a good Replication, and an Estoppell of the
said plea in bar. And then the defendant pleaded, that the hurt which the
plaintiff received was by his own assault, upon which plea the plaintiff
demurred, seeing the defendant before had pleaded that plea against the King.
And then he also waiued that plea, and confessed the trespass: whereupon a writ
was awarded to inquire of damages. And so for this assault and battery the
king was first entitled to a fine by the Indictment, and after the party
grieved recovered damages, by an action of Trespass.

34 Imprisonment is where a man is arrested by force, and against his will, and
is restrained of his liberty, What imprysonment is.
and put in a common Jail, or other jail, Lib. Intrac. fol. 319.
in a cage, or in the stocks, or otherwise kept in the high street, or open
field, if he be in restraint, and cannot go at liberty when he will, but is
bound to become obedient to the will of the Law, and is in the custody of the
Law. And in all the cases aforesaid, the party so restrained, is said to be a
prisoner, so long as he has not his liberty, freely to go at all times, when
he will, without bail, mainprise, or other restraint: And therefore if one
person do arrest, imprison, or otherwise restrain an other person of that
liberty, without sufficient and lawful cause, the party grieved may have an
action of False imprisonment, or an action of Trespass against him that does so
arrest, An action of False imprysonment.
or imprison him, and recover damages against him. And the King shall also have
a fine of him, for that his law is contemned, and his peace is broken, in that
one of his subjects presumes to imprison an other without sufficient warrant
of him, or his law; seeing imprisonment of an other by only act, will, or
commandment (without offense of the Law) is one of the kings most royal
prerogatives, and only annexed to the majesty, dignity, and imperial Crown
of this Realm: For by the Statute of Magna charta it was specially ordained,
Stat. 9. H. 3. 29.
That no man shall be taken or imprisoned, or disseised of his freehold, or
liberties, or free customs, or be outlawed, or exiled, or any other ways
destroyed, neither shall any pass or fit in judgment upon him, but by lawful
judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the land. And by the statute of An^
28. Ed. 3. it was enacted, Stat. 28. Ed. 3. 3.
That no man shall be put out of his land or tenement, nor imprisoned, nor
disherited, nor put to death, without being brought in answer by due process
of the Law. And therefore whereas the Mayor and Burgesses of a town corporate
(being before authorized by the Kings letters patents to make ordinances for
the good government of the same Town) did condescend amongst themselves, Co.
Lib. 5. 64.
to levy a sum of money for the charges of a lawful and necessary act to
be done in the same Town, and did further agree, that if any of them did
refuse to pay his part of that contribution money so assessed, to be paid,
that then he should be committed to prison until he had paid it: and after one
of the Burgesses of the Town which before had agreed to the same assessement
and ordinance, Voluntary consent, no cause of imprysonment.
refused to pay the money which he was by the residue assigned and assessed to
pay: whereupon the Mayor of the same Town committed him to prison, against
whom the same Burgess brought his action of False imprisonment, and recovered
damages against the same Mayor: for though the same Burgess, and all others
of the same Corporation might have submitted himself to have paid a sum of
money, to have been levied by distress, or action of debt, if he or they had
not performed the same order, and paid his part of that contribution: yet the
liberty or impri^onment of his body rests in the censure and judgment of
the Law, and not in his own disposition. As if B. do promise C. or be bound by
Obligation unto him, that if he do not pay unto the same C. xx. li. within
six months, that then C. shall take and impryson him, until he has paid
it: notwithstanding B. do not pay to C. the same xx. l. at the time assessed,
C. may not imprison B. for it, though it was his own promise, agreement, or
bond: for that B. is not judged by his peers or condemned by the law of the
land according to the foresaid statute of Magna Charta. Neither is he brought
to answer by due Process of the law according to the purport of the before
specified statute of An 28. E. 3.

35 But in many cases one person may arrest, Imprisonment by the commaundment
of the King, his Justices, etc.
imprison and restrain an other of his liberty and no action of false
imprisonment, action of Trespass, or other remedy will be had against him. As
first it is a lawful imprisonment which is done by the absolute commandment
of the King, the chief Sovereign head of the common weal by his own mouth,
or by the privy Council, (which speak and direct by his Authority) or by
the absolute commandment of the Kings Justices: Or for the forest: Or for
the detestable offense of wilful murder. And the common law does prohibit the
prisoner to be mainpernable in all the foresaid cases, Stat. 3. E. 1. 15.
as it appears by the statute of Westminster 1.

36 He is lawfully imprisoned as a special disturber of the peace,
Imprisonment for notorious and great offenses.
who is committed to prison, for any great and notorious offense, viz. such as
we do call Mala per se, which be hated, abhorred, and persecuted in all
Kingdoms, Provinces, Cities, and well governed commonweals: As Treasons,
murders, rapes, burglaries, robberies etc. And it appears by the statute of
West. 1. that he is lawfully imprisoned which before was outlawed: And he which
is an approuer: Stat. 3. E. 1. 15.
And that felon which is taken with the manner: And he which has broken the
Kings prison: And he which is a thief openly defamed, and known: And he which
is appelled by an approuor: And he which is taken for burning of a house
feloniously done: Or for false money: Or for counterfeiting the Kings seal:
And he which is excommunicat taken at the Bishops request: And he which is
taken for a manifest offense, or for Treason touching the King: in which said
cases the offender shall be committed to prison and not be let to bail or
mainprise. St. 1. Iac. 12.
And if any person shall be once convicted that he did take upon him by
witchcraft, enchantment, charm, Witchcraft, charm, sorcery.
or sorcerie to declare in what place any treasure of gold or silver might be
had, or where things lost, or stolen, should be found, or to the intent to
provoke any person to unlawful love, or whereby any cattle or goods of any
person shall be distroyed, wasted, or impaired, or to hurt or distroy any
person in his or her body, S. Felony by Statute.
although the same be not effected: Then he shall suffer imprisonment one whole
year without bail, or mainprise, and shall stand upon the Pillorie etc. for
he that declares the things aforesaid, by any of the means aforesaid,
receives his knowledge therein, and practices to effect the same, by the
inspiracion of the Devil, the professed enemy of man's peace, and so
commits a great and notorious offense, and worthily deserves imprisonment.

37 He is lawfully imp^isoned who is found by verdict, Imprisonment for
offenses done vi and armis.
or by his own confession convicted for any offense done vi et armis and
against the Kings peace: for the law has orda^^ed that all things shall be
done, and all suits prosecuted between one memb^r of the common weal and an
other with all tranquillity and quietness, and he that does any thing in
perturbation of that tranquillity, breaks the Kings peace, and so shall be
committed to prison, as a disturber of the peace, until he has paid unto the
King a fine. And therefore in an action of Trespass or false imprisonment, if
the plaintiff do declare against the defendant, that he did such an offense, or
made such a trespass, vi and armis and contra pacem, the defendant does first
and principally seek to avoid that, to clear him self of force, and the
breach of the peace, and does plead thereunto Quoad venire vi and armis and
quicquid est contra pacem non est culpabilis etc. Accordingly in an Assise
brought against four men, 2. Ass. p. 8. 12. Ass. pla. 33.
it was found by verdict that one of them came with force and arms, and all
four were committed to prison because in Trespass all be principals, and none
be accessories; and yet if any of them had bin within age, then he should not
have been imprisoned. 14. E. 3. 18. 16. Ass. p. 7.
But if a woman covert be found a disseisoresses with force, she shall be
committed to prison, 22. ass. p. 87.
And if an action of Trespass of battery be brought against the husband and
wife, and it be found by verdict that the wife was guilty of the battery, but
not the husband, the wife shall be imprisoned, and not the husband. If he that
is proved to be a disseisor in an assise be found to have carried away any
goods, this is an attainder of force, 11. H. 4. 17.
and he shall be imprisoned without further inquiry of the force, for so it is
ordained by the statute of Anno 4. H. 4. St. 4. H. 4. 8. 17. Ass pla. 14.
If a man do give council to others to do a disseisin with force, whereby they
do it, this shall be adjudged a disseisin in him, and he shall be imprisoned.
In an Assise if the defendant do plead a plea wherein an Duster is not denied,
which is found against him, he shall be imprisoned, 28. Ass. p. 15
though he does not confess the Duster: And he that confesses an Duster, 40.
Ass. pla. 16. 19. H. 6. 8.
if the Issue be found against him shall be imprisoned. In an action of Trespass
brought for fishing by force and arms in his several fishing, the defendant
was found guilty, and was committed to prison. In an assise of rent charge
against three terre tenants, it was found that the rent was behind, and the
plaintiff distrayned, and one of them made rescous, 39. Ass. p. 4.
and therefore they were all adjudged disseisors, but none were imprisoned but
he that made the Rescous. 9. Ass. p. 7.
And in every case of force where any Trespass is found vi and armis, false
imprisonment, or assise, the judgment shall be, quod defend' capiatur, 22.
Ass. pla. 87.
for he shall be imprisoned for the Kings fine, and when he does pay the Kings
fine he shall be delivered.

38 As one person may be imprisoned who menaceth, assaulteth, or beats the
person of an other, or with force and arms enters upon his lands or
tenements or violently takes away his goods or chattels; so by the statute of
Anno 2. Imprisonment for Riots.
H. 5. St. 2. H. 5. 8.
where three persons or more be attainted of great and heinous Riots, they
shall have one whole years imprisonment at the least, without being delivered
by bail or mainprise, S. Riots 11.
or in any other manner during the said year: And if the Rioters be attainted
of petit Riots, they shall have imprisonment as the King and his Council shall
think good. And by the statute made Anno 1. M. it was enacted, St. 1. M. 12.
S. Riots 36.
that if any persons above the number of two, and under the number of twelve
being assembled together, shall intend, practice, or put in ure, with force of
arms unlawfully, to murder any of the kings subjects, or to break down the
pales, hedges, ditches, walls, or other enclosure of any park or other ground
enclosed, or the bancke of any fish pond or po^le, to the intent the same
should remain open, or to do any other unlawful act, prohibited by that
statute, and being required by a Justice of peace, or shirife of the said
County, or by the Mayor or chief officer of the city or town corporat to
return to their inhabitations, do not, but attempt to put in ure any of the
said things. Then every of the same persons shall be imprisoned one year
without bail or mainprise: for the offenders in both the cases aforesaid,
putting in practice their outrages with a multitude of persons be great
disturbers of the peace, and Transgressors of the law.

21. H. 6. 5.
39 In an action of False imprisonment, Imprisoning him that holds land with
force.
the defendant pleaded that the plaintiff held the manor of D. by force and B.C.
a Justice of peace of the same County did take him, recorded the force, and
sent him to the defendant being Jailer of the same County to be imprisoned, and
this was allowed a good justification, though he was committed to prison but by
one Justice of peace. And in like sort if the action of false imprisonment had
bin brought against the Justice of peace who committed the offender to ward,
the same had been a good plea in bar for him, St. 8. H. 6. 9.
for that the statute of An^ 8. H. 6. does warrant him so to do, and gives
that authority to one Justice alone, or to more then one.

29. Ed. 3. 9. 5. H. 7. 4.
40 If a Huy and Cry be levied and pursued that a horse of such a color or
mark, so many beasts of such a sort, or age, Imprisoning of one pursued by Huy
and cry.
or so many sheep of such a brand be stolen, and one is taken leading or
driving of the said horses, beasts, or sheep: it is lawful for any man to
apprehend and stay him, and to commit him to the Constables of the Town where
he is apprehended, and by them to be put into the stocks, or safe kept, until
he be delivered by due course of law, though he be not of evil fame, or name,
but a man of good credit: for seeing the law by the Huy and Cry has accused
him, by a course of law, he must be again acquitted and discharged: And in this
case he that is so taken though he be after acquit of the felony, shall not
have an action of Trespass, false imprisonment, or other remedy against him,
that did apprehend him.

Fitz. bar 202. 3. H. 4. 9.
41 In an action of Trespass of assault, battery and imprisonment, Imprisoning
him that does break the peace.
the defendant pleaded that the plaintiff menaced to kill him, and therefore he
requested the Constables to arrest the plaintiff to find suerties of his good
abearing, and the Constables, and the defendant with them, did come and arrest
him, and put him into the stocks until he did find suerties: and this was
allowed to be a good justification. 5. H. 7. 6.
And in like sort if one do make an assault upon a Constable, the same
Constable may arrest and imprison him, until he has found suerties to keep
the peace, though the Constable be the same person upon whom the said assault
was made: for in this case he does nothing but preserve the peace, and observe
the Law, which is to be done as well in his own case, 13. H. 7. 10.
as any others: And moreover if a Constable be informed, that a lewd man is in
a suspected house, with a woman of evil name, for incontinencie, he may take
so many of his neyghbors with him as he will, Arresting suspected persons.
and arrest the said man and woman to find suerties of their good behavior.
And they, nor either of them shall have any action of False imprisonment or
other action therefore against the said Constable, or any other of his
assistants; for the Constable was ordained to keep the peace, 10. Ed. 4. 17.
and to repress felons. And he may take suertie by Obligation, if he find any
commiting of a fray, but upon no penalty. And if the party will not find
suerties, the Constable may impryson him, until he has found suerties.

9. Ed. 4. 26.
42 In an action of Trespass of assault, battery, and imprisonment, Imprisoning
him that does attempt to rob.
the defendant pleaded, that the plaintiff lay in wait in a high way leading
from the town of A. to the town of B. to rob such persons as travailed in
that way, and assaulted to rob one L. and drew his sword, and commanded the
same L. to deliver his purse, whereupon L. fled and levied Huy and Cry, and
this defendant being travailing that way, pursued the plaintiff, and took him,
and committed him to the Constable to be put in the stocks, who did it
accordingly: and this was adjudged a good justification: for every man may
arrest and imprison him that does commit a felony, or him who makes it
apparent, that he does intend, and go about to commit a felony: for that he
does manifest him self to be a principal breaker of the law and peace of the
realm.

Assisting to arrest by warrant.
43 In an action of false imprisonment against two, 19. H. 6. 43. 56.
one of them pleaded that he had a precept to arrest the plaintiff which he did
accordingly, And the other defendant pleaded that he came in company with the
other to aid and assist him to arrest the plaintiff. And this was allowed a
good Justification in them both: for any stranger may assist a Sheriff, his
Baylifes or any other that has authority to execute the Kings writs or process,
and he that will not assist him being required shall pay a fine to the King:
And the Sheriff may take as many persons as he will to aid him to execute the
Kings writs, 3. H. 7. 1. 17. E. 4. 5.
for it is in furtheraunce of Justice and no breach of the peace.

Breaking a house to arrest
44 If a man be indicted of Trespass, 27. Ass. pla. 35. 18. E. 4. 4.
and a Capias pro fine awarded to the Sheriff to take the body of the same
person, The Sheriff may break open his house, or close to arrest and imprison
him, and it is a lawful imprisonment. But the Sheriff may not break any house
or chest to make execution by virtue of a fieri facias to him directed. S.
Force 32.

The Sheriff arre^eth and does not return his writ
45 If the Sheriff have a Capias to arrest a man, and he does arrest him, and
after does not return his writ, the party arrested may have an action of
false imprisonment against the Sheriff, and recover damages for his wrongful
arrest or Imprisonment: for the Capias is, ita quod habeas corpus cius etc. and
so if he have not the parties body in the Kings Court at the day of the return
of the writ, it shall be intended that he did not arrest him by force of that
writ, nor according to the purport of it, but of his own wrong. But if the
Sherifes Baylie do arrest the man, 11. H. 4. 58. 21. H. 7. 22.
and the Sheriff does not return the writ, the party arrested shall not have
an action of false imprisonment against the Bailie: for the Sherifes offense
shall not prejudice the Baylie, and the Baylie can not compel the Sheriff to
return the writ: for a Shirife or a Bailie errant which is known and sworn
may arrest a man without showing his warrant, A known officer may arrest
without showing his warrant.
for every man is bound to take knowledge of them; But where the Sheriff does
make a precept to an other to arrest, he must show his warrant. 21. H. 7. 22.
11. H. 4. 36.
And if a Capias be awarded to the Sheriff without an original to take a man,
and he does take him, yet the party grieved shall not have his action of false
imprisonment against the Sheriff, for that he did it by warrant of the Kings
writ, Arresting a man by a Capias without an original.
for it is a good plea in an action of False imprisonment to say that he is
Shirife of the County of M. and that he did arrest the plaintiff by force of a
Capias directed to him, which is the same imprysonment. 22. E. 4. 47.


Arresting upon suspicion of felony.
46 In an action of False imprisonment, 7. H. 4. 35. 27. H. 8. 23.
it is no plea for the defendant to plead, that it was told him, that the
plaintiff had brought cattle to the town, and put them in a blind corner, and
that there was great cause of suspicion that the plaintiff had stolen them,
whereupon he did arrest him; for suspicion only without a felony committed, is
no cause to arrest an other. But if a felony be done in those parts, and one
does suspect an other to have committed the same felony, then he may arrest
him: for a Justice of peace can not arrest an other of suspicion of felony,
14. H. 8. 16.
unless he himself does suspect him to have committed felony, And so much an
other may do that does suspect one to have committed felony viz. if he
himself does suspect him to have committed the felony. The common voice and
fame of the country, cause of suspicion.
The common voice and fame of the Country is a great cause of suspicion of
felony where a felony is committed. 2. H. 7. 15. 5. H. 7. 4. 11. E. 4. 4.
And therefore in an action of false Imprisonment, the defendant pleaded that
there was a felony committed, and the common voice and fame of the Country
was, that the plaintiff was a man of evil behavior, and had done the same
felony: whereupon he that was robbed, came to the Constable and requested him
to arrest the plaintiff, and the Constable came to the defendant and desired
him to assist him to arrest the plaintiff, the which he did, and they arrested
him. And this was allowed a good justification, and sufficient cause to arrest
the plaintiff, seeing there was a Robbery committed, and the common voice and
fame of the Country accused the plaintiff thereof. 5. H. 7. 4.
And in like sort in an action of false imprisonment the defendant pleaded
that I. S. was poisoned, and that the common voice and fame of the Country was
that the plaintiff had poisoned him, whereupon the defendant apprehended the
plaintiff, Suspected of poisoning.
and committed him to prison, as it was lawful for him to do: And this was
also adjudged a good Plea in bar of the said action, for seeing a felony was
committed and the common voice and fame of the Country had accused the
plaintiff thereof, every person who him self has suspicion that the plaintiff
has committed the same felony may arrest him thereof. And so it is if in an
action of false imprisonment, the defendant do plead, that before the
imprisonment A. B. was slain at C. and the plaintiff was in the company of
those who killed him at the time of the felony committed, 7. Ed. 4 10. 7. Eliz.
Die. 236.
Suspected of Manslaughter.
and the common voice and fame of the Country at C. was that the plaintiff was
party to the felony, whereupon the defendant found the plaintiff at C. and
arrested him for suspicion of felony, and committed him to the Sheriff, which
is the same imprisonment. And this was allowed a good and sufficient Plea and
not double, though the defendant did allege the common voice and fame of the
country, and the being in company with those that killed A. B. for where a man
does justify for suspicion of felony, he may show as many causes of suspicion
as he can. And it is a good cause of suspicion to say, Causes of suspicion.
that huy and cry was levied after a felony committed, and that the plaintiff
was a man suspected, Or to say that the plaintiff was a vagarant, exercising no
trade to get his living by, and no laborer, Or to plead that parcel of the
goods stolen were taken in the possession of the plaintiff.

38. Ed. 3. 6. 10. H. 7. 20.
47 In an action of false imprisonment, Arresting upon doubts of Manslaughter.
the defendant pleaded that the plaintiff had so beaten and wounded an other
man, that he was in great peril and danger of death, and that upon the same
huy and cry was levied, whereupon the defendant being Constable did arrest and
imprison the plaintiff four days, until it might be known whether the
party wounded were like to live, or dye, and when he perceived that the party
beaten was like to live, he did let the plaintiff go at liberty: and this was
adjudged a good plea in bar. 24. Ed. 3. 9.
And in the like case in an action of False imprisonment brought against one,
the defendant pleaded, that the King had directed a Commission to certain
persons to apprehend those that were notoriously slaundered for felonies, or
great trespasses, notwithstanding they were not indicted thereof, and that the
plaintiff had most dangerously wounded I.S. whereupon the Commissioners
directed their warrant to the defendant, to apprehend the plaintiff, which he
did accordingly: And this was allowed a good justification, and the plaintiff
was barred of his action; for in both these cases the peace was broken, and at
the time of the arrest it was uncertain whether the offense would prove
felony or not.

A Justice of peace warrant to arrest a felon.
48 In an action of False imprisonment, the defendant justified, 14. H. 8. 16.
for that a Justice of peace directed a warrant unto him to arrest the
plaintiff for felony, which he did. And it was holden that a Justice of peace
cannot make a warrant to arrest a Felon, unless he be indicted, for he is a
Judge of record, and he must have a record whereupon he does award his process.
But if a Bailife serve his warrant, it is a good justification for him, though
the Justice of peace did err in the awarding of the process. And the same law
is, if the Shirife does err in any warrant that he does direct to the Bailife
of a Liberty.

Arresting an offender, and delivering him to the Constable.
If a man do arrest an other, 10. Ed. 4. 17.
who he knows has committed a robbery, man slaughter, or other felony, and
do deliver him to the Constable to carry to the jail, and the Constable will
set him at liberty, or does not carry him to the jail, or that the same
person arrested be rescued out of the possession or custody of him that did
arrest him; yet in neither of the foresaid cases, he that was arrested shall
have an action of False imprisonment against him that did arrest him, for that
there was no default in him, that the offender was not imprisoned according to
his desert.

Imprisonment until he has made an Obligation.
50 An action of False imprisonment was brought for imprysoning the plaintiff,
until he had made an Obligation of xl. 2. Ed. 4. 19.
pounds to the defendant and others unknown by duresse, and this was adjudged
maintenable, for if the plaintiff did not know their names, he could not
express their names, for the Obligation is not the effect of this suit, but
the imprisonment, and he shall not recover damages for the Obligation, but for
the imprisonment, for that he is not yet damnified by the Obligation; because
when that is sued, he may plead, that it was made by duresse of imprysonment,
and so avoid it. But if the action of False imprisonment be brought of an
imprisonment until he had made a fine, he shall recover damages for both, for
he is presently grieved by the fine, and so is he not by the Obligation.

51 If a master do imprison a man in a house, 22. Ed. 4. 45.
and deliver the key of the door of that house to his servant, The servant not
chargeable for the masters offense.
the party imprisoned cannot have an action of False imprysonment against the
said servant for the keeping of the key. But if the servant that has the key
do know that the same party were wrongfully imprisoned, then he ought to let
him go at liberty: for the servant is bound to obey his masters commandment,
but in those things that be lawful only. And if the servant which kept the
key did not know that the same party was imprisoned in that house, then upon
his plea of not guilty, he shall be excused in an action of False imprisonment
brought against him by the party imprisoned.

Imprisonment by force of a Justices.
52 If a writ of Natiuo habendo, or a Iusticies be directed to the Shirif, 2. H.
4. 24.
he cannot justify the impris. of any man by force thereof, for they be but
commissions to hold plea. And the body of a man shall not be arrested or
taken, but by process awarded out of a court of record, and by those Commissions
the Shirises court is not made a court of record.

9. Ed. 4. 30.
53 In an action of False imprisonment, A warrant upon a Supplicauit.
it is a good justification for the defendant to plead, that a Supplicauit came
to the Shirife to apprehend the plaintiff, who made his warrant to the
defendant to take him, which he did accordingly. And yet the Shirife can not
give his authority to an other to take suerty of him.

5. H. 7. 6.
54 A Justice of peace can not direct a warrant to apprehend him who has broken
the peace, for he is to be punished by indictment, Arresting him who would
break the peace.
at the Kings suit, or by action of Trespass of battery at the party grieved
his suit. But he may direct his warrant to apprehend him who he does doubt
means to break the peace in time to come, and to bring him before himself,
or some other Justice, or else to commit him to prison; for one Justice of
peace alone may do his endeavor to preserve the peace before it be broken: but
being once broken it must be punished by indictment in the presence of diverse
Justices of peace, or by action at the common Law.

Sta. 5. El. 4.
55 If any servant, woorkeman, or laborer, Imp. of a servant for assaulting of
his master.
shall wilfully or maliciously make any assault or affray upon his master,
mistress, or dame, or upon any other that shall at that time have the charge
or oversight of him, or of the work wherein he is appointed, or hired to work
and being thereof convicted before any two of the Justices of peace, Mayor, or
head officer of a town corporat where the offense is committed, or before
either of the Lords Presidents of the North, or Wales, by the confession of the
said servant, workman, or laborer, or by the witness and oath of two honest
men: Then every such offender shall suffer imprisonment by the space of one
whole year, or less, by the discretion of two Justices of peace (if it be
without a town corporat) and if it be within a town corporat, then by the
discretion of the Mayor or head officer of the same town corporat, with two
others of the discreetest persons of the same corporation at the least. And if
the offense shall require further punishment, then to receive such other open
punishment (so as it extend neither to life or limme) as the Justices of peace
in open Sessions, or as the more part of them, or the said mayor or head
officers, or vj. or iiij. at the least of the discreet persons of the same
corporation, before whom the offense shall be examined shall think convenient,
for the quality of the said offense so committed.

56 By which foresaid cases, and many more, Where imprisonment is lawful, and
where not.
it appears that imprisonment is lawful, and sufficiently authorized by the
Common Laws and Statutes of this Realm in diverse respects, and for many
crimes, and there is by it no breach of the peace, nor offense to the Law, when
it is inflicted by the warrant of the law: for it aduaunceth as much the
justice and peace of the Realm to have offenders punished, as to have the
innocent protected. But the imprisonment which tends to the breach of the
peace, and the offense of the law is, when one person or more upon his or their
own authority, either in revenge of some supposed wrong received, or in hope
of a private gain expected, or for some other cause, will of his or their own
authority imprison or arrest an other; for the redress whereof the party
grieved shall have an action of false imprisonment, or an action of trespass,
and recover his damages. And the same offender which before did wrongfully
imprison an other, shall then upon his conviction by verdict, or his own
confession, be himself lawfully imprisoned, until he has paid to the king a
fine.

Imprisonment for offenses done to the justice of the Realm.
57 As in the cases aforesaid, imprisonment of offenders is both tolerable and
requisite, when it is inflicted for misdemeanors done to the peace of the
Realm: so in many other cases it is as necessary when it is imposed for
offenses done to the law and justice of the Realm, being the foundation and
principal pillar of the same peace, and without the due execution whereof
there can not be a general and perfect peace. And amongst many other
transgressors who do offend contrary to the justice of the Realm, and yet in
a sort do preserve the peace, the law does principally note four kind of
persons worthy for their offenses to be imprisoned. Whereof the first be they
who do commit some acts that Imprisonment for committing unlawful acts
As to the first by the Statute of Anno 5. Sta. 5. El. 14.
Eliz. Forging of deeds.
Court Roll, or the will of any person in writing, S. Forgery ^
to the intent that the estate of freehold or inheritance of any person in any
lands should be recovered or charged etc. for forging of deeds is an injurious
and wrongful act, and always has bin hated, detested, and persecuted in this
Realm. Sta. 13. E. 1. 11.
By the Statute of Westminster. 2. If the master do assign auditors to any Bailifes,
Servants, Chamberlaines, or other receiuors which are bound to yield account,
Accomptants found in arrerrages.
and it chance them to be found in arrerages (all things being to them
allowed) they shall be arrested, and by the testimony of those auditors
committed to the next Jail which the King has in those parts, and shall be
received by the Sheriff, or his Jailer, and prisoned, fettered in irons, living
of their own goods, until they have fully satisfied their master of all the
arrerages; for detayning of the arrerages of an account is a plain and
manifest wrong to the master: 27. H. 6. 8.
And this imprisonment must be presently after the account taken, Disseison
contrary to his own lease.
and not any distance of time after. And he that does a disseisin, or makes an
entry contrary to his own deed, 14. Ass. pla. 12.
Or is convicted for the imbeziling of an Exigent, or for some other notorious
deceits, commits open and manifest injury, and therefore shall be
imprisoned. 8. Ass. ^. 20. 28. Ass. pla. 28.
If one man do make a lease of a Tenement by writing to an other for term of
life of the lessee, whereupon the lessee does enter and enjoys it, and after
the lessor does enter and disseise the lessee for life, and then the lessee do
bring an Assise against the lessor, and recover against him the Tenement
leased: in this case the same lessor shall be imprisoned, for that he made an
entry contrary to his own deed, and so willingly committed an open and
manifest wrong. 18. Ass. p. 3.
The same law is, if a man do make a disseisin of land, of his whole title
wherein he has before made a release, or confirmation to the tenant of the
same land, in this case he shall be imprisoned. And if a Guardian do take a
feoffement of his wards land, being within age, Fitz. Assise 395.
he shall be imprisoned therefore, for this, and all the former be injurious
acts, and known to the offenders to be prohibited by the law. As 50. Ed. 3. 1.
Imp. for prosecuting unlawful suits.
and that appeal do abate by the plaintifes nonsuit, or by any other default of
his, he shall be imprisoned. A woman brought an Appeal of the death of her
husband against one, 9. H. 4. 2.
who was attainted and hanged at her suit; and after she brought an appeal
against an other man of her said husbands death, who pleaded the attainder of
the first man in bar, whereupon the appeal was abated, and the woman
committed to prison for her wrongful vexation and suit. A woman brought an
appeal against a man of the death of her husband, 8. H. 4. 18.
and her said husband was brought into the court, and she was examined if that
were her husband, who said yea, but she supposed that he had been dead, and
therefore she was imprisoned for her false appeal. If one do bring an appeal
against an other, for a Murder, Burglarie, Robbery, or other felony committed
in W. in the County of N. and there is no such W. in that County, the appeal
shall abate, and the plaintiff shall be imprisoned: for it is manifest, that
this suit was commenced upon malice, and to put the defendant to vexation and
trouble, and not upon any Imp. for false or dilatory pleas.
or dilatorie pleas, in hinderance of suits, and retardation of justice. As if
a man in his plea do deny his own deed; 33. H. 6. 54. 45. Ed. 3. 11 6. Ass.
p. 4. 24. E. 3. 74. Sta. 34. Ed. 1
or do plead a false deed made to himself, which is found against him by
verdict; or do plead a deed that is rased, enterlined, or otherwise suspicious
that is adjudged against him, he shall be imprisoned. By the statute entitled
De coniunctim feoffatis, if the tenant in Assise do plead iointenancie of the
land in demand with his wife, Imprisonment for false pleading of iointenancie.
or a stranger, and shows a deed to testify the same, to the intent to abate
the plaintifes writ: and if it be found by the Assise that the exception was
maliciously alleged to delay the plaintifes right, the said tenant shall be
one year imprisoned, though the assise pass for him against the plaintiff.
And if that tenant in the assise be an Enfant, who does plead iointenancie, yet
if that plea be found against him, 37. Ass. pl. 1.
he shall be imprisoned: for that the said statute is general, 3. H. 6. 51.
St. 13. Ed. 1. 25.
and does not except an Enfant. By the statute of Westminster 2. if he that is named
a disseisour in an Assise, do personally allege any false exception, whereby
the taking of the assise is deferred, viz. that at an other time an assise of
the said tenements passed between the said parties, or that a writ of higher
nature is depending between them of the said tenements, Imp. for failing of a
record pleaded.
and does vouch any rols or records to warrant the same, and at the day given
he fails of his warrant, he shall be adjudged a disseisour, without
recognizance of the assise, and shall restore double damages of that which
shall be Quid iuris clamat, or Per quae seruitia, be brought against a man,
Imp. for not atturning.
who does appear in Court, and will not atturne to the plaintiff, nor plead in
bar, he shall be imprisoned for his stubbornes. And if the tenant that ought
to do homage or fealty to his Lord, Imprisonment for not doing his true
service.
do appear in Court, and will not do such of the said services as be claimed
of him, neither plead in bar thereof, Fitz. Per q^ seruitia 23.
he shall be imprisoned until he will do his foresaid services, for his
wilful contempt of the law, and disobedience to justice. And if a writ of
Estrepement be directed to the Shirife to prohibit him to commit wast in lands
against whom a real action, Co. Lib. 5. 105.
or action of Wast is depending, for, or touching the same lands: the Shirife
by force of the same writ may resist him who would do wast, And if he cannot
otherwise redress the offense, he may impryson him, and if need be, he may
take the power of the County to assist him; for this disobeying of the Kings
writ, and resistance of the Shirife, is a wilful frowardness and contempt of
the law in the offender, and therefore he deserves to taste the smart of the
Law by imprisonment for his contumacy. And in like sort by the statute of An^
27. Stat. 27. H. 8. 20. Stat. 32. H. 8. 7.
H. 8. and An^ 32. H. 8. it was ordained, That if any person after sentence
difinitiue given against him, by the Ordinary, his Commissarie, or other
competent minister, or lawful Judge, do obstinatly refuse to pay his Tithes,
or duties, or such sums of money adjudged, wherein he is condemned for the
same: Then two Justices of the peace of the same Shire (whereof one to be of
the Quorum) shall have authority upon information, Imp. for obstinate refusing
to perform the Ordinaries sentence.
certificat, or complaint made in writing by the ecclesiastical Judge that
gave the same sentence, to cause the same person so refusing to be attached,
and committed to the next Jail, and there to remain without bail or
mainprise, until he has found sufficient suerties to be bound by
Recognizance, or otherwise, before the same Justices, to the use of the King to
perform the said sentence. In the same manner may any one of the Kings
Council, or two Justices of peace, upon an Information or request made to them
by the Ordinary, St. 27. H. 8. 20.
commit any offender to ward, for any contempt, contumacie, disobedience, or
any other misdemeanour of his in any suit, for subtraction of Tithes,
offerings, and other duties of the Church, until he has found suerties etc.
vt gladius gladium iuuet.

What is Matheining.
58 Maiheming is an other greeuance in the Realm, and a special cause to
disturb the peace: And that is when one member of the Common weal shall take
from an other member of the same, a natural member of his body, or the use
and benefit thereof, and thereby disable him to serve the common weal by his
weapons in the time of war, or by his labor in the time of peace, and also
diminishes the strength of his body, and weaken him thereby to get his own
living, and by that means the common weal is in a sort deprived of the use of
one of her members.

How many sorts there be of maiheming.
59 This maiheming is a dismembring of a man, or taking away some member, or
part of his body, or the use thereof; As when a wound, blow, or hurt is given
or done by one person or more to an other person, whereby he is the less able
to defend himself in the time of war, or to get his living in time of peace:
And therefore, if a man do put out the eye, or cut off the hand, or foot, or
any joint of the hand, or foot of an other, it is a Maihem, though it be done
by chance medley. Sta. 5. H. 4. 5
(But if one man of malice pretended, do cut out the tongue, or put out the
eyes of any of the Kings subjects, it is Felony) And if one man do crush the
mouth, or head of an other, or break out his fore-teeth, it is a maihem, for
with them he may defend him self in battle: but to break his hinder teeth,
or to cut off his Nose, Fitz. Corone 458.
or Ears, whereby he loses his hearing, is no maihem, but a deformity, or
blemish of his body, and no weakening of his strength. It is a Maihem to pull
any boane out of a man's head, or to cut off any finger of a man's hand, 28. Ed.
3 94. Lib. int. fol. 45.
or to break any of them so, that they become shronke up, or dried up, or
dead, or crooked. Gelding of a man is also a maihem; though it be in a secret
place, yet it makes him more feeble, and unable to defend himself in in
bataile, or to work for his living. If by any wound received the sinews, or
veins of a man be shronke up, it is a maihem. To cut off the cheek or iawbone
of any person, Lib. intur fol. 45.
or so to crush, or break any of them that the same person is the less able
to take his meat or drink is a maihem. If one person or more do take an
other person by force, and put him in the stocks or otherwise bind him fast,
and after pour so much skalding what oil, and vinegar, or hot melted lead,
or other skalding licor upon any part of his body, and so continue it until it
does wast, and consume the flesh of the same part, and dry up and mortify the
veins and sinews of the same part, it is a maihem. If A. do strike at B. and
the weapon wherewith he strikes, breaking, or falling out of his hand by the
force of the blow does put out the eyes of D. this shall be adjudged a maihem,
13. H. 7. 14.
for that A. had an intention at the first to do some hurt in striking at B.

60 The greatness or smalnes of the wound in some of the cases aforesaid does
make the difference, whether it be a maihem or not, Examination of a maihem.
which is to be examined by the Justices of the court before whom the appeal of
maihem is depending, and by them to be decided, if they be requested by the
defendant in the appeall and will condescend to do it. And they may award the
Kings writ to the shirif of the county where the fact was done, to warn two
expert surgeons of that County, 28. Ass. p. 5. 28. E. 3. 94.
city or town, to appear in the same court at a day prefixed, to inform the
court what they think of the wound, and whether they conceive it to be a
maihem or not: And if the wound be fresh, and new, and thereby hardly to be
discerned, 41. Ass. pla. 27.
whether it will prove a maihem or not, the Justices need not presently to
examine it though the defendant in an appeal of maihem does desire it, or
notwithstanding he does plead that it is no maihem. And if in an appeall of
maihem the defendant does plead not guilty, 22. Ass. pla. 82.
without requesting that the maihem may be examined by the court, by this the
defendant has allowed that it is a maihem. But if in an appeall of maihem the
defendant does pray that the maihem may be examined, 21. H. 7. 40.
if the Justices and the surgeons, (that they will call unto them) be in doubt
whether it be a maihem or not, the Justices may refuse the examination, and
compel the defendant to put him self upon the trial of the country: And yet
in that case, if the defendant do pray that the maihem may be examined, 6. H.
7. 1. 22. Ass. p. 99
by the court, if the Justices do adiudge it a maihem, it is paremptorie to the
defendant, for he shall not after plead not guilty, or any other plea in Bar,
seeing by his plea he has allowed it to be a maihem. But the court can not
view the wound, and examine whether it be a maihem or not, 28. Ass. p. 8.
unless the defendant in the appeal will request it and refer it to their
judgment. If in an appeall of maihem the defendant do plead not guilty, 22.
Ass. p. 82
without requesting that the maihem, may be adjudged by the court, though the
Jury who are to try the issue do desire to see the plaintiff if he be
maihemed or not, the plaintiff need not to show his wound, for by pleading not
guilty the defendant has allowed that it is a maihem though he has estraunged
himself from the committing thereof.

9. H. 4. 2.
61 If several men do at one time assault one man, and one of them does maihem
him in one part of his body, Diverse appels of maihe^ for one offense
and an other in an other part, he may have several appeals of Maihem against
them: for that they be several maihems which he has received: And yet if
several men do murder or otherwise kill a man, there may be but one appeall of
murder maintained against them all, for that a man can have but one death. 40.
Ass. p. 1.
But if a man sue an appeall of maihem against several persons, whereof
against some as principals, and some others as accessories, and after appearance
he is nonsuit, he can not pursue an other appeall of maihem against the same
persons, and charge those as accessories, which before he had named principals,
nor those principals who before were suggested to be accessories.

Principal and accessorie in maihem.
62 In an appeall of maihem the plaintiff may choose to make all principals, or
else to make him principal that did first strike him, 40. Ass. p. 9. 41. Ass.
pla. 16.
and the residue accessorie. The Law was holden in ancient time that the
plaintiff in an appeall of maihem, must have declared against all the
defendants as principals: But now he may choose and make some principals, and
some accessories: for an appeall of maihem is in effect but an action of
Trespass wherein the plaintiff shall recover damages, Maihem is a Trespass. The
iudgem^t in appeall of maihem.
according to the quality and quantity of the offense, and the defendant shall
be imprisoned. 8. H. 4. 2 1.
And if the plaintiff do bring an appeal of maihem whereas it does appear to
the court that by the blow which was given him he is not maihemed, he shall
pay a fine.

Mainprise in an appeall of maihem.
63 In an appeall of maihem if it do appear to the court that the maihem is
very apparent, grievous, bloody, and extreme, 6. H. 7. 1.
as if a man's legs or arms be broken, or that the party maihemed is in great
peril of death, the defendant shall not be let to mainprise, no more then he
should be in an appeall of murder, or burglarie. But if the maihem be not
apparent, or that it is doubtful, and questionable whether it be a maihem or
not, then the defendant in an appeall of maihem may be let to mainprise. And
that also appears by the statute entitled officium Coronatoris: whereby it
is ordained, Stat. 3. E. 1.
that upon an appeall of maihem, if the wounds be mortal, they which be
appealled shall forthwith be apprehended, and kept until it be known whether
he that is hurt shall recover or not: if he die they shall be retained, if he
live, they shall be attached by four or six pledges according to the bigness
of the wound, if it be for a maihem then there shall be no less then four
pledges, if a small wound two will serve.

64 In an appeall of maihem the plaintiff does declare that the defendant did
maihem him felonice vt felo domini Regis: Why maihem is supposed to be done
felomously.
40. Ass. pla. 40. 6. H. 7. 1.
and so it may be called felony as petit Larcenie is called felony, or it may
be termed felony, for that the blow which caused the maihem may be a mean of
his death within the year and day after the stroke stricken, and then it will
be felony, or for that he which did give the blow had then a murdring mind and
so a felonious intent.

65 It is a good plea in bar in an appeall of maihem for the defendant to
plead, Bars in appeall of maihem.
that the plaintiff at the place aforesaid, Li. intur f. 45.
and at the day and year aforesaid, did make assault upon the defendant, and
would have beaten and killed him, unless the defendant had then and there
quickly defended himself against the plaintiff, and so the hurt and damage
(if any were) that then and there did come to the plaintiff was of the
plaintifes own assault and in defense of the defendant. Iustifiing in his own
defense.
And likewise it is a good plea in bar in an appeall of maihem for the
defendant to plead the plaintifs release made unto him after the supposed
offense done of all actions personals, or of all actions, The plaintifes
release.
or of all appeals, or of all demands: for in this case the plaintiff is but
to recover damages.

7. H. 4. 30.
66 If an appeal of maihem be brought against diverse, Execusion in appeal of
maihem.
and one of them does appear in court and confess the maihem, and is
committed to the Marshalsea, and the plaintiff has judgment against him, he
can not sue against the residue, unless he will suffer him that has confessed
the maihem to go at liberty: for if he has judgment, and the body of him who
confessed the maihem to remain in prison, that shall be an execution for this
whole maihem.

67 The Sages and Judges of the land in former ages did hold it for law, An
action of Trespass after an appeal of maihem.
that if one do assault, Fitz. Coron^ 110. 22. Ass. p. 82
beat, and maihem an other, and the party maihemed does bring an appeall of
maihem against the offender, and recover damages against him, yet after he may
have an action of Trespass of assault and battery against the same offender, and
recover damages for his beating: and the recovery of damages in the appeal
of maihem shall be no plea in bar against the plaintiff, for the appeal does
only meddle with the maiheming, and not with the beating. But if the plaintiff
do bring an appeal of maihem in the Kings bench, 43. Ass. p. 39
and after appearance be nonsuit in the same, and then do bring an action of
Trespass of assault and battery for the same fact, Then the defendant may plead
the same appeal and nonsuit in bar against the plaintiff, and it is a good
plea. 41. Ass. p. 16 Co. Lib. 4. 43.
But of late years, viz. An^ 31. Eliz. it was adjudged, that in this and all
cases, when the plaintiff for one wrong and injury is but to recover damages,
he shall not be for that cause satisfied twice for one offense: And in these
two actions of appeal of maihem and trespass, the plaintiff shall only recover
damages. And therefore it was adjudged a good plea in bar in an appeal of
maihem to plead, that the plaintiff had before brought an action of Trespass
against the defendant of assault, battery, and wounding, and had recovered
damages therein, and to auerre that the same assault, battery, and wounding,
and this maiheming were all one offense.

68 As the law has provided remedies to punish those who by menace, Restraint
of affraies by Justices of peace.
assault, battery, imprisonment, or maiheming, do break the peace, So has it
always had a vigilant eye by anticipation to prevent many others that would
break the peace by any of the means aforesaid, and therefore has from age to
age, appointed meet magistrates and watchmen, to whose charge specially (as
selected Sentinels) she did commit the preservation of the peace, who in times
past before the reign of King Edward the third were called Conseruators of the
peace, Stat. 1. E. 3. 26.
and sithence they have been termed Justices of peace, because they be Judges
of record, or otherwise they be named Commissioners of the peace, because they
have and derive their authority by the Kings Commission: who him self being
the chief and general Conseruator and Preserver of the peace throughout all
his Dominions, does by his several Commissions commit some particles of his
authority, touching the continuance of the peace, and maintenance of certain
of his Laws, to some chief and select men in all the parts of the Realm,
whom he takes to be the most meet men for the same, in respect of their
integrity, wisdom, learning, courage, and liuelyhood. The form of so much of
which Commission as touches the Peace and good Abearing is this. Iacobus etc.
praedilecto and fideli Conciliario nostro Thomae domino Elsmere domino
Cancellario, nec non praedilectis, A.B.C.D.E.F.G. H.I.L.M.N.O.P. etc. The
Commission of the Peace.
Sciatis quod assignauimus vos coniunctim and diuisim, and quemlibet vestrum
Iusticiarios nostros ad pacem nostram in Comitatu nostro buck. conseruand', ac
ad omnia ordinationes and Statuta pro bono pacis nostrae, ac pro conseruatione
eiusdem, and pro quieto regimine, and gubernatione populi nostri aedita in
omnibus and singulis suis articulis in dicto comitatu nostro (tam infra
libertates quam extra) iuxta vim, formam, and effectum eorundem custodiend',
and custo dire faciendum. Et ad omnes contra formam ordinationu^ vel Statutorum
illorum aut eorum alicuius in comitatu praedicto delinquentes, castigandu^ and
puniendum, prout secundum sormam ordinationu^ and Statutoru^ illorum fuerit
faciendum. Et ad omnes illos qui alicui vel aliquibus de populo nostro, de
corporibus suis, vel de incendio domoru^ suarum minas fecerint, ad sufficiente^
securitatem, de pace vel bono gestu suo, erga nos and populum nostru^,
inueniendam, coram vobis seu aliquo vestrum venire faciendum: Et (si huiusmodi
securitatem inuenire recusauerint) tunc eos in prisonis nostris (quousque
huiusmodi securitatem inuenirent) saluo custodire faciendum. Et ideo vobis and
cuilibet vestrum mandamus, quod circa custodiam pacis, ordinationum,
Statutorum, and omnium and singulorum caeterorum praemissorum diligenter
intendatis; Et ad certos dies, and loca, quae vos vel aliqui duo, vel plures
vestru^ (vt praedict' est) ad hoc prouideritis, super praemissis faciatis
inquisitiones, and premissa omnia and singula audiatis and terminetis, ac ea
faciatis and expleatis in forma praedicta, factur^ in de quod ad Iusticiam
pertinet, secundu^ legem and consuetudinem Regni nr^i Angliae, saluis nobis
amerciamentis, and alijs ad nos inde spectantibus.

69 And though there be many other offenses mentioned in the said commission
which the Justices of peace are by force of the said Commission to enquire of,
hear, and determine, and to punish the offenders therein, according to the
laws and Statutes of the Realm: Yet as it appears by the words of the said
commission, the same has his chief care and respect of the peace, and to the
preservation thereof. And to the intent that the said Justices, or
commissioners should the better remember and respect their charge and duty,
they are called Justices or commissioners of the peace, and not commissioners
of justice, of conscience, or equity etc. And so their names, together with
their offices, and duties be in a sort written in their foreheads. And the
restraining or punishment of all the other offenses mentioned in the said
commission, do only tend to the maintenance of justice, the root, foundation,
and supporter of peace. And whereas the King by the words of the said
Commission does appoint the persons therein named his Justices to preserve his
peace, The Commission does chiefly respect the peace.
and to keep and cause to be kept all ordinances, and Statutes made for the
conservation of the peace, and the quiet government of his people: These
Statuts amongst many others chiefly be intended, Sta. 2. E. 3. 6. 18. E. 3. 2.
34. Ed. 3. 1.
the Statutes of Anno 2. Ed. 3. 18. Ed. 3. and 34. Ed. 3. by which it is
ordained, that Justices of peace shall have power to hear and determine at the
Kings suit all manner of felonies, Why they be called Justices of Peace.
and Trespasses, committed against the peace in the same County: and to
restrain offenders, riottors, and all other barretors, and to pursue, take,
and chasten them, to imprison and punish them according to their Trespass and
offense, and to inform them according to the said Justices discretion: And to
inquire of all those that have been pillars and robbers beyond the Sea and
become again, and go wandering, and will not labor as they had wont to do:
And to take and arrest all those, which they can find by indictment, or
suspicion, and to commit them to prison: Binding persons suspected to their
good behavior.
And to take of all those which be not of good fame in the place where they
remain sufficient suertie and maineprise of their good abearing or behavior
toward the King and his people, and the other duly to punish, To the intent
that the people be not by such Rioters troubled, or endammaged, nor the peace
broken, nor any passengers by the way disturbed, or put in peril. But the
fines which Justices shall assesse upon any person shall be reasonable, having
regard the quantity of the Trespass, and the cause.

70 So that it appears both by the words of the said Commission of peace, A
Justice taking suertie of the peace.
and also by the foresaid Statutes, That a Justice of peace by virtue of his
office has authority to prevent the breach of the peace, both by taking
suertie for the keeping of it, and for the good behavior of the offenders, And
that he may do either of his own motion, or discretion, or else at the request
or prayer of an other. And by his own discretion he may cause a common
Barretor, Rioter, or one that makes an affray in his presence, or other person
to him suspected to be inclyned to the breach of the peace, 9. E. 4. 3.
or men menacing one to hurt or kill an other, or contending in whote words, to
find suertie of the peace. And he may persuade one man to require the suertie
of peace against an other man, and he himself after may grant it: for it is
no more then he might have done of his own authority: which suertie of the
peace, What the suertie of the peace is.
is a recognizance taken by the said Justice of peace of the party and his
suerties to the King, for the keeping of the peace. And as a Justice of peace
may take this suertie of peace, or suertie of good abearing, as a Judge by
virtue of his office; So may he do it as a minister by force of a Supplicauit
directed unto him out of the Chauncerie; Taking suerty of the peace by a
Supplicauit.
in which case he is then only to direct his precept to compel the party upon
the writ to find suertie of the peace. Which Supplicauit out of the Chauncerie
is sometime directed to one Justice of peace alone, sometime to more, and
sometime to the Shirife, and sometime to him with others: And then the same
Justice or Justices of peace, or Shirife must make return of the said writ of
Supplicauit, and a Certificat of his doing into the Court from whence the same
was awarded. And if the said Justice of peace shall take the said Recognizance
for the keeping of the peace by virtue of his office, Sta. 3. H. 7. 1
then by force of the Statute of Anno 3. H. 7. he shall certify, send,
Certificat of a Recognizance
or bring the same Recognizance at the next Sessions of the peace where he is,
or has bin Justice, that the party so bound may be called. And if the party
make default, the same then there to be recorded: And the same Recognizance
with the record of that default shall be sent and certified into the
Chauncerie, the Kings Bench, or into the Exchequer. Suertie of good abearing.
And the suertie of good abearing is granted by authority of the foresaid
commission of peace, and by the warrant of the before rehearsed statut of 34.
E. 3. as well as the suerty of peace is, and it is ordained for the preservation
of the peace, and it does differ in nothing from that of the peace, but that
there is more difficulty in the performance of it, and the party bound may
sooner slide into the peril and danger of it. The suerty of good abearing is
most commonly granted in open sessions, or by two, or three Just. of P. Or upon
a Supplicauit, and great cause showed, and proved, it is granted in the
Chancery or K. Bench. And though one Justice of peace alone may grant it if he
will, yet it is sildom done so, 9. E. 4. 3. Kel. fo. 41.
unless it be to prevent some great, sudden, and imminent enormity or danger.
The suerty of peace is most times taken at the request of one for the
preservation of the peace chiefly against one. But the suerty of good abearing
is oftentimes granted at the suit of diverse, and those must be men of credit,
and to provide for the safety of many: for the effect and purport thereof is,
that the party bound shall demean himself well in his port, behavior, and
company, and do nothing that may be the cause of the breach of the peace, or
in putting the people in fear or trouble: And it is chiefly granted against
common Barretors, common rioters, common quarrellers, common peace breakers,
and persons greatly defamed for resorting to houses suspected to maintain
incontinencie or adultery, and against those that be generally feared to be
robbers or spoilers of the Kings people, or which do endamage, disturb,
trouble, Articles exhibited to have good abearing granted.
or put in peril passengers by the way: Co. li. 4. 14.
And therefore if one do exhibit Articles to Justices of peace against a
certain person, comprehending diverse great abuses, and misdemeanors, not only
touching the Petitioner himself, but many others, to the intent that the same
person may be bound to his good behavior: in this case the party so accused
shall not for any matter contained in the said Articles maintain an action
upon the case; for the party or parties who exhibited the said Articles have
pursued an ordinary course of Just. and nothing was attempted but the
reformation of the man's conditions, and to have the peace and good behavior
continued. The suertie of good abearing in other cases then for the peace.
And though this suerty of good abearing is chiefly provided for the
continuance of the peace, yet by force of several Statutes it is also
grauntable in some other cases. St. 10. E. ^. 3
As if the King do grant to any person a charter of pardon of any felony, then
he shall come within three Months before the Shirife and Coronors of the same
County where the felony was done, and find six sufficient Mainpernours (for
whom the said Shirife and Coronors will answer) that he from thenceforth shall
bear him self well and lawfully. Sta. 1. M. 3
And if any man disturb a Preacher in his Sermon he shall be bound to his good
abearing for one year. St. 3. Iac. 19. 5. El. 21.
And he shall be bound to his good abearing for seven years who does
unlawfully hunt and steal dear, or conies or take away wrongfully any hawks,
or hawks eggs, or shall unlawfully distroy or break the head or damme of
any pond, poole, moate, stagne or stew whereas fish are put, or shall
wrongfully fish in any of them, to the intent to steal or take away any of
them, against the will of the owner or possessor of the same, not having
lawful authority so to do. And he shall be bound with two sufficient
suerties in CC. Sta. 23. El. 1.
l. to the good behavior which does absent himself from the Church by the
space of twelve months etc.

71 Because it appears by the words of the foresaid commission of peace, that
the said Justices of peace shall cause al those to find suerty of peace which
do threaten any of the Kings people to hurt them in body, or to burn their
houses: For whom and against whom the suertie of peace is to be granted.
Therefore all lay persons under the degree of Lords or Peers of the Realm;
and also Ecclesiastical persons, if they be not attendant upon divine service
may be arrested to find suerty for the peace. And if the husband do threaten
to kill his wife, or outragiously to beat her, or that she has any notorious
cause to fear that he will do so, Fitz. Not. Bre. 80. 239.
she may demand the suertie of the peace against him, and she shall have it
granted. And in like sort and for the like causes may the husband demand
suertie of the peace against his wife, in which case she her self shall not
be bound, but others shall be bound for her. And a Justice of peace upon his
own discretion may in either of the foresaid cases grant suertie of peace. And
one Justice of peace may upon his own discretion, or at the request of an
other grant the suertie of peace, against an other of his fellow Justices of
peace of the same county. And one Justice of peace may demand suertie of peace
of an other of his fellow Justices against an other man. A man attainted of
Treason, or Felony, or in a Praemunire, A man attainted. An Heretic. A Dumb
man An Enfant. A Villeine.
or abiured, or convict of Heresy, a dumb man, or an Enfant within the age of
xiiij. years, may demand and ought upon cause to have suertie of peace. And
so may a Villeine have suertie of peace against his Lord, least that his Lord
should maihem him, and the Lord may have suertie of peace against his villein.
A dumb man, or an Enfant above the age of xiiij. year may also be enforced to
find suerties for the keeping of the peace: but then themselves are not to be
bound, but some others for them: Or else they must be committed to prison
until they can find suerties. A Justice of peace cannot grant suertie of
peace against a Baron of the Realm, nor any other above the degree of a Baron:
A Baron.
But the party who would have the peace against him, must bring him by Subpoena
into the Chauncerie, Fitzh. Subpoena 20.
and there he must be bound to the peace. A man that is frantike shall not have
the suertie of peace of his own demand, A mad man.
because he has not discretion to request it. But a Justice of peace upon his
own discretion may bind an other to keep the peace against him, if he see
cause thereof. Neither shall he who is a Alien borne, and no Denizen, An Alien.
nor in friendship with the King and the Realm have suertie of peace granted
him.

17. Ed. 4. 4.
72 If a man do threaten an other to imprison him, the party threatened shall
not have the suertie of peace against him that did so menace him, Upon what
cause the suertie of peace is to be granted.
for that after he is imprisoned, he may have against the other a Homine
replegiando, or an action of false imprisonment, and recover damages, and so be
recompensed for his imprisonment. But if one man do threaten an other to beat
him, the party threatened may have the suertie of peace against him: for that
beating may tend to the maiheming or killing of him, which the suertie of peace
might have prevented. If a man do fear that an other will kill him, maihem
him, hurt him in body, or burn his house, or procure, or cause the same to be
done, and will come before a Justice of peace, Fitz. Na. B. 79.
and take his corporal oath to that effect, the Justice of peace is to grant
him the suertie of peace against the man complained of: for that may satisfy
the conscience of the said Justice, that the party does complain upon mere
fear, and not upon malice or vexation. And though the party against whom the
peace is demanded may seem to the Justice of peace to be a simple person,
weak, feeble, impotent, or far unable to encounter by force and strength with
him that demands the suertie of peace, yet he may procure, or cause the
other to be slain, maihemed, beaten, or his house to be burned: And further if
the party that does complain and desi^eth the suertie of peace, will swear
that he does fear, where indeed he neither does fear, nor has cause of
fear, yet his oath does therein discharge the conscience and oath of the
Justice of peace. And the whole fault (if any be) shall be justly imputed to
the complainor.

73 And whereas the words of the kings Commission be, Suertie of peace enjoined
by word or writing.
That the said Justices of peace shall cause all those to find suertie of peace,
which do threaten any of the kings people to hurt them in body, or to burn
their houses. It is to be observed, that in some cases a Justice of peace may
by his own word only cause suertie of peace to be found, and sometime he must
do it by writing: As if one man do in the presence and hearing of a Just. of
peace, threaten to kill, maihem, wound, or beat an other, or to burn his
house, or in his presence do offer to strike, or beat an other, the Justice of
peace may command him by word to find suertie of peace: Or if one man will
demand of a Justice of peace, the suertie of the peace against an other man,
who is then in the presence of the said Justice of peace, and will then and
there be sworn that he is afraid of him, the Justice of peace may by word
command the same party to find suertie of peace: or otherwise he may command
the Shirife, Bailife, or some known officer, or his own servant being then
present, to arrest the same party, and to bring him before him to find suertie
of peace. But if the party against whom the peace is demanded, or the
Shirife, or Baylife be absent, and not at that time in the presence of the
Justice of peace: Then the same Justice must make a warrant or precept in
writing to the Constables, Boursholders, Tythingmen, etc. or to any other man
(though he be no Officer) to arrest the same party, and to bring him before
him, or some of his fellow Justices to find suertie of peace. In which Precept
must be contained the cause why the peace was granted, and at whose suit, to
the intent that the party to be bound may provide his suerties ready, and take
them with him to the Justice of peace. Suertie of peace commanded by writing.
And the warrant ought to bear date of the place where it was made, 14. H. 8.
18.
to the intent that if an action of False imprisonment be brought against him
that made the same arrest by force of that warrant, the defendant in his plea
must show the place where it was made. If suertie of peace be required of a
Justice of peace of one County (which at that time remains out of the County
where he is Justice) against a man of the County where he is Justice, the same
Justice may grant a precept to be served in the County where he is Justice: A
Justice remaining out of the county.
But when the party shall be warned to find suerties, Plow. Com. fol. 37. 13.
Ed. 4. 8.
the officer must not carry him out of that County to the Justice that made
the precept, but to some other Justice of that County: for a Justice has no
authority but in the County where he is Justice.

The serving of process for the peace.
74 If a Precept be made by a Justice of peace (either as he is a Judge, or as
he is a minister) to two men to arrest a man to find suertie of the peace, yet
one of them alone may do it: If it be directed to the Shirife, he may command
his Vndershirife, Bailife, or other sworn or known officer to serve it, Who
may serve a warrant without writing, who not.
without any precept by writing: But if he will command an other man that is
no known officer to serve it, he must deliver him a precept in writing, for
otherwise he does if not by sufficient warrant, and so a writ of False
imprysonment will lie against him for the arrest. And if a Just. of peace do
direct his warrant to the Shirifes Bailife, his own servant, or to a stranger,
to arrest one for to find suertie of the peace, the party to whom that warrant
is made must serve it himself, for he can command none other to do it, either
by precept or word. A sworn and known officer, be he Shirife, Vndershirife,
or Bailife, Who may serve a warrant without showing of it, and who not.
etc. 8. E. 4. 14. 20. H. 7. 13.
need not to show his warrant to a man when he comes to serve it upon him,
for his known office does authorize him. But if a Justice of peace will direct
his warrant to his servant, or to an other stranger to serve, he must show his
warrant to the party (if he will demand it) or otherwise the party may make
resistance, and need not to obey it. And if the party against whom the suertie
of the peace is granted, Refusing to obey the Justices warrant.
will upon the serving of the Justices precept, refuse to come to be bound to
the peace, the party to whom the warrant is directed, may commit him to the
jail of the same County, there to remain until he will find suerties. A
warrant for the peace. Buck.
The form of which warrant for the peace is this, viz. Anthonius Greenway
Miles, vnus Iusticiariorum domini Regis nunc, ad pacem in Comitatu praedicto
conseruandam assignatus, vicecomiti comitatus praedicti. Nec non omnibus and
singulis Balliuis, Constabularijs ceterisque Dn^i Regis ministris, tam infra
libertates quam extra in eodem com^ salutem. Quia A. B. de Bechampton in
comitatu praedicto Tailor venit coram me, and sacramentu^ praestitit corporale,
quod ipse sibi metuit damnum vel malum de vita and mutilatione membrorum per
R.C. de Stonistratford in comitatu praedict' Butcher, vel per alium per eius
procurationem ficri. Ideo vobis and cuilibet vestru^ exparte dicti Domini Regis
mando quod capiatis, seu vnus vestrum capiat prefatu^ R. C. ita quod habeatis,
seu vnus vestru^ habeat corpus eius coram me, vel aliquo sociorum meorum
Iusticiaor^ dicti dn^i Regis ad pacem in predict. Comitur conseruanda^
assignatur qua^ cito capi possit ad inuenienda^ sufficiente^ securitate^, quod
ipse aliquod malum vel damnum de vita seu mutilitatione membroru^ dicto A. B.
non faciet nec fieri procurabit quouismodo. Et si hoc facere recusauerit tunc
ipsu^ R. C. Jail dicti dn^i Regis in comitatu predict' duci faciatur, seu vnus
vestrum duci faciat, ibidem moraturum, quousque hoc gratis facere voluerit. Et
qualiter hoc praeceptu^ fuerit executum scire facias dictis Iusticiarijs ad
proxima generalem Sessionem pacis in com' paedict' tenendam, and habeas ibi
tunc hoc preceptum. Dat. apud Lecomstead etc.

21. H. 7. 21. Co. li. 5. 59.
75 If a Justice of peace do direct his warrant to a Constable or other
officer, to arrest one, and to bring him before the same Justice, To which
Justice of peace the party arrested is to be brought.
or some other of his companions to find suertie of the peace, and he does
arrest him accordingly, but will not bring him before such a Justice of peace
as the party arrested will nominate, but before some other, yet
notwithstanding the party arrested shall not have an action of false
Imprisonment, or an action of the case, nor other remedy against the same
Constable, or officer: for it is in the discretion of the same Constable, or
officer, to bring the party arrested before which Justice of peace of that
County that he will, so that he dwell within a convenient distance, and not too
far from the parties own habitation. But if a Supplicauit of the peace be
directed to the Justices of the peace, the Justice to whom the writ is first
delivered shall only make the precept to apprehend the party to find suerty of
the peace, and that precept shall be retornable before him only, and he only
shall take the suerties, and only make the return without the others. Co. lib.
5. 59
And a Justice of peace may if he will make a warrant to the Constable to bring
the party before himself.

5. Ed. 4. 12.
76 If a Justice of peace do direct his warrant to the Constable, A warrant to
find suertie to keep the peace
or some other to cause A.B. to find suerties to keep the peace, The same
Constable or etc. must first require the same A.B. to find suerties to keep
the peace, and if he do refuse it, then he may arrest the same A. B. for if A.
B. will find suerties, then the said Constable may not arrest him, because the
purport of the precept is performed (which is if he refuse so to do, that then
he shall convey him to the Jail.) And if the Constable shall arrest A. B.
after that he has found suerties according to the precept, the same A. B. may
have an action of false imprisonment against him, for that he has arrested and
imprisoned him without warrant, or cause. And likewise if the Constable do
arrest A. B. and do not carry him before some Justice of peace, 5. E. 4. 6.
to find suerties to keep the peace or if he resist, or refuse so to do, then
if he do not carry him to the Jail, A.B. may have an Action of false
Imprisonment against the Constable: The party must offer his suerties.
And when the party comes to the Justice of peace by force of a warrant, he
must offer suerties to the Just. of P. or else he may commit him to prison: 14.
H. 7. 5.
for the Just. needs not to demand suertie of him.

Suerty of the peace dies with the king
77 The suertie of peace is discharged by the kings death, 1. H. 7. 1.
for the band is to observe the peace of the King, and when he is dead it is
not his peace: So does the death of the recognisor, and so does also the death
of him at whose suit it was taken, discharge the suertie of the peace if in
those cases it were not forfeited before. The Justices authority dies with
the King.
And in like sort when the King by his commission does appoint Justices of
peace and after dies, or gives over his crown, the Authority of the same
Justices does cease: for he makes them Iusticiarios suos, and therefore when
he dies their authority ends.

The suertie for the peace must be named.
78 When a Justice of peace does take suerties for the peace, 2. H. 7. 4.
it is not sufficient to say, that I. N. has found sufficient suertie for the
peace without naming the names of the suerties: but he must name their names
and surnames.

He that is vound to the peace must appear etc.
79 If a man do find suerties to keep the peace, 39. H. 6. 26.
and has day until a time prefixed, he must appear the same day (although he
who demanded the peace do not appear) or otherwise, he shall forfeit his
band. But it is otherwise where a suit is between party and party, and the
defendant being taken by a Capias is bound to appear upon a day appointed.

80 When the suertie of peace is granted against a man by a Justice of peace,
he will sometime rather desire to be bound to the peace by an other Justice,
then by him that granted the same, and made the warrant: And therefore he may
offer himself to become bound to the peace to some other Justice of peace of
that County if he will, A Supersedeas for the peace.
and then procure a Supersedeas from that other Justice before whom he is bound
to all other Justices of that County to be discharged of any other arrest to
be made of him, for the law does not require that he should be several times
bound for one cause. And this Supersedeas is sufficient although it neither
name the suertie, nor contein the sums wherein they are bound, but yet it is a
better form to express them both, as the Chauncerie and Kings Bench do. And
when a man does hear of such a precept awarded or granted against him by a
Just. of peace of the County where he dwells, he may go and either give
suertie of the peace in the K. Bench or else in the Chancery, and thereupon may
procure a Supersedeas from the court where he is bound, to restrain the Just.
of peace of the County to take any suertie of peace of him. And then the
Justices of peace of that County must forbear to make any warrant for the
peace against the party; and if any of them have awarded it, A precept awarded
by force of a Supplicauit.
he must make a Supersedias to discharge it. But a Just. of peace of the county
by a Supersedeas cannot discharge a precept that is awarded by his fellow Just.
by force of a Supplicauit directed to him out of the Chancery or the K. Bench
to take the suertie of peace of one resident in that County. If any officer
having a warrant from a Just. of P. to arrest a man to find suerty of the peace
shall receive a Supersedeas out of the Chancery, or the Kings Bench, or from
any Justice of the Kings Bench or from any Justice of peace of that County
where he is commorant, to discharge the same suerty of peace, will nevertheless
urge that party against whom the same warrant is granted to find new suertie
for the peace, he may refuse to give it: And if the said officer will thereupon
under ye color of his warrant commit him to prison, the party imprisoned may
have an action of false impris. against him: for ye the said warrrant is
discharged by as great authority, or greater, as it was made, and the thing
for the which it was made is effected. The form of which Supersedeas granted
by a Justice of the peace is this, viz:

Thomas Denton Miles, Buck.
vnus Iusticiariorum dn^i Regis nunc ad pacem in Comitatu predicto conseruandum
assignatur, Vicecomiti comitatus praedicti: A Supersedeas for the peace.
Nec non cibus and singulis Balliuis, Constabularijs, ceterisque dicti dn^i
Regis ministris, tam infra libertates quam extra in eodem Con^i Salute^. Quia
A. B. de Poundon in com^ praedict' Laborer venit cora^ me, and in venit
sufficiente^ securitatur qd'ipse comparebit ad proxima^ generale^ Sessione^
pacis in com^ praedicto tenend'. Et quod ipse interim pace^ dicti Dn^i Reg.
erga ipsu^ dominu^ Reg. and cunctu^ populu^ suu^, and precipue erga C. D. de
Twyford in com^ praedicto Husbandman conseruabit ideo ex part dicti dn^i regis
vobis and cuilibet vestru^ mando, quod de arrestando, imprisonando, seu
aliqualiter molestando praedictu^ A. B. ex causa predicta Supersedeatis, and
quilibet vestru^ Supersedeat omnio. Et si eu^ ex dict' causa, and non alia
ceperitis, seu imprisionaueritis, seu aliquis vestru^ ceperit, seu
imprisonauerit, tunc a prisona illa s^ne dilatione deliberari faciatis,
Supersedeas in the Chancery for one bound in the common pla^e.
datu^ apud Hilsdon etc. 22. H. 6. 59.
But if a man be arrested in the common place for the suertie of peace, and he
is let to bail, to a certain day, at which day he does bring a Supersedias
out of the Chauncerie, that he has found suerties in the Chauncery: that is
not alloweable, because he was by bail, which is an imprisonment in law, and
therefore the suertie in the Chauncery will not serve. And it may be that the
suerties in the Chancery be not sufficient, and that the King and the Court was
deceived therein. And yet the common place has no authority to take suerty of
peace, 2. H. 7. 1.
but of the peace broken before them.

81 When the party against whom the precept is awarded to find suerties for
the keeping of the peace, A Recognizance for the keeping of the peace.
does come before the Justice of peace to be bound to the peace, then it
rests in the discretion of the same Justice of peace (if he deal in this
cause as a Justice of peace by force of the general commission of peace, and
so as a Judge) to assign what number of suerties he will accept to be bound
with the party, in what sum of money the party and his suerties shall be
bound, to allow, or disallow of the sufficiency of those suerties, to limit
the time how long the party shall be bound, and to determine upon some such
other circumstances touching that matter. But if the same Just. of peace be
commanded as a minister in the erecution of the writ of Supplicauit, to take
the peace of any person, then he must do as the writ does direct him, which
sometime is to take sufficient suertie to be bound in a sum prescribed, and
some other time not, and then it rests in his own discretion. The most
usual manner is for a Justice of peace to take two suerties, besides the party
himself, to be bound by Recognizance to the King, viz. Domino Regi, and that
must always be for the keeping of the peace. The form of which Recognizance
for the keeping of the peace is as follows, viz.

Memorandum qd' nono die Augusti, Anno regni dn^i nostr^ Regis Iacobi dei
gratia etc. 5. A.B. de Padburie in Comitatu predict' Husbandman, Buck.
in propria persona sua venit coram me Richardo Ingols by Milite, vno
Iusticiarioru^ dicti dn^i Regis ad pacem in dicto Comitatur conseruandam
assignatoru^, and assumpsit proseipso sub poena xx. li. et D.E. and H.I. de C.
in Comitatur praedictur Husbandmen, adtunc and ibm^ in proprijs personis suis
similiter venerunt, and manuceperunt pro praedicto A. B. viz quilibet eorum
seperatim sub poena x. li. quod idem A. B. personaliter comparebit coram
Iusticiarijs dicti domini Regis ad pacem ad proximam generale^ Sessionem pacis
in Com^ predicto apud Buck. tenendam, ad faciendum and recipiendu^ quod ei per
Curiam tunc and ibidem iniungetur. Et quod ipse interim pacem dicti dn^i Regis
custodiet erga ipsum dominu^ Regem and cunctum populu^ suum, and praecipue
versus L.M. de O. de comitatu praedict. Et quod damnum vel malum aliquod
corporale, aut grauamen praefatur L.M. nec alicui de populo dicti domini Regis
quod in laesionem aut perturbationem pacis ipsius Domini Regis seu praefati
L.M. cedere valeat, quouismodo non faciet, nec fieri procurabit. Quam quidem
summam xx. l'. praedict' A.B. and quilibet manucaptorum praedictorum praedictas
seperales summas x. l'. recognouerunt se debere dicto domino Regi, de terris
and tenementis bonis, and catallis suis, and cuiuslibet eorum ad opus dicti
domini Regis fieri and leuari ad quorumcunque manus deuenerunt, si contigerit
ipsum A.B. praemissa vel eorum aliquid in aliquo infringere, and inde legitimo
modo conuinci. In cuius rei testimonium ego predictus Richardus Ingolsby
sigillum meum apposui. Datur apud Lethenborow die and Anno supradict'.

And the form of the Recognizance for the good abearing is this, viz.

A Recognizance for the good abearing.
Memorandu^ etc. and quod ipse A. B. interim se been geret erga Dn^m Reg. and
cunctu^ populu^ suu^, and praecipue erga L. M. Et quod ipse non inferet nec
inferri procurabit per se nec per alios, damnu^ aliquod seu grauamen prefato
L.M. seu alicui de populo ipsius dn^i Regis de corporibus suis, per insidias,
insultus, seu aliquo alio modo quod in laesionem seu perturbationem pacis dicti
dn^i Regis cedere valeat quouismodo, viz. vterque praedict' D. E. et H. I. sub
poena 50. libr^, et praedict' A. B. sub poena 100. libr^ etc. And this may be
done by a single Recognizance in Latin, with a Condition thereunto added in
English for the keeping of the peace, or the good Abearing, and for the day and
place of the parties appearance at the Quarter Sessions.

82 A Justice of peace who upon his own discretion compels one to find
suertie of the peace until a certain day, may upon the like discretion
release the same before that day: A Releas of the suertie of peace.
But if a Justice of peace do grant the peace at the request of an other, viz.
at the suit of A. and that the Recognizance be taken to keep the peace against
A. then may the same A. only releas it, and none other, before the same Justice
of peace, or any other Justice, that will certify the same releas before the
Justices of peace at the next quarter Sessions; for that certificat being of
record will discharge it, which a releas by deed can not do, the suertie of
peace being a Recognizance, and so of it self a record. And though the
Recognizance be versus cunctum populu^, and precipue versus A. yet may the same
A. releas it: for though it may seem populer, and that others should have
equal interest therein with A. yet as it appears by the word precipue, it
was specially taken for his safety. But though in some case a Justice of peace
may releas the suertie of the peace, and in some other case the party, yet the
King can in neither of the said cases releas it until it be forfeited, for the
mischief that may come to A. thereby, though the Recognizance be taken domino
Regi, for that it is not a debt unto him until it be forfeited: But being
forfeited, then the King, and none other may releas and pardon the forfeiture.
And in the cases aforesaid, though the Just. of peace, or the party may releas
the suertie of the peace, Buck. The Justices release of the peace.
yet the Recognizance before taken for the suertie of the peace must not be
cancelled, least the peace was broken before the releas made, and so the
Recognizance was forfeited. And the form of the Justice of peace releas of the
peace is this: Ego prefatus Paulus Risley armiger, vnus Iusticiarioru^ dn^i
Regis nunc ad pacem in Com^ predictur conserua^dam assignatur, qui S. T. de
Preston ad securitate^ pacis inueniendam mea discretione compuli eandem
securitatem pacis, quantu^ in me est, in mea discretione 10. die Maij An^ 5.
Reg. Iac. etc. remisi and relaxaui. Dat' apud Chetwood etc.

And the form of the release of the party before the same Justice that took
the Recognizance of the peace is this: Memorandum quod 10. die Iulij Anno 5.
The parties release of the peace.
Regis Iacobi etc. A. B. venit coram me Francisco Cheney Milite, vno
Iusticiariorum dom^ Regis nunc ad pacem etc. and gratis remisit and relaxauit
(quantum in se est) praedictam securitatem pacis per ipsum versus
supranominatum S. T. petitam. In cuius rei testimonium, ego prefatus F. C. etc.
Datur apud Chessam Bois etc. And in like sort the Justice or Justices of peace
may do, which took surety for the good abearing, if they see cause.

83 The peace or good abearing is broken, Causes of the breach of the peace, or
good abearing.
and the Recognisance taken for the keeping of the same, is forfeited by
violent, extreme, malicious, and unlawful menacings, assaults, affrayes,
batteries, strikings, or imprisonments: as if a man bound to the Peace, do
wrongfully and maliciously menace, assault, beat, or imprison another: or do
forcibly thrust him into a river, well, or pond, whereby he is in danger of
drowning: or do ravish a woman against her will: or do commit manslaughter,
burglarie, or robbery, or treason against the person of the King. Br. peace 20
And if a man be bound to the peace, and after he does procure another to
break the peace, this is a cause of forfeiture of his recognizance, taken for
the surety of the peace, for that the peace is broken by his means. 18. Ed. 4.
28.
And if one be bound to the peace, and after do menace I. S. to his face, and
in his presence to kill or beat him, this is a breach of the peace. But if I.
S. be absent when he is menaced, then is it no breach of the peace, unless the
same party do, according to his menace, lie in weight to kill or beat I. S.
for then also it is a breach of the peace. 22. Ed. 4. 35.
And though the suertie of the peace be not broken without fighting, 2. H. 7. 2.
beating, imprisoning, or extremity of menacing, yet the suertie of good
abearing may be forfeited by the extraordinary number of people, 10. H. 7. 12.
that the party bound has attending upon him, or by his wearing of harneis,
or other weapons more then before he has usually done, or be meet for his
degree or estate, or by using of rigorous or terrible words, or threatenings
tending or inciting to the breach of the peace, or indemeaning himself in his
behavior, company or gesture, or doing of any thing which shall tend to the
breach of the peace, or to put the people in dread or fear.

84 As the wisdom of the Realm has ordained Justices of peace to be
preseruors of the peace, and men wholly or specially devoted and assigned to
that office. So has she made choice of other magistrates, who with their other
offices have the conservation of the peace annexed to their charges, and as a
thing incident or inseparable from their other functions, and go continually
lincked arm in arm with them: As every Shirife in his County, every Coroner,
The Shirife, Constable, etc. conseruators of the peace.
high constable of any lath-rape, wapentake, hundred or fraunchise, and every
petit Constable, Borshoulder, Tithingman, Headborough, Boroughhead,
Thirdborough, and chief pledge in every Town, Village, and hamlet, is within
his limits and the precincts of his authority a conseruator of the peace. And
so is the Steward in every Leete, and view of franck pledge, and the Steward of
every Court of Pipowders a conseruator of the peace, and if an affray be made
in their presence sitting in their Court, each of them may commit the offenders
to prison. And they all are in duty first to bend their care and foresight to
prevent the breach of the peace, next to employ both their own valor and
strength, and to command the help and force of others to pacify those who by
word or deed are in breaking of the peace: And thirdly to punish those who have
broken the peace, according to the law. St. 5. F. 3. 14.
And therefore any of the officers aforesaid may take, and arrest suspected
persons which walk in the night, and sleep in the day, and carry them before
a Justice of peace to find suerties of their good behavior. Sta. 13. E. 1.
And if any be taken by watchmen in the night watch that is suspected of evil
behavior, they may take him and imprison him, until he be delivered by the
ordinary course of law. And if any do go or ride armed by day or night in
fayers, or markets, or other places (saving the Kings servants in his presence,
or in executing of his precepts, or such as do pursue huy and cry where
offenses be done) any of the same officers may take their armor from them to
the Kings use, and commit them to the jail. And if any assemblies, Rout, or
rumor shall be begun, St. 17. R 2. 8
the Shirifes and other the Kings officers, shall take the power of the County
and disperse them, and shall commit the offenders to prison until they be
duly punished according to the law. And if any do threaten to kill maihem, or
beat an other, or do attempt or go about to do it; then any of the said
officers may arrest the offender to come before a Justice of peace, to find
suertie for the keeping of the peace, or else the same officer may commit him to
prison. 1. H. 7. 7.
And if either of the said officers shall perceive any other in his presence to
be in breaking of the peace, either die drawing of their weapons, or by
assaulting or striking one of an other, or by assaulting himself, he may
command them upon pain of imprisonment to surcease, 5. H. 7. 6.
or else he may with his weapon part and keep them asunder, and call and
procure others likewise so to do. And then he may carry them before a Justice
of peace to find suertie of the peace, which if they refuse to do, he may
commit them to prison, 3. H. 4. 9.
or else the Constable may take suerties of them by Obligation to keep the
peace. And if any of the offenders do flee into a house, 13. Ed. 4. 9.
the said officer may break open the doors and arrest him, and so he may do
if the offender do flee into another County, for that the arrest is for the
benefit of the commonweal. And likewise if any of the said officers shall
learn that certain persons be fighting or quarreling in a house, in such sort
that they are like to break the peace, or that a man and a woman be in a house
together committing addultery or fornication, 7. E. 3. 10. 1. H. 7. 6.
he may break open the doors and arrest them to come before a Justice of peace
to find suertie of the peace, or otherwise if he will, he may commit any of the
said offenders to prison. And if any of the parties to an affcay have received
any dangerous wound, then the officer must arrest the offender, and carry him
to a Justice of peace, 22. Ass. p. 56
who is either to commit him to prison, or to let him to mainprise until the
next Jail delivery, that it be known whethir the party wounded will live or
die thereof: or else the officer himself may commit him to prison until the
same be known: 38. Ed. 3. 6.
for if the party wounded do die, the offense will be felony. If the common
voice and fame of the County be that C.D. has committed a felony, any of those
officers that do suspect him thereof may arrest him for it. And so he may
search within the limits of his authority for any persons suspected of felony,
for it is a chief part of the Constables duty to preserve the peace and
repress felons. And if any of the officers before mentioned do arrest an
offender, or any person suspected for any of the causes aforesaid, who ought to
be carried to the Jail, or before a Justice of peace, the same officer need
not carry him presently to the Jail, 22. Ed. 4. 35.
or before the Justice, but he may put him in the stocks, or some other safe
custody for a time, until he can provide sufficient company to assist him to
conduct the same offender to the Jail or to the Justice: 2. Ed. 4. 9.
Or if the party arrested be so sick, diseased, or wounded that he cannot be
presently carried without danger of death, the officer may stay him until he
be recovered.

85 But the peace of the Realm has been so precious to all ages; Every able
person is a Conseruator of the peace,
and Treasons, Felonies, assaults, batteries, and other forcible violences and
offenses so odious, that the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, and the wisdom
of our forefathers have made and appointed (besides the Magistrates and
officers before mentioned) all sorts of able persons, in some sort, and to
some purposes, preseruers of the peace; intending that as all the members of
the common weal, do taste sweet comfort, and pleasant repose by the benefit
of peace, so they should be all partakers, when need requires of the pains
to maintain and continue the same peace, and to punish the transgressors
thereof. Sta. 3. E. 1. 9.
And therefore by the Statute of Westminster 1. it is ordained, That all men
generally shall be ready at the commandment and summons of the Shirifes, and
at the cry of the country, to pursue and arrest felons, when need shall be,
as well within fraunchises as without; and they that will not, and be thereof
attainted, shall make a grievous fine to the King. Sta. 3. Ed. 1.
By the statute entitled Officium Coronatoris it is enacted, That upon all
Homicides, Burglaries, men slain, or put in great danger, huy and cry shall
be levied, and every man shall follow the huy and cry, and the offenders
steps if it may be: and whosoever does not, and is thereupon convicted, shall
be attached to appear before the Justices of Jail delivery. St. 5. E. 3. 14.
By the Statute of Anno 5. Ed. 3. it is established, That if any man suspect
lewd persons (then termed robertsmen, wasters, or drawlatches) of any
manslaughters, felonies, or robberies, be it by day, or night, they shall
incontinently be arrested by the Constable of the town, and if it be within
franchise delivered to the Bailifes of the franchise, and if in guildable to
the shirife, and kept until the coming down of the Justices of Jail
delivery, who shall proceed to the deliverance of them. St. 17. R. 2. 8.
By the Statute of 17. R. 2. it is defended to all the Kings people as well
Lords as others, that none shall make assemblies, Riots, or Rumors against the
peace. And if any such assembly be begun, as soon as the Shirife and other
Ministers may have knowledge thereof, they with the strength of the country
shall disturb such offenders, and put them in prison until the law be executed
upon them. And all Lords and other liege people of the Realm shall be
attending with all their strength and power to the Shirifes and Ministers
aforesaid. St. 2. H. 5. 8.
By the Statut of An^ 2. H. 5. it is provided, That the Kings people being able
to travail in the County where Riots, assemblies, or routs against the law be
shall be assistant to the Justices, Commissioners, Shirife, or vndershirif of the
same County, when they shallbe reasonably warned, to ride with the said
Justices, Shirife etc. in aid to resist such Riots, Routs, and Assemblies,
upon pain of imprisonment, and to make fine and ransom to the King. St. 15. R.
2. 2
By the Statute of 15. R. 2. it is ordained, That if the Shirife, or any other
of the County do not attend upon a Just. of peace, to arrest such offenders
as do make forcible entries into lands or tenements, he or they so offending
shall be imprisoned, and pay a fine to the King. Sta. 1. M. 12.
By the Statute of An^ 1. M. it is established, That if any person being above
the age of xviij. years, and under the age of lx. being able to serve, and not
sick, lame, or impotent, shall be required by any Justice of peace, or any
Shirife of any County, where any unlawful assembly of xij. persons or above
shall be to do any unlawful act prohibited by that statute; or by any Mayor,
Bailife, or other head Officer of any City, Borough, or town corporat; or by
any other by the commandment of any such Justice, Shirife, Mayor, etc. to go
with him or them to suppress the persons unlawfully assembled: Then every
person, which so being able and required, does willingly and obstinatly refuse
so to do, shall suffer imprisonment for one year without bail or mainprise.
And as in all the cases aforesaid every able person is bound upon request to
assist the Justices, shirifes, and other the Kings officers, to pursue,
apprehend, arrest, and imprison Manquellors, robbers, felons, or other
disturbers of the peace, and so to do his whole endeavor to be a conseruator of
the peace of the Realm: Every person must assist to execute the K. Writ.
In like sort is every able person bound by the common law, and by the Stat. of
Westminster 1. and Westminster 2. to be attendant upon the Shirife, St. 3. E. 1. 17. S.
13. E. 1. 39.
or vndershirife, in the execution of the kings writs, and by that means to be
a supporter of the justice of the Realm.

These offenses punishable in the Star Chamber.
86 Menaces, assaults, batteries, imprisonments, and maihems committed by some
persons, to some persons, at some times, in some places and in some manner,
form, sort, and with some circumstances (besides the penalties aforesaid
inflicted upon the offenders therein) are also punishable in the Kings high
Court of the Star chamber as other offenses hereafter mentioned be, as it
does more at large appear in Oppressions 35.

Of Riots, Routs, unlawful and rebellious Assemblies.
RIots, Routs, The enormitie of Riots.
unlawful and Rebellious assemblies have bin so many times pernicious, and
fatal enemies to this kingdom, the peace, and tranquillity thereof, and have so
often shaken the foundation, and put in hazard the very form and state of
government of the same, that our lawmakers have been enforced to devise from
age to age one law upon an other, and one stat. after another for the
repressing and punishing of them, and have endeavored by all their wits to snib
the sprouts, and quench the very first sparks of them: as every man may easily
perceive there was cause thereof, who will look back, and call to his
remembrance, what that small Riot begun at Dartmouth in Kent in the reign of
King Richard the second between the collector of a subsidy, and a Tyler and his
wife, about the payment of one poor great did come unto, which being not
repressed in time, did grow to so great a rebellion, that after it put in
hazard the life of the K. the burning of the City of London, the overthrow of
the whole Nobility, gentlemen, and all the learned of the land, and the
subversion of this goodly Monarchy and form of government: Or if they will
call to mind the small Riot, or quarrel begun in the reign of King Henry the
sixth between a Yeoman of the guard and a seruingman of Richard Neuils, Earl of
warwick, which so far increased for want of restraint, that it was the root
of many woeful tragedies, and a mean to bring to untimely death, first Richard
Plantagenet Duke of York proclaimed successor to the Crown, and the chief
pillar of the house of York, and after him King Henry the sixth, and Prince
Edward his son, the heirs of the house of Lancaster; and to ruinate with the
one, or the other of them, most of the Peers, great men, and gentlemen of the
realm, besides many thowsands of the common people. West. 1. 3 E. 1. 32. Sta.
7. Ed. 1. St. 13. E. 1. 6.
And therefore King Edward the first did well ordain, That no Shirifes shall
suffer Barretors or maintainers of quarrels in their Counties: And that to all
parliaments, Treatises, and other assemblies, each man shall come peaceably,
without any armor: and that every man shall have armor in his house according
to his ability to keep the peace. And King Edward the third provided, Statutes
ordained to prevent forces or Riots.
that no man shall come before the Justices, St. 2. E. 3. 3. St. 5. E. 3. 14.
nor go or ride armed. And that suspected, lewd, and riotous persons, shall be
arrested and safely kept until they be delivered by the Justices of Jail
delivery. St. 34. E. 1. 3. Sta. 2. R. 2. 6.
And that Justices of peace shall restrain offenders, riotors, and all other
Barretors, and pursue, take, and chasten them, according to their Trespass and
offense. Sta. 5. R. 2. 6. St. 15. R. 2. 2 St. 7. R. 2. 13
King Richard the second did prohibit Riots, Routs, and forcible entries into
lands, that were made in diverse counties and parts of the Realm. And that
none from thenceforth should make any Riot, or Rumor. And that no man shall
ride armed, 20. Rich. 2. 1
nor use Launcegaies. And that no laborer, servant in husbandry, or Artificer,
St. 12. R. 2. 6
or victualer, shall wear any buckler, sword, or dagger. And that all the
Kings officers shall suppress and imprison such as make any Riots, Routs, St.
17. R. 2. 8.
or unlawful assemblies against the peace. King Henry the fourth enacted, That
the Justices of peace, and the Shirife shall arrest those which commit any
Riot, Rout, or unlawful assembly; shall enquire of them, and record their
offenses. St. 13. H. 4. 7
King Henry the fifth assigned commissioners to enquire of the same Justices and
Shirifes defaults in that behalf, St. 2. H. 5. 8.
and also limited what punishment offenders attainted of Riot should sustain.
King Henry the seventh ordained, Sta. 19. H. 7.
that such persons as were returned to enquire of Riots should have sufficient
freehold or copihold land within the same Shire. And that no maintenance should
hinder their Inquisition. And in the Reign of Queen Mary, Sta. 1. M. 12.
there was a necessary Statute established to restrain and punish unlawful and
rebellious assemblies raised by a multitude of unruly persons, to commit
certain violent, forcible, and Riotous acts.

2 As the said Laws and Statutes were devised in several ages by the wisdom
of the Realm, to enquire of, and restrain Riots, Routs, unlawful, and
rebellious assemblies, and to check violences, and forces, before they should
grow to a head: So have our provident forefathers erected the most honorable
Court of Star chamber, The Court of Star chambers authority to punish
Riots, etc.
to examine and punish those, and other offenses, when they break out to
extremities, viz. to great and heinous Riots, or such like enormities, thereby
to keep every person in awe, and so the whole Realm in peace. As appears by
the Statute of Anno 3. H. 7. whereby it is inacted, That the Chancellor, and
Treasorer of England for the time being (and the President of the Kings
Council, St. 3. H. 7. 1. Stat. 21. H. 8. 22.
and the keeper of the Kings privy seal, or two of them) calling to them a
Bishop, and a Temporal Lord of the Kings most honorable privy Council, and
the two chief Justices of the K. Bench, and common place for the time being
(or other two Just. in their absence) upon bill, or information put to the said
Chauncellor for the King, or any other against any person (for any misbehauing
by unlawful maintenances, giving of liueries, signs and tokens, retainers by
Indentures, oaths, writings or otherwise, embracery of the Kings subjects,
untrue demeanings of Shirifes, in making of pannels, and other untrue returns,
by taking of money, by injuries, by great Riots and unlawful assemblies) have
authority to call before them by writ, or by privy seal, the said misdooers and
they, and other, by their discretion by whom the truth may be known, to
examine, and such as they find therein defective, to punish them according to
their demerits, after the form and effect of the Statutes thereof made, in
like manner and form, as they should or ought to be punished, if they were
thereof convict after the due order of the law. And though the Justices of
peace do assesse a fine in the Country upon some that have committed a Riot
there, yet the Lords in the Star chamber, may assesse upon the said offendrs
for the same Riot, a greater penalty, if they see cause; for in this case the
offenders be not twice punished for one offense, but part of the due punishment
is inflicted at one time, and part at another: And the Lords do sufficiently
punish an offense, which was but remisly done by the Justices.

3 A Riot is where three persons or above do assemble themselves together, to
the intent to beat or maihem a man, to pull down a house, wall, pale, What is
a Riot.
hedge, or ditch wrongfully, to claim or take common or way in a ground, to
destroy any park, warren, douehouse, pond, poole, barn, mill, or stacke of
corn, or to do any other unlawful act with force and violence, and against
the peace, and they do it. If a man go abroad with his household servants
which he has commonly of his own family (though they be more then his
ability or degree is to maintain) and does make a fray by the way, this is no
Riot, unless the Master did before make his servants privy, that he meant to
make an affray: for it is no riot, except there be an intent before to do some
violence and hurt. If three, four, or more do enter into lands with force,
upon the possession of an other, though their entry be lawful, yet is it a
Riot, St. 5. R. 2. 7.
for the Statute of Anno 5. Richard. 2. does prohibit entry into Lands and
Tenements with force, or a multitude of people.

4 An unlawful assembly is, where three persons, or above, What is an
unlawful assembly.
do assemble themselves together, to the intent to do any of the Acts
aforesaid, or any other such unlawful act, with force and violence against
the Peace, although they do it not indeed, but after their assembly they
depart by their own consent, upon some fear conceived, or other cause,
without doing of any outrage, for their intent of assembling was unlawful,
though the act subsequent did not ensue according to the same.

5 A Route is, where three persons or above do assemble themselves, What is a
Rout.
for the revenge of their own common quarrel. As, if the Inhabitants of a
Town do assemble together to pull down a house, wall, pale, ditch, or other
enclosure, of a park, pasture, or close, or the head of a poole, where they
wrongfully pretend to have title of common, or a way, or to beat, or maihem
one man, or more, that have done to them all some public offense. If they once
meet, 17. Ed. 4. 4
proceed, and go forward, toward the execution of any of the Acts
aforesaid, and do show by Armor, Gesture, or Speech, that they mean to do
any violence, or to terrify or fear any of the Kings people, it is a Rout,
whether they put their intended purpose in execution, or not: But if a Mayor
and Aldermen, or Bayliffe and Burgesses, or the fellows of any society do
assemble in their common quarrel, and make a Riot, Rout, or Unlawful
assembly, this shall be punished in their own private natural persons, and
not in the body politic, for it was their private persons that assembled to
offend the Law, and not the body politic. If a man go to the Sessions,
Market, Fair, Rout by wearing of Armor.
or other assembly of company, with his servants in Harness, though he has
no intent to fight, or to commit any Riot, yet this is a Rout by the manner of
his coming, and is contrary to the Statute of 2. St. 2. Ed. 3. 3
Edw. 3. which has ordained, That no man shall bring any force in affray of
the peace, nor shall go armed in faires, markets, or elsewhere, upon pain of
imprisonment, and forfeiture of his Armor.

Lawful assemblies of three persons, or more.
6 An Assembly of three persons or more, which is not to the terror of the
people, nor to do some Act with force and violence against the peace, is not
unlawful nor prohibited by any of the Statutes before mentioned. The watch in
London upon Midsummer night is lawful, and so be such like in other Cities and
Towns. Assemblies be lawful that be used upon May day, to fetch in May
boughs, or flowers; and so be assemblies at Church-Ales, Whitson, or
Midsummer-Ales. Assemblies at the fetching home, setting up, or dancing about
a Maie-pole, and assemblies at the bayting of a Bull, or Bear, or at the
mowing or making of Dole or Revel meade, and assemblies of Minstrells and
their fellows at certain places, and times of the year, allowed by old and
ancient customs are also lawful: And Assemblies to play at Cards, Tables,
Bowls, Clash, Bucklers, Wasters, half Sword, Tennis, Quoits, Cailes, or such
other games be likewise by the common law tolerable (though some of the same
games be prohibited upon some penalties by Statute to be used by some persons)
and assemblies to run at Quintall, Sand bag, Base, Footeball, Stooleball,
Handball, St. 33. H. 8. 9
or such like disports be also lawful: For these assemblies be not made with
the intent to break or disturb the Peace, or to offer violence, force, or
hurt to the person of any; but either to try Actiuity, or to increase
society, amity, and neighbourly friendship. And if in any of the said
assemblies, any of the parties the same, shall make a fray with a stranger,
that is no Riot, neither does it make the residue of the same company Riotors,
who came thither for their disports, and not to any evil or unlawful intent.
But if any of the same company shall fall out with a stranger, or some others
of their own associates, and then some of them do take one part, and some of
them another, An Assembly lawfully begun does end riotously,
whereby a Riot is committed: then so many of both sides as shall take sides,
and be parties to that quarrel, shall be adjudged Riotors, but not the
residue; for the Riot did not take his beginning at the first meeting, when
they did all assemble for any of the sportes before mentioned, but when the
taking of part with those that did quarrel began. And therefore they only,
who made themselves parties to that quarrel, shall be punished as Riotors, and
none other. And so it is, if a Jury be charged to try an Issue, if some of
them fall out, and fight; this is no Riot in the residue assembling to a
lawful end. 22. H. 6. 37 3. H. 7. 1. and 10. St. 17. R. 2. 8. St. 1. M. 12. 8
St. 3. H. 4. 17 Sta. 8. H. 6. 9. St. 3. Ed. 1. 9.
And it is lawful for the Sheriff, Vndersheriffe, or Bayliffe to take the
power of the County, what number they shall think good, to execute the Kings
process: And so may any Justice or Justices of Peace, and the Sheriff, and
the Vndersheriffe, take any power of the County to repress Riots, Routes,
unlawful or Rebellious Assemblies: Or to remove such persons, as by
Inquisition are found to have made forcible Entries into other men's
possessions, or to detain them with force. And so may a Justice of Peace,
Sheriff or Constable take of the County any number that they will to pursue
and apprehend Traitors, Murderers, Robbers, or other felons, or such as do
break, or go about to break, or disturb the peace: For though in the cases
last specified there be three or above assembled together, yet it is to execute
the justice of the Law, and by that means to preserve peace. And it is a
lawful assembly which is gathered together to run at Tilt, Iusts, or
Barriers by the Kings commandment: for the cause, beginning, and end thereof,
do tend to obedience, the laudable exercise of true valor, and manhood, and
to the encouragement and enabling of the actors therein to defend the Realm,
and the peace thereof.

7 And though by the before specified Statute of Anno 34. Edw. 3. it is
ordained, that Justices of Peace shall restrain offenders, Riotors, and all
other Barrators, and pursue, take, chasten, imprison, and punish them according
to their trespasses and offenses, to the intent that the people be not by such
Riotors troubled, or indammaged, nor the peace broken, nor any passengers by
the way disturbed, or put in peril: Yet by force of that Statute the Justices
of Peace could not require the help of the Sheriff, nor command the power of
the county to help to assist them, St. 17. R. 2. 8.
to repress the said Riotors. Whereupon by the before mentioned Statute of
Anno 17. R. 2. it is defended, That none shall make assemblies, riot, or rout
against the peace in any wise. And if any such assembly be begun, as soon as
the Sherifes, Disturbing of riotors.
and other the Kings ministers may have knowledge thereof, they with the power
of the county, where such case shall happen, shall disturb such malice with
all their power, and shall apprehend all such offenders, and put them in
prison, until due execution of the law be made of them: and all Lords and
other liege people of the Realm shall attend with their whole strength and
power, the Sherifes and ministers aforesaid.

8 But because the said Statute of 17. R. 2. or any other Statute or Law before
that time made, does not enable the Justices of Peace, and Sheriff to record
that, which they shall find done in their presence against the law, nor to make
inquiry thereof, nor to hear and determine the same, nor to make certificat
thereof to the King and his counsel, if the truth cannot be found: Nor does
assign what Process shall be awarded against the offenders, nor does inflict
any penalty upon the Justices which shall not execute the law: Therefore by
the before rehearsed Statute made Anno 13. St. 13. H. 4. 7
H. 4. it was established, that if any riot, assembly, or rout of people
against the law be made in any part of the Realm, the Justices of peace,
three, The Justices and sherifs shall arrest Riotors.
or two of them at the least, and the Sheriff or Vndersherife of the shire,
where such riot, assembly, or rout shall be made, shall come with the power of
the county, if need be to arrest them. And the Justices, Sheriff, or
Vndersherife, shall have power to record that which they shall find done in
their presence against the law: And the same trespassors and offenders shall
be convict by the Record of the same Justices, Sheriff, or Vndersherife, in
manner and form as is contained in the Statute of forcible entries. The form
of Recording of which riot is this; Buck. Recording of a riot.
viz. Memorandum quod primo die Martij anno regni regis Domini nostri Iacobi
dei gratur etc. tertio, Nos Franciscus Goodwin miles, and Alexander Hamden
miles Iusticiarij domini Regis nunc ad pacem in comitatu praedicto
conseruandam, necnon etc. assignati, and Richardus Ingolsby miles adtunc
vicecomes eiusdem comitatus, ad querimoniam A. B. de Wadsdon in com^ praedicto
yeoman in proprijs personis nostris accessimus ad domum mansionalem ipsius A.B.
apud Wadsdon praedictur; and ibidem inuenimus quosdam C. D. E.F.G. and alios
malefactores, and pacis dicti domini Regis perturbatores ignotos, ad numerum
octo personarum modo guerrino arraiatos, viz. cum gladijs, baculis, arcubus,
and sagittis riotose, and illegitime aggregatos, and eandem domum sic
custodientur, in magnam perturbationem pacis dicti domini Regis and populi sui
terrorem, and contra formam statuti in Parliamento domini Henrici nuper Regis
Angliae quarti, Anno Regni sui decimo tertio tento, editi. Et ideo nos praefati
F. G. and A.H. corpora predictoru^ C.D.E.F.G. ad tunc arrestauimus, ac proxime
Jail dicti domini Regis in Com' predicto duci fecimus per recordum nostrum de
transgressione praedicta conuictos in praesentia nostra, ibidem moraturos,
quousque finem dicto domino Regi pro transgressione sua praedicta fecerunt. In
cuius rei testimonium huic recordo nostro sigilla nostra apposuimus. Datur apud
Wadsdon praedict' die and Anno praedictis.

9 By the same Statute of 13. H. 4. it is further ordained, St. 13. H. 4. 7
That if it happen such Trespassors and offenders be departed before the
coming of such Justices, Inquiry of a Riot by the Justices, etc.
and Shirife, or vndershirife, the same Justices, three, or two of them shall
diligently inquire within a month after such Riot, assembly, or Rout of people
so made, and the same shall hear and determine according to the laws of this
Realm: And because the said Justices of peace, Shirife etc. are by this
branch of the Statute, to make inquiry of the Riot, which must be done by a
Jury returned by the Shirife, the form of the said Justices precept to the
Shirife to return the said Jury is this, Buck.
viz. Henricus Longuile miles, and Willihelmus Anderous miles Iusticiarij
Domini Regis nunc ad pacem in Comitatu praedicto conseruandam, A precept to the
Shirife to return a Jury to inquire of a Riot.
nec non ad diuersas felonias, transgressiones, et alia malefacta in eodem
Comitatu audiendum and terminandum assignati, vicecomiti Comitur praedicti
salutem. Ex part dicti Domini Regis tibi praecipimus firmiter iniungentes,
quod non omittas propter aliquam libertatem in Balliua tua, quin eam
ingrediaris, and venire facias coram nobis apud Cauluerton in Comitatu
praedicto 10. die huius mensis Ianuarij 24. probos and legales homines
Comitatur praedicti, quorum quilibet habeat terras and tenementa infra dictu^
Comitatum liberi tenementi per chartam ad valore^ viginti solidorum, aut per
Copiam Rotulorum curie ad valorem 26. s. 8. d. aut de vtroque vltra omnes
reprisas; ad inquirendum pro dicto dn^o Rege de quodam Riotto apud C. in
comitatu predicto nuper commisso, vt dicitur, and qd'super quemlibet Iuratoru^
predictoru^ tunc returns in exitibus xx. s. Et hoc nullatenus omittas sub pena
xx.li. quam noueris te incursurum, si in executione premissorum tepidus seu
remissus fueris. Et habeas ibi hoc praeceptum, Testibus nobis prefatis H.L. and
W. A. quarto die Martij, An^ regni dn^i nostr^ Regis Iacobi dei gratia etc.
tertio. And when the Shirife has returned his precept at a day and place, then
two Justices of peace at the least (without the Shirife, who is not to sit upon
the Inquisition) are to make enquiry by the same Jury returned, the form of
which Inquisition is this. Buck.
Inquisitio pro Domino Rege capta apud Wynslowe in Comitatu praedicto, primo
die Octobris Anno Regni dicti domini nostri Regis Iacobi etc. quinto, coram
Roberto Dormer milite, and Anthonio Tiringham milite, adtunc Iusticiarijs dicti
Domini Regis ad pacem in Comitatu praedicto conseruandam, necnon ad diuersas
felonias etc. assignatis super sacramentum A. B. C. D. E. F. G. etc. The form
of an inquisition of a Riot.
Qui dicunt super sacramentu^ suum quod H. I. K. L. M. N. de Addington in
Comitatu praedicto husbandmen etc. simul cum alijs malefactoribus, and pacis
dicti Domini Regis perturbatoribus ignotis, ad numerum december personaru^ vi and
armis, modo guerrino arraiati, viz. cum gladijs, Bacculis, Arcubus and
Sagittis, vicesimo die Septembris, Anno quinto supradicto, inter horas septimam
and vndecimam ante meridiem eiusdem diei, domum mansionalem cuiusdam S. T. de
Wynslowe praedictur freg^runt and intrauerunt and in ipsum S. T. adtunc and
ibidem insultum fecerunt, and ipsum verberauerunt, vulnerauerunt, and
maletractauerunt, ita qd' de vita cius desperabatur, in magnam perturbationem
pacis dicti domini Regis, and populi sui terrorem, ac contra formam statuti de
Riotis, Routis, and illicitis congregationibus, in parliamento domini Henrici
nuper Regis Angliae quarti, Anno regni sui decimo tertio, aediti.

St. 13. H. 4. 7
10 By the foresaid Statute of 13. H. 4. it is moreover established, that if the
truth cannot be found in manner aforesaid, then within a Month next after, the
same Justices, three, or two of them, and the said Shirife, Certifying a Riot.
or Vndershirife; shall certify before the King and his Council, of the whole
fact, and the circumstances thereof: which certificat shall be of the same
force, that a presentment by twelve men is: Upon which certificat, the said
trespassors and offenders shall be put to answer, and they which shall be
found guilty, shall be punished by the discretion of the King and his Council.
And if the same trespassors and offenders do trauerse the matter so certified,
Trauerse of a Certificat.
the same certificat and trauerse shall be sent into the Kings Bench; there to
be tried and determined according to the order of the Law.

St. 13. H. 4. 7
11 The same Statute of 13. H. 4. has also provided, that if the said
trespassors and offenders do not come before the King, and his Council, Process
against offenders.
or into the Kings Bench, at the first precept; then an other precept shall be
delivered to the Shirife of the Shire to take the said trespassors and
offenders, if they may be found, and to bring them at a certain day before the
King and his Council, or into the Kings Bench: And if they cannot be found,
the Shirife or Vndershirife shall make proclamation in his full County next
ensuing the said second precept, that they shall appear before the King and
his Council, or in the Kings Bench; (or in the Chauncerie in the time of
vacation) within three weeks then next following. And if the offenders do not
appear, as is aforesaid, and the proclamation be made, and returned, they
shall be attainted and convicted of the Riot, Assembly, and Rout aforesaid.

St. 13. H. 4. 7
12 By the said Statute of 13. H. 4. it was lastly enacted, The forfeiture of
the Justices, which do not inquire of Riots.
that the Justices of peace, which dwell nearest in every County, where such
Riot of people shall be, together with the Shirife, or Vndershirife of the same
Co^ntie; And also the Justices of assise, for the time that they shall be in
their Sessions (in case any such Riot, assembly, or Rout be made in their
presence) shall do execution of this Statute, every one upon pain of C. li.
to be paid to the King, as often as they shall be found in default of
execution of the same Statute.

13 Because it was not provided by the foresaid Statute of 13. H. 4. A
commission to inquire of the Justices, etc. default.
that the party grieved should have any other remedy, if default should be in
the said Justices, Shirife, or Vndershirife, where such Riot, assembly, or
rout should be made, nor at whose costs the same riot should be repressed,
neither was it limited what punishment the parties attainted of such Riots
should suffer: St. 2. H. 5. 8.
Therefore by an other Statute made Anno 2. H. 5. it was established, That if
default be found in the said two Justices of peace, or Justices of Assise, and
the Shirife, or Vndershirife of the County where such Riot, assembly, or rout
shall be made, touching the execution that they ought to make by virtue of the
said statute of 13. H. 4. and whereof the said Statute makes mention: Then at
the instance of the party grieved, the kings commission shall be awarded under
the great Seal, to inquire as well of the truth of the case, and of the
original matter, for the party complaynant, as of the default or defaults of
the said Justices, Shirife, or Vndershirife in this behalf supposed, to be
directed to sufficient and indifferent persons, at the nomination, and by the advice of the Chauncellor of England. And the said Commissioners incontinently
shall send into the Chauncery the Enquests and matters before them in this
behalf taken and found.

Upon the Commission the coronors shall return the Jury.
14 The Coroners of the same County for the time being, St. 2. H. 5. 8.
in which County such Riot, Assembly, or Rout shall be made, shall make the
panell upon the said commission retornable for the time that the Shirife so
supposed in default shall remain in his office: which Coroners shall return no
persons, but only such which have lands etc. to ye value of x. l. by the year
at the least. And also the same coroners shall return upon every of the said
persons impannelled at the first day when issues be to be lost xx. What issues
shall be returned upon the Jurors.
s. at the least; at the second day xl. s. at the least; and at the third day
C. s. at the least; at every day after the double at the least; which issues so
returned because of nonappearance of such persons impanneled, shall be forfait
to the King and leuiable to his use. And if default be found in the said
coronors touching the return of such persons, to be impanneled, or touching
the return of such issues as before is said, every of them shall pay to the
Kings use forty pounds.

Where the shirife shall return the Jury and not the coronors.
15 And if the Shirife so reputed in default be discharged of his office, St. 2.
H. 5. 8.
at the time that such commission shall go out of the Chauncerie, then the new
Shirife of the same County, his successor mediate or immediate, and not the
coronors, shall make the pannell upon this commission returnable in manner and
form as the said coronors should do in time when the Shirife so reputed in
default stood in his office. And the same Shirife shall incur like pain of
xl. li. to the King, if any default in him be found, touching the return of
other persons by him impannelled, which have not lands, tenements or rents to
the value of x.li. by the year, or of returning such issues as the said
coronors be above charged to return, as the said coronors be to lose to the
King in this behalf.

A writ directed to enquire of a Riot.
16 The Chauncellor of England, as soon as he may have knowledge, St. 2. H. 5.
8.
of such Riot, assembly, or Rout, shall cause to be sent the Kings writ to the
Justices of peace, and to the Shirife or vndershirife of the County, where they
be so made, that they shall put the foresaid Statute of 13. H. 4. in execution
upon the pain contained in the same. And though such writ come not to the said
Justices, Shirife, or vndershirife, they shall not be excused of the pain (of
100. pounds) aforesaid, if they make not execution of the said Statute.

Riots shall be inquired of at the Kings costs.
17 The Justices and other officers aforesaid shall do their offices at the
Kings costs, in going, tarrying, St. 2. H. 5. 8.
and returning in doing their said offices, by payment thereof to be made by
the Shirife of the same County for the time being, by Indentures between him
and the said Justices, and other officers aforesaid, to be made of the payment
aforesaid, whereof the said Shirife upon his account in the Exchequer shall
have due allowaunce.

St. 2. H. 5. 8.
18 Such Riotors attainted of great and heinous Riots, The punishment of Riotors.
shall have one whole years imprisonment at the least without being let out of
prison, by bail, mainprise, or in any other manner during the year aforesaid:
and the Riotors attainted of petit Riots shall have imprisonment as the King
and his Council shall think good.

St. 2. H. 5. 8.
19 The Kings liege people being able to travail in the County where such
Riots, assemblies, or routs shall be made, shall be assistant to the Justices,
Each man shall help to repress Riots.
commissioners, Shirife or vndershirife of the same County, when they shall be
reasonably required, to ride with the said Justices, Shirife, or vndershirife,
in aid to resist such Riots, Routs, and assemblies, upon pain of
imprisonment, and to make fine and ransom to the King.

St. 2. H. 5. 8.
20 The Bailifes of franchises Bailifes of Franchises.
shall impannell sufficient people as before, upon pain to loose xl.li. to the
King, in case that such sufficient persons may be found within the said
franchises. Corporat towns having Justices.
And like ordinances and pains shall hold place and take effect in Cities,
Boroughs, and other places, and towns enfranchised, which have Justices of
peace within them.

21 Forasmuch as in the before rehearsed Statute of 13. H. 4. it is not
expressed of what sufficiency the Jurors impannelled by the Shirife to inquire
of Riots should be, Nor what issues they should lose, if they appear not, Nor
any mention is made of any punishment the maintenors and embraceors of the
Jurors that so shall be impannelled, should have for their misdemeanor, A Jury
to enquire of Riots
if any should be: St. 19. H. 7. 13.
Therefore by a Statute made Ann^ 19. H. 7. it was enacted, that if any Riot,
Rout, or unlawful assembly be committed within this realm, the Shirife
having a precept directed to him shall return xxiiij. persons dwelling within
the Shire where such Riot, etc. shall be so committed whereof every of them
shall have lands and Tenements within the same shire to the yearly value of xx.
s. of Charter land or freehold, or xxvj. s.viij. d. of copihold, or of both,
above all charges, for to inquire of the said Riot, Rout, or unlawful
assembly. And he shall return upon every person so by him impanelled in
issues at the first day xx. s. at the second xl. s^. (if that they appear not
and be sworn to enquire of the premises at the first day.) And if default be
found in the Shirife, or vndershirife, for returning of other persons, being
not of the same sufficiency, or for not returning issues in form aforesaid,
then the said Shirife shall forfeit to the King for either twenty pounds.

St. 19. H. 7. 13.
22 If the said Riot, Rout, or unlawful assembly be not found by the said Jury,
by reason of any maintenance or embracery of the Jurors, Maintenance where by a
Riot is not found.
then the same Justices, and the Shirife, or vndershirife (beside such
certificat that they be bound to make according to the foresaid Statute of 13.
H. 4.) shall in the same certificat certify the names of the mainteinors and
embraceors in that behalf, if any be, with their misdemeanors that they know,
upon pain of every one of the said Justices and Shirife or vndershirife to
forfait xx. li. if they have no reasonable excuse for not certifying of the
same: which certificat so made shall be of like force and effect in the law, as
if the matter contained in the same were duly found by the verdit of xij. men.
And every person duly proved to be a mainteinor or embraceor of the same, shall
forfeite to the King xx. l. and shall be committed toward, there to remain by
the discretion of the Justices.

What one Justice of peace may do alone in a Riot.
23 One Justice of peace alone can neither make inquiry of a Riot, Rout, 7. Ed.
4. 18.
or unlawful assembly, when it is done, nor assesse any fine, nor award any
process for it, nor otherwise meddle with it in the nature of a Riot, or Rout,
but only as a trespass against the peace, or upon the statute of Northampton, or
the Statut of 34. Ed. 3. or upon the Stat. of forcible entries; for the words
of the foresaid Statute of 13. H. 4. be: That if such trespassors or offenders
be departed before the coming of the said Justices, Shirife, or etc. the same
Justices, three or two of them shall diligently enquire etc. So that there must
be two of them at the least to make such inquiry. 14. H. 7. 9.
But if one Justice of peace do hear of any Riot, Rout, or unlawful
assembly, he alone with his servants may go to the place, where the assembly
is reported to be made, and if he find any riotously gathered together, he may
arrest them to find suerties of their good behavior according to the Statute
of 34. Ed. 3. Kel. fo. 41.
and he may take their weapons from them, and retain them until their hot
blood be cooled. And if they refuse to find suerties of their good behavior,
he may commit them to prison. But this must be done presently upon the act
doing, for if there be any mean time, he has then no authority to commit them
to prison. And if he come to the place, whither he does understand, that some
persons will repair to commit some Riot, Rout, or violent act against the
peace, and the same persons be not yet come thither, he may leave his servants
there, to restrain them from committing their intended Riots, or other
offenses, or else to arrest them to find suerties of their good behavior, if
they do offer to commit any Riot, or to break the peacce. And so may he also
do, if he shall be sick and hear of any Riot etc. intended to be done; he
may send his servants to repress it, or to bring the offenders before him, or
some other Justice of peace, to find suerties to keep the peace, or else to
commit them to the Jail. So that one Justice of peace alone may by the warrant
of the said Statute of 34. Ed. 3. do much in prevention of a Riot etc. before
it be done, and for the stayi^^ of it, whilst it is in doing, but nothing to
punish it as a Riot, when it is done: for that statute of 34. Ed. 3. was made
for the common profit of the Realm, speedily to interrupt, and prevent present
mischiefs, and to disperse malefactors, Barretors, and other Riotors in their
very first meeting and encounter, and so far as may be to part and cut off
the quarrel, before it grow to any head or extremity, which peradventure would
not be easily pacified, if one Justice should do nothing, until some other of
his fellows came to assist him therein. And a Justice of peace may by word
only, without warrant in writing, command his own servants, or any of them,
to apprehend those, that are about to commit a Riot in his presence: And they
may justify the taking of them, though those Riotors be gone or fled away out
of the presence of the same Justice, before his said servants can lay hold on
them.

24 Although this Statute of 13. H. 4. does not make that mention which the
Statute of 8. H. 6. of Forcible entries does, touching complaint to be made to
the Justices of peace, of a Riot, Rout, or unlawful assembly, but does hind
the next Justices of peace to do execution of this Statute, every one upon
pain of C.li. yet the Sages of the Realm, and the wisdom of the interpreters
of the law, The Justices must have notice of the Riot.
have thought it reason, 4. El. Die. 210.
that notice should be given unto the said next Justices thereof, before they
should incur the said penalty of C.li. unless it be some great, notorious,
and very perilous Riot, which by common intendment, every person in those parts
may take knowledge of; for as the said Statute of 13. H. 4. does relate to the
Statute of 8. H. 6. touching the conviction of offenders by the record of the
Justices: So it is like, that the meaning of the makers thereof was, it should
do, in giving notice, or making of complaint of the wrong received.

25 If the Justices do assemble themselves, the Shirife, The parties
agreement, no discharge of the inquisition.
and the Jury to make inquiry of a Riot within a month, according to the
Statute, and after at the parties request, they do not inquire of it, but do
dismiss the Jury, for that the parties have agreed between themselves; Yet
the Justices shall pay a fine to the King, although none do give evidence for
the King upon that Riot: for they ought to take and charge an enquest, and to
make enquiry of that Riot, whereof they were informed, or of all Riots, seeing,
it may be, that the Jurors themselves have knowledge of the Riot. And moreover
they must make proclamation, if any will inform the Kings Justices of any
Riots, Routs etc. And the said Statute of 13. H. 4. which gives authority to
the Justices and Shirife etc. to inquire of the Riot, and to hear and
determine it, according to the law, was ordained to punish Riotors for breaking
of the Kings peace, and thereby to make them an example to others, and also to
entitle the King to a fine. And therefore the law will not permit, that the
satisfaction of the parties grieved should deprive the King of his fine, or
ease the offenders of their due and deserved punishment, and also yield
encouragement to others, upon hope of agreement, to put in practice the like
Riots or other outrages.

St. 13. H. 4. 7
26 And whereas the said Statute of 13. H. 4. has ordained, that if any Riot or
etc. against the law shall be made, the Justices of peace, the Shirife or
vndershirife shall come with the power of the County, if need be, to arrest
them: That power of the County is expressed before by the Statute of 17. What
power of the County the Justices shall use to repress Riots.
R. 2. viz. Al Lords and other liege people of the Realm, as Knights,
Esquires, gentlemen, yeomen, laborers, servants, apprentises, villains, and
all others of the age of 15. years or above (which be not of the Clergy,
decrepite, or women) whereof the said Justices and Shirife may take so many to
assist them as they shall think good to arrest the offenders, and to carry them
to the Jail. And if the Justices of peace be informed of a Riot committed at
such a place, and they go with the power of the County to suppress it, and
find no Riot there, yet they are not to be blamed or fined for the leuying of
the power of the County.

St. 13. H. 4. 7
27 By the said Statute of 13. H. 4. the Justices of peace, The Justices record
of a Riot.
Shirife or vndershirife, have power to record that which they shall find done
in their presence against the law, and the trespassors and offenders shall be
convict by the Record of the same Justices; which recording must either be
grounded upon a thing done in their own presence, or else by inquiry upon the
oath of other men: And therefore if two Justices of peace assisted with the
Shirife or under Shirife, do see a Riot, they may command the Riotors to be
arrested, and then record the Riot, without other inquiry. But it is
otherwise, if they do not see it, for then they must first inquire of it by a
Jury, and after the same being found by inquisition, they must make a record
thereof, which record that the said Justices do make, must be in writing, and
is to remain with one of them. And they and none other of the Justices ought
to commit the Riotors to prison, and to assesse their fines, and to cause the
same to be estreated into the Exchequer. And if the Justices do record a Riot
of their own fight, the parties charged therewith shall never be allowed to
trauerse it, No trauerse to the record of a riot made of the Justices own sight.
though indeed there was never any such Riot: for their sight of the Riot being
Judges of record, makes that record in the judgment of the law, as strong and
effectual, as if the supposed offenders had confessed the Riot befere them;
and (touching the restrayning of trauerse) more effectual, then if the Riot
had been found by a Jury upon the evidence of others. And if the Justices of
peace do see the Riot committed, they may record the riot, though the Riotors
do escape for that the fact is done in their presence, which is the ground of
their record. And if the same Riotors do escape from the Justices at that
time, they cannot apprehend them at an other time; for the apprehension and
punishment of them must be whilst the Riot is committing, or presently after,
and as it were, whilst the blood is hot. Neither in that case, if the Riotors
do escape, the Justices can make any process upon their record; neither ought
it to be kept amongst the records of the peace, but must be sent into the Kings
Bench, that process may there be made upon it: And in that case, 36. H. 6. 25.
the offenders are not to be admitted to their trauerse, but are of necessity
to make fine for it. If two Justices of peace or more, and the Shirife or
vnderrshirife, do meet at a place appointed about the Kings service, the
affairs of the country, or their own private business, and any others to the
number of three or above will make an assault in Riotous manner upon them, or
any of them, or upon any other in their presence, The credit of the Justices
record of a Riot.
they may arrest the offenders, commit them to prison, and record the Riot,
as well as if they had come of purpose to see and arrest Riotors; but if they
which do begin a Riot do fly into an other County before they do commit
the Riot then the Justices must not meddle with them. And this recording of a
Riot by the Justices of peace, the Shirife, or vndershirife is of that credit
in the judgment of the Law; That if a man be bound by Recognizance to keep
the peace, and after such a record of being party to the committing of a Riot
is entered against him, in a Scire facias awarded against him, upon his
Recognizance, he shall not be allowed either to justify the fact, nor plead
not guilty thereunto.

28 Whereas the said Statute of 13. H. 4. has ordained, Stt. 3. H. 4. 7
that if the truth cannot be found, then within a Month next after, the same
Justices, three, or two of them shall certify, before the King and his
Council, the whole fact, and the circumstances thereof, which words ( viz. the
same) have relation to the Justices of the Shire; So that if two Justices of
the Shire, and the Shirife, or etc. go to see the Riot, any other two Justices
may make inquiry of it, and then they together, or the first two, or the last
two may make certificat thereof, Certificat of a Riot.
within a month after that inquisition taken. But if the inquiry be made
within a month after the Riot, or etc. committed, and the certificat not made
within a month after that, then is not the certificat good, nor according to
the said Statute; And yet if the Justices do make an inquiry within a month
after the Riot committed, and then do give day to the Jury to deliver their
verdict after the month expyred, that is a good inquisition and according to
the Statut; for by that day given the Jury may enquire further, and receive
more evidence to inform them of the truth of the matter. If an enquest do
find that a Riot was committed by x. persons and the Justices do certify,
that it was committed by xx. persons, then the certificat, and not the
inquisition shall be taken, for by that certificat of the Justices it
appears, that the truth was not found by the inquisition. And so it is, if
the inquisition be of x. persons, and the certificat be of x. persons in
harneis. And likewise if ye indictment be of a riotous assault only, and the
certificat be of a riotous assault, battery, and maiheming: for though in the
cases aforesaid the enquest have found a truth, yet they have not found the
whole truth, neither that which is most for the Kings advantage, nor fully
performed the meaning of the said statute: but if the indictment and the
Justices certificat do vary in the day of the committing of the riot, then the
indictment shall be preferred before the certificat; for the day does alter
nothing to qualify or aggrauat the offense. And yet seeing the said certificat
is but only in the nature of a declaration, to cause the parties accused to
mak^ answer thereunto, the same certificat ought to comprehend the certain
year, and day, though not the addition of the parties, being not within the
words of the statute of Additions made An^ 1. H. 5. 5.

St. 13. H. 4. 7.
29 And though the said Statute of 13. H. 4. The process against riotors.
does only make mention of a Capias, yet it seems by the words of the same,
that first there ought to be awarded a Venire facias against the offenders, and
if they do not appear, then a Capias: for the words of the Statute be, if they
do not come before the King and his council, or into the Kings Bench at the
first precept, then another precept shall be delivered to the Sheriff to take
the said offenders etc. And this process must be returned before the Kings
council, or in the Kings Bench: but if there be awarded against the offenders,
a Subpena, or a privy seal, it shall be void.

St. 13. H. 4. 7
30 Notwithstanding the said Statute of 13. H. 4. The penalty of C. l. for not
executing this Statute.
has inflicted a penalty of C. l. upon the next Justices of the county where
such riot shall be committed, if the execution of that Statute be not done: yet
if other Justices of the same county do perform that office, then the next
Justices shall be excused, and the same penalty shall be saved: for the
Statute does wholly or chiefly respect, that the offenders shall be arrested or
disturbed, their offenses inquired of, recorded, and punished, and by that
means the peace preserved: for all the Justices of peace within the
commission, how far off soever they dwell (so that they dwell within the said
county) if they have notice of such a riot, rout, or unlawful assembly,
ought to enquire of it, to record it, and to suppress it, or otherwise they
may be fined by the Lords in the Star chamber, though the penalty of one C. l.
shall be inflicted only upon the two next Justices, for that they are intended
most likely and soonest to have knowledge of it. But if the Sheriff or
Vndersherife should not come to the Justices, being sent for to assist the
same Justices, and to further the repressing of that riot, and the performance
of that service, then all the said Justices dwelling near or remote shall be
excused of the same penalty of C. l. or any other, for ye said statute does
give him equal authority, and as it were join him in commission in the
copulative with them.

St. 13. H 4. 7.
31 It appears by ye said stat. of 13. H. 4. Trauerse to an Indictment of Riot.
that if the offenders and trespassors do trauerse the matter certified by the
Justices of peace, to the King and his council, the same certificat and
trauerse shall be sent into the K. Bench, and there be tried and determined
according to the law. And in like sort, if the trespassors and offenders do
trauerse the matter found by Inquisition before the Iu. of peace in the
county, the same Inquisition shall be sent to the Justices of peace at the next
Quarter Sessions of the same county, city, borough, or town corporat, having
Justices of Peace within themselves, and there the trauerse shall be tried and
determined according to the Law: the form of which trauerse taken in a town
corporat is this; Alias, scilicet ad Sessionem pacis tentam apud Buckingham in
comitatu praedicto die Lune proximo post festum Sancte Trinitatur, Anno regni
dn^i nr^i Regis Iacobi dei gratur Angliae etc. secundo, coram Iohanne Nichols
generoso Balliuo Burgi and parochiae de Buckingham praedicta, and Francisco
Fortescue milite, Thoma Denton milite, Richardo Ingolsbie milite, Willihelmo
Androwes milite, Roberto Johnson milite, Paulo Risley armigero, A trauerse to
an Inditeme^t of riot.
and Simone Lambard generoso, and alijs socijs suis Iusticiarijs dicti domini
Regis ad pacem in dicto Burgo and parochia conseruandam, necnon ad diuersas
felonias, transgressiones, and alia malefacta in eisdem Burgo and parochia
perpetrata, audienda, and terminanda, assignatis, per sacram^ duodecem
Iuratorum extitit presentatum, Quod A.B.C.D.E.F. de Galcot, cum diuersis alijs
malefactoribus and pacis dicti Domini Regis perturbatoribus modo guerrino
arraiati, unity, and assemblati, vicesimo die Maij, hora quarta post meridiem
eiusdem diei, Anno eiusdem domini Regis nunc secundo, vi and armis, viz.
baculis, gladijs, pugionibus, falcastris, and alijs armis tam inuasiuis, quam
defensiuis apud Prebend-end in Buckingham praedicta clausum cuiusdam L. M.
vocatum Bonehill close, illicite, riotose, and routose fregerunt, and
intrauerunt, and december carractatas seni ad valenc' quatuor librarum de bonis
and catallis dicti L. M. adtunc and ibidem unjust and illicite ceperunt, and
asportauerunt, contra pacem dicti domini Regis, and contra formam statuti inde
editi and prouisi. Per quod praeceptum fuit Iohanni Crook subballiuo, quod non
omitteret propter aliquam libertatem etc. quin venire faceret eosdem
A.B.C.D.E.F. ad responde^dum etc. Posteaque scilicet die Lune proximo post
festum sancti Michaelis Archang' anno regni domini Regis nr^i Iacobi secu^do
cora^ praefatis Iusticiarijs veneru^t predicti A.B.C.D.E.F. in proprijs
personis suis, and habito auditu Indictamenti predicti, seperatim dicunt, quod
ipsi non sunt inde culpabiles. Et de hoc ponunt se super patriam: Et H. I. qui
pro domino Rege in hac part sequitur similiter. Ideo veniunt inde Iuratur
coram Iusticiarijs dicti dn^i Regis ad pacem in Burgo and parochia pred
conseruandam assignatis etc. ad Sessionem pacis apud Buck. pred die Lune
proximo post Epiphaniam dn^i tunc proximo futuro tene^dam. Et qui etc. Ad
recog. etc. Quia tam etc. Idem dies datus est tam praefato H. I. qui sequitur
pro Dn^o Rege, quam prefatur A.B.C.D.E.F. Ad quas quidem Sessiones pacis tentas
apud Buck. pred in com^ pred dicto die Lune proximo post festum Epiphaniae
domini, Anno regni dicti Regis dn^i nostri Iacobi tertio, coram dicto Balliuo
and dictis F.F.T.D.R.I. and socijs suis Iusticiarijs dicti Dn^i Regis ad pacem
in dict' Burgo and parochia conseruandam, necnon ad diuersas felonias,
transgressiones, and alia malefacta in eodem Burgo and parochia perpetrata,
audienda, and terminanda assignatis, venerunt tam prefatus H.I. qui pro dn^o
Rege in hac part sequitur, quam prefatur A.B.C.D.E.F. in proprijs personis
suis: Et Iuratores per subballiutim Burgi and parochie pred ad hoc
impannellatur and exacti; viz. E.F. Mercer. O.P. Draper, etc. similiter
venerunt, qui ad veritatur de premissis dicendam triati and iurati dicunt super
sacrum suum: quod pred A.B.C.D.E.F. culpabiles sunt, and eoru^ quilibet
culpabilis est de transgressione, contemptu, and riotto pred in Indictamento
pred superius specificatis, modo and forma prout superius versus eos
supponitur. Ideo co^cessu^ est per cur^, quod pred A.B.C.D.E.F. capiantur ad
satisfaciendum dicto domino Regi de finibus suis occasion transgressionis,
contemptus, and riotti praedicti. Qui quidem A. B. C. D. E. F. adtu^c and ibid
presents in cur^ petieru^t se ad fine^ cu^ dict' dn^o Rege occasion pred
admitti. Et inde pon^ se seperatur in miserecordia dn^i Regis. Et assessatur
finis eiusd A.B. per Iusticiar^ pred ad 5. li. Et assessatur finis eiusdem C.D.
ad 3. li. etc. bone and legalis monetur Angliae ad opus and vsum dicti dn^i
Regis.

32 Though the laws and statutes before rehearsed, or mentioned did take
sufficient order for ye inquiring of, repressing, and punishing of such as did
commit riots, routs, or unlawful assemblies, by iij.iiij.v. or some small
number of persons, and then were apprehended, or dispersed by the Justices of
Peace, the sheriff, or vndersherife, with the help of the country, when need
required: Yet there was no sufficient law devised to suppress, and punish
such, as did assemble in great numbers, routs, and tumults, and would in
contempt of the law, and in rebellious manner, put in practice, unlawful,
forcible, and violent acts, and being by authority of the same law, in calm
manner required to the contrary, would yet stand at the staves end with the
peace of the realm, and the justice of the law, and as it were in despite of
all government and governors proceed in their fury: Therefore to continue peace
and tranquillity in the common weal, and by a more sharp corrasiue to bridle
or punish so great maladies, St. 1. M. 12.
by a statute made Anno 1. M. it was enacted, Twelve or above assembled to
change laws.
That if any persons to the number of xij. or above, being assembled together,
shall intend, go about, practice, or put in ure by force of arms, unlawfully,
and of their own authority, to alter, or change any laws made or established
for religion by authority of Parliament, which stand in force, or any other
laws or statutes of this realm, or any of them, the same number being commanded
or required by the sheriff of the shire, or by any Iu. of peace of the same
shire, or by the mayor, sheriff, I. of peace, or by the baylifs of any city,
borough, or town corporat, where such assemblies shall be unlawfully had and
made, by proclamation in the Queens name, to retire, and repair to their own
houses and habitations, or places from whence they came; and they or any of
them, notwithstanding such Proclamation, shall remain, and make their abode
and continue together by ye space of one whole hour after such commandment or
request made by Proclamation, or after that shall willingly in forcible and
riotous manner attempt to do or put in ure any thing above specified: Then as
well every such abode or continuing together, as every such act or offense,
that after such commandment or request by Proclamation had or made, shall be
attempted to be done, practiced, or put in ure by any of the persons being of
the number aforesaid, shall be judged felony in all and singular those persons,
that so shall make their abode or continue together, or shall attempt or commit
any act. And the offenders therein shall be adjudged felons, and shall suffer
only execution of death, as in case of felony.

St. 1. M. 12.
33 If any persons to the said number of twelve, or above, shall intend,
Practicing to destroy parks, ponds, conduits.
go about, practice, and put in ure, in manner and form aforesaid, to
overthrow, cut, break, cast down, or dig up the pales, hedges, ditches, or
other enclosure of any Parkes or Park, or other grounds or ground enclosed, or
the banks of any fish pond or poole, or any conduits for water, conduit heads,
or conduit pipes, having course of water, to the intent, that the same or any
of them from thenceforth should remain open, not enclosed, or void, Common or
way.
or unlawfully to have common or way in the same Parkes or Park, or other
grounds or ground enclosed, or in any of them, or to destroy in manner and
form aforesaid the Dear in any Parks or Park, or any warrens or warren of
Conies, Destruction of dear, conies, doue-houses, fish. Pulling down houses,
burning stacks of corn, abating of rents.
or any Doue-houses, or any fish in any fish pond or poole, or to pull or cut
down any houses, barnes, milles, or bays, or to burn any stackes of corn or
grain, or to abate or diminish the rents or yearly value of any manors,
lands, or tenements, or the price of any victual, corn, or grain, or any
other thing usual for the sustenance of men, and being required or commanded
by any I. of peace, or by the Sheriff of the county, or by the mayor, bailife,
or bailifs, or other head officers of any city or town corporat, where such
assembly shall be had by proclamation to be made in the Queens name, to
retire, and return in peaceable manner to their places and houses from whence
they came, and they or any of them (notwithstanding such proclamation) shall
remain or make their abode, or continue together by the space of one whole
hour after such commandment or request made by proclamation; or after that
shall in forcible manner do, or put in ure any of those things last before
mentioned: Then as well every such abode, or continuing together, as every such
act, that after such commandment or request by proclamation, or request had or
made, shall be done, practiced, or put in ure, by any of the persons being
above the number of twelve, shall be adjudged felony, and the offenders therein
shall be adjudged felons, and shall suffer only the execution of death, as in
case of felony.

Raising of unlawful assemblies by some acts or words.
34 If any person or persons unlawfully, and without authority, 1. M. 12.
by ringing of any bell, or bells, sounding of any trumpet, drum, horn, or
other instrument whatsoever, or by fiering of any beacon, or by malicious
speaking or uttering of any words, or making of any outcrie, or by setting up,
or casting of any bills or bil, or writing whatsoever, or by any other deed or
act, shall raise or cause to be raised or assembled any persons to the number
of twelve or above, to the intent, that the same persons should do, or put in
ure, any of the things above mentioned; and that the persons to the number of
twelve or above so raised and assembled after request or commandment had or
given in form aforesaid, shall make their abode, or continue together, as is
aforesaid, or unlawfully and in forcible manner perpetrate, do, commit, or put
in ure any the acts or things abouesaid: Then all and singular persons, by
whose speaking, deed, act, or any other the means above specified, any persons
to the number of twelve or above shall be raised or assembled, for the doing,
committing, or putting in ure of any the acts or things above mentioned, shall be
adjudged for his so speaking or doing a felon, and shall suffer execution of
death, as in case of felony.

Relieuing them which be assembled.
35 If any wife, or servant of any of the same persons, 1. M. 12.
or any other person whatsoever, shall willingly and without compulsion, bring,
send, deliver, or convey, any money, harness, artillery, weapon, meat, bread,
drink, or other victual to any person or persons so being assembled as is
aforesaid, during such time as he or they shall so be assembled, or be
together, as is aforesaid: then every wife, servant, or other person, so
bringing or conueying etc. any of the foresaid things to the same persons so
being assembled together in forcible manner, or to any of them, and not
departing to their houses or dwelling places, upon request or commandment made
unto them as is aforesaid, shall be adjudged a felon, and shall suffer
execution of death, as in case of felony.

Unlawful assemblies above two and under twelve.
36 If any persons above the number of 2. and under the number of 12. 1. M. 12.
being assembled together, shall intend, go about, practice, or put in ure
with force of arms unlawfully, and of their own authority, to murder, kill,
or slay any of the kings subjects, or to overthrow, cut, break, or cast
down, or dig up the pales, hedges, ditches, wall, or other closure of any
parkes or park, or other ground enclosed, or the banks of any fish pond or
poole, to the intent that the same or any of them from thenceforth should
remain open, not enclosed, or void, or to have common or way in the same parks
or park, or other grounds or ground enclosed, or in any of them, or to destroy
any parkes or park, or fish pond, or poole, or any warrens or warren of
conies, or any doue-houses, or to pull, or cut down any house, barn, or mil, or
to burn any stacke of corn or grain, or to alter, defaulke, or abate the
rents, or yearly value of any manors, lands, or tenements of any of the Kings
subjects, or the price of any victual, corn, or grain, or any other thing
usual for the sustenance or apparel of men, and being required or commanded
by any Justice of peace, or the sheriff of the county, or by any mayor,
bailife, or bailifes, or other head officer of any city or town corporat,
where such assembly shall be had, by Proclamation to be made in the Kings name,
to retire or return to their habitations, places, or houses: and they so
required by such proclamation shall not so do, but after that shall in forcible
manner in form aforesaid, attempt to do or put in ure any of the things last
above mentioned: then every of the same persons being above the number of two
and under the number of twelve, shall suffer imprisonment of his or their
bodies by the space of one whole year, without bail or mainprise. The remedy
of the parties grieved.
And also if any person or persons shall be damnified or hurt by the doing,
committing, or putting in ure of any unlawful act or thing above mentioned,
then all and singular persons so damnified and hurt shall recover and have
damages with the costs of their suit sustained in that behalf trebled against
the offenders therein.

1. M. 12.
37 If any persons above the number of two shall unlawfully and of their own
authority assemble together, to the intent with force and arms to do,
practice, Raising of power to suppress unlawful assemblies.
or put in ure any of the things above mentioned: Then it shall be lawful to
every Justice of peace, and to every Sheriff in any county, being within the
K. dominions, and to every mayor, bailife, and other head officer of any city,
or town corporat, for the time he shall be in office, or any other person or
persons having the K. commission, or Letters from his highness, as well to raise
and assemble the kings loving subjects in manner of war to be arraied in such
great number, as he or they then shall think meet or able, to the intent by
violence of strength to suppress, apprehend, and take the said persons that
shall be so unlawfully assembled. And if the said persons so unlawfully
assembled, after such cammandement or request by proclamation made, shall
continue together and not endeavor themselves to return toward their
habitations, houses, or places from whence they came, in as short time as they
may conveniently: Then it shall be lawful to every I. of peace, sheriff, and
also every mayor, bailife, and other head officer of any city or town
corporat, and to every other person having authority as is aforesaid, after
such commandment or request by proclamation made, and to such persons as
shall be assembled with any Justice of peace, or sheriff, or with any mayor,
bailife, or other head officer of any city or town corporat, and with every
other person having authority as is aforesaid, to suppress, apprehend, and
take those persons so unlawfully assembled, which after such proclamation made,
shall continue together, and not endeavor themselves to return toward their
habitations etc. And if the said persons so unlawfully assembled together, or
any of them shall fortune to be killed, slain, maihemed, or hurt, in, or about
the suppressing or taking of them, then every such Justice, Sheriff, Mayor,
etc. and every other person having authority as is aforesaid, and all and
singular persons by him or them assembled shall be free, discharged, and
unpunishable: as well against the king, as against all and every other person
and persons, of, for, or concerning the killing, maiheming, or hurting of any
person or persons so unlawfully assembled, that shall be killed, slain,
maihemed, or hurt about or by occasion of taking or suppressing of the^ etc.

1. M. 12.
38 All and every Copieholder and Customary holder, being a yeoman, artificer,
husbandman, A copieholder being required refuses to serve.
or labourer, and being of ye age of xviij. years, or more, and under ye age
of lx. years, not sick, impotent, lame, maihemed, neither having any other
just or reasonable excuse or cause to the contrary, and being required by the
sheriff, Justice, or Justices of peace, or other having authority by this act,
or by commission, or letters etc. they declaring their said authority, or
being required by the immediate Lord or Lords of whom such copy or customary
holds then shall be holden, to serve the King, for any the causes above
rehearsed, and refuse so to do, shall (only during the life of such person or
persons so refusing) forfeit to his Lord or Lords, of whom such copy or
customarie holds then shall be immediately holden, and should be holden during
the life of such person or persons so refusing, in case he had not refused, all
their copy and customarie holds: And it shall be lawful to every such Lord, etc.
his heirs or assigns of whom such copy or customary holds shall be immediately
holden, and should have bin holden, in case that such persons or persons had
not so refused, to enter and take into his or their hands or possessions all
such copy and customarie holds so holden of the^, or any of the^ immediately,
and to retain the same during only the life of such offe^dor or offenders, in
such manner as he or they should have had ye rents or services of such copy or
customary hold, in case such person or persons so refusing, had not refused.

A farmer required refuses to serve.
39 All and every farmer being a yeoman, husbandman, artificer, or labourer, 1.
M. 12.
and being of the age of xviij. years, or more, and under the age of lx.
years, not sick, impotent, lame, maihemed, nor having any other reasonable
excuse or cause to the contrary, and being required by the sheriff, Justice, or
Justices of peace, or other having authority by this act, or by commission, or
letters etc. they declaring their said authority; or being required by their
said Landlord or Landlords for the time being, to whom the rents of such farms
shall be then rising, growing, or coming, to serve ye king, for any the causes
above rehearsed, and refuse so to do, shall (during only the life of such
farmer or farmers so refusing) forfeit and loose to such Landlord and Landlords
as should have had the rents of such farmer during the life and lives of such
person and persons so refusing, all their said farms. And it shall be lawful to
every such Landlord etc. their heirs and assigns to whom the rents of such
farms should have bin due, during the life of such person or persons so
refusing (in case he or they had not refused) to enter and take into his or
their hands or possession al such farms, and to retain the same only during the
life of every such offe^dor or offenders. But after the death, expiration, or
determination of the interest or term of years of every such copyholder,
customary holder, or farmer, as so shall offend, and forfeit any of the said
copi-holds, customary holds, or farms, as is aforesaid: the^ every such person
as should, or ought to have had the copy holds, customary holds, or farms,
after, or by the death, expiration, or determination of the interest, or term
of years of such copie-holder, customarie holder, or farmer (in case such
copie-holder, customarie holder, or farmer, had not so offended ne forfeited)
shall and may have the same copie-hold, customarie holds, and farms by entry,
action, admission, or otherwise, in like manner, form, and condition, and by
such means, as they and every of them should, might, or ought to have had, if
no such forfeiture or offense had bin had, done, or committed.

40 If any person shall be spoken unto, moved, 1. M. 12.
or stirred to make any co^motion, Disclosing a commotion when one is moved.
insurrection, or unlawful assembly for any of ye intents above mentioned, and
do not within 24. hours next after he shall be spoken unto, moved, or stirred
(unless he have good and reasonable cause of excuse) declare the same unto one
Justice of the peace, or Sheriff of the said county, or to the Mayor,
Sherifes, Bailifes, or other head officers of any city or town corporat, where
such commotion etc. shall be had; he shall suffer imprisonment by the space of
three months, without bail or mainprise, unless he shall be discharged by 3.
Justices of peace (whereof one to be of the Quorum) of the same shire where
the offense shall be committed.

1. M 12.
41 If any person being above the age of eighteen years, An able person
required refuses to serve.
and under the age of threescore, being able to serve, and not sick, lame, or
impotent, shall be required by any Justice of peace, or any Sheriff of any
County, where any such assembly shall be, or by any Mayor, Bailife, or other
head Officer, of any city, borough, or town corporat, or by any other by the
commandment of any such Justice, Sheriff, Mayor, etc. to go with him, or
them, to suppress the persons unlawfully assembled in manner and form
aforesaid: then every person which so being able, and required, does willingly
and obstinately refuse so to do, shall suffer imprisonment for one whole
year, without bail or mainprise.

1. M. 12.
42 If the King shall by his Letters patents make any Lieutenant in any County
or Counties of this Realm, Attendance upon a lieutenant.
for the suppressing of any commotion, rebellion, or unlawful assembly; then
as well all Justices of peace, and the Sheriff and Sherifes of the same, as all
Majors, Baylifes, and other head officers, and all inhabitants and subjects of
any County, City, Borough, or town corporat, within every such County,
shall upon declaration of the said Letters patents and request made, be bound
to give attendance upon the same Lieutenant, to suppress any commotion,
rebellion, or unlawful assembly, unless he so required have any reasonable
excuse for his not attendance, upon pain of imprisonment for one whole year.

1. M. 12.
43 The order and form of the Proclamation that shall be made by the authority
of this Act, shall be as hereafter follows, The form of the Proclamation.
or with the like order and words in effect, viz. The Justices or other persons
authorized by this Act, to make the said Proclamation, shall make or cause to
be made an Oyes, and after that shall openly pronounce or cause to be
pronounced these words, or to the like effect: The King our Sovereign Lord
charge and commands al persons being assembled, immediately to disperse
themselves, and peaceably to depart to their habitations, or their lawful
business, upon the pain contained in the act, lately made against unlawful
and rebellious assemblies: And God save the King.

1. M. 12.
44 If any person or persons do, or shall molest, let, hinder, Hinderance of the
Proclamation.
or hurt any person or persons, that shall proclaim, or go to proclaim,
according to the proclamation and order aforesaid, whereby such proclamation
shall not be made; then every such person so molesting or hurting, etc. and
having knowledge of his message, shall incur such danger, and suffer such
pains and forfeitures, the persons assembled, to whom the proclamation should
have been made, should by this Act incur, for not obeying the Proclamation
(if it had been made,) or for doing after the Proclamation of any the things
before expressed. And also all such persons being assembled to the number
aforesaid, to attempt or do any the things aforesaid, to whom Proclamation
should or ought to have been made, if the same had not been let, shall
likewise in case they do after put in ure, and do any the things aforesaid,
having any ways knowledge of the let so made, or by any means procuring the
same let, incur like danger, and suffer like pains and forfeitures
aforesaid, in every their degrees, as though the proclamation had been made:
any clause, article, etc. in this Act etc. notwithstanding.

Other men's right saved.
45 All and every the heir and heirs of all and every the offender and
offenders in any the cases aforesaid, and all and every person and persons, 1.
M. 12.
bodies politic and corporat, their heirs, successors, and executors, and
every of them (other than such person and persons only, as shall be attainted,
convicted, and outlawed of any the foresaid offenses of felony) shall have,
hold, and enjoy all such right, title, entry, interest, leases, possessions,
rents, conditions, profits, and adua^tages, as they, or any of them shall, or
of right ought to have, in, or to any manors, lands, rents, reuersions,
services, or hereditaments whatsoever, or in, or to any part thereof, in as
large manner to all intents, as if such attainder had never been had: any
thing in this act etc. notwithstanding etc. Saving to every person and persons,
bodies politic and corporate, and their successors, their liberties and
franchises in such manner, as if this act had never been made.

Procuring others to offend.
46 If any person or persons do move, stir, 1. M. 12.
or procure any person or persons, to commit any of the offenses in this Act
specified: then every such person and persons which shall procure, stir, or
move any person or persons so to offend, shall suffer such punishment by
imprisonment, without bail or mainprise, as is before expressed in this Act
against counselors of such offenders.

Unlawful assemblies by xl. or above.
47 If any persons to the number of forty or more, 1. M. 12.
shall assemble together in forcible manner unlawfully, and of their own
authority, to the intent to execute, do, or put in ure any of the things
above specified, or to do any other felonious or rebellious act or acts, and
so shall continue together by the space of three hours after proclamation
shall be made, at or nigh the place where they shall be so assembled, or in
some market town thereunto next adjoining, and after notice to them given
thereof: Then every person so willingly assembled in forcible manner, and so
continuing together by the space of three hours after such proclamation made,
and notice thereof given, shall be adjudged a felon.

A lieutenant shall not appoint a deputy.
48 No lieutenant that shall be made by authority or color of this Act, 1. M.
12.
or for to execute this Act, shall constitute under him, or in his place, any
deputy, nor shall call or appoint to appear before him, by the only
authority of lieutenancie, or of commission of lieutenancy any person for any
cause or matter whatsoever, save only for the causes and matters expressed in
this Act, and for none other.

Aiding of the offenders after the offense
49 No person or persons shall be put to any loss, forfeiture, pain, 1. M. 12.
or punishment, of life, land, or goods, as accessorie to any person or
persons, that shall commit any of the offenses contained in this act, for
receiving, comforting, or aiding of any such offender, after such act committed
or done.

1. M. 12.
50 No attainder or conviction of any person or persons, The attainder of those
offenses no corruption of blood.
for any offense or offenses herein contained, shall be any corruption of blood
betwixt the offender and any of his ancestors, or such person or persons as
should have been heir to such offender, if no such attainder or conviction
had been had: saving to every person and persons, bodies politic and
corporat etc. their liberties and fran^^^ses, in such manner as if this Act had
never been made.

Of Force, forcible Entries, and forcible retayning of possessions.
Unlawful force an enemy to peace.
1 FOrce and violence executed without warrant of Law, be so mere contrary to
the peace and justice of the Realm, as disobedience is to loyalty, and
contempt to government: for whosoever does make a Forcible entry into lands in
the possession of an other, does secretly reuolue in his mind, and distrust to
himself, that there is no Law in the Realm to redress his wrong, or no
ministers to execute the same; and therefore he will sit in judgment of that
cause himself, and take into his own hands the distribution of justice, and
assume into his possession by the strength of his arm, what the fantasy of
his head shall resolve to be his due; whereas the Law in convenient time would
truly satisfy him, whether the land in question, by the rules of justice be
his, or not, and also assign him a mild and calm course to recover all his
whole duty, with valuable damages for the time he is injured. And because this
force and forcible entry into lands, is so opposite and mere repugnant to the
peace and justice of the Realm, and tends so much to the dishonor of the
King, and his Crown, and the discredit of the Law, that any person by birth
and oath devoted to the obedience of the King, and his Laws, should presume of
his own authority, by force, and strong hand to resist them both, and as it
were in contempt of them, violently to intrude himself into an other man's
possession, before the law has decided his title therein: Therefore the
wisdom of the Realm, has by the space of many generations first provided to
restrain those forces, and forcible Entries, and next to inflict condign
punishment upon them, which were offenders therein: Whereupon by a Statute made
An^ 5. There shall be no forcible entry into lands.
R. 2. the King defended, St. 5. R. 2. 7.
that none from thenceforth should make any Entry into any lands and
tenements, but in case where entry is given by the Law, and then not with
strong hand, nor with multitude of people, but only in a peaceble course and
manner. And if any from henceforth do the contrary, and thereof be duly
convict, he shall be punished by imprysonment of his body, and thereof
ransomed at the Kings pleasure.

2 But for that the said Statute of 5. R. 2. did give no speedy remedy to
those which were expelled out of their lands or tenements, nor assigned any
special persons to suppress the said disorder: Therefore by an other Statute
made An^ 15. St. 15. R. 2. 2
R. 2. it was further ordained, The penalty of forcible entry into lands or
benefices.
That when any such forcible entry shall be made into lands or tenements, or
into any Benefices or offices of the Church, and the complaint thereof come to
the Justices of the peace, or any of them, that the same Justices or Justice
take sufficient power of the County, and go to the place where such forcible
entry is made, and if he or they find any that holds such place forcible
after such entry made, they shall be taken, and put into the Jail, there to
abide convict by the record of the same Justices, or Justice, until they have
made fine and ransom to the King. And all they of the County, as well the
Shirife, as other, shall be attending upon the Justices to go and assist the
same Justices, to arrest such offenders, upon pain of imprisonment, and to
make fine to the King.

3 And forasmuch as the said Statute of 15. R. 2. does not extend to Entries
into tenements in peaceable manner, and after holden with force, nor if the
persons which enter with force into any lands or tenements be wholly removed and
departed before the coming of the said Justices, or Justice; Neither is there
any pain ordained, if the Shirife do not obey the precepts of the Justices in
this behalf. St. 8. H. 6. 9.
Therefore by an other Statute made An^ 8. H. 6. it was ordained, that the said
former Statutes should be continued and executed. And further, that where any
do make such forcible entry into lands, tenements, or other possessions, or
hold them forcible, Holding possession by force.
after complaint thereof made within the said County where such entry is
made, to the Justices of peace, or to one of them by the party grieved, that
the Justices or Justice so warned, within a convenient time cause the said
Statute to be executed, and that at the costs of the party so grieved. And
whether such persons making such Entries be present, or gone before the coming
of the said Justices or Justice, presently the same Justices or Justice in some
good Town next unto the tenements so entered, or in some other convenient
place, according to their discretion, shall have authority to inquire by the
people of the same County, as well of them that made such forcible entries into
lands or tenements, Feoffement of lands for maintenance.
as of them which hold the same with force. And if it be found before any of
them, that any does contrary to this Statute, then the said Justices or
Justice shall cause the lands or tenements so entered or holden as aforesaid to
be reseised, and shall put the party so put out, in full possession of the same
lands or tenements so entered or holden, as before they were entered or holden.
And if any person after such entry into lands or tenements holden with force,
make a feoffement or other discontinuance (...) any Lord, or other person to
have maintenance, or to take away and defraud the possessor of his recovery
in any wise, if after in an Assise, or other action thereof to be taken or
pursued before Justices of Assise, or other the Kings Justices whatsoever they
be, by due inquiry thereof to be taken, the same feoffements and
discontinuances may be duly proved to be made, for maintenance, as is
aforesaid, then such feoffements or other discontinuances so as before made
shall be void. And if any person be put out or disseised of any lands or
tenements in forcible manner, or put out peaceably, and after holden out with
strong hand, and arms, against the Justice of peace; or after such entry, any
feoffement or discontinuance in any wise thereof be made, An Assise or action
of trespass against disseisour by force.
to defraude and take away the right of the possessor, the party greiued in
this behalf, shall have an Assise of Nouel disseisin, or a writ of Trespass
against such disseisor. And if the party grieved recover by Assise, or by
action of Trespass and it be found by verdict, or in any other manner by due
form of the Law, that the party defendant entered with force into the lands
and tenements, or them after his entry did hold with force, then the plaintiff
shall recover treble damages against the defendant, and moreover the defendant
shall make fine and ransom to the King. The authority of officers of Cities
and Towns enfranchised.
And the Majors, Justices and Justice of peace, Shirifes, and Bailifes of
Cities and Boroughes having fraunchise, shall have in the said Cities, Towns,
and Boroughes, like authority to avoid such Entries, and in other articles
aforesaid, rising within the same, as Justices of peace and Shirifes in
Counties and Shires have.

4 As by the foresaid Statute of 8. H. 6. if any person after entry into lands
or tenements holden with force, shall make any feoffement or other
discontinuance thereof to any Lord or other person, to have maintenance, or to
defraud the possessor of his recovery, then the same feoffements and
discontinuances shall be void: So by an other Statute made before that Anno 4.
H. 4. St. 4. H. 4. 8.
it was inacted, A special Assise against a disseisor with force.
That if any man in his own right to his use, or in an other man's right to his
use, does make any forcible entry into an other man's lands by way of
maintenance, or does take or carry away any goods of the possessors of the
freehold after any such forcible entry; then if the party grieved or other
lawful man will affirm, that the entry was made in such forcible manner, the
Chancellor of England may grant to the party greiued a special Assise: And
if the disseisor be attainted of such forcible disseisin, he shall be one year
imprisoned, and pay to the party grieved his double damages, and also
damages for his goods. And one of the Justices of the one Bench, or of the
other, or the chief Baron of the Exchequer (if he be learned in the law) shall
be named in every such special Assise. And no Supersedeas shall be granted to
the contrary of such Assise.

5 Wherefore, if a man be disseised by force of any lands or tenements by way
of maintenance, or that his goods be taken or carried away after such entry
made: Or that he be put out, or disseised of his lands in forcible manner: Or
that he be put out peaceably, and after holden out with force against a
Justice of peace: Or after such entry, any feoffement or discontinuance be
made to defraud and take away the right of the possessor; then the party
grieved (as his case requires) may have a special Assise against the
disseisor, and recover his double damages, Several remedies for several
offenses by force.
and damages for his goods, and the disseisor shall be one year imprisoned,
according to the foresaid Statute of 4. H. 4. St. 4. H. 4. 8.
Or else he may have an Assise of Nouel disseisin, or an action of Trespass
against the disseisor, and recover treble damages; and moreover, the disseisor
shall make fine and ransom to the King, according to the before rehearsed
Statute of 8. H. 6. St. 8. H. 6. 9.
Or if the plaintiff will omit the benefit of recovery of his damages, he may
only crave and use the assistance of a Justice of peace, to see and remove the
force, to record it, to inquire of it, and to make him restitution, according
as the truth of his case shall appear to the said Justice upon his own sight,
or be found by inquisition, according to the former provision of the said
Statute of 8. H. 6. Or lastly, he that is put out, or holden out of his lands
with force, may have a writ directed out of the Chauncerie to the Shirife only,
or to the Shirife and the Justices of peace upon the Statute of Northhampton
made An^ 2. Ed. 3. St. 2. E. 3. 3.
commanding that proclamation may be made upon that Statute.

6 And for that it is convenient, that he who is with force expelled out of his
lands, or by force detained from the same, should not be long kept out of
possession thereof, but that there should be a speedy redress to restore him
to his own: and also because it is meant, that the inquisition of that force
should be made by men of good estate, and so the more like to be indifferent,
of better understanding, and to declare the truth in those cases: Therefore by
the foresaid statute of Anno 8. Sta. 8. H. 6. 9.
H. 6. it was moreover ordained, That when the said Justices or Justice shall
make such inquiries, as are beforesaid, they shall cause their warrants and
precepts to be directed to the Shirife of the same County, A precept to the
Shirife to impannell a Jury.
commanding him on the Kings behalf to cause to come before them, and every
of them, sufficient and indifferent persons, dwelling next about the lands so
entered upon as before; to enquire of such entries, whereof every man that shall
be impannelled, and may inquire in this behalf, shall have lands or tenements
to the value of xl. s. by the year at the least above reprises, and that the
Shirife return issues upon every of them at the day of the first precept
returnable xx. s. and at the second day xl. s. and at the third day five
pounds, and at every day after, the double. And if any Shirife or Baylife
within a fraunchise, having the return of the Kings writs be slack, and make
not execution duly of the said precepts to him directed to make such inquiries,
he shall forfeit to the King xx.li. for every such default, Shirifes forfaiture.
and moreover shall make fine and ransom to the King. And as well the Justices
or Justice aforesaid, as the Justices of Assise, and every of them, at their
coming into the Country to take Assizes, have power to hear and determine
such defaults, and negligences of the said Shirifes, and Bailifes, and every of
them, as well by bill at the suit of the party greiued for himself, as for the
King, to sue by Indictment only to be taken for the King. And if the Shirife or
Bailife be duly attainted in this behalf by Indictment, or by bill, he which
sueth for himself, and for the King, shall have the one moitie of the
forfaiture of xx. li. together with his costs and expenses. The process.
And the same process shall be made against such persons indicted, or sued by
bill in this behalf, as should be against persons indicted or sued by writ of
Trespass with force and arms against the Kings peace.

7 The form of which precept by a Justice of peace, Buck.
to the Shirife to return a Jury, to enquire of Forcible entries is this.
Edwardus Tirrell miles vnus Iusticiariorum dn^i Regis, The form of a Precept
to the Shirife to return a Jury.
ad pacem in Comitatu Buck. conseruandam assignatorum vicecomiti eiusdem
Comitatus salutem: Ex part dicti Domini Regis tibi mando, quod venire facias
coramme apud Thornborough in Comitatu praedicto 10. die Octobris proximo futuro
24. probos, sufficientes, and legales homines de viceneto de Thornborough
praedicto, quorum quilibet habeat 40. solidos terrarum and tenementorum, vel
reddituum pet annum ad minus vltra reprisas, ad inquirendum super sacramentum
suum, si A. B. de Adstock in dicto Comitatu Buck. blacksmith, and alij
malefactores, and pacis dicti domini Regis perturbatores, in vnum mesuagium and
20. acras terrae and alia tenementa de C. D. husband. de T. praedict' manu
forti super possessionem dicti C. D. ingressi sunt, aut eadem cum fortitudine
adhuc tenent and occupant. Et videas quod super quilibet Iuratorum in hoc part
impan nellandorum xx. s. ad primum diem returns; and hoc nullatenus omittas
sub pena xx.li. quam noueris te incursurum, si in executione praemissorum
tepidus aut remissus fueris. Et habeas ibi hoc praeceptum. Datur apud Thornton
xx. die September. Anno Regni domini nostri Regis Iacobi etc. tertio.

8 The form of an inquisition or verdit of the Jury which are returned and
sworn to enquire of forcible Entry into lands or tenements, or of the
forcible detayning of them taken by a Justice of peace is this. Buck. The form
of an Inquisition of forcible entry.
viz. Inquisitio pro domino Rege capta apud Buckingham in Com^ praedicto xx.
die N. Anno Regni domini nostri Regis Iacobi etc. quarto, super sacramentum A.
B. C. D. E. F. G. etc. coram Thoma Temple milite vno Iusticiar^ dicti domini
Regis ad pacem in dicto Comitatu conseruandam assignatorum: Qui dicunt, quod
vbi H. I. de Tyngswicke in Comitur praedict husbandman, qui legitime and
pacifice seisitus fuit in dominico suo vt defecdo, de vno mesuagio cum
pertinentijs in Tyngswick praedicto, and possessionem suam sic continuauit,
quousque L. M. de Maydsmoorton in Comitatu praedicto laborer, and alij
malefactores, and pacis dicti domini Regis perturbatores xxx. die O. iam vltimo
elapso, vi and armis, viz. cum baculis, gladijs, arcubus, sagittis, fustibus,
gunnis, and balistis in mesuagium praedictum etc. intrauerunt, and ipsum H. I.
inde expulerunt, and idem mesuagium etc. a praedicto xxx. die O. vsque ad diem
captionis huius inquisitionis etc. cum huiusmodi fortitudine and potentia
tenuer^, and occupauerunt, in magnam pacis dicti domini Regis perturbationem,
and contra formam statuti in tali casu editi and prouisi, vbi nullus eorum, nec
aliquis alius cuius statum ipsi aut aliquis eorum habuerunt, aut habuit,
aliquid in eodem mesuagio etc. aut aliqua inde parcella habuerunt, aut habuit
infra tres annos proximos ante ingressu^ suum praedictu^, neque aliquo tempore
praecedente ad notitiam Iuratorum predictorum.

9 And for that the said Statute of 8. H. 6. has ordained, That if it be found
before any of the said Justices of peace, that any does contrary to that
Statute, then the said Justices or Justice shall cause the lands or tenements
so entered, or holden with force to be reseised, and shall put the party so put
out in full possession of the same lands, so entered or holden as before they
were entered or holden: Therefore, when the Justice of peace shall by the said
Inquisition be informed, or by the view of his own eye perceive, that any such
forcible entry into any lands has been made, or after the same lands be
holden with force, he is either himself to reseise the same lands, and put the
party in possession again, who was so forciblie expelled or kept out of
possession, or else he is to make his Precept to the Shirife of the same
County to make restitution to the same party. The form of which warrant or
precept is this, viz. Georgius Throckmorton Miles, Buck. A warrant to the
Shirife to make restitution.
vnus Iusticiariorum dn^i Regis ad pacem in dicto Comitatu conseruandam
assignatorum, Vicecom^ eiusdem Comitatur, salutem. Cum per quandam
Inquisitionem patriae coram me captum apud East-Claydon in Comitatu predicto 2.
die Dec. Anno regni dn^i nostri Iacobi quarto, super sacr^m A. B. C. D. E. F.
etc. ac per formam statuti in hm^odi casu prouisi compertu^ fuerit, qd' L. M.
de Horwood magna in Com^ predict' husb. alij malefactores, and pacis dicti dn^i
Regis perturbatores, 26. die No. an^ dicti dn^i Regis nunc quarto, in quoddam
messuagiu^ etc. N. T. in East-Claydon predicta, vi and armis ingressi fuerunt,
ac ipsum N. T. inde expulerunt, and predictu^ mesuagiu^ etc. a predicto 26. die
etc. vsque ad dictu^ secundu^ diem December. manu forti and cum potentia
tenuerunt, prout per Inquisitione^ predictam before liquet de recordo: Ideo ex
part dicti dn^i Regis tibi mando, and precipio quod ad hoc debitur requisitus,
vna cum posse Comitatur tui, si necesse fuerit, accedas ad mesuagiu^ and
caetera praemissa, ac eade^ cum pertinentijs reseisiri facias, and prefatu^ N.
T. ad and in plenam possessione^ suam inde, prout ipse ante ingressu^ predictu^
fuerat, restituas, and mitti facias, iuxta forma^ dicti statuti, de Ingressibus
manu forti factis aediti and prouisi. Et hoc nullatenus omittas sub periculo
incumbentur. Test me prefato G. Throckmorton. Datum apud Fulbrooke etc. tertio
die Decembris etc.

7. Ed. 4. 18. 4. H. 7. 18. 15. H. 7. 5.
10 If a man be indicted before the Justices of peace in the County, Restitution
awarded out of the K. bench
for that he did with force expel, and put another out of his possession of
certain lands within the same County, and after this indictment is removed
into the kings bench by a Certiorari, the Justices of the same court may award
a writ of Restitution to the shirife of the same County, to restore possession
to the party so expelled, though the words of the statute of 8. H. 6. do give
that authority only to the Justices of peace of the County, where the forcible
entry is made: and if he be indicted before Justices to hear and determine, and
after the record is removed into the K. Bench, the Justices of the same court
may award restitution: for that they who have supreme authority, and do
represent the K. person, now have before them the record whereby the party was
indicted.

11 By the words of the foresaid statute of 8. H. 6. it does appear, No
restitutio^, but where the force is found by inguisition.
that one Justice of peace alone may remove the force, 21. H. 6. 5.
and also enquire thereof, and so may diverse Justices. But by the aforesaid
statute no restitution can be made to the party put out of possession, if the
said expelling or putting out of possession be not found by inquisition: nor
but in case, where the words of the Indictment upon the statute of 8. 14. H. 6.
16.
H. 6. be, adhuc extratenet.

12 In the foresaid statute of 8. H. 6. there is a prouiso, That they which
keep their possessions by force in any lands and tenements, whereof they or
their ancestors, or they, whose estate they have in such lands or tenements,
have continued their possession by the space of three years or more, be not
endammaged by the force of the said statute. And by one other statute made Anno
31. St. 31. El. 11.
Eliz. for the explanation and declaration of the meaning and intent of the
said prouiso, and of the law therein, it was ordained, declared, and enacted,
That no restitution upon any indictment of Forcible entry, Where no restitutio^
against three years possession.
or holding with force, shall be made to any person or persons, if the person or
persons so indicted has had the occupation, or has been in quiet possession
by the space of three whole years together, next before the day of such
indictment so found, and his, her, or their estate or estates therein not ended
nor determined: which the party indicted shall and may allege, for stay of
restitution, and restitution to stay until that be tried, if the other will
deny or trauerse the same. And if the same allegation be tried against the same
person or persons so indicted, then the same person or persons so indicted to pay
such costs and damages to the other party, as shall be assessed by the Judges or
Justices before whom the same shall be tried, the same costs and damages to be
recovered and levied, as is usual for costs and damages contained in
judgments upon other actions. If a man has been in quiet and peaceable
possession of lands three years or more by a good title, 4. and 5. P. and M
Die. 141.
and then is expelled and disseised of them, and the party offending is
therefore indicted upon the statute of 8. H. 6. and the disseisee who was
expelled, is restored to his possession by a writ of Restitution, and is in
possession accordingly; in this case he cannot justify the detainer of the
possession of those lands, by force of the foresaid prouiso contained in the
statute of 8. H. 6. because his possession was interrupted and discontinued,
for that possession must be three whole years together without interruption,
before the said party may by the said prouiso keep his possession by force.
And likewise if he that is a just and lawful possessor of lands by the space
of twenty years together, 3. and 4. P. and M. Die. 141.
be once clearly and wholly removed from the possession of the same land, he
cannot come again with force, and a multitude of people to put himself in
possession thereof, and detain the same with force, by virtue of the prouiso in
the said statute of 8. H. 6. because his possession was interrupted. Neither in
this case, if he be indicted of a Forcible entry, according to the statute of 8.
H. 6. shall he be relieved touching his restitution by the foresaid statute of
31. El. for that he had not the occupation, nor had been in quiet possession
by the space of three whole years together of the same lands next before the
day of such indictme^t found. But if a man be seized of a lawful possession by
the space of three years of any land without interruption, 22. H. 6. 18. Fitz.
Na. B. 249.
he may keep his possession by force against all others. And he is neither to
be removed from his possession by a Just. of peace, though it be found by
inquisition, that he held that land by force, nor yet by an action of Forcible
entry brought against him upon the said statute of 8. H. 6. Otherwise it is of
a disseisor, where restitution notwithstanding three years possession.
or of a man that comes to land by a wrongful and unlawful title: for if he
has detained the land by force, three years, 14. H. 7. 28.
or twenty years, he may be indicted by virtue of the statute of 8. H. 6.
before a Justice of peace, of forcible detaining of the same land, and that
being found, the said Justice of peace is to reseise the land, and to award
restitution to the party disseised or expelled thereof. And also the same
disseisor shall make fine and ransom to the King (cui nullum tempus occurrit)
whose peace is broken by this long and unlawful detaining of the possession of
another man's land by force. But the party disseised, expelled, or kept out of
possession, cannot in this case maintain an action of Forcible entry upon the
said statute of 8. H. 6. against the said disseisor, seeing he has omitted his
time, and suffered the disseisor to gain of him three years possession, and
thereby the benefit of the same prouiso contained in the said statute of 8. H. 6.

13 If a man who has made an Entry upon the possession of another of any lands
or tenements by force, or does hold lands by force, 1. R. 3. 4.
after a peaceably entry made, do doubt, that he shall be thereof indicted before
a Justice of peace upon the statute of 8. H. 6. and that restitution will be
thereupon awarded, he may have a Certiorari out of the Kings Bench ready, and
when the Bill of Indictment is found, he may presently deliver it to the court,
and that shall be a Supersedeas to stay Restitution, A Supersedeas to stay
restitution.
for that by this Certiorari the indictment shall be removed. And though the
indictment be found after the Test of the writ of Certiorari, it is not
material, for they be both the Kings Courts. And when an indictment upon the
said statute of 8. H. 6. 2. and 3. P. and M. Die. 122.
is removed into the kings Bench, and that the party indicted does tender to
trauerse the same, the Justices of the same Bench may grant or stay
restitution, at their discretion, according as the truth of the Title shall
appear to them. But if a special sessions be procured to inquire of a
Forcible entry, or detaining of possession, according to the said statute of 8.
H. 6. and the Justices to whom complaint is made, do repair to the place
supposed to be entered upon, or holden with force, 2. and 3. P. and M. Die. 187.
and do see the same according to the said statute, and after they do inquire
thereof, and that is found, and thereupon they grant restitution; no other
Justice of peace can grant a Supersedeas to stay the same restitution: for by
the said statute no other Justice has authority to grant restitution, but he
or they to whom the complaint is made, and before whom the force is found, and
the writ shall be granted under the Test of one of them only, saving the
Justices of the K. Bench, who have supreme authority, and where the law does
intend, that the King himself does sit.

14 Whereas the words of the foresaid statute of 8. H. 6. be: Sta. 8. H. 6. 9.
If it be found before any of the Justices or Justice of peace, that any does
contrary to this statute ( viz. enter upon, or hold lands with force) then the
said Justices or Justice shall cause the lands or tenements so entered or holden
to be reseised, and shall put the party so put out in full possession of the
same lands or tenements so entered or holden, as before they were entered or
holden. And therefore if the father be put out of possession of lands by force,
and dies before or after inquisition thereof, his heir shall not have
restitution thereof upon the said statute of 8. H. 6. for that he was not the
same person which was put out. And the same Law is, if after the death of the
father, Where force found, and no restitution.
dying seized of certain lands, a stranger does abate, and holds the same
lands by force against his heir, before he had gotten any possession indeed,
and that force is found before a Justice of peace by an inquisition, the same
heir shall not have restitution by the words of the said statute, for that the
same heir had but a possession in law, and was not in actual possession of
that land, neither is he that party who was put out. And so it is, if tenant
for term of years of certain lands be put out of his term by force, and
die, though after his death the force he f^und by inquisition taken by a
Justice of peace, his executors shall not be restored to the possession of that
land by the same Justice of peace, causa qua supra. But yet in the cases
aforesaid the offender shall be punished by imprisonment and fine to the K. for
by his forcible entry he has broken the peace.

St. 15. R. 2. 2.
15 Whereas by the before rehearsed statute of 15. Rich. 2. it is ordained, That
when any forcible entry shall be made into lands, and complaint thereof come to a
Justice of peace, he shall go to the place where the entry was made, and if he
find any that hold any such place forcibly after such entry made, they shall be
taken and put into the Jail etc. The form of which Justice of peace Mittimus,
whereby he shall send the same offenders to the Jail, is this, viz. Francis
Fortescue knight, Buck. A Mittimus to send to the jail such as do hold land by
force.
one of the Justices of peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, within the
county of Buckingham, to the keeper of his Ma. Jail in Aylesbury in the said
county, and to his deputy and deputies there, and to every of them greeting:
Upon complaint made to me by A. B. of Whaddon in the said county husbandman,
that C. D. E. F. of S. in the said county laborers, and other malefactors and
disturbers of the Kings peace had forcibly and with strong hand entered into his
house etc. in Whaddon aforesaid, and him expulsed, and the same yet held with
force, I went this present day to the said house, and there found the said C.
D. E. F. holding the said house etc. with swords and bucklers, bills and staves,
to the great disturbance of his Ma. peace, and against the form of the said
statute in that behalf ordained. And therefore I send you by the bringers
hereof the bodies of the said C. D. E. F. convicted of the said forcible
holding by my record: commanding you and every of you in his Ma. name, that you
receive them, and safely keep them in your said Goal, until they shall have
made their fine and ransom to the King, and be delivered thence by the order
of the law. Hereof fail you not, upon the peril that will fall thereof. Dated
at Salden the 30. day of I. in the third year of the reign of our soueraign
Lord K. James etc.

16 And though ye words of the before rehearsed stat. of 8. H. 6. be, Upon
complaint made to ye I. of P. or one of the^ etc. yet those words do not alwais
bind a I. of P. to expect ye complaint of ye party grieved, or to omit to do
his duty in inquiring of, repressing, and punishing of force, because ye party
grieved by the forcible entry, or detaining of possession, is ignorant in
seeking lawful redres for his received injury, or does inte^d to take his
remedy by other means: but a I. of P. having notice of such forcible entry, A
Justice may inquire of forcible entries without complaint.
or detaining of possession by force (though it be by others and not by the
party grieved) may and of duty ought to go to the place where the same force
is committed, and to make inquisition thereof; 7. E. 4. 18.
and if the force be found, to make restitution to the party expelled or put
out by force. And so by his means the offender shall be punished according to
his desert, the party wronged shall be restored, and the king shall be
entitled to a fine, all which without the said Justices diligence would be
omitted.

An action of forcible entry.
17 If a man that is seized of lands or tenements of an estate in fee simple,
Fitz. Na. B. 248.
fee tail, for term of his own life, or for the term of another life, be
disseised or expelled thereof by force, he may have an action of Trespass of
forcible entry upon the foresaid statute of 8. H. 6. against him or them that
did so disseise or expel him thereof: and so he may, if he be put out, 6. H.
7. 12.
or disseised of his lands or tenements peaceably, and after the disseisor, or
he that does expel him, 14. H. 6. 1.
does hold them with force. And in like sort he may have the same action, 3. E.
4. 19. 10. E. 4. 11.
if any does enter into his said lands or tenements with force, and after does
defend and hold them by force, then he which is so put out and holden out with
force, may have this action, though the words of the statute be in the
disjunctive, viz. disseised with force, or disseised quietly and after holden
out with force: for that the intent of the statute was to punish all such
forces, whether it were upon the entry and disseisin made, or upon the holding
and detaining of the land with force: in all which cases, he who is so
disseised or put out, may have an action of forcible entry upon the said
statute of 8. H. 6. and shall recover his damages and costs to the treble of
that which shall be found by the Enquest, that he is endammaged, 19. H. 6. 6. 22.
H. 6. 57. 9. H. 6. 19.
and has spent in his suit, The writ of forcible entry must be Vi and armis.
and as well for the occupation as for the first entry. And it is to be noted,
that the writ and declaration in an action of forcible entry, must be, that the
def. entered vi and armis, and not illicite, or by any other such words: for if
the writ be otherwise, it shall abate; seeing a writ of forcible entry is
always vi and armis, 37. H. 6. 23. 38. H. 6. 1.
and process of Outlawry lies in it: and the declaration must express the
certainty of the lands, whereupon the defendant did make his forcible entry,
and which they be, and not suggest, that he did enter upon certain lands in D.
And in this action of Forcible entry, 35. H. 6. 6. 49. Ed. 3. 2. Co. lib. 3. 12.
and in all actions Quare vi et armis, a Capias does lie, and where a Capias
does lie in the process, there after judgment a Capias ad satisfaciendum does
lie, and there the king shall have a Capias pro fine.

Who may bring an actio^ of forcible entry.
18 None can pursue or maintain this action of Forcible entry, Fit. Na. B. 248.
but he who has freehold at the least in the lands or teneme^ts so entered
upon: for tenant for term of years, or a copyholder, cannot maintain this
action, for yt the words of the said stat. of 8. H. 6. be, If any person be put
out, Sta. 8. H. 6. 9
or disseised of any lands etc. and the words of the writ grounded upon the
said statute be, Expulit et disseisiuit: and tenant for term of years, or a
copyholder, cannot be disseised, seeing disseisin is always of a freehold,
which neither of them have in that land. But if tenant for term of years, or
a copiholder, be put out by force, or put out peaceably, and after holden out
with force of land which either of them does hold by the said estate: then upon
complaint made by the party grieved to a I. of peace, after inquisition thereof
by a Jury, and the same force found, the said Just. may reseise the said lands,
and cause restitution thereof to be made to the party so put out: for in this
case the same complaint may be made to the said I. of P. as well by him in ye
reuersio^, as by ye tenant for term of years, or copiholder: seeing he in ye
reuersio^ who is disseised of his freehold by this forcible entry, is and may
as well be termed the party grieved, as the tenant for term of years, or the
copyholder for their said particular estates. And when the Justice of peace
has made restitution, the particular tenant for term of years, or
copyholder, and also he or they in reuersion shall hold and enjoy their said
several estates in the same lands, 4. and 5. P. and M. Di. f. 142.
in such sort as they did before the said Forcible entry made. But if tenant
for term of years be expelled out of that land which he so holds for the
term of years, he in the reuersion cannot bring an action of Forcible entry
upon the statute of 8. H. 6. for the same, although it be a disseisin to him,
for that the expulsion is not done immediately to him.

Fit. Na Br. 248. 9. H. 6. 19.
19 If a man do enter by force into lands or tenements, He that has title
enters by force.
whereunto he has right or title to enter, and does put out him who has ye
freehold of the same lands, in this case he who is so put out by force, cannot
maintain an action of trespass of forcible entry against him, who has title to
enter, for that his entry was no disseisin to ye other, who was not lawfully
seized thereof: but he may invite him for this forcible entry, and this
indictment being found, he shall be restored to his possession again by a Just.
of peace by virtue of the said statute of 8. H. 6. And after that, 22. H. 6. 18.
he that did first enter forcibly by lawful title, may again enter peaceably,
or bring an assise of Nouel disseisin at his pleasure.

Fit. Na. B. 249. 22. H. 6. 37.
20 If a man do enter into lands or tenements, and disseise one with force, He
that has possession sueth a writ of forcible entry.
and after the disseisee does reenter again, yet the same disseisee may pursue
an actio^ of Trespass of forcible entry against the disseisor, and recover his
treble damages, though he be seized of the land at the time of the writ
brought. And therefore it is not a sufficient plea in a writ of forcible entry,
for the def. to plead, that the plaintiff was seized of the same land the day
of the said writ brought.

20. H. 6. 12. 22. H. 6. 23.
21 A man may have a writ of Forcible entry of a rent, as well as of land:
Forcible entry of a rent or common.
for one may distraine with force for rent, and that does counteruaile an entry
with force. And one may have a writ of Entry of a rent, which does suppose,
that the def. did enter into the rent. And in an Assise of rent, the disseisin
may be found to be done by force. 39. Ass. p. 4.
If there be three iointenants of land, out of the which there is a rent going,
and upon a distress taken, one of the^ makes rescous by force, he only shall be
imprisoned, and yet the others be disseisors. And the like law is of a common
of pasture, for a commoner may be force be expelled or kept out of his common.
And a man may keep his beasts in another man's ground by force, 27. Ass. p. 30
claiming common where he has no common, and that is disseisin by force. And
in either of the cases aforesaid, a Just. of peace upon complaint to him made,
may remove the force, but not award restitution, because they are to be taken
and used in another man's land.

2. H. 7. 16. 17. Ass. p. 14
22 If diverse do enter with force to the use of another, Forcible entry to the
use of another.
who himself does not enter, but after does agree to this entry to his use,
this agreement does make him a disseisor, or a trespassor: but he shall not
thereby be punished for ye force, for there can be no forcible entry without an
actual entry. Forcible detaining by words only.
And yet there may be a forcible detaining of possession by words only, without
act: as if he yt has wrongfully but peaceably entered into another man's house,
and expelled and put out the owner thereof, shall say to the same owner, if he
do come thither again to enter, he will kill him, this is a forcible detaining
of possession.

23 If there be two iointenants or tenants in common of certain lands, and one
of them does expel and put forth the other out of possession of the said lands
by force, Iointenants or tenants in common expelling each other by force.
he that is so expelled, 8. Ed. 4. 9. and 19. 10. H. 7. 27. Fit. Na. Br. 249.
21. E. 4. 10. 18. H. 6. 5.
may have an action of Trespass of forcible entry against his companion that did
so expel him, upon the said statute of 8. H. 6. for the words of the writ may
be verified, Expulit and Disseisiuit, and thereupon he shall have a writ of
Restitution to restore him to his former estate. But if one iointenant or
tenant in common of lands do expel the other by force out of the same lands,
he that is so expelled, cannot maintain a writ of Entry upon the statute of 5.
R. 2. against his companion that so put him forth, and suppose that he did
enter into the same lands vbi ingressus non datur per lege^: for that his entry
and possession in that land is lawful through the whole land in respect of his
own moitie or estate: and further, seeing by that action the plaintiff is to
recover but only damages as in an action of Trespass, and not to be restored to
his possession: which action of Trespass one iointenant or tenant in common
cannot maintain against another, for any Trespass done in the land so holden by
them.

Who may bring a writ of Entry upon the statute of 5. R. 2.
24 None can maintain a writ of Entry upon the said statute of 5. R. 2. 8. E.
4. 9. and 19.
vbi ingressus non datur per legem, but only tenant in fee simple, tenant in
fee tail, or tenant for term of life at the least: for tenant for term of
years, a copyholder, or a tenant at will cannot pursue and maintain it,
seeing they have but the manurance and occupation of the land. 4. H. 7. 1.
Neither can the King bring the said Action, nor an Assise, Eiectione firmae,
nor action upon the statute of 8. H. 6. Nor any other action which does prove
him out of possession of the land.

Turning a watercourse by force.
25 If a man do enter into another man's ground, Plow. Com^ 467.
and turn away by force an ancient watercourse, which he has running to his
myll, the party grieved may have a special Assise of Nuisance upon the statute
of 4. H. 4. against the offender, and recover his double damages, and yet he
was not put out, nor disseised of his freehold, but a Nuisance was done to the
damage thereof.

The plea of not guilty in forcible entry.
26 In a writ of Forcible entry, the defendant may plead not guilty, Lib. into
fol. 330. Fit. N. B. 249. 14 H. 6. 16. 22. H. 6. 57. 22. H. 6. 17. 9. H. 6. 19.
21. H. 6. 39.
and that shall be a good plea. But if the defendant do plead some matter in
bar, yet he must in the end of the bar trauerse and deny the entry with
force, which is alleged against him, as to say, without that he did enter with
force etc. And the plaintiff must answer to that special matter alleged in
the bar, without answering to the Trauerse of the force, and upon that
special matter, the issue must be joined, and not upon the force. And if that
special matter alleged in the bar be found by verdict with the defendant,
he shall be excused, and the force shall not be inquired of. But if it be found
with the plaintiff, and against the defendant, then the defendant shall be
attainted of force, and render treble damages, and treble costs, without
inquiry of the force. As, one brought an action of Forcible entry upon the
statute of 8. H. 6. and supposed that the defendant with force and arms entered
into a message etc. 15. H. 7. 17.
Whereunto the defendant pleaded, The finding of the special matter, does
charge or discharge the def. of force.
That a stranger was seized of the same message etc. and enfeoffed him
thereof, by means whereof he entered peaceably, without that, that he entered by
force. And the plaintiff made a title, and trauersed the bar, and the issue
was found for the plaintiff: 1. H. 7. 19.
and thereupon it was adjudged, that the force should not be inquired of: For
seeing the title is found against the defendant, he shall be convict of the
force, as on the other side, if the bar had been found for the defendant,
the force should not have been inquired of: for that if the title of the
plaintiff be not good, although the defendant does enter with force, the
plaintiff has no cause of action; and yet in that case, he that enters with
force, shall be indicted thereof, and shall pay a fine to the K. therefore. And if
the defendant does enter peaceably, where his entry is not lawful, he may
plead, that he did not enter contra formam statuti, and by that means the
force and the disseisin shall be inquired of. But if he make a title to the land
by pleading in bar, as is aforesaid, then it shall be adjudged his own folly.
As, in a writ of Forcible entry, when the defendant does plead in bar, yet he
must trauerse the force: So in a presentment of Forcible entry Presentment of
forcible entry.
before the Justices of peace, 7. H. 6. 13.
it was found and presented, that A. was seized of the manor of B. in his
demesne as of fee, until C. did enter upon the said manor, and put him out
with force and arms against the kings peace. And this presentment being
removed into the kings bench, and process being awarded for the king against C.
he appeared and pleaded to the force and arms, and all that is against the
peace, not guilty. But the court enforced him to plead to his entry, and then
he justified his entry by reason of a remainder intailed to his father of the
same land, and that his father entered and died seized thereof, and that he as
heir to his father did enter. And so it is, if a man be indicted for the taking
away of certain goods by force and arms, he shall answer to the taking, and if
he be found guilty of the Trespass, there shall be no inquiry made of the force
and arms.

19. H. 6. 32.
27 A man brought an action of Forcible entry against diverse others upon the
statute of 8. H. 6. and counted, One action for entering and detaining with
force.
that they did with force and arms enter upon his land, and put him out, and
so declared according to the statute, whereupon they were at issue. And it was
found by verdict, that some of the defendants entered upon the land with force
and arms, and did not hold it with force, and some others of them did enter
peaceably into the same land, and held it with force and arms: and so the
Jury taxed the damages severally upon both those points: upon which verdict
it was adjudged, That the plaintiff should recover treble damages against
those that entered forcibly, and also should recover treble damages against
those that entered peaceably, and held with force, and the costs of his suite:
and further, that the said plaintiff should be amerced, for that he supposed
that all did enter with force, which was found against him. And in like sort,
if two be indicted of Forcible entry and detayning with force, and upon their
Trauerse it is found, that one of them entered with force, and the other
detained with force, yet restitution shall be awarded to the party put out of
possession.

Fit. Na. B. 249.
28 And further if a man do enter by force, or detain by force any lands or
tenements, the party grieved may have a writ out of the Chauncery, directed to
the Sheriff of the County only, or to the Sheriff and Justices of peace, or
some of them, Sta. 2. E. 3. 3.
upon the statute made at Northampton anno 2. Ed. 3. The form of which writ is
this, viz. Iacobus Dei gratia etc. vicecomiti Buck. Salutem; A writ upon the
statute of Northampto^.
Quia datum est nobis intelligi, quod quamplures malefactores, and pacis
nostrae perturbatores, in conuenticulis congregati, armati, and modo guerrino
arraiati apud Westburie accederunt, et clausuras, et domos quorundam legiorum
nostrorum ibidem per vim and potentiam armati intrauerunt, and res, redditus,
and prouentus, ac alia bona sua quaecunque de quibuscunque possessoribus suis
ibidem prouenientia capere consenserunt, and asportare intendunt, and ad hoc
parant in nostri contemptum, ac quorundam de populo nostro ibidem terrore^ and
commotione^ manifestam, ac contra formam statuti apud Northampton de armis
contra pace^ domini Edwardi nuper Regis Angliae tertij, progenitoris nostri,
non portandis editi, and contra pacem nostram. Nos statutum praedictum
inuiolabiliter obseruari, and idem infringentes iuxta vim and effectum eiusdem
statuti castigari facere volentes, and puniri. Tibi praecipimus quod apud
villam de Westbury, et alibi in comitatu tuo vbi necesse fuerit public
proclamari, and ex part nostra firmiter inhiberi facias, ne quis cuiuscunque
status seu conditionis fuerit ibide^ armatus co^tra pacem nostram, ac contra
formam statuti praedicti accedat, nec armatam potentiam, nec quicquid aliud
ibidem, seu alibi facere, per quod pax nostra, seu statutum praedict' laedi,
vel populus noster turbari, terreri, aut indebite grauari poterit quouismodo
sub poena amissionis armorum suorum, and incarcerationis corporu^ suorum ad
voluntate^ nostram, prout in statuto praedicto before continetur. Et omnes
illos quos post and contra proclamatione^ et inhibitionem predictam inueneris
contraria facientes, vel per inquisitionem per te modo and forma debita
capiendam inueneris fecisse, vna cum armis, and armaturis suis secum inuentis,
arrestari, and capi; and corpora ipsorum arrestatorum in prisona nostra,
quousque aliud a nobis pro deliberatione sua habueritis in mandatis, saluo
custodiri, et arma and armatur^ praedicta appreciari, and nobis inde responderi
facias. Nos vero in Cancellaria nostra sub sigillo tuo, de nominibus
arrestatorum praedictorum, and de armis, and armaturis suis, and quae and
cuiusmodi fuerint, and de pretio, and de vero valor eorunde^, ac de toto facto
tuo in hac part reddatis distinct and aperte sine dilatione certiores, hoc
breue nobis remittentes. Test etc. S. Manasse etc. 7.
When the Shirife or Justice or Justices of peace to whom the foresaid writ is
directed, has caused three proclamations to be made according to the purport
of the said writ, then he or they may enter and make search in the house,
houses, or place suspected, and search whether there be any force of armor or
weapons worn, borne, or used against the said proclamation, or otherwise he is
warranted by the said writ to inquire thereof by a Jury. And if any such
armor or weapons be found, he must imprison the offenders, and seize and
praise their armor and weapons so found with them to the Kings use. And if
upon the proclamation they do depart in peaceable manner, then he has no
warrant by the writ to commit them to prison. But by this writ the Shirife or
Justices have only authority to remove the force, but not to put the party
expelled in possession again.

What shall be said to be force
29 Because I have written of force, forcible entry, and forcible detaining of
possession, it is convenient that I should somewhat declare, what the law does
account to be force, and what acts, and in what manner done to be forcible.
This forcible entry or forcible detaining of possession, which the statutes
before rehearsed do prohibit, must be done with some weapons either offe^siue
or defensive, as with swords, bucklers, pykes, iauelines, bills, clubs,
pitchforkes, staves, halberts, bows and arrows, crossebowes, gunnes, harneys,
casting of stones or blocks, pouring of hot coals, scalding water, or lead, or
with any other thing wherewith one man may hurt the person of another. Force by
number of servants.
And further, if a man does enter upon the possession of another, 10. H. 7. 11.
or does keep a possession taken with more servants or attendants, then he
does commonly maintain, it is force, and it shall be adjudged in him a forcible
entry, or a forcible detaining of possession. And so it is, if diverse do come
with bows, bills, gunnes, or other weapons to a ground, or to a house, and
enter without the disturbance of any, this is an entry by force: for the words
of the statute of 5. R. 2. be, Sta. 5. R. 2. 7
That none shall enter with multitude of people, but only in a peaceable
manner. And in like sort, if a man do enter peaceably into a house, Force by
number of weapons
and after does bring into the same more weapons then he and his ordinary
family do commonly and usually wear (besides those weapons that he does find
in the house, whereof he must make no use to defend his possession) it is a
forcible detaining of possession. And moreover, if complaint be made to a
Justice of peace, that one has entered forcibly into a house, and does detain
the same with force, and the said Justice of peace does go thither, and
finds the doors shut, and him or those within denying him to enter, this is a
detayning of possession with force, though there be no weapon showed or used,
and though there be but one person within ye house, for in this case the
offender does use the door as his buckler to keep the possession. If the
Justice of peace do find in the house any great number of people, or any
persons in harneis, or having harneis lying by them, this is a detainer with
force. Wherefore in all the cases aforesaid the Justice of peace may take the
power of the County, break open the doors, and commit the offenders to prison.
11. Ass. p. 25
And if a man do mow, reap, sheare, or sickle corn or grass (or by such
other labor which cannot be done without the hands of man) whereunto he has no
title, this shall be adjudged an entry and disseisin with force. If a man do
keep his beasts by force in another ma^s several ground, 27. Ass. p. 30
claiming common therein, whereas he has no common there, this is a disseisin
of the land by force. 30. Ass. p. 50
And if a man do enter into the possession of another man's land, and after does
fell or lop wood there, this is a disseisin by force. If a man do enter into
another man's house or land, 11. H. 4. 16.
and disseise or expel him thereof, and after does carry away certain goods of
the disseisees, this is a disseisin with force and arms, and the disseisor
shall be imprisoned for it.

16. Assis. p. 7. 14. Ass. p. 18. 12. H. 4. 22. 22. Ass p. 33.
30 A woman covert may commit a disseisin with force, Who may commit a forcible
entry.
and be imprisoned therefore: and so may an infant of the age of 18. years or
above commit a disseisin by force, and be imprisoned. But if he be of tender
age, he shall not be adjudged a disseisor with force, nor be imprisoned.

31 Though force being opposed against the law, What force is lawful to the
persons of me^.
is a professed enemy to the peace of the Realm, yet being used in the
maintenance of the law, it is a principal protector of the same peace: for the
law does put the sword of justice into the kings hand to protect himself and
every of his subjects from the violence and oppression of others, and to
relieve each one that has just cause of complaint, and thereby to yield him
peace. Wherefore force is to be resembled to fire, which being abused, may
consume the whole house, and being well guided is a mean to yield sustenance
and comfort to every person therein. And so force may be lawfully used by all
the kings Officers, Ministers, and Subjects thereunto deputed (with the help
of all others to assist them when need shall require) to execute or advance
justice, or the judgments of the Law. It is lawful force, whereby all
offenders in Treason, Felony, and other great crimes, be apprehended, 7. E. 8.
16.
carried to prison, brought to their answers, and receive condign punishments,
inflicted upon them for their offenses. It is lawful force, whereby the Shirife,
his Vndershirife, Baylifes, or Deputies do with strength apprehend any person
by virtue of the kings writs, to answer or satisfy the purport of the same
writs. St. 8. H. 6. 9.
It is lawful force whereby Justices of peace do remove those unlawful
Entries, or unlawful detainings of possession which one man does make into
another man's land, contrary to the Laws and Statutes abouesaid, and whereby
they do put him again in possession, who was wrongfully disseised or expelled
thereof. And it is lawful force which Justices of peace, Shirifes, Coroners,
Constables, Tithingmen, Headboroughes, Boroughholders, and al other charged and
authorized to preserve the peace (together with their assistants, deputies, or
assignees) shall use in apprehending or committing to prison such as do
attempt to disturb or break the peace within their jurisdictions, or being
commanded, will refuse to put in sufficient sureties for the keeping of the same
peace.

32 As in the causes aforesaid force may be lawfully used to the persons of
men, so in some other cases forces may be used, and forcible entries may be
lawfully made into the lands and tenements of others. Where the house of a man
may be broken by force, and where not.
As for Treason, or Felony, or suspicion of Felony, one may by force break
open a house, if the doors be shut, to apprehend the Felon: 13. E. 4. 9.
For as a Felon is an enemy to the Commonwealth, so is it for the benefit of
the Commonwealth to apprehend him: And the King as head of the Commonwealth
has interest in felony to punish it, and so a house does not defend an entry
to pursue and arrest one that has committed felony, or is suspected thereof. As
if one has wounded a man, 7. E. 3. 16.
whereby he is in peril of death, and the offender does fly into a house, the
Constable or those that do pursue him, may break open the house to apprehend
him, if the doors be shut. And in like sort, if a fray be made, or a quarrel
be moved in a house, whereof the doors be shut, whereby the peace is broken, or
like to be broken, the Shirife, a Justice of peace, or a Constable may by force
break open the door of the house to appease that quarrel, or to take surety
of the offenders to keep the peace. And if a man be outlawed of Treason or
Felony, or in a personal action, whereby a Capias vtlagatum is directed to the
Shirife to apprehend and take him, the Shirife may break open the doors of the
house, if they be shut, apprehend the same Outlaw, and commit him to prison.
And if it be found by an inquisition before a Justice of peace, that one has
entered into another man's house by force, or does detain it by force after
peaceable entry made, he may break open the house by force to reseise the same
land, and to put the party so put out in possession again; and so may the
Shirife do, having the Justices warrant. If a man be indicted of Trespass, and a
Capias pro fine is awarded to the Shirife to take him, 27. Ass. p. 35
the Shirife may break open the house to take him, if the doors be shut. And
in all cases where the king is party, the Shirife may break the house of the
party offe^ding, Co. li. 5. 91. 13. Ed. 4. 9.
or the house where he is, to apprehend him, or otherwise to execute the Kings
process, if the doors be not open, or that he cannot otherwise enter: for where
the King has interest, the writ or action is in the nature of a writ of Non
omittas propter aliquam libertatem. But this is to be observed, that always
before the Shirife or other Officer does break open the house or doors of any
man, Fitz. Execution 252.
he must signify the cause of his coming, and desire that the door may be
opened unto him: for if there be no default in the owner, the law does condemn
the breaking of a house, which was provided for the dwelling and safety of
men. And therefore in any of the cases aforesaid, if the Shirife do break
open the house, where some of the doors of the same be open, whereby he may
enter, or that he may open the door by the key, or without breaking, he is a
Trespassor, and is chargeable therefore to the owner of the house in an action
of Trespass. Sta. 3. E. 1. 17 13. Ed. 1. 38.
If one man do distraine another man's cattle, and after do put them into a
Castle, Fortress, or other strong hold, house, or place, and then the owner of
the cattle does sue a Repleuin directed to the Shirife, to make delivery to
him of ye same cattle: then if the same Castle, Fortress, House, or Hold, be
not opened to the Shirife upon his solemn request, when he comes to make
deliverance of the cattle, according to the purport of his writ, he may take
the force and power of his County, and break down the same castle, fortress,
or house etc. and make deliverance of the same cattle: for it would tend to
the dishonor of the King and his Crown, that the Shirife having the kings
writ, should be resisted with force by any of his own subjects to execute the
same, and to make deliverance of the cattle. When any house is recovered by
one man against another in any real action, Co. lib. 5. 91
or by an Erectione firmae, the Shirife having the K. writ of Habere facias
seisinam or possessione^, may break open the same house, if the doors be shut,
to deliver seisin or possession to the demaundant or plaintiff: for after
judgment the house in right and by the censure of the law is none of the
tenants or defendants. But it is not lawful for the Shirife at the suit of any
common person to break the house of the defendant in the same suit, to execute
process (though he do make request and be denied it) for thereupon might ensue
great inconvenience, 18. E. 4. 4.
that upon color of any fained suit, a man should have his house (being his
castle of defense) broken by day or by night, by any Vndershirife or Baylife,
being many times of small ability. And therefore if in that case the Shirife
break any man's house to make execution of any process at the suit of a common
person, he is a trespassor to the owner of the same house, who may have an
action of Trespass against him therefore, as against any other person, and shall
recover his damages. But notwithstanding, the execution, which the said
Shirife shall then and there make, is good. And yet the house of a man is a
castle, and place of privilege, but for himself, his wife, Co. li. 5. 93
servants, and ordinary resiants, and for his own goods: for it will not
protect any other man which will fly into his house, or the goods of any other
person which shall be brought into his house, to prevent lawful execution, and
to escape the ordinary process of the law. And therefore in any of those cases,
if the Shirife having process to do execution upon the body or goods of a man,
do make request to have the door opened, or to have the body of the party
flying thither, or the goods of another brought thither, to be delivered unto
him, and it be denied him, or that it be not done, the Shirife may break the
house, and execute the process.

33 As force is to be used lawfully, where it is for the benefit of the king,
or to avail the Commonwealth: so every man being of himself a little world,
and his family a small Commonwealth, and he the head thereof, may in diverse
cases defend the same Commonwealth by force. Cok. lib. 5. 91. 26. Ass. p. 23
and 32. Fitz. Cor. 303. 305. 22. Assise p. 55. St. 24. H. 8. 5 21. H. 7. 39.
As, In what cases any person may de^end himself and his by force.
if thieves or robbers do come to a man's house, to rob or murder him, he may
defend his house by force, and if he or his servants do kill any of them, they
shall receive no hurt thereby. And if a man being in his house, do hear that
another will come to his house to beat him, he may lawfully assemble his
neighbors and friends, to assist and aid him in the defense of his person: for
his house is his castle, and place of protection and defense, where he must
dwell. But if a man be threatened, that if he come to such a Market or Fair,
or to such a place, that then he shall be beaten, in this case he may not
assemble his neighbors and friends to go thither, in safeguard of his person,
for there is no necessity that he should go thither, seeing it would rather be
a mean to seek a quarrel, then to eschew it: but in that case he may take
his remedy by surety of peace. 16. Ed. 4. 17. 9. E. 4. 28. 19. H. 6. 31. 6. H.
7. 1.
And if there be an attempt made to maihem, wound, or beat a man, his wife,
father, mother, or any of his children within age, or to disseise him of his
land, or to dispossess him of his goods, or to disturb him of his high way,
or to turn an ancient watercourse from his mill, he may lawfully use force to
resist it.

34 As the law has provided by the before rehearsed statute of 15. R. 2. St.
15. R. 2. 2.
that when any forcible entry shall be made into any benefices or offices of the
church, a Justice of peace shall take the power of the county, and commit the
offenders to the jail: So has it further devised, that if there be debate
between two persons for one church, and one of them does enter into the church
with a great power of lay men, and holds out the other by force and arms,
then he which is holden out, The writ of Vi laica remouenda to remove force.
shall have a writ of Vi laica remouenda directed to the Shirife, commanding
him that he shall remove the power which is within the church: and the shirife
shall be further commanded, that if he do find any that do resist, he shall
take with him the power of the county, and attach the bodies of all the
resisters, and commit them to prison, so that he may have their bodies before
the King at a certain day to answer for their contempt. Fitz. Na. B. 55.
But by this writ the Shirife ought not to remove the Incumbent, who is in
possession of the church, be he in possession by right or wrong, but only to
remove the force, and to suffer the Incumbent to enjoy his possession, for if
he do remove the Incumbent, the same Incumbent shall have a writ to the
Shirife, to restore him to it again.

Where force shall be removed for the K. incumbent, where not.
35 If the King do bring a Quare impedit against the disturber and the
Incumbent, and the Kings title is found for him, Br. force 20
whereupon his clarke is instituted by writ, and after the first Incumbent does
enter by force, and great number of people, and does take the profits, the
Kings Incumbent shall not have the Kings writ to the Shirife to remove the
force, for that when the judgment given by the court is executed, the court
has no more power to deal in that cause. But if the defendant had disturbed
the Bishop to admit the Kings Incumbent, then he should have had such a writ.

Forgerie.
1 Having undertaken to write of the great and general maladies of the Realm,
and the chief impediments of the justice and peace of the kingdom, I shall
not far digress from my theme, by treating of Forgerie, Perjury,
Maintenance, Deceit, Extortion, and Oppression, wherein though a man be not
assaulted by the rapier and dagger, pike-staffe, or bilbow-blade, as he is in a
fray, forcible entry, or riot, yet a forged deed that conueyeth his land from
him, a false oath which depriueth him of his lease, or unlawful mantenance
that wresteth his credit or goods from him, do longer disturb the peace of his
mind, stick in his stomach, and infixeth a deeper and more durable impression
of sorrow into his heart, than a box on the ear, a dust in the neck, or a
blow with a cudgel given on the sudden, will do: For the grief of these
later stripes is short, and do wear out of man's mind by little and little, as
his choler cease, and his hot blood cools: but the discontent, and the
wants which he receives of the former blows, do continue with him, and yield
him most dislike, when he is most patient, and best advised. And therefore the
wisdom of this Realm has from age to age taken great care by laws and
statutes, to repress them, and to inflict upon the offenders in every of
them, penalties correspondent to their deserts. Our laws do chastise those
that break the peace by frayes, assaults, batteries, riots, or routs, with
imprisonment of their bodies, until their hot bloods be cooled, and their
distemperat humors be qualified: but they do impose sharper and more durable
punishments upon such as do forge deeds, commit or procure perjury, Forgerie,
perjury, and maintenance, do ten 5 to the breach of the peace.
or be maintainers of other men's suits, or quarrels; accounting these last
offenses to tend more and for a longer time to the breach or blemish of the
peace, or hinderance of the justice of the Realm, than the former do: As he
that commits forgerie in some cases, shall be set upon the pillorie, loose
his ears, have his nostrels slit, and pay to the party grieved his double
costs and damages: And in some other cases, shall be hanged as a felon: He
that commits perjury, shall in some cases be one year imprisoned, be set
upon the pillorie, and never after be allowed as a witness: And he that
maintains other men's suites, shall in some cases be three years imprisoned,
and further punished at the kings pleasure: And in some other cases sustain
other disgraces. And therefore the preamble of the statute of anno 1. St. 1. H.
5. 3.
H. 5. does truly inform us, that forged deeds do trouble and change the
lands of good people, intending to be in peace. And the statute of anno 32. St.
32. H. 8. 9
H. 8. does teach us, that the suborning of witness for to maintain any matter
or cause, is to ye disturba^ce or hinderance of justice.

The enormity of Forgerie.
2 The forging of false sealed Deeds, Evidences, or Writings, or of Court Rols,
or of the will of any person, or of any Obligation, Bill obligatorie, Release,
or other discharge, or the pronouncing, publishing, or giving in evidence of
the same, whereby any person shall be molested, troubled, charged, or defeated of
his land, lease, annuitie, debt, account, action, suit, or demand, is no less
perilous and prejudicial to the party thereby wronged (if it be not
discovered, prevented, or avoided) then the wresting and euicting from him of
the same land, lease, annuitie, debt, or demand. And the offenders therein do
as injuriously, and with as small color of justice, wrest from the party
grieved his said land, lease, annuitie, debt, etc. as the robber does take a
purse from the traveler by the way, or the burglarer his intended prey from
the houskeeper in the night. And if those real duties or things in action,
were converted into things personal, the undue conueying of them in this
unlawful manner, would deserve to be accounted and punished amongst other
felonies; as in some sort it is ordained so to be by the statute of anno 5.
Eliz. St. 5. El. 14.
And because diverse persons did forge false deeds and miniments, and did cause
them to be openly pronounced, published, and read, to trouble, change, or
undo the lands of other persons, and to undo and troble the possessions and
titles of the kings peope: therefore by a statute made anno 1. H. 5. it was
ordained, St. 1. H. 5. 3.
that the party grieved thereby, shall have his suit in that case, and recover
his damages, and the party convict shall make fine and ransom at the kings
pleasure. But forasmuch as the wicked and dangerous practice of making,
forging, and publishing of false and untrue deeds and writings, was much more
practiced and put in ure, in all the parts of this Realm, than in times past
it had been, to the disherison of diverse persons, and the great subversion of
justice, which has grown chiefly by that the pains and punishments limited
for such great offenses, by the laws and statutes of this Realm, before time
were so small and easy, that such evil people were not afraid to enterprise
the practicing and doing of such offenses: The repeal of former statutes of
Forgerie.
Therefore by a statute made anno 5. St. 5. El. 14.
El. it was enacted, That all other statutes before that time made and provided
for forger of false deeds, charters, miniments, or writings, and all and every
penalty appointed for the same, should from the first day of June then next
following, be void.

Forging of a deed, whereby another freehold shall be troubled.
3 To the intent that condign, or some sharper punishment might be ordained
for such as should be offenders in that crime of forgerie, than in time past
had been, by the said statute of anno 5. Elizab. it was established, St. 5.
El. 14
That if any person or persons after the first day of June then next following,
upon his or their own head and imagination, or by false conspiracy and fraud
with others, shall wittingly, subtly, and falsely, forge, or make, or subtly
cause, or wittingly assent to be forged or made, any false deed, charter, or
writing sealed, court roll, or the will of any person or persons in writing, to
the intent that the estate of Freehold or inheritance of any person or persons,
of, in, or to any lands, tenements, or hereditaments, freehold or copihold, or
the the right, title, or interest of any person or persons, of, in, or to the
same, or any of them, shall or may be molested, troubled, defeated, recovered,
or charged: Or shall pronounce, Publishing of a forged deed.
publish, or show forth in evidence, any such false and forged deed, charter,
writing, court roll, or will, as true, knowing the same to be false and
forged, as is aforesaid, to the intent above remembered, and shall be thereof
convicted, either upon any action or actions of Forger of false deeds, to be
founded upon this statute, at the suit of the party grieved, or otherwise
according to the order and course of the laws of this Raalme, or upon Bill or
Information to be exhibited into the Court of Star chamber, according to the
order and use of the Court, he shall pay unto the party grieved his double
costs and damages, to be found or assessed in the Court where such conviction
shall be, and also shall be set upon the Pillorie in some open market town,
or other open place, and there to have both his ears cut off, and also his
nostrels to be flit, and cut, and seared, so as they may remain for a
perpetual note or mark of his falsehood, and shall forfeit to the Queen her
heirs and successors, the whole issues and profits of his lands and tenements
during his life, and shall suffer and have perpetual imprisonment during his
life. The same damages and costs to be recovered at the suit of the party
grieved, as is aforesaid, to be first paid, and be levied of the goods and
cattels of the offenders, and of the issues and profits of the said lands,
tenements, and hereditaments of such party convicted, or of one, or both of
them, the said title of the Queen, her heirs and successors to the same
notwithstanding.

Stat. 5. El. 14
4 If any person or persons after the said first day of June next, Forging a
deed, whereby a lease or annuitie may be claimed.
upon his or their own imagination, or by false conspiracy, or fraud, had
with any other, shall wittingly, subtly, and falsely, forge or make, or
wittingly, subtly, or falsely, cause or assent to be made and forged, any
false Charter, Deed, or Writing, to the intent that any person or persons shall
or may have or claim any estate or interest, for term of years, of, in, or
to any Mannours, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments (not being Copihold) or
any Annuitie in Fee simple, Fee tail, for term of life, lives, or years: Or
shall, as is aforesaid, forge, make, or cause or assent to be made or forged
any Obligation, or Bill obligatorie, or any Acquitance, Release, or other
discharge of any Debt, Account, Action, Suit, Demand, or other thing
personal: Or shall pronounce, publish, or give in evidence, such false or
forged Charter-Deed, Writing, Obligation, or Bill obligatorie, or any
Acquitance, Release, or discharge, as true, knowing the same to be false and
forged, and shall be thereof convict by any of the ways or means aforesaid:
Then he shall pay to the party grieved his double costs and damages, to be
found and assessed in such Court where the said conviction shall be had, and
also shall be set upon the Pillorie in some open Market Town, or other open
place, and there have one of his ears cut off, and also shall suffer
imprisonment by the space of one whole year, without bail or mainprise.

Stat. 5. El. 14
5 The party and parties grieved by reason of any the offenses aforesaid,
Several remedies for the party grieved.
shall and may at his and their pleasure have and sue his action of forger of
false deeds, upon this Statute against any of the offenders in the same, by
original writ out of the Chauncerie, and shall have like Process upon the same,
as in cases of trespass at the common law; Or may at his pleasure take his suite
against any such offenders in any the premises by Bill in the Kings Bench, or
in the Exchequer: In which suits no Essoine, Iniunction, or Protection shall be
allowed for the party Defendant.

Not twice impeached for one offense.
6 If the Defendant shall be convict for any of the offenses aforesaid, St. 5.
Eli. 14.
according to the order and form above limited, and shall have received
thereupon punishment corporal according to this Act, then he shall not
eftsoons be impeached for the same offense.

The plaintifs release shall only discharge his own remedy.
7 Although the party or parties plaintiff in any such Action, St. 5. Eli. 14.
or Bill to be sued as is aforesaid, shall after verdict past against the
Defendant, or Defendants, happen to release or discharge the judgment or
execution upon the same, or otherwise suffer the same to be discontinued: yet
nevertheless the same release, discharge, or discontinuance, shall extend
only to discharge such costs and damages as the same plaintiff should have
had against the defendant; And the Judges before whom the said action or suite
shall be taken, shall and may prrceede to judgment of and upon the residue of
the said penalties, and forfeitures, and command execution upon the same, the
said release, discontinuance, or other discharge had, made, done, or suffered
by the party plaintiff in any wise notwithstanding.

8 If any person or persons being hereafter convicted, St. 5. Eli. 14.
or condemned of any of the offenses aforesaid, by any of the ways or means
above limited, shall after any such his or their conviction or condemnation
eftsoons commit or perpetrate any of the said offenses in form aforesaid:
The punishment for the second offense.
Then every such second offense or offenses shall be adjudged felony, and the
parties being convicted or attainted according to the laws of this Realm,
shall suffer pains of death, loss and forfeiture of their goods, cattels,
lands, and Tenements, as in cases of felony by the common laws of this Realm
ought to be lost or forfeited, The right of others saved.
without having any advantage or benefit of Clergy or Sanctuary: Saving to
every person and persons, body politic and corporate, their heirs and
successors (other than the said offenders, and such as claim to their uses)
all such rights, titles, interests, possessions, liberties of distresses,
leases, rents, reuersions, offices, and other profits and advantages, which
they or any of them shall have at the time of such conviction, or attainder,
of, in, or to any the lands, tenements, or hereditaments of any such person, so
as is aforesaid convicted or attainted, or at any time before, in as large and
ample manner, to all intents and purposes, as if this Act had never bin made.
Provided always, that any such conviction or attainder of felony as is
aforesaid, No forfeiture of Dower or corruption of blood.
or any forfeiture by reason of the same, shall not in any wise extend to take
away the dower of the wife of any such person attainted, nor to the corruption
of blood, or disherison of any the heir or heirs of any such person or
persons so attainted: This Act or any thing therein contained, or any other
statute, law, or custom notwithstanding.

9 All and every Justices of Oire and Determiner, St. 5. Eli. 14
and Justices of Assise Justices of Oire and Determiner and Justices of Assise.
in their circuits, and every of them shall have full power and authority in
every of their open and general Sessions, to inquire, hear, and determine of
all and every of the offenses aforesaid, committed or done within the limits of
their Commission, and to make Process for the execution of the same, as they
may do against any person being indicted before them of Trespass, or lawfully
convicted thereof.

Stat. 5. El. 14
10 If any person or persons whatsoever has of his or their own head, Forging
of deeds before the statute.
or by false conspiracy or fraud with any other, wittingly, subtly, and
falsely, forged or made, or shall before the first day of June next coming,
forge and make any false deed, charter, or writing sealed, or the will of any
person in writing, or any court roll, to the intent that the estate of Freehold
or inheritance, or the right, title, or interest of inheritance or freehold of
any persons, of, in, or to any Manors, lands, tenements, or hereditaments,
being freehold or copihold: Or that by any such forged deed, charter, court
roll, or writing, before the said first day of June, shall or may be molested,
troubled, or defeated of any of the said estates of any lands, tenements, or
hereditaments being freehold or Copihold: Or if any person or persons have
heretofore published or showed forth in evidence, or before the said first day
of June shall publish or show in evidence, for the proof of any title, any
false and forged deed, charter, writing, will, or Court Roll, as true, knowing
the same to be false and forged as aforesaid, to the intent above remembered,
and shall be thereof attainted or convicted according to the order of the law,
either in an Action of forger of false faits, or in an Action upon the case, at
the suit of the party grieved, his heirs, executors or assigns: Then the party
so convicted shall yielde and pay damages, and costs of suit to the plaintiff,
as shall be assessed according to the law of the Realm, in any such like
Action or suit, and shall suffer imprisonment, and pay fine and ransom at the
pleasure of the Queen, her heirs, or Successors. Pleading a forged deed made
before the statute.
And if any person or persons shall after the said first day of June next
coming, plead, publish, or show forth in evidence, or otherwise for the
proof of any title, any false and forged deed, charter, writing, will, or
Court Roll heretofore falsely made and forged, or to be falsely made and forged
before the said first day of June as true, knowing the same to be false and
forged, to the intent to have or claim thereby any estate of inheritance,
freehold, or lease of years, in, or to any manors, lands, tenements, or
hereditaments, or any annuitie, rent, or profit forth of any manors, lands,
tenements, or hereditaments: Or to the intent to alter, defeat, molest,
trouble, charge, or recover the estate of inheritance, freehold, or lease for
years of any person, in any manors, lands, tenements, rents, or hereditaments:
Then every person and persons that so shall offend, and shall be thereof
convicted in form first above remembered, shall pay unto the party grieved
double costs and damages, and shall have imprisonment, loss of Ears,
slitting and searing of Nose, and forfeiture of lands in the same manner and
form as above is limited for any person that shall offend by forging or
publishing of any false deed, or writing, as aforesaid, after the said first
day of June.

Stat. 5. El. 14
11 This Act or any thing therein contained, Persons not chargeable by this
statute.
shall not extend to charge any Ordinary, or any their Commissaries,
Officials, Registers, or any other their Officers, or Ministers, with any the
offenses aforesaid, for putting their seal of office to any will to be
exhibited unto them, not knowing the same to be false or forged: or for writing
of the said will, or probate of the same. Neither shall this Act or any thing
therein contained, extend or be hurtful to any Proctor, Advocate, or Register
of any Ecclesiastical Court within this realm, for the writing, setting forth,
or pleading of any Proxy made according to the Ecclesiastical laws or
customs heretofore allowed and used by the Ecclesiastical Courts of this
Realm, for the appearance of any person or persons, being cited to appear in
any of the said Courts Ecclesiastical: Official.
Nor to any Archdeacon, or Officall, for putting their authentic seal to the
said proxies, or proxy: Nor yet to any Judge Ecclesiastical, for admitting of
the same: but they and every of them may hereafter do in all points
concerning the same, as they and every of them might lawfully have done before
the making of this Act. Neither shall this Act extend to any Attorney,
Attorney.
Lawyer, or Counselor, Counselor.
that shall for his client plead, show forth, or give in evidence, any false
and forged deed, charter, will, court roll, or other writing, for true, being
not party nor privy to the forging of the same, for the pleading, showing
forth, or giving in evidence of the same. Neither shall this Act extend to any
person or persons, Exemplification.
that shall plead or show forth any deed or writing exemplified under the great
Seal of England, or under the great seal of any other authentic Court of
this Realm. A Judge. A Justice.
Nor shall extend to any Judge or Justice, or other person that shall cause any
seal of any Court to be set to any such deed, charter, or writing enrolled,
not knowing the same to be false and forged: Any thing in this Act to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Forging of a customarie book.
12 If one or more tenants of a Manor, 15. Eliz. Die. 322.
wherein there be several Copiholders, do make a customarie book or roll of
the same Manor, in parchment, or paper, and do insert therein diverse
customs, whereof some be false, and do set his or their own seals
thereunto, and the seals of some other Copiholders of the same Manor, and
the same customarie book or roll is entitled and pretended to be collected,
renewed, set forth and allowed by the Lord, and all the Freeholders and
Copiholders of the said Manor, where in truth it is set forth and made
without the priuitie or consent of the Lord of the same Manor, or of the
residue of the Copiholders thereof: This is a forgerie, and false making of a
writing sealed, to the intent to benefit themselves, and to disinherit the Lord
of the Manor, and therefore punishable by the open and shameful punishment
contained in the foresaid Statute of 5. Elizab.

The process to levy costs and damages of a forger.
13 Whereas the said Statute of 5. Elizabeth. has ordained, 15. Eliz. Dyer 323.
That if any person shall be convicted of forging of a false deed upon a bill,
or information to be exhibited into the Court of the Star chamber, according
to the order and use of the Court, he shall pay unto the party grieved his
double costs and damages, to be assessed in the same Court: Therefore when
any man is attainted of Forgerie in the Star chamber, for the recovery of
the double costs and damages taxed by the Court, a writ in English shall be
made, and directed to the Sheriff of the County where the offender does dwell,
reciting the Statute, and the conviction, commanding the Sheriff to levy the
said costs and damages of the goods, cattels, and profits of the lands and
tenements of the offender, and to bring the money into the Star chamber:
Which writ shall be sealed with the great Seal, and under the Test of the
King. And there by the order of the Court the money shall be delivered to the
party grieved.

The kings pardon of forgerie.
14 If a man be attainted of Forgerie in the Star Chamber, 15. Eliz. Dyer 323.
Co. li. 5. 50.
or in an action of Forger of false deeds, founded upon the said statute of 5.
Eliz. the king may pardon his corporal punishment of setting upon the
pillorie, flitting his nostrels, and perpetual imprisonment, viz. so much of
the penalty of the said statute, as is to be inflicted for a terror or
example to his people, for that he only has interest therein, as he has in
the issues and profits of the said offenders lands. And as he may pardon the
second offense of him, who being once convicted of forgerie, does eftsoons
commit the same again, and thereby does become a felon: And as the plaintifes
release, discharge, or discontinuance, by the words of the said statute, shall
discharge the defendants judgment or execution touching such costs and
damages, as the plaintiff should have had against the defendant: So may the
kings pardon discharge the same defendant of any penalty or forfeiture, that
the same statute does give unto him, which be the corporal punishments, and
the issues and profits of the defendants lands.

23. El. Die. 302.
15 Whereas the said Statute of 5. Elizab. has ordained, Forging of Testament.
That if any shall forge the will of any person in writing, to the intent etc.
That then he shall be punished as is aforesaid: Yet if one do forge the
Testament of another person, whereby any lease for years shall be conveyed,
he is within the danger and penalty of the said statute, though no mention
be made in the statute of a Testament, and he shall be charged only in
respect that he has forged a writing sealed. But of a will concerning
freehold, or inheritance, there is special mention made in the same statute.

12. Eliz. Dyer 288.
16 If a Clerk do write the will of another man which is deadly sick (and
after the Testator is become speechless, Inserting more in a will than is
directed.
and past memory) does insert some article or clause in the same will, which
the Testator did not direct him to do, yet this is no forgerie punishable by
the said statute of 5. El. nor within the meaning of the makers of the same:
For the principal deed or writing, which was the will of the Testator, was not
forged, neither was any false deed, charter, writing, or will, though the
article or clause inserted therein, having no sufficient warrant, was false,
and therefore not the Testators will, nor part thereof, nor to be proved
therewith.

17 And though the said statute of 5. Eliz. does repeal as well the before
mentioned statute of 1. H. 5. and all other statutes before that time made and
provided for forging of false deeds, Lib. int. fol. 359.
and has ordained a new action of forger of false deeds, to be founded upon
that Statute, and other new remedies, yet seeing both those statutes were made
and provided to one end, viz. to avoid and punish the enormities of forgerie of
false deeds, to the disherison or hurt of others, though upon several
penalties: Notwithstanding in some cases the like reason, and so the same law
is to be retained in the said statute of 5. Elizab. which was before in the
first mentioned statute of 1. H. 5. As in action of Forger of false deeds, 9.
H. 6. 26. 20. H. 6. 11. 19. H. 6. 29. 21. H. 7. 15. 37. H. 6. 37.
brought upon the said statute of 1. H. 5. Pleas in bar of forgerie.
it is a good plea in bar, for the defendant to plead not guilty, or that he
did not forge that deed, or to plead, that he gave to the plaintiff a gallon of
wine in satisfaction of the said offense, which he did accept. And so it is a
good plea in bar, in an action of forger of false deeds, brought upon the
statute of 5. Elizab. and the same plea being confessed by the plaintiff, or
found by verdict, shall not only bar the plaintiff of the recovery of his
double costs and damages, but shall also discharge the defendant of all
corporal punishments to be inflicted, and of the forfeiture of the issues and
profits of his land to the king. For this is not a release or discharge after
verdict, but a discharge before verdict, whereby the whole Action and suit is
discharged, and so not within the compass of the said statute of 5. Eliz. 14.
touching the plaintifes release or discharge after verdict.

Where one shall have an Action of forgery, though he has but a right to the
land.
18 There be some cases where a man shall have an Action of forger of false
deeds, though he has neither possession, reuersion, or remainder, but only a
title to the land. As if a man die seized of certain land, and a stranger does
abate, and enter upon the same land before the entry of the heir, and holds
out the heir, and after the same abator does forge some charter, deed, or
other writing sealed of the same land, to the intent to disturb, trouble, or
defeat the estate of the heir in the same, in this case the heir may have an
Action of forger of false deeds against the same stranger, though he has then
no possession, reuersion, or remainder in the same land. And so it is, 4. H. 6.
25. 22. H. 6. 15. 15. Ed. 4. 24.
if one man do disseise another man of land, and after does forge false deeds
etc. of the same land, to the intent aforesaid, the dissesee may maintain an
Action of forger of false deeds against the disseisor upon the Statute of 5.
Elizab. as he might have done before upon the Statute of 1. H. 5. for that his
right and title to the same land is molested, troubled, defeated, recovered, or
charged by the same forged deed. And the same law is, if a man do bring a
real Action against an other of certain land, 9. Ed. 4. 37.
and before judgment one claiming a lease for the term of years of the same
land, prays to be received to save his term according to the Statute of
Gloucester, and does show his said lease, which lease is forged: Stat. 6. Ed. 1
11.
In this case the Demandant in the said Action may have a writ of forger of
false deeds, against him that claims the said term, though he has as yet
nothing in possession, reuersion, or remainder in the same land, but only a
right, for this lease is forged to ^he intent to defeat him of his right, viz.
of his present possession.

19 If a man has neither possession, reuersion, remainder, or title, of, in,
or to land, Where no Title no Action of forgerie.
and yet will bring against another an Action of forger of false deeds of the
same land, it is a good plea in bar for the defendant to plead, 21. H. 6.
51. 8. H. 6. 34.
that he himself is seized of the same land, without that the plaintiff has
any thing therein: for if the plaintiff has nothing in the freehold, or
inheritance of the land, nor any estate for years, copihold or annuity in the
same, then he cannot be the party grieved in that Action, neither his right,
title, or interest, of, in, or to the same can be molested, troubled, or
defeated, recovered or charged. And the same law is, if a man has in land no
mediate or immediate estate expectant upon any lease or leases for life, lives,
or years, nor profit, right of entry, but only a possibility: 33. H. 6. 22.
As if A. do give land to B. and the heirs of his body lawfully begotten, the
remainder thereof to C. and his heirs for ever: If E. do forge a deed
containing that A. gave same land to the said B. and the heirs of his body
lawfully begotten, the remainder thereof to him the said E. and his heirs for
ever: In this case C. cannot pursue an Action of forger of false deeds against
E. during the lives of B. or of any of the heirs of his body lawfully
begotten, for the said forgery, seeing that during the said time, his right,
title, or interest into that land is not molested, troubled, defeated,
recovered, No Action in respect of a possibility.
or charged, for that he has therein during that time but only a
possibility, which possibility it may be shall never come into Esse. And
further, C. cannot for the said forgery recover double costs and damages
according to the said Statute of 5. Eli. for that he is not as yet a party
grieved, nor damnified, nor has sustained any damages, neither peradventure
ever shall, if B. and his heirs do continue from one generation to another,
and not die without issue of their bodies, etc. And of a bare possibility no
value can be made, neither single or double damages assessed.

18. H. 6. 5. 9. H. 6. 26. Kel. fol. 114
20 If there be two Ioyntenants, or tenants in common of land, and a stranger
does forge a deed concerning the same land: Forging of a deed touching
ioyntenants land.
if one of those Ioyntenants, or tenants in common do bring an Action of
forger of false deeds against the offender, and the Defendant do plead that
another has an estate in Ioyntenancie, or in common with the plaintiff who is
in full life, this writ shall abate: for seeing this Action is but in the
nature of an Action of Trespass, wherein the plaintifes are only to recover
damages, Ioyntenants and tenants in common must join in the same Action, for
though their right in the land be several, yet their possession touching the
profit thereof is joint. And this Action is founded upon the possession. And
whereas both the Statute of 1. H. 5. and 5. Eliz. do ordain that the party
and parties grieved, shall and may at his and their pleasure, have and sue this
Action of forger of false deeds, in this case both the Ioyntenants and tenants
in common be the parties grieved, for that their land is molested, troubled,
recovered or charged by this forged deed. Fitzh. Forger. 5.
But if there be two Ioyntenants or tenants in common of certain land, and one
of them does forge a false Release, or other Deed, whereby the whole land is
intended to be conveyed to himself, in this case the other Ioyntenant or, etc.
may have an Action of forger of false deeds against his said ioyntenant or,
etc. for that forged and false deed was made, to the intent that the right or
title of the forgers companion in estate should be molested, troubled,
defeated, or recovered. And in this case he is the party grieved, to whose
only disherison the said forgery does trench.

21. H. 6. 4.
21 In an Action of forger of false deeds, One seals a deed by an others
commandment.
the Defendant pleaded that the Plaintiff being seized of certain land, did
covenant with a stranger to enfeoffe him of the same land, whereupon the same
stranger came to the defendant being a Clerk, and requested him to make a deed
of feoffment of the same land, which he did: and after by the plaintifes
commandment he sealed the same deed, and after did read the deed at the
time of the liuerie and seisin, which is the same forgerie, and proclamation:
and that was adjudged a good Plea: for when the defendant sealed the feoffement
by the plaintifes commandment, and in his presence, it was the plaintifes
own act and deed, and his own sealing, and not the defendants: for the
plaintiff did use the defendants hand but as his instrument therein: as men
unlearned do use an other man's hand to help or direct them, to subscribe
their names to a Deed.

9. H. 6. 26. 7. H. 6. 34.
22 If the father do forge a deed, and after dies, One forgeth and another
does publish.
and then his son does find the same deed, and does pronounce, publish, or
show forth in evidence the same deed, knowing the same to be false and forged,
to the intent the estate of freehold or inheritance of any person of, in, or to
any lands, etc. should be molested, troubled, defeated, or recovered: this is
forgerie in the son, and he shall be punished according to the foresaid Stat.
of 5. El. And the same law is if one man do forge a deed, or etc. and an other
man knowing thereof shall publish it, to any of the intents aforesaid: this is
forgerie prohibited by the same statute: for the same stat. of 5. Eliz. is in
the disjunctive, viz. if any person shall forge or publish.

Forgerie by antedating of a deed
23 If a man do make a feoffement to one person of certain land, 27. H. 6. 3.
and does deliver possession thereof accordingly, and after he does make a
feoffement to another person of the same land, bearing date before the first
feoffement, but does not deliver it, this last feoffement is not the feoffors
deed: But yet if he do publish it to be his deed, the first feoffee may have
an action of forger of false deeds against him: for when he had made the first
feoffement of the land, he then had nothing left in him of the same land. And
therefore when he made the second antedated deed of that land, it was a false
and forged deed, and then after publishing, pronouncing, or showing it forth to
be his deed, it was with intent to molest, trouble, defeat, recover, or charge
the land of the first and lawful feoffee, and so he is punishable according to
the foresaid stat. of 5. El. as he was before by the stat. of 1. H. 5.

24 Though the foresaid two statutes of 1. H. 5. and 5. Eliz. were ordained to
punish those who should forge any false deed, or etc. to the intent, to molest,
trouble, charge, or recover the right or title of any person in his lands,
tenements, or hereditaments, or to the intent that any person should claim any
lease for years, or annuitie, or should forge any Obligation, Bill
obligatorie, Release, Acquitance, or other discharge of any debt, account,
action suit, demand, or other thing personal: yet was there no provision in
either of them to punish those who should get into their hands any money,
goods, cattels, jewels, or things of any other persons, by color of a false
token, or forged or counterfeit letter: for the redress whereof by a statute
made anno 33. H. 8. St. 33. H. 8. 1
it was enacted, That if any person or persons, of what estate or degree soever
he or they be, Getting of other men's goods by counterfeit tokens or letters.
shall falsely and deceitfully obtain or get into his or their hands or
possession, any money, goods, cattels, jewels, or other things, of any other
person or persons, by color or means of any false toke^, or counterfeit
letter, made in another man's name, that then every such person and persons so
offending, and being thereof lawfully convict by witnesses taken before the L.
Chauncelor of England for ye time being, or by examination of witnesses, or
confession taken in the Star chamber before the K. honorable Counsel, or before
the Just. of Assise in their circuits for the time being, or before the Just.
of peace within any part of the K. dominions, in their general Sessions, or by
action in any of the K. courts of record, shall have and suffer such correction,
and punishment by imprisonment of his body, setting upon the pillorie or
otherwise, by any corporal pain (except pain of death) as shall be unto him or
them limited, adjudged, or appointed by the person and persons before whom he
shall be so convicted of the said offenses, or any of them.

Suspected persons called before the Justices.
25 As well the Just. of Assise for the time being, as also ij. St. 33. H. 8. 1
Just. of peace in every county, whereof one to be of ye Quoru^, shall have
power and authority, to call and convent by process, and otherwise, to the said
Assizes or general sessions any person or persons, being suspected of any of
ye aforesaid offenses, and to commit him or the^ toward, or to let him or the^
to bail until ye next Assizes or general sessio^s, there to be examined, and
further to be ordered by their discretions, as is abouesayd: Provided always,
that the Justices of peace within every City, Borough, Town, and Franchise
within this Realm, or other the kings dominions, shall have like jurisdiction,
power and authority, at their general Sessions, and otherwise, to do and
execute all and every thing and things in all points, as other Justices of
Assise in their circuits, or Justices of peace in the Counties, by virtue of
this Act be limited and appointed to do and execute for the punishment and
correction of like offenders, as beforesaid is limited. Saving to the party
grieved by such deceit, such remedy, by way of action, The remedy of the
party grieved.
or otherwise, of and for the same money, goods, cattels, jewels, or other
things so obtained, as he might have had, if this Act had never bin made. Any
thing in this Act etc. notwithstanding.

26 Forgerie of writings has been always so hateful in this realm, that
our lawmakers have pursued the practisers thereof with sharp and bitter
punishment, though in some cases the same was not put in use to molest or euict
any man of his land, lease, annuitie, debt, account, action, suit, or other
demand, nor to get into his hands any others goods, cattels, or jewels, but
only to escape the ordinance and censure of the law: As, by a statute made anno
5. Eliz. it is established, St. 5. El. 7.
That no person retained in husbandry, or in certain inferior arts or faculties
(in the said statute mentioned) shall depart out of one city, town, or parish,
into another, nor out of the Lathe, Rape, Wapentake, or Hundred, nor out of the
County or Shire where he last served, to serve in another City, Town, Forging
of a testimonial.
etc. unless he have a Testimonial of the said City or town corporat from
whence he departed, or of the Constable or other officer, etc. And if any such
person shall be taken with any counterfeit or forged testimonial, then he
shall be whipped as a vagabond.

Perjury, Subornation of witnesses.
Truth tried by the oaths of men.
1 THe Law of the Realm desirous to try out truth in all causes called in
question before her, to the end she might proceed in judgment, and execute
justice accordingly, has in all ages proved it to be the best means to
search out this truth by the oaths of honest, lawful, and indifferent persons:
intending that the man who does profess God to be his Creator, Redeemer, and
Sanctifier, and hops to be saved by his blood, when he does come in the
presence of that God, and his people, and does aduisely swear, that he will
declare the truth, according to his knowledge, in that matter in question, as
God shall help him: (which is to say, as he will expect the blessing of God in
this life, and eternal salvation in the life to come) is void of all
partiality and private affection, in all respects to be credited, and will tell
the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. And therefore an oath is aptly
termed Sacramentum, a holy band, or sacred tie, or godly vow: The credit of an
oath.
some do call it firmame^tum veritatis, the foundation and ground of truth; and
some other, vinculum pacis, a mean of the knot or lincke of peace. And if it
be taken and found by a whole Jury, consisting upon twelve persons or above,
it is called veredictum, viz. a presentment of truth. And others do hold it a
ceremony instituted by God, wherein himself is a party, and therefore he
will see it verified, or sharply punished. We know, that the proof of most of
our acts, deeds, and writings, do depend upon the oaths of others, and
whatsoever men do for their own particular account most certain, is
altogether in most cases uncertain, unless it may be justified by the oaths
of others. As if one do commit murder, rape, burglarie, robbery, or other
offense whatsoever, and it be denied and cannot be proved by the oath of some
other, the offender shall escape unpunished for it. And likewise if a man do
buy land of another, if the feoffor do make him a deed of feoffement thereof,
do seal and deliver it, and give him possession, and after will deny it,
unless it can be proved by the oath of some other, the feoffee shall loose
his land and money. And so it is of leases, annuities, releases, acquitances,
obligations, bargains, contracts, covenants, promises, offenses, entries,
disseisins, and other matters in fait, if they be denied, trauersed, and called
in question, the proof and validity of them does depend wholly upon the oaths
and testimony of others. And there is no case so plain, which comes in
question between party and party, but one of the parties to the suit may
plead such a plea as shall come to be tried by the oaths of others.

2 Therefore as the Law does reverently respect the oaths of men, What sorts
of persons are to be deposed.
takes her intelligence of matters in fait from them, does cleave and lean
unto them, and gives such credit and approbation unto them, that she does
found and build her judgments in most cases of greatest importance upon them:
So she retains a vigilant and careful eye, that those oaths be taken by men
of sincerity of life, and maturitie of judgment, persons not stained with
Perjury, or other grievous or foul offenses, men indifferently affected, and
such as will in swearing respect the truth of their knowledge, and not the
face of the person: for if she epsy any of those defects in him, she does
either wholly reject his oath, or else she gives little or no credit unto
it, and further inflicteth condign punishment upon him, according to his
desert.

Mag. Char. 9. H. 3. 29.
3 And because the King himself at his Coronation is sworn, that justice shall
be sold, deferred, or denied to no man: nor that any man shall be condemned
but by lawful trial: and every of his Judges be sworn, that he shall do
equal Law and execution of justice to all the Kings Subjects, Sta. 18. Ed. 3
rich and poor, without having regard to any person: All the parties to the
execution of justice sworn.
Therefore the law has devised that those Judges before whom any cause is
called in question, and is brought to an issue, shall be informed of the truth
of that issue, by the oaths and verdict of twelve Jurors, who are impannelled,
returned, and sworn to try that issue, to the end the same Judges may ground
their judgment thereupon, and so do equal justice to the parties, according
to their oaths: and also that the said Jurors shall be ascertained of the
verity of the fact, by the Oaths of witnesses, or other evidences, that they
may give their verdict thereupon, according to their Oaths. And seeing those
Jurors being the greatest number of persons that be usually sworn, for the
furtherance and execution of justice, be returned by the Shiriffe of the
County where the cause depends in question, his vndershirife, or the Bailife
of some Liberty, or for some default in them, by the Coroners: Therefore the
Law has further ordained, that the said Shiriffe, Vndershiriffe, or etc.
shall be indifferent persons of themselves, and also deal uprightly in
returning of those Jurors, lest by their partiality, Truth may be concealed,
Perjury committed, and so justice subverted. Fitz. Challenge. 113. 7. Ed. 4.
56. 33. Ass. p. 12 12. Ass pl. 1. 26. Ass. p. 56 12. Ass. p. 36. 44. Ass. p. 18
Plo. Com. fol. 425. 29. Ass. p. 2. 28. Ass. p. 22 7. H. 4. 10. Fitz. Challeng.
94. 99. 8. H. 5. 5. 20. H. 6. 39. 11. H. 4. 26. 38. H. 6. 6. 24. Edw. 37.
And for that cause the providence of the Law does not allow that Shiriffe,
Vndershiriffe, Bailiffe of Franchise, Coroner, Causes of suspicion in Shiriffes
in impannelling of Iuries.
or other person as indifferent, or meet to impannell a Jury, who is a party
to the suit or matter in question: or who does maintain either of the parties
plaintiff, or defendant in the same suit: or is of council with either of them
in that suit then in issue: Nor who is within the distress, receives the
yearly fee, or wears the liuerie or robe of any of the parties to that suit:
Nor who is of kindred by nature, or of affinity by marriage, to any of the
parties to that suit: Nor who does return that Enquest, or any of the Jurors
therein, at the denomination, or by the procurement of any of the parties to
the same suit, or of any other person whatsoever: Nor who does impannell that
Enquest, or any of the Jurors therein, for the favor which he does bear more
to the one party than to the other: Nor who was an Arbitrator in that cause in
question, and to be in trial, and did treat and confer of the same: Nor who
is then in suit of law with either of the parties to this question or trial,
for any matter of trespass, malice, or evil will: Nor who did baptize the
child of any of the parties to this suit and trial, 4. Ed. 4. 11.
or any of the parties to the same suit did baptize his child. All which the
Law does suspect as causes of favor and affection in the Shiriffe, his
Vndershiriffe, etc. and to be moouers, favorers or consentors to Perjury, and
therefore upon challenge of the Array so being impannelled, and the same
proved, the whole Array shall be quashed.

4 As the Law has great care that Shiriffes, Vndershiriffes, Bayliffes of
Liberties, Coroners, and all others having authority to return enquests
should therein be void of all partiality, or presumption or cause thereof, to
the intent that a gappe should not be left open by their means, to those that
be willing to enter into corruption of conscience, and so to commit Perjury:
In like sort has she vigilantly foreseen, that those Jurors which be
returned by the said Shirifes, etc. may be so sifted, tried, and examined, that
they may be found in all respects Probi and legales homines, Every Iuror must
be an honest and lawful man.
viz. honest, upright, 33. H. 6. 55. 26. Ass. p. 28 14 H. 4. 19. 9. Ed. 4. 16.
11. H. 4. 4.
and lawful men in the eye and judgment of the Law, and that none of them be
an Alien, a villain, or outlawe, an excommunicate person, and thereby not
legalis homo, nor convicted in a Writ of Conspiracy, or an Attaint, and by
that means not probus homo, and so to be challenged in every cause, and by
every person: and further, that they may be proved to be men of
indifferency, and void of all partiality, and such as will wholly respect the
truth of the cause in question, and in their verdict nothing regard any that
is party thereunto. And therefore if there be any lawful cause to fear
particular favor and affection in any of the Jurors, and that he will rather
incline to Perjury, than give ear to the truth of the cause, the Law does
allow to the party grieved, Challenges of Jurors suspected.
or suspecting the same, several Challenges to the same Iuror, and thereby to
have him drawn and removed out of that Enquest.

A witness.
5 As if a man be a witness in a cause in question, he can not be a Iuror in the
same cause, for the witness does testify upon his certain knowledge, 23. Ass.
p. 11 12. Ass. p. 12 11. Ass. p. 19
and the Jurors of an Enquest must give their verdict according to their
evidence. And besides, he that produces a witness, expects at his hand a
favorable delivery of his evidence, or otherwise he would not produce him,
which favor every Iuror must be wholly void of, if he will avoid Perjury.

Perjury suspected by delivering his verdict before hand.
6 If a Iuror after he is returned, and before he is sworn, 20. H. 6. 39. 8.
Ed. 3. 69.
will say that he will pass for the plaintiff, or defendant, and does speak
it for the favor which he bears to the one party, or the hatred which he
has to the other, (and not in respect of his own knowledge of the truth of
the cause) the Law does fear perjury in him, and therefore she will remove
him out of that enquest, if he be challenged therefore.

Perjury suspected by lying at the charge of one of the parties.
7 If one that is impannelled of a Jury does go to the Assizes with one of the
parties to the issue, and does eat and drink with him at his charges, 8. Ed.
3. 69 13. H. 4. 13. Fitz. Challenge. 177.
the Law does suspect the same Iuror of partiality, and so of inclination to
Perjury, in recompense of that kindness received, and therefore she will
remove him out of that Enquest if he be challenged therefore.

20. H. 6. 39. 9. Ed. 4. 46. 7. H. 7. 18.
8 If two men be in question for any cause, Perjury suspectcted by an
Arbitrator in the cause in question.
and then do refer the matter in debate to be heard and ended by two
Arbitrators, whereof the one does make choice of one Arbitrator, and the other
of an other, which Arbitrators do meet together, and confer of the cause, but
do not agree, whereupon the party grieved does prosecute the said suit to an
issue, and one of the same Arbitrators is returned of that Enquest, the law
does suspect the same Iuror of partiality, and so of inclination to Perjury,
and therefore she will remove him out of that Enquest, if he be challenged
therefore; for when he was chosen by one of the parties alone, this election
makes him in a sort of council with him that did choose him, and so favorable
unto him, but if he had bin chosen by the consent of both the parties together,
3 H. 6. 25.
the law would have made other construction of him, and adjudged him
indifferent.

34. Ass. p. 6.
9 If two men do combine themselves by Oath, bond, covenant, or faithful and
advised promise, that one of them will take an others part, be his friend, and
assist him in all causes whatsoever: And after there is a suit commenced
between one of those parties and a stranger, and they come to issue, and the
other party who made the same combination is returned upon the Enquest to try
the matter in issue between his companion and that stranger, Perjury
suspected by combination.
the law does suspect him of favor and perjury, and so will reject him, if he
be challenged therefore, for she does fear that his old friendship and former
league with the party to that issue has suncke deeply into his breast, and will
further prevail with him, then the truth of a strangers case to be presently
examined and tried will do, be it never so apparent.

Fitz. Chal. 106.
10 If two men be at controversy, and in suit of law, Perjury suspected if one
of the parties and a Iuror be at suit in law.
and depending that suit; there is an other controversy, and suit in law
commenced between one of those parties and a stranger, 8. H. 5. 11.
and they descend to an issue, and the other party to the first suit is
returned one of that Enquest: In this case the law does suspect him of malice,
and will remove him out of that enquest, if he be challenged therefore by his
former adversary: for she does fear that the grudge which he has conceived
in his heart against his adversary upon the first suit, will move him to
revenge, which is one of the grounds and causes of perjury.

8. H. 4. 3. 27. Ass. p. 13
11 If two persons or more do conspire and agree between themselves to indite
an other of felony, and accordingly they do procure him to be indicted of the
same felony, of which felony upon his arraignement he is acquit; if the party
indicted do bring a writ of conspiracy against the said conspirators, and they
do come to an issue to be tried by a Jury, Perjury suspected for that the
Iuror passed against him before.
if any of those who were the Inditors of the same person be returned upon the
enquest to try the conspiracy, the law will suspect him of partiality, and
not admit him to be sworn to try the conspiracy, for fear of perjury: for
she conceiueth that he will do his endeavor to justify and maintain that
which before he had found upon the indictment, though it be false, for the
saving of his own credit. And the like law is, if a man be one of those who
do indite an other of felony; and after when the party indicted has pleaded
not guilty, and does submit himself to be tried by the Country, 7. E. 4. 4.
12. Ass. p. 36
the same Inditor is returned upon the enquest, to try innocence or guilt of
the man, upon the challenge of him by the party indicted, he shall be removed:
for the law will suspect him of perjury, and that he will rather respect his
own credit, and justify his former oath and the indictment to be true, then
regard his evidence the life of the man arraigned, and the truth of the case in
trial. And it is specially provided by the Statute of An^ 25. Ed. 3. St. 25.
E. 3. 3
That no Inditor shall be put in Enquests upon the deliverance of the
Inditees, if he be challenged for the same cause by him which is indicted.

Perjury suspected in respect of Subjection or government.
12 And the Law does suspect one that is returned of a Jury of partiality and
favor, who is within the distress of either of the parties to that suit,
Fitz. Challenge. 19. 27. 46. 61. 4. H. 6. 25. 44. Ed. 3. 5.
or that is within the Jurisdiction of the Court Hundred, or Court Leete of the
plaintiff or defendant, or of any other, in whose right, to whose use, or, by
whose commandment either of them do claim: for if he has any land in his
own right, or his wives, or that any other is seized to the use of him or his
wife of any land whereof he takes the profit, 38. Ed. 3. 25
which is holden mediately or immediately of either of the parties to that
suit, the Law does suspect him of Perjury, and being challenged therefore,
he shall be drawn, and not sworn of that Enquest. 22. Ed. 4. 1.
And so it is if any of the persons returned to be of a Jury be servant to
either of the parties to that Issue, the Law does suspect him of Perjury, for
that he is at the commandment, and under the correction of his Master, and
therefore being challenged, he shall be drawn out of that Jury. And the like
Law is if either of the parties to the suit, 2. H. 4. 13.
be servant to any of the Jury, and that Iuror be challenged therefore, he
shall not be sworn for fear of Perjury, which he may commit for his
servants benefit.

Perjury suspected in respect of kindred, aliance, or profit.
13 The Law does also perceive, 8. H. 6. 15. 7. H. 6. 40.
that Nature and private profit be often times special motions to Partiality,
Favor, and Perjury. As if any person be returned of a Jury, who is near of
kindred or affinity to either of the parties to that suit, or to his wife, viz.
within the degrees of Marriage, and specially, if the same Iuror may by any
presumption, or likeliehoode, after take benefit of the thing in question: Or
if either of the parties to that Issue, may be heir to the Iuror, or the Iuror
or his heir be heir to the said party: then the Law upon Challenge does
reject that Iuror for fear of Perjury. But if the kindred or aliance between
the party to that suit, 40. Ass. p. 20.
and the Iuror be far off, and many degrees asunder: Or that one be a kinsman
on the fathers side, and the other of the mothers side, or one be a kinsman to
the other of the half blood, or a Bastard, or otherwise, Fitz. Challenge. 102.
in such sort that the land of the one can not by the course of inheritance,
and the rules of the Law descend to the other: Or if the alliance be such,
that the son of the one has married the daughter of the other, and not
between themselves: 3. Ed. 4. 12.
then the Law does not fear Perjury in the same Iuror, but he may be sworn
to try that Issue. And if there be a suit commenced between a Corporation and
a private person, and that does come to be tried by a Jury, if any of the same
Jury be near of kindred, or alliance to any person of that Corporation, 34.
Aff. p. 6. 7. Ed. 4. 4.
or to any principal Officer of that Corporation, the Law does suspect him of
Perjury therefore, and if he be challenged for that cause, he shall be
drawn out of that Enquest. 2. H. 4. 15. 10. H. 6. 24.
The Law does account it a kind of affinity, One godfather to the others
child.
if one of the parties to the suit have baptized, and been godfather to a
child of one of the Jurors, and that the Iuror in respect thereof does bear
an extraordinary affection, and is to make a recompense to the same party,
and that therefore in this trial he will favor him, and be a mean of
Perjury: and therefore if the Iuror be challenged for that cause, he shall be
drawn: And some do affirm the same cause of challenge and fear of Perjury
to be, 7. H. 6. 40. 19. H. 6. 66.
if a Iuror has been godfather to either of the parties to that trial, or to
any child of his.

14 The Law expecting to be satisfied per Veredictum Iuratorum of the truth
of such causes as do come to an issue, does carefully foresee, that those
Jurors who are to deliver the truth by their verdict, Perjury suspected in
respect of ignorance of the cause.
should either before the time of the trial upon their own private knowledge,
or by their Evidence at the time of the trial, be certainly informed of that
truth of the thing in question, lest by ignorance, mistaking falshoode for
truth, they should slide into Perjury. And because those that be dwelling, or
have some land, where the land, lease, or thing in question does lie, are more
likely to have intelligence of the truth of the cause in question, both to
satisfy themselves, and inform their Companions, than other strangers of the
same County are, who dwell far off, the Law has ordained by the Statute of
Anno 27. Elizab. That there shall be six sufficient Hundredors impannelled
upon every Issue joined, which is to be tried in any of the Courts of the
Kings Bench, Stt. 27. El. 6.
Common Pleas, and the Exchequer, Want of Hundredors.
or before the Justices of Assise, in all cases where every Iuror by the
ancient laws of this Realm ought to have forty shillings of freeholde at
the least. And that at, or upon the trial of any personal action, there
shall two sufficient Hundredors at the least appear. And for that cause, if in
those cases there be not so many Hundredors at the least, the Law does
conceive, they be ignorant of the truth of the Issue in trial. And to that end
for the avoiding of Perjury, she will reject the whole Jury, if they be
challenged. And so it is in an Assise, where the plaintiff is to be put in
possession per Visum Iuratorum (if he recover) or in any action where the Jury
is to have the view of the land in question; 8. Ed. 3. 69. Fitz. Chall. 102.
169.
if the same Jurors, Want of the view.
or some of them had not the view of the land in question, nor did know it
before, the Law will suspect that they will commit Perjury, if they should be
sworn, seeing they be ignorant of the land, and know it not in specie. And
therefore upon challenge they shall be removed.

1. R. 3. 4.
15 Because our Lawmakers have in several ages found by experience, that
nothing is a greater motive, enticement, Perjury in respect of poverty.
or rather inforcement to Perjury than need and poverty: Therefore they have
endeavored by many Statutes to provide, that such as be returned of Enquests,
should not only be men of good behavior and credit, but also of convenient
liueliehoode, estate, and ability to live of themselves, for that Necessity
(which has no law nor bridle) should not compel them to sell truth for
rewards, nor to plunge themselves into Perjury for bribes. And for the
prevention of this Perjury in poor persons, and such as be of mean and
weak estate, Stt. 21. Ed. 1
by a Statute made Anno 21. Ed. 1. it was ordained, That no Shiriffe,
Vndershiriffe, or Bayliffe of Liberty, shall put in any Recognisaunces of
Assizes, Iuries, Enquests, or Attaints, Jurors impanelled that shall pass out
of their own Counties.
that shall pass out of their proper County, any person of their Bayliwickes
(except he has lands and tenements to the yearly value of a hundred shillings
at the least) or that shall pass within the County (except he has lands to
the yearly value of xl. s. And for the same cause, and upon the same reason of
prevention of perjury in poor and needy persons, by a Statute made Anno 3. H.
5. it was established, St. 3. H. 5. 3
That no persons shall be admitted to pass in any enquest upon trial of ye
death of a man, or in any enquest between party and party, in plea real, or
in plea personal, whereof the debt or damages declared do amount to xl.
Marks, if the same person has not lands and tenements of the yearly value of
xl. s^. above all charges, so that he be challenged for that cause by the
party. But by the Statute of An^ 23. H. 8. St. 23. H. 8. 13.
every person being the Kings natural subject borne, which by the name of a
Citizen, a freeman, Jurors to try felonies in corporat towns.
or any other name, does enjoy the liberties of any City, borough, or town
corporat where he dwells, being worth in goods to the clear value of xl. li.
shall be admitted in trial of Murders, and felonies, in every Sessions, and
gaoles of delivery, kept in, and for the liberty of such Cities, Boroughes, or
Towns corporat, albeit he has no freehold. But this Act extends not to any
Knight, or Esquire, dwelling, abiding, or resorting in, or to any such city,
borough, etc. And by the Statute of An^ 27. Eliz. it was enacted, Sta. 27. El.
6.
That in all cases where any Iuror to be returned for the trial of any issue
or issues, joined in any of the Courts of the Kings Bench, common Pleas, and
the Exchequer, or before Justices of Assise, by the Laws of the Realm now in
force, ought to have estate of freehold in lands, Where Jurors must have 4. li.
land.
tenements, or hereditaments, of the clear yearly value of xl. s^. in every
such case the Jurors that shall be returned, shall every of them have estate of
freehold in lands, etc. to the clear yearly value of four pounds at the
least, out of ancient demesne within the County where the issue is to be
tried. By the Statute of 11. H. 7. it is provided, St. 11. H. 7. 21.
That no person shall be impannelled, summoned, or sworn in any Jury or Enquest
in Courts within the city of London, Jurors in London.
except he be of lands, tenements, goods, or cattels to the value of xl.
Marks. And no person shall be impannelled, summoned, or sworn, in Iuries or
Enquests in any Court within the said City, for lands or tenements, or action
personal wherein the debt or damages amounts to the sum of xl. marks,
except he be in lands, teneme^ts, goods, or cattels, to the value of one
hundred marks. St 19. H. 7. 13.
By the Statute of Anno 19. H. 7. it was ordained, That every of the xxiiij.
persons dwelling within the shire where any riot, Jurors to enquire of riots.
rout, or unlawful assembly shall be committed, which shall be returned by the
Sheriff to enquire thereof, shall have lands and tenements within the same
shire, to the yearly value of xx. s. of Charter land, or freehold, or twenty
six shillings eight pence of copiehold, or of both, above all charges. But in
that case, by the Statute of Anno 2. H 5. St. 2. H. 5. 8.
if they be returned by the Coroners, then every of them shall have lands and
tenements, or rents to the yearly value of ten pounds at the least. By the
Statute of Anno 1. St. 1. R. 3. 4.
R. 3. it was enacted, That no officer shall return in any panell to be taken
or put in, Jurors in the sherifs Turn.
or upon any inquisition or inquiry before the Sheriff in his Turn, other
than such which be of good name and fame, and which have lands or tenements of
freehold within the same county to the yearly value of xx. s^. at the least,
or else copyhold lands to the yearly value of xxvj. s^. viij. d. at the least,
above all charges. By the Statute of An^ 8. H. 6. Sta. 8. H. 6. 9
it was provided, That every person which shall be returned to inquire of any
forcible entry into lands, Jurors to inquire of forcible entry.
or detayning of lands by force, shall be a sufficient and indifferent person,
and shall have lands and tenements to the clear yearly value of xl. s^. By
the Statute of An^ 1. H. 8. it was established, Sta. 1. H. 8. 8.
That every Iuror which is returned before any escheator, Jurors returned
before Escheators.
or commissioner, to inquire of lands or tenements, or some other to his use,
shall have lands or tenements of the yearly value of xl. s. above all charges
in the same shire where the inquiry shall be made. St. 11. H. 7. 21. 23. H. 8.
3. 37. H. 8. 5.
And by the stat. made An^ 11. H. 7. An^ 23. H. 8. An^ and 37. H. 8. The Jurors
returned upon an attaint in London, or else where, shall be of more or greater
ability in lands, tenements, goods or cattels then is before specified.

16 The law having first used al good devises to cause shirifes, vndershirifes,
Bailifes of liberties, coroners, and al others authorized to return and
impannel Iuries to be indifferent, and to return the said Iuries and Jurors
without al partiality, and that they shall be no furtherers, maintainors, nor
assistors to perjury, subornation, or embracery, and also having provided that
all those Jurors which be so returned upon Enquests, and to try issues between
party and party, may again one by one be sifted, tried, and examined, whether
they standing unsworn be indifferent, or not: She does then expect to receive
from those Jurors Veredictu^ a true tale, that is to say, a true verdit or
presentment of such things as be given them in charge, according to their
evidence. But if the same Jurors will decline from truth, and make a false
presentment, contrary to their evidence, then is it not to be termed
Veredictum, but Periurium, and it will be returned to them as Maledictum: for
by the common Law, they being attainted by the verdict of xxiiij. other Jurors,
shall receive a cursed and villainous judgment therefore, viz. the said Jurors
shall loose the freedom of the Law, their wives and children shall be thrust
out of their houses, Fit. Ass. 396. 46. Ed. 3. 23. 42. Ed. 3. 26 6. Assi^. p.
7. 30. Ass. p. 24 40. Ass. p. 20. 41. Ass. p. 18. Li. Int. fo. 92
The judgment in an at the common law of a Jury proved perjured.
their houses shall be pulled down to the ground, their orchards and gardens
shall be supplanted, their trees shall be dug up by the roots, their
meadows shall be eyred up: All the goods and cattels which they had at the
time of the Attaint brought, or at any time after, shall be forfeited to the
King: The King shall have all the profits of their lands during their lives:
And they shall be committed to perpetual prison. Which judgment was devised,
and many years put in execution, to the intent it might be known how much the
common Law did detest and punish wilful Perjury and falsehood, in those who
she trusted in place of justice, and from whom she accounted to receive truth.

17 But sithence by the Statute of An^ 11. H. 7. and An^ 23. H. 8. the said
judgment against a petit Jury attainted, is in some cases altered and
qualified, Sta. 11. H. 7. 21.
for by the Statute of 11. H. 7. it is ordained, That the party grieved by any
false verdict given in any of the Courts of the City of London, shall and may
sue Attaint by Bill in the Hustings of London, The judgment in Attaint in
London.
holden for common Pleas before the Mayor and Aldermen of the same City. And
if the graund Jury sworn in the same Attaint, find that the petit Jury have
given an untrue verdict, then the judgment shall be against the defendant, as
is used in attaint sued by writ at the common Law: And the judgment shall be
against the petit Jury, that every of them shall loose xx. li. or more, by the
discretion of the Mayor and Aldermen of the said City keeping the Hustings, to
such uses as other issues and penalties been forfeited in any action or plaint
commenced before the Mayor and Aldermen of the said city; and his body to be
imprisoned, there to remain without bail or mainprise vj. months, or less,
by the discretion of the Mayor and Aldermen; and to be disabled for ever to be
sworn in any Jury before any temporal Judge: But the judgment in such
Attaint shall not extend to any lands or tenements, St. 23. H. 8. 3 An. 13. El.
25.
ne to other punishment of the petit Jury. And by the before mentioned Statute
of Anno 23. H. 8. it was enacted, That upon every untrue verdit given between
party and party in any suit, plaint, or demand, before any Justices or
Judges of Record, where the thing in demand, and verdict thereupon given
extends to the value of forty pounds, An attaint where the thing eetendeth
to xl. l.
and concerns not the ieopardie of man's life, the party grieved by the same
verdict shall have a writ of Attaint against every person so giving an untrue
verdict, and every of them, and against the party which shall have judgment
upon the same verdict. And every one that shall pass in the same Attaint,
shall have lands and tenements to the value of twenty marks by year of
freehold, out of ancient demesne. And if the graund Jury find that the petit
Jury gave an untrue verdict, then every of the said petit Jury shall forfeit
twenty pounds, whereof one half shall be to the King, and the other half to
him that sueth, to be levied by Capias ad satisfaciendum fieri facias, or
Elegit, or by Action of Debt against every person of the petit Jury so
forfeiting, and against his Executors and Administrators, having then
sufficient goods of their said Testator not administered. And every of the said
petit Jury shall severally make fine by the discretion of the Justices before
whom the said false Serement shall be found, after their several offenses,
defaults, and sufficiency of them. And those of the petit Jury so attainted
shall never be after of any credit, nor their oath accepted in any court. And
if a false verdict be given in any action, suit, or demand before any Justice,
or Judge of Record, Attaint where the thing does not extend to xl. l.
of any thing personal, as debt, trespass, and other like, which shall be under
the value of xl. pounds, then the party grieved shall have an Attaint. And if
the petit Jury be attainted, then every of them shall forfeit five pounds to
the King and the party after the form aforesaid, and also shall make fine by
the discretion of the Justices. And every person that may dispend five marks
by the year of freehold, out of ancient demesne, or is worth an hundred
marks in goods, is able to pass in the same Attaint.

18 The Law does so hate Perjury, and so much endeavor to extirpate the very
root thereof, that she does sometime punish it in the only will, and
intention of a man, though that will never come to effect, so that the same
will and meaning may be laid open unto her; The meaning to commit perjury
punished.
by due proof; as it appears by a branch of the before specified Statute of
Anno 11. Hen. 7. St. 11. H. 7. 21.
whereby it is ordained That if it be found by the graund Jury that the petit
Jury have given a true verdict, in any of the courts of the city of London,
in a suit whereupon an Attaint is brought, then the graund Jury shall have
authority to inquire if any of the petit Jury has received any sum of
money or other reward, or promise of money or other reward, of the named
defendants, or tenants in the same Attaint, or of any other person by the
commandment, couin, or assent of any of them, for the intent of their verdict
giving, whereupon the same Attaint is grounded: And after any such corruption
by the said graund Jury found, Decies tantu^.
then the Iuror that is so found defective in taking money, or rewards etc.
shall pay to the plaintiff named in the said Attaint, ten times the value of
the sum, or other reward so taken, or promised, and shall suffer imprisonment
without Bail or Maineprise six months, or less, by the discretion of Mayor
and Aldermen of the said city, and shall be disabled for ever to be sworn
in any Jury before any temporal Judge. And such defendant and tenant in the
same Attaint, shall pay to such use as other penalties be forfeited within the
same city, ten times the value of the sum of money, or other reward by him
so given to any of the said petit Jury, and shall be imprisoned without Bail or
Maineprise during six months, or less, by the discretion of the said Mayor
and Aldermen. And in like sort, St. 34. E. 3. 8 38. E. 3. ^2.
and for the same cause the Statutes of Anno 34. Edw. 3. and 38. Edw. 3. were
provided, whereby it was enacted, That if any Iuror sworn in Assizes, or other
Enquests to be taken between the King and the party, or between party and
party, do by himself or any other take any thing of the plaintiff, or
defendant, to give his verdict, and thereof is attainted at the suit of the
party, which will sue for himself, or for the King, or of any other person
(entering his plaint by Bill immediately before the Justices before whom the
Jury was sworn) the said Iuror shall pay ten times so much as he has
received. Decies tantu^.
And all those which be Imbraceors Imbraceors.
to lead and procure such Enquests in the Country, to make a gain and profit
thereof, shall be punished as the Jurors. And if the Iuror or Imbraceor so
attainted have not wherewith to make recompense in form aforesaid, he shall be
one year imprisoned; which imprisonment shall not be pardoned for any fine:
and the party grieved may have his action before other Justices if he will.
But no Justice or other officer shall inquire of office upon any of the points
of this Statute, but only at the suit of the party, and of others as
aforesaid. By which foresaid Statutes it does appear, that the Law does punish
Perjury, not only in such Jurors as do commit it, but also in those persons
who be the Imbraceors, Perswaders, or Procuters of it: and not only in those
who do commit or procure it, but likewise in those who give or take rewards to
have it done, though it be never effected: for she accounts, that when a
man has given his heart leave for a reward to be sworn, it is the reward he
respects in his oath, and not the truth of the cause; which reward will lead
him blindfold into the dungeon of Perjury, and therefore he deserves to be
punished as a perjured person. S. Maintenance etc. 6.

19 Because diverse did resort to Jurors in Wales, and the Marches thereof, and
suborned them to acquit Murderers, Felons, and Accessories openly knowns: St.
26. H. 8. 4
therefore by a Statute made Anno 26. H. 8. it was enacted, That forthwith upon
the charge given to any Enquest, to be taken and sworn before any Justices,
Steward, Lieutenant, or other officer within Wales, or the Marches of the same,
of, for, or upon any Trauerse against the King, or the trial of any
Recognizance broken, or any other forfeiture forfeited to the King, or of, for,
and upon the trial of any Murderer, felon, or accessorie of felony or murder,
an officer shall be sworn for the keeping of the same Jurors. And if the same
Jurors do acquit any such felon, murderer, or accessorie, upon whose trial
they shall be charged, or give any untrue verdict against the King, upon the
trial of any Trauerse, Recognizance, or other forfeiture, The punishment of
perjury committed by an enquest in Wales.
contrary to the good and pregnant evidence ministered to them by the persons
sworn before the said Justice, Steward, Lieutenant, or other officer: Or that
the said Jurors or any of them do eat, drink, or speak to, or with any
person, or persons, than to such as be sworn with them, or otherwise misdemeane
themselves after they be sworn, and before they have given their verdict: Then
the Lord President or other of the Council of the Marches for the time being,
upon notice or complaint thereof to be made, shall not only have authority to
call such Jurors before them, but also the same Iusticiar, Steward, or other
officers, before whom any such acquitall, untrue verdit, or misdemeanors shall
happen to be made, shall have full power to compel such Jurors, and every of
them, upon pain of imprisonment, to be bound by Recognisance in a certain
sum of money, by their discretion to be limited, that the same Jurors, and
every of them shall personally appear at a certain day by the same Iusticiar,
Steward, or other officer to be limited, before the Lord President, and other
of the Council aforesaid for the time being, then, and there to abide, and
stand to such direction and order, as the same council shall make, ordain,
and decree, of, in, and upon the same. And the same council shall thereupon
have authority by examination, or otherwise, to hear and determine all and
every such cause, and shall have like authority to commit every of the same
Jurors to prison, or other punishment, as shall be thought meet by the discretion
of the said counsel, or otherwise assesse, or tax every such Iuror to his fine
and ransom by the same discretion, to be paid and levied of their lands,
goods, and cattels, to the use of the King.

Perjury committed by witnesses.
20 Having written of the restraint and punishment of perjury in Jurors
consisting of twelve persons at the least, impannelled or sworn to deliver
their verdict according to their evidence, I am now to express what
punishments ye law does inflictt upon such, which do come one by one, as
deponents, or witnesses, to testify the truth, and to inform the Judge, or
the Jury of the verity of the matter in issue or question, according to their
knowledge, whereof every man by himself may be called singularis testis,
though there be more witnesses sworn in that cause. And seeing that justice
cannot be executed without the knowledge of the truth of the cause in question,
and that truth is in most cases only to be delivered by the oaths and
testimonies of such parties as were witnesses, privy, or best acquainted with
the matter in variance: Therefore first it is to be observed, that the wisdom
of the law has thought it necessary, to provide that such witnesses may be
compelled under a great pain to appear in court, and testify their knowledge
concerning such matter in question: as by the Statute made Anno 5. A witness
upon process served shall appear.
El. it was ordained, St. 5. El. 9. St. 29. El. 5.
That if any person upon whom any process out of any of the courts of Record
within this Realm, or Wales, shall be served, to testify or depose concerning
any matter depending in any of the same courts, and having tendered to him
according to his countenance, or calling, such reasonable sums of money for his
costs and charges, as (having regard to the distance of the places) is
necessary to be allowed in ye behalf, do not appear according to the tenor
of the said Process, having not a lawful and reasonable let to the contrary;
then the party making default shall forfeit for every such offense x. l, and
shall yield such further recompense to the party grieved, as by the discretion
of the Judge of the court out of the which the said process shall be awarded,
according to the loss and hindrance yt the party which procured the said
process shall sustain, by reason of the non appearance of the said witness:
the said several sums to be recovered by ye party so grieved against the
offender by A.I.B.P. etc. in any of the K. courts of Record, wherein no W.E. or
P. etc.

21 There were several statutes made during the reigns of king H. 6. K. H. 7.
and K. H. 8. against Perjury, and the procurers and committers of perjury:
and lastly one was ordained Anno 32. H. 8. St. 32. H. 8. 9
against such as should suborne witnesses, to the hindrance of Justice, and the
procurement of perjury: Sithence the making whereof, for that the penalty
therein is small toward the offenders in that behalf, the said offense of
subornation, and sinister procurement of false witnesses did nevertheless
greatly increase, and by reason of the wilful Perjury committed by the same
suborned witnesses, diverse persons did sustain disherison, and great
impouerishment, as well of their lands and tenements, as of their goods and
cattels: The penalty for procuring of wilful perjury in witnesses.
for the redress and more sharp punishment whereof, St. 5. El. 9. 29. El. 5.
by a Statute made Anno 5. El. it was enacted, That all and every person and
persons which shall unlawfully, and corruptly procure any witness, or witnesses,
by Letters, Rewards, Promises, or by any other sinister and unlawful labor,
or means whatsoever, to commit any wilful and corrupt Perjury, in any matter
or cause whatsoever, depending in suit and variance by any Writ, Action, Bill,
Complaint, or Information, in any wise concerning any lands, tenements, or
hereditaments, or any goods, cattels, debts, or damages, in any of the courts
of the Chauncerie, Star chamber, White hall, or in any other of the Kings
Courts of Record, or in any Leet, view of Frank pledge, or Law day, Ancient
demesne Court, Court Hundred, Court Baron, or in the Court or Courts of the
Stannerie in the county of Deuon, and Cornwall: Or shall likewise unlawfully
and corruptly procure, or suborne any witness, or witnesses, which shall be
sworn to testify in perpetuam rei memoriam: Then every such offender or
offenders, shall for his, hers, or their said offense, being thereof lawfully
convicted or attainted, forfeit forty pounds to the King and the party
grieved, hindered or molested by reason of any of the offenses aforesaid, that
will sue for the same by A. B. P. or I. in any of the Kings Courts of Record,
wherein no W. E. P. or I. shall be allowed. And if it happen any such offender
or offenders being so convicted or attainted as is aforesaid, not to have any
goods or cattels, Lands or Tenements to the value of forty pounds, then every
such person or persons so convicted or attainted of any of the offenses
aforesaid, shall suffer imprisonment one half year, without Bail or
Maineprise, and stand upon the Pillorie one whole hour in some Market Town,
near, or next adjoining to the place where the offense was committed, in open
market there. And no person being so convicted or attainted shall be from
thenceforth received as a witness to be deposed in any court of Record within
any of the Kings dominions of England, Wales, or the Marches of the same,
until the Judgment, given against him, or them, shall be reuersed by
Attaint, or otherwise. And upon every such reuersall, the parties grieved shall
recover his or their damages against all and every such person and persons, as
did procure the said judgment so reuersed to be first given against them, or
any of them, by action to be sued upon his or their case, according to the
course of the common Law.

St. 5. El. 9.
22 If any person or persons, either by the subornation, The penalty for
committing of wilful perjury.
unlawful procurement, sinister persuasion or means of any others, or by
their own Act, Consent, or Agreement, shall wilfully and corruptly commit any
manner of wilful perjury, by his, or their deposition, in any of the Courts
before mentioned, or being examined ad perpetuam rei memoriam: Then every
person or persons offending, shall for his or their said offense loose and
forfeit twenty pounds to the King and the party grieved, hindered, or
molested by reason of any of the offenses before mentioned, that will sue for
the same by A. B. P. or I. in any of the Kings courts of Record, wherein no W.
E. P. or I. shall be allowed, and shall have six months imprisonment without
Bail or Maineprise. And the oath of such person or persons so offending from
thenceforth, shall not be received in any court of Record within England, or
Wales, or the Marches of the same, until such time as the judgment given
against the said person or persons shall be reuersed by Attaint, or otherwise.
And upon every such reuersall, the parties grieved, to recover his or their
damages against such person and persons as did procure the said judgment so
reuersed to be given against the^, by action to be sued upon his case. And if
the said offender have not any goods or cattels to the value of xx. l. then he
shall be set on the Pillorie in some market place within the shire, city, or
borough, where the said offense shall be committed, by the Sheriff, or his
ministers, if it be without any city or town corporat: and if it be within
any city or town corporat, then by the head officer or officers of the same
city or etc. or by his or their ministers, and there shall have both his ears
nailed, and from thenceforth be discredited and disabled for ever to be sworn
in any of the courts of Record aforesaid, until the judgment shall be
reuersed; and thereupon shall recover his damages in manner and form before
mentioned.

In what courts Perjury shall be punished.
23 As well the Judge and Judges of every such of the said courts where any such
suit is, or shall be, Sta. 5. El. 9.
and whereupon any such perjury is or shall happen to be committed, as also the
Justices of Assise, and jail delivery in their several circuits, and the
Justices of the peace in every county within this realm, or in Wales, at their
Quarter Sessions, both within liberties and without, shall have authority by
virtue hereof, to enquire of all and every the defaults and offenses committed
contrary to this act, by inquisition, presentment, bill, or information,
before them exhibited, or otherwise lawfully to hear and determine the same,
and thereupon to give judgment, award process, and execution of the same,
according to the course of the laws of this Realm.

Proclamation of this Statute.
24 The Justices of Assise of every circuit within this Realm shall in every
county within their circuits two times in the year, St. 5. El. 9.
viz. in the time of their sittings, make open Proclamation of this Statute, or
of the effect thereof, to the intent that no person shall be ignorant of the
penalties herein contained.

Perjury punished in the spiritual court.
25 Provided that this Act, or any thing therein contained, St. 5. El. 9.
shall not extend to any spiritual or Ecclesiastical court within this Realm
of England, or Wales, or the Marches of the same; but all and every such
offender and offenders as shall offend in form aforesaid, shall and may be
punished by such usual and ordinary laws, as heretofore has bin, and yet be
used in the said Ecclesiastical court: any thing in this Act etc.
notwithstanding.

Perjury punishable in the Starcha^ber.
26 Provided that this Act shall not extend to restrain the power or authority
given by Act of Parliament made An^ 11. H. 7. Sta. 5. El. 9.
St. 11. H. 7. 25.
to the Lord Chauncelor, and others of the Kings Council, to examine, and
punish riots, routs, heinous Periuries, and other offenses (which have used to
hear and determine such matters in the Star Chamber at Westminster) nor to
restrain the power of the Lord President and Council in the Marches of Wales,
or in the North, nor of any other Judge having absolute authority to punish
Perjury before the making of this Statute: But But they and every of them
shall proceed in the punishment of all offenses heretofore punishable, in such
wise as they might have done and used to do before the making of this Act, to
all purposes, so that they set not upon the offenders less punishment then is
contained in this Act.

27 Because by the said statute of 5. Eliz. 9. there is no Ordinance made for
the punishment of those Bankrupts, who being sworn and examined upon
Interrogatories by Commissioners thereunto authorized, shall commit Perjury:
Nor for the punishment of those witnesses, who either by the procurement of
others, or by their own consent shall commit Perjury, being examined by the
said Commissioners touching Bankrupts goods or debts: Therefore by a statute
made Anno 1. St. 1. Iac. 15.
Iac. it was ordained, That it shall be lawful for the Commissioners
authorized under the great Seal of England, or the greatest part of them, to
take order with Bankrupts bodies, lands, teneme^ts, and hereditaments, money,
goods, cattels, wares, and debts, to examine the said offender or offenders
upon such interrogatories, touching the lands, tenements, goods, cattels, and
debts, bills, bonds, books of account, and such other things as may tend to
disclose his, her, or their estate, or the secret graunts, co^ueyances, and
eloigning of his, her, or their lands, tenements, goods, money, and debts, as
they shall think meet. And if therein the offender or offenders shall refuse
to be examined, or to answer fully to every interrogatorie, to him to be
ministered by the said Commissioners, or the greater part of them, it shall be
lawful for the said Commissioners, or the greater part of them, to commit the
said offender or offenders to some strait or close imprisonment, there to
remain, until he, she, or they shall better conform him or her self. And if
upon his, her, or their examination it shall appear, that he, she, or they have
committed any wilful or corrupt Perjury, tending to the hurt or damage of
the creditors of the said Bankrupt, Perjury punished in Bankrupts.
to the value of ten pounds of lawful money of England, or above, the party
so offending shall or may thereof be indicted in any of the Kings Courts of
Record, and being lawfully convicted thereof, shall stand upon the Pillory in
some public place by the space of ij. hours, and have one of his ears nailed
to the Pillory and cut off. And by the same statute of Anno 1. Iac. it is
further established, That if any person or persons (other then the Bankrupt)
either by subornation, unlawful procureme^t, sinister persuasion or means of
any others, or by his own act, consent, or agreement, shall wilfully and
corruptly commit any manner of wilful Perjury, Perjury committed by witnesses
for Bankrupts.
by his deposition to be taken before the said Commissioners, or the greater
part of them, as is aforesaid: Then the party or parties so offending, and all
and every person and persons that shall unlawfully and corruptly procure any
such unlawful, wilful, and corrupt Perjury, shall or may therefore be
indicted in any of the Kings Courts of Record, and after his or their conviction
thereof, shall incur such forfeiture, and receive and have such pains and
punishment as are limited by the statute made concerning Perjury, St. an^ 5.
El. 9.
Anno 5. Eliz. 9.

Co. li. 5. f. 99
28 A man cannot be indicted for Perjury upon the foresaid statute of 5. Perjury
committed upon an indictment of Riot.
El. for giving false evidence on his oath to the Enquest at a Sessions, upon
an Indictment of Riot: For the statute was ordained against procurers of
Perjury, in a matter depending in suit and variance, by any Writ, Action,
Bill, Complaint, or Information, and so procurement of Perjury upon an
indictment is out of this branch of the said statute. And the second branch
of the same statute touching committing of Perjury, shall have the same
construction which the first has, though it be not there in words, and shall
have reference to the first: And it shall be expounded as if the words of the
statute had been, If any person shall wilfully and corruptly commit any
wilful Perjury in any cause depending in suit by any Writ, Bill, Action etc.
And the same law is, if a man commit wilful Perjury, Perjury upon an
indictment of Felony.
upon evidence given to the great Enquest upon an indictment of Felony, he is
not to be punished by force of the foresaid statute of Anno 5. Eliz.

Perjury in proving a suggestion for a prohibition.
29 If wilful Perjury be committed in the Kings bench, 7. and 8. Eliz. Dyer
243.
by any witness produced to prove a Suggestion for a Prohibition there
granted against an Ecclesiastical Judge, according to the statute of 2. and
3. E. 6. St. 2. E. 6. 13
whereby the party is stayed of this consultation, this shall not be examined
and punished in the Star chamber: for the statute of 3. H. 7. St. 3. H. 7. 1
which makes mention of such things as the Court of Star chamber is to hold
plea of, provides no more punishment by special words for Perjury, then it
does for Murder or Rape. There is a prouiso in the foresaid statute of Anno 5.
El. That the Lord Chancellor and others of the Qu. Counsel shall and may
proceed in the punishment of all offenses, in such wise as they might have
done, and used to do, before the making of the said Act to all purposes, so
that they set upon the offenders no less punishment then is contained in the
said Act.

30 A Bill of Perjury may be sued in the Chancery for a perjury committed in
the same Court, A suit upon perjury in the Chancery.
contrary to the foresaid statute of Anno 5. 12. El. Die. 288.
El. and if the defendant do plead unto it not guilty, he shall be sworn to
his plea, and also shall answer to Interrogatories, as it is usually done in
the Star chamber, for the L. Chauncellor had absolute power before the said
statute of Ann^ 5. El. to punish Perjury. And therefore by a prouiso in the
said statute, his power therein is not restrained by the same statute. And if
the Court of Chauncery will examine Perjury committed there, it must be done by
a bill in Latin, and pleaded in Latin, and the issue shall be joined there, and
tried in the K. Bench, as it is used in the like cases.

Where perjury shall be punished in the te^porall court, and where in the
spiritual.
31 There is no remedy or punishment for Perjury in a spiritual Court against
indictors, that do endite a man of felony, which be perjured, 22. H. 8. Kel. 39.
or against a Jury which does give a false verdict between party and party:
And if a suit be commenced in the spiritual court against an offender in
Perjury, in either of those cases, he may have a prohibition; for this perjury
does rise upon a cause that is temporal, viz. the Treason, or Felony, Debt,
Trespass, or plea of land: and for this perjury the offenders shall be punished
by attaint by the common law, or otherwise. And so it is, if a man be defamed
by a false indictment, there is no remedy in the spiritual Court for his
defamation, for that it grows upon a matter which is temporal. But where the
Perjury does rise upon a matter which is spiritual (as upon a Testament,
Matrimony, or Legacy, or such like) then the spiritual Judge has authority
to punish it, and in that case a Prohibition will not lie. And as there is no
punishment in the Ecclesiastical Court for Perjury that does rise upon a cause
that is temporal: So the Law has provided, Co. lib. 4. 20
that defamation Defamation.
(which is another evil fruit of a malicious and corrupt heart, and of a lewd
and venomous tongue) shall not be punished in the Ecclesiastical Court,
unless it concern matter that is merely spiritual, and determinable in the
Ecclesiastical Court, as to call a man Heretic, Schismaticke, Adulterer,
Fornicator etc. and unless it does concern matter that is merely spiritual
only: For if such a defamation do concern any thing that is determinable at
the common Law, the Ecclesiastical Judge shall not hold plea thereof. And yet
if such a defamation be merely spiritual, and only spiritual,
notwithstanding he that does sue in the Ecclesiastical Court for being
defamed, cannot sue there for recompense or damages, but only for the
punishment of the offense.

Maintenance, Champertie, Embracerie, and Buying of Titles.
MAintenance is, where a man gives to another (that is demaundant, What
maintenance is, and the enormities thereof.
or tenant, plaintiff or defendant in any suit, or to any other in his behalf,
or to his use) any sum of money, or other reward for to maintain his plea or
suit: Or otherwise uses persuasion, or makes labor for him, or uses other
means to countenance, aid, or assist him, when he himself has nothing
therewith to do. Which is an offense that the wisdom of the Realm from age
to age has condemned, and has endeavored to inflict diverse punishments upon
the transgressors therein, as it may appear by the statutes of West. 1. West.
2. 28. Ed. 1. 33. Ed. 1. 8. H. 6. 19. H. 7. 32. H. 8. and 18. El. The law does
so greatly desire the continuance of peace between one member of the
Commonweal and another, and so much condemns variance and suits without
cause, that many times and in many causes the plaintiff is amerced for
commencing a wrong full suit: for the law does intend those suites to be
pursued for vexation and trouble: and likewise in some other cases the def. is
amerced for the wrongful detaining of that which is not his own, and for
enforcing the plaintiff by suit in law to seek and recover his own. But as in
all cases the unlawful maintainor of suits is in fault, so is he in every such
case punishable. For though the case of the plaintiff or def. which he
undertakes to maintain, be just and lawful in him, who prosecuteth or
defends the suit, and whose the cause is, yet in the maintainor it is
unlawful, for it is not his own suit, neither is it pursued or defended for
the recovery or protection of yt which he pretends to be due to himself; and
so in a sort he makes complaint where he has no wrong, or makes defense
where none seek to hurt him, whereby, opposing himself against others who do
not contend with him, he labors to disturb the ordinary course of justice,
and therewith to blemish the peace of the Realm: for as it appears partly by
the statute of Anno 1. Ed. 3. Sta. 1. E. 3. 14
and specially by the preamble of the statute of Anno 32. H. 8. St. 32. H. 8. 9
Nothing conserueth the people in more peace and good concord, then the due
administration of justice, and the indifferent trial of titles and issues,
according to the Laws of this Realm, which being hindered and let by
Maintenance, Embracery, Champertie, Subornation of witnesses, sinister labor,
and buying of titles, there will of necessity ensue thereof great perjury,
unquietness, oppressions, troubles, wrongs, and disheritances.

2 And because this Maintenance is as an evil Tree having grown out of it
many corrupt branches: therefore the wisdom of the Realm has from time to
time provided several statutes (as it were sharp hatchets) to loppe or shred
those boughs when they did spring and shoot out. As King Ed. 3. Maintenance by
men of authority.
perceiving that his Counselors, Magistrates, and Officers in his house, and
certain great men of the Realm, by sending of Letters, Messengers, giving of
Liueries, and by other means, did solicit matters, and maintain quarrels,
and took parts in the Country, St. 1. E. 3. 14 20. Ed. 3. 3.
by a statute made Anno 1. of his reign, and another Anno 20. of his reign,
did ordain, That common right should be done to all persons, as well poor as
rich: and that none of his said Officers, nor any Noblemen, nor any other great
or small, should take upon him to maintain quarrels, or to take parts, to the
let or disturbance of the common law: Nor that any should take in hand, or
meddle with quarrels or questions, but their own. And because there was no
special punishment ordained by the said statute of Anno 1. Ed. 3. for those
who should transgress that Law, therefore King R. 2. by a statute made in the
first year of his reign established, St. 1. R. 2. 4.
That if the kings Counselors or great Officers should take upon them to
sustain any quarrel by Maintenance in the Country, or elsewhere, he so
offending should endure that pain which should be inflicted by the King
himself, by the advice of the Lords of his Realm: and other inferior officers
and servants of the Kings, in the Exchequer, and other Courts: and his meniall
servants shall loose their offices and services, and be imprisoned, and be
ransomed at the kings pleasure, every of them according to his degree, estate,
and desert: and all other persons of the Realm, of what estate soever they be,
shall be imprisoned and ransomed as the other aforesaid.

St. 33. Ed. 1.
3 The statute entitled Definitio de conspiratoribus, made Anno 33. E. 1.
Maintenance by co^bination
does decypher another sort of Maintainors, which there be called conspirators
in this sort, St. 1. R. 2. 7.
viz. Conspirators be they that bind themselves by oath, covenant, or other
alliance, that every of them shall help and sustain the other, falsely and
maliciously to indite, or falsely to move or maintain pleas: and also such as
cause children within age to appeal men of felony, whereby they are imprisoned
and sore grieved: and such as retain me^ in the country with liueries, or
fees, to maintain their malicious enterprises; and this extends as well to
the takers as to the giuers: and stewards and bailifes of great lords,
Maintenance by noblemens officers.
which by their seigniorie, office, or power, undertake to uphold or maintain
quarrels, pleas, or debates, that concern other parties then such as touch the
estate of their lords, or themselves.

4 There is also another kind of Maintenance, which is called Champerty,
Maintenance by champerty.
and the offenders therein be called Champertors, whom the foresaid statute of
Anno 33. St. 33. Ed. 1.
E. 1. does define in this manner, Who be champertors.
viz. Champertors be they that move pleas and suits, or cause to be moved,
either by their own procurement, or by others, and sue them at their proper
costs, for to have part of the land in variance, or part of the gains: which
Champertors were accounted great maintainors of suits, and professed enemies to
peace: whereupon it was ordained by the statute of West. 1. St. 3. E. 1. 25.
That no Officer of the Kings by themselves, nor by other, shall maintain
pleas, suits, or matters hanging in the Kings Court, for Lands, Tenements, or
other things, for to have part or profit thereof, by covenant made between
them, and he that does, shall be punished at the kings pleasure: and after by
the statute of Westminster. 2. St. 13. E. 1. 48
the same was expressed more at large, by the which it was enacted, That the
Chauncellor, Treasurer, Justices, nor none of the Kings Council, no Clarke of
the Chauncerie, nor of the Exchequer, nor of any Justice, or other Officer, nor
none of the Kings house, Clarke, nor Lay, shall receive any Church land nor
tenement by gift in fee, nor to farm, nor for purchase, nor otherwise, so long
as the thing is in plea in the Kings Court, or before any of his Officers, nor
shall take reward therefore: and he that does contrary to this Act, either
himself, or by any other, or make any bargain, shall be punished at the
Kings pleasure, as well he that does purchase, as he that does give. And
because other Officers were not bound by the foresaid Statutes as well as the
Kings, and to the intent some certain and more sharp penalty might be
imposed upon the transgressor of the said statutes, then before time had been
provided, Therefore by a statute made Anno 28. E. 1. St. 28. Ed. 1. 11.
entitled Articuli super Chartas, it was ordained, That no Officer, nor any
other (for to obtain part of the thing in plea) shall maintain any matter
that is in suit: Nor none upon such covenant shall give up his right to
another, and if any do and be attainted thereof, the taker shall forfeit to
the King so much of his lands and goods, as does amount to the value of the
part that he has purchased for such Maintenance: and to obtain that, any
person that will, shall be received to sue for the king, before those Justices
before whom the suit does depend, and the judgment shall be given by them. But
it may not be understood in this case, Pleaders may give counsel for their
fees.
that a man may not have counsel of pleaders and learned men for his fee, nor
of his next friends. And after, to the intent to impose a sharper punishment
upon such as should be offenders in Maintenance, Champerty, or ye like, by a
statute made Ann^ 33. E. 1. it was enacted, St. 33. Ed. 1.
That if any person do take upon him for Maintenance, Champerty, or the like
bargain, any manner of suit or plea against another, The punishment of
champertors.
and is attainted of such assumption, suit, or bargain, or of consent
thereunto, he shall be three years imprisoned, and further punished at the kings
pleasure.

8 And so it appears by the foresaid statutes, that it is Champerty, Fit.
Not. Br. 171. 7. Ed. 3. 9. Fit. champ. 6.
where a man by covenant or agreement made by writing or word, What is
cha^perty, and what not.
does bargain to have parcel of the land, debt, or other thing which is in
suit, if it be recovered to aid and maintain the party to that suit: and in
this case, he that is the other party to that suit, and oppressed or grieved by
this Maintenance, may prosecute a writ of Champerty against the same offender,
9. H. 6. 64.
or a writ of Maintenance at his choice, for every Champerty is Maintenance,
but every Maintenance is not Champerty. And in this case of Champerty, he that
sells his land, or demiseth his land for life or years, or any part thereof,
during the time that the same land is in suit, shall be punished according to
the foresaid statute of 28. Ed. 1. as well as he that purchases the same land.
Fit. champ. 5. 30. Ass. p. 5. 8. Ed. 4. 13.
And the writ of Champerty may be brought against the buyer alone, or against
the seller alone. And it is all one penalty where he sells his land for money
or other consideration, and where he freely does give his land: for if it be
given during the time that the land is in suit, it is Champertie: for the Law
does prohibit every man to obtain land when it is in suit. But if a man
purchase land after judgment, it is no Champertie, for then there is no suit
depending touching that land: and if a man that is learned in the Law, and does
give counsel therein, 13. H. 4. 19.
do take part of the land that was in variance of his client for his fees,
after the same is recorded, this is no Champerty: So that the bargain be made
after the recovery of the land, and not depending the suit. 47. E. 3. 9. 7. E.
4. 15.
And if a man do bring an action against another, and do recover the thing in
question against the defendant, yet the plaintiff may have an action of
Maintenance against every person that shall maintain the defendant in that
suit, though he has lost nothing by that Maintenance, for that the same
Statute of 28. Edw. 1. is a prohibition of Champertie. And if a man do
bargain for land before any suit is commenced for the same, and after a suit
is prosecuted against the tenant of the land for the same, Fit. champ. 15.
if the same tenant do make a feoffement or other assurance to the purchasor,
according to his bargain of the same land, during the time of the same suit,
yet this is no Champertie: For in this case the seller did not assure this land
to the purchasor, upon covenant to have Maintenance, but to perform his former
bargain, and the sale was before the suit, though the performance thereof was
after. And if a man do make a feoffement of land to others to his own use, 8.
E. 4. 13
during the time that a suit is depending for the same land, this is no
Champertie: for the feoffement was not made to have Maintenance in that suit,
but to have the possession of the land to be transferred to others, and yet to
the same use it was before. And a man may give land to his son in
Franke-marriage, 6 E. 3. 33.
or for the term of his life, during the time that a suit is depending against
him of the same land, and it is no Champertie: for that the words of the
statute of Anno 28. Edw. 1. be, But it is not intended, that a man shall not
have counsel of pleaders, and of learned for his fee, nor of his next friends:
and the father is bound to relieve and help his son as much as he may, and
it is no Maintenance nor Champertie in him to assure the land to his son, nor
in the son to take it. 21. Ed. 3. 52.
And in a writ of Champertie it is a good plea for the defendant to plead, That
he purchased the land of him who recovered it for his money, and not for
Champertie to maintain the suit. And if a man do make a lease for the term
of life of land, Fit. champ. 14.
and after the tenant for life is impleaded for the same land, and depending
that plea, the tenant for life does surrender his estate for life to him in
Reuersion, this is no Champertie.

6 Maintenance may also be committed in other sorts then be aforesaid,
Maintenance by Embracery
viz. by Embraceors, St. 33. Ed. 1.
and by Iuries. By the Statute of Anno 33. Edw. 1. an Embraceor is described to
be one that comes to the bar with the party, and speaks in the matter,
and is there to survey the Jury: And he is accounted an Embraceor, Fit. Not.
Br. 171.
who will threaten the Jury, or any of them, if they do not give their
verdict by his direction: and he also, who is a procuror of a Jury to appear,
13. H. 4. 19.
that is commonly called a leader of Enquests. And the punishment of
Maintenance both in Embraceors and Jurors, is assigned by the Statutes of Anno
34. Edw. 3. and Anno 38. Edw. 3. whereby it is ordained, St. 34. E. 3. 8. 38.
Ed. 3. 12.
That if any Iuror sworn in Assizes, Maintenance by Jurors.
or other Enquests, to be taken between the King and the party, or between
party and party, do by himself, or any other, take any thing of the
plaintiff, or defendant, to give his verdict, and thereof is attainted at the
suit of the party, which will sue for himself, or for the king (or of any
other person entering his plaint by Bill immediately before the Justices before
whom the Jury was sworn) the said Iuror shall pay ten times so much as he
has received. And all those which be Embraceors to lead and procure such
Enquests in the Country, The penalty of Maintenance in Jurors and Embraceors.
to make again and profit thereof, shall be punished as the Jurors. And if the
Iuror or Embraceor so attainted have not wherewith to make recompense in form
aforesaid, he shall be one year imprisoned, which imprisonment shall not be
pardoned for any fine: and the party grieved may have his action before other
Justices, if he will. But no Justice or other officer shall inquire of office
upon any of the points of this Statute, but only at the Suite of the party,
or of others, as is aforesaid. See Perjury 18.

Maintenance punished by a Decies tantu^.
7 Upon the foresaid Statutes of 34. Edw. 3. and 38. Edw. 3. is the writ of
Decies tantum grounded. By the which writ the party grieved by any such
Maintenance and taking of money by a Iuror or Embraceor, shall recover against
the offender ten times so much as he has taken, whereof the King shall have
the only half, and the same party who does recover, the other half. 40 E. 3.
33. 41. Ed. 3. 9.
And a man may have one writ of Decies tantum against all the Jurors of an
Enquest, if they all did take money to give their verdict, or against so many
of them as did take money. Fitz. Decies tantum 1.
And so he may have one writ against the Embraceors and the Jurors, and recover
against every of them ten times so much as he received to give his verdict,
or to embrace: as if one of them took ten shillings, another twenty
shillings, a third 5. pounds etc. and the damages shall be taxed against every
of them severally. And therefore when one action is brought against several
Jurors, for taking of money to give their verdict, every of them must plead his
plea severally, 21. H. 6. 20.
and by himself. If a Iuror do take money to give his verdict on the one
part, if after he does give no verdict, or if he with his companions do give
a true verdict, or such a verdict as the party who brings the writ receives
no hurt thereby, or if the plaintiff be nonsute, 37. H. 6. 31.
yet a Decies tantum may be brought against him: For it is not the giving of
the verdict which the Law does respect, and punish, but the taking of the money
to give his verdict, and so to do an unlawful act. But otherwise it is of an
Embraceor, for if he take money to embrace, and yet does not embrace, no action
will lie against him: for he is no Embraceor, if he do not embrace. In a writ
of Decies tantum, if the Jury find, 41. E. 3. 9.
that one of the Jury in the former Issue did take land for forty pounds
less then it was worth, to give his verdict, the same Iuror shall forfeit to
the King and the party ten times so much, viz. four hundred pounds. And so
shall the Embraceor forfeit ten times so much, if he has the land for less
then it is worth, after the Jury has given their verdict by his means or
persuasion. And the one moytie which is due to the King in this case, according
to the foresaid Statute of Anno 38. Edward. 3. 41. Ed. 3.15. Fitz. Decies
tantum 12. 44. Ed. 3. 36.
is a fine to the King for his offense, and not a debt to the King, and
therefore the party grieved shall be first satisfied of his moytie, and after
him the King shall be paid in the receipt of the Exchquer. Men that be learned
in the Law, may for their fees speak to the Jury, 6. E. 4. 5.
and enforce their clients evidence unto them so much as they can openly, upon
the trial of the cause: But they may not otherwise labor to the Jury to give
their verdict, and receive money to that end, for then they be Embraceors. If
he that is the party grieved, who may have against any Iuror a Decies tantum
for taking of money, do release to the same Iuror all actions, this will not
avail the same Iuror, for by the said statute any person that will, being a
stranger, may have a Decies tantum against the same Iuror. But if the King do
release before any suit commenced, it is a good bar against all persons, as
it is in other popular actions: 1. H. 7. 3. 5. E. 4. 2.
and yet if the party has begun his suit, the Kings release will not discharge
it, but for his own part: for that which was before popular, is now become his
private action: and a condemnation or acquitall at his suit is a discharge
against the King and all others.

8 There is another kind of Maintenance by Jurors, Maintenance by Ambidexter.
that the Law does prohibit, which is, when a Iuror does take money or other
thing of the one part and the other, who is commonly called Ambidexter: for the
punishment of whom, Sta. 5. E. 3. 10
by a statute made An. 5. E. 3. it was ordained, That if any Iuror in Assizes,
Iuries, or Enquests, take of the one part, and of the other, and be thereof
duly attainted, he shall not after be put in any Assizes, Iuries, or Enquests,
but shall be sent to prison, and further punished at the Kings pleasure. And
the Justices before whom such Assizes, Iuries, and Enquests shall pass, have
power to inquire and determine, according to this statute. As this greedy
Ambidexter does offend two Laws, so it is provided to impose two several
punishments upon him: upon a writ of Decies tantum brought against him, he
shall be compelled to pay to the King and the party grieved ten times so much
as he has received to give his verdict, according to the statute of 38. E. 3.
And shall be no more put in Enquests, but sent to prison, and punished at the
Kings pleasure, according to the foresaid statute of Anno 5. Ed. 3. But no
person shall be punished according to the said statute of Anno 5. 44. E. 3. 39.
Fit. Dec. tantum 12.
Ed. 3. upon any writ of Decies tantum brought against him, but only upon an
Indictment at the Kings suit. If any Iuror do take money of either of the
parties to a suit after his verdict given, for giving his verdict, without
making covenant therefore before hand, 39. Ass. p. 19
he shall not be punished according to any of the foresaid statutes of Anno 5.
E. 3. 34. Ed. 3. or 38. E. 3. for he is out of the danger of the writ of Decies
tantum, and he shall not be imprisoned by force of the statute of Anno 5 Ed. 3.
for he did not take money contrary to the meaning of that statute: But in that
case he shall pay a fine to the king.

9 As it is Champertie, and therewith Maintenance, to have part of the land or
thing in variance: so it is Maintenance to take part in any quarrel depending
in suit in the Kings court, or to work any fraud whereby justice may be
hindered; Westminster. 1. 3. E. 1. 28.
as it appears by the statute of West. 1. whereby it is ordained, That if any
Clerk of the kings, or of any Justice, The penalty for maintaining of suits.
do receive the presentment of any Church, for the which any plea or debate is
in the K. Court, without the kings special license, he shall loose the Church
and his service. And if any Justices or Shirifes Clerk, take part in any
quarrel depending in the Kings Court, or do work any fraud, whereby common
right may be delayed or disturbed, he shall loose his service, and be further
punished, if the Trespass do require. St. 32. H. 8. 9
And after by a statute made Anno 32. H. 8. there was a greater penalty imposed
upon those who shall be maintainors of suits: By which statute it was ordained,
That no person or persons whatsoever, shall unlawfully maintain, or cause or
procure any unlawful maintenance in any action, suit, demand, or complaint in
any of the Kings Courts of the Chauncerie, Star Chamber, White hall, or
elsewhere, within any of the K. dominions of England, or Wales, or the marches
of the same, where any person or persons have authority, by virtue of the K.
Commission, Patent, or Writ, to hold plea of lands, or to hear, examine, or
determine any title of lands, or any matter of witness, concerning the title,
right, or interest of any lands, tenements, or hereditaments: Or shall
unlawfully retain for maintenance of any suit or plea, Retaining for
maintenance, or embracing, or suborning of Jurors.
any person or persons, or embrace any freeholders or Jurors, or suborne any
witness by letters, rewards, promise, or by any other sinister labor or
means, for to maintain any matter or cause, or to the disturbance or
hinderance of justice, or to the procurement or occasion of any manner of
Perjury, by false verdict, or otherwise, in any of the Courts aforesaid, upon
pain of forfeiture for every such offense x. pounds to the king and Inf. to be
recovered by him that will sue for the same in any of the kings Courts of
Record, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information, wherein no W.E.P. etc.
if the suit be commenced in any of the kings Courts within one year next after
any such offense committed, or else not.

10 As it is Maintenance to have by agreement part of the land in variance, or
part of the gains of the suit in question, so is it Maintenance to buy a
pretenced right or title of another, of, or to lands or tenements, whereof the
seller has no possession, for this often times the cause of Subornation of
witnesses, procurement of Perjury, and of the subversion of justice: For the
redress whereof, by the last specified Statute of Anno 32. H. 8. St. 32. H. 8.
9
it was first enacted, That all Statutes heretofore made concerning
Maintenance, Champertie, and Embracerie, or any of them, then standing in
force, should be put in due execution, according to the effects of the same.
And also by the same statute it was over that ordained, Maintenance by buying
of prete^ced titles
That no person or persons, of what estate, degree, or condition soever he or
they be, shall bargain, buy, or sell, or by any means obtain, get, or have
any pretenced rights or titles, or take promise, grant, or covenant to have
any right or title of any person or persons, in, or to any Manors, Lands,
Tenements, or other Hereditaments: but if such person or persons which shall so
bargain, give, grant, covenant, or promise the same, their ancestors, or
they by whom he or they claim the same, have been in possession of the same,
or of the reuersion or remainder thereof, or taken the rents or profits
thereof, by the space of one whole year next before the said bargain,
covenant, grant, or promise made, upon pain that he that shall make any such
bargain, sale, promise, covenant, or grant, shall forfeit the whole value of
the Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, so bargained, sold, promised,
couenanted, or granted, contrary to the form of this Act. And the buyer or
taker thereof knowing the same, shall also forfeit the said value of the said
Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, so by him bought or taken, as is
aforesaid: the one half of the said forfeitures to be to the king, and the
other half to the party that will sue for the same, in any of the kings Courts
of Record, by Action of Debt, Bill, P. or I. etc. wherein no W. E. P. or I.
etc. if the suit be commenced by A. B. P. or I. in any of the kings Courts,
within one year next after any such offense committed, or else not. Provided
always, The possessor purchases a pretenced title.
That it shall be lawful to any person or persons, being in lawful
possession, by taking of the yearly ferme, rents, or profits of any Manors,
Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, to buy, obtain, get, or have by any
reasonable means the pretended right or title of any other person or persons
to be made to, of, or in any such lands, tenements, or hereditaments, whereof
he shall be so in lawful possession: Any thing in this Act etc. notwithstanding.

22 and 23. El. Dyer 374. 6. Ed. 6. Die. 74. Plow. Com^ 87.
11 If a man take a lease or promise a lease for the term of certain years to
another of land, contrary to the foresaid statute of Ann^ 32. H. 8. What is
selling of a pretenced title.
viz. of those lands, whereof neither he himself, nor any of his ancestors,
nor any by who^ he does claim the same land, have been in possession of the
same, nor of the reuersion, nor remainder thereof, nor taken the rents or
profits thereof by the space of one whole year before the said bargain,
grant, and demise made, he is within the danger of the foresaid statute of
Anno 32. H. 8. as well as if he had made an estate for the term of life, in
tail, or in fee simple of the same la^d: for that the scope and effect of the
statute is utterly to root out of Maintenance, and bargains and promises of
Titles, for the which the words of the statute be, That no person shall sell or
buy any pretenced rights or titles. And a lease is no more lawful for one
year, then for an hundred years: and some man will be as ready to maintain
to have a lease for years, as to have a greater estate. Wherefore he that does
make a lease for years, or make promise of a lease for years of lands,
whereof he has but a pretenced right or title, shall forfeit to the King and
him that will sue, the whole value of the inheritance of the land, as well as
if he had bargained and sold the fee simple thereof. But it is specially to be
respected in that case, that he has but a pretenced right or title at the time
of his Lease made: for if he has a good title in the same land at the time of
the said Lease, then is he not within the danger of the said Statute, though
neither he himself, nor any of his ancestors, nor any by whom he does claim
the same land, have been in possession thereof, nor of the reuersion or
remainder thereof, nor have taken the rents or profits thereof by the space of
one whole year before the said Lease made: For if a man do enter into lands
that be holden of him, for an alienation in Mortmaine: Or if he do recover
lands by a real action, he may sell the same land, or make a Lease of the
same land within a year after the Entry or Recovery, though neither he, nor
his ancestors, nor they by whom he claymeth the same land, have been in
possession thereof, nor taken the Rents or Profits thereof, by the space of
one whole year before. Br. Maint. 38 6. E. 6.
And so it is, if a man do morgage his Land for diverse years, upon condition
of repayment of money at a certain day, or upon any other condition. If after
he do redeem his Land, he may sell it, or Lease it within one year after,
though he has not been in possession thereof, nor taken the Rents or Profits
thereof by the space of many years before: For the meaning of the Statute is
not to restrain the bargaining, buying, or selling of good and clear Rights,
but of pretended Righs and Titles. And this pretenced Right or Title is, What
is a pretenced title.
when one man is in possession of Lands or Tenements, and another man who is
out of possession of them, does claim them, or does sue for them: for he is
not aptly said to have title to land, who is in possession of the same. And
therefore if he that is out of possession of land, does bargain, sell, or make
any Agreement, Covenant, or Promise to depart from the same land, or to make
any assurance thereof, after he shall recover the said Land, he is within the
danger of the said Statute, whether he has a good title to the same land, or
not. And so it is, if one who has a pretenced Right or Title to copyhold
Lands, does bargain and sell it to another, Co. lib. 4. 26
he is within the compass and danger of the foresaid statute of Anno 32. H. 8.
For the words of the statute be, If any do bargain, buy, or sell etc. any
right or title in or to any lands or tenements: So that those words (any right
or title) do extend to all manner of rights or titles, and consequently to
copyhold lands. And seeing a great part of the land of the Realm is granted
by copy; Therefore the meaning of the makers of the said Statute of Anno 32.
H. 8. was to include them, for the avoiding of Suits, Maintenance, and
Champertie, and not to leave all copyhold estates to the mischiefs mentioned
in the preamble of the said Act.

Maintenance by giving of Liueries and retaining.
12 Giving of Liueries, Badges, Signs, and Tokens, and retayning of
unnecessary servants, is an evil budde springing out of the foresaid Branch
of Maintenance, being put in practice by men of great countenance, authority,
and estate, and it has been from age to age accounted a mean to stir up
quarrels, to boulster Suites, to procure Perjury, and to subvert justice. And
therefore the chief Governors of this Realm have endeavored by many Acts of
Parliament to repress or snibbe it: as by the Statute of Anno 1. R. 2. and 7.
Hen. 4. it was ordained, St. 1. R. 2. 7. 7. H. 4. 14.
That if any person shall give any Chaperons, Hats, or such like Liueries to
any man for maintenance of quarrels, or other confederacies, he shall forfeit
an hundred shillings for every such Liuerie: and he which receives such
Liuerie, shall forfeit forty shillings. And by the statute of 8. H. 6. it was
enacted, Sta. 8. H. 6. 4
That if any person of his own authority and proper costs do buy, or wear
for his clothing any Clothes or Hats, called Liueries, of the sort or suit of
any Lord, Lady, Knight, Esquire, or other person, to have supportation,
succor, or maintenance in any quarrel, or in any other matter, and being
thereof lawfully convict, he shall forfeit forty shillings, and be one year
imprisoned. And by the statute of Anno 1. H. 4. it was provided, St. 1. H. 4. 7.
That if any which is a Knight or Esquire, meniall of the Kings, or who is of
his retinue, to whom his Majesty shall give his honorable Liuerie, do wear
his said Livery in the country or County where he is resiant or dwelling, or
in any other place of the Realm out of the Kings presence (saving in going or
coming from the Kings house) and is thereof duly attainted, he shall loose his
Liuerie, and forfeit his fees for ever. And by the statute of Anno 8. Ed. 4. it
was established, Sta. 8. E. 4. 2. Sta. 1. H. 4. 7.
That no person by himself, or any other for him, shall give any Liuerie, or
Badge, or retain any person, other then his meniall Servant, Officer, or
learned man in the one Law or in the other, by any writing, oath, or promise:
And if any do the contrary, he shall forfeit for every such Liuerie or Badge
given an hundred shillings. And he which does retain or take of any other such
oath, writing, or promise, or is retained by Indenture, shall forfeit an
hundred shillings for every month that any person is so retained with him, by
Oath, Writing, Indenture, or Promise. And every person which is retained by
Writing, Indenture, Oath, or Promise, for every month that he is so retained,
shall forfeit an hundred shillings. But this act shall not extend or be
prejudicial to any Gift, Grant, or Confirmation made of any Fee, Annuity,
Pention, Rent, Lands, or Tenements by the King, or any others, to any person or
persons, for their counsel given, or to be given, or for their lawful service
done or to be done (and for no other unlawful cause, or unlawful intent)
although the person to whom such gift, grant, or confirmation is made, be not
learned in the one law or the other: Neither does it extend to any liberty
given at the Kings or Queens coronation, or at the instalment of any
Archbishop, or Bishop, or erection, creation, or marriage of any Lord or Lady of
estate, or at the creation of any Knights of the Bathe, or at the commencement
of any clerk in an University, or at the creation of Serieants of the law, or
given by any Fraternity, Guild, or Mystery corporat, or by the Mayor,
Sheriff, or other chief Officer of any City, Borough, Town, or Port of this
Realm of England for the time being, during that time, for the executing of
their office or occupation: Nor to any Liueries or Badges, given in the defense
of the King and his Realm: Nor to the Constable or Marshal for giving any
Badge, Liuerie, or token, for any feats of arms to be done within this
Realm: Nor of any Wardens of the Marches toward Scotland, for any Badge,
Liuerie, or token by the^ given, from Trent Northward, at such time only as
shall be necessary to levy people for the defense of the Marches. St. 7. H.
4. 14
And by the stat. of anno 7. H. 4. it was ordained, That no congregation or
company shall make any Liuerie of cloth, or of hats, at their own costs, upon
pain that every of the same congregation or company, shall forfeit forty
shillings (except Guilds and Fraternities, and also people of Arts and
Sciences within Cities and Boroughes, which be ordained to a good intent.

13 As the wisdom of the Realm has established from one age to another the
foresaid laws and statutes, Publishing, inquiring of, and punishing of
maintenance
for the repressing or snibbing of Champertie, Embracerie, buying of titles,
and all other sorts of Maintenance: so has she provided trumpets to sound out
and publish those laws into the ears, and sink them into the hearts of all
people: and secondly she has assigned watchmen and sentinels, to see who
infringed those laws: and lastly she has ordained Censors and Judges to
punish the offenders therein; as it appears by the before specified statute
of anno 32. St. 32 H. 8. 9
H. 8. whereby it is enacted, That the Justices of Assise shall in every
County within their circuits, two times in the year, viz. in the time of
their sittings for taking of Assizes, or delivery of the Gaoles, cause open
proclamation to be made as well of the said statute, and every thing therein
contained, as also of all other statutes heretofore made against unlawful
maintenance, champertie, embracerie, or unlawful retayners, to the intent that
no person hearing the same, should be ignorant, or misconisant of the damages
and penalties therein contained. And by the former rehearsed statute of anno 8.
St. 8. Ed. 4. 2
E. 4. it is ordained, That every person which will sue against any other, for
any offense committed contrary to that statute, or any other of the premises
( viz. any other ordinance or statute before that time made against any persons
for giving or receiving of Liueries or Badges) before the Kings Justices in his
Bench, before the Justices of the Common Pleas, Justices of peace in their
Sessions, Justices of Oier and Terminer, and Jail delivery, Justices of the
county Palantine of Lancaster and Chester, and in the Court of Hexamshire, and
in the Court of the Bishop of Durham in the County Palatine of Durham, shall
be admitted thereunto by the discretion of the said Judges, to give information
for the king of any of the premises committed within the jurisdiction of the
same Courts. And every Informer shall be admitted to sue for the King and
himself, action or actions upon the same, by information in any of the said
Courts, against as many such offenders in one Bill of Information as likes
him, which Information shall be in stead of a Bill, or original writ, wherein
such Process shall be awarded, as in an original writ of Trespass (but that
in the Counties Palantine of Lancaster and Chester, nor in Duresme, no Exigent
shall be awarded upon any information, suit, or process, to be made by force of
this ordinance.) And if any be, or any Outlawrie thereupon pronounced, the same
shall be void without any writ of Error. And if any of the offenders be present
in any of the said courts, any of the Justices may command him to be brought
to answer to such bill upon such information (by an oath first to be taken upon
a book by such informer, before some one of the Judges, that his complaint is
true) without any other or further process therein. And every of the same
Judges within his jurisdiction may by his discretion examine every of the
defendants upon such information, and judge him convict as well by examination,
as by trial, and the King shall have the one half of the forfeiture (if it be
not in a city or town corporat, that has the same by the grant of the king,
or etc.) and the informer the other half, which also shall recover his costs
by the Judges discretion, and execution thereof, as in recoueries upon debt or
trespass, wherein no Essoine or Protection shall lie. And the Mayor, Sheriff,
Bailife, or other chief officer of every city, borough, town, or port
within this realm, having power to hear and determine personal pleas in the
court holden before them, or any of them, within any such town, have
authority to receive information of any person which offends in the premises,
and to hear and determine as well by examination as by trial, all things done
concerning the same, by, or to the inhabitants within the jurisdiction of the
same court, and to put this stat. for those offenses provided, in execution.
And the King shall have the one moitie of all penalties forfeited by the said
stat. and the Informer and chief officers of such city, borough, etc. shall
have the other moitie, equally to be divided betwixt them. And the said chief
officers part shall be employed to the use the said city, borough, town, or
port, etc. And sithence the foresaid laws and statutes, by one other stat.
ordained an. 33. Just. of peace may inquire of and punish maintenance.
H. 8. and confirmed an. 37. H. 8. it was enacted, St. 33. H. 8. 10. 37. H. 8.
7.
That Just. of peace at their Quarter Sessions, shall have authority to inquire
as well by the oaths of xij. men, as by information given to them, by any person
or persons, of defaults, contempts, and offenses committed against the laws
and statutes made and provided concerning, or in any wise touching retainers,
giving of liueries, signs, tokens, or badges, maintenance, embracerie, etc. and
every of them, and to hear and determine the said defaults, offenses, etc. And
upon any information touching the penalties, or any of them, to make process by
Venire fac', one Capias and an Exige^t under their seals, against every such
person and persons against whom such information or presentment shall be had, for
their appearance before them in their Sessions, to answer to such information or
presentment as shall be there made. And if the person or persons so accused by
information or presentment shall be convicted upon such information or etc. by
confession, or verdit of xx. men, then the said Just. have power to give
judgment, against every such offender so convicted, of imprisonment,
forfeiture of money, or both of them, as are limited by the said several
statutes for such offenses whereof they are convict, and to cause execution
thereof to be made accordingly.

Why the pursuing of maintenance is left out of the stat. of 18. El.
14 Maintenance, Champertie, buying of titles, and Embracery, have bin accounted
so offensive and professed enemies to the justice and peace of the realm, that
though by the stat. of an. 18. El. it is ordained, Stat. 18. El. 5
That every informer upon any other penal stat. shall exhibit his suit in
proper person, and pursue the same only by himself, or by his Attorney in
court: and that none shall be admitted to pursue against any person upon any
penal stat. but by way of information or original writ, and not otherwise,
nor shall have any deputy at all. And that upon every such information which
shall be exhibited, a special note shall be made of the very day, month, and
year of the exhibiting thereof into any office, or to any officer which lawfully
may receive the same, without any manner of antedate to be made thereof: And
that upon every such process shall be indorced as well the parties name that
pursues the same process, as also the stat. upon which the information in that
behalf made, is grounded, and that no Informer or plaintiff shall compound or
agree with any person that shall offend, or shall be surmised to offend against
any penal statute, for such offense, but after answer made in court unto the
information or suit in that behalf exhibited or prosecuted: nor after answer,
but by the order or consent of the court, in which the same information or suit
shall be depending: Yet in the said stat. of 18. El. there is a prouiso, That it
shall be lawful for any person or persons grieved by means of any maintenance,
cha^pertie, buying of titles, or other embracery, to pursue upon any stat.
provided against maintenance, champerty, buying of titles, or embracery, as he
or they might have done before the making of the said act. Which prouiso was
made to the end that all persons grieved by reasons of any maintenance,
champertie, buying of titles, or embracery, should be left at liberty to
pursue and chasten the offenders therein, by all such means as former laws have
authorized the^, and not be restrained by any of the ordinances or articles
before rehearsed, for that the said offenses were by the makers of the said
stat. adjudged to be greater impedime^ts and obstacles to the execution of
justice, than other penal stat. were.

15 As the policy of the realm has devised the foresaid popular actions and
suits to enable every person yt will, Assurances to have mainte void.
in diverse cases to pursue and prosecute maintainors, champertors, buyers of
pretenced rights, etc. to the intent the sooner to root out and extirpat those
offenders who endeavor to wrest the execution of laws out of their due course,
to subvert justice, and thereby to hinder the peace of the realm: so has it
in some cases gone further, and ordained, that some assurances made for
maintenance, shall be presently void: as it appears by the stat. of an. 8. St.
8. H. 6. 9
H. 6. whereby it was enacted, Lands gotten by force assured to have maintenance.
That if any person after his entry into lands or tenements, holden with force,
do make a feoffement or other discontinuance to any Lord, or other person, to
have maintenance, or to toll and defraud the possessor of his recovery in any
wise: If alter in an Assise, or other action thereof to be taken or pursued
before the Just. of Assise, or other the kings Justices whatsoever they be, by
due inquiry thereof to be taken, the same feoffements and discontinuances may be
duly proved to be made for maintenance, as is aforesaid, that then such
feoffements or other discontinuances, so as before made shall be void, St. 4.
H. 4. 8.
and holde^ for none. And by the stat. made an. 4. H. 4. it was established,
That if any man, great or small, of what estate or condition they be, Lands
forcibly gotten by maintenance.
make any forcible entry in his own right, or to his own use, or in another
right, to his use, by the way of maintenance, and thereof is attained at the
suit of the party grieved, he shall be one year imprisoned, and pay to the party
grieved his double damages: And also he shall answer to the party grieved
damages for his goods and cattels, if upon the said forcible disseisin he took
away any.

16 As by the before mentioned stat. maintenance, champerty, What maintenance
is punishable, and what justifiable.
embracerie, and buying of titles, be in general terms deciphered, together
with their several penalties, so have the learned Judges and Sages of the law
expounded the particular branches of every of those stat. as they grew in
question, and were prosecuted in suit before them, and also resolved what
maintenance is punishable, and what justifiable, who may pursue an action,
writ, bill, or information etc. of maintenance, champerty, etc. against whom
the same is to be brought, for what offense or cause the same is maintenable,
what pleas are to be pleaded to ye writ, or in bar of the said actions, writs,
informations, etc. and what judgment shall ensue thereupon. As every
champertie is an unlawful maintenance, prohibited by the foresaid stat. of.
West. 1. and West. 2. 9. H. 6. 64. St. 28. E. 1. 11.
and punishable according to the before rehearsed stat. of An. 28. E. 1. and
every cha^pertie is a maintenance, and the party grieved may have as well a
writ of Maintenance as of Champertie, for by that means the champertor having
bargained to have part of the land or thing in question, does ofttimes move and
further the suit, suborneth witnesses, corrupts the Jury, and so subuerteth
justice: but there must be a suit depending before it can be adjudged
maintenance in any sort: for if one man will give money to another to begin
and prosecute a suit against a third person, 3. H. 6. 55. 8. H. 5. 8. 10. Ed.
4. 19. 30. Ed. 3. 3.
this is no maintenance, for that this money was given when there was no suit
depending: and if there be a writ brought and never returned, it is no
maintenance.

No maintenance in a Iuror for giving his verdict.
17 If there be a suit depending between two, and they do join an issue, 18.
E. 4. 2. 28. H. 6. 6.
which is tried by xij. men, and found for the plaintiff: in this case the
defendant cannot have an action of maintenance against the said Jurors, or any
of them, for this verdit given, for that they gave their verdit according to
their evidence, and their knowledge of the truth of the matter: and besides
they did not thrust themselves into that cause, but were compelled to appear
by an ordinary course of law, being impanelled and returned by the Sheriff, or
some other lawful officer: Maintenance by a Iuror suing for judgment.
but if after the verdit given any of the Jury will solicit or labor to ye
Judge or Judges of the court where the said suit is depending, to give
judgment for the plaintiff, then the def. may have an action of Maintenance
against him, for that the same judgment is a thing wholly belonging to ye
office of a Judge, and not of a Iuror, and therefore he does therein intermeddle
with another man's office and another man's cause, more than he has to do or may
justify, and so has committed unlawful maintenance.

Maintenance in a Iuror.
18 If a Jury be charged to inquire of a matter in issue, 17. E. 4. 5. 18. Ed.
4. 4.
one Iuror may persuade his companions, or any of them, to pass for ye
plaintiff or def. as he conceiueth the truth of the cause to be, or as their
evidence does induce them, and this is no maintenance: but if one of the Jurors
will give or promise money to another of his fellows, to give his verdit for
the pl. or def. this is unlawful maintenance, though he does wage him to give
his verdit according to truth, and right of the cause in issue.

Maintenance by speaking of words.
19 If a man of great authority in a country will in the presence of a Jury,
22. H. 6. 5. 13. H. 4. 19.
and the standers by at the trial of an issue say openly, that he will spend
money in the cause in question, in the behalf of the pl. or the def. or that
he will give money to labor the Jury, or will speak other great or high
words, in favor of one of the parties, this is unlawful maintenance in him,
though he do spend no money in that cause, nor does labor the Jury therein: for
it may be, that when the Jury do by his words know his meaning, they dare not
in respect of his authority or greatness in that cou^tie, give their verdit
otherwise tha^ he would have them. None shall sit with the Just. of Assise on
the bench.
And for the prevention of that kind of maintenance, by a stat. made An. 20. R.
2. it was ordained, That no Lord, or other of the country, great or small, St.
20. R. 2. 13.
shall sit upon the bench with the Just. of Assise in their Sessions, in any of
the Shires of England, upon pain of a great forfeiture to the King: neither
the Justices shall suffer the contrary to be done. Maintenance in coming to
the bar with one of the parties.
And in like sort if a man of great authority in the County where an Issue is
to be tried, having nothing to do in that cause, does come to the bar with
the plaintiff, or defendant, 22. H. 6. 6.
that is one of the parties to an Issue that is then to be tried, and stands
by him, this is an unlawful maintenance in him, though he neither does, nor
yet speaks any thing in the matter: for his presence and company with the
one party, does show to the Jury his particular affection to the same party,
and does ofttimes induce them to favor, as much as labor and persuasion by
words could do. And though the Jury do not respect him, but give their
verdict for the other party to that suit, according to their evidence and the
truth of the cause in question, yet he has done what in him lies to the
contrary.

21. H. 6. 15. 22. H. 6. 5. 28. H. 6. 7. Dyer fo. 95.
20 And so it is if two be in suit, and do join in issue, Maintenance by giving
of money to labor a Jury.
and the Master of one of the parties to that issue, or any other will deliver
money of his own to a stranger, to labor the Jury impanelled to try that
issue, to give their verdit for his said servant or friend: this is maintenance
unlawful in the Master or other, though the party to whom the money was
given, did never deliver it to the Jury, nor did not labor unto them in such
sort as he was directed, or though the Jury did give their verdict against
his said servant: for when the Master had delivered the money to the stranger,
and told him to what purpose he should use it, he had done as much as he could
do in that suit, to hinder the course of justice, though his direction took no
success according to his desire. And also it is unlawful maintenance, if one
give money to a man that is impanelled of a Jury to give his verdict on the
one side, though that party impanelled does not appear, or do appear, and is
drawn out by challenge or otherwise. 22. H. 6. 6.
And it is maintenance unlawful, if one do threaten to kill or beat a Iuror,
if he do not give his verdict for the one part to that issue, which he does
name, though the same Iuror do otherwise.

28. H. 6. 6.
21 If a Jury do come to a man's house, What is maintenance in a witness, and
what not.
and desire him to inform them of the truth of a matter whereof they do doubt,
and he does inform them thereof, this is justifiable: But if one do come to a
Jury, or of himself do labor to inform them of the truth of a cause in
question, this is maintenance unlawful, and therefore punishable. And so it
is, if the Court be informed by the plaintiff or defendant when an issue is to
be tried, that there is a man at the bar, or in that place, who does know the
truth of the matter in issue, and does desire that the same man may be examined
by the Court to testify the truth of that cause in question to the Jury, and
the Court, does cause him to be called to testify his knowledge therein, and
he at the commandment of the Court delivers that which he does know in that
matter, this is maintenance justifiable: But if the same party will come to
the bar of his own head, and testify for the plaintiff, or the defendant,
this is unlawful maintenance, and he may be punished therefore.

22. H. 6. 6.
22 If one man do labor to indict another, by force whereof he is indicted:
Maintenance by procuring of an indictment.
in this case he that is indicted may have a writ of Maintenance against the
procurer of that indictment, and yet this is no quarrel, but it is a taking of
a part, St. 1. E. 3. 14.
and so prohibited by the stat. of anno 1. E. 3. and it is in the nature of an
action between the King and the party indicted: and the foresaid statute is
general, that it shall not be lawful to any person great or small, to maintain
quarrels, or to take parts, to the let or disturbance of the Common law.

What is maintenance in a mainpernor.
23 If a man be arrested, indicted, or sued, 34. H. 6. 25. 14. H. 6. 6. 18. E.
4. 12.
so that he is compelled to become bound with mainpernors for his appearance,
the mainpernor may come into the Court and see the appearance of the same party
recorded, and justify the same in a writ of Maintenance brought against him:
but he cannot retain or entreat a man learned in the law to be of counsel
with the principal party, nor meddle further in that cause, than to see the
mainprise performed, and himself discharged.

Maintenance in respect of his interest in the land.
24 Every person that has any interest in land, may meddle and maintain him
who is impleaded for the same land, and not be punished therefore in a writ of
Maintenance: As if tenant for term of life, or in tail of land, be impleaded
for the same land, or any part thereof, Bro. Maint. 53.
he in the reuersion or remainder thereof, may at his own charges maintain
him in that suit, for the safeguard of his own estate; for it is in a sort his
own case, and the defense of it is to his own benefit, and the euiction to
his own disheritance. But this maintenance must be after tenant for term of
life has atturned unto him in the reuersion: for i^ he maintain the suit
before, it is punishable in him. 9. H. 6. 64.
And so it is, if a man being seized of land, has issue a daughter, who is
married to another, if the father in law be impleaded of that land in a real
action, the son in law may maintain him at his own charges; for that by
possibility that land may after the decease of his father in law descend to
his wife, and so come to him in her right. But if the daughter dye without
issue of her body begotten by the said husband, before the said suit
commenced, 14. H. 7. 2. 6. E. 4. 5. 19. E. 4. 3.
then the son in law cannot maintain the father in law in that suit: Neither
can he maintain him during the life of his wife, if an action of Debt,
covenant, account, or any other personal action be brought against him: for he
is neither to take benefit or loss by any of those suits. 6. E. 4. 2. 39. H.
6. 20.
And if a man seized of land make a lease for certain years of the same, and
after a suit is commenced between the said lessee for years, and a stranger,
touching the same land, or any part thereof, the lessor may give evidence for
the lessee, upon the trial of the cause in question, or otherwise may
maintain him in that suit, at his own charges, for it tends to his own
private benefit or loss. And in some case a man may maintain a suit lawfully,
though he be neither heir to the land, nor in possession, reuersion,
Maintenance in respect of his possibility.
or remainder thereof: As if a man being seized of land, 9. H. 6. 64.
do make a lease thereof to another, for the term of the life of the lessee,
and after does grant to a stranger, that if the said tenant for term of life
do dye during the same lessors life, that then the same stranger shall have
and enjoy the same land for the term of xx. years after the death of the same
tenant for life; if in this case the tenant for life be impleaded for this
land, the same stranger may maintain him for the saving of his own estate for
years, and yet he has no certainty, but a possibility of a term for
years, which peradventure will never chance. And likewise in some other case a
man may maintain a suit lawfully, though he be neither in possession,
reuersion, remainder, or possibility of the thing in question: Maintenance in
respect of his warranty
As if a man be seized of a rent going out of another persons land, 11. H. 6.
49.
to him and to his heirs, and by his deed does grant the same to another and
to his heirs, with clause of warrantie, and the tenant of the land out of the
which this rent is issuing, does atturne to the grauntee of this rent, if after
the grauntee be impleaded of this rent, upon trial of the issue the grantor
may come into the Court, and show to the Jurors such evidence as he has to
prove the title of this rent; and it is lawful maintenance, and not
punishable in him, though he was neither called into the Court by voucher to
warrantie, or by Warrantia Chartae. And so might he have done, if he had been
called to warrantie by any of the means aforesaid, upon a warrantie made of
land or rent: for it is to preserve himself out of danger, and from
recompencing in value of that whereof before he had made warrantie.

25 As it is in lands and leases, so is it in rents, goods, and debts,
Maintenance in respect of his rent.
for every person that has interest in them may meddle, and maintain and
defend him who is impleaded or prosecuted by suit, or does implead or prosecute
by suit any other, for any matter or cause concerning him, or whereupon he
does depend, so that the same suit does tend to impeach, prejudice, or trouble
his estate therein, or may redound to his benefit or profit, or may be a mean
thereof: 9. H. 6. 64.
As if a man have a rent charge in fee out of certain lands, and another man
has in custody a box of writings concerning the same rent, and after he
that has the rent does grant it to a stranger and his heirs, to the which
grant the tenant of the land charged does atturne; and moreover, the grantor
of that rent charge, does grant to the assignee of the same, that if he can
recover the same box of writings, that then the same assignee shall have them:
If after this grant the grauntor does pursue a writ of Detinue against him
that has the custody of this box of writings, he to whom the same re^t
charge was granted, may lawfully maintain him in that suit, for that by
promise he is to have the same box of writings, if it be recovered, for the
preservation of his estate in the said rent charge. 11. H. 6. 47.
And a Lord may maintain his tenant if he be impleaded for his freehold, A
Lord may maintain his tenant.
in respect of his rent and services that he is to receive and have of him. And
so it was before the Statute of Uses, made anno 27. H. 8. if a man had made a
feoffement of land to others, to his own use, the feoffor might maintain the
freehold tenant which held of his feoffees, in respect of the use which he has
in the rent and service of that tenant.

15. H. 7. 2.
26 And the same law is touching debt: As if A. do owe unto B. xx. l. and C. do
owe to A. xx. l. due by Obligation, Maintenance in respect of debt.
and A. will deliver unto B. the same Obligation, in satisfaction of the xx. l.
which he does owe him: In this case B. may sue an Action of Debt upon this
Obligation against C. in the name of A. and retain an Attorney and learned
counsel, and pursue and maintain the suit, and so may A. for either of them
has interest in this debt: and one of them may aid, assist, and maintain the
other, to recover his debt against C. in respect of their several interests in
the same debt. But if in this case A. had promised to B. but part of this debt,
to have prosecuted and maintained this suit, then it had been Champertie, and
unlawful maintenance in B. And the same law is, 34. H. 6. 30.
if one man be bound by Obligation to pay another man xx. l. to the use of a
third man: the Obligee, and he to whose use the Obligation was made, may both
meddle in the suit of this Obligation.

27 And so it is in goods: for he that has any property, title, Maintenance
in respect of his title to goods.
or lawful possession in goods, 39. H. 6. 20.
may maintain a suit that is prosecuted against another touching the same
goods: As B. brought an action of Debt against A. in London, and the Sheriff
returned that A. had nothing etc. Whereupon at the plaintifes surmise, certain
goods of A. were attached in the hands of I. according to the custom of the
said City, and a Scire facias was awarded against the same I. to answer for
those goods, in which A. did maintain the same I. in nominating unto him a
learned man in the law, to whom by his advice he went for his counsel, and
this was awarded maintenance justifiable, for that the property of the goods
fo attached in the hands of I. were, and did continue in the said A.
Maintenance in detaing of a writing delivered in trust.
So it is if one man do deliver a deed or other writing to another to be kept,
if a stranger will bring an action of Detinue against him to whom the same was
delivered, the party who delivered that writing, may lawfully maintain him in
that suit, for the interest he has in the same writing. And yet the recovery
of that writing would not have bound him that did deliver it, but he might
have had his action for the same against him that did recover it.

Maintenance in respect of his joint interest with others.
28 As every person may lawfully maintain any suit that shall be prosecuted,
which concerns his private and particular land, lease, rent, debt, or goods,
so may he maintain a suit touching any land, or other thing, which he has
jointly or in common with others: 18. E. 4. 2.
As the Parson of a Church brought an action of Trespass against one of his
Parishioners, for digging of his ground, and spoiling of his grass: Whereunto
the defendant pleaded, That the place where the Trespass was supposed to be
done, is a Churchyard, consecrate by the Bishop, and that he, and all those who
are inhabitants in the same Parish, have used to have their Sacraments and
burial for their dead there: And that one of the inhabitants of the same
Parish dyed, and he with others brought his body to the Church, and after
made a grave for him in the same Churchyard, and there buried him, which is the
same digging whereof the plaintiff has conceived his action: Whereupon they
were at issue: In this case it was agreed by all the Justices, that every
inhabitant of the same Parish may lawfully give evidence, and otherwise
maintain this issue, though they be not parties thereunto: for every of them
has the like interest in the Churchyard, Maintenance by all the inhabitants of
a parish.
as the party to that suit. And the same reason and law seems to be, if
there be a suit commenced between one or more inhabitants of a village,
Hamlet, or Parish, and some other person or persons, for a common or way, or
for the digging of a pit of stone, marle, gravel, mortar, sand etc. used, or
claimed to belong, or of right to be due to the inhabitants of the same
Village, Hamlet, or Parish; after issue joined touching the right or title of
the same common, way, or pit, the residue of the inhabitants of the said
Village, Hamlet, or Parish, may aid, and assist their neighbor or neighbors
party to that issue, and it is lawful maintenance, for it tends to the
benefit or prejudice of all the said inhabitants, and is in a sort their own
case.

Maintenance of a poor man in his suit.
29 In a Writ of Maintenance the plaintiff supposed that the defendant did
maintain one A. in an action which the plaintiff brought against the said A.
Whereunto the defendant pleaded, That the same A. was a poor man, 32. H. 6.
35. 21. H. 6. 15.
and had nothing to defend himself in the suit which the plaintiff had
commenced against him, and that the defendant of his alms gave him xx. s.
which is the same maintenance. This was allowed a lawful maintenance, and
justifiable for any man to do: for whereas unlawful maintenance is in case
when a man does maintain a suit, to have the whole or parcel of the land, 9.
H. 6. 64.
or thing in question, or to have some other consideration to further or uphold
that suit, or where a man having nothing to do, nor color to meddle, yet will
undertake for evil will to maintain that cause in question; this giving money
to a poor man to defend his right, is not to either of the intents aforesaid,
but bestowed upon a charitable disposition, to search out truth, and further
the execution of justice: which appears by the stat. of 11. H. 7. wherein the
king and the whole parliament willing indifferent justice to be ministered,
according to the common laws, as well to the poor as to the rich, and
perceiving that the poor were not of ability to sue according to the law of
the realm, for the redress of their injuries and wrongs, ordained, that the
king himself, the L. Chancellor, and some of each profession toward the law,
should in a sort aid and assist them: the words of which stat. be these, St.
11. H. 7. 12
viz Every poor person which shall have cause of action against any other,
shall have by the discretion of the Chancellor, Process, counselors, and
Atturneyes assigned to aid the poor.
writs original, and writs of Subpena, according to the nature of his cause,
nothing paying to the K. for the seals of the same, nor to any person for ye
writing of ye same writs. And the said Chancellor shall assign such of the
clerks, which shall use the making and writing of the writs, to write the same
ready to be sealed, and also learned Counsel and Atturneyes for the same,
without taking any reward therefore. And after the said writs be returned, if
it be before the King in his Bench, the Justices there shall assign to the
same poor person counsel learned by their discretions, which shall give their
counsel, nothing taking for the same. And likewise the Justices shall appoint
Atturneyes for the same poor person, and all other officers requisite to be had
for the speed of the said suits, which shall do their duties, without any
rewards for their counsels, help, and business in the same. And the same law
and order shall be observed in all such suits to be made before the K. Justices
of his Common pleas, and Barons of his Exchequer, and all other Just. in Courts
of Record, where any such suits shall be.

30 As Maintenance in the cases aforesaid is lawful and justifiable,
Maintenance in respect of kindred or alliance.
in respect of the parties private profit or interest in the thing in question,
or when it is done without malice or hope of profit, upon a charitable
disposition, so is it in diverse cases allowable, in regard of the link or bond
of nature, whereby one person is by love or duty tied to another; 34. H. 6.
26. 6. Ed. 3. 33.
as the father may maintain his son and heir, and give money of his own in
defense of him, or his title, or suit, for he is bound to find him: but so he
may not do for another kinsman. And the son may maintain the father and
mother, and one brother another, and one near kinsman another, 21. H. 6. 16.
14. H. 7. 2. 20. H. 6. 1. 19. Ed. 4. 3. 21. H. 6. 16.
and one ally another, in some cases, and in some sort: as if a man be
impleaded, another that is his brother, or kinsma^, or of his alliance, may go
to the bar with him, and stand by him, and comfort him: or he may ride to his
counsel with him, or he may request a man that is learned in the law, to be
of counsel with him in that cause: 9. Ed. 4. 32.
but he must not retain that learned man, nor give him any money of his own to
be of counsel, neither must he give or promise money to the Jurors, or any of
them, to give their verdict for him, for then it is unlawful maintenance in
him: and so it is in a stranger, who has nothing to do in that cause; if he
do go to the bar with him that is impleaded, or do stand by him of purpose,
for to countenance the cause in question, or do request a learned man in the
law to be of counsel with him, or do give money to any of the Jurors for
their verdict, this is unlawful Maintenance in him. And in the cases
aforesaid, and all other cases of Maintenance, Unlawful maintenance is
continual.
this unlawful Maintenance is a continual Maintenance during that suit,
unless the party grieved do in the mean time release the same. But if the
same Maintenance be in respect of alliance, and that he who is supposed to
be the maintainor, has married the daughter, sister, niece, or other kinswoman
of one of the parties to the first suit wherein the maintenance was supposed
be, he must plead, 6. Ed. 4.
that his wife was living at the time of the maintenance supposed to be: for if
she were then dead, the alliance between them is dissolved, and then he had no
cause to maintain that suit, but shall be punished as a stranger. And yet in
that case, 14. H. 7. 2.
if the same woman has any issue of her body begotten, who may inherit the
land of him whose suit that husband of the deceased woman, and the father of
that issue did maintain, then is the maintenance lawful in any action brought
against the same party, in respect of the kindred, and also of the benefit
that may come to his own issue. And in a writ of maintenance it is a good plea
for the defendant to plead, Maintenance in respect of gossiprie.
that he was gossip to him whose cause he was supposed to maintain, 6. Ed. 4.
5.
for that gossiprie is in law adjudged a kind of affinity.

Maintenance in respect the party could not speak English.
31 A. brought a writ of Maintenance against B. and supposed, 34. H. 6. 26. 15.
H. 7. 2.
that the same B. did maintain L. in an action which he brought against the
said L. on the part of the said L. Whereunto the said B. pleaded, that the same
L. was a Dutchman, borne out of the Kings obedience, and could not speak the
English or Latin tongue, and therefore being acquainted with B. the defendant,
who could speak the Dutch tongue, he desired him to bring him to some man
learned in the law, to be of his counsel in that suit, and to inform that
learned man of the truth of his cause in question: whereupon he brought him to
one M. a man learned in the law, and opened the truth of his case unto the said
M. as he received it from the said L. in Dutch, which is the same maintenance.
And this was adjudged a good plea in bar, and a lawful maintenance: for it
is a deed of charity to aid and help him who could not help himself. And
the Dutchman had no means to help himself, being a stranger borne, and not
understanding the English nor Latin tongue, but by the assistance and
information of some English man.

Maintenance in a professor of the Law.
32 If a Serieant at law, an Apprentice, or other Councellor, 6. Ed. 4. 5.
being retained for his fee, do give unto his Client the best counsel that he
can for the recovery or defense of the suit which he undertakes, according to
the ordinary course of the law: or does enforce the evidence at the bar so
much as he can, at the trial of his clients cause, this is lawful
maintenance, and justifiable: But if he do pay or promise money to any of the
Jury, to give his verdict for his client, or do threaten any of them to be
killed, beaten, 22. H. 6. 6.
or otherwise evil entreated, if they do give their verdit against his client:
or if he do spend, 11. H. 6. 13.
or do offer to spend his own money in defense of his clients cause, this is
unlawful mainnance, and punishable according to the before rehearsed stat. of
ann. 1. R. 2. for those things he does not as a lawyer, or according to the
course of the law, nor by the warrant of law, but by injustice, and upon his
own corruption and wrong. But in the first specified case, if a man that is
not learned in the law, 22. H. 6. 5
having himself no interest in the cause in question, will declare to the
Jury, or to the party, or to his counsel, the cause in question, and the
circumstances thereof, as a man learned in the law, this is unlawful
Maintenance in him, though he do it as well as a man learned in the law: for
he does it upon Maintenance, where the learned man does it for his fee. And
so it is, if a man that has land in suit or question, will bring and show his
evidences and writings to a Nobleman, Fitz. Maint. 21.
Gentleman, or other man of countenance, that is not learned in the law, and
request his opinion of them, whether they will serve to defend his title in the
cause in suit, and the party does affirm them to be good and sufficient in
law, to justify and maintain his cause, this is unlawful maintenance in that
person who gives this counsel, for by this means the party may be
encouraged to prosecute or defend a suit which the law will not warrant him to
effect. Co. li. 1. 177
And if L. being a man that is not learned in the law, will publish that B.
has good right and title to the Manor of D. whereas in truth B. has no good
right and title thereunto, but C. has the only right and title to the same:
in this case because L. has taken upon him the knowledge of the law, and
intermedled in a matter wherein he has nothing to do, C. may have an action
upon the case against the said L. for slandering of his title, and shall
recover his damages against him, and his ignorance of the law will not excuse
him.

33 In an Action of Maintenance the plaintiff declared, Maintenance by an
Attorney.
That the defendant maintained one B. in the court of L. in an action of
Covenant, 36. H. 6. 37.
which the plaintiff brought against the said B. in the same court. Whereunto
the defendant pleaded, That he was retained to be the Attorney of the same B.
in the said suit which the plaintiff did prosecute against him, by force whereof
he came to a man learned in the law, by the commandment of the said B. his
client, and desired him to be of counsel with the said B. and gave him his fee
of the money of the said B. the which is the same maintenance. And this was
adjudged maintenance justifiable: for when an expert and learned man is
Attorney for another, he is to do all lawful things which he can touching that
suit, for the benefit of his client, with the priuitie or direction of his
client, as in retaining of learned counsel, suing forth of original or
judicial process, procuring a Jury to be impanelled, Kel. fol. 50: 13. H. 4.
19.
and returned by the Sheriff, by obtaining a Supersedeas for his client, when
cause does require it, and he may give evidence to the Jury upon the trial of
his clients cause: and also he may request any of the Jurors impanelled for the
trial of the said cause, to appear, for the speedy end of the said suit. 34.
H. 6. 26.
But neither the same Attorney who is retained for that only cause, nor a
general Attorney that is constituted by any person in all his causes,
according to the stat. of West. 2. St. 13. E. 1. 10.
may do any unlawful thing in his clients behalf, as to give or promise
money, or other reward, of his own, or his clients, to a Iuror, 11. H. 6. 10.
to give his verdict for his client, or to threaten him if he do otherwise,
or to defend or offer to defend his clients cause at his own charges: or to
procure the Sheriff to return a Jury at his denomination for the trial of his
clients cause: for in all these cases last specified, the maintenance is
unlawful and punishable; for he cannot do them as an Attorney, but as a
stranger, a maintainor, and of his own wrong. And if a man do maintain a
suit by an Attorney, 22. H. 6. 24.
an action of Maintenance does lie against the Master. Maintenance in a Sheriff
or his bailifes
And if the Sheriff of any County, his Vndersherife, or any Bailife, do any of
the things aforesaid, 13. H. 4. 19.
in any suit prosecuted between party and party, other than impanell a Jury,
and summon them to appear at a day and time prefixed by the kings writ, it is
unlawful maintenance in him.

22. H. 6. 35.
34 In an action of Maintenance the defendant pleaded, Maintenance in respect of
neighborhood.
That he who^ it is supposed that he maintained, is his neighbor, and that he
came unto him, and told him that the plaintiff had procured a Capias to arrest
him, and therefore prayed the defendant to give him counsel, what he were best
to do, and he this defendant advised his said neighbor, to go to London,
and to yield his body to the Justices, and to procure a Supersedeas, which is
the same maintenance whereupon the action is brought. And this was adjudged no
unlawful maintenance, but a neighbourly and friendly counsel, which every
person may give to another. For if a husbandman, or any other do come to his
neighbor, and tell him that a stranger does owe him money, or does detain his
goods from him, and request his counsel, that neighbor may advise him to
bring an action of Debt or Detinue against the same stranger: 12. Ed. 4. 14.
19. Ed. 4. 3.
Or if one neighbor shall tell another, that he has a cause to put in suit,
and desire that he will instruct him what learned man in the law he does know
to whom he may repair for counsel, his neighbor may inform him of such one
as he takes to be learned, and also may go with him to that learned man,
and be present when he does retain him of his counsel, and open his case
unto him, and also, he being a mean man and of small countenance or
authority in the country, may go to the bar, and stand by him at the
trial of his cause in question: but if that neighbor shall give any money to
the counselor, to be retained with his neighbor, or shall give any money or
other reward to the Sheriff, or Vndersherife, or to any Bailife, to arrest the
other party in his neighbors behalf, or to answer his suit, then is it
unlawful maintenance in him, and he is by action of Maintenance to be
punished therefore.

Where the master may maintain his servant.
35 In an action of Maintenance brought by A. against B. the plaintiff declared,
31. H. 6. 8.
that where he brought another action before against C. the said defendant did
maintain the same C. in the same first action: whereunto B. the defendant
pleaded, That the same C. is his servant, retained in his service for one whole
year, and therefore he retained one M. an Apprentice of the law, to be of
counsel with the said C. his servant, and paid the said M. his fee, with part
of the wages due to the said C. which was the same maintenance: and this was
adjudged a good plea in bar, and lawful maintenance; 22. H. 6. 35. 9. H. 6.
64. 28. H. 6. 12. 19. Ed. 4. 3. 19. H. 6. 30.
for it is lawful for the Master to request a man that is learned in the law
to be of counsel with his servant in his suit, and to pay the same counselor
his fee, with part of the wages of his said servant, and to go with his
servant to the bar at the trial of his cause in question, which the law does
allow him to do, in respect the sooner to deliver his servant from suit and
trouble, that he may not loose the benefit of his service, for the longer he
does lack his man's service, the greater is the Masters loss. And if the
servant be arrested in any privileged place, the Master may maintain him, and
spend his own money to deliver him, in respect that otherwise he should loose
his service: for by that means he does maintain him in his own behalf, and
to avoid his own hinderance. But if the servant be impleaded in a real
action, wherein he may appear, and answer by Attorney, and that his own
presence is not requisite, 21. H. 7. 40.
then the master may not maintain him therein, for that the Master shall
receive no prejudice if the land in question shall be recovered from his
servant. And in like sort the servant may maintain the Master, How the servant
may maintain his Master.
in any suit commenced by or against his said Master in all lawful manner: As,
he may travail in furtherance of his Masters suit, 19. H. 6. 31. 19. Ed. 4. 3.
he may retain his counsel with his Masters money, and show his counsel, or
the Jury, upon the trial of his Masters cause in question, his Masters
evidence: for he is bound to do his Master his diligent service, and that
which his Master commands him to do touching his suit, is his Masters
service. But that servant which may justify to maintain his Master in such
sort as is aforesaid, must be a servant who is retained with his Master for a
year, 39. H. 6. 5.
or some long time, and to do all such services as he shall be employed in by his
said Master: for if he be a servant only hired for a day, two, or three, or to
ride but some one journey, or to do but some one special service, then if he
do maintain his Master, or his Master maintain him in any sort, as aforesaid,
it is unlawful maintenance in him. But if in either of the cases aforesaid,
the Master for his servant, or the servant for his Master, shall give or
promise money, or other reward, to any of the Jury, to give his verdict, or do
threaten any of them to be killed, beaten, maimed, dispossessed of their
farms, 12. E. 4. 14. 19. H. 6. 31.
or do give his own money to the Sheriff to arrest the other party to that
suit, then it is punishable by action of Maintenance, in him that shall so
offend.

Deceit, Couin, Collusion, Fraud.
1 DEceit, Couin, Collusion, and Fraud, be great offenses to the Commonweal,
and special impediments of the justice and peace of the Realm, whereof there be
so many, and of so general sorts and kinds, as there be wicked devises in the
hearts of men, and lewd persons to put them in practice. And it were a work
almost as infinite, to diuulge the particulars, and to reduce into writing all
the Deceits, The multitude and enormitie of Deceits and Frauds.
Couins, Collusions, and Frauds, which in time have been invented and
effected, as it were to poise the weight of the sands of the sea, or to
decipher the number of the stars of the element: for by how many means a man
may trust, by so many and more he may be deceived. And therefore I will
undertake to treat of no more than our common and statute laws have detected,
and accused to be deceits, frauds, etc. and amongst others, but of those which
the makers, expositors, and Sages of our laws have noted to be chiefly
offensive, and most opposite to the due execution of justice, upon which this
peace, whereof I do write, does chiefly depend. For the wisdom of this
Realm, first in the making of our laws, and after in expounding them, have
bent their chief care to crush and beat down Deceit and Fraud, plainly
seeing, that the greatest part of the crimes which be committed in this
kingdom, from the highest treason to the smallest trespass, have some
intermixture with them: And that if they with their dependants could be fully
extirpat, both justice and peace would more brightly flourish. And
notwithstanding they do not begin their quarrels with rapier and dagger, sword
and buckler, as some other of the offenses before mentioned do, yet is there
grafted in the root of them as much gawle and venim, and more durable and
bitter extremities do spring from them, than ^oe ensue by the Canon shot, the
light horsemans staff, or the footmans bill: For though some part of every
kings reign has had a calm and repose from war and hostility, yet never any
age or year was clearly freed of falsehoods, corruptions, deceits, and frauds.

2 The wisdom of the Realm perceiving how necessary a thing justice is, and
how opposite and repugnant unto it deceits and frauds be, does therefore
specially provide to make choice of such men of all sorts, The reward for
pains and punishments for deceit of officers toward the law.
to execute the same justice, as she is persuaded by their learning and
experience can, and by their virtue and integrity will perform to every
person his due, and tread and beat down fraud, whose pains she does requite
with reverend respect, liberal rewards, titles of credit, and large
privileges. But if she do find any of the said officers whom she puts in
trust, to deceive her expectation, and to practice falsehood or guile, then she
does as sharply punish them, as she did before munificently wage them: As
appears by the stat. of An. 8. St. 8. R. 2. 4.
R. 2. whereby it was ordained, A Judge, A Clerk.
That if any Judge or Clerk do make any false entering of a plea, raze any roll,
or change any verdict, whereby any person receives disheritance, and he be
thereof convict before the K. and his Counsel, he shall be punished by fine and
ransom at the K. pleasure, and satisfy the party: And for the recovery of
the inheritance, the party shall sue by writ according to the law. And for the
avoiding of corruption which may happen in officers in those courts and places,
wherein there is requisite to be had the true administration of justice; and to
the intent that worthy persons should be preferred to the places of justice,
and none other should attain the same for fee or reward, by a stat. made An.
5. Stat. 5. and 6. E. 6. 16.
and 6. E. 6. it was enacted, No office of justice shall be sold or bought
That if any person bargain or sell any office, or deputation of office, or
take any money, fee, reward, or other profit, directly or indirectly, or take
any promise, agreement, covenant, bond, or assurance, to receive or have any
money, reward, etc. for any office, or the deputatio^ of any office, or any part
of any of the^, or to the intent that any person should enjoy any office, or the
deputation of any of the^, or any part or parcel of any of them, which office,
or any part of it does concern ye administration or execution of justice, or
which shall co^cern any clerkeship, to be occupied in any court of record,
wherein justice is to be ministered: then he so offending, shall not loose only
all his right and estate, which he shall then have of, in, or to the said
office, or deputation; but also he that shall give or promise any money, fee, or
reward, for any such office, or deputation, shall immediately upon the said
gift, or promise, be adjudged a disabled person in the law to all intents, to
have or enjoy the said office or deputatio^. And every such bargain, sale,
bond, covenant, promise, and assurance, shall be void, to and against him by
whom the same is made. But this Act shall not be prejudicial to the chief
Just. of the K. Bench and Common pleas, or to the Just. of Assise, but they may
do in every behalf concerning any office to be granted by any of the^, as
they might have done before the making of the same Act. And because the
providence of the realm did conceive some jealousy and suspicion in those
learned men in the laws of this realm, who by their own means and industry,
and for their own commodity and ease, obtained to be Just. of Assise in the
counties where they were borne, or did dwell, and did fear that affection and
favor toward their kinsmen, allies, neighbors, and friends, might sometime
allure the^ to decline from the beaten path of justice, therefore by one stat.
made An. 8. St. 8 R. 2. 2. St. 33. H. 8. 14.
R. 2. and another An. 33. H. 8. it was enacted, No man shall be justice of
Assise in his own county.
That no Justice, nor other man learned in the laws of this realm, shall
exercise the office of Just. of Assise within the county where he was borne or
does inhabit, upon pain to forfeit for every offense done contrary to this act
C. l. to the K. and him that will sue by B. P. I. or actio^ of debt, wherein no
W. E. P. But this stat. does not exte^d to any Clerk of Assise, associat to any
Just. of Assise: nor to the Justices, Justices Clerks, or Clerk of Assise
withithin the Duchy, and County Palantine of Lancaster: nor to the I. of the
one Bench or the other, for taking, hearing, and determining of Assizes in the
said courts: nor to any Just. that shall take any Assise upon adiournment, for
difficulty of ye same: nor to any Majors, Sherifes, Recorders, Stewards,
Bailifs, Suitors, or other officers in any city, borough, or town, but they
may be I. of Assise, of Fresh force, and of other Assizes, in the same town
etc. where he or they do dwell, or were borne, as they might have bin before.
And in like sort by the stat. of W. 1. A Serieant, A Pleader.
it was established, That if any Serieant, Pleader, St. 3. Ed. 1. 2
or other, do any deceit in the K. court, or do consent thereunto, to beguile
the court, or the party, and is thereof attainted, he shall be imprisoned a year
and a day, and being a counselor, he shall not any more be received to plead in
the K. court for any man, and if he be any other than a pleader, he shall be
imprisoned as aforesaid. And if the trespass require a greater punishment, it
shall be at the K. pleasure. And by the stat. of An. 10. A Philozer, An Exige^ter.
H. 6. and An. 18. H. 6. it was enacted, That if any Philozer, Exigenter, St.
10. H. 6. 4 18. H. 6. 9.
or any other officer of the K. Bench, or Common pleas, do make any entry in
any suit, that the plaintiff in the same suit has offered himself in his own
proper person, except the pl. in ye same suit (before such entry be made) do
appear in his own proper person before some of the Just. of ye place where ye
plea is depe^ding, and there be sworn upon a book, yt he is ye same person in
whose name ye said suit is pursued, or yt some other credible person of the K.
counsel will take such oath for him, ye said philozer, exigenter, etc. shall
forf. xl. s. to ye K. every time yt he shall be attainted by ye examination of
any of ye I. of ye same place where any such entry or record is.

3 And because Atturneies be also necessary members in the co^monweale, and
special means to solicit and further ye execution of justice, therefore the law
has had a careful regard that they should be men of integrity, virtuous, and
of good name; and has provided several stat. to punish such of the^ as shall
commit any notorious falsehood, guile, fraud, slacknes, ignorance, omissio^, or
contempt of duty: As by ye stat. of An. 4. H. 4. it was ordained, St. 4. H. 4.
18
That all Atturnies shall be examined by ye Just. and by their discretio^s their
names shall be put in ye roll, and they yt be good, virtuous, learned, and of good
name, shall be received and sworn well and truly to serve in their offices, and
specially, yt they make no suit in a foreign cou^ty. And if any such Attorney be
notoriously found in any default of record, or otherwise, he shall forswear ye
court, and never after be received to make any suit in ye K. courts. And this
ordinance shall be performed in ye Exchequer after ye discretion of the treasurer
and the barons there. And accordingly by one other stat. made an. 3. Ia. it was
enacted, St. 3. Iac. 7.
That none shall from henceforth be admitted Atturneies in any of ye K. courts
of record at West. but such as have bin brought up in ye same courts, Who
shall be Atturneyes.
or otherwise well practiced in soliciting of causes, Soliciters.
and have bin found by their dealing to be skilful, and of honest disposition:
and none to be suffered to solicit any cause or causes in any of ye courts
aforesaid, but only such as are known to be men of honest disposition. And no
Attorney shall admit any other to follow any suit in his name, Following a suit
in another name.
upon pain yt both ye Attorney and he that follows ye suit in his name, shall
each of the^ forf. for such offense xx. l. to ye K. and ye party grieved, to be
recovered in any of ye said courts of record, by A. B. P. I. wherein no W. E. P.
etc. And ye Attorney in such case shall be excluded from being an Attorney for
ever hereafter. By ye stat. of an. 18. H. 6. it was enacted, St. 18. H. 6. 9
That in all cases wherein process of Capias and Exige^t lies, if ye Attorney
have not his warrant of record, ye same term yt the Exigent is awarded, he
shall lose xl. s. to the K. if he be attainted thereof by examination of ye Just.
And by ye stat. made an. 32. H. 8. St. 32. H. 8. 30. St. 18. El. 13.
and an. 18. El. it was established, That every such person which shall be
Attorney for any other person or persons, being demandant or plaintiff, tenant
or defenda^t, in any actio^ or suit co^menced in any of ye K. courts of record
at West. and plead to an issue in ye same, shall deliver or cause to be
delivered, his lawful warrant of Attorney, to be entered of record for every of
ye said actions or suits wherein he is named an Attorney, to ye officer or his
deputy ordained for ye receipt or entering thereof, in ye same term when ye issue
is entered of record in ye said court, or before, upon pain of forf. of x. l.
for every default, for not delivery of ye said warrant: the one moity to the K.
his heirs and successors, ye other to such officer, to who^, or in whose office
ye same warrant should be delivered, entered, or filed, to be rec. by A. of det.
B. P. or I. wherein no W. E. P. etc. and also he shall suffer such imprisonment
as by ye discretion of ye I. of ye Court (where any such default shall be made)
shall be thought good. Fit. N. B. 9 6
If a man make an Attorney in a real action brought against him, Deceit by an
Attorney.
and after by couin agreed upon between the demandant and the said Attorney,
the same Attorney makes default, whereby the tenant does loose his land: then
the same tenant who lost his land, may have a writ of Deceit against the
Attorney. And so it is, if a man bring an action of Trespass against two
others, Register fo. 113. Fit. N. B. 96.
and the plaintiff and an Attorney by couin agreed upon between them, do
cause two strangers, not parties to the writ, to come into the court, and to
say, that they be the same two defendants named in the writ, and that they do
constitute the same man to be their Attorney in that suit: whereupon the same
Attorney, as Attorney to the defendants named in the writ, do plead to an
issue, and after suffer the enquest to pass by his default, by which means
the plaintiff does recover against the defendant: in this case they who be
indeed defendants, and against whom the same action of Trespass was brought,
may have a writ of Deceit against the same Attorney, that appeared as Attorney
for them, and shall recover their damages. 10. Ed. 4. 9. 20. Eliz. Dyer 367.
If an Attorney be informed by his client, to plead a false plea, which he
cannot in conscience plead, he may procure this Entry to be made, Quod non
fuit veraciter informatus, ideo nihil etc. to defend him in a writ of Deceit
brought against him by his said client. If an Attorney do sue forth a Capias
where there was no original writ before, 20. H. 6. 39.
he shall be committed to prison, and thrust out of his place in that and all
other Courts.

4 As the law does punish her Officers who do practice or commit any deceit or
fraud, in stead of truth, in place of justice, The law rejects fraudulent
acts.
so does she renounce and condemn all acts of greatest importance, if they be
intermixed with guile and falsehood: For though Judicial acts, as Fines,
Recoueries, Warranties, deeds enrolled, etc. being of their own natures just
and lawful, and means to settle titles, to appease controversies, and to
yield each person his due, be therefore greatly respected and favored in her
sight; yet if any of them be devised, or executed by couin, or to deceive, then
she does utterly reject them, and adiudge them void. Co. li. 3. 77.
As a man was Lord of the Manor of D. wherein there was a tenant which had
some parcels of freehold land in fee simple: the Lord demised certain lands,
parcel of the demesnes of his said Manor to the said freeholder, for xxj.
years, reserving certain rent, and demised some other lands, parcel of the
said demesnes, to the same freeholder at will, reserving another rent, and
granted by copy of Court roll certain other lands, parcel of the same
Manor, to the said freeholder, for the term of life, according to the custom
of the said Manor, reserving a third rent: And after the same freeholder
demised all the said lands, which he held by lease, for years, at will, and
by copy in D. to a stranger for the term of life: and then the same
freeholder levied a fine with proclamations, of so many messuages, so many
acres of land, meadow, pasture, etc. as he had by lease for years, at will, by
copy of Court roll, and of his own inheritance in D. by couin and fraud, to
bar ye lord of his inheritance. All the proclamations were made, and the five
years were past, the same freeholder continued in possession of the land which
was granted to him by lease for years, at will, and by copy, and paid to the
Lord yearly his several rents for the same. And after the stranger to whom the
freeholder made the lease for life, died, and the lease which the Lord made to
the freeholder for xxj. years expired. And then the same freeholder claimed
the inheritance of all the land which the Lord demised unto him for years, at
will, and by copy, intending to bar the Lord thereof, by force of the fine
with proclamations, and the five years past. But this fine was adjudged void
against the Lord, and that it did not bar him to claim and enter upon his
land, for that it was levied by him, who had but estate in those lands for
years, at will, or by copy of court Roll, and that neither had nor could
pretend any title to the inheritance of the land, but only by fraud practiced
the disheritance of the leassor. And whereas the meaning of the makers of the
statute of Anno 4. H. 7. St. 4. H. 7. 24
was (as it may appear by the preamble of the same) that fines ought to be of
the greatest strength to avoid strifes and debates, when the lessee for years,
at will, or copyholder shall make an assurance by fraud and couin, A fine
levied of land to defraud the right owner thereof.
to the intent a fine may be levied, to disherit the right owner of his land,
this is not a means to avoid or appease strife, but to begin it, where none
was before: and therefore the same statute did not intend to ratify such an
estate begun by deceit. And further, the meaning of the makers of the said
statute was not, That he who could not levy a fine of this land, in respect of
the debilitie of his estate therein, should be enabled by his own practice and
deceit to levy a fine thereof, to bar him who had a lawful title therein,
and a right to levy a fine thereof. And the same lessee for years, tenant at
will, and copyholder contrived his fraud in so secret manner, that by his
covert practice he deprived his lessor of the remedy which the said statute of
Anno 4. H. 7. did give him, viz. to make his entry, or to pursue his action
within five years, which he could not do, being ignorant of the lease for life
which his tenant had made of this land to a stranger: and also conceiving that
the lessee having land of his own fee simple in the same town, he levied a
fine of that land, which he might lawfully do. And the deceit and fraud in
this case is the more odious, because it was practiced by the lessee against
his lessor, and by the copyholder against his Lord, who is by the law bound to
do fealty to the lessor and Lord, which is a bond of confidence, and a link of
trust. And if a man seized of land in fee, Fit. Fines 120.
do make a lease to another thereof for term of life, and the lessee for life
does levy a fine thereof to a stranger, he in the reuersion may enter into the
same land for a forfeiture, and put forth the conusee in the fine, and avoid
the fine, for it was levied by deceit, to defraud him of his reuersion. If a
fine be levied of lands to secret uses to deceive the purchasor of the same
land, it may be auerred to be levied by fraud, and so by the statute of 27. El.
4. avoided. St. 27. Eli. 4.
And so if a fine be levied upon an usurious contract, and that be auerred, the
same fine shall be void by the stat. of 13. Eliz. 8. St. 13. Eli. 8


A fine levied of ancient demesne lands to defraud the Lord.
5 The law is as provident to protect men's seigniories, rents, and services from
euiction by deceit, as she is their lands and tenements: and knowing that a
fine in some cases levied by couin of the one, may be as prejudicial to his
inheritance, as of the other, has therefore ordained several remedies to
redress several wrongs: as if a man seized of lands in ancient demesne, do
leuy a fine thereof at the common law to another, this is a deceit to the lord
of that manor of whom the said lands be holden, 21. Ed. 3. 20 Fit. Not. Br. 98.
and therefore he may have a writ of Deceit against the cognisor and the tenant
of the lord, and thereby avoid the said fine, and then he that levied the said
fine shall be restored to the possession, and the title which he had before in
the same land, and also the same land shall return and become ancient demesne
as it was before, for that the said fine shall be utterly void. 21. Ed. 3. 56.
And he that is lord of a manor of ancient demesne but for the term of his
life only, may maintain this writ of Deceit. And so may he in reuersion, if
tenant for the term of life do not bring it during his life, and either of
them by his said writ may avoid the same fine: for by the leuying of a fine at
the common law of lands in ancient demesne, 8. E. 4. 6.
or by recovery of them at the common law, the same lands do become Frank
fee, and pleadable at the common law, and so the lord should be deceived of his
right, and loose his seigniorie in them. And the writ of Deceit will avoid the
said fine or recovery, because the fine was levied, and the recovery was
suffered coram non iudice, in deceit of the Lord, viz. not before that Judge,
nor in that Court where they ought to have been. 17. Ed. 3. 31. 7. H. 4. 44.
8. H. 4. 23. Fitz. Na. Br. 98.
But if a man seized of lands, whereof parcel be ancient demesne, and parcel
Frank fee, do levy a fine at the common law of both parcels: in this case
though the Lord of the ancient demesne do by his writ of Deceit avoid the
fine for so much as is ancient demesne, yet the residue of those lands which be
Frank fee, shall continue in force: for a fine levied of them was no wrong or
deceit to any.

6 And the same law is where land is recovered by deceit: A writ of Deceit to
avoid a recovery.
as if one man do bring a Praecipe quod reddat against another, and demand
certain land, by force whereof the tenant ought to be summoned to be before
the Justices at a certain day, and the shirife does return the tenant of the
land, against whom the said Praecipe is brought, Fit. Not. Br. 97.
summoned, whereas in truth he was not summoned: by which false return and
deceit of the shirife, the demaundant does upon the Graund Cape recover seisin
of the land by default of the tenant: in this case the tenant to whom this
deceit is done, 3. E. 3. 28. Fitz. Deceit 49.
may after judgment given for the demaundant, have a writ of Deceit against
him that did recover, and against the shirife for his false return. And by this
writ of Deceit the tenant shall be restored to his land again, 18. E. 4. 11.
so yt it be brought during the life of the summoners, viewers, and pernors, or
any of them: for if it be not brought until all the summoners, viewers, and
pernors be dead, it will not lie, for after the death of them the tenant shall
not have a writ of Deceit; for process shall be awarded against the summoners,
viewers, and pernors to appear in Court, and by the examination of them it is
to be tried whether the tenant was summoned, or not: 50. Ed. 3. 16. 8. H. 6. 1.
Fitz. Deceit 48. Fitz. Deceit 32. 33. 34. 46
for the summons must be made by two summoners at the least, and two viewers.
And if any of them did not their duty, then the writ was not executed as it
ought to have been, and therefore the plaintiff in the writ of Deceit ought to
be restored. But the K. shall have the issues of the land in the mean time.
And if the demaundant, who did recover by the shirifes false return, do make a
feoffement of the land, then the writ of Deceit must be brought against the
demaundant, the feoffee, and the shirife: and if the demaundant that does
recover, 8. E. 3. 6. 10. Ed. 3. 43.
and the shirife also, be both dead, yet the writ of Deceit may be brought
against the heir of the demaundant, and the tenant of the land, if the
summoners, viewers, and pernors be living. And if a man do lose his land by
default in a Praecipe quod reddat, Fit. Not. Br. 98. Fitz. Deceit 43. 80.
whereby he was not summoned, and then dies, his heir may have a writ of
Deceit as well as his auncestor, and shall have restitution: and the vouchee
The vouchee.
may have a writ of Deceit, where he does loose by default, if he were not
summoned.

7 And so it is, if a man sue a Scire facias against another, Deceit to avoid a
recovery upon a Scire facias.
to have execution of a fine, if the shirife return the tenant of the land
summoned by two summoners, whereas he was not summoned, by which return the
demaundant shall recover, and have execution of the land, if the tenant do not
appear, and the tenant shall loose the land: in this case the tenant may have
a writ of Deceit against the shirife, and the demaundant that did recover, and
him that is then tenant of the land, and shall be restored to his former
possession. And the like law is, 17. Ed. 3. 12.
if a man sue a Scire facias upon a Recognizance against another for a debt
before recovered, Deceit to avoid a recovery of debt.
if the shirife return the defendant summoned, whereas he was not summoned, by
reason whereof the defendant has execution awarded against him of the debt,
then the defendant may have a writ of Deceit against him that had the
execution, and the shirife, and the shirife shall be punished for his false
return, and the party who did recover, shall make restitution of that which he
recovered: and if the defendant die, his executors may have a writ of Deceit,
Where executors shall have a writ of Deceit.
and be restored, if the deceit be proved, and that the Testator was not
garnished, whereupon the garnishers shall be examined. And so it is, if a man
recover in a writ of Annuity, Annuity.
and after does sue a Scire facias, and recouereth by default of garnishment,
Fitz. Deceit 42.
the defendant may have a writ of Deceit: For by the statute of Anno 2. Ed. 3.
St. 2. E. 3. 17. 17.
a writ of Deceit holds place, and is maintenable as well in case of
garnishment, which touches plea of land where such garnishment is given, as in
case of Summons in a plea of land: for in all the cases aforesaid a Deceit was
wrought by the shirife to the Court and the party grieved by his false return:
and the Law has ordained, That every of those deceits shall be reformed by the
writ of Deceit. And a recovery and judgment had, made, and given, to the
intent to defraud and frustrate the true meaning of a statute, shall be void, as
amongst others it appears by the statute of Anno 43. A judgment to defraud
the meaning of a statute.
Eliz. whereby it was ordained, St. 43. Eli. 9.
That all judgments which shall be had, for the intent to have and enjoy any
lease of a benefit with cure, or any bonds, contracts, promises, and covenants
made for any person to enjoy the same, contrary to the statute of An. 13. El.
20. and An. 14. El. 11. or any of them, shall be void, in such sort as bands and
couena^ts are appointed to be void, which are made void for that purpose: for
that the suits whereupon the same judgments be giued, were commenced and
prosecuted upon collusion and fraud, to defeat and make frustrate the true
intent and meaning of the said statutes, or of one of them.

Deceit vhon recovery in a Quare impedit
8 If any person do recover against another in a Quare impedit by default of the
defendant, whereas he was not summoned, 27. H. 6. 5. Fitz. Deceit 57. 19. Eliz.
Dyer 353.
then the same defendant may have a writ of Deceit, and the Summoners, and the
pledges upon the attachment, and the mainpernors upon the distress shall be
examined, and if the deceit be found, the first judgment shall be reuersed, and
there shall be a writ awarded to the Bishop, to remove the Clerk that was in the
Church. And so it is, Deceit upon a recovery in wast
if any person do bring an action of Wast against another, 29. Ed. 3. 42. 48.
Ed. 3. 20. Fitz. Deceit 30.
and the plaintiff do recover against the defendant by default, whereupon a
writ is awarded to the shirife to inquire of the wast, whereas the defendant
was not summoned, the defendant may have a writ of Deceit against him that
recovered in the same action of Wast, and he shall suppose that he was not
summoned, attached, nor distrained: and process shall be awarded against the
summoners, the pledges, and the mainpernors, who shall be severally examined, and
if they all did not their duty according to the Law, the plaintiff in the writ
of Deceit shall recover, and be restored to that which before he lost in the
action of Wast.

Deceit upon a recovery by a Praecipe in capite.
9 And the like law is, 17. Ed. 3. 31. 36.
if any person do recover land against another by a Praecipe in capite, where
the same land is not holden of the King in chief, but of a mean lord by other
services, and where the demaundant had no license of the chief lord to sue at
the common place: then the chief lord may have a writ of Deceit against him
that recovered the same land, wherein he shall recover his damages, and the
demandant shall be imprisoned for the deceit, and also the lord shall retain his
seigniory in the same land: But the recovery shall remain in force, and he that
did recover, shall also hold of the K. in chief, by the way of estoppell. And
this writ of Deceit is maintenable in this case, by force of the stat. of Magna
Charta, 9. H. 3. 24.
whereby it is ordained, That the writ which is called Praecipe in capite
shall be granted to no man, whereby any freeman may loose his Court.

10 Couin is accounted so professed an enemy to justice, Where a good title
shall be impaired by a couenous recovery.
and therefore is so hated by the law, that she adiudgeth that bad and unlawful
which is mixed with couin, though before of it self it were good and lawful:
as if the issue in tail, who has good cause to bring a Formedon in discender
upon a discontinuance made of certain lands by one of his ancestors, 44. Ass.
p. 28 41. Ass. p. 28
be of couin, that a stranger shall disseise the tenant of the land, against
which stranger he does bring his action, and does recover this land, and has
execution: in this case he shall not be remitted to his former estate, though
his title be good, but shall be adjudged in possession by disseisin, 44. Ed. 3.
46. 15. E. 4. 4. 7. H. 7. 11 Co. lib. 5. 31
in respect of the couin. And so it is, if a woman that has good cause to be
endowed of her late husbands lands, will be of couin that a stranger shall
disseise the tenant of the land whereof she is indowable, against which stranger
she will bring a writ of Dower, and recover, and has execution, she shall be
adjudged in possession against the disseisee but as a disseisor, in respect of
her couin, though she had good title to be endowed. And so couin mingling
together virtue and vice, persuadeth the law to reject and condemn a lawful
title, which is unlawfully achieved.

11 As the law does both condemn and reject fines and recoueries, Warranties
devised by fraud.
which be practiced or put in execution by fraud or deceit, so does she
renounce and make frustrate all sorts of warranties that be devised or
contrived upon collusion or couin to defeat or defraud others of their just and
lawful titles: for though warranties be much favored in the law, for that they
be means to establish the title of those who be tenants of land in possession,
but yet if any of the^ be undertaken, performed, or mixed with fraud, then it
does not only loose his favor, but also his force in law. Co. lib. 5. 79 50.
Ed. 3. 12. 43. E. 3. 7.
As if land be given to the father for the term of his life, the remainder to
his son and heir apparent in tail, and the father by couin and agreement
between him and another (to bar his son by a collateral warranty of his
remainder) will make a lease of the same land to that other person, who will
make a feoffement in fee to a third person of the same land, to whom the father
will release with warranty: and the^ the father dies, and the warranty does
descend upon his son being of full age: yet this warranty will not bar the
son of this land: for the feoffement of the lessee for years was a
disseisin, and the father was partaker of the offense, an actor, and agreeing
thereunto: and though the release with warranty was made after the disseisin,
yet seeing the disseisin was made to that end, the law does adiudge the whole
fact from the beginning to be fraudulent, the warranty to begin by disseisin,
and so all that assurance to be void against the heir in tail. And in like
sort, other warranties that do commence by disseisin, be contrived to deceive
and defeat the right heirs of their just and lawful titles.

20. H. 6. 10. Regist. f. 113 44. Ed. 3. 4.
12 If one do bring a Praecipe quod reddat against two other men, Deceit by
getting of a Protection.
and they do purchase a protection for one of the^, suggesting yt he is to go
beyond ye sea in ye kings service, whereas he does not so, but remains still
in England, and so has done ever sithence his protection purchased, by which
means the demaundant is delayed of his suit: in this case the same demaundant
may have a writ of Deceit against the said tenants for this deceit and delay,
and shall recover his damages.

Deceit by purchasing a writ to charge another.
13 Whereas according to the course of the Chauncery, Fit. Not. Br. 96.
the king is to have of every person, who does bring against another an action
of Debt of the sum of forty pounds, or more, vj. s^. viij. d. for a fine,
and for an hundred marks, vj. s^. viij. d. and so for every hundred marks vj.
s^. viij. d. and for every Praecipe quod reddat brought of land, to the yearly
value of five marks, vj. s. viij. d. and so according to that rate (unless it
be a writ of right patent.) If any other person do purchase a writ in the
Chauncerie in my name, without my priuitie, whereby I shall be charged to pay
to the king for a fine any of the sums aforesaid, I may have an action of
Deceit against him, and recover my damages, for this writ was obtained to put
me to charges, and thereby to deceive me of so much.

Deceit for purchasing a writ in another name.
14 If A. being patron of a Benefice, Fitz. Na. Br. 96. Regist. f. 112. 7. H. 6.
45.
when the Church is void do present his Clerk to the Ordinary, and B. does
disturb him, whereupon C. does purchase a Quare impedit against B. in the name
of A. returnable in the common pleas, A. not knowing thereof, and after does
cause the writ to be abated, or A. to be nonsuit in that writ: in this case A.
may have a writ of Deceit against the same C. and recover his damages. Deceit
for procuring of a suit.
And if B. do procure C. to sue an action against A. whereby A. is vexed,
Fitz. Na. Br. 98.
A. may have a writ of Deceit against B.

Deceit by acknowledging of a statute.
15 If A. and B. do come before the Mayor of the Staple, Fitz. Na. Br. 105 and
100. Regist. f. 115
or before any other Mayor of any City, Borough, or Town, having authority to
take acknowledgement of debts, and there A. does acknowledge a statute to B. of
an hundred pounds, or etc. in the name of C. and does report himself to be C.
where he is not so, whereupon C. is troubled, and this statute extended against
him, then the same C. may have a writ of Deceit against the said A. and B. and
shall recover his damages. And so it is, if another man will levy a fine of
my land in my name, Deceit by doing of a judicial act in another name.
or confess an action brought against me in my name, or will enter into a
voucher in my name, 19. H. 6. 44. Regist. f. 113
and confess the demaundants action, or will acknowledge a Recognizance, or
statute Merchant, or other matter of Record in my name, I have no other remedy
but by an action of Deceit. But it is otherwise, if he seal and deliver an
obligation in my name: for I may plead that it is not my deed, which I cannot
do against a Record.

Deceit by forging of a resignation.
16 If a Notarie, Fitz. Na. Br. 99. Regist. f. 114
and other persons do by agreement counterfeit the seal of any Parson or
Vicar, and forge letters of resignation of his Parsonage or Vicarage, in the
name of the same Parson or Vicar, by which means he is removed from the
possession of the same Parsonage or Vicarage, he may have a writ of Deceit
against the same forgers.

20. H. 6. 36. 21. H. 7. 41. 16. Ed. 4. 9.
17 If a man do bargain with another to enfeoffe him of certain lands within
twenty days, Deceit by assuring of land to one man, which was bargained to
another.
or etc. and after he does enfeoffe a stranger of the same land, the he with
whom the bargain was made, and was deceived therein, may have a writ of Deceit
against him that so bargained and defeated him thereof. And so it is, if a man
do compound with another to purchase a manor, or certain land for him, and
he does buy it for himself, the party may have an action of Deceit against
the same purchasor. And in all cases, where a man does promise to do a thing,
and he does it falsely, a writ of Deceit is maintainable against him: Deceit by
charging of land after sale.
as if a man do promise to assure land to another, and after he does grant a
Rent charge, or a common out of it, or does make a Lease for life or years of
it, and then does assure it to the bargainee, this is deceit, and a writ of
Deceit is maintenable against him for it, for though he has assured the land,
he has not assured it clear and discharged, according to his bargain, but
has deceived the purchasor therein.

11. E. 4. 6.
18 If a man do sell a piece of cloth to another, Deceit upon a warranty.
and warrant it to be forty else long, and it is not so long, the buyer may
have a writ of Deceit against the seller of the same cloth, by force of his
warranty, although the warranty be by word only, 6. Ed. 6. Dyer 76.
without writing, so that it be at the time of the bargain made. But if the
warranty be at another time after the bargain made, then the buyer must have
some writing to testify this warranty, or otherwise he shall not have a writ
of Deceit against the seller.

9. Ed. 4. 13. Fit. Not. Br. 98.
19 If an action of Debt be brought against two as executors, Deceit by
confession of an action brought against executors.
whereas one of them was never executor nor administrator, and if he which is
executor do make default, and he who was not executor do appear, and confess
the action, he that was named executor may have against the other an action of
Deceit: for he has undertaken to plead a plea to the action of debt, which he
could not do, and that also to the deceit and hurt of another.

26. H. 8. 7.
20 If a man do marry a wife possessed of goods, Couin by aliening of his wives
goods.
those be the husbands, to give and dispose at his pleasure during the marriage
between them. But, if after they be divorced, the wife shall have her goods
again, unless the husband has given or sold them before the Divorce, for in
that case the wife is without remedy. And yet if the husband do alien those
goods by couin, to the intent to defraud and defeat his wife of them, and after
they be divorced, then she may auerre the couin, and recover the goods from
the alienee.

35. H. 6. 5. Co. lib. 3. 78 83. li. 5. 83.
21 Though buying of goods in an open marketh does work an alteration of the
property of the same goods, Sale of goods in open market by couin.
and does bind the Title as well of all strangers as of the owner (if the goods
be sold in such a shop or place as is commonly used for the selling of goods of
the same kind or nature) yet if one man do steal, purloine, or injuriously
take away another man's goods, and then by couin between him and a third person
does sell the same goods in an open and usual place of sale, 7. H. 7. 12
in an open market or fair, to ye third person, who at the time of buying of
the same goods, did know that the seller came not lawfully by them, or that
they were not his goods, this is a void sale. And in respect of this Couin, the
first and right owner of these goods may lawfully take and carry them away,
notwithstanding the said sale in open market.

Fraudulent assurances to defeat the discontinuee in tail.
22 If the father being tenant in tail of certain lands, M. 34. E. 1. Fitz.
Garrantie 88,
will make a feoffement thereof to another with warrantie, and so discontinue
the estate tail, having assets of other lands in fee simple, to leave to
descend to his son and heir, and then within few days before his death will
alien the same fee simple land to his son and heir, and to his heirs, upon
couin, and to the intent that the same fee simple land should not be pleaded to
come by descent from the said father to his son, nor adjudged as Assets by
descent in his hands: yet this couin being found by verdict in a writ of
Formedon brought against him by the heir of the land entailed, shall give the
discontinuee advantage to plead, that the same heir had assets by descent in
fee simple left him by his said father: for that the law does adiudge this
alienation made by the father to the son a little before his death, by couin
to defraud the discontinuee of his lawful plea, to be as no alienatio^, but
that the father dyed seized of the same fee simple land, and that it came to
his son and heir by descent.

23 Because Lords of Manors, lands and tenements, have as great right to enjoy
the wardship of the bodies and lands of their wards, Fraudulent conueyance to
defeat a Lord of his wardship.
as they have to their other inheritances, lands, and goods, and it is as great
an injury to deceive them thereof by couin and collusion, as to defeat and
defraud them of their other lawful titles: therefore by a statute made at
Marlebridge anno 52. H. 3. it was enacted, That if any man do enfeoffe his
eldest son or heir, St. 52. H. 3. 6
being within age of his inheritance, that thereby the Lord might loose his
wardship, yet notwithstanding such feoffement, the chief Lord shall have his
wardship. And by the said statute it was further ordained, That if any persons
meaning to demise their lands for term of certain years (that they might
thereby defeat the Lords of the fee of their wardships) will feign false
feoffements, containing, that they are satisfied of the whole service due unto
them, until a certain term, and that such feoffees are bound to pay at the
said term a great sum, to the value of the same lands, or much above, so that
after the said term the land shall reuert to them or their heirs, for that no
man will desire to hold the same of so great a price, yet by such fraud no
chief Lord shall loose his wardship. And if the chief Lords do by judgment
of the Court recover their wardships, yet the feoffees shall have their action
reserved, to recover their term or fee, when the heirs shall come to their
lawful age. And for the further prevention of couin in avoiding of wardships,
by one other stat. made anno 34. H. 8. it was ordained, St. 34. H. 8. 5
That if any person or persons having estate of inheritance of or in any
Manors, lands, tenements, or hereditaments, holde^ of the king by Knights
service, in chief, or otherwise of the king by Knights service, or of any other
person or persons by Knights service, have given at any time since the 20. day
of July anno 32. H. 8. and anno Dom. 1540: or hereafter shall give, will,
devise, or assign by will or other act executed in his life, his manors,
lands, tenements, or hereditaments, or any of them by fraud or couin to any
other person or persons, for term of years, life, or lives, with one
remainder over in fee, or with diverse remainders over for term of years, life
or lives, with one Remainder over in fee simple to any person or persons, or to
his or their right heirs: Or at any time since the said 20. day of July, has
conveyed, or hereafter shall convey, or make by couin (contrary to ye true
intent of the Act provided 34. H. 8. for the making of Wills) any estates,
conditions, mesnalties, tenures, or conueya^ces, to the intent to defraud or
deceive the King of his Prerogative, primer seisin, liuerie, relief,
wardships, marriages, or rights; or any other Lords of their wardships,
reliefes, heriots, or other profits which should or ought to accrue, grow or
come unto them, or any of them, by or after the death of his or their tenant,
by force and according to the Statutes made 32. H. 8. 1. and 34. H. 8. 5. and
the same estates, and other conueyances being found by office to be so made by
couin, fraud, or deceit, contrary to the true intent of the said Acts: Then the
king shall have as well the wardship of the body, and custody of the lands etc.
as livery, primer seision, relief and other profits, which should or ought to
appertain to him, according to the true meaning of the said acts, as though no
such estates or conueyances by couin had never been had or made, until the
said office be lawfully undone by trauerse or otherwise. And the other Lord and
Lords of whom any such lands etc. shall be holden by Knights service, as is
aforesaid, shall have their remedy in such cases, for his or their wardships of
bodies, and lands, by writ of right of ward, and shall distraine and make
auowrie or cognizance by themselves or their bailifes for their reliefes,
heriots, and other profits, which should have been to them due, by or after
the death of their tenant, as if no such estate or conueyance had been had or
made: Saving the right and title of the donees, feoffees, leasees, and deuisees
thereof against the said deuisor and his heirs, after the interest and title
of the King or other Lord therein ended.

24 If the father do make a feoffment of his lands holden by Knights service,
Fitz. Collusion 29. 33. H. 6. 14. Co. li. 1. 122.
to his eldest son, He that is not party to a fraud shall sustain no loss.
then by the foresaid Statute of Marlebridge the Lord of whom the same lands be
holden is inpossibilitie to have the wardship of the said son, if the father
die, his said son being within age. But if the same son do after make a
feoffment of the same land to an other bona fide, and after the father does
die, leaving his son within age, there this possibility is destroyed: for
that the stranger who had no notice of this fraud, has purchased the land bona
fide, and therefore shall sustain no prejudice by it. And yet in that case, if
the son had made the Feoffment after the fathers death, Co. li. 2. 94.
this alienation had not deprived the Lord of his wardship, which was once
lawfully deuolued unto him.

25 And it is a deceit, collusion, and defrauding of the law and a great
disheritance, and prejudice to the Lords of the Fee of whom any lands be
holden, to give the same lands in Mortmaine, or to do any Act, or procure any
thing to be done, whereby they may come into Mortmaine, contrary to the
statutes of Magna Charta, 7. Ed. 2. 13. Ed. 1. 15. R. 2. and 23. H. 8. for the
Lords do loose the wardships, marriages, reliefes, and other services of their
Tenants by that means. And therefore by the Statute of West. 2. it was
enacted, That if any religious or Ecclesiastical person do impleade an other,
St. 13. E. 1. 31.
by a Real action of land, and the Tenant will make default after default,
whereby he ought to loose the land. Then he which does recover, shall not
have Execution of the same Land recovered, until he has sued forth the kings
writ of Quale ius directed to the Escheator of the same county, to make
inquiry by a Jury, what right he that recovered the land has to the same:
And if he has right, Deceit and Collusion to bring land into mortmaine.
judgment shall be given for him, and he shall have execution of the same land:
And if it be found yt he has no right to recover by his said action, but that
the lands were lost by collusion between him, and the tenant of the land, then
the land shall accrue to the next Lord of the fee, if he demand it within a
year next after the Enquest taken: And if he does not demand it within a
year, it shall accrue to the next Lord above, if he demand it within half a
year after the same: And so every Lord after the next Lord immediate shall have
half a year to demand it successively, until it come to the King, to whom
through the default of other Lords the land shall accrue: For this recovery of
land by default, by a compact and couin before agreed upon, between the
demaundant being a religious or Ecclesiastical person, and the tenant, is to
defraud the intent and meaning of the Statutes of Magna Charta, and an. 7. Ed.
1. whereby it was ordained, St. 9. H. 3. 37 St. 7. Ed. 1.
That if any religious person, or other whatsoever, will buy or sell any lands
or tenements, or will receive the same by color of any gift, or lease, or by
reason of any other title whatsoever, or will by other practice or devise
procure the same to himself, whereby such lands or tenements may come into
mortmayne, he shall forfeite the same lands. And by the equity of the foresaid
Statute of Westminster 2. if any Ecclesiastical person do recover land against
another by reddition, 3. Ed. 4. 14.
confession, or action tried, yet the collusion shall be inquired of, for that
the same recovery may be by collusion before had between the demaundant and
the tenant. And because that by feoffments, fines, recoueries, and other
assurances made of trust of lands to the use of parish Churches, Lands assured
in Mortmaine to churches, chapels, Guilds, etc.
Chapels, Guildes, Fraternities etc. there grows to the King, and other
Lords, and subjects of the Realm, the like losses, and inconveniences, and is
as much prejudicial to them, as does and is where lands be aliened in
mortmaine: Therefore for the eschuing and auoydance of them, by a Statute made
an. 23. H. 8. it was enacted, St. 23. H. 8. 10.
That all feoffments, fines, recoueries, wills, and other estates devised, or
in any wise made of trust, of any manors lands, tenements or hereditaments, to
the use of any parish churches, chapels, churchwarde^s, Guildes, fraternities,
or brotherhoods erected or made of devotion, or by common assent of the people,
without any corporation: Or that the Feoffees, Conisees, Recouerees, or other
persons, and their heirs thereof seized, shall take, levy, or perceive, or
cause to be taken etc. the issues and profits thereof, and the same to
dispose, or otherwise employ, or suffer or cause to be paid, disposed, or
employed to any of the foresaid uses, or to any of the like uses (above the
term of 20. years next after the first making and beginning of any such uses)
shall be utterly void. But for the preventing of collusion and fraud which might
be devised for the further establishing or corroboration of such uses, by the
said Statute of an. 23. H. 8. Collateral conueyaunces to defraud the assurance
to Churches.
it was moreover provided, That if any person or persons in defraud of the said
Statute, does bind, or ordain any of their heirs or successors, or any other
persons, that they shall suffer such uses, intents or purposes to continue,
contrary to the said statute, upon pain of loss of any other lands, or of
any other thing: or do devise by any color, craft, or means any thing to
make such uses declared contrary to the meaning of the said Act to continue
for any longer time then is above limited for the same: Then every such
penalty, craft, color, and every other thing that is made or devised in
defraud of the said act, shall be void: for the said Statute shall be interpreted
as beneficiallie as may be to the destruction, or utter avoiding of the uses
above remembered, and of all other like, other then such as are before expressed.

Co. lib. 1. 26
Notwithstanding the foresaid Statute of An^ 23. H. 8. To what uses lands may be
given.
it is lawful for any person at this day to give his lands, tenements, or
hereditaments to any person or persons, and to his or their heirs, for to find
a preacher, for the maintenance of a School, for the relief of maihemed
soldiers, for the sustentation of poor people, for the reparation of
churches, highwayes, bridges, cawseis, for the discharge of ye poor
inhabitants of a town of common charges, for to make a stock for poor
laborers in husbandry, and poor apprentices, for the marriage of poor maids,
or for such other charitable uses: for the said stat. was made only to
restrain the assuring of lands to superstitious uses, and not to charitable
uses. And in this case it shall be expedient that the feoffor which does assure
his land to any of the uses aforesaid, do reserve to himself some annual
rent, or take some money of the feoffees at the first, for then the feoffement
or assurance shall be good to the feoffees, and their heirs, though the use be
unlawful. And it appears by the stat. made an. 43. Stat. 43. El. 4.
El. that they be accounted good and charitable uses, and no superstitious
uses, to give lands, tenements, rents, annuities, profits, hereditaments,
goods, chattels, money, and stocks of money for the relief of aged, impotent,
and poor people: or for the maintenance of sick and maihemed soldiers, and
mariners, schools of learning, free schools, and scholars in Universities:
or for repair of bridges, ports, havens, cawseys, churches, sea-ba^ks, and
high ways: or for education or preferment of orphans: or for, or toward
relief, stock, or maintenance for houses of correction: or for marriage of
poor maids: or for supportation, help, and aid of young tradesmen,
handicrafts-men, and persons decayed: or for relief or redemption of prisoners
or captives: or for aid or ease of any poor inhabitants concerning payment of
fifteens, setting out of soldiers, and other taxes. For the said Stat. of 43.
El. does give authority to the L. Chauncelor, the L. Keeper etc. and to the
Chauncelor of the Duchy, to award commissions from time to time into all or
any parts of this Realm to certain persons, to enquire of al and singular
such gifts, assignments, and appointments, and of the abuses, breaches of the
truce, negligences, misimployments, not employing, concealing, defrauding,
misconuerting, or misgouernment of any lands, tenements, rents, etc. goods,
chattels, money etc. heretofore given or assigned, or which hereafter shall be
given, limited, or assigned to or for any the charitable or godly uses before
rehearsed: And after such enquiry, hearing, and examining thereof, to set down
such orders, judgments, and decrees, as the same lands, tenements, rents,
goods, money etc. may be duly and faithfully employed to and for such of the
charitable uses and intents aforesaid respectively, for which they were given
or appointed by the donors and founders thereof.

26 Because when tenants for term of life, tenants in dower, or by the
courtesy of England, or tenants after possibility of issue extinct were
impleaded, they would often be of couin with the demandants, that the teneme^ts
demanded should be recovered against them, and they would not pray in aid, nor
vouch to warrantie them in the reuersio^, but plead in chief such a plea
whereby they knew the tenements should be lost: for the prevention and eschewing
of which couin, St. 13. R. 2. 16.
by a stat. made an. 13. R. 2. it was ordained, That if any such tenant be
impleaded, and he in the reuersion come into the Court, and prays to be
received to defend his right at the day that the tenant does plead to ye
action, or before, he shall be received to plead in chief to the action, without
taking delay by voucher, ayd-prayer, nonage, or other delay whatsoever; Couin
by a particular tenant to defraud him in the reuersion.
so that after such receipt, he shall have no delay by protection, essoine of
the Kings service, or common Essoine, but the suit shall be hastened as much as
it may be by the law: And days of grace shall be given by discretion of the
Judges betwixt the demaundant and him which is received, and not the common
days given in pleas of land (except the demaundant will thereunto assent) to
the intent the demaundant shall not be too much delaied which must plead with
two adversaries: And he in the Reuersion which prays to be received shall
find sureties for the issues of the Land, as well where the receite is
counter-pleaded, as where it is granted. Stat. West. 2. 13. Ed. 1. 3
And by the Statute of Westminster 2 it was established: That if by default, or
yielding of such tenant in dower, or etc. judgment shall be given, then the
heirs, or they which have the reuersion shall recover after the death of such
tenants by a writ of Entry ad communem legem. The wives receipt upon the
husbands default.
And by the same Statute of Westminster 2. it is also ordained, That if in an
Action, brought against the husband and the wife of lands which be the right
of the wife, the husband will absent himself, and will not defend his wives
right, or will against his wives consent yield the land: If the wife will come
before judgment, and be ready to answer to the demaundant and to defend her
right, she shall be thereunto admitted. And for the further avoiding of Couin in
Recoueries suffered by particular tenants, by the Statute of Anno 14. Eliz. it
was enacted, Stat. 14. El. 8.
That all recoueries to be had or prosecuted by agreement of the parties,
Recoueries against particular tenants by Couin to defraud him in the reuertion.
or by Couin, against any tenants by the Courtesy of England, Tenants in tail
after possibility of issue extinct, or otherwise only for the term of life,
or lives, or of estates determinable upon life, or lives, of any lands,
Tenements, or hereditaments, whereof the same particular Tenant is or shall be
seized of any such particular estate, as is aforesaid, or against any other
with Voucher over of any such particular Tenant, or of any having or that had
right or title to any such particular estate, or tenancie as is aforesaid, shall
as against such person or persons to whom any reuersion, or remainder thereof,
by force of any Conueyance or devise before that time had or made, shall,
ought, or lawfully may appertain, and against their heirs and successors be
utterly void. Provided always that this Act shall not extend to any person or
persons that shall by good title recover any lands, teneme^ts, or
hereditaments, without fraud or Couin, by reason of any former right or title:
But al and every such recovery and recoueries upon former rights and titles
shall stand and be in like force, as they were before the making of this Act.
And in all and every recovery and recoueries to be had or prosecuted of any
lands, tenements or hereditaments by the assent and agreement of any person, or
persons, to whom any reuersion or remainder thereof then shall or ought to
appertain (so that the same assent and agreement do appear of record in any
of the Kings Courts) shall stand in like strength, and of like effect against
such person and persons that shall so assent and agree, their heirs, and
successors, as they were before the making of this act.

27 And for that Couin and fraud should be restrained and punished when it
shall be put in practice, or intended by those in reuersion to defeat their
Lessees of their terms for years, as it was by the aforesaid Statutes, when
it was executed by particular Tenants, to the prejudice or disheritance of them
in the Reuersion: Couin by him in the reuersion to defeat his Lessee for
years.
Therefore by a Statute made Anno 21. H. 8. Stat. 21. H. 8. 15 Stat. 6. E. 1.
11.
it was enacted, That if any persons do make leases of their lands, tenements,
or other hereditaments by Indentures, or without writing to other persons, for
term of years, if after the same Lessors, their heirs or assigns do cause
or suffer recoueries to be had against them in the Kings, or any other Lords
Court, upon fained and untrue title, by craft and Couin to put the said Termors
from their Terms: all such Termor shall and may falsify for his term only
such recovery, in such wise and form, as a tenant of freehold shall and may
do by the course of the common law, where such tenant was neither privy, nor
party to such recovery. And the same Termors their Executors and assignees,
notwithstanding such recovery so had, shall enjoy, retain, and hold their
said terms, according to their said leases, against all such recouerors, their
heirs, and assignees. And the said recouerers, their heirs, and assignees
after such recovery so had, shall have like remedy against the said termors,
their Executors and assignees by auowrie, or action of debt for the rents and
services reserved upon the same leases, being due after the same recoueries,
and also like actions against them for waste done after the same recoueries so
had, in like manner and form, as the said Lessors should or might have had, if
the same recoueries had never been had. No manner of Statute of the Staple,
Couin to avoid a Statute or recognisance.
statute merchant, nor execution by Elegit, shall be avoided by means of any
such feyned recovery, but all persons having any lands, tenements or other
hereditaments in execution, or being entitled to have execution of any lands
or tenements by any such means, shall have like remedy to avoid and falsify
ye same recovery, as before is provided for the lessee for term of years.

28 There have been many laws and Statutes devised from age to age, to
restrain and punish several sorts of deceits, Couins, collusions and frauds,
but most to encounter and check fraudulent deeds co^triued of malice or guile,
to defeat, Stat. 50 Ed. 3. 6. 1. R. 2. 9. 2. R. 2. 3. 3. H. 7. 4. 13. El. 5.
27. El. 4.
delay or hinder others of their lands, leases, goods, cattels, debts, etc. as
it appears by the statute made A. 50. Ed. 3. 1. R. 2. 2. R. 2. 3. H. 7. 13.
El. and 27. El. But as deceit and fraud increased in this realm, so new
penalties, and greater punishments were invented from time to time to inflict
upon the transgressors therein. And because fained, couenous, and fraudulent
Feoffme^ts, gifts, graunts, alienations, conueyances, bonds, suits, judgments,
and executions of lands and tenements, goods and cattels being devised of Couin
and guile, to defraud creditors, and others of their just and lawful actions,
dets etc. be not only to the let of the due course and execution of law, and
justice, but also to the overthrow of all true and plain dealing, bargaining,
and cheuisance between man and man, without the which no common weal, or
civil society can be maintained or continued: Therefore by a Statute made A.
13. El. it was enacted; Stat. 13. El. 5 Stat 29. El. 5.
That all and every Feoffment, gift, grant, bargain, alienation, Fraudulent
deeds to avoid other men's debts and duties.
and conueyaunce of lands, tenements, hereditaments, goods and cattels, or of
any of them; or of any lease, rent, common or other profit or charge out of
the same lands, hereditaments, goods, etc. or any of them by writing or
otherwise; And all and every bond, suit, judgment, and execution at any time
had or made, sithence the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign, or at any time
hereafter to be had or made, which have been, and are devised, and contrived
of malice, fraud, couin, collusion, or guile, to the intent, etc. to delay,
hinder, or defraud creditors, and others of their just and lawful actions,
suits, debts, accounts, damages, penalties, forfeitures, hariots, mortuaries,
or reliefes, shall be taken and deemed only as against yt person, his heirs,
executors, successors, or assigns whose actions, suits, debts, accou^ts etc.
by such guileful, couenous, or fraudule^t deeds, devises, practices as is
aforesaid, are, shall, or might be in any wise disturbed, hindered, delaied,
or defrauded, to be clearly void and of none effect, any color, feigned
consideration, expressing of use, or any other matter to ye contrary
notwtstanding: And al and every ye parties to such fained, or fraudule^t
feoffment, gift, grant, alienation, bargain, conueyance, bond, suit,
judgment, execution, Parties to fraudulent deeds.
etc. or being privy and knowing of the same, or any of them, which shall
willingly and wittingly, put in ure, auowe, maintain, justify or defend the
same or any of them, as true, simple, and done or made bona fide, and upon good
consideration, or shall alien, or assign any the lands, tenements, goods,
leases, etc. to them conveyed, or any part thereof, shall forfeit to the Queen
etc. and the party grieved by such fraudulent feoffement, gift, bond, suit,
etc. one years value of the said lands etc. leases, rents, or other profits,
and the whole value of the said goods and cattels, and so much money as shall
be contained in such couenous and fained bond, to be recovered by A. I. B. P.
etc. wherein no W. E. P. etc. And being thereof lawfully convicted, shall
suffer imprisonment one half year, Common recoueries.
without Bail or Mainprise. But common Recoueries had against Tenant in tail,
or other tenant of the freehold of lands, the Reuersion or Remainder, or right
of Reuersion or Remainder whereof then shall be in any other person, shall as
touching such person, and his heirs, which has the Reuersion or Remainder
thereof, be of like force, and none other, Voucher in Formedon.
as the same should have been if this Act had not been made: And no estate or
conueyance, by reason whereof any person shall use any voucher in any writ of
Formedon, shall be made void by this Act: But every such voucher in any writ
of Formedon, shall be of like force, as if this act had not been made. Lands
or goods assured bona fide, and upon good consideration.
Provided always that this Statute shall not extend to any estate or interest
in lands, leases, goods, etc. lawfully assured upon good consideration, and
bona fide, to any person or persons, bodies politic or corporat, not having
at the time of such conueyance etc. any knowledge of such fraud or collusion,
as is aforesaid.

Fraudulent deeds to avoid forfeitures.
29 If a man to prevent a forfeiture for a felony, or upon an outlarie, Co. li.
3. 82.
will make a gift of all his goods, and after is attainted of felony, or
outlawed, these goods shall be forfeited, notwithstanding this gift: for this
word forfeitures specified in the foresaid Statute of Anno 13. St. 13. El. 5.
El. shall not be intended only of the forfeiture of an obligation,
Recognisance, or such like, but also of every thing which by the Law may be
forfeited to the King, or to a Subject. And the same Act of Anno 13. El. shall
not extend only to creditors, but also to all others, who have cause of
Action, or suit, or to have any penalty or forfeiture. And if a man do bind
himself and his heirs to pay to another a certain su^me of money at a day
assigned, and before the day does come of payment, Co. li. 5. 60.
the obligor dies, leaving to his son and heir sufficient land to pay the
same debt, and the heir does enter and alien the same land before the obligee
does commence his suit upon the said obligation: If upon the suit of the same
obligation ye heir do plead nothing but descent, and upon the trial of that
issue, the foresaid alienation be found by the Jury to be made by fraud to
deceive the said creditor of his debt, or that be pleaded, the said alienation
shall be void by the foresaid statute of 13. El. and the plaintiff shall recover.

A deed of gift must be upon good consideration, and bona fide.
30 In the said Statute of Anno 13. El. there is one Prouiso, St. 13. El. 5.
That the said Act shall not extend to any estate or interest in lands,
tenements, or hereditaments, leases, rents, commons, profits, goods, or
cattels, which is, or hereafter shall be lawfully had, made, conveyed, or
assured upon good consideration, and bona fide to any person or persons, or
bodies politic or corporat, not having at the time of such conueyance or
assurance to them made any manner of notice or knowledge of such couin, fraud,
or collusion. By which Prouiso it appears, that the gift which is within the
compass of the same Prouiso, must be both upon good consideration, and also
bona fide. And therefore, whereas A. did owe to B. CC. l. and to L. a hundred
pounds, Co. li. 3. 80.
payable by two several obligations, L. brought an Action of debt against A.
upon his said obligation of a hundred pound; during which suit A. being
possessed of goods and cattells, to the value of two hundred pounds, in secret
made a general deed of gift by writing, of all his goods and cattells,
Realls and Personalls whatsoever to B. in satisfaction of his debt, and
notwithstanding A. continued in possession of the same goods, and sold some of
them, and did share and brand the sheep with his own brand: and after L. had
judgment to recover against A. and had a Fieri facias directed to the Shiriffe
of the County where A. dwelt, who by force of the Writ came to make execution
of the same goods; but B. resisted him by force, clayming those to be his
goods, in respect of his said deed of gift, and reported that it was a good
deed of gift, and made upon lawful consideration: But in the Starrechamber
this was adjudged a fraudulent deed, and within the statute of 13. Infallible
marks of a fraudulent deed of gift.
Eliz. for this deed of gift had all the badges and marks of fraud: for it was
general, and without any exception of his apparel, bedding, or any other
necessary thing: and the owner continued in possession of all the goods, and
used them as his own: and the deed of gift was made in secret, and not
sealed, delivered, nor published amongst his neighbors: And it was made
whilst the suit was depending between L. and A. And here was a trust
between the Donor of these goods and the Donee, for the Donor possessed the
goods, and used them as his own; and fraud is always shaddowed with trust,
and trust is the cover of fraud: and the writing purported, that the deed was
made honestly, truly, and Bona fide, which be not accustomed words in a deed
of gift; and unusual terms in any Instrument do breed suspicion. And though
this was a true debt due to B. and the consideration was good, yet this was not
within the before specified Prouiso, for that the deed of gift was not made
also Bona fide; for no deed shall be adjudged to be made Bona fide according
to the said Prouiso, which is accompanied with any trust: and the words of the
Prouiso be in the copulative, upon good consideration and Bona fide: So that
good consideration will not serve, unless the gift be also Bona fide, viz. to
the intent, that the Donee shall have, carry away, and enjoy to his own use
the possession of the same goods, without any trust expressed, or implied, and
therefore whosoever will make a deed of gift of goods to an other in
satisfaction of his debt, or for any other reasonable cause, How a deed of gift
may be made without fraud.
and will eschew therein the suspicion and question of fraud, or of a
fraudulent gift, it is expedient for him to make the same deed openly, and
before his neighbors, or some men of credit in those parts where he does
live, and not in any secret place, or before witnesses of small credit, or
unknown in that Country; and further, that the goods which shall be aliened
by that deed of gift be set down in particular, and praised to the uttermost
value by indifferent persons, or seen that they be of the same value, and that
the party to whom the gift is made do presently take them into his own
possession, and carry them away: for to leave them in the Donors possession is
an undoubted argument of trust: which trust is a principal veil of fraud and
deceit: for though between the Donor and the Donee this trust has a pleasing
and goodly show of confidence, and faithful, and true dealing: yet between
the same Donor and his Creditors, it is mere fraud and deceit: for the Donor
makes his deed of gift of trust, hoping the Donee will not deceive him, who
by the self same deed means to deceive others. But as a deed of gift must
be made Bona fide, viz. without any trust, so must it be made upon good
consideration, A deed of gift must be made upon valuable consideration.
viz. upon valuable consideration: For if a man being in debt to diverse
persons, will make a deed of gift of his goods to his son, his nephew, or
near kinsman in blood, and deliver him possession thereof, and the Donee does
take and carry away the goods, and imployeth them to his own use; In this
case the deed is made bona fide, for that the Donee has taken and carried
away the goods, and it is made upon good consideration, viz. consideration of
Nature, and blood, but it is not made upon valuable consideration, for money
paid, or wares delivered, according to the intent and meaning of the Prouiso
aforesaid: And further, though here is no trust expressed, by the Donor in the
Donee, yet the Law does intend that there is a trust implied between the
Donor and his son, nephew, or near kinsman, to whom he has made this
deed of gift, and therefore accompteth it void against Creditors, etc.

31 Forasmuch as diverse persons after conueiances obtained, and purchases made
of lands, tenements, leases, estates, and hereditaments for money, or other good
considerations, may receive great prejudice by reason of fraudulent and
couenous conueiances, estates, gifts, graunts, charges, and limitations of uses
before made, of, in, or out of lands so purchased: which said^ gifts, graunts,
etc. are or shall be meant by the parties that so make the same to be
fraudulent and couenous, of purpose, and intent, to deceive such as shall
purchase the same: or else, by the secret intent of the parties, the same be to
their own proper use, and at their free disposition, colored nevertheless by
a fained countenance and show of words and sentences, as though the same were
made bona fide, for good causes, and upon just and lawful considerations: For
the remedy of which inconveniences, and for the avoiding of such fraudulent,
fained, and couenous conueiances, gifts, graunts, charges, Fraudulent
assurances to deceive purchasors.
etc. by a Statute made Anno 27. Elizab. it was ordained, St. 27. El. 4. St.
39. El. 18
That all and every conueiance, grant, charge, lease, estate, incombrance, and
limitation of use, or uses, of, in, or out of any lands, tenements, or other
hereditaments whatsoever, had, or made at any time heretofore sithence the
beginning of the Queens reign that now is, or hereafter to be had or made,
for the intent, and of purpose to defraud and deceive such person or persons,
bodies politic, or corporat, as have purchased, or shall afterward purchase
in fee simple, fee tail, for life, lives, or years, the same lands,
tenements, and hereditaments, or any part or parcel thereof, so formerly
conveyed, granted, leased, charged, incombred, or limited in use; or to defraud
and deceive such as have, or shall purchase any rent, profit or commodity, in,
or out of the same, or any part thereof, shall be deemed and taken only as
against that person and persons, bodies politic, and corporat, his and their
heirs, successors, executors, administrators, and assigns, and against all
and every other person and persons lawfully having and claiming, by, from, or
under them, or any of them, which have purchased, or shall hereafter so purchase
for money, or other good consideration, the same lands, tenements, or
hereditaments, or any part or parcel thereof, or any rent, profit or
commodity, in, or out of the same, to be utterly void, frustrate, and of none
effect: Any pretense, color, fained consideration, or expressing of any use or
uses to the contrary notwithstanding.

Parties to fraudulent conueiances, which do auow the same.
All and every the parties to such fained, couenous, and fraudulent gifts,
grants, St. 27. Eli. 4^
leases, charges, or conueiances before expressed, or being privy, and knowing
of ye same, or any of the^, which shall wittingly put in ure, auow, maintain,
justify, or defend the same, or any of the^, as true, simple, and done, had or
made bona fide, or upon good consideration, to the disturbance, or hinderance
of the said purchaser or purchasers, leasees, or grauntees, or of or to the
disturbance or hinderance of their heirs, successors, executors,
administrators, or assigns, or such as have, or lawfully claim any thing by,
from, or under them, or any of them, shall incur the penalty and forfeiture,
of one years value of the said lands, tenements, and hereditaments so
purchased or charged: The one moitie whereof to be to the Queen, her heirs,
and successors, and the other moitie to the party or parties grieved, by such
fained and fraudulent gift, grant, lease, conueiance, incombrance, or
limitation of use, to be recovered in any of the Q. Courts of Record by action
of debt. B. P. or I. wherein no E. P. or W. etc. And also being thereof
lawfully convicted, shall suffer imprisonment for one half year without bail
or mainprise.

St. 27. El. 4.
This Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not extend, or be construed
Conueiances made upon good consideration, and Bona fide.
assignement of lease, assurance, grant, charge, lease, estate, interest or
limitation of use or uses, of, in, to, or out of any lands, tenements, or
hereditaments, heretofore at any time had or made, or hereafter to be had or
made upon, or for good consideration, and Bona fide, to any person or persons,
bodies politic or corporate: any thing before mentioned to the contrary
hereof notwithstanding.

St. 27. El. 4.
If any person or persons have heretofore sithence the beginning of the Q.
Conueiances with condition of reuocation or alteration.
demise, charge, limitation of use or uses, or assurance of, in, or out of any
lands, tenements, or hereditaments, with any clause, provision, article, or
condition of reuocation, determination, or alteration, at his or their will or
pleasure of such conueiance, assurance, grants, limitations of uses or estates,
of, in, or out of the said lands, tenements, or hereditaments, or of, in, or
out of any part of parcel of them, contained or mentioned in any writing,
deed, or indenture of such assurance, conueiance, grant, or gift, and after
such conueiance, grant, gift, demise, charge, limitation of uses or assurance,
so made or had, shall or do bargain, sell, demise, grant, convey, or charge
the same lands, tenements, or hereditaments, or any parcel thereof, to any
person or persons, bodies politic, or corporate for money or other good
consideration paid or given, the said first conueiance, assurance, gift, grant,
demise, charge or limitation not by him or them revoked, made void, or
altered, according to the power and authority reserved, or expressed unto him
or them, in and by the said secret conueiance, assurance, gift, or grant: Then
the said former conueiance, assurance, gift, demise, and grant, as touching the
said lands, tenements, and hereditaments so after bargained, sold, conveyed,
demised, or charged, against the said bargainees, vendees, lessees, grauntees
and every of them, their heirs, successors, executors, administrators, and
assigns, and against all and every person and persons which have, shall, or
may lawfully claim any thing, by, from, under them or any of them, shall be
deemed, taken, and adjudged to be void, frustrate, and of none effect by
virtue and force of this present Act.

St. 27. El. 4.
Provided nevertheless, that no lawful morgage, made or to be made Bona and
without fraud or couin upon good consideration, Morgages.
shall be impeached or impaired by force of this Act, but shall stand in the
like force and effect, as the same should have done, if this act had never
been had or made: Any thing, etc.

St. 27. Eli. 4.
shall extend or be construed to make good any purchase, Assurances of lands
defeated before the Statute.
grant, lease, charge, or profit, of, in, or out of any lands, tenements, or
hereditaments, heretofore made void, defeated, or undone, by reason or any
former conueiance, grant, or assurance, so as the party or parties, or their
heirs or assigns, which have so defeated, or made void the same, were in
actual possession, the first day of this present Parliament, of, or in the
said lands, The authority of the court of Starrechamber.
tenements, or hereditaments, whereof, or out of which any such purchase,
grant, lease, charge, or profit was made. Neither this Act, nor any thing
therein contained, shall extend in any sort, to restrain or impair the
jurisdiction, power, or authority of the Court of Starrechamber.

A purchasor does know before of a fraudulent deed.
32 If a man seized of land in fee, Co. li. 5. 60.
do make a fraudulent conueiance thereof, to the intent to deceive and defraud
purchasors, contrary to the said Statute of Anno 27. Eliz. and does continue in
possession of it, and takes the profit of it, and does after enter into
communication with a stranger for the sale of it to him: and by chance the
same stranger has knowledge of the same fraudulent assurance, and
notwithstanding he does bargain with the same party for his land, does
conclude with him, and takes his assurance from him: in this case, the same
purchaser, shall avoid this former fraudulent co^ueiance, made by the seller of
this land, though he had notice thereof before: for the said Act of Anno 27.
Elizab. by express words does make the fraudulent conueiance void touching
the purchasor: and seeing it is within the express puruiew of the same
Statute, it is to be so taken and construed in repressing of fraud, and it is
not the purchasors knowledge thereof, that does make the fraudulent conueiance
good which the said statute has made void.

The father makes a fraudulent lease, and the son sells the land.
33 If the father do make a lease for years of his land by couin, Co. li. 6.
72.
to defraud others to whom he will demise, or sell the same land, (as all
fraudulent leases shall be intended to be made to that end) and before he does
sell or demise the same land, he dies, and his son and next heir knowing,
or not knowing of the said lease, does sell the same land for good
consideration: Then the purchasor shall avoid this lease by force of the
foresaid Statute of Anno 27. Elizab. for seeing the Law does presume that
every fraudulent lease is made generally to defeat purchasors, lessees, etc.
within this generality every particular purchasor, farmor, lessee, etc. is
included. And it is not material, though he who sold the land, did not make
the former fraudulent lease, estate, or incombrance: but if the estate be
fraudulent, the purchasor shall avoid it, whosoever sells the land.

A woman's iointure made by fraud.
34 And the same Law is, if a man do convey land to the use of his wife, Co.
li. 6. 73
for her iointure, by deceit and couin to defraud a purchasor to whom he
intends to sell the same land: in this case, if the same fraud be proved by
evidence, or confessed by pleading, the purchasor shall avoid the said wives
estate.

Fraudulent deeds to defeat successors of disapidations.
35 Because diverse Ecclesiastical persons being possessed of mansion houses,
and other buildings belonging to their Ecclesiastical Benefices, or livings,
did suffer the same for want of due reparations partly to decay, and partly to
fall down, converting the timber, lead, and stone to their own uses, and also
made deeds of gift, and colorable alienations, and other conueiances of like
effect of their good and cattels in their life time, of purpose after their
deaths, to defraud their successors of such just Actions and remedies, as
otherwise they might and should have had against the executours, or
administratours of their goods, by the Laws Ecclesiastical of this Realm:
for the redress whereof by a Statute made Anno 13. Elizab. it was enacted, St.
13. El. 10 St. 1. Iac. 25
That if any Archbishop, Bishop, Deane, Archdeacon, Fraudulent deeds to
defeat successors of dilapidations.
Provost, Treasurer, Chancellor, Chaunter, Prebendarie, or any other having any
dignity or office in any Cathedral, or Collegiat Church within this Realm,
or any Parson, Vicar, or other Incumbent, of any Ecclesiastical living,
whereunto do belong any houses or buildings, which by law or custom he is
bound to maintain in reparation, do suffer any of his said houses or
buildings to fall down, or run in decay, and after do make any deed of
gift, alienation, or other conueyance of his moveable goods or cattells in his
life time, to the intent after his death to defeat his successors of such just
Actions and Remedies, as otherwise they might have had for the same, against
their executours, or the administratours of their goods: Then the Successors
of him which shall make such deed, etc. shall and may commence suit, and have
such remedy in any Court Ecclesiastical within this Realm, competent for the
matter, against him or them to whom such deed of gift, or alienation shall be
so made, for the amending and reparation of such Dilapidations, or just
recompense for the same, as has happened by his fact or default, in such sort as
he might, should, or ought lawfully to have, if he or they to whom such deed of
gift were made, were executor of him that made such deed, etc. or
administrator of his goods, etc.

36 For the avoiding and preventing of couin or collusion in suing of Actions
popular, which have bin ordained from time to time to restrain and punish
several sorts of offenders: and to the intent that the penalties of those
Statutes might indeed be imposed upon the transgressors thereof, and the same
offenses might not be shadowed, and the meaning of the makers of those Statutes
might not be deluded by the couenous, deceitful, and fraudulent suits of the
same offenders friends, whose practices have been to cover, and not to punish
the same offenses: by a Statute made Anno 11. H. 7. St. 11. H. 7. 20.
it was established, That if an Action popular be sued against any man by
cellusion, An Action popular sued by Collusion.
and the plaintiff in the same do recover against the defendant, or be barred;
any other person may after sue against the same defendant another Action
popular, with good faith, and shall in the same recover and have execution, if
the Recovery or bar in the first Action be found to be by couin. And the
defendant beign attainted of Couin, shall have two years imprisonment, by
process of Capias and Vtlarie, to be sued within the year after judgment
given, or at any time after, until the defendant be had and imprisoned, and
that as well at the Kings suite, as at every other persons, that will sue in
that behalf. And no release of any common person, made to any party before or
after an Action popular or indictment hanging, shall be available to let or
surcease the said Action, indictment, process, or execution. Provided always,
No couin shall be auerred where there has been trial by verdict.
that no plaintiff or plaintifes be in any wise received to auerre any couin in
any action popular, where the point of the same Action, or else collusion have
been once tried, or lawfully found, with, or against the plaintiff by trial
of twelve men, and not otherwise.

St. 13. Eli. 7.
37 By the Statute made Anno 13. Elizab. entitled, An Act touching orders for
Bankerupts, Fraudulent possessing of Bonkerupts lands, goods, or debts.
amongst other things it is enacted, That if at any time before, or after that
any such person (viz. a Bankerupt) departs the Realm, or shall keep his
house, or otherwise absent himself, or take Sanctuary, or suffer himself to
be arrested, outlawed, or yield his body to prison, any person do
fraudulently by couin claim, demand, recover, possess, or detain any debts,
duties, goods, cattels, lands, or tenements, by writing, trust, or otherwise,
which were or shall be due, or appertain to any such offender, other than such
as he can, and does prove to be due by right and conscience, for money paid,
wares delivered, or other just consideration, to the just value thereof before
the Commissioners thereunto authorized, or the more part of them, and the same
to proceed (bona fide) without fraud or couin: Then every such person so
craftily demanding, claiming, having, or possessing any such debt, shall
forfeit double as much as he shall so claim, demand, detain, or possess,
which said forfeiture shall be recovered, levied, and employed for the payment
of the Creditors debts.

38 Forasmuch as it was oftentimes put in ure to the defrauding of Creditors,
that such persons as were to have the administration of the goods of others
dying intestate committed unto them, if they require it, would not accept the
same, but suffer, or procure the administration to be granted to some stranger
of mean estate, and not of kin to the intestate, from whom themselves, or
others by their means did take deeds of gift, and authorities by letter of
Attorney, whereby they obtained the estate of the intestate into their hands,
and yet stood not subject to pay any debts owing by the said intestate, and so
the creditor for lack of knowledge of the place of habitation of the
Administrator could not arrest him, nor sue him: and if they fortuned to find
him out, yet for lack of ability in him to satisfy of his own goods the
value of that he had conveyed away of the intestates goods, or released of his
debts, by way of wasting, the creditors could not have or recover their just
and due debts: For reformation whereof by a Statute made Anno 43. Fraudulent
administration of intestates goods.
Elizab. it was ordained, St. 43. El. 8.
That every person and persons that hereafter shall obtain, receive, or have
any goods or debts of any person dying intestate, or a release, or other
discharge of any debt or duty that belonged to the intestate upon any fraud as
is aforefaid, or without such valuable consideration, as shall amount to the
value of the same goods and debts, or near thereabouts (except it be, in, or
toward satisfaction of some just and principal debt of the value of the same
goods or debts to him owing by the intestate at the time of his decease) shall
be charged and chargeable as Executor of his own wrong, and so far only as
all such goods and debts coming to his hands, or whereof he is released or
discharged by such Administrator will satisfy, Allowance of just debts and
other lawful payments.
deducting nevertheless to and for himself allowance of all just, due, and
principal debt upon good consideration, without fraud, owing to him by the
intestate at the time of his decease, and of all other payments made by him,
which lawful Executors or Administrators, may, and ought to have and pay by
the Laws and Statutes of this Realm.

39 By a Statute not imprinted, made Anno 27. H. 8. it was enacted, St. 27. H.
8.
That all crafty and fraudulent Recoueries, feoffements, estates, gifts,
grants, and leases, and every of them made by any of the chief governors of
such religious houses, Fraudulent conueiances of Abbey lands
as were given to the King by that Statute (viz. of such as had not in lands
above two hundred pounds by the year) under their covent seals, within one
year next before the making of the said act, should be utterly void. St. 31.
H. 8. 13
And by a like statute made Anno 31. H. 8. it was ordained, That all leases of
lands, tenements, or other hereditaments not usually let, leases of lands etc.
in reuersion, leases of lands etc. not reserving the old and accustomed rent,
sales of wood, assurances of lands of the kings gift, or ancient foundation,
without the kings license made by any abbots, or governors of any Monasteries
or other religious houses (which were before the making of the said act
dissolved) within one year before the coming to the K. hands of the same
Monasteries, religious houses etc. (or which after that should be dissolved,
or come to the kings hands, should be utterly void: for the same leases, sales
of wood, and assurances were intended to be made by fraud to deceive the king
of certain commodities which the makers of that statute did mean and intend
to give him.

40 Where maidens and women children of noblemen, gentlemen, and others, Anno
4. St. 4. and 5. P. and M. 8.
and 5. P. and M. it was enacted, Deceitful conueying a maid inheritable under
xvj. years of age.
That it shall not be lawful to any person or persons to take or convey away,
or cause to be taken or conveyed away any maid or woman child unmarried, being
within the age of xvj. years, out of, or from the possession, custody, or
governance, and against the will of the father of such maid or woman child, or
of such person or persons to whom the father of such maid or woman child, by
his last Will, or by any other act in his life time, shall assign, bequeath,
give, or grant the order, keeping, education, or governance of such maid or
woman child: except such taking and conueying away as shall be had, made, or done
by or for such person or persons as without fraud or couin then shall be the
master or mistress, or the guardian in socage, or guardian in chiualry of or to
such maid or woman child.

St. 4. and 5. P. and M. 8.
If any person or persons above the age of xiiij. years shall unlawfully take
The forf. for taking away a maid under 16 years of age.
or cause to be taken or conveyed any maid or woman child unmarried, being
within the age of xvj. years, out of, or from the possession, and against the
will of the father or mother of such child, or out of, or from the possession
of such person or persons as then shall have by any lawful ways or means the
order, keeping, or education, or governance of any such maid or woman child,
then every such person and persons so offending being thereof lawfully
attainted or convicted by the due course of the law of this realm (other then
such of who^ such person taken away shall hold any lands or tenements by
knights service) shall be 2. years imprisoned of his or their bodies without
bail or mainprise, or else shall pay such fine for his or their said offense to
the Q. and party grieved, as shall be assessed by the Q. counsel in the star
chamber at Westminster.

St. 4 and 5. P. and M. 8.
or cause to be taken away as is aforesaid, Taking away and deflouring, or
co^tracting matrimony with a woman etc.
and defloure any such maid or woman child as is aforesaid: Or shall against
the will, or unknowing of, or to the father of such maid or woman child, if the
father be in life, or of or to the mother of such maid or woman child (having
the custody and governance of such child, if the father be dead) by secret
letters, messages, or otherwise, contract matrimony with any such maiden or
woman child (except such contracts of matrimony as shall be made by the consent
of such person or persons as by the title of wardship shall then have or be
entitled to have the marriage of such maid or woman child) then every such
person or persons so offending, being thereof lawfully convicted, as is
aforesaid, shall suffer imprisonment of his or their bodies by the space of
five years, without bail or maineprise, or else shall pay such fine for his or
their offense to the Queen and party grieved, as shall be assessed by the
Queens Counsel in the Star Chamber.

Who may hear and determine these offenses.
and Justices of Assise by inquisition or indictment, St. 4 and 5. P. and M. 8.
have authority to hear and determine the said offenses, upon every which
indictments and inquisitions such process shall be awarded, as upon an
indictment of Trespass at the common law.

St. 4 and 5. P. and M. 8.
years and under xvj. A woman consenting to an unlawful contract.
do at any time consent to such person that so shall make any contract of
matrimony, contrary to the form and effect of this statute: then the next of
her kin, to whom the inheritance should return or come after her decease,
shall from the time of such assent, have and enjoy all such lands, tenements,
and hereditame^ts, as she had in possession, reuersion, or remainder, at the
time of such assent, during the life of such person that so shall contract
matrimony: and after the decease of such person so co^tracting matrimony, the^
the said lands shall descend, reuert, remain, and come to such person or
persons, as they should have done in case this act had never been made, other
then to him only that so shall contract matrimony.

St. 4 and 5. P. and M. 8.
or authority, concerning any orphans within the City of London, or any other
City, Borough, or Town, where Orphans Orphans.
are commonly used to be provided for, either by grant, or by custom: But the
Lord Mayor of the city of London, and the Aldermen of the same, and every other
head Officer of any other City etc. where such Orphans be provided for, shall
and may have and take like rule, order, keeping, and charge of such Orphans,
and of all their lands, tenements, goods, and cattels, as heretofore they used,
or lawfully might have had and used, if this act had not bin made.

Co li. 3. 37.
the grandmother being seized of certain land in see holden in socage, did by
her last will in writing bequeath ye same to the said ij. daughters, and to ye
heirs of their ij. bodies begotten, by even portions, equally to be divided,
the remainder to the mother, being her sole daughter and heir apparent and her
heirs: and after the mother married a second husband, and then the grandmother
dyed, after whose death both the said daughters entered into the said lands so
devised unto them: and then the younger daughter being between the age of
xiiij. and xvj. years, and living in house with her father in law and mother,
of her own will and forwardness, and with the consent and agreement of her
father in law, departed forth of his house in a morning, and the same day in
another place married a husband: In this case it was adjudged, that the said
younger daughter had forfeited her moitie or half part of the said lands so
devised unto her, The daughters forfeiture for marriage without her mothers
consent.
by her contracting of Matrimony, and that her said mother should take the
benefit of the said forfeiture; for the mother had the custody and government
of the said daughter at the time of the said contract, by the special words and
provision of the said statute, which government was annexed to the person of
the mother Iure naturae, and was not transferred to her second husband by her
marriage, as her lands and goods were, and so her husbands consent was not
material, nor that consent which the meaning of the makers of that statute did
respect and provide for. And though the daughter was forth of her mothers house
at the time of the contract of marriage, yet in the judgment of law the mother
had then the custody of her, which was inseparable from her person. And seeing
the foresaid stat. of 4. St. 4. and 5. P. and M. 8.
and 5. P. and M. does give the forf. to the next of the kin to whom the
inheritance should descend or come after her decease, during the life of such
person that so shall contract matrimony, therefore the party must be of the
blood, and next of ye blood to whom the inheritance upon such forf. shall
descend or come, which is the mother, and not the eldest sister (for
administration may be granted of ye goods of the son, or of the daughter, dying
intestat, to the father or mother, as to the next of the blood of the party
deceased, according to the stat. of an. 21. H. 8. 5.) And further, though the
elder sister be of kin to the younger, yet in this case if the younger have any
issue, her land should descend to her issue; and if she have no issue, it
should remain to her mother: for that the elder and younger sisters were
tenants in common in tail, though they never made partitio^ indeed, the
remainder thereof to their mother in see, by force of the said devise of their
grandmother, who by her will meant and ordained, that the land should be
divided, and that one of them should not enjoy the whole as suruiuor to the
other.

41 Having written of deceits and frauds practiced or performed by some
particular persons to others, as by the tenant to his Lord, Several deceits
prohibited by several Statutes
the debtor to the creditor, the seller to the purchaser, the lessor to the
lessee, etc. I am now to express and discover some other guiles, frauds, and
falsehoods, which the offenders therein do endeavor to put in use or practice, not
only against any one, two, or more special persons (as in the cases
aforesaid) but against every person that shall put them in trust, or otherwise
shall have occasion to use them, or theirs, which our stat. laws have accused,
and condemned to be offenses, and have inflicted upon the transgressors thereof
several punishments. As, by the stat. of Anno 9. St. 9. H. 5. 8.
H. 5. falsifiers and counterfeiters of deceitful and untrue weights,
Counterfeiting of weights deceitful.
being attainted thereof, shall be taken by Just. of peace, Sherifes, Eschetors,
and other commisioners, and kept in prison without mainprise, until they have
made fine and ransom according to the Just. discretion. St. 23. H. 8. 4
By the stat. of An. 23. H. 8. If any diminish a barrel, a kilderkin, or
firkin, to the deceit or hurt of another, Deceit by diminishing of a vessel.
by taking out the head or any staff, he shall forf. iij. iiij. d. and be
punished by the discretion of the chief officer, Deceitful things upon
fustian.
before whom the offense shall be presented, and the vessel shall be burned.
By the stat. of An. 11. H. 7. Sat. 11. H. 7. 27.
If any denizen or forreiner shall use yrons or other deceitful thing upon
fustians unshorn, to break off the nap and cotton of the same, but only the
broad sheeres, he shall forfeit for every offense twenty shillings to the
king and him that will sue. By the statute of Anno 18. Deceit in goldsmithes
work^.
El. If any Goldsmith do make any Goldsmithes work, Sta. 18. El. 14
or plate, which shall be touched, marked, or allowed for good by the Wardens
or Masters of that Mystery, and that in the same there shall be found any
falsehood or deceit, then the said Wardens and Corporation shall forfeit the
value of the thing exchanged or sold, to the king and the party grieved. By
the Statute of Anno 1. Deceitful using of linen cloth.
Eliz. If any do cast, or cause to be cast, St. 1. El. 12.
any piece of linen cloth over a piece of timber, and does by any device,
rack, draw, and stretch the same of length and breadth, and then does beat it,
and cast deceitful liquors mingled with chalk or other things, upon it: or
does use any other deceitful thing, whereby it shall be the worse, for the use
thereof, then he shall forf. the same to the K. and him that will sue for it, be
one month imprisoned at the least, and pay such fine as shall be assessed by
the Justices before whom he is condemned. By the Statute of Anno 19. Deceits in
weights or beams for pewter or brass.
H. 7. St. 19. H. 7. 6 4. H. 8. 7.
If any person using buying and selling of Pewter or Brass, do occupy any
false or deceitful beams or weights, of the said wares, he shall forfeit xx.
s. to the King and the party that will sue. And if he be not able to pay so
much, he shall be put in the stocks until the next Market day, and then set
on the Pillorie all the Market time. By the Statute of Anno 23. Deceit in
winding of wool.
H.S. No person shall wind, or cause to be wound, St. 23. H. 8. 17.
any fleece of wool, not being sufficiently washed, nor put in a fleece any
clay, lead, stones, sand, tails, deceitful locks, cot, calls, cumber,
lambs wool, nor any other thing whereby the fleece may be the more weighty,
to the deceit and loss of the buyer, upon pain to forfeit for every fleece
vj. pence, to the king and finder and proouer of the same deceit. Deceit in
packing of wool.
By the Statute of Anno 8. H. 6. St. 8. H. 6. 22
If any wool packer do make any other but good and due packing, he that
feels himself grieved thereby, shall have his action of Trespass and deceit
at the Common law against him. And if any stranger do force, clacke, or beard
any wool, he shall forfeit the same, or the value thereof, and be
imprisoned. By the Statute of Anno 23. Deceit in using of wax or honey.
Eliz. St. 23. El. 8.
Every person which in the making and melting of wax or honey, shall use any
deceit by mingling the same with rosin, t^llow, turpentine, or any other
deceitful thing, to the intent to sell, or offer the same to be sold, shall
forfeit the same mingled wax or honey. And if it be sold before the corruption
shall be found, then he shall forf. ij. s. for every pound to the K. and the party
deceived, Deceit in Vpholsters.
if he will sue. By the stat. of An. 11. H. 7. and An. 5. E. 6. St. 11. H. 7.
19. 5. E. 6. 23.
If any person shall make to the intent to sell, or offer to sell, any
featherbed, boulster, or pillow, except the same be stuffed with dry pulled
feathers, or clean down only, without mingling of scalded feathers,
fen-downe, thistle down, sands, lime, grauel, hair, or any other deceitful or
corrupt stuff: or shall make to the intent to sell, or offer to put to sale,
any quilt, mattrice, or cushions, which shall be stuffed with any other thing
than feathers, wool, or flocks alone, he shall forfeit the same so sold, or
offered to be sold, to the K. and him that will sue. By the stat. of Anno 1.
Bringing in deceitful hops
Iac. If any forreiner, denizen, or Englishman, shall bring, St. 1. Iac. 1^.
or cause to be brought into this realm, out of any foreign dominion beyond
the sea, any deceitful hops mixed with powder, dust, sand, or other soil
whatsoever, he shall forf. the same hops. And if any Brewer of ale or beer,
which shall buy the same brought from beyond the seas, or growing within this
realm, shall spend the same about ye brewing of ale or beer to be sold, being
corrupt or mixed with powder, dust, or any soil whatsouer, he shall forf. ye
same, or the value thereof to the K. and him that will seize or sue for the
same. For the avoiding of great deceits committed in selling of sundry sorts of
corrupt and mingled spices, drugges, wares, St. 1. Iac. 19.
and other marchandizes garbleable, by a statute made Anno 1. Deceit in spices
and drugs.
Iac. it was ordained, That all spices, wares, drugges, and other marchandizes
garbleable, shall for the fees usually allowed in that behalf, be sufficiently
garbled and divided, and after sealed by the garbler, his deputy or servant,
before the same be sold, and shall not after be mixed with any garble, upon
pain of the forf. of the same, or the value thereof, Deceit in Woollen cloth
to the King and him that will sue for the same. And because in several ages
there have bin diverse and many deceits and frauds practiced and put in ure in
the spinning, carding, and dying of wool and woollen yarne, and in the making,
weauing, fulling, watering, tucking, milling, rowing, dying, thicking, folding,
pressing, tacking, mingling, te^tering, straining, stretching, measuring,
searching, marking, and sealing of woollen cloth, and in ye length, breadth, and
weight thereof, to the prejudice and hinderance of the buiers or wearers of the
same: for the prevention and restraint whereof, by the statutes made Ann^ 2. E.
3. 14. 3. R. 2. 2. 13. R. 2. 11. 4. H. 4. 6. 7. H. 4. 10. 13. H. 4. 4. 6. H. 8.
9. 25. H. 8. 18. 27. H. 8. 12. 3. Ed. 6. 2. 5. Ed. 6. 6. 4. and 5. P. and M. 5.
8. El. 12. 23. El. 9. 27. El. 18. 35. El. 10. 39. El. 20. 43. El. 10. 3. Iac.
16. it was ordained and enacted, how the wool provided for the making of cloth
to be sold, shall be spun, carded, and dyed, and of what length, breadth, and
weight several sorts of clothes wrought in several counties, cities, towns,
and parts of the realm made to be put to sale, shall and ought to be, and how
and in what manner and sort the same several clothes shall be made, wouen,
fulled, watered, tucked, milled, rowed, dyed, thicked, folded, pressed, tacked,
mingled, tentered, strained, stretched, measured, searched, marked, and sealed,
and several penalties be inflicted upon the transgressors therein, if any of the
same be omitted, or otherwise used then they ought to be. Every of which to set
down particularly, or so much thereof as at this present are reputed in force,
would require a large discourse or whole Treatise by it self. And the which I
do the rather refrain to set down and express, because it is doubtful and
disputable, whether any branch or article in either of the foresaid statutes or
any other statute do repeal, diminish, or alter the force of any other former
statute or branch of statute. And therefore consider of three several
branches of repeal in the before mentioned statutes of Anno 5. Ed. 6. 6. 8.
El. 12. and 43. El. 10. Et quaere.

42 As the governors of this state have bin provident from time to time to
prevent and punish deceits and frauds, when they were practiced toward men's
lands, leases, annuities, rents, debts, or other goods, cattels, or rights, so
have they taken care, that man's health shall be preserved, and their bodies
defended from feeding upon deceitful and corrupt victual, and have ordained
laws to punish those who in steed of good, deceived men with bad, corrupt, and
unwholesome viands: as it appears by ye stat. made An. 51. H. 3. and An. 51.
E. 1. whereby it is ordained, That a butcher ye sells swines flesh measled,
St. 51. H. 3. 3 St. 51. Ed. 1.
or flesh dead of the morion, Deceit by selling of unwholesome victuals.
after yt he shall be convict thereof, for the first time shall be grievously
amerced, ye second time he shall be adjudged to ye pillory, ye third time he
shall be imprisoned, and make fine, and the fourth time he shall forswear the
town. And in this manner shall it be done of all that offend in like case, as
of cooks that sees flesh or fish any ways that is not wholesome for man's
body, or after that they have kept it so long, that it loses the natural
holesomenesse, then sees it again, and sell it. And in like sort, St. 39. El.
10
by one other statute made An. 39. El. it was enacted, That if any alien or
stranger born, or any denizen or natural born subject of this realm shall
bring into any haven, port, creek, or town of this realm any salt fish or
salt herrings which shall not be good, sweet, seasonable, and meet for ma^s
meat, and shall offer ye same to be sold, and shall be warned by any officer of
such Port etc. where the same shall be offered to be sold, that the same be not
seasonable, nor meet for man's meat: Then if he or they shall after that offer
any of the said unseasonable fish to be sold to any person within this Realm:
or being an alien borne, and no denizen, shall not depart with the same from
the said Haven, Port, or Town so soon as conueniencie will serve: Then all
and every person, owners thereof, shall forfeit to the Queen all the said
unseasonable fish, unmeet for man's meat, as is aforesaid. And by a statute made
Anno 4. Ed. 3. it was established, St. 4. E. 3. 12
That assay shall be made of wines twice every year, once at Easter, and
another time at Michaelmas, and more often if need be, by the lords of the
Towns, and their Baylifes, and also by the Mayors and Baylifes of the same
towns: and all wines that be found corrupt shall be powered out, and the vessels
broken.

Extortion, Exaction.
1 EXtortion is a wrong done by an Officer, What is Extortion.
as Ordinary, Archdeacon, Official, Mayor, Bailife, Shirife, Escheator,
Coroner, Vndershirife, Auditor, Receiver, Clerk, or other Officer, or by any
other by color of an office, in taking of an excessive reward or fee, and more
then the law does allow him, for execution of his said office: which offense in
some degrees is worse then the privy picking of a man's purse in secret, and the
transgressor in a sort may be compared to the Freebooter, which with drawn
sword and with menacing words assaulteth the trauailer by the way, who casts
down his purse to him for fear of further hurt: And so is the poor suitor many
times enforced to do to the Officer, when of necessity he must use his help.
It is a thing most odious and offensive to the justice and peace of the Realm,
and to all the members thereof, that those men who be specially made choice of,
and principally selected to serve their prince and country, and to further the
execution of justice in their offices and places, and be sufficiently rewarded
with convenient stipends for their pains therein, should in contempt of the
law assesse their own fees, in a sort put their hands in other men's purses,
and there take what they will, and thereby do wrong, under the color and
shadow of justice.

Exaction is a wrong done by an officer, What is Exaction.
or by one pretending to have authority, in demanding and taking reward or
fee for that matter, cause, or thing, which the law does allow no fee at all.
And as our common and statute laws have declared, which offenses or acts they
do condemn and adiudge as Extortions and Exactions, so have they prescribed
in most cases several penalties to be inflicted upon the several
transgressors therein, leaving the residue to be punished at the kings
pleasure, or by the discretion of such of his Judges, Justices, or others by
his commission authorized, before whom the offenders shall be thereof
convicted. And further, our said statute laws have set down for the most
part, what fees or duties the suitor ought to pay to the officer, and the
officer is to demand of him; to the intent that the one shall not be ignorant
what to offer, nor the other what to require; and to the end, that the Law
having written it in a sort in the officers forehead what his duty is, he may
blush when he looks in the suitors face, and demands more.

2 I will begin with an Exaction, that no former generation did taste of, hear
of, or fear, but it has sprung up of later years, and bin greatly exclaimed
of, and condemned in this our present age (which is taking of money, or some
other reward for a Report or Certificat) wherein the offender most commonly
does a double injury, and to two several persons, viz. first to him whose
money, fee, or other reward he takes for the favorable making of that report
in his behalf, whereas the law does allow him none for reporting, but
otherwise bountifully rewards him for that and all such other pains, and
next and chiefly to him, in prejudice of whom, or whose case he makes that
report. He does not now indifferently respect the cause in question, but
bends his eye upon the reward which he has received, and deuiseth to
accomplish the request of the one, and yet to yield to the other not the
effect, but some color of justice. The King at his coronation does promise to
all his subjects, Mag. Chart. St. 9. H. 3. 29
Quod nulli vendemus, nulli negabimus, aut differemus iusticiam: whereupon the
whole realm did take it unkindly at their hands, who being the kings
Substitutes in place of justice, and receiving but a small particle of his
authority, would do then all the said offenses at once, and sell, deny, and
defer justice to some of the kings subjects, and certify that for good which
was bad, or that for justice which was mere injury: Or if they did make
report and certificat of that which was just and true, would sell it, and take
money or other reward for it, which the king himself upon his oath refuses to
do. And therefore, because all ex^^tions, extortions, and corruptions be
odious as well in this, as in all other well governed Commonweales, and to the
intent to prevent the like enormities in this and other ages, by a statute made
Anno 1. Jacob. it was enacted, St. 1. Iac. 10
That no person to whom any order or cause shall be committed, Exaction by taking
or reward for a report.
or referred, by any of the Kings Judges, or Courts at Westminster, or any
other Court, directly or indirectly, or by any act, shift, color, or device,
have, take, or receive any money, fee, reward, covenant, obligation, promise,
agreement, or any other thing, for his report or certificat, by writing, or
otherwise, upon pain of forfeiture of one hundred pounds for every such report
or certificat; and to be deprived of his office and place in the same Court:
The one moitie to be to the king, his heices etc. the other moitie to the party
grieved, which will sue for the same at any time during the said suit, or
within one year after the same cause discontinued or decreed: and in his
default of such suit, to him or them that will sue for the same by original
writ, B. P. or I. in the Kings Court of Star Chamber, or in any of his Courts
of Record at Westminster: in which suit by B. P. or I. no W. E. P. S. P. or any
other delay shall be admitted. The Clerks duty.
Provided nevertheless, That it shall be lawful for the Clerk to take for his
pains for writing of every such report or certificat twelve pence for the
first side, and two pence for every side after, and no more, upon pain to
forfeit ten shillings for every penny taken, over and above the said sums
to be had and recovered as aforesaid.

Extortion in the shirife, coroner, and other officers.
3 For that the kings of this Realm have allowed to their Officers from time to
time sufficient Salaries to maintain them, according to their estates and
degrees, to the intent that they should not otherwise extort any thing from
their subjects, but such fees and duties, as the ancient customs, laws, or
statutes of the realm did allow them. Therefore by the statute of West. 1. it
was ordained, That if any shirife, coroner, St. 3. E. 1. 26
or other officer of the kings do take any thing to execute his office, but
only that which the king allows him, he shall render double to the party, and
shall be punished at the kings pleasure.

St. 3. E. 1. 29
4 To prevent extortion in certain Officers of the Judges, Extortion in a
Serieant, Crier, or Marshall, of a Judge.
by the same stat. of West. 1. it was enacted, That if the Serient, Crier, or
Marshall of any Justice, do wrongfully take money of any which does recover
land, obtain his suit, levy a fine, or prosecute any suit touching any plea
of the Crown, he shall be punished at the kings pleasure, and yield treble
damages to the party grieved. And if he be a Serieant of fee, his Office
shall be seized into the K. hands. But in an attaint, 29. Ass. p. 13
if the plaintiff be nonsuit, every of the petit Jury shall pay xij. d. to the
Marshall, and be discharged.

5 To eschew extortion which in some cases before had been committed by some
Coroners, St. 1. E. 1. 10. St. 1. H. 8. 7
first by the stat. of anno 3. E. 1. Extortion in a Coroner.
and after that by the stat. of anno 1. H. 8. it was established, That a
Coroner upon request made to him to come, and inquire upon the view of any
person slain, drowned, or otherwise dead by misaduenture, the same Coroner
shall do his office diligently, upon the view of the body of every such
person or persons, without taking any thing therefore, upon pain to every
Coroner that will not endeavor himself to do his Office, as is aforesaid: or
that he takes any thing for doing of his Office upon every person dead by
misaduenture, for every time forty shillings. 27. Ass. p. 14
And upon the said statute of Anno 3. Ed. 1. two Coroners were indicted of
Extortion, for that they had taken of some of the K. people, half a mark at
several times, contrary to the foresaid stat. and their oaths, and therefore
they paid a fine to the King.

6 Because the Sheriff of every County is a great and necessary Officer in
the Commonweal, and used as a special instrument to the furtherance of
justice, in all suits pursued at the common law, and his service is employed in
the beginning, prosecuting, and ending of the most of them: therefore as the
law has always had a special regard of him, and foreseen that he shallbe a
man of wisdom, of worth, of credit, countenance, and ability, and that he
shall be allowed a convenient stipend, and salary for his pains in most cases:
so does she carry a vigilant and watchful eye upon him, and his inferior
Officers, or Substitutes, knowing what grievous oppressions might ensue, if she
should leave a man of his authority, and necessary employment, at liberty to
diue at his pleasure into other men's purses, and to take what he would; and
therefore she has restrained him, his Vndersherife, Bailife of Franchise, and
other Bailife within certain lists, and assigned them what they shall take for
Arrests, Attachements, Mainprises, letting to Bail, and serving of Executions,
which if any of them do cxceed, he shall forfeit the penalties hereafter
expressed, and be adjudged an extortioner: Extortion in Sherifes, Vndersherifs
Bailifes.
As appears by the stat. of An. 23. St. 23. H. 6. 10.
H. 6. whereby it was ordained, That no Sheriff, Vndersherife, Bailife of
Franchise, nor any other Bailif, by occasion, or under color of his Office,
shall take any other thing, by themselves, or by any other person to their use,
or to their profit, of any person by any of them arrested, or attached, nor of
any other for them, for the omitting of any arrest or attachement to be made
by their bodies, or of any person by any of them by force or color of their
office arrested or attached, for fine, fee, mainprise, letting to bail, or for
showing any ease or favor to any such person so arrested, The fees of the
Sheriff for arrests, etc.
for their reward or profit, but such as follows, viz. The Sheriff xx. d, the
Bailife which makes the arrest or attachement iiij. d. the Jailer (if the
prisoner be committed to his ward) iiij. The Sherifes duty for the making of
a copy of a Panel
d. The Sheriff, Vndersherife, Sherifes Clerk, Steward, or Bailif of
Franchise, servant to the Bailife, or Coroner, shall not take by color of his
office, by himself, nor by any other person to his use, any thing of any
person, for making of any return or panell, and for the copy of a panell
iiij. d. No Sheriff, nor none of the officers aforesaid, shall take, or cause
to be taken or made any obligation by color of their office, but only to
themselves, of any person, nor by any person which shall be in their ward by
course of the law, but in the name of their office, and upon condition written,
that the said prisoners shall appear at the day of the said writs, bills, or
warrants, and in such places as the said writs, bills, or warrants shall
require. And if any of the said Sherifes, or other officers aforesaid, take any
Obligation in any other form, by color of their offices, it shall be void.
And he shall take no more for making of any such obligation, The Sherifes, etc.
forfeiture for extortion.
warrant, or precept by him to be made, but iiij. d. And all Sherifes,
Vndersherifes, Clerks, Bailifes, Gaolers, Coroners, Stewards, Bailifes of
Franchises, or any other Officers or Ministers, which do contrary to the
foresaid ordinances, in any point of the same, shall lose to the party in this
behalf endammaged or grieved, his treble damages, and shall forfeit xl. l. at
every time that any do the contrary in any point of the same, whereof the king
shall have the one half, to be employed only to the use of his house, and the
party that will sue, The warden of the Fleet.
the other. But the Warden of the Fleet, and of the K. palace at West. shall
not be prejudiced by this ordinance, in his duty of his office.

Extortion in a Sheriff for sparing of a Iuror.
7 To the intent that the Sheriff nor any of his officers should take any
reward, for the sparing to return any Iuror, and by that means commit
extortion, by a stat. made anno 27. El. it was provided, That if any Sheriff,
St. 27. El. 6.
Vndersherife, Sherifes deputy, Sheriff or Vndersherifes Clerk, or any
Bailife of Franchise, shall receive, have, or take, by himself, or any other,
any sum of money, reward, or other profit, directly or indirectly, or do take
any promise, make any agreement, or assent to have any sum of money, reward,
or other profit, directly or indirectly, of any person or persons, for the
sparing, not warning, or not returning of any person to be sworn as a Iuror,
for ye trial of any issue joined in any of the courts of the K. Bench, Common
Pleas, and Exchequer, or before any Justice: then every Sheriff etc. so
offending, shall forfeit for every such offense v. l. to the K. and I. to be
recovered in any Court of Record by A. B. P. I. etc. wherein no W.E.P. etc.

How much Sherifes may take for serving of an execution.
8 And for that our later age thought it as expedient to prevent extortion or
oppression in Sherifes and other their Officers in serving of executions, as
the former age did in making of arrests or attachements, etc. and to the intent
that the Sheriff and his Officers might know what to demand and take for the
serving of an execution, without danger of extortion, and that the suitor might
be ascertained what to offer and pay therefore, without any scruple of
receiving injury, by a statute made An. 29. Eliz or rather An. 28. St. 29. El.
4. St. 28. El. 4.
Eliz. it was enacted, That it shall not be lawful, to, or for any Sherif,
Vnder-sherife, Bialife of Franchises, or liberties, nor for any of their, or
either of their officers, ministers, servants, Balifes or Deputies, nor for any
of them, by reason or color of their or either of their offices, to have,
receive, or take of any person or persons whatsoever, directly or indirectly,
for the serving and executing of any extent or execution upon the body, lands,
goods or chattels of any person or persons whatsoever, more or other
consideration or recompense, than in this Act is and shall be limited, which
shall be lawful to be had, received, and taken, viz. twelve pence of and for
every 20. shillings, where the sum exceeds not an hundred pounds, and six
pence of and for every 20. shillings, being over and above the said sum of an
hundred pounds, that he or they shall so leuy, or extend and deliver in
execution, or take the body in execution for, by virtue and force of any such
extent or execution whatsoever, upon pain and penalty, that all and every
Shirife, Vndershirife, Baylife of Franchises etc. which at any time shall
directly or indirectly do the contrary, shall loose to the party grieved his
treble damages, and shall forf. xl. l. of lawful English money for every time
that he, they, or any of them shall do the contrary, to the Q. and I. to be
recovered by A. S. B. or I. wherein no W.E.P. Provided always, Execution
within cities or towns corporat.
that this act shall not extend to any fees to be taken or had for any
execution within any city or town corporat.

St. 2. H. 4. 8
9 By the stat. of An. 2. H. 4. it was established, Extortion in the
chirographer of the common place
That the Chirographer of the common place, nor his fermor, deputy, or
lieutenant, shall not take any more then iiij. s^. for any fine levied in the
same court. And if the fermor, deputy, or lieutenant do take any more, he shall
forf. his office, be excluded the same court, suffer one years imprisonment,
and pay to the party grieved his treble damages: and the party grieved shall
have his suit before the same Justices.

Sta. 33. H. 8. 39.
10 By the stat. of Ann. 33. H. 8. it was enacted, Extortion in auditors, or
their clerks.
That if any auditor of the Exchequer, Duchy of Lancaster, and court of Wards
and Liueries, or any of his clerks, or any other, to their or any of their
use, shall take for the inrolment of any letters patents, decrees of the same
courts, grants, or indentures of leases, or for the allowance of the same,
above 3. s^. 4. d. he so offe^ding shall forf. 6. s^. 8. d for every penny that
he takes above the foresaid sum, to the K. and I. etc. to be recovered by A.
I. wherein no W.E.P. etc. And if any person do offer to any such auditor any
such letters patents, decrees, or leases, to be enrolled, he shall inroll the
same, or as much thereof as shall appertain to his office.

St. 33. H. 8. 39.
11 By the same stat. of An. 33. H. 8. it was moreover ordained, Extortion in
the kings receivers.
That every receiver of the Exchequer, Duchy of Lancaster, and court of Wards
and Liueries, which shall pay to any person an annuity, pention, or other rent,
shall (if the same person will upon the receipt thereof deliver unto him a
sufficient acquittance, sealed and signed, testifying the same receipt) receive
the same, without taking any reward therefore, upon pain to forf. for every
penny or pennyworth received, 6. s^. 8. d. And if the party do not deliver such
a sufficient acquittance, but that the receiver or his clerk does make the
same, he shall have therefore 4. d. and if he take above 4. d. he shall forf.
for every penny or pennyworth so taken, 6. s^. 8. d. And if any Treasurer,
Receiver, or Minister accomptant, Extortion in them who do pay fees, pentions,
etc.
or their deputies, which shall pay to any person any fee, annuity, pention,
duty, warrant, or rent, do retain, receive, or take of the party to whom he
shall pay ye same, in way of reward, or otherwise, above 4. d. for every l. that
he shall pay, he shall forf. 6. s^. 8. d. for every penny or pennyworth that he
shall receive over, to the party grieved, to be recovered by A. B. or P.
wherein no W. E. or P. etc.

12 By the stat. of An. 26. H. 8. it was ordained, Extortion in officers of the
Exchequer.
That if any Officer of the exchequer do take of any archbishop, bishop, or
other person having charge with the collection and payment of the Tenth of
Spiritual promotions, any reward for making his account or Quietus est in the
same Exchequer, or for any thing concerning the Tenth, he shall forfeit his
office, and make fine at the kings pleasure.

Extortion in a clerk of the signet o^ privy seal.
13 By the statute of Anno 27. H. 8. it was established, St. 27. H. 8, 11
That all and every Clerk, and Clerks of the Signet, and privy Seal, shall
have and take for his or their writing of a warrant upon a Bill for Tales of
reward, twelve pence: for the writing of a warrant for the gift of every
office, twenty pence: for the writing of a warrant for a pention, annuitie, or
wages, twenty pence: for the writing of a warrant for a special Livery, or
other perpetuity, six shillings eight pence: for the writing of a warrant upon
every bill for a Conge deslier, royal assent, restitution of Temporalties,
Donatiues, Aduocations, Presentations, or other Ecclesiastical matter, three
shillings four pence: for the writing of every warrant upon a Placard,
License, Pardon, or Shirifes reward, two shillings: for the writing of every
warrant upon a denizen, three shillings four pence: for the writing of a
warrant for the keeping of an idiot, twenty pence: for the writing of a warrant
for the keeping of a Ward, three shillings four pence. And no Clerk or
Clerks of the Signet or privy Seal aforesaid, shall take for the writing of
any manner warrant above specified, more large and ample fees then is before
prescribed, upon pain of ten pounds to be forfeited to the K. and I. to be
recovered by B.A.P.I. in any of the kings Courts, wherein no E. P. W. shall be
admitted.

Extortion by officers of the faculties.
14 To the intent that the Clerk of the Faculties, St. 25. H. 8. 21.
and his inferior officers and clerks might content themselves with their fees
and duties assigned, and extort no more, by the statute of Anno 25. H. 8. it
was enacted, That such as shall exact or receive of any suitor more for a
dispensation, faculty, or license, then is contained in the two books of one
tenor of Taxes, shall forfeit ten times so much as he shall so extortiously
receive and exact, to the K. his heirs and successors, and the party that will
sue, to be recovered by A. B. P. wherein no E. W. P, shall be admitted.

Extortion upon prentices and freemen.
15 Because no Extortion should be committed upon apprentices when they begin
or end their terms, by the stat. of Anno 22. H. 8. and Anno 28. St. 22. H. 8.
8 St. 22. H. 8. 5
H. 8. it was established, That no Masters, Wardens, or Fellowships of crafts,
nor any of them, shall take of any apprentice, or other person, for the entry
of the said prentice into their said Fellowship, above the sum of ij. s^. vj.
d. nor for his entry when his years or term is expired, above iij. s. iiij.
d. upon pain to forf. for every time that they or any of them shall offend
contrary to this act, xl. l. to the K. and the I. etc. to be recovered by A. I.
etc. wherein no P. E. etc.

The fees of the officers of the court of wards.
16 Because the makers of our laws were willing to give forewarning to the
officers of the Court of Wards to eschew extortion, St. 32. H. 8. 46.
therefore by the stat. of An. 32. H. 8. it was enacted, That the master and
officers of the Court of wards and liueries shall take for the fees of all
process at the suit of the parties, under ye privy seal of the same court, ij.
s^. vj. d. and for the fees of al co^missions directed out at the suit of the
parties ij. s^. vj. d. and for recording of all appara^ces iiij. d. and no more.

St. 26. H. 8. 3
17 By the statute of Anno 26. H. 8. The fees for obligations for first fruits.
it was provided to avoid Extortion in the officers of the first fruits, That
no person shall compel an other to pay for any writing obligatorie to be made
for the payment of the first fruits of Ecclesiastical livings to the King,
above eight pence, nor for any acquitance for the receipt thereof, above four
pence.

18 For that Eschetors should know what is their duty for the finding of
offices, and for the execution of Writs, Extortion by Esc^cators.
to the intent that they might thereby the easlier shun the danger of
Extortion, if they will: by a statute made Anno 33. St. 33. H. 8. 22.
H. 8. it was enacted, That if any Escheator does take above the sum of xv.
shillings for the finding of an office of any lands, tenements, or
hereditaments, not exceeding the clear yearly value of five pound, viz. for
the Escheators fee vj. s^ viij. d: for the writing of the office iij. s^ iiij.
d: for the charges of the Jury iij. s^, and for the officers that shall
receive the said office in any court of Record ij. s^, he shall forfeit for
every time so offending, v. l. to the K. and I. to be recovered by A. I.
wherein no W.E.P. etc. And by the statute of Anno 23. St. 23. H. 6. 17.
H. 6. it was ordained, That if an Escheator do take privily, or openly, by
himself, or any other, above the sum of xl. s^, for the execution of any
Writ in one county, he shall forfeit for every offense forty pounds, whereof
one half shall be to the King, and the other to him that will sue.

19 To prevent Exactions by the officers of the Admiralty upon those who
travail into other Countries, St. 2. Ed. 6. 6
for the getting of fish, Exactions upon them who travail for fish.
by a Statute made Anno 2. Ed. 6. it was ordained, That if the Admiral, or any
officer, or minister of the Admiraltie shall exact, receive, or take by
himself, his servant, or deputy, of any merchant, or fisherman, any sum of
money, doles or shares of fish, or any other reward, or benefit, for any
license to pass this Realm into Island, New Foundland, Ireland, or other
places commodious for the getting of fish, or for any other respect concerning
the said voiages: he shall forfeit for the first offense treble the sum, or
value of the reward so taken, to the King and him that will sue for the same,
to be recovered by A.I. etc. wherein no W.E.P. etc. And for the second offense,
shall loose his office, and make fine at the Kings pleasure.

20 To the intent that the Marshall of the Marshalsey of the Court of the Kings
house may take such fees in open Court as were wont to be taken in the time of
King Edward the third, and none other, The fees of the Marshall of the K. house
and may thereby omit to commit Extortion: St. 2. H. 4. 23.
by a Statute made Anno 2. H. 4. it was declared, That the said Marshall may
take the fees hereafter following, viz. of every person which comes by
Capias to the said Court iiij. d, and if he be let to mainprise until his day
ij. d more. And of every person being defendant which is impleaded of Trespass,
and finds two Mampernors to keep his day until the end of the plea ij. d.
And of every person committed to prison by judgment of the steward, in
whatsoever manner the same be, iiij. d, and of every ptrson delivered of felony
iiij. d, and of every felon let to mainprise by the Court, iiij. d. But if the
Marshall, or any of his officers under him, do take any other fees, than are
before declared, the said Marshall and every of his officers, shall lose their
offices, A Seruitor of bills in the Marshals Court.
and also pay to the party grieved treble damages, for the which the said
party shall have his suit before the Steward of the said Court for the time
being. A seruitor of bills, which bears a staff of the Court, shall take for
every mile from the said Court until the same place, where he shall do his
service, j. d, and for xij. miles xij. d, and to serve a Venire facias, or a
Distringas out of the same court the double. And if any Seruitor of Bills do
the contrary, he shall be imprisoned, and make fine to the K. after the
discretion of the Steward of the same court, and also be foreiudged and
banished the same court. All which articles the steward at his coming into the
country has authority to proclaim, and put in execution.

21 And for that the kings of this realm have from time to time bestowed upon
such as they assigned to be muster masters, or captains in times of wars
liberal and bountiful stipends, and allowances, the rather, to the intent
they should not exact, or make a pray, of such as should be, or then were
soldiers: Therefore to prevent such like exaction, by a statute made An^ 4. and
5. St. 4. and 5. P. and M. 3.
P. and M. it was ordained, Muster masters exacting money to spare soldiers.
That if any person which shall be commanded by the Q. her heirs or successors,
by commission, leters, or otherwise authorized, to leuy muster, or to make men
to serve in her wars, or otherwise for the defense of this Realm, do by any
mean exact, levy, receive, or take, or cause to be taken any money, or other
reward, or thing whatsoever, of any person for service in wars, or that shall be
appointed, named, or mustred to serve in any such service, or for the sparing,
or discharging of such person from the said service, then he shall forfeit ten
times so much, as he shall receive, exact, or take, to the Q. and I. to be
recovered by A.I. etc. wherein no W.E.P. If any captain, petit captain, or
other having charge of men, shall for any advantage or gain by him to be
received, discharge, or license any of the men, or soldiers appointed to serve
in the wars under his rule, or order, to depart from the said service: or
shall not pay unto his soldiers, Exacting by captains of their soldiers
and to every of the^ their full and whole wages, conduct, and coat money,
within x. days next after he shall have received the same: then the party
offending in giving such license, or discharge, shall forfeit for every such
offense x. times the value of the thing so received, to the Q. and I. to be
recovered by A. I. wherein no W.E.P. etc. And also he shall pay unto every such
soldier from whom he shall withold any such wages, conduct, or coat money,
treble the sum so withheld.

Extortion by taking of scauage of merchants.
22 Because Scauage, otherwise called Shewage was many times wrongfully, and
extortiously taken by Magistrates of cities and corporat towns, of merchants
that transported or brought their marchandizes thither: therefore by a statute
made Anno 19. H. 7. it was provided, That if any mayor, shirife, St. 19. H. 7. 8
bailife, or other officer, in any city, borough, or town within this realm,
do distraine, take, or levy any custom called Scauage or Shewage of any
merchant denizen, or of any other the K. subjects denizens, for any merchandise
to the K. before truly customed, that is brought by land or water to be uttered
in any city, borough, or town in this land: or if any mayor, shirife,
bailife, or other officer in any city, borough, or town for non payment of the
said scauage, let or disturb any merchants, or any other persons denizens, to
sell and utter their merchandise by them brought into any city, borough, or
town; then he which offends shall forfet for every offense xx. l. to the K.
and the party grieved, or any other that will first sue by A. of debt in any
shire, wherein no W.E.P. shall be allowed. But the mayor, shirifes, and
co^munalty of London and every of them shall have such sums of money for
scauage of every person denizen, as of right they ought to have.

23 Every of the chief Justices of the Kings Bench and Common Pleas, and the
mayor of the Staple at Westminster, and the Recorder of the City of London,
before whom any obligation being of the nature and force of a statute Staple
shall be recognized, St. 23. H. 8. 6
according to the statute of An^ 23. H. 8. The Justices and Clarks fee upon
every Recognisance
shall take for every such Recognisance iij. s^ iiij. d, and the clarke that
shall write, make and inroll the same iij. s^ iiij. d, and for the certificat
of every one such obligation xx. d. And if any of the said Justices, Mayor,
Recorder, or Clarke take of any of the K. subjects above the sum or sums to
them limited by this statute, then the same offender shall forfeit for every
time so offending, xl. l. to the K. and I. to be recovered by A. I. wherein no
W.E.P. etc. And by the Stat. of An^ 27. St. 27. Eli. 4.
Eli. it was further ordained, That no Clarke of the same Recognisances shall
or may take, for, or in respect of any search to be made for, or concerning any
statute Merchant, or of the Staple, The Clerks fee for search.
brought unto him to be entered, above ij. d for one years search, and so after
the rate of ij. d for every year, and not above, upon pain to forfeit and
lose to the party or parties grieved twenty times as much as he shall take,
contrary to the true meaning of this Act: to be recovered in any of the K.
courts of Record, by action of debt B. P. I. wherein no W.E.P.

24 Because it is well perceived, that learned and expert Atturnies be
necessary members in our State, and great means to further justice, and to
bring suits to their expected ends, and that they must therefore disburse money
for learned council, for process, for pleading, for copies, and many other
things, and after receive the same again, with their own fees, and salarie
for their pains of their Clients: Therefore the Law (as a provident mistress)
taking care that Atturnies and Sollicitors, shall not in any secret manner commit
extortion, by charging their Clients with excessive fees, and unnecessary
demands, St. 3. Iac. 7.
by a statute made An^ 3. Iac. procured it to be established, Means for
Atturnies to avoid the suspicion of extortion.
That no Attorney, Solicitor, or servant to any, shall be allowed from his
Client, or master, of, or for any fee given to any Serieant, or Councellor at
law, or of or for any sum or sums of money, given for copies to any clarke or
clerks, or officers in any court of Record at Westminster. unless he have a ticket
subscribed with the hand and name of the same Serieant, or Councellor, clarke,
clarks, or officers aforesaid, testifying how much he has received for his
fee, or given or paid for copies, and at what time, and how often. And all
Atturnies and Sollicitors shall give a true Bill unto their masters, or
clients, or their assignees, of all other charges, concerning the suits which
they have for them, subscribed with his own hand, and name, before such time,
as they or any of them shall charge their clients with any the same fees or
charges: An Attorney delaying of a suite, or dema^ding more tha^ is due.
And if the attorney or solicitor do or shall willingly delay his clients
suits, to work his own gain, or demand by his bil any other sums of money, or
allowance upon his account of any money which he has not laid out or disbursed:
then in every such case the party grieved shall have his action against such
attorney, or solicitor, and recover therein costs and treble damages: And the
said attorney and solicitor shall be discharged from thenceforth from being an
attorney or solicitor any more.

25 For that the Stewards of Leets and court Barons, did of late years get
into their own hands, and in their own names, or into the hands of some of
their friends to their use, the profits and perquisites of the said Leets, and
court Barons, whereby many suitors to the same Courts were iniustly vexed, and
by grievous fines and amerciaments, unduly punished, and much extortion was
done unto the Tenants and Inhabitants where such stewards were, to make and
obtain an undue and extraordinary gain to themselves: for the restraining
whereof, A prevention of extortion in Stewards of Courts.
by a statute made Anno 1. St. 1. Iac. 5.
Iac. it was established, That no Steward, deputy Steward, or under Steward of
any court Leete, or court Baron, shall directly, or indirectly in his own
name, or in the name of any other, take, receive, or make benefit to his own
use, in money, goods, or any other thing, to the value of twelve pence, or
more, by virtue or color of any demise or grant, hereafter to be made, of
any of the profits, or perquisites, or amerciaments of any such Courts,
whereof they are Steward, which rightfully shall belong to the Lords of the
same: upon pain that every Steward offending contrary to the Tenor of this
Act, shall for every such offense forfeit ten pounds, and to be disabled ever
after to be Steward of such Court, or of any other: The one moitie of which
forfeiture shall be to the K. etc. and the other to any party that will sue, to
be recovered in any of the Kings Courts of Record, by A. B. P. I. etc. wherein
no E. P. or other dilatorie plea shall be allowed.

26 To the intent that Gaugeors, and Searchers of barrells of fish should know
what was due unto them for their pains, and take no more, nor commit
extortion, Extortion in Gaugeors, Searchers, and Packers of fish.
by a statute made Anno 11. H. 7. it was enacted, St. 11. H. 7. 23.
That every Gaugeor, Packer, and Searcher shall take no more for gauging of a
barrel of salmon, herring, fish, eeles, half barrel, and firkin, than for
every piece a farthing, and for his labor for searching and packing, if need
be, of a barrel of salmon from head to head a penny, and for boning, naping,
and packing of a barrel of fish, if need be, a penny, and for searching and for
packing of a barrel of herring, if need be, two pence: and for searching and
packing of every barrel of eeles ij. d: and so in half barrels, and firkins
of herrings, and eeles, they shall take according to the former rate. And if any
Gaugeor, Searcher, or Packer do the contrary, he shall loose his office, and
also be imprisoned forty days. But the said Searcher, or Packer shall receive
nothing of the said fees by color of their office, but only for such Buts,
Barrels, half Barrels, and Firkins, as by them shall be sufficiently searched
and packed, and were not sufficiently packed before.

27 In the reigns of K. Edward the third, and K. Henry the fifth, the Commons
several times complained in parliament of diverse extortions committed by
Ordinaries, and their officers, in probat of Testaments, making of Inuentories,
and giving of Acquitances, as it does appear by the statute of Anno 31. Ed. 3.
and Anno 3. H. 5. St. 31. Ed. 3. 4. St. 3. H. 5. 8.
But because the former of those statutes inflicted no condign punishment upon
the offenders therein, and the later is expired; A prevention of extortion in
Ordinaries and their officers.
and also, for that the same extortions enormity did increase: Therefore for the
redress of the same, by a Statute made Anno 21. H. 8. St. 21. H. 8. 5
it was established, That nothing shall be demanded, received, or taken by any
Bishop, Ordinary, Archdeacon, Chancellor, Commissarie, Official, nor any
other person or persons whatsoever, having authority to take, or receive
probation, insinuation, or approbation of Testament, or Testaments, by him, or
themselves, nor by his, or their Registers, Scribes, Praisors, Summoners,
Apparitors, or by any other of their Ministers, for the probation of any
Testament, The Ordinaries duty for probat of Testaments. The goods not
amounting to C. s^.
or for writing, sealing, praising, registring, fines, making of inuentories,
giving of Acquitances, of for any cause concerning the same, where the goods of
the Testator of the said Testament, or person so dying do not amount clearly
over and above the value of C. s^. sterling: except only to the scribe to have
for the writing of the probat of the Testament of him deceased, vj. d. And for
the commission of administration of the goods of any man deceasing intestate,
not being above the like value of C. s^ clear vj. d. And when the goods of the
Testator do amount over and above the clear value of C. s^, The goods not
amounting to xl. l.
and do not exceed the sum of forty pounds sterling; Then no Bishop,
Ordinary, nor other person or persons whatsoever, having authority to take
probation of any Testament, by himself, or any of his ministers, for the
probation, insinuation, and approbation of any testament or testaments, or for
the registring, sealing, writing, praising, making of Inuentories, giving of
acquitances, fines, or any other things concerning the same, shall take, or
cause to be taken of any person or persons, only three shillings six pence,
and not above, whereof to the Ordinary for him and his ministers, two
shillings six pence, and to the scribe the xij. d residue, for registring of
the same. The goods exceeding xl. l.
And where the goods of the Testator do amount above the clear value of
forty pounds sterling: then the Ordinary by himself, nor any of his
Ministers for the probation of any testament, or for the registring, sealing,
etc. or for any thing concerning the same probat, shall take of any person but
only five shillings, and not above, whereof to be to the said Ordinary for
him and his ministers, two shillings six pence, and not above, and two
shillings six pence residue to be to the scribe for the registring of the same:
Or else the scribe to be at his liberty to refuse the two shillings six pence,
and to have for the writing of every ten lines of the said testament a penny
(whereof every line to contain in length ten inches.) And every such Bishop,
Ordinary, or other person, having authority to take the probation of any
testament, their Registers, Scribes, and Ministers, shall approve, insinuate,
seal, and register the said Testaments, and deliver the same sealed with the
seal of their office, to the executor or executors named in such testaments
for the sums abouesaid, and in manner and form above rehearsed with
convenient speed, without any frustratorie delay. If any person die intestate,
An administration granted.
or the executors named in any such testament, refuse to prove the said
testament: Then the Ordinary, or other person or persons, having authority to
take probat of testaments, shall grant the administration of the goods of the
testator, or person deceased, to the widow of the same person, or to the next
of his kin, or both, as by the discretion of the same Ordinary shall be
thought good, taking surety for the true administration of the same goods, and
taking nothing for the said administration granted, unless the goods of the
person so deceased amount above the value or sum of C. s^. And in case the
goods of the person so deceased amount above the value of C. s^, and not above
xl. l. then he and his officers shall take only ij. s^ vj. d, and not above.
And in case any person or persons at any time require a copy or copies of a
testament proved, or inventory made; The fees for copies.
then the said ordinary, etc. or his ministers shall from time to time with
convenient speed, without frustratory delay, deliver, or cause to be delivered,
a true copy, or copies of the same unto the said person or persons demanding
the same, taking for the search, and for the making of the copy of either of
ye said testament or inventory, but only such fee, as is before rehearsed for
ye registring of the said testament; or else the scribe or register to be at
his liberty to demand, have, and take for every x. lines thereof, being of the
proportion before rehearsed, j. d. But where any persons having authority to
take probat of testame^ts have used to take less sums of money than abouesaid,
for ye probat of testame^ts, or co^missio^ of administ^atio^s, or other cause
concerning ye same, they shall take such sums for ye same, as they before ye
making of this act used to take, and not above. Every Bish. ordinary,
archdeaco^, cha^celor, co^missary, official, and other person and persons,
having authority to take probat of Testaments, their Registers, Scribes,
Praisors, Summoners, Apparitors, and all other their Ministers whatsoever they
be, The forfeture of the offender
that shall do, or attempt, or cause to be done, or attempted against this
Act, in any thing, shall forfeit for every time so offending, to the party
grieved in that behalf, so much money as he shall take contrary to this Act,
and over that shall forfeit to the King and the party grieved ten pounds to be
recovered by A. I. B. etc. wherein no W.E.P. And every of the same Bishops, and
other persons, which shall incur the danger of such penalty, shall be charged
only for himself, and none of them shall be chargeable to the penalty for
others offenses.

Extortion is an Ordinary for the Seal of a Citation.
28 Shortly after the making of the foresaid Statute of Anno 21. H. 8. the
graund Council of the Realm being as careful that Ordinaries, or their
Officers, should no more commit extortion in sealing of Citations, than they
might in proouing of Wills, granting of Administrations, or such like, did
therefore by a statute made Anno 23. H. 8. ordain, St. 23. H. 8. 9
That if any Archbishop, Bishop, Ordinary, Official, Commissarie, or other
person having spiritual jurisdiction, or any substitute, or minister of his,
do ask, demand, take, or receive, more than three pence for the seal of a
Citation, he shall pay to the party, of whom he does demand, take, or receive
the same, double damages, and costs, and shall forfeit for every offense ten
pounds to the king, and I. to be recovered by A.I. wherein no W.E.P. etc.

Mortuaries.
29 Because in former times it was uncertain, and by this means, often times
great question did grow, what, and how much Parsons, Vicars, or other
spiritual men, or their farmors ought to take for Mortuaries, or Corse
Presents, after the death of their Parishioners: Therefore, to the intent that
the same should be limited in certainty, and not be excessive, nor any
Extortion, Exaction, or other wrong committed in the taking, St. 21. H. 8. 6
or receiving of them, by a Statute made Anno 21. H. 8. it was established,
That no Parson, Vicar, Curate, or parish Priest, nor any other spiritual
person, nor their farmers, Baylifes, or Lessees, shall have, take, receive, or
demand of any person or persons within this Realm, for any person or persons
dying within the same, any manner of Mortuarie or Corse present, nor any money,
or other thing for the same, more than is hereafter expressed: Nor shall
convent, or call any person before any Judge spiritual, for the recovery of
any such Mortuaries, The penalty for extorting for a Mortuarie.
or any other thing for the same, more than is hereafter expressed: upon pain
to forfeit for every time so demanding, receiving, taking, conuenting, or
calling any such person or persons before any spiritual Judge, so much in
value, as they shall take above the sum limited by this Act, and over that,
forty shillings to the party grieved, contrary to this Act: for the which the
party grieved shall have an action of debt by W. B. P. or I. in any of the K.
Courts, A Legacy given to a spiritual person.
wherein no W.E.P. etc. But it is lawful for any spiritual person to take any
sum of money, or other thing, which by any person dying shall be given and
bequeathed to him, or to the high altar of the Church.

No Mortuary or Corse present shall be given or demanded of any person, St.
21. H. 8. 6
but in such place only where Mortuaries have been used to be paid and
given: But one Mortuarie for any person.
in the place of his most dwelling and habitation, and there but one Mortuarie.

St. 21. H. 8. 6
No Mortuarie shall be taken, or demanded of any person whatsoever he be, The
parsons duty for all Mortuaries.
bailifes or lessees, shall for any person dying, or dead, and being at the
time of his death of the value in moveable goods of ten marks or more, above
his debts paid, and under the sum of thirty pounds, take for a mortuarie
above three shillings four pence in the whole: And for a person being at ye
time of his death of the value of thirty pounds above his debts paid in
moveable goods and under the value of forty pounds, there shall no more be
taken for a mortuarie then six shillings eight pence: And for a person having
at the time of his death of the value in moveable goods of forty pounds or
above, to any sum, there shall no more be taken, paid, or demanded for a
Mortuarie, then ten shillings in the whole.

St. 21. H. 8. 6
No Parson, Vicar, Curat etc. or other, shall take, demand, or ask any Who
shall pay no Mortuaries.
for any woman being covert baron, nor for any child, nor for any person not
keeping house, nor for any waifaring man, or other that makes not residence in
the place where they shall happen to die: But the mortuaries of such wayfaring
persons shall be answerable (in places where mortuaries have been accustomed to
be paid, and in manner, form, and rate above mentioned and none otherwise) in
the places where such wayfaring persons, at the time of their death had their
most habitation, house, and dwelling place, and no where else.

St. 21. H. 8. 6
No mortuaries, or Corse presents, nor any sum of money for them, Mortuaries
in Wales, Barwicke, and the Marches.
nor in the Marches of the same, nor in the town of Barwicke, or the Marches
of the same, but only in such places where Mortuaries have been accustomed to
be paid: Neither shall any Mort^aries, nor Corse presents, nor any thing for
them be demanded, or had in those places, but only after the order, and manner
above specified, and none otherwise, nor for any other person then is above
limited. But it is lawful to the Bishop of Bangor, Landaffe, S. David, and S.
Ass, and likewise to the Archdeacon of Chester, to take such mortuaries of the
priests within their Diocesses, and jurisdictions, as heretofore have been
accustomed.

St. 21. H. 8. 6
No person shall be compelled in such places (where mortuaries have been
Mortuaries of less value by custom.
Nor any mortuarie shall be demanded taken or had in such place, of any person
or persons exempt by this Act, nor contrary to this Act.

30 There be certain other extortions, or exactions in spiritual,
Ecclesiastical, or Scholasticall causes, which antiquity did not know, or
dream of, and therefore neither made Statutes, or ordained any temporal laws
against them; but the same, having great society and intermixture with
Simonie, and being sprung out of a spur of the root of Avarice, are so
secretly put in practice, that humane policy only, will be hardly able to know
them, and less to repress them; for in most cases the offenders therein do
wittingly enter into corrupt, and wilful perjury, and upon premeditate
consideration do violate their oaths solemnly and advisedly taken, when they
do first enter into their own vocations and degrees. It is a soul and odious
fact, and hateful in the eyes, ears, and hearts of all good persons, that a
man to whom the law has given no profit, interest, or right, in the tithes,
glebe, or other fruits of a Benefice, but only a bare and naked authority to
present, collate, or admit a worthy, meet, and fit man to the same, should for
a lease, annuitie, money, or other reward, present, collate, or admit a man, be
he worthy or unworthy, to the same: Or that a man who does: or ought to come to
a benefice with cure of souls freely, should for any money, pension, or other
consideration, corruptly resign or exchange the same: Or that a man in whom
the law has reposed a special trust, to make choice of ministers, and
preachers, according to their virtue, learning, and worth, should admit them
for money, or other reward: Or that they who have but only the nomination, or
presentation, of a fellow, scholar, or other person, to any place in a
college, school, or other society, should take money or other reward for
their voices or assents in such election: Or that he who has place in such a
society should take reward for the resigning, or leaving of it, as if the same
places and livings were their own lawful freehold, and they authorized to
make sale thereof: The which grievous and irreligious enormities, the high
court of Parliament assembled Anno 31. St. 31. El. 6.
El. did there endeavor and show their good meaning to reform, by an Act
wherein it was agreed, That if any person or persons, bodies politic or
corporat, shall, or do, for any sum of money, reward, Exaction for
presenting or collating to a Benefice.
gift, or profit directly, or indirectly, or for or by reason of any promise,
agreement, grant, bond, covenant, or other assurance, directly or indirectly,
present, or collate any person to any Benefice with cure of Souls, dignity,
prebend, or living Ecclesiastical: Or give or bestow the same, for, or in
respect of any such corrupt cause or consideration: Then every such
presentation, collation, gift, and bestowing, and every admission, institution,
inuesture, and induction thereupon shall be utterly void, and of none effect in
law. And it shall and may be lawful, to, and for the Queen, her heirs and
successors, to present, collate unto, or give, or bestow every such Benefice,
dignity, prebend, and living Ecclesiastical, for that one time, or turn
only. And all and every person or persons, bodies politic and corporat, that
from henceforth shall give or take, any such sum of money, reward, gift, or
benefit, directly or indirectly: Or that shall take or make any such promise,
grant, bond, covenant, or other assurance, shall forfeit the double value of
one years profit of every such benefice, dignity, etc. to the Queen and I.
to be recovered by A. B. I. wherein no W. E. P. And the person so corruptly
taking, The penalty of the corrupt taker of a Benefice.
procuring, seeking, or accepting any such Benefice, dignity, prebend, or
living, shall thereupon, and from thenceforth be adjudged a disabled person in
law, to have or enjoy the same Benefice, etc.

Exaction for admiting to a Benefice.
31 And by the same Stat. of an^ 31. El. it was further established, Stat. 31.
El. 6
That if any person shall for any sum of money, reward, gift, or profit
whatsoever, directly, or indirectly, (other then for usual and lawful fees)
or for, or by reason of any promise, agreement, grant, covenant, bond, or other
assurance, of, or for any su^me of money, reward, gift, or profit whatsoever,
directly or indirectly admit, institute, install, induct, inuest, or place any
person, in, or to any benefice with cure of souls, dignity, prebend, or other
living Ecclesiastical: then every such person so offending shall forfeit the
double value of one years profit of every such Benefice etc. to the Q. and I.
to be recovered by A. B. I. wherein no W. E. P. And thereupon immediately from
and after the inuesting, installation, or Induction thereof had, the same
Benefice, dignity etc. shall be eftsoons merely void. And the patron, or person
to whom the Aduowson, gift, presentation, or collation shall by law appertain,
shall and may by virtue of this Act, present, or collate unto, give, and
dispose of the same Benefice, dignity, etc. in such sort to all intents, as if
the party so admitted, installed, invested, inducted, or placed, had been, or
were naturally dead. But no title to confer, or present by lapse, shall
accrue upon any voydance mentioned in this act, Notice of Lapse.
but after six months next after notice given of such voydance by the
Ordinary to the Patron.

St. 31. El. 6.
32 By the Statute of Ann^ 31. El. it was moreover ordained, Exaction for
resigning or exchanging of a Benefice.
That if an Incumbent of any Benefice with cure of souls do, or shall
corruptly resign or exchange the same: Or corruptly take, for, or in respect
of the resigning, or exchanging of the same, directly or indirectly, any
pension, sum of money, or benefit whatsoever; Then as well the giver, as the
taker, of any such pension, sum of money, or other benefit corruptly, shall
loose double the value of the sum so given, taken, or had, to the Q. and I.
to be recovered by A. P. I. wherein no W.E.P. But this Act shall not take
away, Penalties by the Ecclesiastical law.
or restrain any penalty prescribed by the Ecclesiastical law, for any
offense in this Act mentioned, but the same shall remain in force, and be put
in execution, as before etc.

Stat. 31. El. 6
33 By the foresaid Statute of Anno 31. El. it was also enacted, Exaction for
making of ministers, or giving license to preach.
That if any person or persons whatsoever, shall, or do receive or take any
money, fee, reward, or other profit directly, or indirectly: Or shall take any
promise, covenant, bond, agreement, or other assurance, to receive, or have any
money, fee, reward, or any other profit directly, or indirectly, either to him,
or themselves, or to any other of their or any of their friends (all ordinary
and lawful fees only except) for, or to procure the ordaining, or making of any
minister, or giving any Orders, or license, or licenses to preach: Then every
person and persons so offending, shall for every such offense forfeit x. l, and
the party so corruptly made minister, or taking Orders x. l to the Q. and I.
to be recovered by A. P. I. wherein no W.E.P. And if at any time within vij.
years next after such corrupt entering into the ministry, or receiving of
Orders, he shall accept, or take any Benefice, living, or promotion
Ecclesiastical, then immediately from, and after the induction, inuesting, or
installation thereof, or thereinto had, the same Benefice, living, etc. shall be
eftsoons merely void. And the patron, or person, to whom the aduowson, gift,
presentation, or collation, shall by law appertain, shall, and may (by virtue
of this Act) present, or collate unto, give, and dispose of the same benefice,
living, etc. in such sort to all intents, as if the party so inducted,
invested, or installed, had been, or were naturally dead: Any law, ordinance,
qualification, and dispensation to the contrary notwithstanding.

Stat. 31. El. 6
34 By the same sttatute of an^ 31. El. for the causes before rehearsed, it was
also provided, That if any person or persons, bodies politic, or corporat,
which have election, presentation, or nomination of any fellow, scholar, or
any other person, Exaction for a voice in electing of a fellow or scholar
to have room or place in any Churches collegiat, Colleges, Schools,
Hospitals, Halles, or Societies, shall have, receive, or take, any money, fee,
reward, or any other profit, directly or indirectly, either to him, or
themselves, or to any other of their, or either of their friends, for his or
their voice, or voices, assent or assents, or consent in electing, choosing,
presenting, or nominating of any officer, fellow, scholar, or other person to
have any room or place in any of the said Churches, Colleges, Halles,
Schools, Hospitals, or Societies: then and from thenceforth, the place, room,
or office, which such person so offending shall then have in ye said churches,
colleges, etc. shall be void. And then as well the Queen, her heirs, and
successors, and every other person and persons, or their heirs, or successors,
to whom the presentation, gift, donation, election, or disposition shall of
right belong, of any such of the said rooms or places of ye said person
offending, as is aforesaid, shall or may at their pleasure, elect, present,
nominate, place, or appoint any other person or persons, in ye room, office,
or place of such person or persons so offending, as if ye said person or
persons were naturally dead.

Exaction by taking money to resign a place.
35 For some reason before alleged, it was lastly ordained by ye said stat. of
an^ 31. El. That if any fellow, officer, or scholar of any of the said
churches, St. 31. El. 6.
colleges, schools, halls, hospitals, or societies, or other persons having
room or place in any of the same, shall at any time hereafter directly or
indirely take, or receive, or by any way, devise, or means, contract, or agree
to have, or receive any money, reward, or profit whatsoever, for the leaving or
resigning up of the same his room, or place, for any other to be placed in the
same: then every person so taking, or contracting, or agreeing to take, or have
any thing for the same, shall forfeit double the sum of money, or value of
the thing so received and taken, or agreed to be received or taken. And every
person, by whom, or for whom, any money, gift, or reward as aforesaid shall be
given, or agreed to be paid, shall be incapable of that place, or room, for that
time, or turn, and shall not be, nor had, nor taken to be a lawful fellow,
scholar, or officer, of any the churches, colleges, halls, hospitals,
schools, or societies, or to have such room (...) place there: But they to
whom it shall appertain at any time thereafter, (...) and may elect, choose,
present, and nominate any other person fit to be elected, presented, or
nominated into the said room, or fellowship, as if the said person, by, or for
whom any such money, gift, or reward shall be given, or agreed to be paid,
were dead, or had resigned, and left the same. And to the intent that every
person that is or may be subject to the said penalties, may take notice
thereof, This Stat. shall be read at every election.
by the said statute it was also ordained, That at every election of fellows,
scholars, and officers, this Act, and the Statutes of the same places,
concerning such election, shall be publicly read: upon pain yt every person in
whom the default shall be, shall forfeit xl. l to him that will sue, and to the
same college, society, etc.

Extortion by gathering others money.
36 If any person do levy and receive money of certain other persons, 27.
Ass. p. 15
which they ought to pay in discharge of a fifteen, due by a town to the
king, and he does not pay the same money to the king, he may be indicted of
extortion, and the matter being found accordingly, the offender shall be
distrained to pay the same money to the people of the said town, toward their
discharge of the said fifteen.

48. Ed. 3. 8.
37 If a man be amerced in a Court Baron for a trespass done to the Lord of the
Manor, and the amerciament is aff^ired in the Lords court, Extortion for
amerciament in a court baron.
this is extortion in the Lord: But if the Lord do accept the amerciament,
that is a sufficient satisfaction for the trespass, and a good bar in an
action of trespass brought by the Lord against the offender.

38 But though extortion and exaction be prohibited by the laws and Stat.
before specified, as things offensive to the laws and justice of the Realm; No
extortion to take lawful fees.
yet the same law does allow to each officer and other person, to have a
reasonable consideration and satisfaction for his pains, according to his
countenance, degree, and calling, and the pains and service which he shall do
and employ in ye furtherance or execution of justice: 34. H. 6. 38. 8. Ed. 4.
18.
as the L. Chancellor, and they which write to the great seal are not to make
writs without their fees: and if a prisoner be discharged of his imprisomnent
by the court, paying his fees, the Marshall of ye Kings Bench, the Sheriff of
the county, nor any Jailer or keeper of prison, ought to detain him in
prison, for meat, drink, or other thing which he has bought, but for his fees
only. But if a man be committed to prison for suspision of felony, 11. H. 7.
16.
and after he is acquitted thereof, and discharged by the court paying his
fees; the Sheriff or Jailer may take of him barre-fees, and this is no
extortion, but justifiable: for this money is not taken contrary to the
foresaid stat. of an^ 23. H. 6. which prohibiteth the sheriff to take money for
showing ease or favor to any person arrested. Taking of barre-fees no
extortion.
For this barre-fee is money which the court from one age to another, has in
discretion assigned the prisoner so discharged to pay to the Sheriff, or Jailer
for his great pains and charge, for the safe keeping of the prisoners, for
attending upon them, and for conueying of them safely to the bar, and from
it, to the prison. If a man be committed to prison for two several felonies,
26. Ass. p. 47.
and after he is discharged by the court paying his fees, he shall pay but one
fee, for the Gaolers attendance was but upon one person. And if the Sheriff or
Jailer take from a prisoner in his custody, the money in his purse, or any
garment that he has, this is no extortion, but a trespass, for the recovery
whereof the prisoner may have an Action of trespass against the same Sheriff
or Jailer, and recover the value thereof in damages. No extortion for gloves
given upon the allowance of pardon.
And if a man indicted and arraigned of felony, 4. Ed. 4. 10.
does plead and show forth the Kings pardon of the same felony, which is
allowed by the court, whereupon he does pay and give his fees of gloves to the
Justices, and other officers of the court, this is no extortion, 34. H. 6. 38.
but an ancient fee, and lawfully due unto them. If the Justices in an
especial Assise do take their lawful fees, this is no extortion: for they
are not bound to sit unless they have them.

34. H. 6. 42.
39 If a man that is attainted of trespass, do come into the court, Extortion
in taking fees of him that does appear gratis
where he was attainted, and prays to make his fine to the King, and offers
pledges for his fine, if the Warden of the Fleet, or other Keeper of a prison
do take any fees of him, it is extortion, seeing he came in gratis, and out of
ward, and yielded himself to the court. But if there be process awarded against
him for his said fine, and he be taken thereby, then he shall pay his fees to
the warden or Keeper etc. and it is no extortion to take them, for that he came
in by compulsion, and not willingly.

St. 27. H. 8. 26.
40 After that by the Stat. of an^ 27. H. 8. it was enacted, That the Kings
country or dominion of Wales, should be incorporatd; united, and annexed to
and with the Realm of England, and that all persons borne and to be borne in
the said Principality and dominion of Wales should have, enjoy, and inherit
all and singular freedoms, liberties, rights, privileges, and laws within
this Realm, and al other the kings dominions, as other the Kings subjects
borne within the same, have, enjoy, and inherit. And that the laws, ordinances
and statutes of this Realm of England for ever, and none other, shall be used
and executed in the said dominion of Wales, and every part thereof, in like
manner, form, and order, as they be in this Realm. And that the said dominion
of Wales was by the said Statute of 27. H. 8. and by the statute of an^ 34. H.
8. divided into xij. shires, and a President and Council established there and
in the Marches of the same, with all officers, clerks, and incidents to the
same. And that there should be Justices of Assise and Jail delivery there,
which should keep Sessions in every of the said shires twice in the year, and
a Marshall, and a Crier in every circuit. And that there should be original and
judicial seals, for the sealing of Writs and Process in the said shires: And
yt there should be four Prenotaries in Wales, and also certain Justices of
Peace and Quorum, and a Custos Rotulorum, Bailifs of Hundreds, Sherifs,
Escheators, Coronors, and Constables of Hundreds in every of ye said xij.
shires. Then to prevent and avoid extortion of the foresaid Officers in Wales,
and to the intent that the said Officers might know what money to demand, and
every suitor what to pay for all Process original and judicial, declarations,
pleadings, etc. by ye said Stat. of an^ 34. H. 8. it was particularly expressed
how much should be paid for the writing and sealing of original and
judicial Writs and process, The fees expressed to prevent extortion in Wales.
and what Prenotaries shall take for their fees, what every Marshall and Crier
of the Justices shall have, and what fees the said Sherifes and Coroners shall
take, in many, diverse, and several cases. But after, in and by the said Stat.
of an^ 34. H. 8. it was further ordained, That in all and every Writs original
or judicial, or other Process, pleas, or writings which be not expressed in
the said ordinance, the fees thereof, as well for the seals as writing, shall be
rated by the said President, Council, and Justices, or three of the^, whereof
the said President to be one, by their discretion from time to time, as the
case shall require. And they shall have full power from time to time, to
assesse and appoint what fee the said Sherifes, Escheators, and Coroners, and
their ministers, Prenotaries and their clerks, and other ministers of justice
in the said shire, shall have of the Kings subjects for any manner writs,
plaints, pleas, process, returns, or any other matter or thing, concerning or
belonging to the execution of their offices and rooms, and to augment or
diminish any fee or fees above declared, as shall be thought by their discretions
to be convenient and meet for the common wealth of the kings subjects of those
parts of Wales.

Oppression.
1 OPpression is a grieuance done by one man or more to the hurt or prejudice
of others, What oppression is.
without any warrant of law, or color of justice: or it is a burden or charge
which one man does impose on another, more than the law does lay upon him, and
is for the most part wrought by the superior in countenance, ability, or
office, to the inferior in the same: for the oppressor sicuti Nimroth robustus
venator, and tanquam Leo subuersor in domo sua, is always offering hard
measure to them who are to deal with him, until they be able and willing to
resist him. The fraudulent deceiuor yields a man something for his money, or
at the least gives a fair color so to do. The extortioner is most times an
officer, and does take pains, and is worthy of his due reward, and so is
tolerable, until he wresteth more than his desert. But the oppressor grapleth
for what he can get, and returns nothing, and wresteth to reap that which he
has not sown, and to gather fruit where he has not grafted: the mark he
roueth at, is his private profit, and respect^th not how many, and how much he
in that cause hurts, so that his own purse be filled, or his will be
accomplished. As, Oppression by disseisin.
every disseisor who does unlawfully expel and put another man out of his
freehold, may aptly be termed an oppressor, for he does not put in practice
that injury covertly and secretly, by fraud and collusion under hand, as the
deceiuor and extortioner do, but by plain and open wrong, and does stand in the
face of al his beholders, and commonly justifies that which he has done. And
therefore as the said disseisin and oppression is manifest, so has the stat. of
West. 2. appointed a speedy and manifest remedy to the disseisee to redress
and reform the same, which is by an Assise of Nouel diss. to the end, that as
he was newly and lately disseised so he might be quickly and speedily restored.
And because the law does adiudge a man oppressed and injured, who is disseised
of estouers of wood, Of what things one may be disseised.
or of profit to be taken in wood, nuts, acorns, and of other fruit to be
gathered: or of a corrody of delivering corn, and other victuals and
necessaries to be received yearly in a place certain: or of toll, tonnage,
passage, pontage, pawnage, or such like things to be taken in places certain:
or of the keeping of woods, forests, parks, chases, warreines, gates, and
other bailiwikes and offices in fee: or of common of pasture, turbaries,
fishing, and such like, which a man has belonging to his freehold, or without
his freehold by special deed, at the least for term of life: or when one man
does pasture another several: or when tenant for years, or garden of a
tenement does alien the same in fee, whereby the freehold is transferred to the
feoffee: St. 13. E. 1. 25.
therefore in all the cases aforesaid, that said stat. of West. 2. does give to
the party so oppressed and disseised, his remedy to recover the same by the
said Ass. of nouel diss. in which the writ shall be De libero tenemento. If
tenant by Elegit be put out of the tenement which he has in execution: St. 13.
E. 1. 25. St. 13. E. 1.
or tenant by Statute merchant be put out of the land which he has in
execution: or tenant by Stat. staple be put out of the land which he has in
execution: or tenant by Recognisance in the nature of a Statute staple, his
executors, St. 27. E. 3. 9 St. 23. H. 8. 9.
administrators, or assigns, or any of them be disseised, or put out of the
land which he or they have in execution, he or they so disseised, or put out,
may have and maintain an Assise, for it is to him or them a disseisin and an
oppression. St. 32. H 8. 7
If any person who has an estate of inheritance or freehold, in any parsonage,
vicarage, portion, pention, tithes, oblations, or other Ecclesiastical profit,
made temporal, be deforced, kept, or put from the same, this is a disseisin
and oppression, and the party so wronged may have an Assise to recover the
same. And if any Escheator, St. 3. E. 1. 24
Sheriff, or other of the K. Bailifes, shall by color of his office (without
special warrant or certain authority which belongs to his office) disseise
any man of his freehold, or of any thing which belongs to his freehold, this
is an oppression, and the disseisee may at his choice either have an Assise,
and recover double damages, and the defendant shall be amerced, or else the K.
upon complaint shall redress the matter. If lands be granted by the Kings
Patent, without any title sound by Enquest, St. 1. H. 4. 8.
or where the Kings entry is not given by the law, and if any be put out or
disseised of his freehold thereby, this is an oppression: And the party put
out, shall have a special Assise against the kings Patentee, and recover treble
damages.

Oppression by approuement of common.
2 If the Lord of a Manor (wherein he has certain freehold tenants, and
certain neighbors) do approve some part of the wastes, woods, or pastures of
the same Manor, not leaving to his said tenants and neighbors sufficient
common of pasture unto their tenements, or not sufficient and convenient
ingresse and regresse to the same, this is an oppression of the same tenants,
and a disseisin of their common. And the said tenants and neighbors (or any of
them) may by force of the Statutes of Merton, and West. 2. St. 20. H. 3. 4 St.
13. E. 1. 46.
bring an Assise of Common of pasture against the Lord who does so approve and
oppress. And if it be found by the Jury, that their ingresse and regresse
were any thing hindered by the deforceors, or that they had not sufficient
pasture, then they shall recover their seisin by the view of the Jurors: so
that by their discretion and oath they shall have sufficient pasture, ingresse
and regresse, and the disseisors shall be amerced, and render damages, which
damages (by force of the statute of Anno 3. Ed. 6. St. 3. E. 6. 3.
) shall be trebled by the judgment of the Court where such Assise and
judgment shall be had. Oppression by surcharge of common.
And so it is if the Lord of a Manor does surcharge the common with so many
cattle, Fitz. Admes. 11. Common 29.
as that his freeholders or neighbors cannot have sufficient common for their
cattle, as they had wont to have, or as they ought to have belonging to their
tenements, this is an oppression and disseisin of their common, and any of them
may bring an Assise of Common of pasture against the said Lord, and recover his
common, and his damages. Enclosure of common by cause of vicinage, is no
oppression.
But if there be two Lords of two several Manors, which have two wastes
adjoining parcel of their manors, Co. li. 4. 38.
lying together without enclosure or separation, and yet the bounds of each
manor is well known by certain meers and marks, in which wastes the tenants
of the one manor and of the other have reciprocally had and used common by
cause of vicinage: 13. H. 7. 14: M. 14 Eliz. Dyer 316.
In this case one of those Lords may enclose against the other, and by that
means utterly take away his common by cause of vicinage from him, though it
has been otherwise used time out of the remembrance of man. And this common
per cause de vicinage, is rather an excuse of a Trespass when the cattle of
the tenant of one Manor do stray into the wastes of the other Manor, than any
certain inheritance: for the tenants of one Manor may not put their cattle
into the wast of the other Manor, but they may come thither only by escape,
and this enclosure is only to prevent the escape of the cattle, which is a
lawful act, and no oppression: For in the case aforesaid, where the wastes of
both the Manors be adjoining together, and that the one of them has common
with the other by cause of vicinage, Co. li. 7. 5.
and that the one village has an hundred acres of common, and the other but
fifty acres of common: Commoners shall charge common according to the quantity
thereof.
in this case the inhabitants of the village which has but fifty acres of
common can put no more cattle into their said common of fifty acres, than it
will maintain, without having respect to the common in the said hundred acres,
for if they do, it is an oppression and wrong, nece conuerso: for the original
cause of this common by cause of vicinage, was not for profit, but for
preventing of suits in a Champion country, in respect of reciprocal escapes
from one town to another.

3 It appears by the preamble of the statute of Marlebridge, that they who
took distresses of their tenants, or neighbors, for rents supposed to be due
to them, or for any trespasses done to them, and after did drive the same
distresses forth of the county where they were taken, to be impownded in
another county, were accounted to do it to oppress them whose cattle they so
did distrain and impownd, and the same was also adjudged an act done against
the peace: whereupon, for the eschewing of such oppressions, by the same
statute, and also by the statute of West. 1. St. 25. H. 3. 4 St. 3. E. 1. 16.
it was ordained, Oppression by distresses.
That no man shall cause a distress to be driven forth of the County wherein
it was taken. And for the avoiding of the like oppressions, vexations, and
troubles, by a statute made Anno 1. St. 1. and 2. P. and M. 12.
and 2. P. and M. it was enacted, That whosoever shall drive any distress out
of the Hundred, Rape, Wapentake, or Lath where it was taken (except it be to a
pownd ouert within the same shire, being not above three miles distant from the
place where it is taken) or shall impownd in several places, goods distrained
for any cause at one time, whereby the owner shall be constrained to sue
several Repleuies for the delivery of the same distresses, shall forfeit to
the party grieved for every such offense five pounds, and treble damages.
And whosoever does take for keeping in pownd, pondage, Pondage money.
or the impownding of a whole distress, above iiij. d. or does take so much
where less has usually been taken, shall forfeit to the party grieved five
pounds, and so much as he takes over the said iiij. pence. And because the
law has devised, that one neighbor may distraine the goods of another for his
debt, duty, or damages sustained, and that the same distress shall be
reasonable, according to the quantity of the said supposed debt, or damages,
and that then the same distress shall be put in a pownd ouert sub custodia
legis, until it be decided whether the same was taken upon just cause or not:
and not to the end that one neighbor should by distraining unjustly oppress
another, or demand of him that which is not due, or put him to further charge
or trouble than the necessity of that cause, for the recovery of his own
debt or damages required: therefore by the before mentioned statute of
Marlebridge, it was further established, That if one neighbor take a distress
of another (whereby he has received less) without award of the Kings Court,
he shall make fine according to the quantity of the trespass: and nevertheless
sufficient amends shall be to them which have received loss by such distress:
Distraining out of his fee.
Or if one do distrain another to come to his Court which is not of his fee, or
upon whom he has no jurisdiction by reason of his Hundred or Bailiwike, or
do take a distress without his fee, or the place where he has jurisdiction
or bailiwike, he shall make fine according to the quantity of his offense.
Excessive distress.
Or if one do take any unreasonable and excessive distresses, which is
grievous, and more than the quantity of the debt or damages, this is an
oppression, an he shall be amerced: 41. Ed. 3. 26 29. Ed. 3. 23.
As a man auowed the distraining of 200. sheep and 16. beasts for ij. pence
rent, and he was amerced therefore: for all that he took above vj. sheep,
were adjudged an oppression, and so unlawful. But if a man distraine for
homage, 28. Ass. p. 50 42. Ed. 3. 26. Co. li. 4. 8. Fitz. Na. Br. 178. 27. Ass.
p. 51 28. Ass. p. 50
the distress cannot be too excessive, how many beasts soever he does take,
for that homage is not valuable, though for rent, fealty, and other services,
it may be excessive. And in like sort, Oppression by often distress.
if the Lord of a Manor, or any other, who has rent issuing forth of certain
land, do distraine the tenant of the same land diverse times for rent, or
services, where none is behind unpaid, this is an oppression of the same tenant
who is distrained: for in this case the party who claims this rent, cannot
distraine for rent, seeing none was due to him, but his distress is only
taken to vex the tenant of the land, and so to oppress him. And therefore the
said tenant may have an Assise of Souent foits distress against the same Lord,
and recover damages of him according to the loss he has received by the same
distresses, viz. for not plowing, or for not manuring his land, Lib. int. 82.
Co. li. 4. 8.
or for taking no profit thereby. But it is otherwise, if the same several
distresses were taken for homage. Several distresses for one thing.
And so it is, if a man do distraine for rent, or services, or for any other
thing, Fit. Not. Br. 71.
and depending a suit between the parties for the same rent, service, or other
thing, he who did distrain does distrain again for the same rent, service, or
thing, for ye which he did distrain before, the beasts or goods of him whose
he did first distraine, this is an oppression of him whose goods be twice
distrained: For the redress whereof he may have a writ of Recaption A writ of
Recaption.
against him who so did distraine his goods twice for one cause, whereby he
shall recover damages for his second distress: And also he that did take the
same distress, shall make fine to the King for his oppression and wrong,
though the first distress were lawfully taken, yea and though the rent or
service for the which he did distraine, were behind, unpaid, or undone, seeing
by the first distress (the cause being proved true and lawful, he might
have had return of the goods or cattle which he did distraine until he had
been satisfied of the rent, service, or thing, for the which he did
distraine. But a man may distraine the cattle of him who be eating of his
corn or grass, Distresses for damages fort.
or doing any other hurt in his ground, 47. Ed. 3. 7
so often as he shall find them doing hurt therein, and it is no oppression or
wrong so to do: for he does not distraine twice for one cause, as in the former
case, but distraineth several times for several new offenses.

4 And every Trespass which the law does interpret to be injuriously
committed vi and armis, may also fitly be termed an oppression: for it is done
upon the offenders own wrong, without warrant of law: St. 5. R. 2. ^
As if one person do enter upon another land, and expel him out of the
possession thereof, whereas his entry is not given by the law, or does enter
with strong hand, or multitude of people, Fitz. Tresp. 13. 45. 234 20. H. 6.
22. 9. Ed. 4. 28. 9. H. 6. 64. 21. H. 6. 5. 21. Ed. 4. 18. 9. Ed. 4. 29. 10.
Ed. 4. 4. 21. Ed. 4. 4. 1. H. 7. 10. 37. H. 6. 36. 21. H. 7. 1^. 11. H. 4. 64.
20. H. 6. 14. 3. H. 6. 12. 10. H. 6. 16. 43. Ed 3. 13. 4. Ed. 3. 48 47. Ed. 3.
22 43. Ed. 3. 35 1. H. 5. 1.
and not in peaceable manner, this is an oppression. And so it is, Oppression
by Trespasses.
if one person do pull down, break, or impair another house, or any part
thereof: Or if one person do fell, cut down, or carry away the Timber,
Trees, or Wood of another: Or if one person do fell, cut, tread down, or
carry away the corn or grass of another: Or if one person do with his
cattle depasture, feed, or eat the corn, grass, or hay of another: Or if one
person do take and carry away the money, plate, jewels, household stuff,
cattle, corn, hay, or any kind of goods of another: Or if one person do
plough, till, air, or dig the ground or soil of another: Or if one person
do mayme, imprison, wound, or beat another, or does mayme, wound, or beat the
servant of another, whereby he loses his service: Or if one person do hunt,
chase, or hawke in the free Warren of another, or do take, kill, or destroy
his game there: Or if one person do fish in the Pond, Poole, Mildam, Stew, or
other several fishing of another: Or if one person do break the doue-house
of another, or destroy the flight of the doves of another: Or if one person do
dig the Mine of Tin, Lead, Stone, Coal, Gravel, Sand, Matle, Chalk, etc.
of another: Or if one person do pull up and take away the meerestones which by
consent have been set between his own ground and another: In all and every of
which cases, the party grieved may pursue an Action of Trespass against the
offender, and declare that he committed any of the said offenses, vi and
arm^s, wherein (if the defendant be attainted) he shall pay to the plaintiff
his damages sustained, and to the King a fine, for that he has done an
oppression to one of his subjects, and made an offense to the law.

Fit. Not. Br. 183. 4. Ass. p. 3.
5 Every Nuisance which one person does to the land of another, Oppression by
Nusances.
wherein the owner has an estate for the term of life, in tail, or in fee
simple, may also be accounted an oppression: for those Nusances be put in
practice by the offenders only will, and by his own open, plain, and
manifest wrong, to the disheritance of another, or to the prejudice of his
Freehold, without any warrant of law, 18. Ed. 3. 22. 21. Ed. 3. 2 Co. li. 5.
101. Li. Int. 406.
or color of justice: As if one person do build or levy a house, a wall, a
shead, a leantor, a chimney, a gutter, or other structarie, in his own ground,
to the offense of another freehold, or to the drowning or rotting of his
house, or to the stopping of his light, or way thereunto, this is an
oppression. 46. Ed. 3. 23. 7. Ed. 3. 56.
And if one person do levy, raise, abate, or pull down a Damme, Poole, Pond,
or Ditch, to the hurt of another Freehold, that is an oppression. 27. Ed. 3.
88. 12. H. 4. 3. 8. Ed. 4. 5. 48. Ed. 3. 27 8. Eliz. Dyer 2 50. 14. Eliz. Dyer
319.
And if one person do stop, straiten, or turn an ancient watercourse, to
the hurt of another Freehold, or in such sort as it does drown the ground or
soil of another, that is an oppression. And if one person do stop, streiten,
or greatly impair another highway, which he has belonging to his Freehold,
that is an oppression. If one person do convey water to his house or ground,
by a pipe of lead, timber, or vault of stone, and another person will make
another pype out of that pype, to take away part of the same water, that is an
oppression of him that made the first pype. And if one do erect a lime-kill
near unto another dwelling house, 4. Ed. 3. 36 5. Ed. 3. 43. 4. Ass. p. 3.
the smoke and heat whereof, when it is set on fire, does annoy the inhabitant
of the said house and his family, or does scorch or dry up the fruit trees in
his orchard, that is an oppression. And if one person has the freehold of a
several fishing in a river, pond, poole, moat, mill damme, or other water, Lib.
int. 406.
and another person will build a dye-house adjoining, or near unto it, and then
will power out, or cause to run from thence, corrupt ashes, dung, slime, filth,
or other annoyances, into the said several fishing place, to the destruction
of the fish there, whereby the owner does loose the benefit of his several
fishing, that is an oppression of him. And if one person will erect or settle
up a Fair or Market, Fit. Not. Br. 184. Register. 197. 199. Li. Int. 407.
to the prejudice or hinderance of another Fair or Market, that is an
oppression of him who had the first Fair or Market. And if one person do lay
timber, faggots, stones, lime, sand, gravel, dung, or any other thing, upon or
against the house of another, which do rot, putrify, corrupt, or impair the
walls, timber, or other part of the same house, or any corrupt, noisome, or
stinking thing, the savor or smell whereof is offensive to the inhabitant of
the same house and his family, that is an oppression of the same inhabitant:
The remedies for oppression by Nusances.
In which foresaid cases the parties grieved by the said Nusances, and
oppressions, may in some cases have their remedies by Assise of Nuisance brought
in the Common Pleas, in some other cases, by writs of Nuisance called
Vicountiels, tried in the County before the Sheriff, in some other cases, by
the writ of Quod permittat, in some other cases by action upon the case: and in
most of the said cases, the said parties grieved by the said Nusances, may take
away, pull down, Co. li. 5. 101.
and remove the same Nusances, as their several estates will enable them, or
their several cases do require.

Oppression by Rescous.
6 Every Rescous that is unlawfully made of cattle or other goods distrained,
is an oppression; for the offender does a wrong of his own authority, to the
prejudice of another, in contempt of the justice of the Realm, without any
warrant or color of law: Seeing when the party grieved by himself, 44. Ed.
3. 20 40. Ed. 3. 32. 17. Ed. 3. 43. 18. Ed. 3. 30 2. H. 4. 15.
or some other, does distraine within his fee, for his rent or services behind,
for damages which he has sustained, for amerciaments, a rent charge, or for
some other cause which he takes to be lawful, the cattle or other goods of
him who he does conceive detaineth his due rent, or service from him, or whose
cattle have eaten or spoiled his corn, or grass, or otherwise have
trespassed in his ground, and does in quiet and peaceable manner drive them
toward the pownd, there to remain as a pledge sub custodia legis, until the
law has decided whether there was just cause of distress or not, the owner of
the same cattle, or some other in his behalf, will by force and strong hand,
make Rescous of this cattle, and take them from him who distrayned them, and
so will not submit himself to the censure of the law, nor tarry until it be
discussed by the ordinary course of justice, whether the party that distrained
had lawful cause so to do or not, but will be his own judge, and take the
authority of revenge to himself: which is an oppression of him whose rent or
services were due, and unpaid, or whose corn or grass was eaten, etc. and who
was also forcibly deprived of the ordinary remedy which the law did assign
him for the recovery of his own duty. And moreover it is a contempt of the
law which the same offender does refuse to be judged by: 7. H. 6. 1. 22. H. 6.
54. Fitz. Na. Br. 101.
and therefore in this case the party grieved may pursue against the offender
a writ of Rescous for this Rescous made, and oppression done unto him, and
thereby recover his damages: and also the King shall have a fine of him, for
this contempt of his law, and his peace broken, Li. Int. 527.
and the offender shall be imprisoned until he has paid the same.

7 Every Encrochment which one person does make upon another land, Oppression
by incrochments,
ground covered with water, rent, or service, is also an Oppression: for they
be done and put in practice by the offenders own open, plain, and manifest
wrong, without any warrant or color of the law. As, it is an oppression for
one person by ploughing, earing, ditching, hedging, remoouing of Meerestones or
land marks, 22. Ass. p. 93
to get away the ground or soil of another: and so it is for one person to
draw away or alter an ancient River, Brook, or Stream of another persons out
of the old and wonted course: and so it is, if there be lord and tenant, and
the tenant does hold his land of his lord by fealty and five shillings of
yearly rent, and of late years the lord has had seisin of more rent of the
tenant by the tenants own payment without cohertion of Distress, if in this
case the lord will distraine his tenants Cattle for that surplusage of rent,
that is an oppression, and for the redress thereof the same tenant may pursue
against his lord a Writ of Ne unjust vexes, grounded upon a branch of the
statute of Magna Charta, St. 9. H. 3. 10
thereby commanding the Lord, that he shall not oppress nor unjustly vex his
tenant for more rent or services then he ought to pay or do: 12. E. 4. 7. 28.
Ass. p. 33 5. Ed. 4. 82.
Or otherwise the tenant may avoid this surplusage of rent in an Assise, Writ
of Rescous, or Cessauit brought against him by his lord: but in a Repleuin he
cannot avoid his lord of this rent newly incroched, seeing the same lord has
had seisin thereof: and so it is, if the lord of a Manor, 40. Ed. 3. 44. 49.
Ed. 3. 22. 39. E. 3. 6.
which is ancient demesne, will encroch upon his tenants, and distraine them
or any of them that hold their lands by Charter freely, to do other services
or customs to the same lord then they ought to do, or that their ancestors
were accustomed to do, this is an oppression of the same tenants: and for the
redress thereof, all the tenants of the said ancient demesne Manor may have
against their said lord the kings writ of Monstrauerunt directed to the said
lord, commanding him thereby, that he shall not require nor cause to be
required of his said tenants more services or customs then they ought to do,
Fitz. Na. Br. 14.
or had wont to do. And if after the said writ directed, he will distraine the
goods of them or any of them again, to do more services then they ought to
do: Then the same tenants, or such, or so many of them as be so distrained
may procure an attachment against their said lord, Fitz. Na. Br. 15.
returnable in the K. Bench or common place, for this oppression and contempt,
wherein every of the same tenants shall recover his damages severally,
according to his loss.

8 Every excessive amerciament which one person does take of another,
Oppression by excessive amerciament.
is also to be accounted an oppression of the party so amerced: for by the
Statutes of Magna Charta and West. 1. St. 9. H. 3. 14 3. Ed. 1, 6.
it is ordained, That no City, Borough, Town, or man shall be amerced but for
a reasonable cause, and according to the quantity of his offense: and every
freeman shall be amerced saving his freehold, a merchant saving his
merchandise, and every other man's villain (besides the kings) saving his
villain tenure: and the same amerciaments shall be assessed by the oath of
honest and lawful men of the same vicenage. So that if one person do take a
much greater amerciament of another then the quantity of his offense does
require in a Court Baron, or other Court which is not of record, or do take
that amerciament of his own authority, without being before assessed by
others upon their oaths, and so makes himself judge in his own cause, this
is an oppression of the party amerced: for the redress whereof the party
grieved may procure to be directed to the lord of the said Manor, or to his
Baylife, a Writ of Moderata misericordia (which was founded upon the said stat.
of Magna Charta) commanding them thereby, Fitz. Na. Br. 75.
that they shall take a moderat and indifferent amerciament of the same person,
according to the quantity of his offense. And if the lord or his baylife will
not then cease to distraine for the said excessive amerciament, the party so
oppressed may have against the offender an attachment, directed to the Shirife
of that County where the same Distress is taken, to attach him to appear in
the kings Court, and to answer his said offense.

Oppression by committing of wast.
9 The Wast and Estrepement which one person having a particular estate in
another persons land, does make or commit to the disheritance of him in the
reuersion or remainder of the same land, without his consent, may also be
accounted an oppression of him in whom the said inheritance is: for when one
person does lease, or otherwise convey his land to another, for the term of
life, lives, or years, he does in effect but lend the same land to the said
particular tenant for the term between them agreed upon, expecting to have
the same again at the end of the term, in as good plight, and in such sort,
as it was when he first did deliver and lend it. And therefore if the
particular tenant, during the continuance of his estate, do commit any wast in
the same land, he cannot deliver it again at the end of his term in such
plight and sort, as at the first he did receive and borrow it: but by the wast
the perpetual profit of the land is impaired, and therefore of so much in
value, he in the reuersion or remainder is disherited. And for the prevention
thereof, by the statute of Marlebridge it was ordained, St. 52. H. 3. 24.
That Farmors during their terms shall not make wast, sale, or exile of
houses, woods, or men, nor of any thing belonging to the Tenements which they
have in farm, without they have special grant in writing, making mention of
a covenant, that they may do it. And to the intent that condign punishment
might be provided and inflicted upon such as should be transgressors and
oppressors in these cases of Wast, by the statute of Gloucester it was enacted,
St. 6. Ed. 1. 5
That a man shall have an action of Wast in the Chauncerie against him which is
tenant by the courtesy of England, The tenants forf. which commits wast.
or otherwise tenant for term of life, or for term of years, or against a
woman which holds in Dower: and he which shall be attainted of Wast, shall
forfeit the thing wasted, and besides shall pay treble so much as the Wast
shall be taxed: and after by the statute of Westminster the second, the same
was in a sort confirmed, St. 13. E. 1. 14
and the said action of Wast was again given against the foresaid tenants by
the courtesy, in dower, for term of life, or years, and also ordained to
extend against Gardens. And by the same statute, the process to be used in the
said action of Wast was assigned to be Summons, Attachment, and Distress, and
if the party defendant do not appear at the distress, then a writ shall be
awarded to the Shirife, to inquire of the wast by the oaths of twelve men. And
because diverse persons did let their lands to others, sometime for term of
life, or another life, and sometime for term of years, and after the said
tenants did grant their estates which they had in the same Lands and Tenements
to others, to the intent that they in the reuersion, viz. their lessors, their
heirs or assignees should not take knowledge of their names, and yet the first
lessees did continually occupy the said Lands, and took the profits to their
own use, and in the said Lands and Tenements did commit wast and destruction
to the disheritance of them in the reuersion. For the restraint and punishment
of which said offense, being both an oppression, and also a fraud and deceit,
St. 11. H. 6. 5 Fit. N.B. 59
by a Statute made Anno 11. H. 6. it was ordained, That they in the reuersion
in such case may have and maintain a writ of Wast against the said Tenants for
term of life, another life, A termor alieneth his estate, occupies the land,
and commits wast.
or for years, and so recover against them the place wasted, and their treble
damages, for the wast so by them done, as they ought to have done for the wast
done by them, before the said Grant and Lease of their estate. Provided, That
this Ordinance shall not hold place, but where the first Tenants, before the
Grant and Lease of their estates in the manner and form abouesaid, were
punishable of wast: and also, where after the said Grant and Lease the said
first Tenants of the said Lands and Tenements do take the profits at the time
of the wast done to their own proper use. And though the words of the said
Statute do give an action of Wast in the case aforesaid but only to him in
the reuersion, Co. li. 5. 77.
yet he in the remainder also (being in the like mischief) shall or may take
the benefit thereof, and maintain an action of Wast in this case against his
particular Tenant for life, or years, if either of them do commit wast to his
disheritance. And whatsoever the intent of the Grauntor is, in the case
aforesaid, yet if the Grauntee do assign his Lease, take the profits thereof,
and commit Wast, he is punishable according to the said Statute, for his intent
shall not be issuable, nam exitus acta probat, viz. the taking of the profits
do sufficiently express his intent: and every assignee of the first Tenant,
mediat or immediate, is within the compass of this Statute: for the Statute was
made to suppress Fraud, Wast, and Oppression. And so was the Statute of
Westminster the second, being made and provided to restrain Wast and
Oppression committed by one Tenant in common to the prejudice and disheritance
of another: by which it was ordained, St. 13. E. 1. 22
That whereas two or more do hold Wood, Wast committed by a tenant in common.
Turbarie, Fishing, or such like things in common, wherein none knows his
own several, and one of them does commit Wast against the will of the other,
an action of Wast may lie: and when it is come unto judgment, the defendant
shall choose either to take his part in a place certain, by the assignement of
the Shirife, and by the view and oath of his neighbors sworn and tried for
the same intent; or else he shall grant to take nothing from thenceforth in the
same Wood, 3. E. 1. Wast 25. 50. Ed. 3. 3.
Turbarie, and such other, but as his parteners will take: And if he do choose
to take his part in a place certain, the place wasted shall be assigned for
his part, according as it was before he committed the Wast. And because the
before rehearsed statute of Marlebridge does express in general terms, in
what things Wast may be committed, as in Houses, Woods, and Men: and the words
of the writ of Wast in the Register be, Quare fecit vastum, venditionem, seu
destructionem de terris, domibus, Boscis, and Gardinis: and the foresaid
Statutes of Anno 6. Edw. 1. 13. Edw. 1. and 11. H. 6. do declare, who are
forbidden to do that Wast: and seeing Wast in Lands, Houses, Woods, or etc. is
a great wrong and oppression to him or them in reuersion or remainder of the
same, therefore I will somewhat particularly explain, which the Law does
construe and expound to be Wastes, prohibited and punishable by the foresaid
Statutes, or either of them, to the intent, that both he that has the
inheritance, and also the particular Tenant, may know what is due to either of
them, in respect of their several estates, and what to take, and what to
leave. And to begin with the words of the Writ touching Wast in Land: Wast in
land.
If one person do demise or convey to another for the term of years, life,
or etc. Land, 22. H. 6. 18 2. H. 7. 14 17. E. 3. 7. 9. Ed. 4. 35. Co. li. 5.
11. Fit. Not. Br. 149. Lib. int. 6^6
where there is included in the bowels of the earth Tynne, Iron, Lead, Coal,
Stone, Gravel, Mortar, Sand, Chalk, or Marle, if the Mine or Pit thereof be
not open, when the Lessees estate or term does begin, the said Tenant may not
open the ground, make a new Mine, and take the same Coal, Stone, Gravel, or
etc. for if he do, it is Wast of the land, and he in the reuersion or
remainder may punish him therefore by an action of Wast: For whereas there was
assured to the Tenant but Vesturam terrae, and the annual profit of the Land,
he has dug and carried away the Land it self, and impaired the
inheritance thereof for ever. But if there be a Mine or Pit open in any part
of the ground so demised or assured, at the time of the Lease or assurance
thereof, or at the time when the estate of the Tenant did begin, then the
Tenant may dig there, and take and carry away so much of the Coal, Stone,
Gravel, as shall be necessarily used or employed for or toward the repair or
maintenance of the House, Land, or other commodities therewith demised, and it
is no Wast. But if he do give, sell, 41. E. 3. Wast 82.
or otherwise dispose the same to any other person, place, or use (saving as is
aforesaid) then for so much as he shall so mis-imploy, it is Wast. If one
person do lease or assure his Land to another, and all the Mines or Pits
therein, for years, life, Co. li. 5. 11.
or etc. the Lessee may open and dig the ground for Coal, Mortar, Stone,
etc. and take and carry away the same, though there was not any Mine open at
the time of the Lease or estate made: For by the assurance it does appear,
that the Lessor was contented that wast should be made in any part of the
ground leased, by myning or digging: and in this case the Lessee may sell or
otherwise dispose the same Coal, Stone, Marle, or etc. at his pleasure, 17.
Ed. 3. 7
for it is as much as if the Lease or assurance had been made to the Tenant,
without impeachment of any manner of Wast to be committed by Mines, Pits, or
diggings. If the Tenant for years, life, or etc. do air, plough up, and
convert into Tillage or Wood ground an ancient and usual m^wen Meddow, it is
Wast: and so it is, 15. H. 3. Wast 131. 46. Ed. 3. Wast 91.
if he do drown or suffer to be drowned continually a Meddow or other ground
demised: for it is not lawful for a particular Tenant to convert ground to any
other use then he received it, as to turn Meddow into arable, arable into
Wood, 29. H. 8. Dyer 37.
Wood into Pasture or Meddow, arable or Wood into Pooles or Ponds, for thereby
he does wrong to the inheritance for his own profit. And likewise it is wast
if the Tenant do suffer the Banks of the Sea or of a River to be usually
overflowed, and to decay, whereby a Meddow, a Pasture, 20. H. 6. 1.
or other ground which he holds for life or years, that before was
fruitful, shall become rushie, sedgie, or otherwise barren. But if he suffer
ground set with Saffron to decay, or Land, Meddow, 10. H. 7. 2 Fit. N.B. 59 2.
H. 6. 10.
or Pasture to grow full of Bushes or Thorns, or to lie fresh, and not
manured, it is no Wast, but evil husbandry. If the owner of a Poole or Pond
stored with fish, do assure the same for years, life, or etc. and the tenant
lets forth the water, or otherwise fisheth the same, and takes forth the
fish, or part thereof, and yet leaves it as sufficiently stored at the end of
his term, 7. H. 3. Wast 141. 5. R. 2. Wast 97. Ed. 1. Wast. 128.
as at the beginning thereof he found it, this is no Wast. But if he do let
forth the water of the said poole, or etc. and suffer the same to lie
continually dry, or do destroy by other means the fish therein, and do not
repair it, and leave it as well and sufficiently stored with fish, as he
received it, by the view and judgment of the country, then it is wast, and
he may be punished therefore by an action of Wast. And the same Law is, if
one do assure to another for term of years, or life, a Park stored with
Dear, and the tenant destroys all the Dear, and does not store the same
again with as many before the end of his term, this is Wast. If the tenant
for term of life, years, or etc. of a several Pasture or Close enclosed with
a Wall, Pale, or Quick-set hedge, 12. H. 8. 1.
do suffer the same to decay, it is wast: for by the decay of the Wall, Pale,
or Quick-set hedge he has made it no pasture, but laid it in common. As
concerning wast in houses, it is wast, Wast in houses.
and an oppression of him or them in reuersion or remainder, if the tenant for
term of years, life, or etc. do willingly pull down, 34. E 3. Wast 145. 3.
H. 6. 53. 4. Ed. 3. Wast. 22. 21. H. 6. 46. 38. E. 3. 7. 40. E. 3. Wast 90.
or negligently suffer to decay a dwelling house, or any Hall, Parlour,
Chamber, Buttery, Kitchen, Brew House, Bake-house, Day-house, Doue-house,
Barn, Stable, Oxe-house, Kill-house, Myll, Cottage, or any other House,
Cullice, Leantor, Edifice, or Building, being of the value of three shillings
four pence, which being covered, and in good repair, was standing and being
upon the ground, when the same tenant did or lawfully might have entered upon
the lands demised, in respect of his Lease, 17. E. 3. 7. 42. Ed. 3. 22. 17. Ed.
2. Wast 118.
or other estate to him assured thereof. And also it is wast, if any of the
particular tenants aforesaid do during his estate build any new House, Floor,
or Partition upon any land demised or conveyed unto him, and after he or his
assignees do pull down the same again, or suffer the same to fall into ruin
and decay: for that the House, Floor, or Partition being builded, was once
parcel of the inheritance of the Lessor, and therefore being again pulled
down, or decayed, it is to his disheritance. But if the Lessor do build a
house upon the ground so demised or assured, 49. Ed. 3. 1.
during the estate of the particular Tenant therein, and the Tenant do pull it
down, or suffer it to decay, it is no Wast, for it was not parcel of the
thing demised, neither was there any covenant in Law, that it should be
repaired. And it is Wast, if any of the Houses, Edifices, or Buildings
aforesaid be willingly or negligently burned, 19. Ed. 3. Wast 30. 20. Ed. 3.
Wast 32.
pulled, or thrown down by the Tenant thereof, or by any of his Family, or
Neighbors, or by any other person whatsoever (so that it be not by the kings
enemies, Thunder, Lightening, extreme Wind, or Tempest, in which cases it is
no Wast punishable by the Law, 44. E. 3. 34. 43. Ed. 3. 6. 28. H. 8. Dyer 33.
33. H. 6. 1
seeing they were burned or thrown down by the power and hand of God.) But it
is otherwise, if it be burned or overthrown by Rebels, or others, against
whom the Tenant may have his remedy and recompense by the Law: For in that
case it is punishable by action of Wast, if it be not repaired again within
convenient time. If a Tenant for life, 44. E. 3. 44. 10. H. 7. 5. 29. H. 8.
Dyer 36. 21. H. 6. 2 Fit. N.B. 59. 40. Ass. p. 22
years, or etc. do suffer a Pale, or a wall of Stone, Brick, Timber, or
Mudde, which is covered with Slate, Tyle, Timber, or Thatch, to decay, or lie
uncovered, it is Wast: But if any House, Pale, or Wall were ruinous, or
uncovered, at the time when the estate of the said Tenant begun, and after did
decay and fall down, then the tenant is not chargeable therefore in an Action
of Wast, for he is bound to keep them in none other repair then he found
them. If the tenant for years, or life, or etc. do take away a partition, or
a loft in a house, 10. H. 7. 5. 42. E. 3, 6.
whereby he does make two chambers, or other two rooms, or more, but one, it
is wast: for the tenant must maintain the house, and leave it in such sort as
it was demised unto him, and not transpose or alter any part thereof otherwise
then he received it. And in like sort it is Wast, if the said tenant do take
away a Furnace, a Bench, a Table fixed in the ground, a Door, 21. H. 6. 26.
or a Window from a house, which were there at the time when his estate began:
for they be made parcel of the inheritance of the house, and were demised
with it, and cannot be severed from it, but by him who has the inheritance
thereof. And yet if the same were set there by the termor, then he may take
them away again at any time during his term, 20. H. 7. 13.
but not after his term expired. And it is Wast, if the Tenant do take away
the glass of the windows of a house: Co. li. 4. 63.
for whether the lessor or the lessee did set up the same glass, and whether
it be set up with nails, lyme, or otherwise, the ^ermor ought not to take it
away, for without the glass it is not a perfect house. The same Law is of
Wainscot, whether it be affixed to the house by the lessor, or by the lessee,
or whether it be fastened by great nails or small nails, or by screwes or
yrons put through the posts or walls, or by any other means, yet if it be
taken away, it is Wast, and the Tenant of the house shall be punished for it
by action of Wast: for it is made parcel of the house, as seeling and
plastering of a house is: For the said Furnace, Bench, Table, Door, Glass,
20. H. 7. 13. 21. H. 7. 26.
and Wainscot are made parcel of the inheritance of the house, as the Walls,
Beams, and Transomes be, and they shall descend to the heir of the house,
and not accrue to the executors: Neither shall they be forfeited by Vtlarie,
nor attached in an Assise, as Chattels may. But if in any of the cases
aforesaid the Tenant do repair the house or thing wasted, 20. E 3. Wast 32.
22. H. 6. 58. 28. H. 6. 2. 38. Ass p. 1 42. Ed. 3. 22.
and make it so long, so broad, so high, and in such and so good sort, as it
was when his estate did begin, before any action of Wast shall be brought
against him therefore, then no action of Wast is maintenable against him for
that cause. Notwithstanding, if any house, wall covered, or etc. were ruinous
at the time of the beginning of the Tenants estate, 22 H. 6. 18 21. Ed. 4. 39.
and after the Tenant do pull it down, and build it again, though it be not
so large as it was before, yet is it no Wast, neither is the Tenant punishable
therefore by an action of Wast, for that he had not been punishable therefore,
if he had suffered it wholly to decay, and not have builded again any part
thereof. If Wast be committed in several principal parts of a house, 4. Ed.
3. 32. 8. Ed 2. Wast 112. 12 Ed. 3. Wast 108. 127.
he in the reuersion or remainder thereof may by an action of Wast recover the
whole house for this dispersed Wast. As in like case, if Timber Trees of Oak,
Ash, or Elm be felled in several parts of a Wood or Close, he in the
reuersion or remainder may by an action of Wast recover against the Tenant the
whole Wood, or Close, for this dispersed Wast. To proceed according to the
words of the Writ, with Wast in Woods: Wast in woods.
If the Lessee for years, Lessee for life, Tenant in Dower, Plo. Com. 470. 3.
E. 6. Dyer 65. 7. H. 6. 40 21. H. 6. 46 14. H. 4. 12.
or etc. do sell or fell Oaks, Ashes, or Elmes, being of twenty years
growth, and above the value of three shillings four pence, this is Wast, and
punishable by an Action of Wast: For those Trees, of that age, will endure
long, be meet for Building, and be parcel of the inheritance of him in the
reuersion or remainder, 27. H. 6. Wast. 8. 29. H. 8. Dyer 36. Co. li. 4. 64
and notwithstanding the said lease, or any other particular estate for life
assured, the same trees be the leassors, and not the leassees, though the
leassor cannot fell them, or grant, or sell them to any other without consent
of the tenant, for that the said tenant has the loppe and maste of them, and
shade for his cattle. And likewise, if the boughs or branches of any of the
same trees, being of the said age of twenty years be cut down by the
tenant, the same is also wast, for they in like sort may serve for building.
But if a house with certain ground be assured to a tenant for term of years,
life, or etc. whereupon Oak, 7. H. 6. 40. 41. Ed. 3. Wast. 82.
Ash, or Elm above twenty years of age be growing, if the same house do
fall in decay during the said term, the said tenant of his own authority,
without the assignement of the Leassor, may fell sufficient of the said Oak,
Ash, or Elm, to repair the same house: for the Law has ordained, that one
commodity or parcel of the farm demised shall help to maintain the other.
And so the tenant if he will may fell timber to repair the house, though the
same were in decay at the time of his entry: Notwithstanding, 12. H. 8. 1. 7.
H. 6. 40. 29. H. 8. Dyer 36. 49. E. 3. 1. 42. Ed. 3. 22. 11. H. 4. 31. 9. H. 4.
Wast. 59. 9. H. 6. 66.
if he be so disposed, he may permit the same house which he so found in
decay, to be utterly ruinated and fall down; for he need not keep the house
in other repair than he received it. But if the tenant do give or sell any
timber, or fell more for any of the uses aforesaid, than is necessary and
sufficient, or do fell any timber to build a new house, where there was none
upon the ground before, then he may be punished therefore by an Action of
wast. And the same Law is of a Copieholder, who can fell no timber but to
repair his houses which he holds by copy of Court Roll. The felling of
Maples, Sallowes, Willowes, Hornebeams, Crabtrees, 46. E. 3. 17.
Hasils, Thorns, or such like is no wast, for that they will not continue
long, nor serve for building: And therefore they are accounted seasonable wood,
and are lawfully to be felled by the termor, and to be spent upon the same
ground for house-bot, 12. H. 8. 1.
plough-bot, hedge-bot, fold-bote, or fire-bote, which the Law does allow to
the termor for years or life. And the tenant may fell Oaks, Ashes, or Elmes
for any of the purposes aforesaid, 21. H. 6. 46.
if there be no underwood growing upon the same ground to be employed to those
uses. By the custom of some country, where wood is plentiful, Oaks, Ashes,
and Elmes, under twenty years grows be called underwood, 11. H. 6. 1. Lib.
Intr. 617.
or seasonable wood, and may be felled by the termor for any of the uses
aforesaid, and so may wrangles above twenty years growth, which are never like
to prove timber, or meet for building: but in some other countries where wood
is scant, it is otherwise. Felling of seasonable wood, 40. E. 3. 25. Fitz. N.B.
59.
which is used to be cut every seven, ten, fifteen, or twenty years, is
no wast: Neither is it wast for the tenant to fell and take dotards, or to take
windfalles wherein there is no timber; for they be the tenants to use and
spend as is aforesaid: 7. H 6. 40. Co li. 4. 64. Fit. N.B. 59 29. Ed. 3. 33.
But windfalles wherein there is any timber be the Leassors. And so is the
timber of a house, which does decay and fall down during the term, the
Leassors, unless the tenant will reedifie the same house, and employ the said
timber in the building thereof again. Though the felling of Willowes, or other
such like seasonable wood, be of it self no wast, 40. E. 3. 15. 12. H. 8. 1.
10. H. 7. 5.
yet if Willowes or any of the trees aforesaid do grow within the view or
site of a Manor house to defend the house from tempests and storms, or near
unto the bank of a River, to defend the Bank, then the felling of them is
wast: and the tenant of the land is punishable for the same by an action of
Wast. If a tenant for years, life, 20. Ed. 3. Wast. 32. 9. H. 6. 66. 11. H. 6.
1. 22. H. 6. 12. 4. H. 3. Wast. 140.
or etc. do fell Oaks, Ashes, or Elmes, and after he has felled them, he
does suffer cattle to come into the same ground, which do croppe and spoil
the sprouts or new springs growing out of the roots of the same trees, then
this is a new, and another Wast, and punishable by the same Action of Wast
that the Trees be, or by another, in which Action he in the Reuersion or
Remainder shall recover treble damages: first for the Trees felled, and also
treble damages for the springs spoiled, though he can but once recover the
place wasted. If the Termor do fell green wood to burn, 20. E. 3. Wast. 32.
7. H. 6. 40. 22. H. 6. 24.
where he has dead wood sufficient, it is Wast. But the felling of dead wood
which will bear no leaves in Summer is no Wast; neither is the pulling down
of a hedge Wast, or of a Pale or Wall that is uncovered Wast. And the foresaid
Writ of Wast proceeds further to punish wast in Gardens: Wast in gardens.
Therefore if the Termor do fell and destroy Appletrees or Pearetrees growing,
dispersed in several places of the ground demised unto him, it is no Wast; for
he may fell them, and take them to burn as seasonable wood: 10. H. 7. 5. 21.
H. 6. 46.
But if he fell a whole Garden or Orchard of Appletrees or Pearetrees, or any
great number therein, it is wast; for the words of the Writ of Wast do
express so much, which be, Non liceat alicui vastum, vendicionem, seu
destructionem facere in terris, domibus, Boscis, seu Gardinis. And if any
Appletrees, or Pearetrees be thrown down by the wind in an Orchard or
Garden, 44. E. 3. 44.
and they do lean upon some of their boughs, and the spurs or roots of
them continuing fast in the ground, do so cherrish the trees that they do
bear fruit, it is wast to fell and carry them away. And to make an end of
this Branch with the words of the foresaid Statute of Marlebridge, touching
exile of men: If the tenant for years, life, or etc. of a Manor do so vex
the villeins regardant of the same Manor by Distresses, Wast in men.
Fines, Amerciaments, 29. H. 8. Dyer 37. Fit. N.B. 55 Fitz. Wast. 2. 113. 118.
130. 131.
or otherwise, that the same villeins do depart from their Tenements, this is
to the disheritance of him in the Reuersion or Remainder, and therefore
punishable by an Action of Wast. But if the Termor of a Manor during his
estate do enfraunchise a villeine regardant to a Manor, this is no Wast
punishable by the Law; 2. H 6. 11.
for after the particular estate ended, he in the Reuersion or Remainder may
seize the same villeine again cum tota sequela sua. If the tenant for years,
life, or etc. of a Manor or other land, wherein there be cottages, or small
Tenements, do demise the same Cottages, or etc. to several Tenants, and they
do die of the Plague, and the same Leassee can get none other tenants to
inhabit the same Cottages or etc. whereby they do decay, and fall down, 44.
E. 3. 21. Fitz. Wast. 104. 105.
the Leassee is not punishable therefore by an Action of Wast; for that the
wast which ensued by the death of those Cotiees or inferior tenants came by
the visitation and hand of God, and not by any default of the Termor, and
therefore the said Termor doing his endeavor to reform the defect, and to
provide other tenants, and being not able to perform it, could not redress
the same.

10 When one person does bargain, covenant, or conclude with another for any
paime^t, matter, cause, or thing to be performed, and is once fully satisfied
thereof by money, wares, or other means, according to ye true intent of ye same
agreem^t: if ye same party do after sue or attempt by course of Law to
obtain a new, or other satisfaction for the same contract; this a plain and
manifest wrong and oppression, for the said party does in a sort endeavor to
be twice satisfied for one debt or duty. And likewise, it is an oppression
and wrong, if one person do endeavor to lay a burden or charge upon others,
which the Law of the Realm will not impose upon them, or which himself
alone, or himself with others ought to sustain: or when one person shall
imprison or restrain another of his liberty, who by law ought to be free. As
if one person be bound to another by Statute merchant, or Statute Staple for
the payment of a sum of money, whereof there is a defeasaunce that if the
Conusor do pay to the Conusee a less sum of money at a day prefixed, 46.
Ed. 3. 4. 47. Ed. 3. 26. 20. E 3. Fi. N.B. 105
or diverse sums at several days, or do perform certain covenants or
agreements in the said defeasaunce, or in certain Indentures made between
them specified, and the conusor does pay the said sum or several sums of
money, or does perform all the covenants in the said Indenture specified,
according to the purport of the said defeasaunce: and that notwithstanding the
Conusee does sue execution of the said Statute against the Conusor, this is a
manifest wrong and oppression pretended to the Conusor: Wherefore the Conusor
for his relief may have an Audita querela directed out of the Chauncerie to
the Justices of the Kings Bench, Oppressions redressed by an Audita querela.
or Common Place, comprehending the whole matter, and charging them to call
before them the parties, Plaintiff and Defendant, and to do them justice,
according to the Law and Custom of the Realm, which is either to grant a
Supersedeas to stay the Execution, or to set the body of the Conusor at
liberty, if he be taken and imprisoned therefore, and to discharge his lands
and goods of execution, if the suggestion of the plaintiff in the said writ be
proved to be true. And if the Conusee in the case aforesaid do take away the
defeasaunce or Indenture from the Conusor, 47. Ed. 3. 26 Fi. N.B. 103
and after extend the same Statute against him, this is likewise an oppression,
and to be redressed by an Audita querela. And in like sort if the Conusee
after the said Statute acknowledged, do make a Release or Acquitance of the
same to the Conusor, and then do sue execution of the said Statute against the
same Conusor, 47. E. 3. 3. 45. E. 3. 17. 3. H. 4. 12. 31. E. 3.
or any feoffee of any part of his land, this is a great injury and
oppression, and therefore in this case the said Conusor or his feoffee is to
be relieved by an Audita querela. If a statute be made and acknowledged by one
person to another, and then committed in ouell maine to a stranger to be
delivered to the Conusee upon certain conditions performed, 12. H. 4. 13. 43.
E. 3. 17.
and after the same stranger do deliver the said Statute to the Conusee before
the conditions performed, whereupon he does sue execution thereof against the
Conusor, this is a great wrong and oppression of the Conusor, and therefore he
may have an Audita querela upon this matter in fact, stay the the exeeution,
and thereby redress this injury. If one person be bound to another by Statute
or Recognisance for the payment of a sum of money, 45. E. 3. 17. 47. E. 3. 3.
9. H. 4. 5. 13. H. 7. 22. 16. El. Dyer 332.
and after the Conusor does make several feoffements of several parcels of
his land to diverse persons, and then the Statute or Recognisance is forfeited,
and the Conusee does sue execution thereof against one of those feoffees only,
this is a wrong and oppression of him, for that all the land of the conusor
which he had at the time of the said stat. or recognisance acknowledged, or at
any time after, ought to be charged and extended for the payment of this debt,
to the intent the money might be the sooner paid, and the execution more
speedily discharged: And therefore ye same feoffee, whose land is so extended
may have an Audita querela, or a Scire facias, as the case requires, to defeat
the execution against him, Co. li. 3. 14. 23. Ed. 3. Execution 127.
(and thereby he shall be restored to all the mean profits) and to compel the
conusee to sue execution of all the land which was the conusors at the time of
the said Statute or Recognisance acknowledged, or at any time after; and so the
land of every terre-tenant shall be equally charged, and each person
contributorie to the same extent, in respect of his land. If the conusor after
a Statute or Recognisance acknowledged do make many feoffements of several
parcels of his land to diverse persons, and then all, or any of those feoffees
lands be extended by force of the same Statute etc. the party or parties
grieved by the same extent, 9. H. 4. 5.
may procure an Audita querela to cause the lands of the conusor to be
likewise extended: for he or they be wronged and oppressed by the said
conusors former Act and means. But on the other side, if the land remaining in
the hands of the conusor be extended by the conusee, by force of the said
Statute or Recognisance, the conusor cannot maintain an Audita querela against
his seoffees, or any of them, 23. Ed. 3. Fitz. Execution. 127. 45. Ed. 3. 22.
to cause their lands to be extended: for he is not vexed or oppressed by the
same extent by any of their means, nor for any of their debts, but for his
own debt, though in the case before rehearsed they be troubled and oppressed
for his debt: for when any person does become bound by Statute or Recognisance
to another, and after alieneth his land, or any part thereof to a stranger, the
body of the conusor remains debtor to the conusee in respect of his
acknowledgement and confession of the same, made of record before a competent
Judge or officer thereunto lawfully assigned, and the debt is his, and the
burden thereof is his, and the land is only chargeable in respect that it was
in his hands at the time of the Statute or Recognisance acknowledged, or after,
and so the conusors person, and the land in his hands is only chargeable in
that case. As in like case, if a man do become bound by Statute or
Recognisance to another, and after the conusee does purchase parcel of the
land of the conusor, 11. H. 7. 4. 13. H. 7. 22: 45. Ed. 3. 22 2. El. Dyer 193.
Plo. Com. 72.
and then the Statute is forfeited, the conusee may extend the Statute, take
and imprison the body of the conusor, and have the residue of his land
delivered to him in execution, and the conusor shall have no remedy by Audita
querela against the conusee, for that the conusor is not wronged or oppressed
by this extent, seeing he himself is the only debtor of the conusee, and his
body, lands, and goods, are liable to the payment of this debt, and not the
lands in the hands of the conusee. And so it is if a man be bound by Statute
or Recognisance to another, and after the conusee do purchasse parcel of the
land of the conusor, and a stranger purchases another parcel of land of him,
and then the Statute is forfeited, and the conusee does sue execution of the
land of that stranger the other purchaser: that is a wrong and oppression, and
therefore the said stranger may sue an Audita querela against the said
conusee, 11. H. 7. 4. 13. H. 7. 22. Fitz. N.B. 105.
and thereby discharge his land of execution: for that the said conusee has
discharged this land by his own Act, viz. by purchasing of parcel of the land
charged: for by the Statute or Recognisance acknowledged, the whole land was
charged, and by purchasing of parcel by the conusee, he has discharged the
whole, saving that which remains in the hands of the Conusor. If an Infant
within the age of one and twenty years be bound by Statute or Recognisance,
and the Conusor will extend the same, the Infant may pursue an Audita querela
to avoid the same, either during his minority, if by inspection the Court
shall adiudge him within age, 6. Ed. 3. 39. 23. Ed. 3. Au. qu. 26. Fi. N.B. 104
or after he shall accomplish his full age: for it was a wrong and oppression
practiced by the Conusee to abuse the tender age of the Infant, and to urge a
Statute of him before the Law did enable him to acknowledge it. And the like
Law is, if one person will acknowledge to another a Statute by Dures of
imprisonment, and then the Conusee do sue execution of the same, the Conusor
may prosecute an Audita querela and avoid the Statute: for in this case the
Conusee has done to the Conusor a double wrong and oppression: viz. first, to
imprison him, and thereby to exact act a Statute of him, and then contrary to
the warrant of Law to extend the same against him. And as in the cases
aforesaid, so likewise in all other cases where any person has just and
lawful cause to seek and have relief by an Audita querela, Fi. N.B. 104 20.
Ed. 3. Au. qu. 27.
in the same cases either he is, or is offered to be oppressed and wronged:
And in all the same cases the oppressor endeavors to make the Law his
color and instrument to abuse him.

11 Forestallers, Ingrossers, and Regrators deserve to be reckoned amongst
the number of Oppressors of the common good, and public wealth of the Realm,
for they do endeavor to enrich themselves by the impouerishment of others,
and respect not how many do lose, so they may gain. They have been exclaimed
upon, and condemned in Parliament from one generation to another, as appears
by the Statutes of Anno 51. H. 3. Anno 34. Ed. 1. Anno 25. Ed. 3. Anno 27. Ed.
3. Anno 28. Ed. 3. Anno 31. Ed. 3. Anno 42. Ed. 3. Anno 2. R. 2. Anno 6. R. 2.
Anno 14. R. 2. Anno 25. H. 8. Anno 5. Ed. 6. and Anno 5. El. but amongst the
others specially forestallers, St. 34. Ed. 1.
for by the foresaid Statute of Anno 34. Ed. 1. it was ordained, That no
forestaller shall be suffered to dwell in any town: for he is a manifest
oppressor of the poor, and a decayer of the rich, a public enemy of the
country, a Canker, a Moth, and a gnawing worm that daiely wastes the common
wealth: And the act and name of a Forestaller was so odious in that time, that
it was moved in Parliament to have had it established by Law, That a
Forestaller should be baited out of the town where he dwelt by dogs, and
whipped forth with whippes. But because in Oppression by forestallers
ingrossers, regrators.
who an Ingrosser, and who a Regrator, and what punishment former laws had
inflicted upon them; therefore to the intent that they and their offenses might
more certainly be laid open to the knowledge of the whole Realm, and condign
punishment provided for them, St. 5 and 6. Ed. 6. 14.
by a Statute made Anno 5. and 6. E. 6. it was established, Who is a
forestaller.
That whatsoever person or persons shall buy or cause to be bought any
merchandise, victual, or other thing coming by land, or water toward any
fair, or market, to be sold in the same, or coming toward any city, port,
haven, creek, or rode of this realm, or Wales, from any part beyond ye sea to
be sold: or make any bargain, contract, or promise for the having or buying of
the same, or any part thereof so coming as aforesaid, before the same
merchandise, victuals, or other things shall be in the market, fair, city,
port, Haven, Creek, or Rode, ready to be sold: Or shall make any motion by
word, letter, message, or otherwise, to any person or persons for the
inhaunsing of the price, or dear selling of any of the things above mentioned:
Or else dissuade, move, or stir any person coming to the Market or Fair,
to forbear to bring any of the things above mentioned to any Fair or market,
city, port, etc. to be sold as aforesaid, shall be adjudged a forestaller. But
by the statute of an^ 13. El. it is ordained, That the said Statute of an^ 5.
and 6. Ed. 6. St. 13. El. 25.
shall not extend to any wines, oils, sugars, spices, currants, or other
foreign victuals, brought from beyond the sea (fish and salt only except.)

St. 5. and 6. Ed. 6. 14.
or get into his or their hands, Who is a regrator.
or possession, in any fair or market, any corn, wine, fish, butter, cheese,
candles, tallow, sheep, lambs, calves, swine, pigges, geese, capons, hens,
chickins, pigeons, conies, or other dead victual whatsoever, that shall be
brought to any fair or market within this realm, or Wales, to be sold, and
do sell the same again in any fair or market holden or kept in the same
place, or in any other fair or market within iiij. miles thereof, shall be
reputed and taken for a regrator, or regrators.

St. 5. and 6. Ed. 6. 14.
or get into his or their hands by buying, Who is an ingrosser.
co^tracting, or promise taking, (other than by demise, grant, or lease of land
or tithe) any corn growing in the fields, or any other corn or grain,
butter, cheese, fish, or other dead victuals whatsoever, within the realm of
England, to the intent to sell the same again, shall be reputed and taken an
unlawful engrosser or engrossers.

St. 5. and 6. Ed. 6. 14.
and being thereof duly convicted or attainted by the laws of this realm,
The punishment of forestallers, regrators, and ingrossers.
or after the form hereafter mentioned, he or they shall for his or their
first offense, have or suffer imprisonment by the space of two months without
bail or mainprise, and shall also lose and forfeit the value of the goods,
cattels, and victual, so by him or them bought or had. And if any person
lawfully convicted or attainted, of or for any the offenses abouesaid, be
thereof eftsoons lawfully convicted or attainted, then every person or persons
so offending, shall have and suffer for his said second offense, imprisonment
by the space of one half year, without bail or maineprise, and shall lose
the double value of all the goods, cattels, and victual, so by him bought or
had as is aforesaid. And if any person being lawfully twice convicted or
attainted, of or for any of the said offenses, shall eftsoons offend the third
time, and be thereof lawfully convicted or attainted, then every such person
for the third offense, shall be set on the pillorie in the city, town, or place
where he shall then dwell, and inhabit, and lose and forfeit all the goods and
cattle, that he or they have to their own use, and also be committed to
prison, there to remain during the kings pleasure.

St. 5. and 6. Ed. 6. 14.
as any person or persons (not forestalling) shall convert into malt, Cases
wherein regrating or engrossing be tolerable.
or oatmeale, in his or their own house or houses, or shall so be converted
indeed: or the buying of any such thing, by any such Fishmonger, Butcher, or
Poulter, as concern his or their own faculty, craft, or mystery (otherwise
than by forestalling) which shall sell the same again upon reasonable prices
by retaile: or the taking of any cattle, corn, grain, butter, cheese, or any
other thing above mentioned, reserved (without fraud or couin) upon any lease
for term of life or lives, year, or years, heretofore made, or hereafter to
be made: or the buying of any wine or other dead victual above mentioned,
being apt and meet for man's sustenance by any Inholder or other victualler, to
sell the same by retaile within his house, or to any of his neighbors for
their sustenance, for reasonable prices: or the buying of any dried or salted
fish, herring, or sprats (not forestalled) and sold for reasonable prices: or
the buying of any corn, fish, butter, or cheese, by any such Badger, lader,
kidder, or carier as shall be assigned, and allowed to that office, or doing by
three Justices of Peace of the County where the said badger, lader, kidder, or
carier shall dwell, which shall sell and deliver in open fair or market, or to
any other victualler, or to any other person or persons for the provision of
his or their house or houses, all such corn, grain, butter, and cheese, as
any such person shall buy or cause to be bought (and that within one month
next after he shall so buy any such corn, grain, butter or cheese) so that
the same shall be bought without forestalling: or else that any such common
provision made, or hereafter to be made without fraud or couin, by any person
or persons, of any of the things abouesaid, for any city, borough or town
corporat, or for the provision or victualling of any ship, castle, or fort
within the kings dominions without forestalling, which shall be employed only
to that use and purpose: or the buying and provision of any of the victuals
above mentioned, necessary for the furniture and provision of the inhabitants,
or of the town of Barwicke, Holy Island, or the Marches of England against
Scotland, which without fraud or couin shall be transported and conveyed, as
soon as wind and weather may serve to such of the places aforesaid, for the
which the same shall be so provided, shall not be in any wise deemed, adjudged
or taken any offense contrary to this Act.

If any person or persons having sufficient corn and grain for the provision
St. 5. and 6. Ed. 6. 14.
and sowing of their grounds for one year, do buy any corn in any fair or
market, Buying of corn for the change of seed.
for the change of his or their seed, and do not bring to the same fair or
market the same day so much corn as he shall fortune to buy for his seed, and
sell the same if he can, as the price of corn then goes in the said market or
fair: then every such person or persons so buying corn for seed, shall
forfeit and loose the double value of the corn so bought.

If any person or persons shall buy any manner of oxen, ronts, stieres, kine,
St. 5. and 6. Ed. 6. 14.
calves, sheep, lambs, goats, or kids living, Buying and selling of cattle
alive.
and sell the same again alive, unless he or they do keep and feed the same
by the space of five weeks, in his or their own houses, ground, farm ground,
or else in such ground or grounds where he or they have the herbage or common
of pasture, by grant or prescription, then every person and persons so buying
and selling again shall loose the double value of the cattle, or things so
bought and sold again. The moitie of all which forfeitures before rehearsed
shall be to the King, and the other moitie to him or them that will sue in any
of the Kings Courts of Record by B.P.A. or I. etc. in the which no W.E.P. etc.

The Justices of peace in every County within this Realm or Wales, at St. 5.
and 6. Ed. 6. 14.
shall have full power and authority by virtue of this Act, to inquire, hear,
and determine all and every the defaults and offenses, The authority of
Justices of peace.
committed or done contrary to this Act within the County where any such
Sessions shall be kept, by Inquisition, presentment, bill, or information
before them exhibited, by examination of two lawful witnesses, or by any of
the same ways or means, by the discretion of the said Justices, and to make
process thereupon, as though they were indicted before them by Inquisition, or
by verdict of twelve men, or more, and upon the conviction of the offender, by
information or suit of any other than the King, to make extracts of the one
moity of the forfeitures to be levied to the Kings use, as they use to do of
other fines, issues, and amerciaments grown in the Sessions of peace, and to
award execution of the other moity for the complainant or informer against the
offender by Fieri facias, or Capias, as the Kings Justices at Westminster may
do, and use to do. And if any such conviction or attainder, shall hereafter
happen to be at the Kings suit only, then the whole forfeitures to be
extracted, and levied to the Kings use only. Whatsoever person shall at any
time hereafter be punished by virtue of this Act, But once punished for one
offense.
for any thing mentioned in this Act, then the same person shall not otherwise
be vexed, troubled, sued, or put to any pain or punishment for that one thing,
wherefore he or they shall have been so punished.

St. 5. and 6. E. 6. 14.
that it shall be lawful to every person or persons which shall be assigned and
allowed by three Justices of the peace of the county where he shall dwell,
Transporting allowed by Justices of peace.
thereunto, to buy (otherwise than by forestalling) corn, grain, or cattle,
to be transported or carried by water from any port, or place within the said
Realm, or Wales, unto any other port, or place within the said Realm, or
Dominions, if he or they shall without fraud or couin, ship or imbarke the
same within forty days next after he or they shall have bought the same, or
taken covenant, or promise for the buying thereof, and with such expedition and
diligence as wind and weather shall serve to carry and transport the same to
such port or place, as his or their cockets shall declare, and there do
dis-barke, unlade, and sell the same, and do bring a true certificat thereof,
from one Justice of peace of the County, or mayor, or bailife of the town
corporat where the same shall be unladen, and also of the Customer of the port
where such vnlading shall be, of the place, and day, where the said corn or
cattle shall be disbarked, unladen, and sold to be directed unto the Customer
and Comptroller of the port where the same was embarked.

When corn may be engrossed.
or under, St. 5. and 6. E. 6. 14.
malt and barley at three shillings four pence the quarter, or under, otes,
or otes maulted, at the price of two shillings the quarter, pease or beans at
the price of four shillings the quarter, or under, and rye or mescelin at the
price of five shillings the quarter, or under, (all which quarters shall be
intended to be of London measure) then it shall be lawful to every person and
persons (not forestalling) to buy, ingrosse, and keep in his or their
grainers, or houses such corn of the kinds aforesaid, as without fraud or
couin shall be bought, at, or under the prices before expressed, any thing in
this Act to the contrary notwithstanding. Provided always, that this Act,
Within what time the suit shall be commenced.
or any thing therein contained, extend not to charge any person or persons for
any the offenses above mentioned, unless he or they be sued for the same
within two years next after such offense done or committed.

5. and 6. Ed. 6. 14.
Provided always, that it shall be lawful to every of the kings subjects,
Buying and selling of fish near the sea.
or that hereafter shall dwell and inhabit within one mile of the maine Sea to
buy all manner of fish fresh and salted (not forestalling the same) and to sell
the same again at reasonable prices, this Act, or any thing therein contained
to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. Provided also, Drouers licenced
may buy and sell cattle.
that it shall be lawful to all and every person and persons known to be a
common Drouer or Drouers being licenced, or authorized, and allowed in writing
by three Justices of peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum of the County or
Counties where the same Drouer or Drouers shall be most abiding and dwelling,
to buy cattle in such Shires and Counties where Drouers have been wont in
times past accustomably to buy cattle, at their free liberties and pleasures,
and to sell the same as is aforesaid at reasonable prices, in common faires and
markets distant from the place or places, where he or they shall buy the same,
forty miles at the least, so that the same cattle be not bought by the way of
forestalling. Provided always, that such license of the Justices of the Peace
shall not endure above one year, The continuance of a license.
unless the same be yearly renewed by so many Justices as is aforesaid.

St. 5. El. 12.
12 Because since the making of the foresaid Statute of An^ 5. and 6. Ed. 6.
diverse persons by their own suit, were licenced to become drouers of cattle,
badgers, laders, kidders, cariers, buiers, or transporters of corn, grain,
butter and cheese, thereby to live easily, and to leave their honest labor in
husbandry, or manual occupations, and also to inhaunce the prices of corn,
grain, and other victuals; Oppression by badgers, kidders, laders, cariers.
by which means they oppressed the commonwealth, only to procure unto
themselves both wealth, and ease: for the redress whereof by a Statute made
Anno 5. Eliz. it was enacted, That if any license shall be made to any badger,
lader, kidder, or carier of corn, drouer of cattle, buyer or transporter of
corn and grain, butter or cheese, otherwise than in the general and open
Quarter Sessions of the peace holden in the shire where the party admitted
does, Observations necessary in all licenses
and by the space of three years before the Test of his License has dwelled:
Or other than to such person as is or has been married, is a householder, no
household servant or retainer, and thirty years of age at the least: Or to
have continuance for more than one year: or which bears not date the day and
place where the Sessions be holden: Or is not signed and sealed with the hands
and seals of three Justices of peace being present at the same Sessions at the
least, whereof one to be of the Quorum, the same License shall be void: And
the party which takes the same, shall forfeit five pounds. And no person shall
upon the pain of the forfeiture of five pounds by the authority of such
License buy any corn out of open fair or market, to sell the same again,
except he be thereunto specially licenced by express words in his license. The
moitie of which forfeitures shall be to the Q. her heirs and successors, and
the other moitie to him or them that will sue for the same in any of the Q.
Courts of Record by B.P.A. or I. wherein no W.E.P. etc. But this Act shall not
extend to prejudice the liberties of any city, or town corporat, but every of
them, may lawfully assign and license Purueiors for the provision of the same
city, or town, as they might have done before. Neither shall this Act be
prejudicial to the Inhabitants within the Counties of Westmerland, Comberland,
Lancaster, Chester, York, or any of them, but they may do as they have used
to do: And the Justices of peace in every County within this Realm, or
Wales, shall have authority to inquire, hear, and determine all offenses
committed contrary to this statute by inquisition, presentment, bill, or
information before them exhibited, and by examination of two lawful witnesses,
and to make process thereupon as though they were indicted by inquisition or
verdict etc.

Oppression of Printers and Stationers.
13 Though by the Statute of Anno 1. R. 3. St. 1. Ri. 3. 9.
license was given to aliens and strangers to bring books into this Realm, and
to sell and retaile them at their liberties, for that there were then few
Printers, or skillful binders of books within this Realm: But seeing since
there have been and are many expert and cunning Printers, and skillful binders
of books within this Realm, who have wholly addicted themselves to the said
trades, and made it their whole or chief living: and therefore to bring into
this Realm any printed books bound; or for any stranger to bring books into
this Realm, to be by them sold by retaile were a great oppression and
prejudice to the Stationers, and also the same books would be so much the
dearer, and so hurtful to others, who should buy those of them: Therefore by a
Statute made Anno 25. Oppression by Printers or Stationers.
H. 8. it was ordained, St. 25. H. 8. 15.
That if any person resiant or inhabitant within this realm shall buy to sell
again any printed books brought from any parts out of the Kings obedience,
ready bound in boords, leather, or parchment, he shall forfeit for every book
bound out of the Kings obeisance, and brought into this Realm, and bought by
any person within the same to sell again, vj. s^ viij. d to the King, and the
party that will seize, or sue for the same in any of the Kings courts of Record
by B.P.I. etc. wherein no W.E.P. etc. And if any person inhabitant or resiant
within this realm, shall buy within this realm of any stranger borne out of
the kings obeisance (other than of denizens) any printed books brought from
any parts beyond the sea (except only in gross, and not by retaile) he shall
forfeit for every book so bought by retaile vj. s^ viij. d to the King, and
the party that will seize or sue for the same in any of the kings courts of
Record, by B.P. or I. etc. wherein no W.E.P. etc. The said forfeitures to be
always levied of the buyers of such books contrary to this statute. For that
it was then thought expedient, that Printers and sellers of printed books,
should as well be restrained from the oppression of others, by making excessive
prices, in sale or binding of their books, as it was by the said statute
provided that they should not be oppressed by others: Therefore by the before
rehearsed statute of Anno 25. H. 8. it was further established, St. 25. H. 8.
15.
That if any Printers or sellers of printed books, inhabiting within this
Realm, do at any time in such wise inhance or increase the prices of any such
printed books, in sale, or binding, at too high and unreasonable prices, in
such wise as complaint thereof be made to the King, or unto the Lord
Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, or any of the chief Justices of the one Bench, or
of the other: Then the same Lords, or two of any of them, shall have authority
to enquire thereof, as well by the oaths of twelve honest and discreet
persons, as otherwise by due examinations by their discretions: and after the
same inhauncing and increasing of the prices of the said books and binding
shall be so found by the said twelve men, or otherwise by the examination of the
said Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, and Justices or two of them: Then the
same Lords, or two of them at the least, shall have power to redress such
inhancing of the prices of printed books from time to time by their
discretions, and to limite the prices as well of the books, as for the binding
of them. And over that, the offender or offenders being convict by examination
of the said Lords, or two of them, or otherwise shall forfeit for every book
by them sold, whereof the price shall be enhaunced for the book and binding
thereof three shillings four pence to the King and party grieved, that will
complain upon the same in manner and form aforesaid.

St. 5. Ri. 2. 2.
14 It appears by the preamble of the statute of An^ 5. R. 2. that the carrying
of gold or silver in money, vessel, plate or jewels forth of the Realm, was
then accounted a great mischief, oppression and destruction of this land,
which the policy of this State has before, and since, by several Statutes
endeavored to restrain: As appears by the statutes of An^ 9. Ed 3. Anno 5.
Oppression by transporting of gold and silver.
R. 2. Anno 2. H. 4. Anno 2. H. 6. Anno 17. Ed. 4. Anno 4. H. 7. and Anno 19.
St. 9. Ed. 3. 1 St. 5 R. 2. 2
H. 7. Whereupon by the said statute of An^ 9. Ed. 3. and Anno 5. R. 2. it was
established, That whosoever does send, or carry out of the Realm of England,
any gold, or silver in money, bullion, plate, or vessel, without the Kings
license, St. 2. H. 4 5.
(saving for his reasonable expenses Anno 2. H. 4.) shall forfeit the value of
the sum carried forth: And he which is upon his passage in any ship or
vessel, for to go out of any port, haven, or creek, shall immediately
confess and declare after warning unto him given by the Kings searcher what
gold or silver in coin or mass he has with him for his expenses, or else
that money so concealed shall be also forfeited to the King: But by the statute
of Anno 2. St. 2. H. 6. 6.
H. 6. Raunsoms for fines of English prisoners taken beyond the Sea, and the
money that soldiers shall carry with them for their reasonable costs be
excepted, so that the same be not done without the Kings license, And also by
the same statute is excepted money for things bought in Scotland to be brought
to the parts adjoining. And by the said Statute of Anno 19. H. 7. it was
ordained, That no person shall carry or convey, nor cause to be carried out of
this Realm, St. 19. H. 7. 5
any bullion, plate, or coin of gold or silver into Ireland above the sum
of vj. s^ viij. d, nor convey any such bullion into any ship or boat, upon
pain of forfeiture of the same, and of imprisonment and fine at the Kings
pleasure.

15 Because there is no mine of copper metal within this realm, Oppression
by transporting copper, brass etc.
where sufficient copper may be gotten, for the use of the King and his people:
and for that several other mettalls be mixed therewith, of which diverse
vessels and instruments be made: And therefore the transporting thereof beyond
the sea, was found by experience to be a great hinderance, and oppression to
the workers thereof, and also to all those that should have the use and
occupation of the same; which were in effect all sorts of housekeepers,
wherefore for the restraint of the transportation of the same, first one
statute was made Anno 21. St. 21. H. 8. 10. St. 33. H. 8. 7 St. 2. E. 6. 37
H. 8. And after another Anno 33. H. 8. And lastly, a third Anno 2. Ed. 6. By
which two last Statutes it was enacted, That no persons shall carry or convey,
or ship, to the intent to carry or convey, any brass, copper, latten, bell
metal, pan metal, or shroffe metal, whether it be clear or mixed (tin
and lead only excepted) into any part beyond the sea, or into any outward
dominion, upon pain to forfeit the double value thereof, and x. l. for every
thousand weight of the same metal so carried, or shipped to the intent to be
carried, to the King, and him that will sue for the same in any of the Kings
courts, by A.B.P. or I. wherein no W.E.P. etc.

16 For that a great number of persons occupying the trade and faculty of
pewterers within this Realm were decayed and oppressed in estate, by reason
that much ware made of tin was brought out of other countries into this
Realm, and because strangers did learn the occupation of Pewterers in this
Realm, Oppression of pewterers.
and then did depart the Realm, and taught it to the people of foreign
Nations: and for that sometime Englishmen borne would travail into other
countries, and teach the same to forrainers: for the restraint whereof by a
Statute made Anno 25. H. 8. it was ordained, St. 25. H. 8. 9 St. 33. H. 8. 4
That no person inhabiting within this Realm, shall buy, or take by exchange
for other wares any wares made out of this Realm of tin, or mixed with tin,
as platters, dishes, sawcers, pots, basins, ewers, flaggons, goblets,
saltsellers, spoones, or any other wares made of tin or pewter whatsoever it
be, upon pain of forfeiture of the same wares, in whose hands soever it may be
found, or taken, to the use of the King, and the finders thereof, and also
lawful current money of this Realm, to the value thereof. And further, that no
stranger borne out of this Realm shall use the said craft of Pewterers, nor
work any manner of vessel, or other ware aforesaid to be made of tin or
pewter within any part of this Realm, upon pain of forfeiture of ten pounds
to the use of the K. and I. to be recovered by A.I. wherein no W.E.P. and also
upon pain of forfeiture of the same pewter or tin so wrought, in whose
hands soever it be found, or taken: A pewterer shall not go to dwell in an
other realm.
and no persons borne within this Realm, occupying the said craft of
Pewterers, shall resort into any strange countries, there to teach or exercise
the said craft of pewterers, upon pain to loose the privilege and benefit of
an English man.

17 Because complaint was made in Parliament, that Linen Drapers, Woollen
Drapers, Haberdashers, Grocers, and Mercers dwelling in the Country out of
cities, boroughs, town corporat, and market towns, did not only occupy the
art and mystery of the said Sciences in the places where they dwelt, but also
came unto the said cities, boroughes, towns corporat, and market towns, and
there sold their wares, and took away the relief of the inhabitants of the
said cities, market towns etc. to the great decay, oppression and utter
undoing of the inhabitants of the same: For the reformation whereof, Oppression
of inhabitants of market towns.
by a Statute made Anno 1. and 2. P. and M. it was enacted, St. 1. and 2. P.
and M. 7.
That no person dwelling in the Country any where within England, out of any
cities, boroughs, towns corporat, or market towns, shall sell, or cause to be
sold by retaile, any woollen cloth, linen cloth, Haberdash wares, Grocerie
wares, or Mercerie wares, at, or within any of the said cities, boroughs,
towns corporat, or market towns, or within the suburbs, or liberties thereof
(except it be in open faires) upon pain of forfeiture for every time so
offending the sum of vj. s^ viij. d, and the whole wares so sold, proffered,
and offered to be sold, contrary to the intent of this Act, whereof one moitie
shall be to the King, and the other moitie to him or them that will seize or
sue for the same, in any of the Kings Courts of Record by A.B. P.I. or
otherwise, wherein no W.E.P. etc. But this shall not be hurtful to any persons
that bring any of the said wares, to any of the said cities, market towns,
etc. to be sold by whole sale, in gross, and not by retaile, but every of them
may lawfully sell the same by whole sale, in gross, and not by retaile, as
they might have done before. Neither shall this Act extend to any persons that
dwell in the Country out of any of the said cities, boroughs, etc. but every of
them at any time when he shall be free of any of the guildes or liberties of any
of the said cities, market towns etc. and dwell within any of them, shall or
may sell, or cause to be sold any of the wares aforesaid by retaile: Neither
shall this Act be prejudicial to the privileges of the universities of Oxford
and Cambridge, or either of them. And it shall be lawful to all persons to
sell, or cause to be sold by retaile, or otherwise, all linen or woollen cloth
of their own making, Cloth of their own making.
in every City, Borough, Town corporat, and Market Town, as freely as they
might have done before.

St. 25. H. 8. 13
18 It appears by the words of the stat. of An. 25. H. 8. That for one man to
get and take into his hands diverse farms, which were ordained and provided
habitations and livings for diverse men: Or for one man to get into his
possession many pastures or walks for sheep, by the occupying whereof several
persons before had lived, was accounted a most grievous and heinous oppression,
and to tend to the high displeasure of almighty God, to the decay of
hospitality, to the diminishing of the kings people, to the let of cloth
making, whereby many poor people did live, and to turn and incline to the
utter desolation and destruction of this realm: for the redress whereof, by
the same statute it was ordained, That no person or persons shall receive or
take in farm, for term of years, life, or at will, by indenture, copy of
Court Roll, or otherwise, any more houses or tenements of husbandry, whereunto
any lands are belonging in town, village, hamlet, or tything within this
realm, above the number of two such holds or tenements: and no manner of
person shall have or occupy any such holds so newly taken, to the number of
two, as is before expressed, Oppression by taking of several farms.
except he or they be dwelling within the same parishes where such holds be,
upon pain of forf. for every week that he or they shall have, occupy, or take
any profits of such holds 3. s^. 4. d. whereof the one moity shall be to the
king, and the other to the party that will sue for the same in any of the K.
Courts by A.B.P.I. or otherwise within one year next after such offense
committed. St. 4. H. 7. 16
And by the stat. of An. 4. H. 7. it was established, That if any person do
take any several farms more then one, of any manors, lands, teneme^ts,
parsonages, or tithes within the isle of Wight, Taking of farms in the isle of
Wight.
whereof the farm of them altogether shall exceed the sum of x. marks, the
lessee shall forf. to the king for every such taking xl. l.

St. 25. H. 8. 13
19 And for the reasons last specified, the said stat. of an. 25. H. 8. did also
ordain, Oppression by keeping of many sheep.
or have in his possession in his own proper lands, nor in the grounds of any
other which he shall have or occupy in farm, nor otherwise have of his own
proper cattle, in use, possession, or property, by any manner of means or
couin, above the number of two thousand sheep at one time, within any parts of
this realm, of all sorts and kinds (alwais accounting 6. score to the hundred,
and 10. such hundreds to the thousand) upon pain to forf. for every sheep
that any person shall have or keep, above the number limited by this act, 3.
s^. 4. d. to the king and such as will sue for the same by A.B.P.I. in any
court of Record, wherein no W.E.P. etc. So that the suit be commenced for the
king within three years, and for a subject within one year next after the
offense committed. But lambs Lambs.
under the age of one whole year, and as much as shall be from the time of the
falling of them unto the feast of the Nativity of S. John Baptist shall not be
taken for sheep prohibited by this statute.

St. 25. H. 8. 13
If any person having sheep of his own, happen to be made executor or
administrator Sheep coming by executorship or marriage.
or happen to be married to any person which shall have sheep at the time of
the marriage, by reason whereof the said person shall by such means have above
the number of 200, then he shall loose no penalty for having above the number
of 2000. sheep, by such means, so that within one year next after such
advancement, he do put to sale, or otherwise dispose so many of the said
sheep, so to him advanced, or else of his own sheep that he had before, so
that above one year he shall not keep, have, or occupy by any such means, or
otherwise by any fraud, any more number of them, then is before limited, upon
pain before rehearsed.

Sheep given by will to a child within age.
and appoint them by his last will to be kept by his executors, St. 25. H. 8.
13.
or by any other person, until the foresaid child shall come to a certain age
limited by his last will: then after the death of the Testator, the said
sheep so being in possession of the executors, or of any other person to the
use of any such child within age, for the time yt he shall be limited to have
the said sheep, by the will of the Testator, shall not be accounted against the
said executors, nor any person having the sheep for the intent aforesaid, any
of the number of the said sheep prohibited by this act.

25. H. 8. 13
or borne under his obeisance, Sheep kept upon inheritance or freehold.
which shall have or be seized of inheritance, in possession, or in use, or
that shall have a iointure in use, or in possession, or shall be tenant in dower,
or by the courtesy of, or in any manors, lands, tenements, pastures, feedings,
or liberty of foldage, within any part of this realm of England, Wales, or the
Marches of the same, may have, keep, and maintain upon the same, his own
demesne lands, and all other his pastures, feedings, and fold courses, which he
so has, as many his own sheep and lambs, in number to his own proper behoof,
as he lawfully might have had and kept upon the same at any time before the
making of this act.

25. H. 8. 13
or in any lands, He that keeps his number upon his inheritance, shall not
keep upon a farm.
tenements, pastures, feedings, or liberties of fold courses, do keep upon the
same the number of 2000. sheep, or above, then he shall not in any wise keep
or have any sheep above the number of 2000. upon any lands, pastures, or
feedings, which he shall have in farm, or otherwise, upon pain of forf. for
every sheep, besides the said number of 2000. 3. s^. 4. d.

25. H. 8. 13
and liberties of fold courses of any person before rehearsed, Sheep kept upon
demesns and farms.
suffice not for the feeding, pasturing, and keeping of 2000. sheep, then any
such person may have or feed upon the said demesne lands, and upon his farm
holds (which he lawfully may have, to the said number of 2000. sheep, and not
above) upon pain of forf. for every sheep above that number 3. s^. 4. d.

25. H. 8. 13
to have from time to time such convenient number of sheep, Sheep kept for
the maintenance of a man's house.
above the number expressed in this act, as shall be necessary for the only
expenses of his household, to be provided, kept, and fed, in and upon his own
lands, or other lands, such as he lawfully can provide for, in farm, or
otherwise, so that he at no time shall have for the expense of his household, or
by color of the same, above the number to him limited by this act, any number
of sheep more then shall suffice for the only expenses of his household for
one year, without fraud or couin. And it is lawful for all spiritual persons
Spiritual persons.
to keep such and as many sheep upon their own lands, and after such manner,
and none otherwise, as they might have done before the making of this act.

20 As it is a thing far unfit, and not consorting with their function, that
An. 21. St. 21. H. 8. 13
H. 8. it was enacted, Oppression by spiritual persons in taking of farms.
That no spiritual person shall take to farm to himself, or to any person to
his use, of the lease or grant of ye K. or any other person or persons, by
letters patents, indentures, writings, by word, or otherwise by any manner of
means, any manors, lands, tenements, or other hereditaments, for term of life,
years, or at will, upon pain to forf. for every month that he or they to his
use do occupy such farm, by reason of such grant or lease, x. l. to the king
and him that will sue, to be recovered in any of the kings Courts by A.B.P. I.
wherein no W.E.P. Oppression by the^ in buying and selling.
And that no spiritual person, of what estate or degree soever he be, shall by
himself, or any other for him, to his use, bargain, and buy to sell again
for gain, in any markets, faires, or other places, any manner of Cattle,
Corn, Lead, Tin, Hides, Leather, Tallow, Fish, Wool, Wood, or any manner of
victual or merchandise, of what kind soever they be, upon pain to forfeit
treble the value of the things so bought to sell again to the king and him
that will sue, to be recovered in any of the kings Courts by A.B.P.I. wherein
no W.E.P. But a spiritual person, who without fraud buyeth any horses,
cattle, goods, etc. with only intent at the buying thereof to employ the same
to the necessary apparel of himself, his servants, or household, or for the
only occupying or manuring of his glebe or demesne lands annexed to his church,
or for the necessary expenses of his household, and after the buying or
exercising thereof, misliketh the same, that they should not be good,
profitable, and convenient for the purposes abouesaid, for the which they were
bought, then he may lawfully bargain, and put them away. And also other
spiritual persons, not having sufficient glebe or demesne lands in their own
hands in the right of their churches, houses etc. for pasturing of cattle, or
increase of corn for the only expenses of their households, or for their
cariages and iourneyes, may take in farm other lands, and buy and sell corn
and cattle for the only manurance, tillage, and pasturage of such farms, so
that the increase thereof be always employed to the only expenses in their
households, and not to buy and sell again for any other commodity, but only
the overplus of such corn and cattle above the expenses of their households,
if any such shall happen to be bred and increased thereof, without fraud or
couin.

St. 21. H. 8. 13
And for the causes aforesaid, by the said statute of An. 21. H. 8. it was
moreover Oppression by them in farming of parsonages etc.
shall have or occupy by himself, or any other to his use, any Parsonage or
Vicarage in farm, of the lease or grant of any other person, or take any rent
or profit out of any such farm, upon pain to forf. xl. s^. every week yt he
or any to his use shall occupy any such farm, and also shall forf. ten times
the value of such profit or rent which he shall take out of any such farm, to
the K. and I. to be recovered by A.I. P. etc. wherein no W.E.P. etc. Oppression
by keeping a Tanne-house, or Brewhouse
And moreover, no spiritual person shall have, use, or keep by himself, or
any other to his use or commodity, any Tan-house, to be occupied to his use or
commodity, or any Brewhouse, to any other intent, then only to be spent and
occupied in his own house, upon pain to forfeit for every month so using or
occupying any of the said mysteries, x. l. to the K. and I. to be recovered by
A.P.I. wherein no W.E.P. etc.

Oppression by taking of excessive toll.
21 Because complaint was made in parliament, that some did oppress the people,
by taking excessive and outrageous toll in market towns, therefore by the stat.
of West. 1. it was enacted, St. 3. E. 1. 30.
That if any do take outrageous toll contrary to the custom of the realm in a
market town, which is the K. town, and let to fee farm, the K. shall seize
the franchise of the market into his own hands: and if it be another town,
and yt be done by the lord of the town, the K. shall do in like sort: and if it
be done by a bailife or other mean officer, without ye commandment of his
lord, he shall restore to ye plaintiff for his outrageous taking so much as he
has received of him, if he has carried away ye toll, and shall be imprisoned xl.
days.

No oppression shall be done to strangers.
22 The governors of this realm having from time to time a special regard that
reciprocal courtesy and favor might be performed to all strangers and aliens,
that did come into this realm to merchandise, or to any other good intent, and
that Ius gentium might be yielded unto them, have made many good laws and
statutes to protect and defend them from oppressions and wrongs. As K. Henry
the third ordained by the stat. of Magna Charta, St. 9. H. 3. 30
That all merchants (if they were not lawfully prohibited before) shall have
their safe and sure conduct to depart forth of the realm, and to come into
England, and to tarry, and go through England, as well by land as by water, to
buy or sell without any manner of evil tols, according to the ancient and
lawful custemes (saving in time of war.) And if they be of a country in war
with us, they shall be attached without hurt of their bodies or goods, until it
be known to us, or our chief justice, how the merchants of our land be used
in yt country wherewith we have war: and if our marcha^ts be well used there,
theirs shall be so likewise with us. And by the stat. of an. 9. E. 3. St. 9. E.
3. 1. St. 25. E. 3, 2
it was enacted, That all merchant strangers and denizens, and all other ye
will buy and sell corn, wines, aver de pois, flesh, fish, and all other
livings, and victual, wools, clothes and all other things vendible, from whence
soever they come, at what place soever it be, city, borough, town, port of the
sea, fair, market, or elsewhere, within the realm, within franchise, or
without, may freely sell them to what person it shall please the^, as well forreins
as denizens, in gross, at retaile, or by parcels, at their wills to all people
ye will buy the same (except to the enemies of the K. and his realm)
notwithstanding any charter, usage, or custom. And if any disturbance be done
to any merchant stranger, or denizen, or to any other, for ye sale of such
things in any city, borough, town, port of the sea, or other place which has
franchise, and the majors and bailifes, or other, which have ye rule of such
franchise, being required by such merchants, or other, thereof to provide
remedy, and do not, and thereof be attainted, the franchise shall be seized into
the K. hands: and nevertheless, they which have done such disturbance, shall
restore to ye said merchant his double damages, which he has thereby sustained.
And if such disturbance or interruption be done in such places or towns where
no franchise is, and the lord, if he be present, or his baylife, constable, or
other ruler of the said towns and places (in the absence of the lord) being
therein required to do right, and do not, and thereof be attainted, they shall
yield to the plaintiff damages, as aforesaid, and the disturbers in the one
case, and in the other, as well within the Franchises as without, if they be
attainted, shall have one years imprisonment, and be ransomed at the kings
pleasure: No alien or denizen upon the foresaid pain shall be troubled, but he
may freely buy such things aforesaid in the said places, and carry them where
it pleases him, to his own use, or to the profit of the king or the realm,
saving that such Merchants aliens shall carry no wine out of the same realm.
St. 6. R. 2. 10
And by the stat. of Ann. 6. R. 2. it was established, That all aliens being in
friendship with the king and the realm, and coming into any cities or towns
within the realm, with fish, or other victuals, and there tarrying, and
returning again to their own countries, shall be under the kings protection:
and it shall be lawful to every of them to cut their fish and victuals in
pieces, and by retaile or in gross to sell the same. And by the stat. of an^
14. St. 14. H. 6. 6
H. 6. it was provided, That if any man disturb any alien to sell his fish in
form aforesaid, he shall forf. x. l. to the K. and him that will sue. And
besides, the stat. of an. 31. E. 3. 10. an. 7. R. 2. 11. an. 11. R. 2. 7. and
an. 16. R. 2. 1. were made and provided to give liberty, protection, and safety
to aliens and strangers, and to defend them from wrongs and oppressions.

St. 23. El. 5.
23 It appears by the preamble of the stat. of A. 23. Oppression by making of
iron works.
Eliz. that by the erection of sundry iron mils in diverse places of this
realm, not far distant from the city of London, and from the downs and sea
coasts of Sussex, the necessary provision of wood, as well timber fit for
building, and other uses, as also all other fellable woods serving for fuel,
does daily decay, and become scant, to the great damage and oppression of the
city of London, and the suburbs of the same, and of al other persons, having
occasion daily to resort thither from all the parts of this realm: for the
remedy whereof, by the same statute it was enacted, That no person or persons
shall convert or im^loy, or cause to be converted or employed to coal or fuel,
for the making of iron or iron metal, in any iron mils, furnace, or hammer,
any manner of wood, or underwood, now growing, or which hereafter shall grow
within the compass of 22. miles, from and about the city of London, or the
suburbs of the same, or within 22. miles of the river of Thames, from
Dorchester in the cou^ty of Oxford downward the same river of Thames, or within
four miles of the foot of the hills called the Downs, betwixt Arundell and
Pemsey in the county of Sussex, or within four miles of any of the towns of
Winthelsey and Rye, or within two miles of the town of Pemsey, or within two
miles of the town of Hastings in the said County, upon pain to forfeit for
every load of Wood so to be employed, or converted into coal or other fuel,
for the making of iron or iron metal in any iron mill, furnace, or hammer, as
aforesaid, xl. s^. to the Qu. and I. to be recovered by A.B.P.I. wherein no
W.E.P.I. etc. But this Act shall not extend to any Woods growing, or to grow in
any such parts of the Wields of Surrey, Sussex, or Kent, within the said 22.
miles of the said City of London, and the river of Thames, as is distant above
18. miles from the City of London, and 8. miles from the said river of Thames.
St. 23. El. 5
And by the same statute it was moreover ordained, Oppression by new iron works
That no new iron works shall be erected within 22. miles of the said city of
London, nor within 14. miles of the foresaid river of Thames, nor within 4.
miles of the Downs aforesaid, or of ye said towns of Pe^sey, Winchelsey,
Hastings, or Rye, upon pain of an hundred pounds to be likewise recovered and
employed, as is aforesaid. But this act shall not extend to any woods or
underwoods of Christopher Darrell, growing or which shall grow in the parish of
Newdigate. And for the causes and reasons aforesaid, by one other stat. made
An. 27. St. 27. El. 1
El. it was further enacted, That no person or persons shall make, erect,
build, or new set up, at, or in any place within the counties of Sussex, Surry,
or Kent, or any of them, any manner of iron mils, furnace, finary, or bloomary,
for the making or working of any manner of iron, or iron metal, other then
either upon such old and former baies or pens, whereupon has lately bin, or
at the time of the new erection, shall be then standing some iron mils, surnace,
or hammer, or else in and upon such lands, as ye party or parties so erecting
any such intended new work, shall continually furnish the same with sufficient
supply of his or their own wood, standing and growing upon his or their own
soil or land, being to him or them in fee simple, fee tail, or for term of
life or lives, without impeachme^t of wast at the least, and not otherwise: Nor
shall convert or employ, or cause to be converted to coals or other fuel for
the making or working of iron or iron metal in or about any iron mils,
furnaces, hammers, finary, forge, or blomarie the body or bodies of any sound
timber tree or trees, apt for the making of good and sufficient cleft wares, or
sawing timber of Oak, Ash, or Elm, growing of the breadth or bigness of one
foot square at the stub, or any part of the same body or bodies of any such
tree or trees, upon pain of forfeiture for every iron mill, furnace, forge,
finarie, or bloomarie made, erected, builded, or set up, contrary to the tenor
and true meaning of this act, three hundred pounds: and for every body of such
timber tree so employed or converted to coal or fuel, for the making or
working of iron, as is aforesaid, xl. s^. to the Q. and I. to be recovered by
A.B.P. or I. wherein no W.E.P. etc. Provided always, that it shall and may be
lawful to and for the owners of such trees, the bodies whereof have been or
shall be from time to time converted and employed to or for any manner of timber
or cleft ware within the wields of Sussex, Surrey, or Kent, or any of them (the
same not being within 18. miles of the city of London, or 8. miles of the river
of Thames, or 4. miles of the towns of Rye and Winchelsey, or within 3. miles
of Hastings, or within 4. miles of the foot of the Hills, called the Downs
between Arundel and Pemsey, in the county of Sussex aforesaid, or any of the^)
to employ the tops and offals of all such trees to or for coals, or other
fuel, serving to or for iron works at their own wills and pleasures: This
statute or any other notwithstanding.

Oppression by Brewers.
24 If any Ale or Beer brewer do sell or take for any barrel, kilderkin, St.
23. H. 8. 4
or firkin of ale or beer, above such prices as shall be assessed by the Just.
of peace of the shire, or by the mayor, shirife, or head officer of the city,
borough, or town corporat, where the said brewer does dwell, this is an
oppression of al those that do buy the same ale and beer: and therefore by the
stat. of An. 23. H. 8. the offender shall forfeit for every barrel so sold, 6.
s^. for every kilderkin 3. s^. 4. d. for every firkin 2. s^. for every less
vessel xij. d. and for a greater then a barrel, x. s^. to the K. and I.
Oppression of Coopers by Brewers.
And if any Brewer which breweth beer or ale to sell, St. 23. H. 8. 4
shall by himself, or any other to his use, occupy the mystery of Coopers, or
make any barrels, kilderkins, firkins, or other vessel of wood, wherein to put
his beer or ale, this is an oppression of Coopers, and by the said stat. of
An. 23. H. 8. the offender shall forf. for every vessel to the K. and I. 3. s^.
4. d. But a brewer may keep a Cooper to bind, hoope, pin, and amend his
vessels.

25 It is an oppression to many thousand woollen cardmakers and cardwierdrawers
of this realm, who do live by the same trade, Oppression by bringing in of
woollen cards.
to have cards for wool brought out of foreign regions into this Realm, and
here sold to the hinderance of the sale of their like wares. And therefore if
any person shall bring or send, or cause to be brought or sent any such cards
for wool to be bartered or sold in England or Wales, St. 39. El. 14 St. 1.
Iac. 25
by the stat. of An. 39. El. he shall forf. them or the very value of them to
the K. and him that will seize or sue for the same.

26 If any person shall erect a new wear along the sea shore, Oppression by
erecting of wears.
or in any haven, harbor, or creek, or within 5. miles of the mouth of any
haven or creek, or shall willingly take, destroy, or spoil any spawne, fry,
or brood of any Sea fish, in any wear, or other engine or device whatsoever,
Oppression by destroying of fish.
this is an oppression to all those that live by or use fishing in those parts,
and a hinderance to the commonwealth. St. 3. Iac. 11
And therefore by the stat. of An. 3. Iac. the offender shall forfeit for every
time so erecting, setting up, taking, or destroying of fish, x. l. to the king
and I. And if any person shall fish with any drawnet or dagnet under three
inches meash, viz. one ynch and a half from knot to knot (except for the
taking of Smoulds in Norfolk only) or with any net with cannas, Oppression by
nets.
or other engine or device, whereby the spawne, fry, or brood of sea fish may be
destroyed, this is also an oppression to all those that live by, or use
fishing, and a hinderance to the commonwealth: and therefore the offender shall
forf. such net, and for every time so doing, x. s^. whereof the one half to
him that will sue, and the other half to the poor of the city, town, parish,
or liberty, where the offense shall be committed.

27 For that buying, selling, and regrating of wood by greedy and covetous
persons, is a mean to make the same deerer, and is a great oppression and hurt
to the commonwealth, St. 7. E. 6. 7.
therefore it is ordained by the stat. of An. 7. Ed. 6. That if any person
shall buy any fuel, coals, or wood, but only such as will burn or consume
the same, Oppression by buying and selling of fuel.
or such persons as shall sell the same again by retaile to such as shall burn
or consume the same for their own occupying, without fraud or couin, or
wharfingers or bargemen, he shall forf. to the K. and I. the treble v^lue of
the same wood, coals, or fuel, as shall be otherwise bought for lucre and gain.

St. 15. H. 8. 2
28 If any person shall carry and convey, Oppression by transporting of
victuals.
or cause to be carried and conveyed, any victuals necessary for men's
sustenance to any parts beyond the Sea (unless it be by license under the
Kings great seal) saving for the victualling of Mariners and Merchants of
Ships passing the Sea, and saving barrelled butter, and meal, to be carried
to the parts of Ireland, as has bin accustomed, this is a mean to enhaunce
the prices of victuals within this Realm, an so an oppression to the
inhabitants of the Realm. And therefore by the Statute of Anno 25. H. 8. the
party offending shall forfeit the value of the thing carried to the K. and I.

St. 37. H. 8. 9 St. 13. El. 8 St. 39. El. 18.
29 By the Statute of Anno 37. H. 8. Oppression by usury.
and confirmed and explaned by the Statute of Anno 13. El. it is ordained to be
unlawful usury and an oppression, if any man do sell any marchandises or
wares to another, and buy the same again within three months for a less
price, knowing them to be the same that he sold: And so it is if any person by
any bargain, loan, exchange, or shift of any wares, or other things, shall
take in gains for the forbearing of his money or other thing one whole year,
above x. l. in the 100. l. And so it is, if any person shall take above x. l.
for the forbearing of 100. l. for a year, upon sale or morgage of lands, of
the profits of the same lands: and in the cases aforesaid the offender shall
forfeit for every such offense the treble value of the wares, marchandizes, and
other things so bargained, sold, changed, etc. and the treble value of the
issues and profits of the said lands so taken, by bargain, sale or morgage to
the K. and I. and shall suffer imprisonment, and make fine at the kings
pleasure. And all bands, contracts, and assurances collateral made for payment
of any principal, or money to be lent, or covenant to be performed, for any
usury in lending or doing of any thing, upon, or by which loan there shall be
reserved or taken above the rate of x. l. for the 100. l. for one year, shall
be utterly void: and he that does take, or covenant, or reserve to take x. l.
for the forbearance of 100. l. for one year, and so after that rate, or any
sum under x. l. shall forf. only that x. l. or other less sum which he does
so take, or covenant or reserve to take (though it be but a penny, or less
then a penny) to the K. and I. etc. Fraudulent shadowing of usurious bargains.
If A. do lend to B. 100. Co. li. 5. 70:
l. and do bargain and agree with him, that if I. S. do live one whole year
next coming, that then B. shall pay him xx. l. for the loan of his 100. l. for
a year, and if I. S. do die within the year, that then B. shall pay him but
his 100. l. again, this is an oppression of B. and an usurious bargain, and A.
is to be punished according to the foresaid stat. of 37. H. 8. For as he made
and reserved the interest of xx. l. payable, if I. S. should live one year, so
he might as lawfully have put in the lives of xx. other persons, and so deluded
the true meaning of the makers of the said Statute. And in like sort, if A. do
lend to B. 100. l. for a year, and do bargain with B. that if I. S. shall
live until the end of that year, then B. shall pay him xx. l. for the interest
or loan of his 100. l. for that year, and if the same I. S. do die within
the said year, that then B. shall repay to A. but lxxx. l. of his principal
money, this is an usurious contract, and an oppression, and to be punished
according to the said statute: for in both the foresaid cases there was but a
shadow devised by the lender, to protect him from the penalty of that statute,
which at the time of his loan he meant to offend. And therefore the stat. of
13. Eliz. 8. has well provided, that the same stat. of 37. H. 8. shall be most
largely and strongly co^strued for the repressing of usury, and against all
persons that shall offend against the true meaning of the said statute, by any
way or device, directly or indirectly.

Oppression by cutting out the head or pipe of a conduit.

Oppression by burning a cart laden.

Oppression by cutting off ears.

Oppression by barking of trees.


30 It is an oppression, and manifest and palpable injury, if any person do
wilfully, maliciously, and unlawfully cut or cause to be cut out the head or
pipe of any conduit of any other persons: Or burn or cause to be burned any
wain or cart laden with coals, or any other goods, or any heap of wood of any
other persons prepared and felled for making of coals, billet, or Tallwood: Or
to cut or cause to be cut out the tongue of any tame beast, being alive, of
any other persons: Or to cut, or cause to be cut off, the ear or ears of any
of the kings subjects, otherwise then by authority of Law, chance-medley,
sudden affray, or adventure: Or to bark any Appletrees, Pearetrees, or other
fruit trees of any other persons: in all which cases, by force of the statute
of Ann. 37. H. 8. the offender shall forfeit to the party grieved treble
damages, St. 37. H. 8. 6
to be recovered by action of Trespass at the common law, and to the king 10. l.
for a fine.

31 It is an oppression, and a resolved intent to do hurt and wrong to others,
Oppression by hawking or hunting in corn growing.
if any person shall hawke or hunt with his spaniels in any ground (except his
own) where corn or grain shall then grow, at such time as any eared or
codded corn or grain shall be standing and growing upon the same, or before
such time as such corn or grain shall be shocked, cocked, hiled, or copped: in
which cases the stat. made an. 23. St. 23. El. 10.
El. has ordained, That the offender shall forf. for every time that he shall
so hawke or hunt, without consent of the owner of the corn, to such person as
shall be owner of the eared or codded corn, xl. s^.

32 If any person shall by day or night unlawfully, without authority, break,
Oppression by taking of fish.
cut down, cut out, or destroy the head or dam of any pond, poole, moat,
stagn, stewe, or several pit, wherein fish shall be put, or stored by the owner
thereof: Or shall wrongfully fish in any of the said several ponds etc. to the
intent to destroy, kill, take, or steal away any of the same fish, against the
will of the owner or possessor thereof, not having lawful authority so to do,
this is an oppression to the said owner or possessor: St. 5. El. 21
and therefore by the stat. of an 5. El. it is enacted, That the offender being
lawfully convict of any of the said offenses, at the suit of the K. or the
party grieved, shall pay to the party grieved his treble damages, suffer
imprisonment 3. months, and find sufficient surety for his good abearing for
the space of 7. years, or else remain in prison without bail or main-prise,
until he has found such surety. And it shall be lawful for the party grieved
to take his further remedy against the offe^dor for his loss and damages, and
upon satisfaction or confession of the damages, to release the offender of the
suretiship and good abearing at any time within vij. years.

33 I will draw toward an end of this title of Oppression, Oppression by
decaying o^ towns and houses of husbandry.
with one of the greatest and most durable of all oppressions, viz. with
oppression by pulling down of Towns, houses of Husbandry, and decaying of
Tillage. When the realm ceased to be oppressed by the long and tedious civil
wars, which before were many years continued between the ij. houses of
York and Lancaster, and that K. Edward the fourth had overthrown Q. Margaret
and Prince Edward her son at Tewksbury field, and settled the title of the
Crown, and planted peace in the Realm, then some men of stirring spirits
diuerting their bloody humors to covetous humors, pulled down towns, and laid
wast houses of husbandry, thrusting forth of doors men, women, and children,
and co^uerting the same to their own private uses: which offense then daily
increasing (though it were but in Cunabilis, being about 120. years sithence)
was so bewailed, exclaimed of, and cried out upon in open parliament, that the
same may in a sort be rese^bled to the pitiful lamentation which the prophet
Jeremy (sitting down weeping) made, Threnae Ierem.
after ye temple of God and the city of Jerusalem were destroyed, and ye
priests, Leuits, and Elders slain by Nabuchadnezzar K. of Babylon: Or the same
may be compared to those woeful miseries and calamities which ye prophet Esaias
foretold should after fall upon the said great city of Babylon: Esaias 13.
for as it appears by ye stat. of an. 4. St. 4. H. 7. 12 St. 7. H. 8. 1.
H. 7. 12. and 19. and 7. H. 8. 1. it was then holden, That by the desolation
and pulling down of houses and towns, and laying to pasture land, which
customably has been manured and occupied with tillage, idleness (the ground
and beginning of all mischiefs) does increase: men, women, and children, that
were daily occupied, and lived by the sowing of Corn, and breeding of Cattle,
and other increase, were diminished: husbandry, the greatest commodity of this
Realm for sustenance, was decayed, Churches were destroyed, the service of God
was withdrawn, Christian people there buried are not prayed for, the Patrons
and Curats were wronged, Cities and market towns were brought to great ruin
and decay, necessaries for man's sustenance were made scarce and dear, the
people of the realm were sore minished, the power and defense thereof was
feebled and decayed, to the high displeasure of God, and against his laws, and
to the subversion of the Commonwealth, and desolation of the same. Which
grievous and doleful moan made, and enormities so displaied, the grand
counsel of this realm having commiseration upon, did endeavor to reform at
several parliaments: as appears by the stat. of An. 4. H. 7. 12. and 19.
Ann. 7. H. 8. 1. An. 27. H. 8. 22. An. 5. E. 6. 6. An. 2. and 3. P. and M. 8.
and An. 5. El. 2. which said stat. were all after repealed by a stat. made an.
39. St. 39. El. 1
El. And then by the same stat. it was enacted, That every house that now has
( viz. 24. die October. an. 39 Reg. El. and An. Do. 1597. Which is an house of
husbandry.
) or heretofore had 20. acres of arable land, meddow, and pasture, or more
thereunto belonging, and so occupied or letten to farm by the space of 3.
years together, at any time sithence the beginning of the Qu. reign that now
is (and which is not or has not bin the castle or dwelling house of any
nobleman or gentleman, nor the chief mansion house of any manor) is and shall
be adjudged a house of husbandry for ever: and all acres spoken of in this
statute, shall be adjudged acres according to the Statute or Ordinance de terris
mensurandis. Which is an acre of land.
And every person and persons, bodies politic and corporat, which shall
offend in not building, erecting, repairing, continuing or maintaining of
houses of husbandry, according to the purport and true meaning of ye said
statute, The forf. for not building a house of husbandry.
shall, for every house that shall not be erected, builded, repaired, continued
or maintained in necessary reparations tenantable, according to the intent of
the same act, by the space of one year, forf. x. l. and so yearly x. l.
until ye same shall be sufficiently erected, continued, repaired etc. and for
every acre of land, meddow, or pasture, which shall not be laid unto, or let
with such houses of husbandry, when the same shall be demised, shall forf. for
every year that he or they shall so offend, the sum of x. s^. as long and as
often as such acre shall not in those respects be ordered and used according to
the intent of this act: of which forf. the K. shall have one part, the poor of
the parish where the offense was committed the second part, and he that will
sue in any of the K. courts of record at Westminster the third: and if none
will sue, the^ the K. shall have also that third part. But no offender shall be
impeached or sued by virtue of this act, Within what time the suit shall be
presented
except the suit be brought and commenced by the party for the king and
himself, within 2. years of the same offense done: but where the suit shall be
prosecuted for the K. only etc. then within 3. years after the offense done.

Oppression by decay of Tillage.
34 By the stat. of an. 39. El. 2. it was ordained, St. 39. El. 2
That all lands and grounds which now are used in tillage, or for tillage,
having bin tillable lands, fields or grounds, such as next before the first day
of this parliament have been by the space of 12. years together at the least
used in tillage, or for tillage, according to the nature of the soil, and
course of husbandry used in that part of the country, shall not be converted
to any sheep pasture, or to the grazing or fatting of cattle by the occupiers
or possessors thereof, but shall according to the nature of that soil, and
course of husbandry used in ye part of the country continue to be used in
tillage, and for tillage for corn and grain, and not for wood. And if any
person, body politic or corporat shall offend against ye premises, the^ the
offe^dor shall forf. for every acre not restored or not continued, as is
aforesaid, x. s^. for every year yt he or they so offend, to be divided into 3.
parts, and then to be distributed as is aforesaid, so yt the suit be co^menced
or prosecuted wtin ye time or times before mentioned. I have for some special
causes herein set down but only the offenses and penalties mentioned in the two
last specified stat. of an. 39. El. 1. and 2. Wherefore the two last stat. be
not set down at large
omitting purposely the exceptions, reseruations, prouisoes, and some other
matters in the same.

35 As Menaces, Assaults, Batteries, Imprisonments, Maihems, Riots, Routs,
unlawful assemblies, Forgeries, Periuries, Maintenances, Deceits, Extortions,
Oppressions, and all other the crimes before mentioned, have from one age to
another bin noted and accused as maladies in the common wealth, and adjudged
and condemned as professed enemies to the peace of the realm, and by several
laws and statutes diverse penalties have bin imposed upon the transgressors
thereof, in a measure certain, and within some limits: So the providence of
our forefathers sounding deeper into the corruption of man's nature, and
foreseeing that sometime his cholerike passions, and turbulent spirit, sometime
the gall and bitterness of his heart, sometime his covetous and insatiable
affections, and eftsoons his secret desires and devices of revenge, do carry
him headlong into exorbitant and unusual designments and practices, be they
never so contrary to the Laws of God, of Nature, and Reason, and in several
degrees further the^ our said lawmakers did then either fore-thinke, fear, or
by particular words restrain: and knowing also, that the subtlety of the
Serpent (and of men of the serpents nature) does exceed the other beasts of the
field: have therefore erected and established the most honorable Court of
Star Chamber, All the former offenses punishable in the Star-cha^ber.
to the intent that the wisdom of that Court, authorized partly by the K.
prerogative, and partly by several laws and statutes of the realm, might
search forth the serpents subtilty, and utterly crush and dash the same: and
seeing ye dead letter of each law does ordain in most cases but one kind of
punishment for one sort of offense, and the circumspection of the makers of
that law (were they never so wise or experie^ced) could not foresee all the
circumstances which in time might ensue in the manner of transgressing of that
law: Therefore the lords and others of that high Court, being now the speaking
law, and representing the persons of the dead lawmakers, and careful
expositors of their meanings, by their grave foresights and deep considerations
do look into those offenses which be committed contrary to the same laws, do
search into every quarter, corner, and circumstance thereof, and do pierce
through the very bowels and intrailes of them, and the transgressors thereof:
as what persons, of what estate, St. 13. H. 4. 7 St. 2. H. 5. 8
degree, ability, function, or calling committed the offense, to whom, in what
manner, in what place, at what time, before whom, with what number, and for
what cause the same was done, and then do inflict punishment upon the
transgressors thereof, first according to the laws and statutes therefore
provided, and then do qualify or aggrauate the same, according to the
circumstances. As it is a Riot punishable by the stat. of An. 13. H. 4. and
Ann. 2. H. 5. if three persons, or more, do assemble together, and beat or
mayme a man, pull down his house, pale, or ditch wrongfully etc. so if a great
number of mean persons, of small ability or credit, shall assault a peer of
the realm, or a Knight, or Esquire, that is Custo^s Rotulorum of the shire, or
a Justice of peace and Quorum in his country, shall strip and whip him, shall
pull down his house to the ground, shall set him in the stocks, or on the
pillory, shall beat his wife and children, kill his cattle, and spoil his
corn before his face, and shall use other acts and words of infamy and
disgrace unto him, and only for that he did cause some lawful punishment to be
inflicted upon certain of them for their crimes: notwithstanding all these or
such like misdemeanors, be neither Treason nor Felony by the Law, but a Riot;
and yet in respect of the baseness of the parties which committed this wrong,
of the cause for the which they put it in practice, of the worthiness of the
person, and of his place, upon whom it was executed, of the barbarous course
taken in the performance thereof, of the perilous example given to other
malefactors, these riotors deserve to be censured with a much sharper
punishment then the former. For as there be no bounds observed by lewd and
wicked persons of their outrages, so be there no certain means or limits
assigned of their punishments; but the said most honorable Court of estate may
draw forth his Majesty's sword of justice, and first punish the said offenses
according to the particular laws and statutes provided therefore, and then
every person transgressing by himself, according to the circumstance of his
demerits: as partly may appear by the statute of anno 3. H. 7. St. 3. H. 7. 1.
which expresses some parts of the authority given to the Lords of the said
Court, and more by a branch of the statute of Magna Charta, whereby it is
enacted, St. 9. H. 3. 14
That every freeman shall be amerced, viz. punished for reasonable cause, and
according to the quantity of his offense. And further, by the statute of Anno
33. H. 8. St. 33. H. 8. 1
which gives the lords of the said Court of Star Chamber authority to punish
those, who by counterfeit letters or tokens shall get other men's goods into
their hands, by imprisonment, setting upon the pillory, or other corporal
pain whatsoever (except death.)

Treasons.
1 CRimen lesae Maiestatis, What is Treason.
in our English tongue called Treason, is a great offense done to ye Majesty of
government and the peace of the land, which the wisdom of this Realm has
from age to age so much hated and abhorred, that they have persecuted those
that were guilty therein, with most violent and untimely death, and with
extreme and severe tortures: they have ordained, that an offender therein
shall be hanged, and cut down alive, that his bowels shall be cut off, and
burned in his sight, that his head shall be severed from his body, that his
quarters shall be divided asunder, and disposed at the Kings pleasure, and
made food for the birds of the air, or the beasts of the field, and that his
wife and children shall be thrust out of his house and livings, that his seed
and blood shall be corrupted, that his lands and goods shall be confiscated,
and (as by the statute of 29. H. 6. 1. it is ordained of the Traitor John Cade)
he shall be called a false Traitor for ever. And as our respective and
considerat forefathers have devised to yield unto those grievous offenders
Legem talionis, and to tear their bodies, lands, and goods, who do practice
to rent and pull asunder this Majesty of government, by destroying the head,
or such as are like to be the principal succeeding members thereof, or by
dividing the body into parts, or by weakening the force and strength thereof,
or by subuerting the chief Magistrates of justice, or by counterfeiting,
staining, or blemishing of the peculiar and royal Ensigns, Cognisances, and
Sinews thereof: so have they been careful and provident, that there should
be no greater number of those dreadful, sharp, and bitter laws, than urgent
necessity, for the preservation of that Majesty of government required. And
because it was in former times greatly doubted, and ofttimes called in question
amongst the Sages of the Realm, and learned in the laws, which offenses were
by the common law high Treason, and which not, and which were petit Treason,
and which not, and several men were of several opinions therein, and to the
intent that al future ages might know, and be more vigilant to eschew the
penalties thereof, King Edward the third at his Parliament begun at Westminster
the thirteenth day of January, St. 25. E. 3. 2
in the 25. year of his reign, at the request of his Lords, and petition of his
Commons, made a declaration thereof in manner as hereafter follows, viz. It
is high Treason where a man does compass, High treason.
or imagine the death of our Sovereign Lord the King, or of our Lady the
Queen his wife, or of their eldest son and heir, or if a man does deflower
the Kings wife, or the Kings eldest daughter, being unmarried, or the kings
eldest son and heirs wife: or if a man do levy war against our Lord the
king in his Realm, or be adherent to the kings enemies in his Realm, giving
to them aid and comfort in his Realm, or else where, and thereof be probably
attainted of open deed, by people of their own condition: And if a man do
counterfeit the Kings great Seal, or his privy Seal, or his money (which
offenses Bracton does term Crimen falsi) And if a man bring false money into
this Realm, counterfeit to the money of England, knowing the money to be
false, Bracton de Corona, cap. 3.
to merchandise, or make payment, in deceit of our Lord the King, and his
people: And if a man kill the Chauncellor, Treasurer, or the Kings Justice of
the one Bench or the other, Justices of Eire, and of Assizes, and all other
Justices assigned to hear and determine, being in their places doing their
Offices. And it is to be understood, that in the cases aforesaid it ought to
be adjudged Treason, which extends to our Lord the King and his royal
Majesty. And of such Treason the forfeiture of the escheat does appertain to
our Lord the King, as well of the lands and tenements holden of others, as of
himself. And moreover there is another manner of Treason, Petit treason.
that is to say, When a servant kills his Master, or a wife her husband: or
when a secular or religious man kills his Prelat, to whom he owes faith and
obedience. And such manner of Treason gives the escheats to every Lord of his
own fee. And because many other cases of like Treason may happen in time to
come, which a man cannot think of, nor declare at this present: It is
accorded, that if any other case supposed to be treason, that is not before
specified, does happen of new before Justices, the Justices shall stay without
proceeding to judgment of Treason, until the case be declared and showed
before the King and his Parliament, whether it ought to be adjudged Treason, or
other Felony. And in case any man of this Realm do ride armed, openly or
secretly, with people armed, against another, for to kill or rob him, or to
take and detain him until he has made fine and ransom to be delivered, it
is not the King or his Counsels will, that in such case it shall be adjudged
Treason, but it shall be adjudged Felony or Trespass, according to the law of
the land in ancient time used, and according as the case does require. And if
in such case, or any like, the Justices have adjudged it Treason before this
time, and there by the offenders lands and tenements have come into the kings
hands as forfeit, the chief Lords of the fee shall have their Escheats of those
tenements which be holden of them, whether the same tenements be in the hands
of the King, or of any other, by gift, or in other manner (saving to our Lord
the King the year and wast, and the forfeiture of the chattels which do
belong unto him in the cases aforesaid.) And in such cases writs of Scire
facias shall be awarded against the tenants of the land, without any other
original, and without allowing the kings protection in the same suit. And
touching those lands which be in the kings hands, there shall be writs granted to
the Sherifes of the Counties where the lands be, to deliver them out of the
kings hands without delay.

2 By which statute it does appear that there be two sorts of Treason by the
ancient common laws of this Realm, viz. High Treason, and Petit Treason;
High treason.
High Treason when any of the grievous offenses aforesaid be done, or attempted
to the universal and general Majesty of government, that is to say, to the
body of the whole Commonwealth, or to the King, the head, ruler, and directer
thereof, Petit treason.
in his person, wife, issues, or authority. Petit Treason is when the bloody
and grievous offense of wilful murder is done and committed by an inferior
person, and one in subjection to another, that has a dominion, or a kind of
Majesty in government over the same party. And though sithence the before
mentioned Statute of 25. Ed. 3. diverse other offenses have been made Treason
by the Statutes of 21. R. 2. 3. H. 5. 4. H. 5. 8. H. 6. 14. H. 6. 20. H. 6. 4.
H. 7. 22. H. 8. 26. H. 8. 27. H. 8. 28. H. 8. 31. H. 8. 32. H. 8. 33. H. 8. 35.
H. 8. and 1. Ed. 6. yet every of the succeeding ages were soon weary of the
said new Treasons, and thought that the grievous pains and most heinous
punishments of them were too heavy and unsupportable for the Subjects of this
Realm to endure. As the Lords and Commons in the Parliament holden Anno 4. St.
4. H. 4. 10
H. 4. 10. did complain, that diverse pains were ordained to be Treason by the
statute of 21. R. 2. insomuch that no man did know how he ought to behave
himself, to do, to speak, or say, for doubt of such pains: and thereupon it
was enacted, That in no time to come any treason shall be adjudged otherwise,
than was ordained by the Statute of 25. Ed. 3. And long time after, the makers
of the statute of Anno 1. Mar. considering and rehearsing, that the state of
every King, Ruler, and Governor of any Realm, Dominion, or Comminaltie,
consists more assured by the love and favor of the subjects toward their
Governor, than in the dread and fear of laws made with rigorous pains, and
extreme punishment: and that laws justly made for the preservation of the
Commonwealth, without extreme punishment or great penalty, are more often
obeyed and kept, than laws and statutes made with great and extreme
punishments; and in special such laws and statutes so made, whereby not only
the ignorant, unlearned, and rude people, but also learned and expert persons
minding honesty, are often trapped and snared, yea many times for words only,
without any other fact or deed done or perpetrated: and therefore to the intent
that the severity of such like extreme, dangerous, and perilous laws might
be abolished, A repeal of former treasons.
and adnulled, St. 1. M.
by the said statute of Anno 1. M. Parl. 1. it was ordained, That from
thenceforth none act, deed, or offense, being by act of Parliament or stat.
made Treason, Petit Treason, or Misprisio^ of Treason, by words, writing,
ciphering deeds, or otherwise whatsoever, shall be taken, had, deemed, or
adjudged to be High treason, Petit treason, or Misprisio^ of treason, but only
such as be declared and expressed to be high Treason, Petit treason, or
Misprision of Treason, in or by the stat. of 25. E. 3. concerning Treason, or
the declarations of Treasons, and none other: Nor that any pains of death,
penalty, or forfeiture in any wise ensue, or be to any offender or offenders,
for the doing or committing of any Treason, Petit Treason, or Misprision of
Treason, other than such as be in the said stat. of 25. E. 3. ordained and
provided. By force of which stat. made Anno 1. M. the subjects of this Realm
were eased and unburdened of al acts, deeds, and offenses, made or declared to
be treason, by the space of two hundred and more years before: Or as it may
more aptly be said of all offenses made Treason by any stat. or act of
parliament whatsoever. But sithence the stat. of repeal made Anno 1. M. there
have been diverse other offenses made or declared to be treason by the stat. of
An. 1. M. 6. 1. and 2. P. and M. 11. 5. El. 11. 18. Offenses made treason by
Statutes.
El. 1. 5. El. 1. 13. El. 2. 23. El. 1. 27. El. 2. and 3. Iac. 4. whereof the
first four were but as an addition, augmentation, enlargement, or exposition
of the before specified Treasons ordained by the common law, or declared by the
foresaid stat. of 25. E. 3. All which said last mentioned Treasons I will set
down and express verbatim, after I have somewhat more particularly expressed
how the Sages and Judges of this Realm have construed and expounded several
branches of the said statute of explanation made Anno 25. Ed. 3.

3 The foresaid statute of 25. Ed. 3. does confirm it to be high treason, for
any person to compass or imagine the death of our Sovereign Lord the K. the
Queen, etc. by which words it does approve what a great regard and reverend
respect the common law has always had to the person of the K. which it has
endeavored religiously and carefully to preserve, as a thing consecrated by
almighty God, and by him ordained, to be the head, health, and wealth of the
kingdom, and therefore it has ingrafted a deep and settled fear in the
hearts of all sorts of subjects, to offer violence or force unto it, under the
pain of high treason; Leges Aluredi cap. 4. Co. li. 4. 124
in so much as if he that is non compos mentis do kill, or attempt to kill the K.
it shall be adjudged in him high treason, though if he do commit petit treason,
homicide, or larceny, it shall not be imputed unto him as felony, for that he
knew not what he did, neither had he malice prepenced, nor a felonious intent.
And this law does not only restrain al persons from laying violent hands upon
the person of the K. but also by prevention it does inhibit them so much as to
compass or imagine, Compassing or imagining the death of the K. etc.
or to devise or think in their hearts to cut off by violent or untimely
death, the life of the K. Qu. etc. for the only compassing or imagination,
Bracton de Corona, cap. 3.
without bringing it to effect, is High treason, because that compassing and
imagination does proceed from false and traitorous hearts, and out of cruel,
bloody, and murdering minds. 19. H. 6. 47. 13. H. 8. 13. Co. li. 1. 28.
But seeing compassing and imagination is a secret thing lying hidden in the
breast of man, and cannot be known but by an open fact or deed, it is
requisite to have some thing or means to notify the same to others, before it
can be discovered and punished: and therefore if it be uttered by words it is a
sufficient signification thereof. Conspiracy by diverse, executed by some of them.
If two, three, or more, P. 1. M. Dyer 98. Co. li. 1. 28.
do conspire to commit High treason, as to compass or imagine the kings death,
or to levy war, and some of them after do commit and execute it, this is
High treason in them all by the common law.

Leuying of war, or adhering to the K. enemies.
4 And because by the said statute of 25. E. 3. it is declared to be High
treason, to levy war against the king in his Realm, or to be adherent to
his enemies, aiding them in his Realm, or elsewhere: 13. Eliz. Dyer 298.
therefore if a subject borne of this Realm being beyond the seas, does
practice with a prince or governor of another country to invade this Realm
with great power, and do declare, where, how, and by what means the invasion
may best be made, it is High treason: for an inuasian with great power cannot
be, but of likelihood it will tend to the destruction or great peril of the K.
and hurt to the Realm: and moreover the said offender has manifested himself
to be adherent to the K. enemy and to aid him with his counsel, though not in
the Realm, yet elsewhere. And this offense shall be tried in the K. Bence, The
trial of his offense.
or elsewhere, before such commissioners, and in such county, as the king by
commission shall appoint, according to the stat. of 35. H. 8. 2. If a man do
confederat with others to destroy the King, Co. li. 1. 28
subvert the realm, and to advance a rebel to be king, and do endeavor by
such friends and means as he can to put the same in practice, this is high
treason, and he shall suffer death, and forfeit, as in case of High treason.
And if a man accompanied with a convenient number of persons, do ride toward
the king, 21. Ed. 3. 23.
to help him in his wars, and another does encounter him, and kill him, this is
high treason, for he does levy war against the king, who doch encounter in
fight such as be assisting to the king in his wars, and he is adherent, and
gives comfort to the K. enemies, who in open field gives battle to the K.
friends, for taking he K. part. Before the foresaid stat. of 25. E. 3. it was
adjudged Treason to kill the K. messenger, 22. Ass. p. 49
who was sent to execute his commandment.

5 And though the words of the foresaid stat. of 25. E. 3. be, Counterfeiting
the kings Seal.
That it is High Treason for a man to counterfeit the K. great seal, or his
privy seal, yet the law does construe it a counterfeiting of the great seal,
2. H. 4. 26. 40. Ass. p. 33
to take the wax printed with the great seal, to affixe it to a writing made
in the K. name, and to use it as the kings commission, to gather money of the
kings people, though this is not making or counterfeiting of a new seal, but
the abusing of an old seal, to remove it from one Patent to another, and
thereby to abuse the K. prerogative and authority, and to exact money of his
subjects. And so though the letter of the law be not infringed, A. 37. H. 8.
Brook Treason 3
yet the meaning of the law, which is the essence and substance of the law, is
broken; wherefore the offender shall be punished in this case as a traitor: And
yet when a Chaplein had affixed an old seal of the kings to a Patent of
Non-residence, it was adjudged but Misprision of treason, and not High treason.
And notwithstanding that in the foresaid stat. of 25. Ed. 3. Consenters and
aiders to treason.
there is no mention made of any consenters or aiders to this counterfeiting,
yet the consenters and aiders be taken to be within the puruiew of this stat.
for in that they be aiders and consenters to a treason, 19. H. 6. 47.
they be offenders, and in treason all the offenders be principals, and none
accessarie, and therefore they be principal traitors in this fact.

6. H. 7. 13. 1. R. 3. 1.
6 And whereas it appears by the foresaid stat. of Anno 25. E. 3.
Counterfeiting, but not uttering of false money.
that if a man do counterfeit or forge the K. money, it shall be Treason; the
meaning of the said law is, that the counterfeiting or forging of the said
money, shall be construed and expounded Treason, although the offender does
not utter the same in payment: for the K. by his prerogative royal, has the
only authority to coin money, and to make the price or value of the quantity
thereof, and to set a seal thereupon. 3. H. 7. 10. 11. Eliz. Dyer 266.
But if false money be made within the Realm, in Ireland, or any the Dominions
thereof, and another knowing thereof does utter it in payment, he commits
not high treason, but misprision of treason. And the receiving, helping, and
comforting of him which has coined money of false metal like to the money of
England, knowing him to have coined it, is but misprision of treason. 23. Ass.
p. 2
A woman that did coin money before the foresaid stat. of 25. E. 3. was
adjudged a traitor, and burned for the same, which does prove, that the said
offense, amongst the others before rehearsed, was high treason by the common
law, and not newly ordained by that stat. He who coineth money by warrant does
abuse it.
If he which does coin money by the kings warrant in the tower of London, 3.
H. 7. 10.
or elsewhere, makes it less in weight by much than the old and ancient
ordinance, or coyneth false metal, it is high treason in him: But yet they
which do utter it in payment to the K. subjects within the Realm be not
traitors, for it is in them only Misprision of Treason.

7 And whereas the words of the foresaid stat. of 25. E. 3. be, Petit treason.
That there is another manner of Treason, when a servant kills his Master,
etc. although there be therein no mention made of the Mistress; yet if a man
or woman servant do kill his or her Mistress or Dame, A servant kills his
Master or Mistress.
it is Petit treason, 19. H. 6. 47. 12. Ass. p. 30
and within the puruiew and meaning of the said stat. though it be not within
the letter thereof, and it was Petit Treason by the common law: for the servant
is retained to serve as well the one as the other, and to be obedient as well
to the one as to the other, and one of them has affiance in the servant as well
as the other. And if a servant kill his Master after he is out of service, 33.
Ass. p. 7 Co. li. 1. 99.
if it be upon a premeditat malice conceived against him during the time that
he was in service, it is petit Treason: for the execution of the fact does
respect and look back to the original cause, which was the malice the
servant conceived against his Master when he was his servant. If a servant do
procure one to kill his Master, 40. Ass. p. 25
who does kill him in the servants presence, this is petit Treason in the
servant: but if he do kill him in the servants absence, then is it not petit
Treason in the servant, but he is accessory to murder. 2. and 3. P. and M. Die.
128
A woman servant conspired with a stranger to rob her Mistress, and at a time
appointed in the night she did let him into the house, and led him to the bed
with a candle, where her Mistress lay sleeping, and the same stranger killed
her Mistress in her bed, the servant saying or doing nothing, but holding the
candle: in this case the servant committed petit Treason, and was adjudged a
principal therein, though the party who did the bloody fact, The wife
co^spireth with another to kill her husband.
was but a murderer. P. 16. Eliz. Dyer 332.
If a wife and a servant do conspire to kill the husband, and appoint a time
and place for it, and the servant kills the husband in the wives absence,
this is petit Treason in them both, though the wife be absent: and yet the law
is otherwise if he be not a servant, but a stranger: for if a woman procure a
stranger to kill her husband, which he does in her absence, she shall be hanged
and not burned, for that the principal offender was a murderer, and not a
Traitor, as the servant was in the former case. 4. Ass. p. 25.
And so abettors and procurers, Abettors and procurers in petit Treason
be within this part of the stat. touching petit Treason, although they are not
expressly named within the letter of the statute.

The son kills father or mother.
8 Some do affirm it to be petit Treason in the son, or daughter, 21. Ed. 3.
17.
to kill the father or mother, and some others do not think it to be so,
unless the father or mother do at the same time give meat and drink to that
son or daughter which does kill him, or her, as to a servant, and so, that
the Treason should be in respect of the duty of service broken, and not of
duty of nature violated.

Breaking of prison.
9 It is Petit Treason if a man outlawed of felony, 1. H. 6. 5.
and imprisoned in the K. Bench, be attainted for breaking of prison, and
letting at liberty such persons as were there imprisoned for Treason, and the
offender shalb^ drawn and hanged. An Indictor does discover counsel.
And it has been adjudged petit Treason in some age, 27. Ass. p. 6^
and felony in another age, S. Felony etc. 15.
for one of the indictors to discover the K. counsel and his fellows: but
sithence it has been taken only as finable to the King.

Treasons by Statutes.
10 Besides the before mentioned offenses which be explained to be Treasons by
the common laws of this realm, and besides all the offenses aforesaid, which
were made Treason by the several stat. before rehearsed, and after repealed by
the foresaid stat. of An. 1. M. there have been sithence that time several
other offenses made high Treason by several stat. which I will set down in order
as they were made, and, as near as I can gather, express the causes why they
were made. For as much as by the laws of this Realm small and no due and
condign punishment was before provided for such evil disposed persons, as
should counterfeit or forge such kind of gold or silver of other realms, as is
not the proper coin of this realm, and yet permitted by the Queens consent,
and heretofore suffered by her progenitors to be current in payment within this
realm: nor for such persons as should counterfeit the Queens sign manual, St.
1. M. 6.
her privy signet, or her privy seal, therefore by a stat. made An. 1. M. 6.
it was enacted, Forging the coins of other realms curra^t in this realm
That if any person or persons shall hereafter falsely forge or counterfeit any
such kind of gold or silver, as is not the proper coin of this realm, and is
or shall be current within this realm by the consent of the Q. her heirs or
successors: or if any person or persons at any time hereafter, do falsely forge
or counterfeit the Qu. sign manual, privy signet, or privy seal, Forging
the Kings signet Manual, etc.
that then every such offense shall be deemed and adjudged high treason, and the
offenders therein, their counselors, procurers, aiders, and abettors, being
convict according to the laws of this realm, of any the said offenses, shall
be likewise deemed and adjudged Traitors against the Qu. her heirs and
successors, and the realm, and shall suffer and have such pains of death,
forf. of lands, goods, and cattels, and lose the privilege of all Sanctuary,
as in case of high Treason is used and ordained.

11 Where sundry coins of gold and silver of other realms, not being the
proper coin of this realm of England, and by the sufferance of the K. and Q.
be current in payment within this realm, many evil disposed persons for their
own corrupt lucre, did bring into this realm from the parts beyond the sea,
great quantity of forged and counterfeit money, like to the said coin of
other foreign realms, and did utter the same by marchandises, and otherwise,
to diverse subjects of this realm, to their great damage, for that there was
not any sufficient law then provided, for the condign punishment of the
offenders in that behalf, St. 1. and 2. P. and M. 11.
therefore by a stat. made An. 1. and 2. P. and M. it was established, That if
any person or persons shall bring from the parts beyond the sea into this
realm, or into any of the dominions of the same, Bringing in of counterfeit
money.
any such false and counterfeit coin of money being current within this
realm, as is aforesaid, knowing the same coin or money to be false and
counterfeit, to the intent to utter or make payment with the same within this
realm, or any the dominions of the same, by marchandizing, or otherwise, then
all and every such person or persons so offending, as is aforesaid, their
counselors, procurers, aiders, and abettors, in that behalf, shall be deemed
and adjudged to be offenders in high Treason, and shall suffer (after lawful
conviction or attainder thereof) such pains of death, loss and forf. of
lands, goods, and cattels, as other offenders shall do in cases of high
Treason. And all and every person and persons, By what evidence an offender
shall be indicted or attainted.
that shall be accused or impeached of any of the offenses contained and provided
for in this stat. or of any other offense or offenses, concerning the
impairing, cou^terfeiting, or forging of any coin current within this realm,
shall and may be indicted, convicted, or attainted by such like evidence, and in
such manner and form, as has been used within this realm at any time before
Anno 1. Ed. 6. Any Statute, custom, law, etc. notwithstanding.

12 Because diverse false and evil disposed persons, for wicked lucre and gains
sake, did diminish impair, and falsify the money and coins current within
this Realm, Clipping, washing, rou^ding or filing of money.
by clipping, washing, rounding, and filing thereof, to the dishonor of the
Queen, and loss of the subjects of this Realm: for the remedy whereof by a
stat. made An. 5. El. it was enacted, That clipping, washing, rounding, St. 5.
El. 11.
or filing for wicked lucre or gains sake, of any the proper moneys or coins
of this realm, or the dominions thereof, or of the moneys or coins of any
other realm, allowed and suffered to be current within this realm, or the
dominions thereof, at this present, or that hereafter at any time shall be the
lawful moneys or coins of this realm, or the dominions thereof, or of any
other realm, and by proclamation allowed and suffered to be current here, by
the Qu. her heirs or successors, shall be taken and adjudged by virtue of this
act to be treason: and the offenders therein, their counselors, consenters,
and aiders, shall be taken, deemed, and adjudged as offenders in Treason: and
being thereof lawfully convicted or attainted, according to the due order of
the law, shall suffer death, and lose and forf. all his and their goods and
cattels, and also shall lose and forf. all his and their lands and tenements,
during his and their natural life or lives only. To whom the forfeiture shall
accrue.
And every person which has any lawful grant to have and enjoy the forf. of
lands, goods, or cattels of offenders, and men attainted of high treason,
within any Manor, Lordship, Town, Parish, Hundred, or other precinct within
this realm of England or Wales, shall and may at all times hereafter, have
like liberty, to take, seize, and enjoy all such forf. of lands, tenements,
goods, and cattels, as shall come or grow within their liberties, by force of
the attainder of any person or persons, for and upon any offense and offenses
made treason by this act, as they or any of them should, ought, or might by
virtue of any good and lawful grant to them or any of them heretofore had or
made. Provided always, No corruption of blood, or forf. of dower.
and be it enacted, That this act, nor any attainder or attainders of any
person or persons, for any offense or offenses made treason by this act, shall
extend or be expounded, to make any corruption of blood to any the heir or
heirs of any such offender or offenders, or to make the wife of any such
offender to lose or forf. her dower, of, or in any lands, tenements, or
hereditaments, or her title, action, or interest in the same: Any thing in this
act contained, or attainder etc. notwithstanding. Trial of a Peer.
If any of the Lords of the Parliament, or Peer of the realm, shall be indicted
of any offense made treason by this act, then they shall have their trial by
their Peers, as heretofore has been used in cases of High Treason. By a
stat. made An. 3. H. 5. it was ordained, That clipping, St. 3. H. 5. 6
washing or filing of the money of the land, should be adjudged treason, but
that stat. was repealed by the before rehearsed stat. of An. 1. M. as is
aforesaid.

13 For that diverse evil disposed persons knowing that the said act of an. 5.
El. 11. being penal, ought to be expounded strictly according to the words
thereof, and the like offenses not by any equity to receive the like
punishment, did sithence the making of the said stat. practice for gains sake,
other undue means, to falsify, impair, diminish, and lighten as well the
proper money of this realm, as also of other realms, Diminishing, scaling, or
lightning of money.
allowed to be current within this realm and the dominions thereof by the Qu.
proclamation, to the great loss and deceit of the Q. and her subjects: for the
redress whereof by a Statute made Anno 18. St. 18. El. 1.
Eliz. it was established, That if any person or persons shall for wicked lucre
or gains sake, by any act, ways, or means whatsoever, impair, diminish,
falsify, scale, or lighten the proper moneys or coins of this Realm, or any
the Dominions thereof, or the moneys or coins of any other Realms, allowed
and suffered to be current, at the time of the offense committed, within this
Realm of England, or any the Dominions of the same, by the proclamation of the
Qu. her heirs or successors, it shall be taken, deemed, and adjudged to be
Treason: and the offenders therein, their counselors, consentors, and aydors,
shall be likewise deemed and adjudged as offenders in treason, and being
thereof lawfully convict or attainted, according to the due course of the laws
of this realm, shall suffer death, and lose and forf. all their goods and
cattels, to the Queen, her heirs and successors, and shall lose and forfeit
to the Queen, her heirs and successors, all their lands, tenements, and
hereditaments, during his or their natural life or lives only. Provided
always, that this Act, No corruption of blood, nor forf. of dower.
nor any attainder or attainders, for any offense or offenses made treason by
this Act, shall in any wise extend, or be judged, or expounded, to make any
corruption of blood to any the heir or heirs of such offender or offenders,
or to make the wise of any such offender to lose or forfeit the dower of, or in
any lands, tenements, or hereditaments, or her title, action, or interest to
the same, Any thing in this Act contained, or any attainder hereafter to be had
etc. notwithstanding. If any Lord of the Parliament, or Peer of this Realm,
Trial of a Peer.
shall be indicted of any offense made treason by this Act, then every of them
shall have his trial by his Peers, as has been heretofore used in cases of
High Treason.

14 For preservation of the Queens Highness, her heirs and successors, and
the dignity of the imperial Crown of this realm, and for avoiding of such
hurts, perils, dishonors, and inconveniences, as have before time fallen as
well to the Qu. noble progenitors, Kings of this realm, as for the whole
estate thereof, by means of jurisdiction and power of the Sea of Rome,
unjustly claimed and usurped within this realm, and the dominions thereof, and
also of the dangers by the fautors of the said usurped power, grown to
licentious boldness, St. 5. El. 1.
and marvelous outrage, by a stat. made An. 5. El. it was ordained, That if
any person or persons, dwelling, inhabita^t, or resiant within this realm, or
within any other the Qu. dominions, seigniories, or countries, or in the
Marches of the same, or elsewhere, within or under her obedience and power,
Maintaining the authority of the Bishop of Rome.
of what estate, dignity, pre-eminence, order, degree, or condition soever he
or they be, shall by writing, ciphering, printing, preaching, or teaching,
deed, or acts, advisedly and wittingly, hold, or stand with, to extol, set
forth, maintain, or defend the jurisdiction, or power of the Bishop of Rome,
or of his Sea, heretofore claimed, used, or usurped within this realm, or in
any dominion or country, being, of, within, or under the Queens power or
obedience: Or by any speech, open deed, or act, advisedly and wittingly,
attribute any such manner of jurisdiction, authority, or pre-eminence, to the
said Sea of Rome, or to any Bishop of the same Sea for the time being, within
this Realm, or in any the Q. dominions or countries, then every such person
or persons so doing or offending, their abettors, procurers, and counselors,
and also their aidors, assistants, and maintainors, upon purpose, and to the
intent to set forth, further, and extol the said usurped power, authority, or
iurisdsction of any of the said Bishop or Bishops of Rome, and every of them,
being thereof lawfully indicted or presented, within one year next after such
offenses by him or them committed, and being lawfully convicted, or attainted
at any time after, according to the laws of this Realm, for every such
default and offense, shall incur the danger, penalties, pains, The penalty
for the first offense.
and forfeitures ordained and provided by the Statute of Provision and
Praemunire, St. 16. R. 2. 5
made Anno 16. R. 2. And for stronger defense and maintenance of the said Act,
it was further established by authority of the said Parliament, That if any
such offender or offenders, The second offense Treason.
as is aforesaid, by writing, cypering, printing, preaching, or teaching, deed,
or act, advisedly, and wittingly, do hold or stand with, to extol, set forth,
maintain, or defend the authority, jurisdiction, or power, of the Bishop of
Rome, or of his Sea heretofore claimed, used, or usurped within this Realm, or
in any Dominion or Country being of, within, or under the Queens power or
obedience: Or by any speech, open deed, or act, advisedly and wittingly,
attribute any such manner of jurisdiction, authority, or pre-eminence to the
said Sea of Rome, or to any Bishop of the same Sea for the time being, within
this Realm; or in any the Queens Dominions or Countries, or be to any such
offender or offenders abetting, procuring, or counselling, or ayding, assisting
or comforting, upon purpose, and to the intent to set forth, further, and
extol the said usurped power, authority, or jurisdiction, after such
conviction and attainder, as is aforesaid, do eftsoons commit or do the said
offenses, or any of them, in manner and form aforesaid, and be thereof duly
convicted and attainted, as is aforesaid, then every such offender and
offenders, for the same second offense and offenses, shall forfeit, lose, and
suffer such like and the same pains, forfeitures, judgment, and execution, as
is used in case of High Treason. Provided always, that this act nor any thing
therein contained, nor any attainder to be had by force of this Act, No
corruption of blood, nor forf. of dower.
shall not extend to make any corruption of blood, the disheriting of any
heir, forfeiture of dower, nor to the prejudice of the right or title of any
person or persons, other than the right and title of the offender or offenders,
during his, her, or their natural lives only. And it shall and may be
lawful, to every person and persons, to whom the right or interest of any
lands, tenements, or hereditaments, after the death of such offender or
offenders, should or might have appertained, if no such attainder had been, to
enter into the same, without any Ouster le main to be sued, in such sort as
he or they might have done if this act had never been made. Giving of alms
to an offender.
Provided, that charitable giving of reasonable alms to any of the offender or
offenders above specified, without fraud or couin, shall not be taken and
interpreted to be any such abetment, procuring, counselling, aiding, assisting,
or comforting, as thereby the giver of such alms shall incur any pain,
penalty, or forfeiture appointed in this Act. Provided also, that if any Peer
of this realm shall offend contrary to this Act, or any branch or article
thereof, in all such cases they shall be tried by their Peers, in such manner and
form as in other cases of treason they have used to be tried, and by none
other means. No person or persons shall be indicted for assisting, aiding,
maintaining, comforting, or abetting of any person or persons, for any the said
offenses, in extolling, setting forth, or defending of the usurped power and
authority of the Bishop of Rome, unless he or they be lawfully accused by
such good and sufficient testimony and proof, as by the Jury by whom he shall be
indicted, shall be thought good, lawful, and sufficient to prove him or them
guilty of the said offenses.

15 To the intent that all usurped and foreign power and authority spiritual
and temporal, may for ever be clearly extinguished and never to be used or
obeyed within this realm, or any other the Q. dominions, by a stat. made an. 1.
El. 1. St. 1. El. 1.
it was ordained, That no foreign prince, person, prelat, state, or potentat,
spiritual or temporal, shall at any time after the last day of this Session of
Parliament, use, enjoy, or exercise any manner of power, jurisdiction,
superiority, authority, pre-eminence or privilege Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical within this Realm, or any other the Queens Dominions or
Countries that now be, or hereafter shall be: Abolishing of foreign authority.
But from henceforth the same shall be clearly abolished out of this Realm,
and all other the Queens Dominions for ever: any statute, ordinance, custom,
etc. notwithstanding. And for the better observation and maintenance of the
said statute, it was then further enacted, Who shall take the oath for the
Queens supreme gogouernment.
That all and every Archbishop, Bishop, and all and every other
Ecclesiastical person, and other Ecclesiastical Officer and Minister, of what
estate, dignity, pre-eminence, or degree soever he or they be, or shall be,
and all and every temporal Judge, Justice, Mayor, and other lay and temporal
Officer and Minister, and every other person having the Queens fees or wages
within this Realm, or any of her Dominions, shall make, take, and receive a
corporal oath upon the Evangelists, before such person or persons as shall
please the Queen, her heirs or successors to assign and name, to accept and
take the same oath. And every person that at any time shall be preferred,
promoted, or collated to any Archbishopricke or Bishopric, or to any other
Ecclesiastical benefice, promotion, dignity, office, or ministry, or that
shall be by the Queen, her heirs or successors preferred to any temporal or
lay office, ministry, or service, within any her Dominions, before he shall
take upon him to receive, use, exercise, supply, or occupy any such
Archbishopricke, Bishopric, promotion, dignity, office, etc. shall receive
the same oath before such persons as shall have authority to admit any such
person to any such office, etc. or else before such person or persons as by the
Queen etc. under the great Seal, shall be assigned to minister the said oath.
And every person temporal suing liuerie, or Ouster le maine out of the hands
of the Queen, her heirs or successors, before his liuerie or Ouster le maine
sued forth, and allowed: And every temporal person doing any homage to the
Queen, her heirs and successors: or that shall be received into service with
her, etc. shall take the foresaid corporal oath before the Lord Chancellor, or
Keeper of the great Seal, or before such person or persons, as by the Queen
etc. shall be appointed to receive the same. And every person taking orders, and
every other person which shall be preferred to any degree of learning, in any
University within this Realm, or dominions, before he shall receive such
orders, or be preferred to such degree of learning, shall take the foresaid
oath before his Ordinary, Commissary, Chancellor, or Vicechancellor, or their
sufficient deputy in the said University. And by another stat. made an. 5.
Eliz. it was further enacted, St. 5. El. 1.
That all other persons which have taken or shall take orders, commonly called
Ordines sacros, or Ecclesiastical orders, or have been or shall be promoted,
preferred, or admitted to any degree of learning in any University within this
Realm, or dominions to the same belonging: And all Schoolmasters, and public
and private teachers of children, as also all manner of person and persons that
have taken, or hereafter shall take any degree of learning, in, or at the common
laws of this realm, as well vtter-barresters, benchers, readers, ancients in
any house or houses of court, and al principal Treasurers, and such as be of
the grand company in every Inn of Chancerie, and all Atturneies,
Prothonotories and Philozers, toward the laws of this realm: And all manner
of Sherifes, Escheators, and Feodaries, and all other person and persons, which
have taken, or shall take upon him or them, or have been, or shall be admitteed
to any Ministry or Office, in, at, or belonging to the common law, or any
other law or laws, of, to, or for the execution of them, or any of them, used
or allowed, or at any time hereafter to be used or allowed within this Realm,
or any the Dominions or Countries belonging, or which hereafter shall happen to
belong to the Crown, or dignity of the same. And all other Officers or
Ministers of or toward any Court whatsoever, and every of them, shall take
and pronounce a corporal oath upon the Evangelists, before he or they shall
be admitted, allowed, or suffered to take upon him or them, to use, exercise,
supply, or occupy any such vocation, office, degree, ministry, room, or
service, as is aforesaid, and that in the open Court whereunto he does or
shall serve and belong. And if he or they do not, or shall not serve or belong
to any ordinary or open Court, then he or they shall take and pronounce the
oath aforesaid, in an open place before a convenient assembly to witness the
same, and before such person or persons, as have, or shall have authority by
common use, or otherwise, to admit or call any such person or persons, as is
aforesaid, to any such Vocation, Office, Ministry, room, or service, or else
before such person or persons, as by the Queen, her heirs or successors, by
commission under the great Seal of England, shall be named or assigned to
accept and take the same, according to the tenor, effect, and form hereafter
following, viz. I A. B. do utterly testify and declare in my conscience, The
Oath.
that the Queens Highness is the only supreme governor of this Realm, and
of all other her Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual
or Ecclesiastical things, or causes, as temporal: And that no foreign
Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate, has, or ought to have any
jurisdiction, power, superiority, pre-eminence, or authority Ecclesiastical
or Spiritual, within this Realm: And therefore I do utterly renounce and
forsake all foreign jurisdictions, powers, superiorities, and authorities, and
do promise, that from henceforth I shall bear faith and true allegiance to
the Queens Highness, her heirs and lawful successors, and to my power shall
assist and defend all jurisdictions, privileges, preheminences, and
authorities granted or belonging to the Queens Highness, her heirs and
successors, or united and annexed to the imperial Crown of this Realm: So
help me God, and by the contents of this book. And by the foresaid Statute of
Anno 5. Elizab. 1. it was further enacted, That every Archbishop and Bishop
within this Realm, A Bishop may tender the Oath.
and the Dominions of the same, shall have authority to tender or minister the
oath aforesaid, to every or any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical person, within
their proper Diocese, as well in places and jurisdictions exempt, as not
exempt. And that the Lord Chauncelor, The L. Cha^cellor may grant commissions
to tender the Oath.
or Keeper of the great Seal of England for the time being, shall and may at
all times hereafter, by virtue of this Act, without further warrant, make and
direct Commission and Commissions under the great Seal of England, to any
person or persons, giving them thereby authority to tender and minister the
oath aforesaid, to such person or persons, as by the foresaid Commission or
Commissions, the said Commissioners shall be authorized to tender the said
oath unto. And moreover it was enacted, That if any person or persons appointed
or compellable by this Act, The penalty for the first refusal of the Oath.
or by the foresaid Act made Anno 1. El. 1. to take the said oath: or if any
person or persons, to whom the said oath by any Commission or Commissions shall
be limited or appointed to be tendered, refuse to take, or pronounce the said
oath, in manner and form aforesaid, that then the party so refusing, and
being thereof lawfully indicted, or presented, within one year next after such
refusal, and convicted or attainted at any time after, according to the laws
of this Realm, shall suffer and incur the dangers, penalties, pains, and
forfeitures, ordained and appointed by the Statute of Provision and Praemunire,
made An. 16. R. 2. St. 16. R. 2. 5.
And also if any of the persons above named, and appointed by this Act, to take
the oath aforesaid do after the space of three months next after the first
tender thereof, The second refusal of the Oath high Treason.
the second time refuse to take, and pronounce, or do not take and pronounce
the same in form aforesaid to be tendered: That then every such offender and
offenders for the same second offense and offenses shall forfeit, loose, and
suffer such like, and the same pains, forfeiture, judgment, and execution as
is used in cases of high treason: No corruption of blood or forfeiture of dower.
But no attainder by force of this Act shall extend to make any corruption of
blood, the dis-heriting of any heir, forfeiture of dower, nor to the prejudice
of the right or title of any person, other than of the offender during his,
her, or their natural lives only, etc. But forasmuch as the Queen is
otherwise sufficiently assured of the faith and loyalty of the Temporal
Lords of her high Court of Parliament: Therefore this Act shall not extend to
compel any temporal Lord, of, or above the degree of a Baron of this Realm,
Temporal Lords discharged of the Oath.
to take or pronounce the Oath aforesaid, nor to incur any penalty limited
by this Act, for not taking, or refusing the same. Provided always, that no
person shall be compelled by virtue of this Act to take the Oath above
mentioned, at, or upon the second time of offering the same, according to the
form appointed by this Statute, except the same person has been, is, or
shall be, an Ecclesiastical person, that had, has, Who only shall take the
Oath upon the second tender.
or shall have in the time of one of the Reigns of the Queens father,
brother, or sister, or in the time of the Queens Majesty, her heirs, or
successors charge, care, or office in the Church: Or such person or persons as
had, has, or hereafter shall have any office or ministry in any
Ecclesiastical Court of this Realm, under any Archbishop, or Bishop in any
the times or reigns aforesaid: Or such person or persons as shall wilfully
refuse to observed the orders and rites for divine service, that be authorized
to be used and observed in the Church of England, after that he or they shall be
publicly by the Ordinary or some of his Officers for Ecclesiastical causes
admonished to keep and observe the same: Or such as shall openly and advisedly
deprave by words, writings, or any other open fact, any of the rites and
ceremonies at any time used, and authorized to be used in the Church of
England: Or that shall say or hear private Mass prohibited by the Laws of
the Realm: And all such persons shall be compellable to take the Oath upon the
second tender or offer of the same, and incur the penalties for not taking
the said Oath, and none other.

16 Because diverse seditious and evil disposed people have lately procured and
obtained to themselves from the Bishop of Rome, and his See diverse Bulls and
Writings, the effect whereof has been, and is, to absolve, and reconcile all
those that will be contented to forsake their due obedience to the Queen, and
to yield and submit themselves to the unlawful and usurped authority of the
said Bishop and his See: and by color of the said Bulls and Writings,
have by their lewd practices, and persuasions so far wrought, that sundry
simple and ignorant persons have been contented to be reconciled to the said
usurped authority, and and to take Absolution at the hands of the aforesaid
subtle practisers, whereby there has grown disobedience in many, to absent
themselves from divine service, and thought themselves discharged from all
allegiance to her Majesty, whereby unnatural Rebellion has ensued. For
redress whereof, and to prevent great inconveniences that might ensue, by a
Statute made Anno 13. Elizab. 2. it was enacted, St. 13. El. 2.
That if any person or persons shall use or put in ure in any place within this
Realm, Giving or taking absolution by any bulls from Rome.
or any the Queens dominions, any bull, writing, or instrument written, or
printed, of absolution, or reconciliation, obtained from the Bishop of Rome, or
any his successors, or from any other person or persons authorized, or claiming
authority, by, or from the said Bishop his predecessors or successors, or
See of Rome: Or if any person or persons shall take upon him or them by color
of any such bull, writing instrument, or authority, to absolve or reconcile
any person or persons, or to grant or promise to any person or persons within
the Realm or any other the Queens Dominions any such absolution or
reconciliation, by any speech, preaching, teaching, writing, or any other open
deed: Or if any person or persons within this Realm, Obtaining of bulls from
Rome.
or any the Queens Dominions shall willingly receive and take any such
absolution or reconciliation: Or else, if any person or persons have obtained
or gotten since the last day of the Parliament holden Anno 1. Elizab. or shall
obtain, or get from the said Bishop of Rome, or any his successors, or See of
Rome, any manner of bull, writing, or instrument written, or printed,
containing any thing, matter, or cause whatsoever: or shall publish, or by any
ways or means put in ure any such bull, writing, or instrument: Then all and
every such Act and Acts, offense and offenses shall be deemed and adjudged to
be high treason, and the offender and offenders therein, their procurers,
abettors and counselors to the fact, and committing of the said offense or
offenses shall be deemed and adjudged high traitors, to the King, and the
Realm, and being thereof lawfully indicted and attainted according to the
course of the Laws of this Realm, shall suffer death, and forfeit all their
lands, hereditaments, etc. and cattells as in cases of high treason, by the
Laws of this Realm ought to be lost and forfeited, etc. All and every ayders,
The forfei^^res of Ay^^rs, Main^^inors, etc. after the offense.
comforters, or maintainers of any of the said offender or offenders, after
the committing of any of the said acts, or offenses, to the intent to set
forth, uphold, or allow the doing drexecution of the said usurped power,
jurisdiction, or authority concerning the premises, or any part thereof, St.
16. R. 2. 5
shall incur the pains and penalties containe^ ^n the Statute of Praemunire
made Anno 16. Ri. 2.

17 Because diverse persons evil affected had practiced contrary to the
meaning of the foresaid Statute of 13. Elizab. 2. by other means than by
Bulls, or Instruments written or printed, to withdraw several of the Queens
subjects from their natural obedience to her Majesty to obey the usurped
authority of the Bishop of Rome, and in respect of the same to persuade great
numbers to withdraw their due obedience to her Majesty's Laws established for
the due service of God: Persuading to the Romish religion.
For reformation whereof, St. ^ 3. Eli. 1
and to declare the true meaning of the same Law by a Statute made Anno 23.
Elizab. 1. it was declared and enacted, That all persons whatsoever, which have
or shall have, or shall pretend to have power, or shall by any ways or means
put in practice to absolve, persuade, or withdraw any of the Queens subjects,
or any within her Realms or Dominions from their natural obedience to her
Majesty, or to withrawe them for that intent from the Religion now by her
Highness authority established within her Highness Dominions, to the Romish
Religion, or move them, or any of them to promise any obedience to any
pretended authority of the Sea of Rome, or of any other Prince, State, or
Potentate to be had or used within her Dominions, or shall do any ouert Act
to that intent or purpose, and every of them shall be to all intents adjudged
to be traitors: and being thereof lawfully convicted, shall have judgment,
suffer, and forfeit, as in case of high Treason: And if any person shall by any
means be willingly absolved, or withdrawn as aforesaid, or willingly be
reconciled, Being persuaded to the Romish Religion.
or shall promise any obedience to any such pretended authority, Prince,
State, or Potentate, as is aforesaid: Then every such person and persons
their Procurers and counselors thereunto, being thereof lawfully convicted
shall be taken, tried and judged, and shall suffer and forfeit as in cases of
high Treason. And for the further confirmation and explanation of the said
Statute of Anno 23. Elizab. 1. and for a more augmentation thereof in some
sort, there was an other Statute made Anno 3. St. 3. Iac. 4
Jacob. 4. whereby it was enacted, That if any person or persons shall either
upon the Seas, or beyond the Seas, or in any other place within the Dominions
of the King, his heirs, or successors, put in practice to absolve, persuade,
or withdraw any of the Subjects of the King, his heirs, Practicing to absolve
or reconcile to the Romish Religion.
or successors of this Realm of England, from their natural obedience to his
Majesty, his heirs or successors: Or to reconcile them to the Pope or Sea of
Rome; or to move them or any of them to promise obedience to any pretended
Authority of the Sea of Rome, or to any other Prince, State, or Potentate:
Then every such person and persons their Procurors, Aidors, Counselors, and
Maintainors knowing the same, shall be to all intents adjudged Traitors, and
being convicted shall have judgment, suffer, and forfeit as in case of high
Treason. And if any such person as is aforesaid, either upon the Seas or
beyond the Seas, or in any other place within the Dominions of the King, his
heirs, or successors shall be willingly absolved, or withdrawn as
aforesaid; or willingly reconciled, or shall promise obedience to any such
pretended authority, Prince, Absolved or reconciled.
State, or Potentate, as is aforesaid: Every such person and persons, their
Procurers, Councillors, Aidors, and Maintainours, knowing the same, shall be
to all intents adjudged Traitors, and being convict, shall have judgment,
suffer, and forfeit as in case of high Treason. But this Clause touching
Reconciliation shall not extend to any person which shall be reconciled to
the Pope or Sea of Rome, that shall return into this Realm, and within six
days after his return, A reconciled person submits.
before the Bishop of the Diocese, or two Justices of the Peace of the
County where he shall arrive, shall submit himself to the King and his
laws, and take the oath of Supremacy, ordained Anno 1. Eliz. 1. and the oath
set down in this Act.

18 Whereas diverse persons, called or professed Jesuits, Seminary priests,
and other priests made beyond the Sea, according to the order of the Romish
Church, have come, and been sent into this Realm, of purpose, not only to
withdraw the Queens subjects from their due obedienes to her Majesty, but
also to move sedition, rebellion, and open hostility within her Highness
Dominions: For reformation whereof, by a Statute made Anno 27. Elizab. it was
enacted, That it shall not be lawful, to, Jesuits and Priests shall not come
into this Realm.
or for any Jesuit, Seminary Priest, or other such Priest, Deacon, or other
Religious or Ecclesiastical person whatsoever, St. 27. 2 E. 2
being borne within this Realm, or any of the Dominions thereof, and
heretofore (since 24. Iun. Anno 1. reginae Eliza.) made, ordained, or
professed, or hereafter to be made, ordained, or professed by any authority
or jurisdiction derived, challenged, or pretended from the Sea of Rome, by, or
of what name, title, or degree soever the same shall be called or known, to
come into, be, or remain in any part of this Realm, or any Dominions thereof,
other than in such cases, and upon such special occasions only, and for such
time only, as is expressed in this Act (viz. if he be so weak and infirm of
body, that he cannot pass out of this Realm:) And if he do, then every
such offense shall be adjudged high Treason: And every person so offending
shall for his offense be adjudged a Traitor, and shall suffer, loose, and
forfeit as in case of high Treason.

19 By a Statute made Anno 27. Elizab. it was established, That if any the
Queens subjects (not being a Jesuit, Seminary Priest, St. 27. El. 2.
or other Priest, Deacon, or Religious or Ecclesiastical person) as is before
mentined, now being, or which hereafter shall be of, or brought up in any
College of Jesuits, Seminary persons shall retire into England.
or Seminaries, already erected or ordained, or hereafter to be erected or
ordained in any parts beyond the Seas, or out of this realm, in any foreign
parts, shall not within six months next after Proclamation in that behalf to
be made within the city of London, under the great Seal of England return
into this Realm, and thereupon within two days next after such return before
the Bishop of the Diocese, or two Justices of peace of the County where he
shall arrive, submit himself to her Majesty and her Laws, and take the Oath
set forth Anno 1. Elizab. 1. Then every such person which shall otherwise
return, come into, or be in this Realm, or any other the Dominions thereof,
for such offense of returning, or being in this realm, or etc. without
submission as is aforesaid, shall be adjudged a Traitor, and suffer, and loose,
and forfeit as in case of high Treason.

20 Having treated of Treasons generally, and first showed which be high
Treasons, and which petit Treasons by the common law, and which be made
treasons by Statutes: It rests that I declare what is Misprision of treason;
how many sorts thereof there be, and what is the penalty, or punishment of
the offenders therein. What misprision of treason is.
Misprision of treason, or felony, is most properly when any person does
understand or know that another person has committed treason or felony, and he
will not disclose it to the King, or his Council, or to some Magistrate, that
it may be repressed and punished, but does conceal it. Bracton writes,
Bracton de Corona cap. 3
That if any man does know another to be guilty of a treason, or to be
vehemently suspected thereof, he ought presently, and without any delay, come
to the King if he can, or send to him if he be not able to come, or to some
other near about the King, and to declare every thing in order: he ought not
tarry in one place two days or two nights before he does see the Kings
person, neither must he attend any other business, be it of never so great
importance, for he is scarcely allowed to look back, because if he do
delay, and conceal the matter for a time, he shall be accounted a manifest
deceiuer of the King, and as consenting and agreeing to the offense, whether
the party which is accused be his familiar friend or a stranger: and if he
would after accuse the offender, he shall not be heard, unless he can prove,
that he was hindered upon good cause. And to the intent it might be certainly
known what misprision of treason is, the Statutes of 5. and 6. Ed. 6. St. 5.
E. 6. 11 1. and 2. P. and M. 10.
and 1. and 2. Ph. and M. have defined it in this manner, viz. concealment, or
keeping secret of any high treason shall be deemed and taken only misprision of
treason, the offenders therein to forfeit, and suffer as in cases of misprision
of treason, as heretofore has been used: The forfeture in misprision
And in all cases of misprision of treason, the offender shall forfeit to the
King his goods, and his lands during this life, 2. R. 3. 10.
and he shall be imprisoned during his life. And every treason or felony does
include Misprision, so that where any person has committed treason or felony,
the King, if he will, may cause the offender to be indicted, and arraigned,
but of misprision. But some other offenses, partly by the common Law, and
partly by Statute be misprision of treason, besides concealment or keeping
secret of treason, which be hereafter expressed.

21 By reason that diverse evil disposed persons, as well without this Realm,
as within were boldened to counterfeit and forge such kind of gold and
silver, and utter the same in the Realm, as is not the proper coin of this
Realm, nor current in payment in this Realm, because before there was no
condign punishment provided for such offenses: For the redress whereof, St.
14. El. 3
by a Statute made Anno 14. Elizab. 3. it was enacted, That if any person or
persons shall hereafter falsely forge, Counterfaiting of money not current.
or counterfeit any such coin of gold or silver, as is not the proper coin
of this Realm, nor permitted to be current within this Realm: Then every such
offense shall be deemed and adjudged Misprision of high Treason: And the
offenders therein, their procurors, aiders, and abettors, being convicted
according to the Laws of this Realm of such offenses, shall be imprisoned and
forfeit such Lands, goods, and Chattells, as in cases of Misprision of
treason, for concealment of treason. S. Br. 6.

St. 23. Eli. 1
22 By the Statute made Anno 23. Elizab. 1. Aiding of perswaders to Romish
religion.
it is enacted and declared, That all and every person and persons that shall
wittingly be Aidors or Maintainors of such persons as shall offend in
persuading or reconciling to the Romish Religion, or in being reconciled
thereunto, or in any of the same offenses, knowing the same, or which shall
conceal any of the said offenses, and shall not within twenty days at the
furthest after such persons knowledge of such offense disclose the same to some
Justice of Peace, or other higher officer, shall be taken, tried, and judged,
and shall suffer, and forfeit as offenders in misprision of Treason. S. Br. 17.

Concealing of reconciliation offered.
23 By the Statute made Anno 13. Elizab. 2. it was ordained, St. 13. Eli. 2.
That if any person or persons to whom any absolution, reconciliation, bull,
writing, or instrument obtained from the Bishop of Rome, or any of his
successors, or from any other claiming authority, from, or by them, shall be
offered, moved, or persuaded to be used, put in ure, or executed, shall
conceal the same offer, motion, or persuasion, and not disclose and signify
the same by writing, or otherwise, within six weeks then next following, to
some of the Queens privy Council, or to the president or vicepresident
established in the North, or the Marches of Wales for the time being: Then the
same person or persons so concealing, shall incur the penalty and forfeit of
misprision of high Treason. But no person or persons shall be troubled, in, or
for misprision of high Treason, for any offense made Treason by this Act, other
than such as by this Act before are declared to be in case of misprision of
high Treason, S. Br. 16.

Recording an indictment not found.
24 If a Justice of Peace do inroll a bill of indictment not found by the
Country, amongst other indictments which be found; 2. R. 3. 10.
This is a great misprision, and fineable, and he shall loose his office.

Drawing a sword to strike a Justice.
25 If one draw his sword to strike a Justice assigned, Mi. 22. Ed. 3 13.
sitting in place of Judgment, this is misprision of Treason, and the offender
being indicted, and found guilty thereof, shall have judgment to forfeit his
lands and chattels, and to have his right hand cut off, and to be perpetually
imprisoned: for that the Justice assigned by the Kings Commission to execute
justice, sits in the place and stead of the King, and so the offender
opposes himself against the King, and the office of justice.

Striking a Iuror in a Justices presence.
26 If in the presence of a Justice assigned, M. 19. Ed. 3. Fitz. Judgment. 174.
one do strike a Iurour that is returned upon an Enquest: this is misprision
of Treason, and the offender being indicted thereof, shall have judgment to
loose his lands and goods to the King, to have his right hand stricken off,
and to be committed to perpetual prison.

Striking in Westminster Hall.
27 And the same Law is, Fitz. Cor. 280. M. 2. and 3. P. and M. Die. 188.
if one strike another in Westminster Hall during the time that the Kings
Courts be sitting there, and be indicted thereof; this is misprision of
Treason, and an indignity offered to the Magistrates, and place of justice:
Therefore in this case the offender shall have judgment to have his right hand
cut off, to loose his lands, and goods, and to be perpetually imprisoned.

Re^scuing a prisoner arrested by a Judge.
28 If one of the Kings Justices assigned, M. 22. Ed. 3. 13.
do arrest any person which has made a fray before him, and a stranger will
rescue the prisoner, whereby he does escape, this is misprision of Treason, and
in this case, as well the prisoner, as he that made the rescous, shall forfeit
to the King his lands and goods, and be imprisoned during their lives: Because
the attachment of such a Justice, is the Kings own attachment in the
construction of Law.

29 Because striking in the Kings palace, or where he shall remain in person,
is a kind of disgrace offered unto, or contempt had of the majesty of the
king, who is the head of the common wealth, and the chief preserver of peace
therein, and therefore it is to be accounted a great Misprision, and worthy of
severe punishment: wherefore for the prevention thereof, Shedding of blood
within the kings palace.
by a Statute made Anno 33. St. 33. H. 8. 12.
H. 8. 12. it was established, That if any person or persons shall maliciously
strike any other person, whereby blood shall be shed in any of the Kings
houses, or Palaces, or any other house wherein the king, his heirs, or
successors, shall be at that time abiding in his royal person, viz. within
any edifices, courts, places, gardens, orchards, or houses within the Porters
ward of any of the houses above rehearsed, or within any Gardens, privy
walks, orchards, tilt-yards, wood-yards, tennice-plaies, cocke-fights, bowling
alleyes near adjoining to the said houses, and being part of the same, or
within two hundred foot of the Standard of any outward gate, or gates of any of
the said houses, commonly used for passage from any of the houses etc. and
shall be thereof indicted, arraigned, and attainted, according to the form of
the said Statute, he so offending, shall have his right hand cut off, be
imprisoned during his life, and make fine to the King at his pleasure. But this
Act and the pains and forfeitures before rehearsed shall not extend to any
Noble man, nor other person, that shall strike his servant within the said
Palaces, or Houses, or the limits of the same, with his hand or fist, or any
small staff or stick, for correction for any offense committed: Nor to any of
the Kings officers, that in execution of his office, shall strike any person
with his hand, fist, or small staff, stick, or tipstaffe: Nor to any other
person that in doing service at any triumph, or any other time of service by
the Kings, or any of his Council, or other his head officers commandment, shall
for the execution of his said service strike any person with his hand, fist, small
staff, or stick, or any tipstaffe within the same palace, house, etc. although
by reason of ye same stroke or strokes, there happen to be any bloodshed of
such person as shall be so stricken, except the person so stricken die of the
same stroke within one year next after.

And so it is to be noted by the foresaid Statute of 33. H. 8. and the four
cases next precedent, that striking in the Kings Palace, or House where
himself does make his abode is not so penal, as striking, or drawing a weapon
to strike is, where he is but represented by others in time and place of
Justice; for the law does inflict a more severe punishment upon him who
strikes, or draws his weapon to strike, in place and time of execution of
Justice, than it does to him who offers the like violence in the house, and
at the time where the kings own person is remaining: In which case the
offender receives no punishment at all for striking, or drawing of his weapons
to strike, unless blood be shed thereby. Which laws do proceed of the great
care and reverend respect that is had of Justice, and of peace ensuing thereof.

30 For as much as some doubts and questions were moved, that certain kinds
of Treasons, Misprisions, and concealements of Treasons, committed out of this
Realm, could not by the common laws of this Realm be enquired of, heard, and
determined within this Realm of England: for a plain declaration whereof, St.
35. H. 8. 2 26. H. 8. 13. 5. Ed. 6. 11.
by a Statute made Anno 35. H. 8. it was enacted, That all manner of offenses
being already made or declared, or hereafter to be made or declared to be
Treasons, Misprisions of Treasons, or concealements of Treasons, and done,
perpetrated, or committed by any person or persons out of this Realm of
England, shall be enquired of, heard, and determined before the Kings Justices of
his Bench for pleas to be holden before himself, Trial of treasons committed
out of the Realm.
by good and lawful men of the same shire, where the said Bench shall sit, and
be kept: or else before such Commissioners, and in such shire of the Realm,
as shall be assigned by the Kings Commission, and by good and lawful men of
the same Shire, in like manner and form to all intents, as if such treasons
etc. had been committed in the same shire, where they shall be so inquired of,
heard, and determined as is aforesaid. And if any Peer of this Realm shall be
indicted of any such Treasons etc. then he shall have his trial by his Peers,
etc. Which foresaid Statute of Anno 35. H. 8. remains in force
notwithstanding the Statute of Anno 1. and 2. P. and M. 10. By which it is
ordered, h. 13. El. Dyer. 298.
That all Trials had, awarded, or made for any Treason, shall be had and used
only according to the course of the common laws of this Realm, and not
otherwise.

Outlawrie of offenders in Treason being beyond Sea.
31 By a branch of a Statute made Anno 26. H. 8. it was ordained, That all
Process of Outlawrie to be made within this Realm, against any offenders in
Treason, being resiant or inhabiting out of this Realm, or beyond ye Sea, at
the time of the Outlawrie pronounced, shall be as good and effectual in the law
to all intents, as if any such offenders had been resiant within this Realm,
at the time of such Process awarded, and Outlawrie pronounced. And after by a
Statute made Anno 5. E. 6. it was conditioned and provided, St. 5. E. 6. 11.
That if the party so outlawed shall within one year after the said Outlawrie
pronounced, or judgment given thereupon, yield himself to the chief Justice
of England for the time being, and offer to trauerse the said indictment, or
Appel, whereupon the said Outlawrie shall be pronounced: then he shall be received
to the said trauerse and being thereupon found not guilty by verdict of xij.
men, he shall be clearly discharged of the said Outlawrie, and of all penalties
and forfeitures by reason of the same; as though no such Outlawrie had bin
made. And it is to be noted, h. 12. El. Dyer 287.
that the foresaid two Statutes do extend to offenders in any manner of
Treasons by ye Common law, or Statute, and not to those only which were
declared to be Treasons by the Statute of 25. Edw. 3.

32 For the speedy trial and punishment of such persons, as shall commit any
manner of Treasons within the Principality of Wales, and the Marches of the
same, or elsewhere within the Kings dominions, where his original Writs in the
Chauncerie of England commonly run not, by a Statute made Anno 32. H. 8. it
was enacted, That all such Treasons and Misprisions of Treasons as is
aforesaid, Trial of treasons committed in wales.
shall be presented, St. 32. H. 8. 4.
and tried by the oaths of twelve men, inhabiting within any such Shires, and
before such commissioners, as the King from time to time in such cases shall
assign and appoint by his Commission, or Commissions of Oyer and Determiner,
in like manner and form, as if such Treasons, or misprisions of treasons had
bin done and committed within such of the said Shires, into the which the said
Commissions of Oyer and Determiner shall be directed, as is aforesaid: And all
Presentiments, Trials, Processes, Judgments, Executions, and forfeitures
hereafter to be had, made, or done by virtue of such Commissions, shall be good
and effectual in the law, to all purposes. Any grant, custom, or usage, to
the contrary notwithstanding etc. After that, by the Statute made an^ 1. and
2. P. and. M. it was enacted, That all trials hereafter to be had, St. 1. and
2. P. and M. 10.
awarded, or made for any Treason, shall be had and used only according to the
due Order and Course of the common law of this Realm, and not otherwise.
Quaere whether this Statute of 1. and 2. P. and M. does repel or take away the
force of the before rehearsed Statute of 32. H. 8.

St. 33. H. 8. 20.
33 By a statute made an^ 33. H. 8. it was established, The force of attainder
of treason by the common law.
That if any person or persons shall be attainted of high Treason by the course
of the common laws or statutes of this Realm, in every such case, every such
attainder by the common law shall be of as good strength, value, force, and
effect, as if it had bin done by authority of Parliament. And the king, his
heirs, and successors shall have as much advantage by such attainder, as well
of uses, rights, entries, conditions, and possessions, reuersions, remainders,
and all other things, as if it had been done and declared by authority of
Parliament, and shall be deemed and adjudged in actual and real possession of
the lands, tenements, hereditaments, uses, goods, chattels, and all other
things of the offenders so attainted, which his Highness ought lawfully to
have, and which they so being attainted, ought or might lawfully loose and
forfeit, if the attainder had been done by the authority of Parliament,
without any office or inquisition to be found of the same: Any Law, Statute,
etc. notwithstanding. Saving to all and every perfect and persons, and bodies
politic, and their heirs, assigns, and successors, and every of them,
(other than such person and persons which shall be attainted of high Treason,
and their heirs and assigns, and every of them, and all and every other
person and persons claiming by them, or any of them, or to the uses of any of
them, after the said Treasons committed) all such right, title, use,
possession, entry, reuersions, remainders, interests, conditions, fees,
offices, rents, annuities, commons, leases, and all other commodities, profits,
and hereditaments whatsoever, they, or any of them, should, might, or ought to
have had, if this Act had never bin made.

34 Because through corruption, or negligent keeping, the Records of attainders
of Treasons happen to be many times impaired, blemished, or otherwise to be
defective; St. 29. El. 2.
therefore by a Statute made an^ 29. El. it was ordained, That no Record of
attainder that now is, of any person or persons, No record of attainder shall
be reuersed when the offender is executed.
of or for any high Treason, where the party so attainted, is, or has been
executed for ye same Treason, shall by the heir or heirs, of any such person,
or by any other whatsoever, clayming in, by, from, or under any such heir, or
heirs, be in any wise hereafter reuersed, undone, avoided, or impeached by any
plea, or for any error whatsoever. But this Act shall not extend to any Record
of attainder of or for any treason upon which any writ of Error is now
depending, or which Record is already reuersed, repealed, or undone, by or for
any error, matter, plea, or cause whatsoever, but the same shall be and remain
as unto, and against that party at whose suit the same writ of Error is
depending, or at whose pursuit the same Record has bin reuersed, repealed, or
undone, and his, and their heirs and assigns only, as if this Act had never
been had, or made: Any thing in this Act etc.

M. 33. H. 8. Dyer 50.
35 If an offense be murder, or other felony by the common law, Felony made
treason by Statute.
and after the same offense shall be made treason by a Statute, Then it is not
punishable as murder and felony, but as Treason: And no appeal will lie
thereof, and the Kings pardon of all Treasons will discharge the offender
therein.

An English traitor subject to another prince.
36 If an English man borne being indicted of high Treason, P. 13. El. Dyer 300.
will upon his arraignment plead, that he will not answer to the said
indictment, for that he is a subject and servant to a foreign Prince, and not
subject to the King of England: in this case the Court will record a Nihil
dicit, and he shall have such judgment as is used in cases of Attainder of
Treason.

An alien borne commits treason.
37 If an alien borne do commit high Treason in England in the time of peace,
between England and that Nation where the same alien was borne, P. 3. and 4. P.
and M. Dyer 140. H. 33. H. 6. 1
he shall be indicted and arraigned of high treason, and shall have judgment
according to his desert. But if it were in the time of war between England
and that nation where the said alien was borne, then the alien shall be
ransomed, and not arraigned.

Joining the kings arms with his own.
38 An Earl of this Realm was attainted of high treason, An. 38. H. 8. Bro.
Treason 2.
for joining the Arms of England before the Conquest, and the Arms since, to
his own Arms, and for some other offenses: Quaere within which words of the
first rehearsed Statute of 25. E. 3. or of any other Statute at the time of his
arraignment in force, that offense was comprised and made Treason. S. Trial by
Peers. 2.

Homicide.
HOmicide is a word compound, and is derived of these two words, B^acton de
corona.
viz. hominis and cedium, and the most apt and proper definition thereof is,
when one man or more men do kill another man: for if a man be killed by a
dog, a beast, or other thing, it is not properly termed homicide. The said
homicide may be committed by several means, viz. by justice, Homicide by
justice.
as when a Judge does command or pronounce his sentence, that a man attainted
by course of law shall be put to death: By necessity, Homicide by necessity.
as when one man kills an other with grief and sorrow of mind, thereby to
deliver himself, or that which is his, or some other persons, or things which
he is bound to defend from further peril, which he or they cannot otherwise
escape: By mischance, By mischance.
as when a man casts a stone at a bird, or a beast, or is in lopping or
felling of a tree, and another man passing by is slain therewith, without the
foreknowledge and against the will of him who did the deed: By will, By will.
as when one man has a will to fight with another, and then does kill him, or
some other that is in his company, and does take his part in that combat: But
of this Homicide by will there be two sorts, whereof the one is called
Murder, and that is, By murder.
when one man upon malice prepenced, and forethought, does feloniously kill an
other. And the other is called Manslaughter, or Chance medley, and that is, By
manslaughter.
when two men fight together upon a sudden heat of blood, without any malice
precedent, and one of them does kill the other.

2 If a man be adjudged by the court to be hanged, Homicide by justice.
and the Sheriff is commanded by the Judge to do execution in that manner, and
he does it accordingly; this is Homicide by justice. But if the Sheriff do
behead him, or cause him to be beheaded, or by any other means to be put to
death, than according to the Judgment, M. 35. H. 6. 58.
this is no Homicide by justice, but felony in the Sheriff, The order of law,
not observed in execution of Justice.
for that he has not observed the order of the Law, viz. the judgment in
putting the offender to death. And the same law is, if one which is not
Sheriff, or other officer thereunto lawfully deputed, will put to death an
offender that is condemned to die upon his own authority: for that is no
Homicide by justice, but felony in him who being not the Kings officer
thereunto assigned, has killed one of the Kings Subjects, without warrant of
his law. And therefore if the Judge himself who gave judgment of death
against an offender, shall after put the same offender to death, it is not
justifiable, but being indicted and arraigned thereof, he must plead not
guilty. And in this case the wife may have an Appell of the death of her
husband so put to death, against the said Sheriff or other person, though the
heir cannot have an Appell of ye death of his father so executed, because his
blood is corrupted by the Attainder. 35. H. 6. 57.


No man may kill him that is outlawed of felony, or attainted in a Praemunire.
3 If a man be attainted of felony by Outlawrie, it is Homicide by justice for
the Judge before whom he is brought, to command him to be put to death, and for
the sheriff to see execution done of him, according to the judgment, 2. Ass.
p. 3. 27. Ass. p. 4. 35. H. 6. 58.
viz. to hang him: But it is felony and not Homicide by justice, for any other
man of his own authority to kill him. And for as much as it was doubtful
whether by the laws of this realm there was any punishment for such as kill,
or slay any person or persons attainted in, or upon any Praemunire. Therefore
by a Statute made an^ 5. El. 1. it was enacted, St. 5. El. 1.
That it shall not be lawful to any person or persons to slay or kill any
person or persons in any manner attainted, or hereafter to be attainted of, in,
or upon any Praemunire by pretense, reason, or authority or force of any word,
or words, thing or things contained or specified in any Statute or Law of
Provision and Praemunire, or in any of them: Any Law, Statute, Opinion, or
Exposition to the contrary notwithstanding: So that to kill any person
attainted upon a Praemunire is felony, and not Homicide by justice.

Killing a felon that will not be arrested.
4 A shirife, a bailey, 22. Ass. p. 45 Fi. Cor. 261
or any other which has warrant to arrest a man indicted of Felony, may well
justify the killing of him, if he will not suffer himself to be arrested, but
that he does stand at his defense, in such manner, that the officer and his
assistants cannot arrest him without killing of him. And in this case the
officer shall be discharged without the kings pardon: for this is homicide by
justice done upon him, who refuses to yield unto, and submit himself to the
justice of the Law. And every person, as well he that has no warrant, as he
that has, may apprehend a Felon: and if he will not yield to be arrested, but
stand to his defense, or fly, the pursuer may kill him without blame, the
arrest being for Felony, and therein he shall commit homicide by justice. And
by the statute of Anno 1. Killing of such as be unlawfully assembled.
M. it is established, That if any persons, St. 1. M. 12.
above the number of two, shall unlawfully assemble together, to the intent
with force and arms to do, practice, or put in ure any of the things in the
said statute mentioned, then it shall be lawful to every Justice of peace, and
to every Shirife, Mayor, Bailife, and other head officer of any City, or Town
corporat, or to any other having the Kings commission, or letters, to raise and
assemble ye Kings subjects in manner of war to be arraied in such great number
as he or they shall think meet or able, to the intent by violence of strength
to suppress and take the said persons so unlawfully assembled. And if the said
persons so unlawfully assembled, or any of the^ shall fortune to be slain,
maihemed, or hurt, in, or about the repressing or taking of them, then every
such Justice, mayor, sheriff, etc. and every other person having authority as
is aforesaid, and every person and persons by him or them assembled, shall be
free, discharged, and unpunished, as well against the King, as against all and
every other person and persons, of, for, or concerning such killing, maiheming,
hurting, etc. for it is homicide by justice done and committed by persons
lawfully authorized, upon such riotous and rebellious persons which after
Proclamation made will not depart, and sever themselves asunder, and submit and
yield themselves obedient to the law of the Realm. S. Riots 37.

5 As any man may justify the killing of another before arrest, Killing him
that is carrying to the Jail.
if he will not yield, so may he do after arrest, if there be any inevitable
necessity therein: as if an offender be arrested for felony, 22. Ass p. 55
Fitz. Cor. 288.
and when he is in leading toward the Jail he breaks from those that do
conduct him, and flies away, and his conductors do pursue him so, that they
cannot apprehend and take him again without killing of him: In this case, if
they do kill him, this is homicide by justice, and justifiable, for that the
offenders would not yield to the trial and justice of the law. But if he which
killed the offender, procured the matter which is justifiable for the cause
aforesaid, to be found before himself, in respect of some jurisdiction which
he has to enquire of felonies, Fi. Cor. 328
he shall not be discharged upon such an indictment found, until he be
arraigned thereof, and the matter also found by verdict, because he himself
was Judge. But the law is otherwise if it were found before other commissioners.

6 As a man may kill an offender before arrest, Killing a prisoner attempting
to escape.
or after arrest if he will not yield, so in some case a man may kill him that
is under arrest, and in prison: As a Jailer came in the night with a Lantern
in his hand to see his prisoners, who before his coming had broken their
yrons, 22. Ass. p 55
and stood all ready to kill him, and did beat and evil entreat him, and he
having a hatchet in his hand, therewith slew two of them, and escaped from the
residue: This was adjudged to be well done, and to deserve no punishment, for
this was by the Jailer homicide done by justice, to kill them who attempted to
kill him, and who indeauoured to escape the trial and justice of the law.

St. 24. H. 8. 5
7 It appears by the Statute of an^ 24. H. 8. 5. Killing him that attempteth
robbery or burglary.
That it is homicide justifiable, if a man do kill an offender which
attempteth feloniously to rob, or murder him, 22. Ass. p. 55 26. As p. 23 and
32. Co. l. 5. f. 91 Fi. Cor. 303 and 305.
in, or near any high way, cart way, horse way, or foot way, or in his mansion
house, or to kill him which attempteth burglarie to break his dwelling house
in the night, and that the same shall be by verdict so found and tried; for he
shall neither loose lands, goods, or cattels for the death of any such evil
disposed person, but shall be fully discharged as if he were acquit thereof.

8 To the intent that Trespassors in forests, chases, parkes, and warrens,
Killing of an offender in a Park, warren, or forest.
may more charily eschew, and fear to enter and trespass in the same, by a
Statute made an^ 21. Stat. 11. E. 1.
E. 1. it was ordained, That if any forester, parke-keeper, or warreiner shall
find any offenders within his Bailiwicke there wandering and doing hurt, which
after Huy and Cry levied to keep the peace, and obey the law, will not yield
themselves to the Forrester etc. but will fly and defend themselves by
violence, Then though the Forresters, Park-keepers, and Warreiners, and any
other coming in their company to keep the Kings peace, endeavoring to arrest
such offenders, do kill any of the same offenders, he shall neither suffer
death, nor sustain any other trouble or punishment therefore: But if any of
the said Forresters, Parke-keepers, or Warriners, or any other by reason of
contention, despite, or hatred, will lay to any man's charge passing through his
Bailiwicke, that he came thither to do hurt, whereas he did not, neither was
found wandering or offending, and so kill him, and thereof be convicted, he
shall be punished for his death, as he ought to be for the death of an other
being in the Kings peace. And by this means the Forrester does commit homicide
by justice upon the offender, because he will not submit himself, and yield to
be justified by the law.

9 If the king have an ancient Chase, whereof the Lieutenants, M. 15. and 16
El. Dyer. 327.
or Keepers have used time out of ye remembrance of man, as well by night as by
day to hunt in the Manor of Dale adjoining to the said Chase such dear as do
strate out of the same Chase into the said Manor, as in the purlewe of the said
chase, but yet divided from the same with hedge and ditch. And after the same
Manor of Dale does come unto the Kings hands, and the King does grant the same
Manor to another and his heirs, and further does grant unto the same person
free Warreine in all his demesne lands of the said Manor, Unity of possession
in a chase, and a manor adjoining, having free warrein.
which free Warreine has bin before confirmed by diverse ancient Charters with
these words, viz. Ita quod nullus intret in Warrennam illam ad fugandum sine
licentia and voluntate of the grauntee of the said Manor. In this case,
notwithstanding the unity of the possession of the Chase, and the Manor of D.
in the king, and notwithstanding the Kings grant of the manor, and the
confirmation of the warreine with the general words of the Prohibition
aforesaid (which do only extend to the Subject) the kings liberty of the
purlewe does remain vnextinguished. And therefore if one of the Kings Keepers
of the said Chase shall come into the said Manor of D. being purliew to fetch
in his straied dear, it is not lawful for the Lord of the said manor of D. or
for any of his servants to kill him after huy and cry made to keep the peace,
and obey the law, and if he do, it is not justifiable by the foresaid Statute
of 21. Ed. 1. for he cannot commit homicide by justice, nor justify the
killing of him in his Warreine, who has in a sort, and to some purpose,
interest, to come into ye said ground to fetch forth his straied dear.

One killing another in combat.
10 If in Appell of murder, burglarie, or other felony, the defendant do, 37
H. 6. 21
plead not guilty, ready to defend it by his body, and the Appellant and
Appellee do join in the combat, and one of them do kill another in battle:
This is Homicide by justice, and not punishable: for as the law of the Realm
does allow trial by battle in that case, so does it ratify and confirm the
event and success thereof to be justifiable. And the law (depending upon the
judgment of God, who gives victory according to the truth) has assigned
either of the^ to do execution of justice upon the other, as it has assigned
the Sheriff to do execution of justice upon him that after verdict, confession,
or outlawrie is condemned to die.

Homicide upon necessity.
11 Homicide upon necessity, as before is said, is when one man kills an
other with grief of mind, and sorrow of heart, and being enforced unto it,
thereby to deliver him self, or that which is his, or some other persons that
he is bound to defend from further petill, which otherwise cannot be avoided,
and this homicide is by law justifiable. As if one or diverse persons come to a
man's house to burn his house, Homicide in d^fence of his house from burning.
but he or they do not burn it, 26. As p. 23
if the owner of the house or any of his servants do shoot forth of the
house, Co. l. 5. 91.
and kill the offenders or any of them, this is homicide by necessity in
defense of his house, and not felony. Lex Al^re. di.
And in like sort if one or more come to a man's house to rob him, Homicide in
defense of a man from robbery.
and the owner or any of his servants, or company being with him in the house
do kill the offenders, or any of them, this is homicide by necessity in
defense of his goods, and thereby justifiable: for a servant may justify the
killing of an other in defense of his masters person, 21. H. 7. 39.
or house, if the offense can not be otherwise avoided. And he may justify the
killing of him who robbed and killed his Master, 26. Ass. p. 23
so that he do it presently. And if one do attempt to rob an other being
out of his house, and pursues him to that end, 26. As. p. 32.
the true man may kill the offender, and shall be discharged thereof, without
any forfeiture or suing of the Kings pardon. And so shall he in the other
former cases, where any do attempt to burn, or rob a man's house: for a
man's house is his Castle, out of which the Law will not compel him to fly.
21. H. 7. 39.


12 Forasmuch as it was in question, and doubt, if any evil disposed person or
persons, do attempt feloniously to rob or murder any person or persons, in,
or nigh any common high way, cart way, horse way, or foot way, or in their
mansion, messuages, or dwelling places: Or that feloniously do attempt to
break any dwelling house in the night time, should happen being in their such
felonious intent, to be slain by him, or them whom the said evil doers should
so attempt to rob, or murder, or by any person or persons being in the
dwelling house which the same evil doers shall attempt burglarily to break by
night, if the said person so happening in such cases to slay any person so
attempting to commit such murder, or burglarie, should for the death of such
evil disposed person forfeit and loose his goods and cattells for the same, as
any other person should do, that by chance medley should happen to kill any
other person in his or their defense: for the declaration of which ambiguitie
and doubt by a Statute made Anno 24. St. 24. H. 8. 5
H. 8. it was enacted, That if any person or persons shall be indicted or
appealed for the death of any such evil disposed person or persons, attempting
to murder, rob, No forfeiture for homicide upon necessity.
or burglarily to break mansion houses as is aforesaid, that the person or
persons so indicted, or appealed thereof, and of the same by verdict so found
and tried, shall not forfeit or loose any lands, tenements, goods, or cattells,
for the death of any such evil disposed person in such manner slain, but
shall be thereof, and for the same fully acquitted and discharged, in like manner
as the same person or persons should be, if he or they were lawfully acquitted
of the death of the said evil disposed person or persons.

13 But if one man do come in the day time to an other man's house, Killing
another in his own defense in his own house.
and does make an assault upon him in his own house, Fi. Cor. 305
and does fight with him, if the owner of the house do slay the assailant in
his own defense, the owner of the house shall forfeit his goods, and be driven
to sue for the Kings pardon, except that it be proved and found, that the
assailant came also to rob the other in his house.

14 Homicide in a man's own defense, ought to be so great, Necessity
inevitable is requisite in homicide in his own defense.
and upon such necessity, that it must be esteemed to be inevitable, or
otherwise it will not excuse: for here the killer of the man has not to do
with a felon, as in some of the former cases, but with a lawful and true man.
And it is not material whether the person that did kill, or the person which
was slain did begin the fray, but the whole matter will consist upon the
inevitable necessity, without the which the killing is by no means excusable.
The definition of homicide in his own defense.
And therefore the true definition of Homicide in his own defense is, when the
assailant does make a fray, Fi. Cor. 284 286. 287. 297.
or offer force to the defendant, and does strike him, and the defendant does
flee so far as he can for saving of his life, so that he is come to a strait,
beyond the which he cannot fly, and the Assailant does continue his assault;
whereupon the defendant does strike the assailant, and does kill him, this is
homicide in his own defense. For if the defendant could have avoided the
assailant, and did not, but when the assailant did strike him, 43. Ass. p. 31
he did strike him again and killed him, this is felony in the defendant. And
though the defendant does give to the assailant diverse wounds, yet that is not
material, if he fly to a strait before he does give him the mortal wound:
for the Law does allow that justifiable, which a man does in defense of his
own person. And yet in the case aforesaid, if the defendant upon malice
prepenced, does strike another and the^ fly to a wall or strait, and the
other does pursue and strike him, Fi. Cor. 387
and the defendant who fled does kill the pursuer, this is murder and not
homicide in his own defense: for the malice prepenced was the ground and
beginner of this homicide, and not necessity inevitable.

Where in homicide in his own defense goods shall be forfeit, and where not.
15 One man did strike another to the ground, 44. Ass. p. 17
and then drew his knife to kill him, and the defendant lying upon the ground
drew his knife, and the assailant was so hasty to kill the defendant, that he
did fall upon the defenda^ts knife, and so was slain: In this case the
defendant was not adjudged guilty of the assailants death, neither did he
forfeit his goods, for the assailant in a manner killed himself. But if one man
do strike another, and the defendant does fly to a strait, Fi. Cor. 286 287.
and there being and perceiving that the assailant would kill him, holds a
pitchforke between the assailant and him, and the assailant is so fierce that
he runs upon the pitchforke, and is slain: In this case the defendant shall
be forced to purchase his pardon, and shall forfeit his goods, for here he did
not lie upon the ground, but stood upon his feet, and so might have made some
other defense for his safety, that the other in the case aforesaid lying upon
the ground could not do.

Killing of a man in his own defense found by verdict.
16 When a man is indicted and arraigned of murder or manslaughter, 43. Ass p.
31 26. H. 8. 11.
it is not a sufficient verdict for the Jury to say, that the prisoner killed
the dead man in his own defense; but they must show specially how: And though
it be specially found upon the indictment, yet the prisoner shall not be
discharged, until he has purchased his Charter of pardon; for that it is a
confession by implication of the indictment: Or otherwise he shall wholly
estrange himself from the fact, and plead not guilty. And this is done to the
intent to induce a forfeiture of his goods, which be forfeit for the said
offense: for the better corroboration and establishment whereof, the Statute of
Anno 6. E. 1. St. 6. E. 1. 9
made at Gloucester was ordained, by which it is enacted, That no writ shall be
awarded out of the Chauncerie touching the death of a man, to enquire if a man
killed another by misaduenture, or in his own defense, or in other manner,
without felony: but the prisoner shall remain in the Jail until the coming
of the Justices in Eire, or assigned to deliver the Jail, and the^ he shall put
himself upon the country before them of good and evil: And if it be found by
the country that he did it in his own defense, or by misaduenture, the
Justices shall give intelligence thereof to the King, and the king shall give
him pardon, if he please. And so note, that though by this Stat. the life of a
man is meant to be pardoned, Why the goods shall be forfeited.
who does kill another by misfortune, 21. E. 3. 17
or in his own defense (for the which by the common law he should have bin
hanged) yet his goods do remain forfeit to ye K. as they were at ye common law,
Et ipse in misericordia dn^i regis.

17 Whereas the foresaid Statute of Anno 6. Ed. 1. has ordained, The prisoner
indicted must put himself upon the country.
That the prisoner shall put himself upon the Enquest of good and evil, that
is to be intended, when he is indicted of murder, or homicide, and not where in
the indictment the special matter is found: for to such an indictment of
murder or homicide, 4. H. 7. 2. Kel. fol. 53. 26. H. 8. 5.
he must plead not guilty, because it is no plea to plead the special matter,
viz. that he killed the dead man in his own defense, for then it should be as
a justification of the offense, whereas this kind of homicide is in no manner
justifiable: wherefore he must plead not guilty, and then the special matter
being found by verdict, shall give him advantage.

18 He that is in this manner charged for the killing of a man in his own
defense, shall not be discharged thereof, until he has obtained the Kings
pardon, How he shall be discharged who kills a man in his own defense.
or be acquit thereof, and then his discharge shall be in this manner, viz. if he
desire to purchase his pardon, he shall first be let to mainprise, and then
shall sue to have the Record certified by the Justices before whom he was
arraigned to ye Chauncellor of England, Fi. Cor. 116 361. Fi. N. B. 246.
who shall make him a charter of pardon, without speaking to the king: for the
giving of intelligence to the King, whereof the foresaid Statute of Gloucester
makes mention, is intended to certify him in ye Chancerie: for that in law
the King is always said to be present in the Chancery, to give ear to every
of his Subjects petitions.

19 Homicide by misaduenture is when any person without any evil intent does a
thing that is lawful, or which is not prohibited by the law, Homicide by
misaduenture.
and yet another is slain, or comes to his death thereby: as if a man
casts a stone at a bird, or a beast, and another man or woman passing by the
way is stricken thereby, and dies: Or if one man be in felling of a tree, and
the same tree, What is homicide by misaduenture.
or some arm or bough thereof falls upon another person, and kills him: Or
if one do shoot an arrow at a Butte, or other mark, and another passing that
way is killed therewith; Or if one man do let a stone or a piece of timber fall
from a house, or out of a window, and another passing that way is killed by it,
this manner of killing is homicide by misaduenture, Fi. Cor. 302 354. St. 6.
Ed. 1. 9.
for the which he that does kill shall have his pardon of course, as it does
appear by the before rehearsed stat. of Gloucester, and also he shall forfeit
his good, as in the foresaid case of killing of a man in his own defense. But
in this case it is to be considered, whether he that committed this homicide by
Misaduenture was then busied in a thing that was lawful, or unlawful, for if
he were doing of a lawful act, as if the Schoolmaster do in reasonable manner
beat his Scholar for correction only, or the master his servant, and after
the Scholar or Servant dies: Or two men do by consent wrestle one with
another, Kel. fol. 108 136.
and one gives the other a fall and hurts him, whereby he dies: Or one does
play with the other at hand sword by consent, and one of them gives the other
a blow, or thrust, whereby he dies: or if a man do cast wood, stone, or other
thing from a cart, a house, or from a window, houel, or ricke, and another is
oppressed therewith, and dies: Or if a man being in due and convenient time
doing any thing that might breed danger to passengers thereby, do cry out
with so loud and audible voice to give warning thereof, that any other which
trauelleth that way may hear and fly the peril, and yet one careless and
nrt respective of his life and safety is oppressed therewith and dies: Or
where two men do run at Tilt, Just, or fight at Barriers together by the Kings
commandment, and one of them does kill another, in these cases and the like
the offenses shall be adjudged as homicide by misadue^ture. P. 11. H. 7 33.
But if a man being in doing of an unlawful act, as casting of stones into a
high way where men do usually pass, or shooting of arrows into a Market, or
other place, whither men do usually resort, or fighting at Barriers, or
running at Tilt, or Iustes with others without the kings commandment, P. 11.
H. 7. 23
whereby a man is slain: in these last specified cases it is felony at the
least, viz. manslaughter, if it be not murder; for the offender being doing of
an unlawful act by his own will, the law will construe his meaning and will
therein by the success of the act. As if two men be fighting together, and a
third man comes to part them, and he is slain, Fitz. Cor. 262. 22. Ass. p. 71
by one of those two without any malice prepenced, or evil intent in him that
slew him: this is murder in him that killed him, and not Homicide by
misaduenture, because they both that fought together were doing of an unlawful
act. And if they both that did fight together, 2. and 3. P. M. Dyer 128.
came thither with malice prepenced, one intending to kill the other, then is
it murder in them both.

The like order in misaduenture as in his own defense.
20 The same order shall be observed in the pleading, verdict, forfeiture, and
pardon of one which kills another by misaduenture, as shall be of him who
slays another in his own defense: St. 6. Ed. 1. 9
And the before rehearsed Statute of Gloucester shall extend as well to the one
as to the other.

Homicide by murder or manslaughter
21 Homicide by murder is when one man upon malice prepenced does kill another
feloniously. And because it should be certainly known to all persons, which
offenses should be adjudged murder, by a Statute made at Marlbridge Anno 52. H.
3. it was ordained, St. 52. H. 3. 26.
That murder from henceforth shall not be judged before the Kings Justices,
What is murder.
where it is found misfortune only; but murder shall be intended upon them which
be feloniously slain, viz. with a premeditate and malicious mind. Pl. com. 261
And some do define murder to be a secret killing of one man by another, none
being present, nor none knowing thereof. But if one man kill another upon
malice prepenced, the law does not respect whether he do kill him secretly, or
openly, or whether he that was slain be an English man, or other country man,
so that he lived under the Kings protection: Neither does the law regard who
gave the first blow, for though he that was slain did strike the first blow,
yet if he were slain upon malice prepenced, it shall be adjudged murder in him
that killed him. What is manslaughter.
And manslaughter, otherwise called Chance medley, is when two do fight
together upon the sudden, Pl. com. 261
without any malice precedent, and one of them does kill the other; in which
case the offender shall have his Clergy.

The name of murder.
22 The name of murder is an old and ancient term, and it is the rather
continued to make a difference between Homicide committed by Chance medley, and
Homicide committed by malice prepenced. And therefore if a man be indicted of
murder, Murder more grievous than felony.
a pardon of al felonies will not excuse and discharge him; as it appears by
the Statute of an^ 13. R. 2. which has ordained, St. 13. R. 2. 1 Stat. 2. S.
Pardon. 5
That no charter of pardon shall be allowed before any Justice for murder, for
the death of a man slain by a wait, assault, or malice prepenced, Treason, or
Rape of a woman, unless the same murder etc. be specified in the same Charter:
For murder is a more grievous and hateful offense in the hearts, and ears of
men, than other felonies be. And yet if a Commission be granted to certain
persons to enquire of all felonies, they may thereby take indictments of
murder, Kel. fol. 91.
though a pardon of all felonies will not avail him, who has committed
murder; but that is in respect of the Statute aforesaid.

St. 1. E. 6. 12
23 By a Statute made Anno 1. Ed. 6. it was ordained, Wilful poisoning.
That all wilful killing by poisoning of any person or persons that at any time
hereafter shall be committed or done, shall be adjudged and taken wilful
murder, of malice prepenced: and that the offenders therein, their aydors,
abettors, procurers, and councillors shall suffer death, and forfeit in every
behalf, as in other cases of wilful murder of malice prepenced.

24 To the end that stabbing, and killing men on the sudden, done by many
inhumane and wicked persons, in the time of their rage, drunkenness, hidden
displeasure, or other passion of mind, may be from henceforth restrained
thorough fear of due punishment to be inflicted on such cruel and bloody
malefactors, who heretofore have been thereunto imboldened, by presuming on
the benefit of Clergy: St. 1. Iac. 8.
Therefore by a Statute made Anno 1. Iac. it was enacted, That if any person or
persons shall stabbe, Stabbing to death wilful murder.
or thrust any person or persons, that has not then a weapon drawn, or has
not then first stricken the party which shall so stabbe or thrust, so as the
person or persons so stabbed or thrust shall die within the space of six
months then next following (although it cannot be proved that the same was
done of malice forethought) yet the party so offending, and being thereof
convicted by verdict of xii. men, confession, or otherwise, according to the
laws of this realm, shall be excluded from the benefit of his or their
Clergy, and suffer death, as in case of wilful murder. Provided always,
that this Act shall not extend to any person or persons, which shall kill any
person or persons, se defendendo, or by misfortune, or in any other manner than
as is aforesaid: nor shall extend to any person or persons, that in keeping
and preserving the peace, shall chance to commit manslaughter, so as the said
manslaughter be not committed wittingly, willingly, and of purpose, under
color or pretense of keeping of the peace; nor shall extend to any person or
persons, which in chastising his child or servant, shall besides his or their
intents or purpose, chance to commit manslaughter.

Co. l. 4. 40.
25 If upon a fray made, the Constable with others to assist him, Constable or
other is slain in parting of a fray.
do come to part the fray, and to preserve the peace, and in doing of his
office, the Constable, or any of his assistants shall be slain, this is wilful
murder in him that slew him, although the murderer did not know the party whom
he killed, and although the fray was on the sudden: Because the Constable and
his assistants came by authority, warrant, and command of the Law to keep
the peace, and avoid the danger which might ensue by the breach thereof: And
therefore the Law does adiudge this murder, and that the murderer had a
prepenced malice in him, to oppose himself against the Law and the justice of
the Realm. And if the Shiriffe or any of his Bayliffes, or Officers be killed
in the execution of the Kings Process, or in doing their office, The Shiriffe
or his officer is slain in execution of Processs^.
this is murder. And it is murder, if a watchman be killed in watching, and
doing of his office; for in those cases the Law does construe the offense, not
only as done to the person that is slain, but to the office of execution of
justice, or the keeping of the peace, which the law had imposed upon him that
was slain, and so the offender by killing of this man, has done as much as in
him lies, to restrain the execution of justice, or to hinder the preservation
of the peace.

Murder and manslaughter committed in the death of one man.
26 If a man go with malice prepenced to fight with an other, and to kill him,
and a third person seeing them fighting, Plo. Com. 100.
goes on the sudden without malice, to take the part of him that went with
his malice, and to fight for him, and then they two strike and kill the man
that was by them assaulted: This is wilful murder in the first man which went
with the malice prepenced to kill, and but manslaughter, and no murder in the
other who went to take his friends part, and had no malice prepenced to kill.
As if the master upon malice prepenced does lie in the way to assault and kill
a man, and takes some of his servants with him that he does not acquaint with
this malicious intention, and the master does assault the same person who he
did lie in weight for, and does fight with him, and the servants do take their
masters part, and also fight with the party assaulted, and they altogether do
kill him; This is wilful murder in the master, and but manslaughter in the
servants, for that in them there was no malice prepenced toward the party
slain. But if the master had made his servants privy to his intention, and
they had gone with him and killed the other, it should have been adjudged
murder in the servants also.

27 If a man upon malice prepenced do lie in weight to kill an other man, Plo.
Com. 101.
and does meet him, A man bearing malice to one does kill an other.
assail, and fight with him, and a third man being in the company of him that
is assailed does fight, and defend him. In this case if the first man that made
the assault do kill the third man, who took part and defended the second man
that was assailed, it is in him wilful murder, though at the first he did
bear no malice to him that he killed, neither knew him. But when the first
man did bear malice to the second man that he first assaulted, and meant to
have killed him, and to have put his intended malicious purpose in execution
against him, and slew one other who resisted his purpose: the law does construe
it that he carried a malicious and revenging mind against all those that did
resist his wicked purpose. And therefore as he slew one in the defense of an
other, so is his malicious and murdering mind, and intention expounded to be
transferred from the one to the other: and he shall be adjudged a murderer, as if
he had killed the first man. And the same law is, if one man do lie in weight
in a place to kill an other man, and a stranger does come to the same place,
and he that does lie and wait to kill, mistaking the man, does kill that
stranger, thinking he had bin the same person which he did mean to kill: This
killing shall be adjudged wilful murder, for it is grounded upon malice
prepenced, though it were not executed upon him to whom he did bear the
malice. And therefore it shall be adjudged the like offense, as if he had slain
the same person that he meant to have killed. And so it is, if a man upon
malice prepenced do shoot at one man with intent to kill him, and his arrow
or pellet does kill an other man to whom he did bear no malice, this shall be
adjudged murder in him, for in his act doing he intended murder: and seeing he
directed his arrow to kill one man, and that slew another, the offense shall be
accounted in equal degree, as if had killed him whom he meant to have slain,
for the end of the fact shall be judged by the beginning thereof, and the later
part shall taste of the first, and the first part, which was the shooting of
the arrow or pellet, was grounded upon malice prepenced, and a murdering mind,
and so the offense in Law shall be judged wilful murder.

Plow. com. 474
28 The husband did give to his wife a roasted apple, wherein he had put poison,
with intent to poison and kill her; and the wife not knowing the intent of her
husband, nor that the apple was poisoned, delivered the same apple in the
presence of her husband to a young child of their own to eat, who did eat
of it, and died thereof within few days after: Giving poison to one, and
another takes it, and dies
This was adjudged wilful murder in the husband, for that he delivered the
poisoned apple, with intent to kill one person, and seeing by his act death did
ensue, although it was to another person than he meant to kill, yet it shall be
adjudged murder in him, for he was the original founder, and only cause of
this death: and this murder should be unpunished, if he should not be punished
therefore; for the wife which delivered the poisoned apple to her own child,
could not be guilty of any offense, for that she was ignorant of the mischief
pretended. But if one do lay rats-bane, or other venomed thing in a house or
place, with intent to kill rattes, mice, or other vermin, and a man or woman
does eat of it, and dies thereof; this is no murder or other felony in him
that laid it, for that he had no intent to hurt any man or woman.

M. 2. El. Di. 186
29 An aduouterer and a harlot being by him begotten with child, Two agreeing
upon a murder, and one of them does it.
did agree, that after the woman's delivery, the child should be killed,
whereupon the mother, after her delivery, persuaded the Midwife to kill the
child, who did it accordingly, viz. she cut the throat of it: In this case the
mother and midwife were adjudged principal murderers, and the aduouterer, who
was accessarie before the birth of the child, and the murder done, was
adjudged to continue accessarie after the murder done, and to suffer death
without the benefit of his Clergy.

Fitz. Cor. 383
30 If a man intending the death of another, Meaning without act is not homicide.
does beat him so grievously that he does leave him by all the beholders
judgment thought to be dead, and then does fly away, and after the other does
revive, and live; this is not felony in him that did that violence, though it
does plainly appear that he had a meaning to kill him: for it is not felony,
except the party stricken be indeed killed, and die within a year and a day
after the stripes given. But on the other side, if one man do strike another,
with intent only to beat him, yet if he die of this battery within a year
and a day after, it is felony in him that did strike him. For though, as
Bracton affirms, Act without meaning is homicide.
the old Law of this Realm did hold, Quod in maleficijs spectatur voluntas
and non exitus, and nihil interest, vtrum quis occidat, an causam mortis
praebeat: But now we say, Lex antiqua mutatur, and do affirm, Quod exitus in
maleficijs spectatur, and non voluntas duntaxat.

Co. l. 4. 40.
31 A man brought drink to another that was mingled with poison, Homicide by
giving poisoned drink to another.
and advised him to drink it, telling him that it would be a mean to procure
him to get a child of his wife; by reason of which persuasion, he to whom that
poisoned drink was brought, did receive it, and after drunk it in the absence
of him who brought it unto him, and shortly after died: In this case he that
brought the drink was adjudged a principal murderer, though he was not
present at the time of the receipt of the drink: or otherwise he should have
been guilty of that horrible offense, and yet have escaped unpunished, for
there was none in this case to whom he could be accessarie. And so note this
for a special case where a felony is committed, and neither principal nor
accessarie be present at it.

Many do attempt an unlawful act and one of them commits homicide.
32 If several persons assemble together to do a disseisin, Fitz. Cor. 350.
11. H. 4. 13.
to break a house, or commit any unlawful act, and of them kills a man, he
and all the other shall be adjudged principal fellons, because they all came to
do an evil act, though not that act. As if they all had come to have killed
or robbed one man, and after they killed, or robbed an other.

Homicide by carrying abroad.
33 A man was indicted that he did feloniously carry his own father being sick
against his will in a frostie and cold time from one town to an other,
whereof he died; and this was adjudged felony in him: 2. Ed. 3. 18
for in this case the son had a meaning that his fathers life should be
shortened, and he brought to his death.

A man dies in the hands of a Physician or Surgion.
34 If a physician ar surgion has a man in his cure, Fit. cor. 163
who dies being in his cure, or at any time after: this is not felony in the
same physician or surgion, because he did not any thing to his patient with a
felonious intent, but against his will. And moreover it is not to be discerned
whether the man came to his death by any wilful default in the said
Physician, or Surgion, or by his former infirmity, or other cause.

Homicide upon the evil words of an other.
35 Anno. 3. Ed. 3. Itin. North: Fit. cor. 331
it was presented that through the evil words of a woman, two men did fall
out, and fought, and one of them killed an other: and this was adjudged felony
in the woman. But it must be intended that the woman by her words did persuade
council, or advise them, or one of them to fight with the other, and so was
accessarie before the felony committed.

Homicide by a frantic man.
36 A man that is frantic though he kill an other man, M. 21. H. 7. 13. Fitz.
forf. 33 Fi. Dower 183. Fitz. N. b. 202. d Fitz. cor. 193 351. Co. l. 4. 42 26.
Ass. p. 27 Plow. com. 19. Co. l. 4. 125
cannot commit murder, for he has not a felonious intent, nor does carry
within him malice prepenced to any, neither does know what he does. And
therefore he is not to be arraigned for the killing of a man in his Lunacie,
though after he does recover his memory, neither shall he be enforced to sue
for his pardon. And the same law is of a man that is deaf and dumb, who can
not commit murder, for he has not a felonious intent, neither does he know
what he does. And therefore if he kill a man he shall not be arraigned
thereof, nor driven to sue for his pardon. But if a man that is drunk, do in
his drunkenness kill an other man, it is felony, and he shall be hanged therefore,
for it is voluntary ignorance in him to be drunk.

Homicide by an Infant.
37 An Infant of the age of twelve years, 3. H. 7. 2. and 12. 12. Aff. p. 30
or above may commit murder, and so may an Infant of the age of eight, or nine
years if it may appear (by hiding of the person slain, or by any other act)
that the abundance of his malice does exceed the tenderness of his years. But
if an enfant of tender and younger years do kill a man, this is no felony,
because he wants discretion and understanding, Pl. com. 19.
and the Law will impute it to the ignorance which comes to him by nature.

Fit. cor. 311.
38 If a man has a beast that is accustomed to do hurt, Homicide by a beast.
and the owner knowing thereof, does not tie him, or otherwise keep him fast
shut up, but suffer him to go at liberty, and after that beast kills a man:
this is felony in the owner, for by his sufferance of the beast to go at
liberty, the owner does seem to have a will to kill: or that he used this
beast as an instrument wherewith to kill. And this was a Law ordained by
Alured Alured.
king of the West Saxons.

Fit. cor. 263 22. Ass. p. 94
39 To make it Homicide, it is requisite that the party killed be in Esse, In
homicide the party killed must be in Esse.
viz. in rerum natura: for if a man kill an infant in his mothers womb, this
is no felony, neither shall he forfeit any thing for it, and that for two
causes, the one, because the thing had no name of Baptism, the other, for that
it is hard to judge if the infant died of that battery or not, or upon some
other cause. Wherefore a man being indicted in the Kings Bench, for that he did
beat a woman great with child with two children, An^ 3. Ass. pl. 2. M. 1. E.
3. 24
so that one of the children died presently, and the other was borne, baptized,
and had a name of Baptism given, and within two days after that child also
died by the hurt it received by the foresaid beating: this was adjudged no
felony, for the reasons aforesaid: But if a woman being delivered of a
child, does presently kill it before it be baptized, Fit. cor. 418 M. 2. El.
Di. 186.
this is felony in her, though the child had no name of Baptism, because the
child was in rerum natura before it was killed, and it is known by whom, and
what means that child came to his death.

40 If a man do beat, or otherwise hurt another, whereby he dies, In
homicide, the p^rty must die within a year and a day.
it is requisite to make it Homicide, Fit. cor. 303
that the party do die within a year and a day next after the battery, or
hurt done: Or else the Law will not adiudge it homicide, or that the party
stricken did die of that beating or hurt. And the same Law is, if poison be
given by one man to an other, whereby he dies, the Law will not construe it
to be murder, unless the party do die within a year and a day next after
the poison received.

41 As a man may commit felony in killing of an other, Homicide by felo de se.
so he may commit felony in killing of himself, and then the Law does aptly
call him felo de se: for though Homicide is most fitly and commonly termed
where one man does kill an other, yet the same phrase may in good congruitie of
speech be well applied to one that kills himself, for there is an Agent and
a Patient, a killer, and one slain, and both in one and the self same person.
And though there may be many causes why a man may kill himself, as there be
many and several humors, opinions, distractions, and fantasies in men, yet
most commonly he becomes felo de se, Bracton de coro. ca. 31.
and feloniously kills himself, who being guilty of any grievous crime is
apprehended for ye same, or vehemently suspected, or accused thereof, or being
weary of his life, for extreamitie of pain or poverty, as being not able to
kill his enemy, or to be revenged of him according to his desire, does
therefore kill himself, etc. which felon of himself shall forfeit to the
King, his goods, chattells, real and personal, Plow com. 260. 261. Fitz.
Cor. 362. 301. 426.
and debts, but not his lands: for the Law does so greatly favor inheritance,
that it shall not escheate without attainder indeed: Neither shall his wife
forfeit her dower, nor his blood shall be corrupt. And the reason why the King
shall have the goods, chattels, and debts of felo de se forfeited unto him,
The cause of the forfeiture of felo de se.
is, for that the King has lost a subject, and the same subject has broken
the Kings peace, in killing of himself, and given an evil example to his
people, and has fled from, and escaped the trial of the Law, and he himself
was the cause why he could not be tried by the Law. Co. l. 5. 110.
But the goods of felo de se be not forfeited until his death be presented
and found of Record: And therefore those goods cannot be claimed by
prescription. And if felo de se be cast into the Sea, or a great River, or so
secretly buried that the Coroner cannot have the sight of his body, and by thgt
means can not enquire thereof: Then all such Justices of Peace, and Oier and
Determiner which have authority to enquire of felonies, shall enquire thereof.

An Enfant or Lunatike kills himself.
42 If an Enfant, furious, or frantike man do drown, Bracton de coron. ca 31
21. H. 7. 31 Fitz. cor. 244. Co. li. 1. 99. Plow. com. 260.
or otherwise kill himself, he shall not forfeit his goods, etc. because he
wants reason and judgment. And if a man that is lunatike do strike himself
with his knife, or other weapon, and after does recover, and notwithstanding
dies of the same stroke that himself did give within one year and a day
after the stroke given, yet he shall not be adjudged felo de se, nor forfeit
his goods, or any thing therefore: for the Law does respect what he was at the
beginning when he gave himself the stroke, which was the cause of his death,
and not what he was when he died. For if a man that is frantike from day to day
do kill himself, he shall not forfeit his goods. But the Law is otherwise if
a man do kill himself who is frantike but at certain times, Fitz. coron 324.
viz. per lucida interualla.

Killing of him self in the stead of an other.
43 If a man do strike an other to the ground, and then draws his knife to
kill him, and the defendant lying upon the ground draws his knife to defend
himself, H. 44. Ed. 3 44.
and the assailant is so hasty to kill the defendant that he falls upon the
defendants knife, and so is slain: In this case the assailant is felo de se:
for he had an intention to kill, though not himself, yet the defendant. And so
as the death intended by him, was by his have transferred from the defendant to
himself, so is the name of a murderer transfered to felo de se.

44 If a lease of lands be made to the husband, Plow. com. 258.
and the wife for the term of certain years, and the husband goes into the
water and drowneth himself in this case, Forfeiture of lease made to felo de
se and his wife.
after the death of the husband shall be found by the Coroner upon the sight of
the dead body, and the title of this land shall be likewise found by an
inquisition taken before commissioners authorized thereunto, the foresaid lease
and whole term of years shall be forfeited to the King, and the wife shall have
no part thereof: for this forfeiture shall have relation to the husbands going
into the water, whereupon the drowning did ensue, at the which goeing into the
water he had the whole interest of the lease in him so to dispose, that he
might have aliened the whole interest thereof from his wife: and this going
into the water, whereupon this drowning and death did ensue, was a forfeiture or
alienation in law of the term, and was as much in construction of the law, as
if he had then aliened the whole term to the King. And the finding of the
death of this man before the Coroner, upon the sight of the body, and the
finding of the title of this lease before Commissioners, be equiuolent to a
judgment that might have been given against him in his life time, for murder
of another person: And if this man had been outlawed, or otherwise attainted
of Felony in his life time, this lease should have been forfeited to the
King, and the wife should have had no part thereof.

P. 16. E. 4. 7 P. 9. Eliz. Dyer 262.
45 If one which is felo de se, has a debt due to him upon a contract, No
forfeiture of a debt upon a simple contract.
and not by specialtie, he shall not forfeit the debt to the King amongst his
other goods and chattels, for that the said debtor shall be rebutted of his
law against the King.

Pl. Com. 260. 262.
46 If a villeine do give himself a deadly wound, A villeine felo de se, and
then his Lord seiseth his goods
and after the Lord of the same villeine does seize his goods, and then this
villeine does dye within a year and a day after the wound given, and so
becomes felo de se, and after the whole matter is found before the Coroner,
those goods of the villeines shall be forfeit to the King, and the King shall
have them out of the Lords possession: for the forfeiture shall have relation
to the wound which the villeine gave himself, and that was before the Lords
seizure of his goods. For if a man does give himself a deadly wound, and dies
thereof within a year and a day after, all the goods, cattels, and debts which
he had at the time of the blow given, or at any time after, shall be
forfeited to the King, and in his life time he has no authority to dispose
of them after the wound was given.

4. and 5. P. and M. Die. 160
47 A man was bound with two Suerties, One mortgaged his goods and then became
felo de se.
for the payment of twenty pounds at two several days, and the principal
debtor, for the security of his Suerties, by his Indenture did sell unto his
said two Suerties, twenty oxen for twenty pounds, with a Prouiso in the
Indenture, That if he did discharge or save them harmless of the said
Obligation of twenty pounds, that then the said sale of the twenty oxen
should be void. And it was agreed between them, that the principal debtor
should have the occupation and use of the said twenty oxen, at the will of the
said Suerties, and to be used as his own. And after one day of payment due to
the Obligee, and no money paid by the seller or principal debtor, and before
the second payment was due, the seller killed himself, and became felo de se,
having those twenty Oxen in his possession, and the Suerties seized the beasts
as their own: And notwithstanding the property was in them, by the not
performance of the condition, yet it was adjudged that the Aulmoner should have
the beasts, or the money which they were sold for, and then he should
discharge the Suerties against the Creditor. And so the Aulmoner was awarded to
have in these beasts the best estate of the seller, and the same that the
Debtor might have had, if he had paid the debt at the due times which were
agreed upon.

Homicide by casualtie.
48 Though Homicide is most usually known and termed by the killing of one man,
or woman, or more, by another man or woman, or more, yet hominis cedium,
whereof the same word Homicide is derived, may be done by some other
casualtie; though when a man is slain by some other mischaunce than by the
hand or means of another man, as by the fall of a pit of earth, or stone, or a
tree, or killed by a Bear, or Bull, or such like, it is not aptly nor usually
said, that Homicide is committed, but that such a man is slain.

49 When a man comes to his death by the means of any thing that falls
upon him, or by the means of a hurt which himself receives in falling from
some other thing, without the procurement of another man, that thing which is
the cause of his death, shall be forfeited to the King, taken for a Deodand, A
Deodand.
and distributed in alms. And it is not material whether the thing that
killed the man was moving or not at that time when it killed him: for though
it were not moving, yet it shall be taken and accounted as a Deodand, as well
as if it were moving, Fitz. Cor. 403. M. 6. E. 6. Dyer 77.
because all things moving with the thing which was the cause of the man's
death, shall be forfeited, in like sort as the principal thing, according to
the old rule, Omnia quae mouent ad mortem sunt Deodanda. And yet those goods
which be forfeited as Deodand, be not forfeited until the matter be found of
Record, Co. li. 5. 110
and therefore they cannot be claimed by prescription. And the same Jury which
does find the death of the man, must also find and appraise the Deodand.

A tree and the bough of another tree do kill a man.
50 If a man do fell a tree, Fitz. Cor. 398.
and that tree falls upon the bough of another tree, which bough falls upon
a man and kills him: in this case both the bough that killed the man, and
also the tree which did fall upon that bough, shall be Deodand: for they both
did move unto, and were the cause of his death.

Falling off a cart, or from a cart.
51 If a man do ride in a cart, and the same cart falls upon him, Fitz. Cor.
388.
and kills him, as well the same cart as the horses that drew the cart, shall
be Deodands. And in like sort, if a man be in a cart, and by the stirring of
the horses which drew the cart, or any of them, he is cast out of the cart, and
dies thereof, Fitz. Cor. 397. Pl. Com. 323.
as well the horses which drew the cart, as also the cart, shall be Deodands:
for the horses and cart being fastened together, be all the cause of the man's
death.

Falling from a cart laden.
52 If a man fall from a cart laden with Corn, Hay, Wood, Fitz. Cor. 326.
etc. and the wheel of the cart breaks his neck, back, or etc. whereby he
dies, as well the Corn, Falling from cart that is in lading.
Hay, Wood, or etc. as the cart, shall be Deodands. But if a man do fall from a
cart as he is lading of Corn, Hay, Wood, Fi. Cor. 326
etc. by the stirring of the horses, and thereby breaks his neck, back, or
etc. whereby he dies, the cart and horses shall be Deodands, but not the corn
etc. for that the corn etc. were not the cause of his death. If a man that
does drive a cart, do clime upon one of the wheels of the cart, Fitz. Cor.
409.
to gather apples, plums, or etc. and do fall from that wheel, and breaks
his neck, back, or etc. whereof he dies, if it be proved that neither the
horses nor cart did stir, then the wheel of the cart only shall be a
Deodand, and not the horses, nor the residue of the cart, for that none of them
did move to the carters death.

Fitz. Cor. 401.
53 If a man ride into the water, to water a horse, Falling from a horse into
the water. A horse kills a man. From what time a Deodand shall have relation.
and then falls from the horse, and is drowned, the horse shall be a Deodand.
And if a horse, bull, boar, etc. do strike a man, Fitz. Cor. 298. Pl. Com. 260.
and after he dies of that blow, the horse, bull, boar, etc. shall be a
Deodand. And if the owner of the horse that did give the same mortal blow, do
alien the horse to another between the time of the stroke given, and the death
of the man, yet the King may seize that horse as forf. for a Deodand: for the
forfeiture shall have relation from the stroke given, which was the cause of
the man's death.

Fitz. Cor. 405.
54 If a beam whereupon a bell in a Church does hang, A beam of a bell of a
church.
do fall upon a man, and kill him, as well the beam as the bell shall be
Deodands, notwithstanding that they were before the goods of the Church, and in
a sort Deo datum. Fitz. Forf. 20.
But if a man be digging in a pit, mine, or quarrey of stone, marle, grauel,
sand, coal, or turfe, and a great heap of earth do fall upon him, and kill
him, the same heap of earth only shall be forf. to the K. and not the whole
pit, mine, or quarrey.

Fi. Cor. 389
55 If a man do fall from a bridge into the water, The wheel of a mill.
and is carried by the force of the stream under the wheel of a mill, and
thereby is slain, the wheel of the mill only shall be a Deodand. Kel. fol. 68
If timber, boords, wainscot, or other goods, do fall upon a man, and oppress
him to death, the same shall be a Deodand.

Fitz. Cor. 314.
56 If a man falls from his horse, and breaks his head, neck, back, Falling
from a horse against a trunk.
etc. against a trunck, piece of timber, or any other thing, whereby he dies,
the horse only shall be a Deodand, and not the trunck, timber, or etc.
because it did not move.

Fitz. Cor. 348.
57 If a man fall from a ricke or houell of corn, hay, Falling from a houel or
rick
or etc. whereby he is killed, the same houell or ricke shall be forfeit to
the king as a Deodand. And so Deodands may be of some things that a man does
move unto, or from them, as well as of those things which move to a man to kill
him.

58 If a man do fall from a ship that is sailing, and dye thereof, Falling from
a ship.
neither the merchandise, nor any other thing in the ship is the cause of his
death, but only the ship, Bracton. Britton.
and therefore the ship only shall be a Deodand. And that ship must be upon the
fresh water, for if it be upon the salt water, and one do fall from it, then
it shall be no Deodand.

Within the age of xiiij. years.
59 If he that does come to his death by any casualtie, Fitz. Cor. 389.
be within the age of xiiij. years, nothing shall be forf. to the king as a
Deodand for him, for the form of the Presentment is A. filius B. vltra aetatem
quatuor december annorum: sed quaere.

The Sheriff shall be charged with the Deodand.
60 The Sheriff of that county where a Deodand shall be found to be, Fitz.
Cor. 298.
shall be charged with the price of every Deodand, and shall answer for it, and
he shall levy the value thereof of the same town where it falls,
notwithstanding it was not committed to them to keep: And therefore when such
a mischance is found, the presenters thereof must also find and appraise the
Deodand.

A man found dead in the field.
61 If a man be found dead in the field, his apparel, Fitz. Indict. 27.
and the money which he has about him, shall be given to a Church, and shall be
distributed to the poor etc. and it shall not be taken as a Deodand, for it
does vary from the nature of a Deodand, being no cause of his death. But that
distribution shall be in case where the same man is unknown, for if he be
known, his money, apparel, and other things about him, shall be delivered to
his executors, or administrators, or to the Ordinary.

Felonies by the Common Law: Larcenie, Theft.
1 LArcenie is a fraudulent taking away of another ma^s goods, above the value
of twelve pence, What is Larcenie.
with intent to steal them, without the knowledge of him whose the goods be:
17. H. 8. 22.
For if the goods do not exceed the value of twelve pence, it is not felony,
but petit Larcenie, Fitz. Cor. 430. 451. 27. H. 8. 22.
for the which the offender shall be imprisoned, Petit larcenie
or otherwise punished by the discretion of the Justices before whom he is
arraigned, and also shall forfeit his goods, but he shall not be put to death.
And this intent of stealing to make it Larcenie, The intent of the stealing
must be at the time of the receipt of the goods.
ought to be at the time when the party does first come to the possession of
the goods, for if the party does come lawfully to the possession of the goods,
though he has an evil intent after, to convert them to his own use, it is
not felony in him: As if a man does deliver goods to another, who after does
convert them to his own use, it is not felony in him, 13. Ed. 4. 9
for no felony is intended to be done but with violence, and vi and armis, and
contra pacem, which cannot be supposed in this case, seeing they were delivered
unto him by the owner of them, and so he came lawfully to them.

2 If any person at several times do steal several parcels of goods, which
parcels being put together, Fitz. Cor. 415.
do amount above the value of xij. d. it is felony, Stealing goods at several
times, above the value of xij. d. Felony in several persons
and the offender shall be hanged. And if two, three, or more together, do
steal goods to the value of twelve pence, Fitz. Cor. 404.
this is felony in them all, for the felony in them is several, though the
stealing be joint.

Fitz. Cor. 451.
3 If any person be indicted for stealing of goods above the value of twelve
pence, and arraigned thereupon, The Jury may find an under value of the goods.
yet the Jury that passes upon his arraignement, may give a special verdict,
and say, that the goods did not exceed the value of eight pence, 18. Ass. p. 14
22. Ass. p. 39
or ten pence, etc. and then that offense shall be taken for petit Larcenie
only, and the offender shall be punished by imprisonment or etc. according to
the Justices discretion.

Taking away a Tauerners plate.
4 If a Tauerner do set a piece of silver plate before his guest to drink in,
and that guest carries away the piece of plate, this is felony in him: P. 13.
Ed. 4. 9
for he had not the possession of the same piece of plate, but the use thereof
only to drink in for that time: And the offender did fraudulently take the
plate away, with intent to steal it, without the knowledge of the owner
thereof. A man being lodged in an Inn, did rise in the night, 27. Ass. p. 39
and carry linen and other goods of the Inn keepers, out of his chamber
where he was lodged, into the hall, with intent to steal them, and then went
to the stable to seek his horse, and the Ostler took him therewith, this was
adjudged felony, and yet the goods were not carried out of the house of the
owner of them, but taken out of the place where he had assigned the^ to be. And
so it is if a man do take up another man's horse in his close, with intent to
steal him, and the owner, or some other, does apprehend the party with the
horse, before he is gone out of the close, this is felony.

A servant having the use of his masters goods, does steal them.
5 If a man commit money to his servant to keep, or plate to his Butler, 21. H.
4. 14. 3. H. 7. 12. 13. Ed. 4. 10.
or vessel to his Cook, to be used in his house, or a horse to his
Horsekeeper, to be kept and dressed, or sheep to his Shepherd, to be followed
and pastured, and the servant who has the same thus committed unto him, does
go away with them, this is felony by the common law in that servant: for
these goods were always in the Masters possession, and kept and used to the
Masters benefit. But if a man deliver a horse to his servant, to ride to the
Market, or money to carry to a Fair, or to pay to another, or to buy cattle,
or other things, and the servant does go away therewith, this is not felony:
for the Master delivered the same to his servant, and therefore he came
lawfully by the possession of it. See Felony by stat. 12.

One having the key of a chamber, does steal the goods.
6 If a man deliver to his servant, or another, the key of his chamber door,
13. Ed. 4. 9
and he to whom the key is delivered takes away the goods in the chamber,
above the value of xij. d. this is felony in him: for the goods were not
delivered, but did always remain in the possession of the owner of them.

A bargain with a carrier and not a delivery of goods.
7 If a man do bargain with a carrier, or other, 13. Ed. 4. 9.
to carry certain bales of wares, or other goods to a place prefixed, and he
takes them, and carries them to another place, and opens the bales, and
takes forth the goods within them feloniously, and conuerteth them to his own
use, this is felony in him: for that this is more than a delivery, viz. it is
a bargain, so that he receives the^ by the bargain agreed upon, and not by
the delivery, the which bargain he has not performed, but has taken the
goods of his own wrong: and in this case the property of these goods did
always remain in the first owner or deliverer.

A carrier steals the goods committed.
8 If one man do deliver goods to another to carry to a place appointed, 13.
Ed. 4. 10.
and he does carry them thither, and then he does take and steal them away,
this is felony in him: for the priuitie of the bailement, and the carriers
possession was determined, when he had carried them to the place appointed, and
therefore what he did after, was feloniously done, and of his own wrong.

13. E. 4. 9
9 If one man do deliver a Tun of Wine to another, A Carrier stealing part of
his charge.
to carry to a place agreed upon, if the Carrier sell or give away the same
whole Tun of wine, it is no Felony, for it was delivered unto him: but if he
take out twenty gallons, or other quantity above the value of twelve pence, or
etc. then it is Felony.

7. H. 6. 45 13. E. 4 10 5. H. 7. 18
10 If a man deliver goods to another man to keep, Felony for taking of his
own goods.
and after the owner who delivered them, does take them away feloniously, to
the intent to recover damages against the party to whom they were delivered by
an actio^ of Detinue, this is Felony in him that delivered those goods, and yet
the property of the goods was always in him that did steal them.

7. Ed. 4. 14 9. Ed. 4. 33
11 It is felony to steal the goods of a Church or Chapel, The goods of a
Church or Corporation.
or the goods of a Deane and Chapter, College, or other corporation, or the
goods of a corporation during the time of the vacation of the governor
thereof: and the indi^tment shall be, Quod bona domus and ecclesiae, etc.

27. Ass. p. 40
12 If a wife do steal goods by the compulsion of her husband, In what case a
married wife may commit felony, in what not.
this is not felony in her: and likewise it is, if she do it by the
commandment of her husband: Fit. cor. 160
and if the husband and wife together do steal goods, this shall be taken the
only act of the husband, and not felony in the wife: But a woman alone by her
self, her husband not being privy thereunto, may commit felony, and may be
principal or accessory: Fit. cor. 383
as if a married wife steal goods, or receive Felons or stolen goods into her
house, knowing them so to be, or lock them up in her chest or closet, her
husband not knowing thereof: Canuti lex 74.
Or if her husband as soon as he knows thereof, refuses her company, and
his own house, and makes his abode elsewhere, in which case the wives offense
shall not be imputed to her husband; or otherwise the law will impute the fault
to him, and not to her: for if the husband do commit felony, Britton.
and the wife knowing thereof, do receive him, and keep him company, Bracton,
de coron^, c. 32
she is not thereby accessory to the felony: for a wife cannot be accessory to
her husband, for that by the law of God she ought not to discover him or his
counsel: In^ leges 58
which law was first established by Inas, Inae lex.
King of the West Saxons. As the husband and wife stealing together the goods
of another, the whole offense shall be imputed to the husband, and it shall be
adjudged no felony in the wife: so if the wife do take the goods of her
husband, the law will not construe them to be stolen, Fit. cor. 455 Bro. cor. 242
nor charge her with felony therefore: A woman taking her husbands goods.
for at the time of the solemnization of their marriage in the face of the
Church, her husband endowed her with all his wordly goods, and so gave her a
kind of interest in them. And if the wife do take her husbands goods, and give
them to another, this is not felony in him to who^ she did give them: but if a
man do take away another man's wife and the husbands goods against the husbands
will, this is felony, S. Felony by stat. 31. That it is felony in the wife to
send any money, victual, etc. to her husband, being assembled with others in
rebellious manner contrary to the stat. of An. 1. M. 12.

Fi. N. B. 202 Bracton. 35. H. 6. 11
13 If an infant above the age of xij. In what case an infant may commit felony.
years do take any goods of another man's, above the value of xij. d. with
intent to steal them, it is felony in him: and some do affirm, that if an
infant of any age do take the goods of another, and that the Justices before
whom he is arraigned do think that he did it with a felonious intent, and
had discretion to understand what he did, and the offense, and the peril
thereof, that then it is felony in him. And yet Inas king of the West Saxons
ordained, Lex 7.
That a child of ten years of age should be condemned for Felony. An Idiot
or Lunaticke cannot commit Felony
But an Idiot or Lunaticke cannot commit Felony by the stealing of the goods of
another, Co. li. 4. 124
for that neither of them does know what he does.

Burning of a house or barn Felony.
14 Burning of a house willingly, and feloniously done, St. 3. B. 3. 15.
is Felony by the common Law. For the statute of West. 1. has ordained, That
they which be taken for the burning of a house feloniously done, be not
repleuisable. 11. H. 7. 1
And if one do burn a barn feloniously in the night, which is adioining to a
dwelling house, it is felony by the common law.

Felony in indictors to discover their counsel.
15 If an indictor, which (with others) has indicted other persons of Felony,
do therein discover the kings counsel, contrary to his oath, 27. Ass. p. 63
Fit. cor. 272
in publishing to others, that he and his companions have indicted such and
such persons, this discovery is felony. S. Treason 9.

Rescuing of a prisoner felony
16 If an offender be arrested or imprisoned for felony, or attainted of felony,
1. H. 7. 6
and a stranger will take him out of the possession of him that did arrest him
or keep him in prison, or will take a felon attainted and condemned to die out
of the possession of the Shirife, or his Officers, whereby he escapes, this
rescous is felony, as well in him that made the rescous, as in him that is
rescued. And if a stranger do rescue one that is indicted of felony, he may be
indicted and arraigned thereof presently, before the principal felony be tried,
1. E. 3. 17.
and if he be found guilty, he shall be perpetually imprisoned, or otherwise
punished at the K. pleasure, but shall not be hanged, because the principal
felon is not tried. S. Breaking of Prison 5. 10

Wilful escape is felony.
17 When a man does arrest another for felony, or any other crime, and after let
him go at liberty whither he will, 9. H. 4. 1
this letting him at liberty is a wilful escape: and if the arrest of him that
escaped, was for felony, it shall be adjudged felony in him that did let him
escape: and if it were for treason, then it shall be adjudged treason: and if
but for trespass, it shall be adjudged trespass.

Goods stolen from him that has the custody of them.
18 If a man do deliver cloth to a tailor to make him a garment, Kel. fol. 70.
and a felon does steal that cloth out of the possession of the tailor, the
offender may be indicted for the stealing of that cloth of the goods of the
tailor, for the tailor had possession of the cloth, and property also against
all others, saving against him that delivered it unto him.

Goods stolen from a felon
19 If a Felon do steal another man's horse, beast, or other goods, 13. Ed. 4.
3. 4. H. 7. 5
and another Felon does steal the same from him, the owner of the same horse,
beast, or other goods, may have an appeal against the first or second Felon at
his own choice, for the property of the goods did always remain in him: for no
felon can by the Law claim property in any stolen goods.

22. Ass. p. 91
20 Larceny cannot be committed by taking of savage beasts found in their
wildness, as Dear, Pigeons, Hawks, Of what things Larcenie may be committed,
of what not.
nor by taking of doves found out of a douecoat, nor by taking of fish in a
river: for such taking is not the stealing of the goods of another, seeing that
they be no man's goods, neither can any person claim property in them: neither
can felony be committed in the taking of Apes, Hounds, Thrushes, Squirels, or
such domestical things, kept only for pleasure, and that but of some special
persons, and profitable to none. Neither is the taking of Pheasants,
Partridges, or Conies, being fowls, and things of warrein felony. 18. Ed. 4. 8.
But it is felony, if a man do take out of another man's douecoat, young
pigeons, which can neither go nor fly, for that the property of them is
always in him who is owner of the douecoat. And likewise it is felony to take
young Goshawks, or young Herons breeding in a park, or several ground, which can
neither go nor fly out of their nests: Or to take fish out of a pond, or
trunk, or to take Swannes, Peacocks, Turkies, Cayons, Geese, or Ducks: Or to
take a Stag, 18. H. 8. 2
Hind, Bucke, or Do which is marked, and domestical, and made tame by the
owners diligence. St. 3. E. 1. 20.
And by the stat. of West. 1. it is felony to take a tame beast, or other
thing in a park, by manner of robbery. And it is felony to kill sheep, and
take their skins, or to pull wool from sheeps backs. So that in all the
cases aforesaid, the thing so taken or stolen do exceed the value of twelve
pence.

12. Ass. p. 32 18. H. 8. 2 Fit. cor. 256
21 The taking away of another man's goods, to make it felony, Felony must be of
personal goods, and not of things real.
must be of personal things, for if it be of things real, it is not felony:
As if one cut down a tree of another man's, and carries it away, or cutteth the
corn, or pulls the apples of another, and carries them away, or hides
them, it is no felony, because the tree etc. was parcel of the owners
inheritance, and not of his personal goods. But it is otherwise, if the owner
do cut down the tree, corn, etc. and another carries it away, then he
commits felony. The lead of a house.
And likewise if one do take and carry away the lead which covers a church,
or any man's house, it is no felony, for it is parcel of the church, or house,
and of the inheritance, and no personal goods. And so it is if an Indenture or
deed poll, A lease for years
purporting a lease for term of years, or a ward be taken, and carried away,
it is no felony: for a lease for the term of years, is a chattell real, and
so is a ward, A ward.
and not a chattell personal. 10. E. 4. 15.
And the same law is, if a writing, or box of writings, Writings.
for i^ it be imbeciled and carried away, it is no felony, because they
cannot be valued: and moreover, for that they concern inheritance, chattels
reals, or things in action: and the taking and carrying away of Treasure troue,
Wrecke of the sea, Treasure troue. Wrecke of the sea. Waife. Strey.
Waife or Stray, is not felony, for that the owner of them is unknown, and it
is uncertain whose they be, though Bracton terms the taking away of Treasure
troue, Bracton, de coron^, c. 3
Quasi crimen furti. But the offender who takes them away shall be punished by
fine and imprisonment: and if a lord do secretly take away his villains
goods, 22. Ass. p. 99 Fit. cor. 265
this is no felony in him, for he may sense and take them away all openly when
he will.

22 If an offense be made felony by statute, A felony made by statute, and
after repealed.
and then one does commit the same offense, Bro. cor. 202
and before he is arraigned thereof, that statute is repealed, by the repeal
of the stat. the felony is extinct, and the offender shall not be arraigned
thereof, nor punished by force of that statute for that fact.

Thiefe-boot.
23 Thiefe-boot is not when a man does take his own goods again, 42. Ass. p. 5
which were feloniously stolen from him: but Thiefe-boot is properly when a man
does take goods of a felon to favor him, Fit. cor. 353
the punishment of which Thiefe-boot is not as for a felony committed, but only
to be ransomed and imprisoned.

Felony committed in one kings reign, punished in another.
24 A man commits Felony in the time of one king, 1. Ed. 3. 3 Bro. Cor. 177.
may be arraigned for it after in the reign and time of another king: for the
same Law and form of government, to the which the offense is done, remains,
though the king dies.

Stolen goods carried into several counties
25 If a Felon steal a Horse, Beast, Sheep, or other goods in one county, Bro.
cor. 170 4. H. 7. 5 7. H. 4. 44
and does carry them into another county, it is felony in every county
whether he does carry or drive those goods: and the offender may be indicted or
appealed in any of those counties, be arraigned, and have his judgment there.
And if a felon do steal goods, commit murder, or do any other felony in
one county, and then fly into another county, and is taken there, 13. Ed. 4.
9.
he shall be imprisoned in the Jail of the county where he is taken, In what
jail a felon shall be imprisoned.
and after shall be removed by the kings Writ into the Jail of the county
where he committed the felony.

Breaking a house to take a felon.
26 A man may break a house to apprehend a felon, 13. E. 4. 9.
or him that is suspected of felony, for it is for the Commonwealth: and the
king has a kind of interest in felony, viz. to cause it to be punished: and
where the king has an interest, that writ or act is a Non omittas propter
aliquam libertatem: and so the liberty of a house will not defend him who has
committed, or is suspected to have committed felony against the K. But if it
were for debt, or trespass, it were otherwise, for that is only the interest of
one particular person.

What is Robbery.
27 Robbery in Latin called Rapina, is in his natural signification, when one
man takes any thing from the person of another against his will feloniously,
although the thing taken be but to the value of a penny, 22. Ass. p. 39 Fit.
cor. 115
for the which the offender shall be hanged. And yet in some case it may be
robbery, notwithstanding the party does not take it from the person of the
owner. As if a felon do take any of the goods of another openly in the place
where the owner is present, against his will, this is robbery, though the
offender do not take it from the person of the owner: for he does it with that
violent force, that the owner dares not, Robbery by threatening
or is not able to resist him. As if one do threaten another presently to
deliver his purse, or otherwise that he will kill him, by force of which
threats he does deliver his purse, this is robbery, as well as if the felon
had taken the purse from the person of the owner by violence, or strong hand:
Or if one or more do take up a horse out of the pasture of the owner, or drive
cattle out of his ground, the owner standing by and looking on the Felon at
the same time, Taking a man's money, but not putting him in fear.
this is robbery, so that the felon does make an assault upon the owner, or do
put him in fear. But if a felon do take money from the person of a man in the
high way, and not put his person in fear, it is no robbery, 5. El. Dyer 224.
but only felony, for the which the offender shall have his clergy.

44. E. 3. 14 4. H. 4. 3
28 If two, three, or more, do by force take a man, Robbery by taking an oath to
bring money.
and by threats compel him to swear to bring them a certain sum of money,
menacing him, that they will kill him if he do it not, by force whereof he does
bring them the same sum of money, this is robbery, for that he did first
swear, and after bring the money against his will: and yet by this enforced
oath he was not bound to bring them the said money, for that the oath was taken
for fear of death, and so against his will. And likewise, Robbery in taking
money given.
if felons come to a man's house in the night to rob him, and the possessor of
the house fearing that they will enter his house and rob him, does cast out
unto them money, or plate, which the felons do take, and then depart, this is
robbery, for it is in construction of the law taken from the person of a man,
and for fear.

9. E. 4. 26.
29 If one lie in the high way to rob passengers, Robbery in will, but not in
deed.
and draws his sword against a man that trauelleth the same way, and
commands him to deliver his purse, whereupon the same party encountreth him,
and is too strong for him, and apprehends him, or leuieth Huy and Cry, and
the offender is thereby taken, yet this is no Robbery, nor Felony, for there
was no act done, though there was an intent and will to rob, Quia voluntas
non reputabitur pro facto.

30 Burglary is, What is Burglary
when one or more persons do in the time of peace break a house, a Church, a
Wall, a Tower, or Gatehouse in the night, with a felonious intent to rob,
kill a man, or commit some other Felony, for the which Burglarie the offender
shall be hanged, Fit. cor. 264 22. Ass. p. 95
though he take nothing away. But that breaking of the house must be to commit
some Felony: For if the offender be indicted for the breaking of a house to
beat some person, that is but Trespass, 13. H. 4. 8
but if it be to kill another, then it is Felony. And if a man be indicted for
the breaking of a Close, to kill or rob another, it is not Burglarie.

1. M. Die. 99.
31 If a man do break a house, and do not enter into it, Breaking a house,
but not entering.
then it is no Burglarie: for a man was indicted, Quod burglariter fregit
ecclesiam in nocte and intrauit, ad depraedandum bona parochianorum in eadem
existentur sed nihil abstulit: and this was adjudged Burglary, for that the
party indicted did enter.

32 Burglary cannot be committed in the day, but in the night: No Burglary in
the day.
for all the indictments of Burglary be Noctanter fregit: St. 39. El. 15.
for though by the statute of 39. Eliz. the benefit of Clergy is taken away
from any person, convicted for the felonious taking away in the day time of any
money or goods, of the value of five shillings, or upwards, in any dwelling
house or out-house, although no person shall be in the same at the time of the
said felony committed, and so that offenceis made as penal as Burglary, by the
loss of the benefit of Clergy, yet is it not Burglary, for it may be
committed in the day time, and the penalty of loosing of his Clergy is not
inflicted, unless the money or goods taken away be of the value of five
shillings, or upwards.

Breaking a dwelling house where no person is
33 If a man has a mansion house, Co. li. 4. 40.
and he and his family does upon some cause go forth of the house, and in the
mean time one does come, and break the house in the night, to commit felony,
this is Burglary: For although the owner, nor any of his family were in the
house, yet it is his mansion house: for the words of an appeal or indictment
of Burglarie be, Domum mansionalem ipsius A. B. fregit. And in like sort, if a
man have two houses, and does inhabit sometime in one of them, and some other
time in another, and has a family or servants in them both, and in the night,
when the servants be out of the house, felons do break the house, this is
Burglarie, for that the house is broken.

Felonies by Statute.
ANd now having expressed which be felonies by the common Law, it rests that
I declare which be felonies by Statute, with the reasons and causes why the
same statutes were made, so far as I may be warranted by the same statutes.
And as in Treasons I began with those Treasons which did concern the K. and
his chief magistrates of justice: So in reporting of such laws and statutes
as have been made for the supply of some defects at the common Law, I will
begin with a statute which indeuoreth to restrain such as practice or
confederat to destroy the king, or his chief officers attending on his person
or estate.

1 For as much as by quarrels made to such as have been in great authority,
office, and of counsel with the kings of this Realm, has ensued the
destruction of the kings, and thereby the undoing of this Realm: so as it has
appeared evidently, when compassing of the death of such as were of the kings
true subjects was had, the destruction of the prince was imagined thereby, and
for the most part it has grown, and been occasion by envy and malice of
the kings own household servants. And for that by the laws of this land, if
actual deeds were not had, there was no remedy for such false compassings,
imaginations, and confederacies had against any lord, or any of the kings
Council, or any of the kings great Officers in his household, or Steward,
Treasurer, Controller, and so great inconveniences did ensue, because such
ungodly demeanor was not straightly punished, before that an actual deed was
done: for the remedy whereof, by a statute made An. 3. H. 7. 14. Conspiring to
destroy the king, or any lord etc.
it was ordained, St. 3. H. 7. 14.
That the Steward, Treasurer, and Controller of the kings house for the time
being, or one of them, shall have full authority and power to enquire by xij.
sad men and discreet persons of the Check Roll of the kings honorable
household, if any servant, admitted to be his servant sworn, and his name put
into the Check Roll of household, whatsoever he be, serving in any manner office
or room, reputed, had, and taken under the estate of a lord, make any
confederacies, compassings, conspiracies, or imaginations, with any person or
persons to destroy or murder the king, or any lord of this realm, or any other
person sworn to the kings Council, Steward, Treasurer, Controller of the
kings house: that if it be found before the said steward for the time being by
the said xij. men, that any such of the kings servants, as is abouesaid, has
confedered, compassed, conspired, or imagined, as abouesaid, that he so found
by the inquiry, be put thereupon to answer. And the Steward, Treasurer, and
Controller, or two of them have power to determine the same matter according to
the law. And if he be put in trial, that then it be tried by other xij. sad
men of the same household. Challenge.
And that such misdoers have no challenge but for malice. And if such misdoers
be found guilty by confession, or otherwise, that the said offense be judged
felony, and they to have judgment and execution as felons attainted ought to
have by the common law.

2 For that unlawful and forcible violence, and also detestable aduowtrie were
committed in the rauishment of women, Rauishment of a woman
therefore by the stat. of West. 2. St. 13. E. 1. 33
it was enacted, That if any man from henceforth ravish any woman married, maid,
or other woman, where she does not consent neither before nor after, he shall
have judgment of life and of member: and likewise where a man rauisheth a
woman married, lady, damsel, or other with force, although she consent
afterward, he shall have such judgment as before is said, if he be attainted at
the K. suit: for the K. shall have the suit.

Abusing a woman under x. years of age
3 By a stat. made An. 18. El. it was ordained, St. 18. El. 6
That if any person shall unlawfully and carnally know and abuse any woman
child under the age of x. years, every such unlawful and carnal knowledge
shall be felony, and the offender thereof being duly convicted, shall suffer as a
felon, without allowance of clergy.

The forf. for consenting to a rape.
4 By a statute made An. 6. R. 2. 6. it was ordained, St. 6. R. 2. 6.
That wheresoever and whenever ladies daughters, and other women be ravished,
and after such rape do consent to such rauishers, that as well the rauishers as
they that be ravished, and every of them, be from henceforth disabled, and by
the same deed unabled to have or challenge heritage, dower, or joint feoffeme^t
after the death of their husbands, and ancestors: and that incontinently in
this case the next of the blood of those rauishers, or of them that be
ravished, to whom such heritage, dower, or joint feoffeme^t ought to reuert,
remain, or fall after the death of the rauisher, or of her that is so
ravished, shall have title incontinently, that is to say, after the rape to
enter upon the rauisher, or her that is ravished, and their assigns, and land
tenants, in the same heritage, dower, or joint feoffement, and the same to hold
in a state of heritage: and that the husbands of such women, if they have
husbands, or if they have no husbands in life, that then the fathers or other
next of their blood have from henceforth the suit to pursue, and may sue
against the same offenders and rauishors in this behalf. And to have them
thereof convict of life and of member, although the same women after such rape
do consent to the said rauishers. And further it is accorded, that the def. in
this case shall not be received to wage battle, but that the truth of the
matter be thereof tried by inquisition of the country, saving always to our
soueraign lord the K. and to other lords of the said realm, al their escheats
of the said rauishers, if peradventure they be thereof convict.

A woman ravished con^eiued with child
Britton, Britton.
if a woman at the time of the supposed rape do conceive with child by the
rauisher, this is no rape, because a woman cannot conceive with child, if she
do not consent.

It is a good plea in an appeal of Rape, to say, that before the rauishment
Bracton.
he kept and used the plaintiff as a Concubine: Or to plead, A Concubine.
that though he lay with her, yet he did not carnally know her, for that is the
force of the declaration in an appeal of Rape.

T. 9. E. 4. 26
If a man shall be charged with a Rape by the way of indictme^t, or otherwise,
(Rapuit) and not by any other words, This word (Rapuit) necessary in an
indictment.
notwithstanding they do amount to as much as this word (Rapuit) does as
carnaliter cognouit, or such like. S. Appeals 81. 85.

St. 3. H. 7. 2
5 By a statute made Anno 3. H. 7. it is ordained, Taking a woman against her
will.
That if any person or persons shall take any maid, widow, or wife, which has
any lands or goods, or is heir apparent to her auncestor against her will
unlawfully, such taking, procuring, and abbetting to the same, and also
receiving wittingly the same woman so taken against her will, and knowing the
same, shall be felony: and such misdoers, takers, and procurers to the same, and
receivers, knowing the offense in form aforesaid, shall be reputed and judged as
principal felons. But this act does not extend to any person taking any woman,
only clayming her as his ward or bondwoman. St. 39. El. 9.
And by a statute made An. 39. El. it was enacted, That all and every such
person and persons as shall be convicted or attainted for any offense made
felony by the said act of 3. H. 7. or which shall be indicted or arraigned, of,
or for any such offense, and stand mute, or make no direct answer, or challenge
peremptorily above the number of twenty, shall in every such case loose his and
their benefit of clergy, No Clergy allowed.
and shall suffer pains of death without clergy: any former law etc.
notwithstanding. Provided always, That this act shall not extend to take away
the benefit of Clergy, but only from such person and persons as hereafter
shall be principals, or procurers, or accessaries before such offense committed.

St. 8. El. 3.
6 By a statute made Ann^ 8. El. it was enacted, Transporting of sheep.
That no person or persons shall bring, deliver, send, receive, or take, or
procure to be brought, delivered, sent, or received into any ship, or
bottom, any Rams, Sheep, or Lambs, or any other kind of Sheep, being
alive, to be conveyed out of any of the Queens dominions, upon pain, that
every such person, his aidors, abbettors, procurors, and comforters shall for
his first offense forfeit all his goods for ever to the Queen and Informer,
that will sue for them in any Court of Record, wherein no W. E. P. etc. And
further, every such offender shall suffer imprisonment one whole year, without
bail or mainprise, and at the years end shall in some market Town, in the
fullness of the Market, on the Market day, have his left hand cut off, and that
to be nailed upon the openest place of such Market. The second offense felony.
And every person eftsoons offending against this statute, shall be judged a
felon, and shall suffer death as in cases of felony. But this act shall not
extend to any corruption of blood, or be prejudicial to any women claiming
dower by or from any such offender. And the Justices of Oyer and Determiner,
Just. of Jail delivery, and I. of P. in every County and Shire within this
Realm of England and Wales, and other the Qu. Dominions, shall have full power
and authority by virtue of this Act to enquire of every offender and
offenders, contrary to the form and effect of this act: and to hear and
determine every offense and offenses committed and done contrary to the form
and effect of the same, according to the course of the laws of this Realm.

7 For as much as diverse evil disposed persons, being married, did run out of
one country into another, or into places where they were not known, and there
became to be married, having another husband or wife living, to the great
dishonor of God, and utter undoing of diverse honest men's children, and others:
therefore by a stat. made an^ 1. Felony in marying until the former husband or
wife be dead.
Iac. it was enacted, St. 1. Iac. 11
That if any person or persons within his Ma. dominions of England and Wales,
being married, or which hereafter shall marry, do marry any person or persons,
the former husband or wife being alive, that then every such offense shall be
felony, and the party and parties so offending shall receive such and the like
proceeding, trial, and execution in such county, where such person or persons
shall be apprehended, as if the offense had bin committed in such county where
such person or persons shall be taken or apprehended. Provided always, that
this act shall not extend to any person or persons, whose husband or wife
shall be continually remaining beyond the seas by the space of 7. years
together, or whose husband or wife shall absent him or her self the one from
the other by the space of 7. years together, in any parts within his Ma.
Dominions, the one of the^ not knowing the other to be living within that time.
Provided also, that this act shall not extend to any person or persons that are
or shall be at the time of such marriage divorced by any sentence had or hereafter
to be had in the Ecclesiastical Court, or to any person or persons, where the
former marriage has bin or hereafter shall be by sentence in the Ecclesiastical
court declared to be void, and of no effect: Nor to any person or persons, for,
or by reason of any former marriage had or made, or hereafter to be had or made
within age of consent. No corruption of blood, or disheritance
Provided also, that no attainder for this offense made felony by this act,
shall make or work any corruption of blood, loss of dower, or disinherison of
heir or heirs.

Infected with the plague.
8 By the stat. made an^ 1. Iac. it was ordained, St. 1. Iac. 31
That if any person or persons infected with ye plague shall be by the Mayor,
Bailifes, Constables, or other head officers of any City, Borough, Town
corporat, privileged place, or Market Town, or by any I. of Peace, Constable,
Headborough, or other officer of the county (if any such infection be out of
any City, Borough, Town corporate, privileged place, or market town)
commanded or appointed to keep his or their house, for avoiding of further
infection, and shall notwithstanding contrary to such commandment wilfully and
contemptuously go abroad, and shall converse in company, having any infectious
sore upon him uncured, then such person and persons shall be taken and adjudged a
felon, and suffer death as in case of Felony. But if such person shall not have
such sore found about him, the^ for his said offense to be punished as a
vagabond should or ought to be by the stat. made 39. El. 4. for the punishment
of vagabonds, and further to be bound to his or their good behauior for one
year: but no attainder of felony by virtue of this act shall extend to any
attainder or corruption of blood, No corruption of blood, or forfeiture.
or forf. of any goods, chattels, lands, tenements, or hereditaments.

St. 35. El. 1 St. 2. Iac. 25
9 By the stat. made An^ 35. El. it was ordained, That if any such offender,
Abiuration by a Recusant.
which by the tenor and effect of the said act (entitled an act to retain the
Queens subjects in due obedience) is to be abiured, shall refuse to make such
abiuration, as by the said stat. is appointed: Or after such abiuration shall
not go to such haven, and within such time as is appointed, and from thence
depart forth of the realm, according to the said statute: Or after his
departure shall return and come again into any of the Q. Realms or
Dominions, without her special license in that behalf first had and obtained:
Then in every such case the person so offending shall be adjudged a felon, and
suffer as in case of felony, without benefit of clergy. Provided, that the wife
of such offender, by force of this act, shall not loose her dower: nor that any
corruption of blood shall grow, or be by reason of any offense mentioned in this
act. But the heir of such offender by force of this act, shall and may after
the death of every such offender have and enjoy the lands, tenements, and
hereditaments of such offender, as if this act had not bin made. Provided, that
no Popish Recusant or feme covert shall be bound to abjure by virtue of this
act.

St. 35. El. 2.
10 By a stat. made an. 35. El. it was enacted, That any such offender,
Abiuration of a Recusant.
which by the tenor and intent of the act made to restrain Popi^h Recusants to
some certain place or abode, is to be abiured, shall refuse to make such
abiuration, or after such abiuration made shall not go to such haven, and wi^h^n
such time as is appointed, and from thence depart out of the realm according
to this act: Or after such his departure shall return or come again into any
of her majesty's realms or dominions, without her majesty's special license,
in that behalf first had and obtained: then in every such case the person so
off^nding shall be adjudged a felon, and shall suffer and loose as in case of
felony, without benefit of Clergy.

St. 25. H. 8 6 St. 5. Eli. 17.
11 By a stat. ordained an^ 25. H. 8. and made perpetual an. 5. El. it was
enacted, That the detestable and abominable vice of Buggery Buggery
committed with mankind, or beast, shall be adjudged felony, and such order and
form of proce^ therein shall be used against the offenders as in cases of felony
at the common law. And the offenders being thereof convict by verdict,
confession, or ^^iclary, shall suffer such pains of death, and losses, and
penalt^es of goods, catte^s, debts, lands, teneme^ts and hereditaments, as
felons be accustomed to do according to the order of the common law of this
Realm. And no person offending in such offense, No clergy
shall be admitted to his Clergy. And I. of Peace shall have authority within
ye limits of their jurisdiction and commission to hear and determine the same,
as they have in cases of other felonies.

St. 21. H. 8. 7 St. 5. El. 10.
12 By a statute provided An. 21. H. 8. and made perpetual An^ 5. Servants
imbesiling their masters goods.
El. it was established, That all and singular servants, to whom any caskets,
jewels, money, goods, or cattels, by his or their master or mistress, shall be
delivered to keep: if any such servant or servants withdraw him or them from
their said master or mistress, and go away with the said caskets, jewels,
money, or cattels, or any part thereof, to the intent to steal the same, and
defraud his or their said master or mistress thereof, contrary to the trust
and confidence in him or the^ put by his or their master or mistress: or else
being in the service of his said master or mistress, without assent or
commandment of his master or mistress he imbesill the same caskets, jewels,
money, goods, or cattels, or any part thereof, or otherwise convert the same to
his own use, with like purpose to steal it: if the said caskets, jewels,
money, goods, or cattels that any such servant shall go away with, or which he
shall imbesill with purpose to steal it, as is aforesaid, be of the value of
forty shillings, or above: then the same false fraudulent and untrue act shall be
from henceforth deemed and adjudged felony, and he or they so offending shall be
punished as other felons be punished for felonies committed by the course of
the common law. Provided always, that this act, or any thing therein
contained, shall not in any wise extend, or be prejudicial to any appre^tice
or appre^tices, nor to any person being within the age of xviij years, going
away with his or their masters goods, or jewels, or otherwise, converting the
same to his or their own uses, during the time of their apprentiship, or being
within the said age of xviij. years, but that every apprentice or apprentices,
such person or persons being within the said age, doing or offending contrary
to this act, shall be and stand in like case, as they and every of them were
before the making of this act.

M. 25. H. 8. Dyer 5.
l. and the servant does receive the money of the obligor, Receiving money upon
an obligation.
and the^ goes away with the same, or does convert it to his own use, this is
not felony within the compass of the foresaid stat. of 21. H. 8. for the
master did not deliver any goods to his servant in this case, but an
obligation, which is not valuable, but a thing in action: and moreover, the
money was not delivered to the servant by the hands of his master, but by the
obligor. But if one of a man's servants does deliver to another of his servants
goods of the masters, being above the value of 40. s^. and he does go away with
it, or convert it to his own use, this is felony.

M. 25. H. 8. Dyer 5.
to sell at a fair, Receiving money for wares.
or a market, and he sells them, and receives the money, and then goes away
with the money, or conuerteth it to his own use, this is not felony by the stat.
of 21. H. 8. for he had not the money by the delivery of his master, neither
went he away with the thing that was delivered unto him.

Servants imbesilling their masters goods after his death
13 By the stat. of An^ 31. H. 6. it was ordained, St. 31. H. 6. 1
That executors shall have a writ out of the Chancery, by the advice of the
Chauncelor, two chief Justices, and the chief Baron of the Exchequer, with
two proclamations, returnable in the K. Bench against such household servants of
the Testator, as have spoiled or eloigned the goods of their master, after ye
death of the Testator. And if the writ be returned served, and the defendants
make default, they shall be attainted of felony: and if they appear, they
shall be committed to prison, there to remain at the discretion of the Justices,
until the defendants do answer unto the said executors in such actions which
the said executors will declare against them, or any of them, by bill or writ,
for the riot, taking, and spoiling aforesaid, and that the same actions be
determined, so that such actions be pursued with effect, and not slackly to
retain the same persons in prison. And if the same persons be enlarged out of
prison by the said Justices, then they shall find sufficient sureties to the
executors by recognizance to keep such days as they shall have assigned by the
Court. And if the keeper of the prison, whereunto they shall be committed, do
let them go at large, without order of the Justices, then the said keeper shall
forfeit xl. l. to the executors. No protection shall lie in any action upon
this statute.

14 By the stat. of An^ 14. E. 3. it was accorded, Enforcing a prisoner to
become an approuer.
That shirifes shall have the keeping of gaoles, St. 14. E. 3. 10
as they had wont to have, and put in such keepers for whom they will answer.
And if any keeper of prison or under keeper shall by too great dures of
imprisonment and pain cause any prisoner which he has in his custody, to
become an approuer against his will, and is thereof attainted, he shall be
adjudged a felon.

15 By the stat. of an^ 5. El. it was enacted, Egyptians
that every person and persons which shall be seen or found within this realm
of England or Wales, St. 5. El. 20.
in any company of vagabonds, commonly called, or calling themselves Egyptians,
or counterfeiting, transforming, or disguising themselves by their apparel,
speech, or other behavior, like unto such vagabonds, commonly called, or
calling themselves Egyptians, and so shall or do remain and continue in the
same by the space of one month: then the same person or persons shall be
deemed and judged a felon and felons, and shall suffer pains of death, loss
of lands and goods, as in cases of felony by the order of the common laws of
this realm, Trial
and shall upon trial of them, or any of them, be tried in the country, and
by the inhabitants of the county, or place, where he or they shall be
apprehended, or taken, and not per medietatem linguae, No Clergy
and shall loose the privilege and benefit of Sanctuary and Clergy. Provided,
Xiiij. years
That this act shall not in any wise extend to any child or children, being
within the age of 14. years.

St. 8. H. 6. 12.
16 By the stat. made An. 8. H. 6. it was ordained, That if any Record,
Imbesilling of Records
or parcel of the same, Writ, Return, Pannell, Process, Warrant of Attorney in
the Courts of Chauncery, Exchequer, the one Bench, or the other, or the
Treasury, be willingly stolen, taken away, withdrawn, or avoided by any
Clerk, or other person, by cause whereof any judgment be reuersed, such
stealer, taker away, withdrawer, or auoider, their procurors, counselors, and
abbettors, being thereof indicted, and by process thereupon made, thereof duly
convict by their own confession, or by enquest to be taken of lawful men
(whereof the one half shall be of the men of any court of the same courts, and
the other half of other) shall be judged for felons, and shall incur the pain
of felony. And the Judges of the said Courts, of the one Bench, or of the
other, have power to hear and determine such defaults before them, and thereof
to make due punishment, as is aforesaid.

2. R. 3. 10 Br. Cor. 173
If a Judge do file an indictment with other indictments, The penalties of
Judges or officers abusing Records
which was not found by the Jury, that did find other indictments: Or if he do
imbesill or raze a Record, or such like, this is but misprision in the Judge,
but this is felony in another person who is no Judge: and the Judge shall be
indicted and arraigned thereof, and shall make a fine, and loose his office for
this misprision. And if the steward of a Liberty does arraigne a man by the
color of Infangtheefe, and does adiudge him to death, the liberty shall be
seized therefore: but no punishment shall be inflicted upon the steward, for he
did it by color of the liberty, and so no felony: and if a man do sue another
by an action of debt to ye exigent, whereupon he is outlawed, and another man
does raze ye original, and the 3. capias, and the exigent, and makes part in
London, and the residue in Middlesex, and does write in them W. B. for I.B.
this is felony by the foresaid statute of 8. H. 6. which is, if a Record in
either of the Benches, or in the Exchequer, be imbesiled, carried away,
withdrawn, or avoided, whereby a judgment shall be reuersed, that then it shall be
inquired by clerks of those Courts, and others, and it shall be adjudged by the
Justices of the same court, and it shall be ordained as felony: and this
rasure does avoid the whole Record, so that it cannot be redressed by error,
and it is a greater offense then if part only had bin avoided: 2. R. 3. 10
and all which be agreeing thereunto be felons.

17 By a stat. made an. 5. H. 4. St. 5. H. 4. 5.
it was enacted, That the offenders which do cut the tongues, or put out the
eyes Cutting of tongues, putting out of eyes.
of any of the K. liege people, and that duly proved, and found that such deed
was done of malice pretenced, shall incur the pain of felony.

18 By the stat. made anno 5. H. 4. it was ordained, St. 5. H. 4. 4.
That none shall use to multiply gold or silver, nor practice the art of
Multiplication: Multiplication.
and if any do, he shall incur the pain of felony in this case.

19 By the Statute made Anno 34. Ed. 3. and 37. Ed. 3. St. 34. E. 3.22 St. 37.
E. 3.19
it was enacted, Withholding of a hawk.
That whosoever finde^h a falkon, Tarcelet, Laner, Laneret, or other Hawke,
which the owner thereof has lost, shall immediately bring the same to the
Sheriff of the County, which shall make proclamation in all the good Towns of
the County, that he h^th such a hawke in his custody, and if the owner which
lost the hawke, or any of his servants come to challenge it, and proou^th that
it is his Masters, he shall pay for the costs, and have it. And if none do
come within four months to challenge it, th^n the Sheriff shall have the
hawke, agreeing with him that took it up, if he be a simple man, and if he
be a Gentleman, and of estate to have a hawke, then the Sheriff shall deliver
him the hawke, taking reasonable allowance for the keeping thereof. And
whosoever takes a hawke, and the same concealeth from the owner, or from his
falkoners, or tak^th away a hawke from the owner, or steals a hawke and
carries it away, not observing the foresaid ordinances, and is thereof
attainted, shall be used as a felon, which has stolen a horse or other thing.

Co^gregatio^s by masons.
20 By a Statute made Anno 3. H. 6. St. 3. H. 6. ^.
it was ordained, That Congregations and Confederacies shall not be holden by
Masons in their general assemblies. And if any such be made, they that cause
such Chapters, and Congregations to be assembled and holden, if they be thereof
convict, shall be adjudged for felons. And all other Masons that come to such
Chapters and Congregations, shall be punished by imprisonment of their bodies,
and make fine and ransom at the Kings will.

A Soldier departing from his captain.
21 By the statutes of Anno 18. H. 6. Anno 2. E. 6. 2. and Anno 4. and 5. P. and
M. St. 1^. H. 6. 19 St. 2 E. 6. 2. St 4 and 5. P. and M. 3.
it was enacted, That if any Soldier, man of Arms, or Archer, which has
taken parcel of his wages of his captain, has mustred, and is entered of
record the Kings soldier, does not pass ye sea, or go with his captain,
(except notorious sickness or impediment by Gods visitation does stay him,
which he shall immediately certify his captain, and repay his money) or else
being in the enemies country in garrison, or elsewhere in the K. service,
where he is appointed to serve, does depart without license of the kings
Lieutenant, Deputy, high Admiral, Vice Admiral, Warden, Captain, or in their
absence of their Deputies, then he shall be taken, judged, and executed as a
Felon, without having any advantage of Clergy or Sanctuary. And Justices of
Peace shall have authority to enquire thereof, and to hear and determine the
same, as they do other felonies committed in that Shire where such Souldior
shall be taken. And by a branch of a statute wade an^ 5. Eli. it was ordained,
That the foresaid statute of 18. H. 6. in all pains, St. 5. El. 5. 2. l^e. 25.
forfeitures, and other things, did, does, and hereafter shall extend, as well
to all and every mariner and gunner, A Mariner or Gunner.
having taken, or which hereafter shall take pressed or wages, to serve the king,
his heirs or successors, to all intents and purposes, as the same did or does
to any soldier. S. the statutes of 7. H. 7. 1. and 3. H. 8. 5. made to the
like effect. St. 7. H. 7. 1. 3. H. 8. 5 Co. li. 6. 27.
Et Quaere whether the first stat. which were made for covenant soldiers, or
the later stat. which were ordained for pressed Soldiers, be, or ought to be
put in execution: wherein have respect to the meaning of the makers of the
foresaid stat. of an. 5. El. 5.

22 By the statute of Anno 27. El. 2. St. 27. El. 2.
it was ordained, Receiving or relieuing of Jesuits.
That every person which shall wittingly and willingly receive, relieve,
comfort, aid, or maintain any Jesuit, Seminary priest, or other priest, made
out of the realm of England, Deacon, or religious or Ecclesiastical person,
being at liberty, or out of hold, knowing him to be a Jesuit, Seminary priest,
or other such priest, Deacon, or religious or ecclesiastical person, shall for
such offense be adjudged a felon, without benefit of clergy, and suffer death,
loose, and forf. as one attainted of felony. No Clergy


St. 28. E. 1. 2
23 By the statute made An. 28. Ed. 1. it was established, That if any make
purueyance or prizes without warrant, Purueiance without warrant.
and do carry them away, against the will of the owner, he shall be arrested by
the town where the prizes were made, and carried to the next Jail, and if he
be thereof attainted, he shall be punished as a felon, if the value of the goods
do so require.

St. 25. E. 3. 15
24 By the Statute of Anno 25. Edw. 3. it was ordained, That no Purueyor of the
kings shall take any more Sheep Purueying of sheep.
before sheare time, but so many as may reasonably suffice until sheare time,
and after that time they shall take as many shorn Sheep, and not other, as
may reasonably suffice for the time to come. And if any Taker, Purueyor, or
Buyer, take any sheep with their Wool betwixt Easter and the Feast of Saint
John Baptist, praise them at a small price, and send them to his house to be
shorn to his own profit, and thereof be attainted at the suit of the king,
or the party, he shall be used as a Thief or a Robber.

St. 5. Ed. 3. 2. 10. Ed. 3. 1. 25. E. 3. 1. 36. Ed. 3. 2.
25 By the Statutes made Anno 5. Edw. 3. 10. Edw. 3. 25. Ed. 3. 36. Ed. 3. it
was enacted, That the Corn, Cattle, and other victual, Appraisement of
things purueied.
and things which shall be taken for the kings house, shall be taken in such place
where most plenty is, and in convenient time, and no more then is needful for
that season. And if the purueyor or buyer cannot well agree with the seller for
that which he shall need, then the same shall be praised at the very value by
the Constables and four honest men of the Towns where such taking is,
thereunto sworn: and the praysers shall not be constrained by menace, threats,
duresse, or other villainy, to set any price other then their oaths do
require, but as such things do commonly go in the next Markets. And
Indentures or Tallies shall be presently made betwixt the purueyors and those
from whom the goods be taken, in the presence of the said Constables, and
four praysers, containing the quantity of their takings, the price, and of
what persons, and they shall be sealed with the purueyors seals, by which
Indentures or Tallies satisfaction shall be made to them, from whom such goods be
taken. And if any Taker or Purueyor do make his provision in other manner then
by four discreet men of the Town, or do not deliver Tallies or Indentures
with his seal, as is beforesaid, he shall be incontinently arrested by the
Town where such purueyance was made, and brought to the next Jail: and if he
be thereof attainted, he shall be punished as a felon, if the quantity of the
goods do require.

Taking of carriage.
26 By the Statute of Anno 36. Edw. 3. St. 36. E. 3. 2
it was enacted, That if any Taker or Buyer, after Commission to him directed,
does puruey, levy, or take any carriage in other manner then is comprised in
his Commission, it is Felony.

And by the Statute of Anno 36. Edw. 3. St. 36. E. 3. 4.
it was ordained, That Commissions shall be awarded, to enquire of Purueyors
behauior: and if it be found at the king, or parties suit, by evidence of the
indictors, or other manner, that the Purueyors have taken more then they have
delivered to the kings house, and that they have not paid for that which they
have taken, it is felony, and they shall be punished as felons.

Forging of evidence.
27 By the Statute of Anno 5. Eliz. it was ordained, St. 5. El. 14
That it shall be Felony, without benefit of Clergy or Sanctuary, eftsoons
to commit any of the offenses prohibited by the said Statute, ordained against
the forging of Evidences and Writings, being once before convicted or condemned
of any of the said offenses by any of the ways or means limited by the said
statute. But there shall be no corruption of blood, or forfeiture of dower, by
reason of this felony. S. Forgerie 3. etc.

A Rogue banished.
28 By the Statute of Anno 39. Eliz. it was enacted, St. 39. El. 4.
That it shall be felony for any Rogue, being by the Justices of Peace
adjudged incorrigible and dangerous, and therefore banished this Realm by the
Justices, in their Quarter Sessions, to return again into any part of this
Realm, or Wales, without license or warrant so to do, which felony shall be
heard and determined in that County of this Realm, or Wales, in which the
offender shall be apprehended.

St. 1. Iae. 7.
And by the statute made Anno 1. Jacob. such Rogues as shall be adjudged (as
aforesaid) incorrigible or dangerous, Rogues incorrigible.
shall also by the judgment of the same Justices, or the more part of them
then present, in their open Sessions of the Peace, be branded in the left
shoulder with an hot burning iron, of the breadth of an English shilling, with
a great Roman R. upon the iron, and the branding upon the shoulder to be so
thoroughly burnt and set on upon the skin and flesh, that the letter R. be
seen, and remain for a perpetual mark upon such Rogue, during his or her
life, and thereupon be sent by the same Justices to the place of his dwelling,
if he have any: if not, then to the place where he last dwelt by the space of a
year, if that can be known by his confession, or otherwise: and if that
cannot be known, then to the place of his birth, there to be placed in labor,
as a true subject ought to be: and after such punishment of any such Rogue, as
aforesaid, if any Rogue so punished shall offend again in begging or
wandering, contrary to the said stat. of 39. El. 4. or this present act, Lex
Alure. di Regis.
Then in every such case the party offending shall be judged a felon, and shall
suffer as in cases of felony, without benefit of clergy, the same felony to be
tried in the county where any such offender shall be taken.

St. 1. Iac. 12
29 By the statute of Anno 1. Jacob. 12. it was enacted, Coniuration, witchcraft.
That if any person or persons shall use, practice, or exercise any invocation
or coniuration of any evil and wicked spirit, or shall consult, covenant with,
entertain, employ, feed, or reward any evil or wicked spirit, to or for any
intent or purpose, or take up any dead man, woman, or child, out of his, her,
or their grave, or any other place, where the dead body rests, or the skin,
bone, or any other part of any dead person, to be employed or used in any
manner of Witchcraft, Sorcerie, Charm, or Enchantment, or shall use, practice,
or exercise any Witchcraft, Enchantment, Charm, or Sorcery, whereby any person
shall be killed, destroyed, wasted, consumed, pyned, or lamed in his or her
body, Lex Athelstani 6.
or any part thereof: then every such offender, or offenders, their aydors,
abbettors, and counselors being of any the said offenses duly and lawfully
convicted and attainted, shall suffer pains of death as a felon or felons, and
shall loose the privilege and benefit of Clergy and Sanctuary.

If any person or persons shall take upon him, or them by witchcraft, Finding
of treasure.
enchantment, charm, or sorcerie, to tell, or declare in what place any
treasure of gold or silver, should, or might be found, or had in the earth, or
other secret places: Or where goods, or things lost or stolen should be found,
or become: Declaring where goods lost should be found. Provoking to love.
Destroying of any person or cattle.
Or to the intent to provoke any person to unlawful love: Or whereby any
cattle, or goods of any person shall be destroyed, wasted, or impaired, or to
hurt or destroy any person in his or her body, although the same be not
effected and done: Then all and every such person and persons so offending, and
being thereof lawfully convicted, shall for the said offense suffer
imprisonment by the space of one whole year, without bail or mainprise, and
once in every quarter of the said year shall in some market town, upon the
market day, or at such time as any Fair shall be kept, there stand openly upon
the Pillorie, by the space of six hours, and there shall openly confess,
his, or her error or offense.

If any person or persons being once convicted of the same offenses, as is
aforesaid, do eftsoons perpetrate and commit the like offense, then every
such offender being of any the said offenses the second time lawfully and duly
convicted and attainted, as is aforesaid, shall suffer pains of death, as a
felon or felons, and shall loose the benefit and privilege of Clergy and
Sanctuary: saving to the wife of such person as shall offend in any thing
contrary to this Act, her title of Dower, and also to the heir and successor
of every such person, his and their title of inheritance, succession, and other
rights, as though no such attainder of the auncestor or predecessor had been
made.

Provided always, That if the offender in any the cases aforesaid shall happen
to be a Peer of the Realm, then his trial therein to be had by his Peers,
as it is used in cases of Felony or Treason, and not otherwise.

Hunting with Visors.
30 By a Statute made Anno 1. H. 7. St. 1. H. 7. 7
it was ordained, That at every such time as any information shall be made of
any unlawful hunting by night, or with painted faces, in Forest, Park, or
Warren, to any of the Kings Council, or to any Justice of Peace of the County
where such hunting shall be, of any person suspected thereof: It shall be
lawful to any of the same Council, or Justice of Peace, to whom such
information shall be made, to make a Warrant to the Shirife, or to any
Constable, Baylife, or other Officer of the same County, to arrest and take the
same person, to have him before the maker of the same Warrant, or any other of
the Kings council, or Justice of Peace of the same County. And the Counselor
or Justice before whom such person shall be brought, shall have power to
examine him of the said hunting, and of the doers thereof: and if he conceal
the offense, or any offender, it is felony: and if he confess the truth, and
all that he shall be examined of and knows in that behalf, then the offense
of hunting by him done, shall be against the King but trespass fineable, to be
assessed at the next general Sessions by the Justices there. And if any
Rescous Rescous.
or disobedience be made to any person having authority to do execution or
justice by any such warrant, by any person which should be arrested, so that
execution of the same warrant be not had, then the same rescous and
disobedience shall be felony: and the same felony shall be enquired of, and
determined as other felonies been.

Twelve or above assembled together to change any law.
31 By a Statute made Anno 1. Ma. and 1. Eliz. it was ordained, St. 1. M. 12 St.
1. El. 16
That if any persons, to the number of twelve, or above, being assembled
together, shall intend, go about, practice, or put in ure, with force of
arms, unlawfully and of their own authority to alter or change any laws,
made or established for Religion, by authority of Parliament, which stand in
force; or any other Laws or Statutes of this Realm, or any of them: the same
number being commanded or required by the Shirife of the Shire, or by any
Justice of Peace of the same Shire, or by the Mayor, Shirife, Justices of
Peace, or Baylifes of any City, Borough, or Town Corporate, where any such
assemblies shall be unlawfully had or made, by proclamation in the Queens
name, to retire and repair to their own houses and habitations, or places
from whence they came: And they or any of them notwithstanding such
proclamation, shall remain and make their abode, or continue together by the
space of one whole hour, after such commandment or request made by
proclamation, or after that shall willingly in forcible and riotous manner,
attempt to do, or put in ure any things above specified, then as well every
such abode or continuing together, as every such act or offense, that after
such commandment or request by proclamation had or made, shall be attempted
to be done, practiced, or put in ure by any persons being of the number
aforesaid, shall be adjudged Felony in all and singular those persons, that so
shall make their abode and continue together, or shall attempt or commit any
such act. And the offenders therein shall be adjudged Felons, and shall suffer
only execution of death as in case of Felony.

If any persons to the said number of twelve or above, shall intend, Practicing
to destroy parks, ponds, conduits.
go about, practice, or put in ure, in manner and form aforesaid, to
overthrow, cut, break, cast down, or dig up the pales, hedges, ditches, or
other enclosure of any Parkes or Park, or other ground enclosed, or the banks
of any Fish Pond, or Poole, or any Conduits for water, Conduit heads, or
Conduit pipes having course for water, to the intent that the same, or any of
them from henceforth should remain open, not enclosed, or void: Or unlawfully
to have common or way in the said Parkes or Park, or other grounds or ground
enclosed, or in any of them, or to destroy in manner and form aforesaid, the
Dear in any Parkes or Park, or any Warreins or Warrein of Conies, or any
Doue-houses, or any Fish in any Fish ponds, or Poole, or to pull, or cut down
any Houses, Barnes, Mills, or Bays, or to burn any stackes of corn or
grain, or to abate or diminish the Rents, or yearly value of any Manors,
Lands, or Tenements, or the price of any victuals, corn, or grain, or any
other thing usual for the sustenance of men, and being required and
commanded by any Justice of Peace, or by the Sheriff of the County, or by the
Mayor, Bailife or Bailifs, or other head Officers of any City, or Town
Corporat, where such assembly shall be had, by Proclamation to be made in the
Queens name, to retire or return in peaceable manner to their places and
houses from whence they came, and they or any of them (notwithstanding such
Proclamation) shall remain, or make their abode, or continue together by the
space of one whole hour, after such commandment or request made by
Proclamation: or after shall in that forcible manner do, or put in ure any of
these things last before mentioned, then as well every such abode, or
continuing together, as every such act, that after such commandment or
request by Proclamation had or made, shall be done, practiced, or put in ure,
by any persons, being above the number of twelve, shall be adjudged Felony,
and the offenders therein shall be adjudged Felons, and shall suffer only
execution of death, as in case of Felony.

If any person or persons, unlawfully, and without authority, Raising of
unlawful assemblies by some act or words.
by ringing of any Bell or Bells, sounding of any Trumpet, Drum, Horn, or
other instrument whatsoever, or by firing of any Beacon, or by malicious
speaking or uttering of any words, or making of any outcrye, or by setting up,
or casting of any bills or bill, or writing whatsoever, or by any other deed or
act, shall raise, or cause to be raised, or assembled, any persons to the
number of twelve, or above, to the intent that the same persons should do or
put in ure any of the acts or things abouesaid, and that the persons to the
number of twelve, or above, so raised and assembled, after request or
commandment had or given, in form aforesaid, shall make their abode, or
continue together, as is aforesaid, or unlawfully, and in forcible manner
perpetrate, do, commit, or put in ure any of the acts or things abouesayd,
then all and singular persons, by whose speaking, deed, act, or any other the
means above specified, any persons to the number of twelve shall be raised or
assembled, for the doing, committing, or putting in ure any of the acts or
things above mentioned, shall be adjudged for his so speaking or doing, a
Felon, and shall suffer execution of death as in case of Felony.

Releeuing them which be assembled.
If any wife, or servant of any of the same persons, or any other person
whatsoever, shall willingly and without compulsion, bring, send, deliver, or
convey, any Money, Harneyes, Artillery, Weapons, Meat, Bread, Drink, or other
Victual to any person or persons so being assembled, as is aforesaid, during
such time as he or they shall be so assembled together in forcible manner, as
is aforesaid, then every wise, servant, or other person so bringing or
conueying etc. any of the foresaid things, to the same persons so being
assembled together in forcible manner, or to any of them, and not departing to
their houses or dwelling places, upon request or commandment made unto them,
as is aforesaid, shall be adjudged a felon, and shall suffer execution of death
as in case of felony.

Unlawful assembly by xl. and more.
If any persons to the number of forty, or more, shall assemble together in
forcible manner unlawfully, and of their own authority, to the intent to
execute, do, or put in ure any of the things above specified, or to do other
felonious or rebellious act or acts, and so shall continue together by the
space of three hours, after Proclamation shall be made, at, or nigh the place
where they shall be so assembled, or in some Market Town, thereunto next
adjoining, and after notice thereof to them given, then every person so
willingly assembled in forcible manner, and so continuing together by the space
of three hours after such Proclamation made, and notice thereof given, shall be
adjudged a felon. S. Riots etc. 32. etc.

32 By the Statute made Anno 39. Eliz. it was enacted, St. 39. El. 17
That all idle and wandering Soldiers, or Mariners, Wandering soldiers and
mariners.
or idle persons, which now are, or hereafter shall be wandering as Soldiers
or Mariners shall settle themselves in some service, labor, or other lawful
course of life, without wandering, or otherwise repair to the places where they
were borne, or to their dwelling places, if they have any, and there remain,
betaking themselves to some lawful trade or course of life, upon pain that
all persons offending contrary to this Act, to be reputed as Felons, and to
suffer as in case of Felony, without any benefit of Clergy to be allowed.
And every idle and wandering Soldier or Mariner, which coming from his
Captain from the Seas, or from beyond the Seas, shall not have a Testimonial
under the hand of some one Justice of Peace, of, or near the place where he
landed, setting down therein the place and time where and when he landed, and
the place of his dwelling, or birth, unto which he is to pass, as aforesaid,
and a convenient time therein limited for his passage: or having such
testimonial, shall wilfully exceed the time therein limited above fourteen
days: And also as well every such idle and wandering Soldier or Mariner, as
every other idle person wandering as a Soldier or Mariner, which shall at any
time hereafter forge or counterfeit any such Testimonial, Forging a
Testimonial.
or have with him or them any such Testimonial forged or counterfeited, as
aforesaid, knowing the same to be counterfeited or forged, in all these cases
every such act or acts to be Felony, and the offenders to suffer, as
aforesaid, without any benefit of Clergy. It shall and may be lawful for the
Justices of Assizes, Justices of Jail delivery, and Justices of Peace of
every County, and for all Justices of Peace in Towns Corporat, having
authority to hear and determine Felonies, to hear and determine all such
offenses in their general Sessions, and to execute the offenders, which shall
be convicted before them, as in cases of Felony is accustomed: Except some
honest person, Retaining an offender into service.
valued at the last Subsidy next before that time, to ten pounds in goods,
or forty shillings in lands, or else some honest Freeholder, as by the said
Justices shall be allowed, will be contented before such Justices as such
person shall be arraigned of Felony, to take him or them into his service,
for one whole year then next following, and before the said Justices will be
bound in Recognisaunce of ten pounds, to be levied of his lands, goods,
tenements, and cattels, to the use of the King, if he keep not the said
person or persons for one whole year, and bring him to the next Sessions for
the Peace, and Jail delivery next ensuing after the said year. And if any
such person retained depart within the year, Departing without license
without the license of him that so retained him, then to be indicted, tried,
and judged as a felon, and not to have the benefit of his Clergy.

33 By a Statute made Anno 31. Elizab. St. 31. El. 4.
it was established, Imbeciling the K. Armor, etc.
That if any person or persons, having at any time hereafter the charge or
custody of any Armor, Ordnance, Munition, Shot, Powder, or Habiliments of
War of the Queens, her heirs or successors, or of a Victuals provided for
the victualing of any Soldiers, Gunners, Mariners, or Pioners, shall for any
lucre or gain, or wittingly, advisedly, and of purpose to hinder or impeach
her Majesty's service, imbecile, purloyne, or convey away any the same Armor,
Ordnance, Munition, Shot, or Powder, Habiliments of War, or Victuals, to the
value of twenty shillings, at one or several times, then every such offense
shall be adjudged Felony, and the offender and offenders therein to be tried,
proceeded on, and suffer as in case of Felony. The suit within a year after
the offense,
But none shall be impeached for any offense against this Statute, unless the
same impeachment be prosecuted, or begun within a year next after the offense
done. And this Act, nor any attainder or attainders of any person or persons,
for any offense made felony by this Act, shall in any wise extend, or be
interpreted to make the offender or offenders to forfeit any lands, tenements,
or hereditaments, any longer than during his or their life or lives, or to make
any corruption of blood to any the heir or heirs of any such offender or
offenders, No corruption of blood, or forf. of dower.
or to make the wife of any such offender to loose or forfeit her dower, or
title of dower, of, or in any lands, tenements, or hereditaments, or her action
or interest to the same: Proof in discharge of the offender.
any thing in this Act etc. notwithstanding. And such person or persons as
shall be impeached for any offense made felony by this Statute, shall by
virtue of this Act be received and admitted to make any lawful proof that
he can, by lawful witness, or otherwise, for his discharge and defense in
that behalf: any law, etc. notwithstanding.

Cutting down of Powdike.
34 By a Statute made Anno 22. H. 8. and revived Anno 2. and 3. St. 22. H. 8.
Ph. and Mar. it was ordained, That every perverse and malicious cutting
down, and breaking up of any part or parts of the dike called new Powdike in
Marshland in the County of Norffolke, and the broken dike, otherwise called
Oldfield dike by Marshland, in the isle of Ely, in the County of Cambridge, or
of any other bank being parcel of the Rind, and uttermost part of the
causey of Marshland aforesaid, made for the defense and salvation of the said
country of Marshland, at every time and times from henceforth committed and
done (otherwise than in working of the said banks or dykes, for the
fortifying, repayring, and amending of the same) shall be taken, reputed, and
adjudged Felony: And the offenders and doers of the same, and every of them,
shall be adjudged and reputed felons. And the Justices of Peace of the said
Counties of Norffolke and Cambridge, within the said isle, at every of their
Sessions within the same isle and Counties to be kept, shall have power to
cause inquiry to be made of every such offense, so at any time in form
aforesaid hereafter to be done and committed, and to award like Process against
every of the said offenders, with like judgment and execution of the same (if
they or any of them be found guilty by verdict, or otherwise) as the said
Justices have used to do upon other felonies, being felony by the common law.

Taking the oath for the Kings title.
35 By a Statute made Anno 3. Iac. 4. it was enacted, St. 3. Iac. 4.
That every subject of this Realm, that after the tenth day of June next
coming, shall go or pass out of this Realm to serve any foreign Prince,
State, or Potentate, or shall after the said tenth day of June pass over the
Seas, and there shall voluntarily serve any such foreign Prince, State, or
Potentate, not having before his or their going or passing, taken the oath (
viz. That our Sovereign Lord King James is lawful and rightful King of this
Realm etc.) before the officer thereunto appointed, shall be a felon. And if
any Gentleman, or person of high degree, or any person or persons which has
borne, or shall bear any office or place of Captain, Lieutenant, or any other
place, charge, or office in Camp, Army, or Company of Soldiers, or
Conductor of Soldiers, shall after go or pass voluntarily out of this Realm,
to serve any such foreign Prince, State, or Potentat, before that he and they
shall become bound with two such suerties as shall be allowed of by the
officers, by this Act limited to take the said bond, unto the K. his heirs or
successors, in the sum of xx.l. of current English money at the least, Bound
not to be reconciled, nor to make conspiracy.
with condition to the effect following, he shall be a felon, viz. That if the
within bounden etc. shall not at any time the^ after be reconciled to the pope
or sea of Rome, nor shall enter into or consent unto any practice, plot, or
conspiracy whatsoever, against the Kings Majesty, his heirs and successors,
or any of his or their estate and estates, realms and dominions, but shall
within convenient time after knowledge thereof had, reveal and disclose to the
K. Majesty, his heirs and successors, or some of the Lords of his or their
privy Counsel, all such practices, plots, and conspiracies, then the said
Obligation to be void.

St. 43. El. 13
36 By the stat. made Anno 43. El. it was ordained, Forcible carrying any person
out of Cumberland, etc.
That whosoever shall at any time hereafter, without lawful authority, take
away any of the K. subjects, against his or their will, or wills, and carry
them out of the counties of Cumberland, Northumberland, Westmerland, and the
Bishopric of Durham, or to any other place within any of the said Counties,
or detain, force, or imprison him, or them, as prisoners, or against his or
their wills, to ransom them, or to make a prey or spoil of his or their
person or goods, upon deadly fewd, or otherwise: Or whosoever shall be privy,
consenting, aiding, or assisting to any such taking, detaining, or carrying
away of any such person or persons, as aforesaid: Or whosoever shall take,
receive, or carry, to the use of himself, or wittingly to the use of any
other, any money, corn, cattle, or other consideration, commonly called
Black mayle, for the protecting or defending of him or them, or his or their
lands, tenements, goods, or chattels, from such thefts, spoils, and robberies,
as is aforesaid: Or whosoever shall give any such money, corn, cattle, or
other consideration, called Black mayle, for such protection as is aforesaid:
Or shall wilfully and of malice burn or cause to be burned, or aid, procure,
or consent to the burning of any barn or stacke of corn or grain, within any
of the said Counties, or places aforesaid, and shall be of the said several
offenses, or any of them, indicted, and lawfully convicted, or shall stand
mute, or shall challenge peremptorily above the number of xx. before the Just.
of Assizes, I. of Jail delivery, I. of Dier and Terminer, or I. of peace
within any of the said counties, at some of their general Sessions, within
some of the said counties to be holden, shall be adjudged, reputed, and taken to
be as felons, and shall suffer death, without any benefit of Clergy,
Sanctuary, or Abiuration, and shall forfeit as in case of felony.

St. 1. Ed. 2.
37 By the stat. of An. 1. E. 2. it was ordained in this manner, viz. Touching
prisoners breaking of prison, Breaking of prison.
the K. does will and command, that none which from henceforth does break
prison, shall have judgment of life and member for the breaking of prison
only, except the cause for which he was taken and imprisoned, do require such
judgment, if he should have been convicted thereof, according to the law and
custom of the Realm, though in times past it has been otherwise used.

Principal and Accessorie.
1 Having treated sufficiently of Treasons, Homicides, and other Felonies, and
showed how many of every of them there be, I am now to write of those that be
culpable therein, and to declare which be the chief and most grievous
offenders in those crimes, who^ the law does term and adiudge Principals, and
which be but Abettors, Procurers, and Receivers, whom the law does brand and
mark with the name of Accessories: and which of those be Accessories before the
offense committed, and which after: in what cases one of them shall be arrested,
imprisoned, appealed, indicted, arraigned, or attainted, before the other, and
in what not: when the acquital of the one shall discharge the other, and when
not: and where the punishment of the one shall be greater than of the other, and
where not. And in this title, to begin with the greatest and highest offense,
The law does hold it a rule infallible, 3. H. 7. 10.
that in High Treason there is no Accessorie, No accessorie in high treason.
for all the aduisers, counselors, persuaders, and assistants therein, be
Principals, as much as if they were actors or doers: so that whatsoever offense
does make a man Accessorie in Felony, the like makes him Principal in High
Treason. But in Petit Treason there is oftentimes a Principal and an
Accessorie, as there is in Homicide, Robbery, and other Felonies.

Accessorie before the offense committed.
2 There be two sorts of Accessories in Felony, whereof the one is Accessorie
before the felony committed, and the other is Accessorie after the offense
done: As if one hire, procure, or command another to commit a Felony, 10. Ed.
4. 14.
but is not present when the other does it, this procurer or commander is
Accessorie before the offense committed: But otherwi^e it is, if he be
present at the time of the felony committed, for in that case he is Principal.
4. H. 7. 18. 7. H. 4. 27.
And in some case one may be appealed as Principal and Accessorie in one
Appeal.

Procurement of felony.
3 If one be present at the death of a man, 4. H. 7. 18. 13. H 7. 10. Plo. Com.
100.
and moves another to strike and kill him, by this means he is principal,
though he did strike no stroke, as well as he that killed him: For the blows
of him that did strike him, be in construction of law the blows of him which
commanded him, when he was present, for if the commander had said nothing,
the man slain had not been killed.

21. Ed. 4 71.
4 If one be present at the killing of a man, Coming purposely to a
manslaughter.
and comes thither for that cause, although he at that time does not move
another to strike or kill him, neither does any thing, yet he shall be
adjudged principal: For when diue^s do come to do an evil act, Bro. Cor.
171. Kel. fol. 161 Pl. Com. 98
and one alone does it, and the others be present abetting him, or ready to
aid him in the fact, they be principals to all intents, as fully as he who
did the act: for the presence of the other is a terror to him that was
assaulted, and the occasion that he durst not defend himself; for when one
does see his enemy and diverse of his companions coming to assault him, 13. H.
7. 10.
and they all do draw their swords, and do enuiron him, and one only does
strike him, so that he dies thereof, the others shall be adjudged as great
offenders as he who did strike him; for if the others had not been present,
peradventure he would have desended himself, and have escaped: for the number
of the others that were present, and also ready to strike him, was a great
fear unto him, and an abatement of his courage, and a cause to make him
despair of his defense, and so the occasion of his death. And though but one
man gave the blow, which was the cause of his death, yet the law will adiudge
it the stroke of them all, given by the hands of that one man, and to be in
each degree as penal to them all, as if they all had holden their hands at one
time upon that sword, or staff, and given him his deadly wound.

Fitz. Cor. 309.
5 If one being present at the killing of a man does nothing, A will to assist
a felon.
but would have aided his companion, if the party that was slain had made any
resistance, Fitz. Cor. 314. 350. 433. 11. H. 4. 13.
he shall thereby be adjudged principal: For all those which come in
company in any place where any assembly is gathered, that an evil fact is
committed, be it Homicide, Robbe^^e, or other Trespass, every of them shall
be adjudged a principal actor, though they stand by, and do not hurt: As if
one come with others to do a diss^^^^^, and a man is killed by another, and
he therein did nothing, Fitz. Cor. 314. 350.
notwithstanding he shall be adjudged principal, though he came not to any
such purpose, because he came to do an unlawful act.

6 If one chance to be present when another is slain, In company, but not
consenting to a felony
or when any other felony is committed, and does not come in company with the
felons, neither is of their confederacy, although he does not make any
resistance, or disturb the felon, or levy Huy and Cry, yet he is neither
principal nor accessorie: Fitz. Cor. 395. 14. H. 7. 31.
for it is no felony in him, but finable as a Trespass. And some do hold,
that he shall be but amerced in that case; and if he be within age, he shall
have no punishment.

25. Ed. 4. 44 13. H. 7. 10.
7 If one man do hold another in his arms, or do bind him, Holding a man
until he be slain.
until a thirdman has killed him, he that did hold the party slain in his
arms is principal: But that holding in his arms must be proved to be done
of a wicked and felonious intent; Bracton.
for sometimes a man holds his friend in his arms of a loving mind, to keep
him from taking or doing of hurt, and upon no malicious or evil intent.

One thing commanded, and another effected.
8 If one command another to lay hold upon a third man, and the party
commanded goes and robs him, if the commander be absent when this
Robbery is done, this is not Felony in him: for the party to whom the
commandment was given, exceeds his commandment; and also the
commandment might have been performed without the Robbery. But otherwise it
is, if the commandment were to beat him, Fitz. Cor. 314.
and the party commanded did kill him in the commanders absence, in this case
he is accessory to the felony, for it is hard to beat a man so, that he shall
be sure that he shall not die of that beating.

Councelling to rob one, and another is killed.
9 If A. do command B. to rob C. and he attempteth to rob him, and D.
does defend C. and fights with B. that assayleth him, Plo. Com. 475.
and B. does kill D. in this case A. shall be accessorie to this murder, for
that B. attempting to rob C. does pursue the commandment of A. and so being
in the pursuit of that commandment, and resisted, another thing does chance,
viz. the death of D. therefore A. shall be partaker of that fact, and of the
punis^ment thereof, for that his commandment was the cause thereof.
Commanding to beat one, and he is killed.
And the same Law is, Fitz. Cor. 314. 350. Pl. Com. 474.
if A. do command to beat C. and he does beat him so, that he dies thereof,
A. shall be accessorie to this murder: For his commandment was the
foundation of this murder, and the murder is the sequel of the
commandment, and if A. be present at this beating, Commandment of burning
one house and another is burned.
then he shall be adjudged principal. And so it is, if A. do command B.
feloniously to burn the house of C. in the night, and he does it, and the same
fire does also burn the house of D. neighbor to C. in this case A. shall be
accessorie as well to the burning of the house of D. as of C. for seeing the
burning of the house of D. does ensue upon the burning of the house of C. and
the first house was burned by the commandment of A. whereunto A. was
accessorie, he must also be accessorie to the burning of the second house, viz.
of the house of D. for he that commands an evil and unlawful act to be
done, shall be adjudged accessorie to all that shall ensue upon the same evil
act, but not to any other distinct thing. Counsel of one act, and another is
done
But it is otherwise, Pl. Com. 475.
where A. does command B. to burn the house of C. whom he knows, and he
does burn the house of D. or does command him to steal a Horse, and he
steals an Ox: or does command him to steal a white Horse, and he steals
a black Horse: or does command him to rob another by the high way of his
money, and he does rob him in his house of his plate; this does differ from the
commandment of A. and therefore these acts cannot be drawn within the
compass of his commandments, and so he shall be adjudged no Accessorie to
any of the foresaid offenses; for these be other acts and other felonies, and
not any of those which A. did command or counsel to be done. The felony
commanded, committed in another manner.
And yet if B. shall commit the same felony which A. does command or counsel
to be done, though he does it at another day, at another time, with another
instrument, or in another sort than A. does command or counsel him to do it,
A. shall be accessorie thereunto: As, if A. do counsel B. to kill C. by
poisoning of him, and he does kill him with his dagger: or does counsel him
to kill C. by the high way, and he kills him in his house: or does counsel
him to kill him upon one day, and he kills him upon another day; in all these
cases and the like A. shall be accessorie to the murder: for the murder is the
substance and principal matter that does ensue upon the commandment or
counsel of A. which the law does wholly respect, and not the circumstances,
being only the manner and form of the facts.

Pl. Com. 476.
10 If A. do command or counsel B. to kill C. and before he has killed him A.
does repent him, and comes unto B. and tells him, The felony commanded
countermaunded,
that he is sorry for his wicked counsel, and persuadeth and charge B. that
he shall not kill C. and yet after that B. does kill C. in this case A. shall
not be adjudged accessorie to the death of C. but it is the only murder and
act of B. because A. did countermaund his first counsel: And the law does
adiudge no man accessorie to a Felony before the Felony committed, but him
only whose mind and meaning is, that the Felony should be committed at that
time that it is done.

Pl. Com. 475.
11 If A. do procure and counsel B. to poison C. and to that end does buy some
venim or poison, and delivers it to B. who tempereth it in an apple,
Counselling to poison one, and another is poisoned.
or other thing, and delivers it to C. with intent to poison him, and C. not
knowing the poison in the apple, nor the intention of the said B. does give the
said apple to E. to eat, who eats it, and is poisoned thereby, and dies of
the same poison within few days after: In this case notwithstanding this be
wilful murder in B. that delivered the poisoned apple to C. (though it poisoned
not him who he meant to have poisoned, but E. a stranger, to whom he
pretended no hurt) yet A. who procured and counseled B. to give this poison to
C. is not accessorie to the murder of E. for that he never persuaded, nor gave
his counsel, that E. should be poisoned, which assent of his the law will
never strain further than he gave it.

12 As commandment and aid is in Murder, and Homicide, Commanding or aiding
to Rape or Robbery.
so is it in every other Felony, as Rape, Robbery, etc. for in Rape, if one
do not commit the act, Fitz. Cor. 314. 350.
but aideth and assisteth his companion, he is principal as well as he that
commits the fact. And the same law is, if one do commit a Robbery, and
others be in his company, and do come with him for that purpose, they be all
principals.

13 Accessorie after the offense is he, Accessorie after the offense committed.
who knowing that another has committed a felony, does receive him, aid him,
or comfort him: As if one do receive a felon (before he is attainted of
felony) knowing of the felony which he has committed, 26. Ass. p. 47
or does favor him, or aid him with money, meat, drink, or lodging, by that
means he shall be adjudged accessorie. What act of the accessorie makes him a
felon, what not.
But this difference is to be taken of aid, or counsel: for if he aid him by
his good word, or suit for his deliverance, or do send a letter for his
enlargement, this does not make him acessorie to the felony.

Receipt of a felon attainted in the same County.
14 If one receive a felon that is attainted of Felony by verdict or confession
in the same County where the receiver is commorant or dwelling, and does aid
him, he is accessorie to the Felony, Fi. Cor. 377 Bracton.
though he does not know that the other has committed Felony, because he is
a Felon by matter of record, whereof every stranger dwelling or commorant in
the same County is to take notice. And it is Felony, if one be indicted of
the receipt of another that is Outlawed of Felony in the same County where the
receiver dwells: for that the offender is attainted of Felony in that
County by matter of record. S. Indictments 34.

Receipt of a felon attainted in another County.
15 If one be attainted of Felony by verdict, confession, Fi. Cor. 377
or outlawry in one County, and another does receive him, and aid him in
another County, he is not accessorie to the Felony, unless he does know of
the Felony: because he cannot take knowledge of an act done in another
County, though it be by matter of record. S. Indictments. 34.

Indictment of an accessorie in one County to an offense done in another.
16 Because that Thieves and Robbers that had robbed or stolen in one County,
would convey their spoil, or part thereof so robbed and stolen, unto some of
their adherents in another county, where the principal offense was not
committed; who knowing of such felony, willingly and by couin did receive the
same: in which case, though the principal felon were attainted in one county,
the accessorie escaped, by reason that he was accessorie in another County,
and that the Jurors of the same county by the common law could take no
knowledge of the principal felony ne attainder in the first county, and so
such accessories escaped thereof unpunished: For the remedy whereof, by a
Statute made Anno 2. and 3. E. 6. it was ordained, St. 2. and 3. E. 6. 24.
That where any murder or felony shall be committed in one county, Trial of
an accessorie in one County, to an offense done in another.
and another person or more shall be accessorie to the same in another county,
Then an Indictment found or taken against such accessorie and accessories, upon
the circumstance of such matter, (before the Justices of Peace, or other
Justices or commissioners, to enquire of felonies in the county, where such
offenses of accessorie shall be committed) shall be as good in the law, as if the
said principal offense had bin committed within the same cou^tie where the
same indictment against such accessorie shall be found. And the Justices of Jail
delivery, or Oyer and Terminer, or two of them, of, or in such county, where
the offense of any such accessorie shall be committed or done (upon suit to them
made) shall write to the Custos Rotulorum, or Keepers of the Records, where
such principal shall be attainted or convict, to certify them, whether such
principal be attainted or convicted, or otherwise discharged of such
principal felony, who upon such writing shall make sufficient Certificat in
writing under their Seal or seals to the said Justices, whether such
principal be attainted, convicted, or otherwise discharged, or not. And after
that they do certify, that such principal is attainted, convicted, or
otherwise discharged of such offense, Then the said Justices etc. shall proceed
upon every such accessorie in the County where he became accessorie, in such
manner and form, as if both the said principal offense and accessorie had
been committed in the same County where the offense of accessorie was
committed, and every such accessorie and other offenders above expressed, shall
answer upon their Arraignments, and receive such Trial, Judgment, order, and
execution, and suffer such forfeitures as is used in other cases of Felony.

27. Ass. p. 69 25. Ed. 3. 39. 9. H. 4. 1.
17 If one receive goods stolen, or any parcel thereof, yet he shall not be
accessorie to the felony, if he do not receive the Felon himself. But if he
do receive the goods stolen, Receiving of of stolen goods
and also the Felon, he shallbe accessorie to the felony, so that the same
Felon be before accessorie of the same felonic. S. Indict. 34.

Fitz. Cor. 427.
18 If a Felon does fly, and come to his friends house, Receiving the Felon.
and his friend does shut the door, and the country which pursues him, do
think that the Felon does continue in the house, whereas he escapes: in this
case the friend shall be adjudged accessorie to this felony, for that his
friend did aid and relieve him, and endeavored to defend him from the justice
of the law. S. Escape 2.

26. Ass. p. 52
19 And also a man may be accessorie to an accessorie: Accessorie to an
accessorie.
as if one do receive him who is accessorie to a felony, by this means he
himself shall be accessorie to this accessorie, because that first accessorie
is a felon.

1. H. 7. 6.
20 If one do rescue him that is arrested, convicted, Rescue of a Felon.
or attainted of felony, he is a principal Felon, and not an Accessorie: and
the reason is, for that this is a new felony by it self, though it does
depend upon the former felony.

21 A woman covert cannot be accessorie in felony to her husband, A wife no
Accessorie to her husband. A married wife a principal Felon*
for that by the laws of God she ought not discover his counsel: But by
force of a Statute made Anno 1. Mar. a wife shall be a principal Felon, if
she do send, deliver, or convey any relief to her husband, which amongst
others, to the number of twelve, or above, shall be assembled, practice, and
put in ure any of the offenses prohibited by the said stat. provided against
Rebellious and unlawful assemblies, St. 1. M. 12. St. 1. El. 16.
Anno 1. M. 12. S. Felonies by statute 31.

22 If an offense be made felony by statute, Accessorie to offenses made
felony by stat.
although the same statute does not expressly make mention of abettors,
procurers, counselors, and receivers, yet they shall be taken within the
compass of the same statute, as the consenter and aider to the counterfeiting
of the great Seal, privy Seal, or the Kings money, 19. H. 8. 47. St. 25. E.
3. 2
is Treason: and yet the words of the statute be, If any do counterfeit etc.
which the other does not, because he was but consenting and ayding thereunto.

St. 13. E. 1. 34. 11. H. 4. 13. Fitz. Cor. 228. Br. Appeal 32*
23 In Rape, Rape
if one do commit the fact, and another does aid and assist him therein, he
is thereby a rauisher, as well as his companion which committed the Rape: and
yet the words of the statute of Westminst. 2. be, If a man do ravish a woman:
for the assistant was the cause of the offense, without whom peradventure the
Rape had not been done. And he is principal, because he was present when the
fact was done, and therefore as much guilty as he which did the fact. And yet
in the foresaid case, if two be indicted for committing of a Rape, one for
doing the fact, and the other for ayding and assisting him, whereby they both
be principals: if he that was indicted for ayding and assisting, be first
arraigned, and by one Enquest found guilty, Plo. Com. 97.
and after he that was indicted for doing the act is arraigned, and by another
Enquest is acquit: In this case judgment shall not be given against him who
was found guilty of ayding and assisting, because he cannot be guilty but in
respect that the principal actor was guilty: and he being found not guilty
of doing the fact, the other could not be ayding and assisting to a thing which
was not done: And seeing both the verdicts cannot be true, but one of them
must needs be false, the Judges ought to give more credit to the verdict which
acquitted him who was charged with doing of the fact, than to the other: For the
Enquest which acquitted him that was charged with the fact, was charged upon the
principal point, viz. if the supposed rauisher committed the rape or not, and
the other Enquest was not so fully charged upon the principal point, but only
whether he that was indicted of ayding and assisting, be guilty of the
Felony whereof he is impeached, viz. of the ayding and assisting.

Imbeciling of Records.
24 By the Statute of Anno 8. H. 6. 12. St. 8. H. 6. 12
it was ordained, That if any record, or parcel of the same, writ, return,
panell, process, or warrant of Attorney in the Chauncerie, etc. be willingly
stolen, taken away, withdrawn, or avoided by any Clerk etc. such stealer,
taker away, withdrawer, and auoyder, their procurers, counselors, and
abettors, being thereof indicted, etc. shall be adjudged felons. S. Felonies by
statute 16.

Rebellious assemblies.
25 By the stat. of an. 1. M. 12. 1. El. 16. St. 1. M. 12. St. 1. El. 16.
it is enacted, That if any wife or servant (of any of the persons being in
rebellious manner unlawfully assembled, contrary to the ordinance of the same
statute) or any other person whatsoever, shall willingly and without
compulsion, bring, send, deliver, or convey any money, harneyes, artillery,
weapon, meat, drink, or other victual, to any person or perfons so being
assembled, during such time as he or they shall be so assembled, or be together,
then every wife, servant, or other person, so bringing or conueying any of the
foresaid things to the same persons so being assembled together in forcible
manner, or to any of them, and not departing to their houses upon request or
commandment made, shall be adjudged Felons. But no person shall be put to any
loss, forfeiture, pain, or punishment of life, lands, or goods, as accessorie
to any person or persons, that shall commit any of the offenses contained in
this Act, for receiving, comforting, or aiding of any such offender after such
act committed or done. S. Felonies by Statute 31. Riots etc.

Coniuration.
26 By the stat. of An. 1. Iac. St. 1. Iac. 12
it was ordained, That if any person or persons shall use, practice, or exercise
any invocation, or coniuratio^ of any evil or wicked spirit, etc. then every
offender or offenders, their aiders, abettors, and counselors, being of any of
the said offenses lawfully convicted and attainted, shall suffer pains of
death as a felon or felons, without benefit of Clergy or Sanctuary. S.
Felonies by Stat. 29.

27 By the Statute of An^ 3. H. 7. 2. St. 3. H. 7. 2
it was provided, That if any person shall take any maid, widow, or wife, which
has lands or goods, or is heir apparent to her ancestor, against her will,
unlawfully, such taking, procuring, and abetting to the same, and also
receiving wittingly the same woman so taken against her will, Taking a woman
against her will.
and knowing the same, shall be felony: And such misdoers, takers, and
procurers to the same, and receivers, knowing the said offense in form
aforesaid, shall be reputed and judged as principal felons. S. Fell. by Stat.
5.

Br. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27.
28 Note that in all the Cases aforesaid touching offenses made felony by
Statute, the aidors, abettors, and councellers be made principalles, Aydors
etc. be principals.
by the special words of the same Statutes, and not accessories to the same
felonies.

27. Ass. p. 10 8. H. 5. 6 2. Ed. 3. 26 Bro. Coro. 185.
29 If one be acquitted of the principal act, he is acquitted of all offenses
committed as accessorie, Acquitall of the principal is acquitall of accessorie.
before the doing of the principal fact; but not of offenses committed as
accessorie after the principal fact. A man being indicted as accessorie in
murder was acquit by verdict, and after he was indicted as principal of the
same murder, and was found guilty, and hanged, for though it concerned the
same murder, yet it was not the same offense whereof he was first arraigned.

Co. l. 4.43
30 A. brought an appeal of the murder of B. his brother, against C. Principal
and accessorie in manslaughter.
as principal, and D. as accessorie before the murder committed, and E. as
accessorie after the murder. C. the principal pleaded not guilty, and by the
Jury was found guilty of manslaughter, but not of murder, and then prayed,
and had his Clergy: In this case, D. which was charged as accessory before
the offense committed, was discharged, because he cannot be charged as
accessorie before the act of manslaughter committed, for manslaughter does
follow upon a sudden debate, or fray, for if it be premeditate, it is murder.
And because C. the principal had his Clergy before judgment, so that it did
not appear by the judgment of Law, that he was principal, both the
accessorie before, and the accessorie after the manslaughter were discharged.
And so it is, if the principal upon his arraignement, does confess the
felony, S. Br. 51.
and before judgment has his pardon, or clergy allowed, the accessorie
shall be discharged.

31 There be two manner of attainders, Two attainders.
whereof the one is upon appearance, that is to say, by confession, verdict, or
battle: the other is by default upon process of outlarie. And in both cases the
principal ought to be attainted before the accessorie: as it does appear by
these words of the Statute of West. 1. viz. St. Ed. 1. 14.
No person shall be outlawed upon appeal of commandment, force, The principal
shall be attainted before the accessorie.
aid, or receipt, until he that is appealed of the fact be attainted: and one
law shall be kept through the whole realm: But he that will appeal shall not
let to attach his appeal at the next County, as well against the accessorie, as
against the principal; and yet the Exigent shall stay until the principal be
attainted, by outlawrie or otherwise. And to the like effect be these words of
the statute of Officium Coronatoris, St. 3. Ed. 1.
If any be appealed of an act done as principal, they that be appealed as
accessorie shall be attached, and surely kept until the principal be attached.

32 The foresaid Statute of Westminster. 1. is to be intended of appeals commenced
by Bill, Appeals co^menced by writ or Bill.
but not of appeals commenced by Writ: for of appeals commenced by writ,
there does not appear any to be accessorie, 43. Ed. 3.18
until the count be made, which is not made until there be an appearance of
the accessorie. And therefore in that case where the appeal is commenced by
writ, if the plaintiff will pray an Exigent against them all, 7. H. 4.27.
he is thereby concluded to count against any of them as accessories: for if he
should so do, he ought not to have had the Exigent against them until the
principal had been outlawed, and therefore therein he is concluded.

Principal shall be attainted before the Exigent against the accessorie.
33 Where the words of the foresaid Statute of Westminster be, That he which
is appealed of the fact shall be attainted before the accessorie be outlawed:
If at the time that the accessorie is come to the Exigent the principal does
appear, and so the process is determined against him: 7. H. 4. 36.
Notwithstanding, because he is not as yet attainted, the Exigent shall not be
awarded against the accessorie, until the principal be attainted. And this is
to be intended where the accessorie does not appear, but makes default. S.
Trial by the Country 8.

34 If Process be awarded against the principal and accessorie, and the
principal makes default, and the accessorie does appear; The principal
makes default, and the accessorie appears.
in this case the accessorie shall answer: But if he plead to an issue, 9. H.
4. 2. 7. H. 4. 36. Fitz. Cor. 12.
process shall not be awarded against the Enquest, until the principal do
appear, or be attainted by process, viz. be outlawed. And yet this process
against the Enquest shall not cease unless the accessorie will: for if the
accessorie will request to have process against the Enquest before the
principal be attainted, he shall have it, 8. H. 5. 6.
for that it is prejudicial to none but to the accessorie himself: and
whether he be attainted or acquitted, it is good. And he shall not be arraigned
again, for the taking of the Enquest is not erroneous.

35 If process be awarded against the principal and the accessorie, Fitz.
Cor. 12.
and the principal makes default, and the accessorie does appear, if the
accessorie will wage battle The accessorie wageth battle.
with the appellant before the principal does appear; he may: for he may
waiue the benefit which the Law does give him, if he will.

36 If the principal do make default, 9. H. 4. 2.
and the accessorie do appear and plead, then if the plea which the
accessorie pleads be a plea in abatement of the whole writ, Accessorie
pleads in abatement of the writ.
the principal shall take advantage thereof, notwithstanding his absence: So
that the Exigent which is to be awarded against the principal shall be stayed,
until it be known whether the whole writ shall abate, or not.

37 If both the principal and the accessorie do appear, Both the principal and
accessory do appear.
then the principal shall answer first, and the accessorie after: for the
principal may plead such a plea, that the accessorie shall not be put to
answer until the principalls plea be tried. And that is in case where the
principal does not plead directly to the felony, but some other plea: as if
he do plead that he himself was at an other time attainted of the same
felony, 9. H. 7. 19.
etc. And the appellant does take issue thereupon, viz. not comprised, etc.
Where the principalls plea shall be tried before the accessories answer.

The principal pleads in abatement of the writ.


In this case the accessorie shall not be put to answer until this issue be
tried.

38 And so it is if both the principal and accessorie do appear, and the
principal does plead a plea in abatement of the whole writ of Appeal, then
the accessorie shall not be put to answer until this plea be tried.

Fit. Cor. 10
39 If the principal and accessorie do both appear, and the principal does
plead to the felony, viz. not guilty, The principal pleads not guilty.
then the accessorie shall presently after that plea pleaded, plead also. And
if they be at issue, one Venire facias shall be awarded for them both: But if
at the day of the Venire facias returned, or at the time of the appearance of
the Enquest, the principal being in the mean time let to mainprise, does make
default, and not appear, the Enquest shall not be taken against the accessorie.

2. and 3. P. and M. Di. 120
40 If there be diverse principalls, and one accessorie, or more: Several
principalls, and one accessorie
and process is awarded against all the principals, and the accessorie, and
some or one of the principalls do appear, and some not, and also the
accessorie does appear: in this Case process shall not be awarded against the
Enquest for the trial of the accessorie, until all the principalls do
appear, or be attainted by outlawrie: viz. if he be indicted or appealed as
accessorie to them all. But it is otherwise if he be indicted or appealed only
as accessorie to some of those principalls: 40. As p. 25 7. H. 4. 36 Plo. com.
99
for there it is sufficient to have that principal, or those principalls only
to appear, or to be attainted by Outlawrie, to whom he is appealed or indicted
as accessorie, without having regard to the residue.

41 To have Process awarded against the Enquest for the trial of the
accessorie, it is requisite, that the attainder of the principal be in the
same suit, The attainder must be in the same suit.
in the which he and the accessorie be sued: for if he be attainted in another
suit, that shall not enforce the accessorie to proceed with his Enquest until
the principal which is sued with him does appear, or be attainted by process
of outlawrie, etc. As in appeal of homicide against the principal and
accessorie, 7. H. 4. 36
and the principal before that time is attainted of the death of the same man
upon an indictment at the Kings suit. And the accessory shall plead for his
own discharge the acquitall of the principal in an other suit; so that it be
an acquitall for that offense, for the which he is charged as accessorie.

7. H. 4. 27
42 If the principal be attainted of the death of a man, and then dies, The
principal attainted and dies.
and the Justices before whom the accessorie is sued have the record of the
same attainder before them, then they may proceed against the accessorie,
otherwise not: for it does by the Record appear unto them, that he which was
appealed of the fact, is by Law attainted of felony, according to the
foresaid Statute of Westminster 1. though he was not executed therefore.

The principal stands mute.
43 And though the Law be, Fit. Cor. 58
that an Enquest shall not proceed against the accessorie to try him until
the principal do appear, or be attainted by outlawrie, yet if the principal
do appear, and will say nothing, but stand mute, the accessorie shall be
arraigned. Sed quaere; for the principal is not attainted of felony.

Error in the Attainder of the principal.
44 If the Attainder of the principal be erroneous, 2. R. 3. 22.
yet the accessorie shall be arraigned: for the accessory shall take no
advantage of any error committed in the attainder of the principal.

An absured accessorie returns.
45 If one do abjure as accessory, and after does return again, Fi. Cor. 124
the principal not being attainted, the accessorie shall be hanged: for that
he has confessed the felony before the Coroner, and did return without the
Kings pardon or license.

The accessory tried upon his own request.
46 If the accessory of his own desire will wage battle before the principal be
attainted, and be subdued therein: Fit. Cor. 12
or will desire to have an Enquest to try him before the principal be
attainted, and be found guilty therefore: In both these Cases he shall be
hanged, though by the Law he was not compellable to either of the said
trialles, until the principal had been attainted; for he has adventured
his life, in hope to gain his liberty.

47 If the principal be found not guilty The principal found not guilty.
by verdict, Bracton*
the accessorie shall be discharged thereby: for where there is no dee^e, there
can no force, aid, or commandment hurt, in that the intended injury took no
effect. So that the acquitall of the principal is in Law the acquitall of the
accessorie.

The principal dies in prison before attainder.
48 If the principal can not be tried (as if he die in prison before he be
attainted of the felony) the accessorie shall be thereby discharged: for there
can none be found accessorie to a felony, Co. l. 4. 43
where there is none attainted to commit the same felony. But otherwise it is
if the principal be attainted of the felony, and dies, there the accessorie
shall be arraigned, and hanged, if he be found guilty.

The principal attainted of an other felony.
49 If the principal be attainted of another felony, and hanged, Fi. Cor. 378.
before he is attainted of this felony, whereof he and the accessorie be
indicted, the accessorie to this felony shall be discharged thereby. And the
same Law is, if he be attainted of the first felony, though he be not
hanged: because in that case after attainder, he shall not answer to other
felonies, but only to robbery and treason,

The principal slew the pa^tie in his own defense.
50 If it be found by verdict that the principal slew him, Fi. Cor. 116
of whose death he is arraigned, in his own defense, the accessory shall be
thereby discharged: And yet the principal shall be enforced to purchase his
pardon: But this pardon proves not, that he is guilty in other manner, than in
his own defense. Notwithstanding in an other pardon it is otherwise; for if a
principal plead his pardon to a felony generally, without any special matter
found, which should cause the pardon, 2. Ed. 3. 27 Fi. Cor. 260 3. Ass. p. 14
42. Ass. p. 16
and is by that discharged; yet that will not discharge the Accessorie, but he
shall be hanged if he be found guilty of the felony: for by that pardon the
felony is confessed, of the which felony, he prays to be discharged by the
Kings favor, and not by the benefit of law, as he does in the other case.

3. H. 7. 12 10. H. 4. 5 13. Ed. 4. 3 Bro. Cor. 184
51 And in the like case, and upon the same reason, The principal has his
clergy.
if the principal and accessorie be arraigned of felony, and both be found
guilty, and the principal does pray, and has the benefit of his clergy; yet
the accessorie shall be hanged: for by the praying of his clergy, the felony is
confessed, and the principal in this case is not saved by his innocence, but
by a privilege in Law, which the accessorie, being no clarke, cannot take the
benefit of: But it is otherwise, if there be principal and accessorie, and the
principal is pardoned, or has his Clergy before judgment, Co. l. 4. 43
the accessorie shall not be arraigned: for where there is no fact, there is no
force, and where there is no principal, The principal is pardoned, or has
his clergy before judgment
there can be no accessorie, and no man can be accounted principal, before it
be so proved and adjudged by the Law, and that must be by a judgment upon a
verdict, confession, or outlawrie: and it is not sufficient that indeed there
be a principal, until that appears by a judgment in Law. And the acceptance
of pardon, or the praying of his clergy is an argument, but no judgment in
law, that he is guilty. But if the principal after attainder be pardoned, or
has his clergy allowed, the accessory shall be arraigned (and hanged if he be
found guilty) for it does appear iudicially, that he was principal.

41. As. p. 24
52 The acquitall of the principal is the acquitall of the accessorie (as is
asaide) if it be not in an appeal, where the accessorie is to recover
damages: In appeal the acquitall of the principal is not the acquitall of
the accessorie.
for if he will recover damages, he must be tried, notwithstanding the
acquitall of the principal. But some do think, that he shall recover
damages by the acquitall of the principal without being further tried: or
otherwise it would ensue, that the Court should admit an accessorie, where
there had been no principal, which were inconvenient.

Breaking of Prison, and Rescous.
BY the common Law of this Realm, if a man had been imprisoned, and broken the
prison, he should have been hanged, for what cause soever he had been
imprisoned, yea although it had been but for trespass. Which great enormitie
was redressed by the statute of Anno 1. Ed. 2. entitled, St. 1. Ed. 2.
De frangentibus prisonam; the words w^^reof be these. Touching prisoners
breaking of prison, our Lord the King does will and command, that none which
from henceforth do break prison, shall have judgment of life, and member,
for the breaking of prison only, except the cause for the which he was taken
and imprisoned does require such judgment, if he should have been convicted
thereof according to the law and custom of the Realm, though in times past
it has been otherwise used. And therefore it is to be considered, who is a
prisoner, and what is breaking of prison, Who is a prisoner.
according to the meaning of the foresaid Statute. Every person who is under
arrest for felony, is a prisoner, as well being out of the Jail, as within: So
that if he be but in the Stocks in the street, or out of the Stocks in the
possession of any that has arrested him, 1. Ed. 3. 17. 1. M. Di. 99
and does make an escape; that is a breaking of prison in the prisoner: for
imprisonment is none other, but a restraint of liberty.

2 Though the letter of the stat. of An^ 1. Ed. 2. 1. H. 7. 6. 25. Ed. 3. 42 1.
Ed. 3. 17.
be touching prisoners breaking of prison, A stranger breaks prison.
yet if a stranger do break the prison, he is within the compass of this
statute, for that by the common law this was a breaking of prison in a
stranger, and felony in him at that time, and is felony also at this time in
the prisoner, that escapes by force of such breaking of prison by a stranger,
although before the said Statute it was not felony in the prisoner.

Letting a prisoner escape.
3 If a Jailer, or any other which keeps a prisoner under arrest do let him
go at liberty, this is not felony in the prisoner, because it was no
breaking of prison in the Jailer: But all the felony in this case rests in
him who did let the prisoner escape, and that is by a voluntary escape, and not
by breaking of prison: which is felony in him that suffered him to escape.

2. Ed. 3. 1
4 If by the negligence of the Jailer, or any other which has the prisoner
under arrest, the prisoner do escape: Negligent escape
this is felony in the prisoner that does escape, for that the prisoner in
making of escape did break the prison: but it is not felony in him out of
whose custody he did escape.

5 To break prison is intended as well of a Rescous made of a prisoner,
Rescuing of a prisoner.
as of breaking of prison: 1. H. 7. 6.
As if a prisoner be under arrest for felony, and a stranger will feloniously
take him out of the possession of him that has arrested him, this Rescous is a
breaking of prison, and is felony, as well in the party which escapes, as in
him that made the Rescous, and so was it by the common law.

Fi. Cor. 333
6 If a stranger disturb the arresting of a felon, Disturbing of arrest.
that manner of Rescous is not felony; for the letting of a felon escape,
which is not arrested for felony, is not felony: but if the felon had been
taken, and arrested, and after rescued, this had been felony.

2. Ed. 3. 1. 1. H. 7. 6.
7 If the Sheriff return a Rescous The Sheriff returns a Rescous.
of a felon taken out of his possession, or do return an escape, that the
prisoner escaped from him; this will not serve as an indictment to put the
party to answer thereunto, for that it is contrary to the Statutes of 25. Ed.
3. 28. Ed. 3. and 42. Ed. 3. St. 25. E. 3. 4 St. 28. E. 3. 3 St. 42. E. 3. 2.
which have ordained, That none shall be imprisoned, or put out of his
freehold, without an indictment or presentment before Justices, or some matter
of Record, or by due Process, or by writ original, which the Sherifes return
is not. S. Indictments 19.

2. Ed. 3. 1.
8 It is no difference whose prison the offender does break, viz. Whose the
prison broken must be.
whether it be the Kings prison, the Lords of a fraunchise, or any other
persons: for whose soever it be, the offender is within the compass of this
statute, though it was otherwise before the Statute, Britton.
viz. it was not felony, unless he had broken the Kings prison.

9 If one be attached and taken for trespass, Attachment for trespass.
and he which is attached does ecape, or is rescued by a stranger, this is no
felony, but trespass: for that ye Statute says: St. 1. E. 2.
Except the cause for the which he is taken and imprisoned does require such
judgment. But yet the fine shall be according to the quality of the person to
whom the rescous is made, and according to the time and place, when, and where
it is done. 22. Ed. 3. 13
A Justice sitting in judgment arresteth an offender
And therefore if a Justice assigned shall arrest a man that makes a fraie
before him, and a stranger does rescue him, by force whereof the prisoner
escapes: in this case as well the prisoner, as he that made the rescous, shall be
disherited, and shall suffer perpetual imprisonment: for that the attachment of
such a Justice, was the attachment of the King himself in the judgment of the
law. But if such a Justice make an arrest when he is out of his place, then
such an arrest and escape is but fineable, nor of any other effect, but as if
the Sheriff, or some other officer had made the arrest.

1. H. 7. 6.
10 If a man be rescued at ye gallows, or as he is in going to execution, this
is within the compass of this Statute: Rescous after judgment.
for the words of the Statute shall be intended as well in the preter tence, as in
the present tence: viz. as well of judgment given, as of judgment to be
given; for the cause for the which he was taken and imprisoned did require such
judgment.

The imprisonment and not the attainder respected.
11 It is not material whether the prisoner which did escape, was, 1. Ed. 3.17.
or should have been attainted of the felony, for the which he was
imprisoned, so that he were in prison for felony, at the time of breaking of
prison: for a stranger which did rescue one that was indicted of felony, was
indicted, arraigned, and found guilty thereof presently, before the principal
felony tried.

Imprisoned for Treason
12 If a man imprisoned for felony, does break the prison, 1. H. 6. 5. S.
Treason 9.
and let escape a prisoner that is in prison for treason, this is petit treason
in him that did break the prison.

Disobeying of a warrant.
13 By a Statute made an^ 1. H. 7. it is ordained, St. 1. H. 7. 7.
That it shall be felony for any person which should be arrested, to disobey, or
make rescue to any person having warrant to arrest a hunter in the night in any
forest, park, etc. or with painted faces etc. so that execution of the same
warrant be not had. S. Felonies by Statute 30.

Confession before a Coroner.
14 The confession of breaking of prison before the Coroner is an attainder in
it self, without any more; if the cause of the imprisonment be for felony.
25. E. 3. 42. Fitz. Cor. 243. 435.


Opening the prison, but not escaping.
15 If a man come to a prison, and sets open the prison door, Kel. fol. 87
and persuadeth the prisoners which be in the Jail, to come forth of prison,
and to depart, yet if the prisoners do not come forth, and escape, this is no
felony in him or them: but if any of the prisoners do escape, then is it
felony in him or them that did escape, and in him also that set open the
door. 30. H. 8. Dyer 44.
And a man is always said to be in prison, so long as he is within sight of
the Jailer, or of him that has him in custody, though he do escape, or
break away.

Escape.
THere be two kinds of escape, viz. voluntary, and negligent: Voluntary
escape Voluntary escape.
is when one does arrest another for felony, or other offense, and after
lets him go at liberty whither he will; this letting him go at liberty
is a voluntary escape. Inaelex 36.
And if the arrest of him wc did escape, was for felony, it shall be adjudged
felony in him wc did let him escape: And if it were for treason, then it shall be
adjudged treason. But it is not material whether he that escaped, was arrested
by him that set him at liberty, or by some other, so that he were arrested:
for without arrest it shall not be accounted an escape. 17. Ass. p. 9.
If a felon be in a house, and another not seeing him being in ye street, does
call to him, and tells him, that he does attach him, but does not arrest his
person, this is no arrest.

^. H. 4. 1.
2 If a man receive a felon, Escape of an offender not arrested.
knowing of the felony which he has committed, and willingly suffer him to
escape, this suffering the felons escape, is not felony in him that received
the offender, because he did not arrest him. S. Principal etc. 17. and 18.

11. H. 4. 4.
3 Also such an escape is not felony, if it were not felony at the time of the
escape Felony at the time of the escape.
made: for notwithstanding that the first act, for the which the party was
arrested, is after become felony, yet that shall not make the escape felony,
which was not felony at the time of the escape. As if A. do strike B.
whereupon the Constables do arrest A. and willingly suffer him to escape, and
after B. dies of that stroke, this is not felony; for that B. being living
at the time of the arrest, and escape of A, it was then no felony in A. But
yet in this case, the party which arrested the offender, shall pay to the King
a fine to the value of his goods, because the escape was voluntary, and upon
an heinous offense before committed: for the law has always so much
endeavored to repress and punish felons, that if one man do kill another,
and a third man is present at the same time, Fi. Cor. 293 331. 395.
but of no confederacy with the manqueller, yet if he being of full age, do
not his best endeavor to apprehend the same felon, he shall be imprisoned until
he has made five to the king therefore.

4 Negligent escape Negligent escape.
is, when one is arrested for felony, and after does escape against the will
of him that arrested him, and is not freshly pursued, and taken again, before
the pursuer shall loose the sight of him: this shall be adjudged a negligent
escape, Fi. Cor. 236 400.
notwithstanding that he out of whose possession he escaped, did take him
again after he lost the sight of him.

Killing him that escapes
5 It is a negligent escape, if the pursuer do kill the party which escaped in
the pursuit of him, as he is carrying him to the Jail, Fit. cor. 328 346
though he did never loose the sight of him: for by this means the party that
escaped cannot be attainted of felony, and so the king shall loose his
Escheates.

Taking again the party escaping
6 Upon fresh suit the Jailer may take again the prisoner which escaped seven
years after the escape made, 13. E. 4. 9. 14. H. 7. 1 Fi. N. B. 130
notwithstanding that in the mean time he lose the sight of him: but that will
not discharge the Jailer of his fine for the same escape. And if the sheriff be
in carrying one that is condemned to die, to ye place of execution, and the
prisoner be rescued, and taken from him by force, 6. H. 7. 12
and the Sheriff does again take away the prisoner from those that did rescue
him, and hang him: this shall not be adjudged an escape in the Sheriff.

License to go to another town.
7 If a Jailer license his prisoner to go to another town, Pitz. Cor. 242.
and to come again, this is a negligent escape, because the prisoner in this
case was found out of the bounds of the prison.

License to go into the same town.
8 If a Jailer give leave to his prisoner to go into the same town, Fi. Cor.
431
and to come again, and he wandreth into another town out of his prescribed
limits, and is there found wandering with an intent to escape, this is a
negligent escape in the Jailer.

9 If one which by the law is not mainpernable, be let to maineprise, Mainprise.
25. Ed. 3. 39
that shall be adjudged a negligent escape in him who did let him to mainprise.

Petit larceny.
10 As an escape may be of one that is imprisoned or arrested for felony: Fi.
Cor. 430 431
so it may be of him, that is arrested, or in prison for petit Larcenie: But
not of any that is arrested or imprisoned for trespass.

Escape by return of Cepi Corpus.
11 A Capias was awarded to the Sheriff to arrest one of felony, 40. As. p. 42
and he thereupon did return Cepi Corpus, and at the day had not the body:
upon this matter of Record, it was adjudged an escape in the Sheriff: and he
was amerced a hundred shillings.

12 If an offender be in prison at the suit of one man, and then at another,
26. Ass. p. 52
or of diverse men, and he does escape: this shall be adjudged but one escape, and
the Jailer shall be charged but with one escape. But if one that is arrested for
felony do escape, Fi. Cor. 422
and fly to the Church, and after escapes out of the Church, Double escape
these shall be adjudged two escapes; viz. one from the prison, and another from
the Church. And the Jailer, or other who suffers him to escape shall be charged
with the first of those Escapes, and the town wherein the Church is with the
last of them.

St. 3. H. 7. 1. 4. El. Dyer. 110.

Fitz. Cor. 238. 293.


13 There be certain cases wherein an escape shall be adjudged, Escape without
arrest.
though there was no arrest before: as if one be murdered or slain in a town
in ye day time, and the murderer do escape without being taken or arrested by
those of the town: in this case those of the town shall be charged with this
escape, that is to say, they shall be amerced for it, and though the escape be at
the evening. And by the Statute of Winchester, viz. of 13. Ed. 1. St. 13. Ed.
1. 1. 2.
If a man be robbed, and the felon does escape, and be not taken within six
month, the town or hundred shall answer the party robbed that made huy and
cry, for the robbery, and the damages.

Fi. Cor. 302
14 If one do kill another by misaduenture, or in his own defense, Who shall be
charged with an escape.
and do escape: the town where he was slain shall be amerced for it, though
the offender was not arrested: for the people of the town do see a man slain,
but they are not to judge, whether it be felony or not; and therefore they
ought to have apprehended the manqueller.

15 As the law is of a town not walled in, or enclosed, Escape in a town
walled
touching a murder committed in the day; so is it of a city or town enclosed,
of a murder committed in the night: for if in a town enclosed one be murdered,
be it done by day or night; Fi. Cor. 299.
if in that case the murderer do escape, the town or city enclosed shall be
amerced: because the city or town enclosed ought by the Statute of Winchester
to be kept fast locked, from the Sun setting, to the Sun rising.

Fi. Cor. 352. 425.
16 If a felon do fly to a Church, and before abiuration he does escape:
Flying to a Church and escaping.
in this case the town where the Church is, shall be charged with this escape:
viz. they shall be amerced for it. But this must be before abiuration, for if he
do escape after abiuration, the town shall not be charged therewith, for that
by the abiuration, he is in law attained.

17 And so it is, if a felon take a Church, which by the law cannot make
abiuration: Escaping by making abiuration.
in this case, if he fly from thence, the town shall not be charged with an
escape: As if a man that is adjudged to be hanged, does escape from the
sheriff, 27. Ass. p. 54 Fi. Cor. 313 335 9. E. 4. 28.
when he is in carrying him to the gallows, and does take a Church, and then
escape: the town where the Church is, shall not be amerced for this escape;
for that in this case, he cannot make an abiuration, which is an attainder in
it self, being attainted before.

18 And so it is to be noted, that a city, borough, Escape before or after
arrest
or town may be charged wc the escape of an offender, which has committed
murder, or homicide, though he were not arrested: But one, two, or more private
persons cannot be charged with the escape of an offender, until he be arrested.

Where the Sheriff, and where the town charged.
19 If the Sherifes bailife do arrest one for felony in a town, and do carry
him toward the prison, and certain persons of the town do go with the
bailife to assist him, and the felon escapes by the way, Fi. Cor. 328. 337.
the sheriff shall be charged with the escape: but it shall be otherwise, if the
felon be committed to the people of the town to carry to prison; for in that
case, if the prisoner do escape, the town shall be charged therewith.

The hundred charged with escape.
20 One was arrested for felony, and led to the hundred court, Fi. Cor. 316
and then he was persuaded to go abroad, and seek his warrant, viz. one that
should warrant him those goods, which he was charged to steal, and he went,
and fled to the Church, and abiured: In this case the whole hundred was charged
with ye escape, and the party who gave him the counsel, and leave, paid a
great ransom to the king, and the felons goods were forfeited to the King.

Escape of one imprisoned for a time.
21 One that has committed petit larcenie is adjudged to be imprisoned by the
space of a month for his punishment, 27 As. p. 27 Fi. Cor. 430
and then being kept in prison after the month, he breaks prison, and
escapes; the keeper of the prison shall be charged with this escape. But if one
that is arraigned of felony, 21. H. 7. 17
be adjudged to be acquit, viz. that he shall be discharged, paying his fees: By
this he shall be out of prison touching the felony, and the Jailer shall not be
charged, if he do escape: for the prisoner in the first case was by judgment
committed to prison, and in the last, adjudged to be acquit of imprisonment,
paying etc.

Where the town, hundred, or county shall be charged with escape.
22 If one be slain in the day time in a town, Fitz. Cor. 238. 293.
and the murderer escape without being taken, the town shall be charged with
the escape: And if the party be killed out of any town, then the Hundred
shall be charged therewith: Or if the town be not sufficient to answer the
amerciament for the escape, Fi. Cor. 425 316.
then the Hundred shall be charged therewith: And for the disabilitie of the
hundred, the whole county shall be charged with the escape. And the same law is
of Abiuration, where the Church is in a field out of any town.

The Jailer will not receive a prisoner.
23 If the Constable do arrest a felon, and carry him to the Jail of the same
county, and the Jailer will not receive him, 10. H. 4. 7.
the Constable ought not to let him go, but the town where the Constable
dwells shall be charged with the keeping of him, until the next Jail
delivery.

Prisoner by matter of record.
24 The law has two several respects to two sorts of prisoners, whereof the
one is prisoner by matter of Record, and the other by matter in deed. A
prisoner by matter of Record is, when one that is present in Court, is
committed to prison by the Court. In this case, if the keeper of the prison
has not this prisoner always ready, when the Court will send for him, Fi.
Cor. 466
or else do show a reasonable cause why he cannot have him, the Court will
judge this an escape by the Keeper without further inquitie. But if the Keeper
of the prison be in this case examined by the court of his prisoner, 39 H. 6.
33.
and he will say nothing, the Court will adiudge it a voluntary escape.

Fi. Cor. 352
25 If it be found in the Coroners Roll, that one did fly to the Church, Escape
by a town.
and no abiuration is found in the same Roll: in this case, the court will
adiudge an escape upon the whole town without further presentment. A man
killed being in carrying to the Jail.
And if a man be apprehended for felony in a town, Fi. Cor. 346
and carried toward the Jail by certain of the same town, and if he do
resist them, whereupon they do kill him: in this case it shall be adjudged an
escape upon that town; for in that he was not safely carried to the Jail, and
attainted of felony, ye king does loose his escheats.

26 When the Deciners do present that a felon is apprehended for felony,
Escape by the Sheriff.
and delivered to the Sheriff, it will be adjudged an escape, if they do not
declare to which Sheriff he is delivered, and name him, so that his rolls may
be searched and seen, whether the prisoner came within the charge of the
Sheriff: Fi. Cor. 345.
and if it be not found, how he came out of the Sherifs ward, according to the
law of the Realm, an escape shall be adjudged upon the Sheriff.

39. H. 6. 33.
27 It is used in the Kings Bench, A Coroner sent to the Marshalsey to enquire
etc.
to send a Coroner once or twice every Term to the Marshalsey, to see all the
prisoners that be committed to ye marshall by matter of Record: and if any of
them be wanting, and cannot be found there, to set his name in a book, and to
inform the Justices thereof: and then the Court will examine the Marshall
thereof, and if he cannot sufficiently excuse himself, the Court will record
escapes upon him for every of them.

21. As. p. 12.
28 And touching those which be prisoners of Record, Confessing and avoiding of
an escape.
the Keeper of the prison cannot trauerse the escape; but confess, and avoid
it: as in alleging that the prison was burnt, or broken by the Kings enemies:
or by saying, that he which is supposed to be escaped, is not the same prisoner
which was committed to him.

29 Prisoner by matter in fait, is where one is prisoner by arrest only,
Prisoner by matter in fait, viz. by arrest.
whether it be by the Sheriff, the Constable, or any other, and he does escape:
there the Escape shall be presented before he shall answer unto it. And this
presentment ought to be before the Justices of the Kings Bench, the Justices in
Eire, or some other Justices that have authority to enquire thereof: Before
whom an escape shall be presented.
As it appears by the Statute of Westminster 1. the words whereof be these:
It is ordained, St. 3. E. 1. 4.
that nothing shall be demanded, nor taken, nor levied by the sheriff, nor by
any other, for the escape of any thief or felon, until it shall be adjudged by
the Justices in Eire. And he that shall do otherwise, shall restore to him
that paid it, so much as he has received, and to the King as much. And
likewise by the Statute of 31. Ed. 3. St. 31. E. 3. 14.
it is provided, That the Escape of felons and Clerks convict, shall be
adjudged by the Justices, and by their view levied. And though the foresaid
Statute of Westminster the first, does not make mention of any but of Justices
in Eire, 21 As. p. 12. 27. As. p. 1.
yet it does also extend to the Justices of the Kings Bench: because the Kings
Bench is in Eire, and higher then an Eire, for if the Justices in Eire do sit
in a County, and the Justices of the Kings Bench come thither, the Eire shall
cease.

Iu. of peace and Coroner shall enquire of escapes.
30 And by the Statute of 1. R. 3. St. 1. R. 3. 3.
Justices of Peace may enquire of all manner of Escapes, of every person
arrested and imprisoned for felony. And by the Statute of 3. H. 7. St. 3. H.
7. 1.
They may enquire of the escape of any that has committed murder, and make
certificat thereof into the Kings Bench. And also by the said Statute of 3. H.
7. the Coroner upon the view of the dead body, may enquire of the escape of
the murderer: for if he do commit the murder in the day, and escape, the town
shall be amerced. And also the Coroner shall deliver his Inquisition thereof to
the Justices at the next Jail delivery of the same County.

Trauerse to a presentment of an escape.
31 Upon an escape, for the which no fine is to be paid, Fi. Cor. 291 328. 346.
but an Amerciament, he or they which be charged therewith, shall have no
Trauerse to the presentment thereof: Quia de minimis non curat lex.

Escapes inquirable in Leetes and Turns.
32 Although Escapes of felons be at this day inquirable in Leetes, and Sherifes
Turns, yet it shall not be levied, until it be adjudged before the Justices:
for that should be contrary to the foresaid Statute of Westminster 1.

The penalties of escapes
33 The penalty of him, which does voluntarily suffer one arrested for felony
to escape, is the forfeiture of all that he has, because it is felony. The
penalty of him which does suffer a negligent escape of a felon, is to pay a
fine. The penalty for the escape of him which was never arrested, is but an
amerciament. And if any do suffer him that is attainted of felony,
negligently to escape, he shall pay to the King for a fine an hundred pounds.
And if the party escaping were but indicted, and not attainted, then he shall
pay to the King for a fine a hundred shillings. If one which is not indicted,
nor taken with the manner, nor apprehended at the suit of the party, 42. As.
p. 5.
but only taken by a stranger for susption of felony, do escape, there shall
no penalty nor punishment follow thereof. But yet if after the same escape, he
that did escape, 44. As p. 12. 42 As p. 5. 43. E. 3. 36
shall be indicted of felony, or make his abiuration, then he that suffered him
to escape, shall pay a fine to the King.

Where a man arrested may be set at liberty, without further trial: where not.
34 If a man be arrested of felony by the Constable, or some other man, Kel.
fo. 34
and after he that made the arrest has intelligence, that there is no such
felony committed: in this case, he may set the party arrested at liberty, and
he shall not be charged with an escape: for there can be no felon where there
is no felony committed. But if a man be slain, and one is arrested for the
same felony, or for the suspicion thereof, although that he who made the
arrest, does after understand, 44. As. p. 12.
that the party arrested, is not guilty of that offense, or that the party
was arrested upon malice, yet he may not set the party arrested at liberty,
for he must be delivered by a course of law, and not by any man's discretion:
for as the law has taken knowledge, that a man was arrested of felony, so
must it take knowledge how he is discharged thereof. And the same law is, if a
man be arrested for any other felony committed, and after set at liberty by
the party, that arrested him, or any other etc.

Pursuit by Huy and Cry.
FOr the prevention of felons, and felonies by watch and ward, and to the
intent that they which shall commit any Homicides, Burglaries, Robberies, or
other felonies may be apprehended, and justified by the Law: Or if they escape,
and fly away, that they may be pursued and taken by Huy and Cry, and
committed to prison: and to the end that due punishment may be inflicted upon
those that do not pursue, or do conceal, or not attach felons, a Statute was
made at Westminster Anno 3. Ed. 1. by the which it was ordained, All men shall
pursue the huy and cry.
St. 3. E. 1. 9.
That all men generally shall be ready at the commandment and summons of the
Sheri^es, and at the cry of the Country to pursue and arrest felons when
need shall be, as well within Fraunchises as without; and they that will not,
and thereof be attainted, shall make a grievous fine to the King. And if default
be found in the Lord of a Franchise, the King shall seize the Fraunchise into
his hands: And if default be in the bailife, he shall be one year imprisoned,
and after make a grievous fine: and if he have not whereof, he shall have two
years imprisonment. And if the Sheriff, Coroner, or any Bailife, within such
franchise or without, for reward or entreaty, Concealeme^t or not attachment
of felons
or any affinity, do conceal, consent or procure to conceal the felonies
done in their liberties, or otherwise will not attach or arrest such felons
(whereas they may) or otherwise will not do their offices, for the favor that
they bear to such offenders, and be thereof attained, they shall be one year
imprisoned, and make a grievous fine; and if they have not whereof to make
fine, they shall be three years imprisoned. And by a Branch of an other
Statute made the same Anno. 3. Ed. 1. St. 3. Ed. 1.
entitled Officium Coronatoris, it was enacted, That upon all Homicides,
Burglaries, men slain, or put in great danger, huy and cry shall be levied,
and every man shall follow the huy and cry, and the offenders steps if it may
be: and whosoever does not, and is thereupon convicted, shall be attached to
appear before the Justices of Gaale delivery.

Freshsuit and inquiry after felons.
2 After, by another Statute made at Winchester Anno 13. Ed. 1. St. 13. E. 1. 1
it was provided, That immediately after any felonies and robberies be
committed, fresh suit shall be made from town to town, and from country to
country, and Enquests shall be taken, if need be, by him that is chief Lord
of the town, and after in hundreds, franchises, and in the county, and
sometime in two, three, or four counties, in case where felonies be committed
in the Marches of the Shire, so that offenders may be attainted, and suffer
punishment. And if the country will not answer for the bodies of such
offenders, the people dwelling in every such country shall answer for the
robberies done, and the damages: so that the whole hundred where the robbery
shall be done, with the franchises which be within the same hundreds shall
answer for the robberies done. The penalty of the country if a felon be not
taken.
And if the robbery be done in the division of two hu^dreds, then both the
hundreds, together with the franchises within the precinct of them shall
answer. And the country shall have no longer time after the robbery and
felony committed, than half a year, within the which half year they must
agree for ye robbery, or else they shall be answerable for the bodies of the
offenders. After, by a Statute made an^ 28. E. 3. 11. St. 28. E. 3. 11
it is established, That the country shall have no longer term after the
robbery or felony committed, than forty days, within which it behooves
them to make gree of the robbery or offense, or that they answer the bodies of
the offenders. And whereas the said stat. of Winchester has ordained, That
immediately after any felonies and robberies be committed, Co. li. 7. 6.
fresh suit shall be made from town to town, and from country to country:
Though the said Stat. does not make mention in what place, or at what time the
robbery shall be done, for the which the country shall answer, if they do not
pursue and apprehend the felons: yet the sages of the law respecting the reason
and ground of that stat do resolve, that the robbery which ye country must
answer for, is to be committed in an open place, The place and time of the
robbery committed.
which the country may take knowledge of by themselves, without huy and cry,
or other notice given to them: for if a man be robbed in his house in the
night, or day, and the felons escape, the hundred where the house is shall not
be charged therewith, for every man's house is his castle, which he must defend
at his own peril, and if a man be robbed in his house it shall be accounted his
own folly that he did defend it no better. And other men may not enter into
that house for the safeguard thereof, as they may enter into the common field.
And also the robbery which the country must answer for, is to be committed in
the day time, and not in the night, viz. at such times add seasons as be meet
for men to travel in, and not at such a time which is ordained for men to rest
in. And therefore if a man be robbed in the morning before day, the country
shall not be charged therewith: but if it be during the day light, though the
sun be set, the country shall be charged therewith: for whosoever does travel
during the day light, is in the guard and protection of the law: and if any
do journey by night, he does it at his own peril.

St. 13. E. 1. 4
3 For the more surety of the country, and speedier defecting of offenders,
warding of walled towns
by the said Statute of Winchester it was enacted, That in great towns being
walled, the gates shall be shut from the sun setting until the sun rising:
and no man shall lodge in the Suburbs, or any place out of the town, from nine
of the clock until day, unless his Host will answer for him. And the bailifs
of towns every week, or at the least every fifteenth day, shall make inquiry
of all persons being lodged in the Suburbs, or in foreign places of the
towns, and if they find any that has received any suspicious persons, not
keeping the Kings peace, the baylifs shall execute right and justice therein.

St. 13. E. 1^4.
4 And by the said statute of Winchester it was moreover ordained, That in all
towns watch shall be kept, as in times past it has been used, That is to
say, When the night watch shall begin and end.
from the feast of the Ascension until Michaelmas, in every city six men
shall watch at every gate, in every Borough twelve men, in every town six or
four, according to the number of the inhabitants of the town, and they shall
watch the town at night from the sun setting to the sun rising. And if any
stranger do pass by them, he shall be arrested until the morning, and if no
suspicion be found, he shall go quit: and if they find cause of suspicion,
they shall forthwith deliver him to the Shirife, and the Shirife shall receive
him without hurt, until he be acquitted in due manner. And if he will not obey
the arrest, Resisting of arrest.
they shall levy Huy and Cry upon him, and such as keep the Town, shall
follow with Huy and Cry with all the Town and Towns near, and from Town to
Town, until he be taken and delivered to the Shirife, as is beforesaid: and
for the arrestments of such strangers none shall be punished. And by the
Statute of Anno 5. H. 4. St. 5. H. 4. 3
Justices of Peace have power to make inquisition in their Sessions from time
to time, and to punish them which be found in default, after the tenor of the
foresaid statute of Winchester.

Enlarging of high ways.
5 And for the more speedy apprehension of felons, and that they may have the
less means to escape, when they have robbed, or otherwise offended, St. 13.
E. 1. 5.
by the said statute of Winchester it is further established, That the
highwaies leading from one Market town to another shall be enlarged there where
any wood, hedges, or ditches be, so that there shall be no ditch, wood, or bush
where he that does lewdly may escape, within two hundred foot of the high way
on the one side, and two hundred foot on the other (but this Statute extends
not to Ashes or great Trees.) And if any robberies be done by default of
breaking down ditches, underwood, and bushes, the Lord shall answer therefore:
and if it be a murder, the Lord shall be punished at the Kings pleasure. And if
the Lord be not able to cut down the underwood, the Country shall help him.
And within the kings demesne woods in forests and without, the ways shall be
enlarged as before is said. And if any Park be near unto the high way, the
Lord thereof shall diminish it by the space of two hundred foot from the high
way, or else make such a wall, ditch, or hedge, that offenders cannot go
forward or backward to any hurt.

6 Because it is very hard, and extreme to many persons, for that by the
foresaid Statutes of 13. Ed. 1. and 28. E. 3. 11. they do remain charged with
the penalties therein contained, notwithstanding their inability to satisfy
the same, and though they do as much as in reason might be required in pursuing
such malefactors and offenders, whereby both large scope of negligence is given
to the inhabitants and resiants in other hundreds and counties, not to
prosecute the huy and cry made, followed, and brought unto them, by reason
they are not chargeable for any portion of the goods robbed, nor with any
damages in that behalf given: and also great encouragement and imboldening is
likewise given to ye offenders to commit daily more felonies and robberies,
seeing it is in a manner impossible for the inhabitants and resiants of the said
hundred and franchise wherein the robbery is committed to apprehend them,
without the aid of other hundreds and counties adjoining. And for that also
the party robbed having remedy by the foresaid statutes for the recovering of
his goods robbed and damages against the Hundred wherein the robbery was
committed, is many times negligent and careless in prosecuting and pursuing
the said malefactors and offenders. The Hundred charged where fresh suit shall
cease.
For the qualifying of all which extreamities by a statute made Anno 27. Eliz.
St. 27. El. 13
it was ordained, That the inhabitants and resiants of every, or any such
Hundred (with the franchises within the precinct thereof) wherein negligence,
fault, or defect of pursuit and fresh suit after huy and cry made shall happen
to be, shall answer and satisfy the one moitie or half of all and every sum
and sums of money and damages, as shall by force and virtue of the said
Statutes ( viz. of 13. Ed. 1. and 28. Ed. 3.) or either of them be recovered or
had against, or of the same Hundred, with the franchises therein, in which any
robbery or felony shall at any time hereafter be committed or done. And the
same moitie shall and may at any time hereafter be recovered by action of
debt, bill, plaint, or information in any of the Queens Courts of Record at
Westminster, by, and in the name of the Clerk of the Peace for the time being,
of, The Clerk of the Peace shall prosecute the suit.
or in every such County within this Realm where any such robbery and
recovery by the party or parties robbed shall be, without naming the Christian
name or the surname of the said Clerk of the Peace. Which moitie so
recovered, shall be to the only use and behoof of the inhabitants of the said
Hundred, where any such robbery or felony shall be committed or done.

St. 27. El. 13
7 If any Clerk of the Peace, of, or in any County within this Realm, shall
at any time hereafter commence, or prefer any such suit, action, or
information, and shall after the same so sued, commenced, or preferred, The
Clerk of the Peace does die, or is removed.
happen to die, or to be removed out of his office before recovery and
execution had, yet no such action, suit, bill, plaint, or information sued,
commenced, or preferred, shall by such displacing, or death, be abated,
discontinued, or ended. But it shall and may be lawful, to, and for the Clerk
for the Peace next succeeding in the said County, to prosecute, pursue, and
follow all, and every such action, bill, plaint, suit, and information for the
causes aforesaid, so hanging and depending, in such manner and form, to all
intents and purposes, as that Clerk of the Peace might have done, which first
commenced or preferred the said suit, bill, plaint, or information.

8 Although the whole Hundred where such robberies and felonies are committed,
with the liberties within the precincts thereof, are by the said two former
statutes charged with the answering to the party robbed his damages, yet
nevertheless the recovery and execution by and for the party or parties
robbed is had against one or a very few persons of the said inhabitants, and
he and they so charged, have not heretofore by Law had any mean or way to
have any contribution, of, or from the residue of the said Hundred where the
said robbery is committed, to the great impouerishment of them against whom
such recovery or execution is had: for the remedy whereof by the said statute
of An^ 27. Eliz. St. 27. El. 13
it was enacted, That after execution of damages by the party or parties so
robbed, had, it shall and may be lawful (upon complaint made by the party or
parties so charged) to, and for two Justices of the Peace, whereof one to be of
the Quorum, of the same County, inhabiting within the said Hundred, or near
unto the same, where any such execution shall be had, to assesse and tax
ratably, and proportionably, according to their discretions all and every the
Towns, A remedy for an equal contribution.
Parishes, Villages, and Hamlets, as well of the said Hundred where any such
robberies shall be committed, as of the Liberties within the said Hundred, to,
and toward an equal contribution to be had and made for the relief of the
said inhabitant or inhabitants, against whom the party or parties robbed
before that time had his or their execution. And that after such taxation made,
the Constables, Constable, Headboroughs, or Headborough of every such Town,
Parish, Village, and Hamlet, shall by virtue of this Act have full power and
authority within their several limits, ratably and proportionably, to tax
and assesse according to their abilities, every inhabitant and dweller in
every such Town, Parish, Village, and Hamlet, for, and toward the payment
of such taxation and assessement, as shall be so made upon every such Town,
Parish, Village, and Hamlet, as aforesaid, by the said Justices. And if any
Inhabitant of any such Town, Parish, Village, or Hamlet, shall obstinately
refuse and deny to pay the said Taxation and assessement so by the said
Constables, Constable, Headboroughs, or Headborough taxed and assessed: then it
shall and may be lawful, to, and for the said constables, and headboroughs,
and every of the^ within their several limits and jurisdictions, to distraine
all and every person and persons so refusing and denying, by his and their
goods and chattels, and the same distress to sell, and the money thereof coming
to retain to the use aforesaid. And if the goods or chattells so distrained
and sold, shall be of more value, than the said Taxation shall come unto, then
the residue of the said money over and above the said Taxation, shall be
delivered unto the said person or persons so distrained.

Delivering the contribute money.
9 All and every the said Constables and Headboroughs, St. 27. El. 13
after that they have within their several limits and jurisdictions levied
and collected their said rates and sums of money so taxed, shall within ten
days after such collection, pay and deliver the same over unto the said
Justices of Peace, or one of them, to the use and behoof of the said
Inhabitant or Inhabitants, for whom such rate, taxation, or assessement shall
be had or made, as aforesaid: Which money so paid, shall by the Justices or
Justice so receiving the same, be delivered over (upon request made) unto the
said Inhabitant or Inhabitants, to whose use the same shall be collected.

Leuying of cantribution.
10 And the like taxation, assessement, leuying by distress, and payment, St.
27. El. 13
as aforesaid, shall be had and done within every Hundred where default or
negligence of pursuit and fresh suit shall be, for, and to the benefit of all
and every Inhabitant or Inhabitants of the same Hundred, where such default
shall be, that shall at any time hereafter by virtue of this Act, have any
damages or money levied of them, for, or to the payment of the one moitie or
half of the money recovered against the said Hundred, where any robbery shall
be hereafter committed.

No penalty where any of the offenders be apprehended.
11 Provided, that where any robbery is, St. 27. El. 13
or shall be hereafter committed by two or a greater number of malefactors, and
that it happen any one of the said offenders to be apprehended by pursuit to be
made according to the said former mentioned Laws and Statutes, according to
this present Act, that then, and in such case, no hundred or franchise shall in
any wise incur, or fall into the penalty, loss, or forfeiture mentioned
either in this present Act, or in any the said former statutes, although the
residue of the said malefactors shall happen to escape, and not to be
apprehended: Any thing in this statute, or in the said former statutes to the
contrary notwithstanding. Which said Branch does in some sort qualify part
of the foresaid statute of Winchester: for by the said statute, Col. 7. fol. 7
the Country must agree for the said robbery within half a year, or else
they shall be answerable for the bodies of the said offenders, which is of all
the offenders. But by this statute it is sufficient if they take any of the
offenders, although not all.

St. 27. Eli. 13
12 Provided also, Within what time the suit shall be commenced.
That no person or persons hereafter robbed shall take any benefit by virtue
of any the said former Statutes to charge any Hundred where any such robbery
shall be committed, except he or they so robbed shall commence his or their
suit or action, within one year next after such robbery so to be committed.

St. 27. Eli. 13
13 No huy and cry, In what manner huy and cry shall be made.
or pursuit hereafter to be done or made by the Country, or inhabitants of any
Hundred shall be allowed and taken to be a lawful huy and cry, or pursuit,
upon, or after any of the said felons, or offenders, except the same huy and
cry and pursuit be done and made by horsemen and footmen: Any usage, or
custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

St. 27. El. 13
14 No person or persons that shall hereafter happen to be robbed, Notice must be
given of the robbery.
shall have or maintain any action, or take any benefit by virtue of the said
two mentioned Statutes, or either of them, except the said person or persons
so robbed, shall with as much convenient speed as may be, give notice and
intelligence of the same felony or robbery so committed unto some of the
inhabitants of some Town, Village, or Hamlet near unto the place where any
such robbery shall be committed: Nor shall bring or have any action upon, or
by virtue of any the statutes aforesaid, except he or they shall first within
twenty days next before such action to be brought, be examined upon his or
their corporal Oath to be taken before some one Justice of the Peace of the
County where the robbery was committed, inhabiting within the said Hundred
where the robbery was committed, The party robbed examined ^ bound to
prosecute the offenders.
or near unto the same, whether he or they do know the parties that
committed the said robbery, or any of them. And if upon such examination it be
confessed, that he or they do know the parties that committed the said
robbery, or any of them, then he or they so confessing, shall before the
said action be commenced, or brought, enter into sufficient bond by
Recognisance before the said Justice, before whom the said examination is
had, effectually to prosecute the same person and persons so known to have
committed the said robbery, by indictment, or otherwise, according to the due
course of the Laws of this Realm.

15 Because the inhabitants of the Hundred of Benherst in the county of Berke
consisting only upon five small villages, and three hamlets, and having in it
two great road ways of three miles in length at the least, through the
Thicket, have been ouercharged by several Branches of the said Statute of
Anno 27. Eli. 13. In reformation thereof, by a Statute made an^ 39. Elizab. St.
39. E. 2^
it was enacted, That the inhabitants of the Hundred of Benherst, alias
Beinersh, within the County of Berke, shall and may to their own proper use,
A remedy for the inahbitants of Benherst in Barkshire.
in the name of the Clerk of the Peace of the said County of Berke, recover,
have, and levy all such sums of money, costs, and damages as hereafter
shall be recovered, or levied, of, or against them by the foresaid Statutes,
or any of them, against the inhabitants and resiants of every, or any such
Hundred, with the franchises within the precincts thereof, wherein negligence,
fault, or defect of such pursuit, and fresh suit (as by the said Statute of 27.
Elizab. is appointed to be made) shall happen to be, after notice given, or huy
and cry brought to the said inhabitants or resiants, or any of them, of, or
upon any robberies which shall be at any time hereafter done within the said
Hundred of Beinersh. And this present Act shall give as full power and
authority in all respects to the inhabitants of the said Hundred of Benherst
(in the name of the Clerk of the Peace of the said County) for recovery,
having, and leuying of all the said money, costs, and damages as aforesaid,
as the aforesaid Statute of 27. Elizab. gave or intended to give for the
recovery of a moitie, or one half thereof. Provided always, that no such
remedy, or recovery shall be had In what cases only the recovery shall be
had.
by this Statute, for all, or the whole sum or sums of money, and damages
aforesaid, but only in these two Cases, viz. The one, where no such notice or
intelligence (as by the said Statute of 27. Elizab. was appointed to be given
of every, or any Robbery) shall be given to the inhabitants of the said
hundred of Benherst alias Beinersh: The other where the inhabitants of the same
Hundred (after such notice of any Robbery to them, or some of them given, or
after huy and cry for the same to them brought) shall make, or cause to be
made fresh suit, and pursuit after the offenders with horsemen and footmen,
according to the said Statute of 27. Elizab. and where nevertheless the
offenders, or any, or one of them shall not be apprehended within forty days
after the Robbery committed.

16 Two joint owners of a sumine of money, P. 24. El. Di. 370.
which were robbed by felons unknown at A. in the Hundred of B. in the county
of C. brought their action against the inhabitants of the said Hundred of B.
and declared, that whereas huy and cry was levied by them, and notice there
given, and the felons were not apprehended, nor descried, nor amends made
within the six months, according to the statute of Winchester: whereunto the
defendants, viz. the inhabitants of the said Hundred of B. pleaded in bar of
the action, that immediately upon the huy and cry levied, they made fresh suit
from the said Town of A. where the robbery was committed through their other
towns unto the town of D. which is next adjoining to the said Hundred, and
there huy and cry was given to the inhabitants of the said Hundred. ^^rsute
will not serve ^^thout apprehensio^ of the ^^lon^, or descrying the^.
But this manner of pursuit was adjudged no excuse, according to the meaning of
the said statute of Winchester, without apprehending, or answering of the
robbe^s, or descrying of their names, that they might be indicted and outlawed.
And in this case the plaintifes may join in action, because they were joint
owners of the money: But if the sums of money had been several, and they
had several properties in them, they would not have joined in Action.

Arresting of him that is pu sued by huy and cry.
17 If a man be driving of cattle, and be pursued by huy and cry, 29. Ed. 3.
39.
the Shirifes Bailiffe, or any other, may arrest him and the cattle supposed
to be stolen, and commit them to the Town where they be apprehended to answer
to the King, according to the Law, though the man arrested be not of evil
name, suspicious, nor a stranger in those parts, nor indicted. For the Law
does give that credit to huy and cry, that every man is a sufficient
Bailiffe and officer to apprehend him that is pursued by huy and cry, and
taken with the thing supposed to be stolen. And therefore if one man do levy
huy and cry upon an other without cause, both the one party and the other
shall be attached to answer it, as disturbers of the Peace.

Appeals.
WHen a murder, manslaughter, rape, burglarie, robbery, or other felony is
committed, and that the offender (be he principal or accessorie) is
apprehended by huy and cry, or by any other means, and so by imprisonment or
mainprise brought to his answer: Or otherwise if he flee and escape, when he is
so discovered and known, that Process may be awarded against him by name, to
take him, and bring him into the Kings court of his answer: Then either the
party most interessed or grieved by the same murder or felony, is to
prosecute suit against the said offender by Appeal, and thereby to seek
revenge against him for the wrong done to himself, or his auncestor; or else
the offender is to be indicted at the Kings suit, whose peace he has broken,
and whose law he has offended, and who has a special interest in all manner
of treasons and felonies to punish them, to weed them out of his kingdoms and
dominions, and to defend his subjects from them. And therefore I am to express
in this Chapter, and the next, what an Appeal of felony is, and what an
Indictment is, by whom, for whom, and against whom, and in what cases they are
to be begun, prosecuted, and maintained, what defenses or pleas are to be
made or pleaded by the supposed offenders unto them, and what counterpleas may
be objected against the same plees. Appeal of death.
An Appeal is a plaint of one person made against another, with an intent to
attaint him of felony, by a course of Law provided therefore; which appeal
may be brought against a woman covert without her husband, against an infant,
and all others that can commit felony: and a woman may have an appeal for the
death of her husband Appeal by a woman of the death of her husband.
(because the husband and wife be one flesh) but of the death of none other, by
force of the Statute of Magna Charta, which has ordained, That none shall be
taken, St. 9. H. 3.34
or imprisoned by the appeal of any woman for the death of any other, than of
her husband. And therefore if a woman do bring an appeal of the death of her
father, and the Defendant would admit it, yet the Court will abate it, 10. Ed.
4.7. Plow. Com. fol. 85.
because it is contrary to the said Statute.

Appella^t conueieth his title by a woman.
2 As a woman shall have no Appeal of the death of any other, but of her
husband: No more shall any cousin of him that was slain, who makes his
conueiance in kindred by a woman, have any appeal of the death of him that is
killed; notwithstanding he be issue male, and not female; Appellant conueyeth
his title by a woman.
and notwithstanding that the woman by whom he makes his conueiance, died in
the life time of him, 20. H. 6.46 Fi. Cor. 385 17. Ed. 4.1.
of whose death the appeal is commenced. As if a man have issue one only
daughter, who marries a husband, has issue a son, and dies; and after the
father of that woman is slain. In this case the son of the woman shall not
have an appeal of the death of his said grandfather, though he be his next
heir at the common law, and inheritable to his land; because his mother was
foreclosed of it by the foresaid statute of Magna Charta, and so likewise he,
which has none other title thereunto, but that which he deriueth from his
said mother. Fi. Cor. 384 17. Ed. 4.1
But if he that was slain, have none heir on the fathers side, then the uncle
or next of kin on the mothers side, shall have the appeal, yea though he do
convey his title thereunto by a woman.

3 By the ancient law of this Realm, a woman could not have an appeal of
the death of her husband, unless her said husband were slain between her
arms, within the year and day before: Neither could she, or any other have
an appeal, unless she or he were present at the death of the party slain,
and see it. But that Law was altered by the Statute of Gloucester, St. 6. Ed.
1.9
whereby it was ordained, That no Appeal shall be abated, so soon as they
have been heretofore: But if the appellant in an appeal do declare the
deed, the year, the day, the hour, The declaration in appeal of murder.
the time of the King, and the Town where the deed was done, and with what
weapon he was slain, the appeal shall stand in effect. And the appeal shall
not be abated for default of fresh suit, where a man does sue, within the
year, and the day, after the deed done.

50. Ed. 3.15. 28. Ed. 3.91. 27. Ass. p. 3.
4 If a woman will have an appeal of the death of her husband, The woman must
be the deads lawful wife.
it is requisite, that she be not only his wife indeed, viz. de facto, but
also lawfully, and in right, viz. de iure: for never accoupled in lawful
marriage, is a good plea, to bar her of her appeal. And it shall be tried by
the Bishop, whether she be his lawful wife, or not.

20. H. 6.46. 12. El. Dyer. 296.
5 It is requisite, that a woman who will maintain an appeal of the death of
her husband, shall live sole, and unmarried: The woman must live unmarried.
for by her second marriage, her appeal is extinct, though her second husband
do die, within a year and day after the death of her first husband. And if a
woman do bring an appeal of the death of her husband, and hanging the Writ,
she does marry another husband, her appeal shall abate for ever.

11. H. 4.46.
6 If a woman do bring an appeal of the death of her husband, A woman marries
between judgment and execution
and do pursue the Defendant until Judgment: And then after judgment, and
before execution, she marries an other husband: In this case, she shall not
obtain execution, viz. the Defendant shall not be hanged at her suit: for she
has willingly lost the name of her first husband, before she has obtained
the effect of her suit, and the revenge which she brought her appeal for.

Where appeal lies, but no dower.
7 There be some Cases, where a woman shall have an appeal of the death of her
husband, though she be not endowable of the possession of the same husband: As
where her husband is attainted of treason, 27. As. p. 41 35. H. 6.58
and after one does kill him, his wife shall have an appeal, and yet she shall
have no dower. And in like sort, if a woman do elope from her husband, and
after one does kill him, she may maintain an appeal against the offendour,
but no writ of dower against his heir. And many other Cases there be, where a
man was so seized of his lands, that his wife is not thereof endowable by the
Law: And yet if he be slain, she may maintain an appeal against the
manqueller.

Where the wife may have appeal, none other shall.
8 Where a woman may have an appeal of the death of her husband, 20. H. 6.47
Kel. fol. 120
none other shall have it during her life, nor after her death, though the wife
do die within the year and day after the death of her husband, and before the
appeal commenced; for that the appeal was once out of the blood, it shall not
be restored to his blood again. If the husband be killed by his wife, The
husband killed by his wife.
his son shall have an appeal. 33. H 8. Dyer 50 18. Ed. 4.1.
And yet if in that case the King do pardon the wife all treasons, the son
shall be barred of his appeal.

Appeal of death by the heir.
9 If he that was slain, had no wife living, at the time he was killed, then
his next heir by the common Law, if he be male, shall have the appeal. But
if he which brings the appeal be the next heir male to him that was
slain, yet if there be another living, which is his heir by the common Law,
though not his heir male, his appeal shall abate. As if he that was slain
had issue a daughter, and no son, 27. As. p. 25. Fi. Cor. 384
his brother cannot maintain an appeal against the offender, though he be
his next heir male, because he is not next heir by the common Law to him
that was slain, but his daughter is. And by the same reason, a Bastard, nor
the youngest son, which does inherit lands in Borough English, A Bastard.
Heir in Borough English.
shall not maintain an appeal, because neither of them is heir by the common
Law. It was a custom in old time, if one were found guilty in an appeal of
murder, that his wife, The manner of a murderers death.
and all the nearest of his kin, which was murdered, 11. H. 4.11. Plo. com.
306
should draw the felon who committed the murder, by a long rope, to the place
of execution.

An appeal dies with the Appellant, or by his nonsuite etc.
10 This appeal of the death of the auncester is so tied and affixed to the
next heir male at the Common Law of him that was slain, that if it be once
attached by him, although that he die, hanging the suite, or be non-suite
therein, or do discontinue the suite, and that within the year, 38. H. 6.13.
9. H. 7.5. 16. H. 7.15,
yet the appeal is extinct for ever: because it is but a personal action, and
not auncestrell, (for he that was slain could not have maintained it:) and
therefore being but personal, it does die with the person of the appellant.
But it is otherwise, if the appeal were not attached by the heir, during his
life, 11. H. 4.11. ^0. H. 6.46
but that he died before he brought his appeal, or died in the life of his
auncester that was killed: In that case, he which is next heir male living,
shall have the appeal.

9. H. 7.5. Stamf. fo. 59
11 If the eldest son, before the appeal commenced, and within the the year,
does release the appeal, and then dies, The heir does release, and die.
the second son and every other which claims as heir to the party slain,
shall be barred thereby.

16. H. 7.15. 38. H. 6.13.
12 If the eldest son do bring an appeal, and has judgment, Recovery and
death before execution.
and before execution of the offender dies, his heir shall not have
execution: for if he should, he is to have it as heir to him that recovered,
and not as heir to the party slain: which cannot be, for he that demands
revenge of his ancestors death, must make himself immediate heir to the same
auncestor which was slain, or otherwise his suit shall not be allowed, which
the heir of the eldest son in this case cannot do.

13 If the eldest son, after the title of appeal accrued unto him, The
eldest son disabling himself.
or during the life of his auncester that was slain, do disable himself by
attainder of felony, or by being a Monk, a Priest, or mayhemed by the
Defendant, Fitz. Cor. 235.322.
or by any other cause: So that by such disabilitie he cannot have an appeal,
yet the second son shall not have it.

14 If the eldest son does kill his father, or his mother, Killing father,
mother, brother, or wife.
the second son shall have an appeal against him. Fi. Cor. 459.
And if there be three brethren, and the middlemost kills the elder brother,
the youngest brother shall have an appeal against him: And yet in the
foresaid cases, he that brings the appeal, 18. Ed. 4.1. 33. H. 8. Dyer 50.
is not heir to him that is slain. And if the husband do kill his wife, his
son shall have an appeal against him.

1. H. 4.6. Littl. vill.
15 If the Lord do kill his Villain, the heir of him that was slain, The
Lord kills his villain.
may have an appeal against his Lord, notwithstanding that the Plaintifs in
the appeal is villain to the Defendant: for the villains heir does not sue
for the recovery of lands, goods, or liberty from the Lord, but only for a
lawful revenge of his auncesters death. And if the villains heir should not
have an appeal in this case, the said offense should remain unpunished by
appeal: for none other may pursue it.

41. As. p. 14. 45. Ed. 3.25 27. Ed. 3.83. Kel. fol. 120 32. As. p. 8.
16 An Infant An Infant.
within the age of twenty and one years, may have an appeal of the death of
his auncester, (and in like sort he may have any manner of appeal:) But
notwithstanding, the plea shall remain to be tried, until he come to his full
age of one and twenty years, for that in this case the Defendant cannot wage
battle against him: Attamen quaere.

A man of 70. years of age.
17 A man of the age of three score and ten years may have an appeal of the
death of his auncestour, Fi. Cor. 385
(and in like sort may have any manner of appeal:) and yet being of that age,
he shall put the Defendant from waging of battle with him.

Disabilities to bring an appeal.
18 If the Plaintiff which ought to sue the Appeal be attainted of treason, or
felony, or a Monk, or a Priest, or mayhemed by the Defendant, Fi. Cor. 32^
he shall not have an appeal.

Disabilities in the appellant.
19 A man that is not of perfect memory, or that is deaf and dumb, Britton.
or a Lazar, or a fool natural, shall not have an appeal of death, nor any
other appeal. For battle cannot be waged against any of them, every of them
being imperfect to perform the same.

Pleading that the appellant has an elder brother.
20 If one brother do bring an appeal of the death of his auncestor, 7. Ed. 4.
15
it is no plea for the appellee to say, that the said auncestor, at the time of
his death, and after the Writ purchased, had an elder brother named B. to whom
the appeal is given, and not to him that is plaintiff: for it may be, that the
same B. was his brother of the half blood. And therefore the surest way is to
begin his plea with the father of him that was slain, as to say, that such a
man took to his wife such a woman, and had issue between them B. their eldest
son, and he which was slain their second son, and the appellant their
youngest son, and that he which was slain died, living B. their eldest son.

The appella^t in appeal of death may sue by attorney.
21 For that by the common Law, he that will sue an appeal, must sue it in
proper person, which suit is long, and costly, and makes the party appellant
weary to sue: For the reformation whereof it was ordained by the Statute of
Anno 3. H. 7. St. 3. H. 7. 1
That the Appellant in any appeal of murder, or death of a man (where battle
by the course of the common Law lies not;) may make his attorney, and appear
by the same, in the said appeal, after it is commenced, to the end and
Execution of the same.

Who shall maintain an appeal of robbery.
22 As concerning an appeal of Robbery, who shall maintain it, Fi. Cor. 100
and for what causes, it is to be observed, That he from whom the goods be
taken, may have the same appeal: As the Servant shall have an Appeal of
Robbery, if the goods of his Masters be taken out of his custody and
possession, and yet he had only the possession, but no property in the goods
robbed. A Carrier.
And so it is, if a Stranger be commanded to carry another man's goods, and
as he is in carrying of them, 2. Ed. 4. 15.
he is robbed of them, and they taken from him: In this case the same Stranger
may have an Appeal of Robbery against those Robbers, because he stands
charged to him, who commanded him to carry the same goods.

Fi. Cor. 357
23 A woman A woman.
may have an appeal of robbery: and so may an infant: An Infant.
Likewise Executors Executors.
may have an appeal of Robbery, of a Robbery of the Testators goods done to
themselves, but not done to their Testator: for if a man be robbed, and after
makes his Executors, and die, the Executors shall not have an appeal of
Robbery; for an appeal, being a personal action, dies with the party, and
shall not accrue to his Executors.

Fit. Cor. 17.
24 A Villain Villain.
shall not have an appeal of robbery, against his Lord, Lord.
for any goods robbed, or taken from him by his said Lord: Because all the
goods of the Villain be the Lords at his pleasure.

17. Ed. 3. 13
25 One may have an appeal of robbery for the King, or the Queen; Appeal for
the King or Queen. Stealing the goods of a man attainted of treason.
as of any iewelles, plate, or other goods of the Kings or Queens robbed or
taken from him. 11. H. 4. 40.
And a man may be indicted of felony, for the stealing of goods of another,
that was attainted of Treason, which goods by the said attainder were forfeited
to the King.

26 There be some Cases, where one may have an appeal of robbery, An appeal
of robbery done to an other.
though the robbery was not done to him, but to another: as if there be two
merchants, Fi. Cor. 392
or other tradesmen, that do merchandise, or occupy their goods in common,
and one of them is robbed, and slain: In this case, the other merchant or
tradesman, may have an appeal of robbery against the Robbers. And in like
sort, if one do steal my goods from me, and another does steal them from
him: In this case I may have an appeal against the second felon, because by
the first taking, the property was not out of me, for a felon does not claim
any property in the thing stolen; in such sort as he does, 4. H. 7. 5. 13.
Ed. 4. 3.
who takes a thing as a trespassor.

27 Touching an appeal of rape, Appeal of rape.
and who by the Law shall maintain the same, it is to be noted, That if a
woman sole, be ravished, she may have an appeal of rape. 8. H. 4. 21.
But if a woman married be ravished, she cannot have an appeal without her
husband.

28 If a woman covert be ravished, An appeal where a woman ravished consents.
and after she does consent to the rauisher, her husband only shall have an
appeal of rape, by the Statute of Anno 6. Ric. 2. St. 6. R. 2. 6
the words whereof be these: It is ordained, that wheresoever, and whenever
any Ladies, Noblemens daughters, or other women be ravished, and after the same
rape committed, do consent to the rauishers, as well the rauishers, as they
that be ravished, and every of them, shall be disabled, and be disabled ipso
facto to have or challenge all manner of inheritance, dower, or joint feoffment
after the death of their husbands, and ancestors. And the husbands of such
women (if they have husbands) or if they have no husbands living, then their
Fathers, or other their next knismen in blood, shall have the suit to
prosecute, and may pursue against the same offenders, and rauishers in this
behalf; and to convict them of felony, though the same woman after the Rape,
do consent to the Rauishers. And in this case the Defendant shall not wage
battle, but the truth of the matter shall be tried by the Country. S. Felonies
by Statute 4.

A lawful husband.
29 The words of this Statute be: That the husbands of such women etc. which is
to be intended, of her lawful husband, That is to say, that her husband in
right and possession, shall have the Appeal: 11. H. 4. 14.
for never accoupled in lawful marriage, is a good plea in bar against him.
And in like sort it is if the appeal be brought by the husband and wife,
because the appeal is in the right; and so he must be her lawful and
rightful husband, that must maintain the appeal alone, or jointly with his
wife.

Where the father or kinsman shall have an appeal of rape.
30 This Statute of 6. Ric. 2. does give the appeal for default of the husband
to the father, or to some other their next kinsman in blood; and so by the
express words of this Statute, an appeal of rape is given to the father: and
yet he shall not have an appeal, of the death of his son, or daughter. And
where the said statute does give the appeal for default of the husband, to the
father, or etc. That is to be intended, where the woman does consent to the
rauisher: St. 13. E. 1. 34
for otherwise the woman shall have an appeal upon the statute of Westminster
2.

31 If a Lord do ravish his Niefe, A Lord rauisheth his niefe
Fit. Cor. 17
she shall not have an appeal of Rape against him: But the King shall punish
him by indictment.

Pledges in rape.
32 It appears by the statute entitled Officium Coronatoris, St. 3. Ed. 1.
That if any be appealed of rape, he shall be attached by four or six
pledges, if the appeal be fresh, and the sign of truth apparent, by effusion
of blood, or an open outcrie levied. But if it be without any manifest token,
or outcrie, two pledges shall suffice.

Within what time an appeal shall be commenced.
33 The before mentioned Statute of Gloucester has ordained, St. 6. Ed. 1. 9
That an appeal shall not be abated, for default of fresh suit, where a man
does sue, within a year and a day, after the deed done. These words of the
Statute be general, not making mention more, of an appeal of death, than of
an appeal of any other felony: But yet conferring them, with the other words
in the statute, they may be intended specialy to extend to an appeal of death,
and to none other appeal: for if a man that is robbed does make fresh suit, 7.
H. 4: 44.
and do his endeavor to apprehend the felon, and use all his diligence to find
him, although he do not commence his appeal, two or three years after the
robbery committed, yet he may then well pursue it. And so in appeal of
robbery, fresh suit shall be decided by the discretion of the Justices. H. 22.
Ed. 4 39.
But in an appeal of death, it is a good plea for the Defendant to plead,
that he of whose death, this appeal is pursued, died above a year and a day,
before the said appeal commenced.

34 The words of the foresaid Statute of Gloucester be, St. 6. Ed. 1. 9
That a man shall pursue his Appeal, within a year and day, after the deed
done. From what time the year shall have relation, touching an appeal.
And therefore if one man do strike another upon one day, and he dies of the
same stroke certain days after, Co. l. 4. 42
the Appeal shall be commenced within the year and day after the death, and not
within the year and day after the stroke given: for there was no felony
committed, until the man was dead. But yet if one man do give to another a
mortal wound in February, and the king does in April next give pardon to the
offender of all felonies before that time committed, Plo. com. f. 401
and the party stricken does die of the same wound in May following; How the
K. pardon shall have relation.
this pardon shall discharge the offender, because the wound given by the
offender was the cause of the felony, the which wound was the offense toward
the King, and that the king has pardoned, and so thereby the death of the
party, and all other things depending upon the same offense be pardoned.

35 Where the words of the Statute of Gloucester be, The year shall have
relation to that offense.
That a man shall pursue his Appeal within a year and a day after the deed
done: St. 6. E. 1. 9.
Those words ( viz. the deed done) shall be intended of the felony whereupon the
appeal is commenced: for if one be accessorie to another a year after the
homicide or murder committed, 26. Ass. p. 52
an appeal shall be pursued against him, and yet it is not within the year and
day after the homicide or murder committed. S. Br. 52.

St. 3. E. 1. 13
36 It appears by Britton, and also by the Statute of Westminster 1. that an
appeal of Rape ought to be commenced within forty days after the fact done:
Within what time an appeal of rape shall be commenced.
But then Rape was but a trespass, which after by the Statute of Westminster
2. was made felony. St. 13. E. 1. 34.
In which Statute of Westminster 2. there is no time limited, within the which
a woman shall be compellable to pursue her Appeal of Rape. And therefore it
seems she is at liberty to bring it when she will, so that it be within a
reasonable time.

18. Ed. 3. 32
37 An appeal ought to be brought in the County where the felony was
committed, as if it be murder or homicide, In what county an appeal shall be
brought.
where the same murder or homicide was done: But if a man be stricken in one
county, and then goes into another county, and there dies of the same wound,
by the common law an appeal may be commenced either in the county where the
stroke was given, A man stricke^ in one county dies in another.
or in the county where the party stricken did after die, and the trial
thereof shall be by the Jurors of both the counties, 3. H. 7. 12. 4. H. 7. 18.
viz. as well of the county where he was stricken, as of the county where he
died. And so it was at the plaintifes pleasure to bring his appeal in which of
those two cou^ties he would. But since by the Statutes of Anno 2. and 3. E. 6.
St. 2. and 3. E. 6. 24.
it is ordained, That where any person shall be feloniously stricken, or poisoned
in one county, and die of the same stroke or poisoning in another county,
then an indictment thereof found by Jurors of the county where the death shall
happen (whether it be found before the Coroner, upon the sight of such dead
body: or before the Justices of peace, or other Justices or Commissioners,
which shall have authority to enquire of such offenses) shall be as good in law,
as if the stroke or poisoning had been committed in the same county, where
the party shall die, or where such indictment shall be found. And such party, to
whom appeal of murder shall be given by the law, may commence, take, and sue
Appeal of murder in the same county where the party so feloniously stricken
or poisoned shall die, as well against the principal and principals, as against
every accessorie to the same offenses, in whatsoever county or place the
accessorie shall be guilty to the same. And the Justices before whom any such
appeal shall be commenced, sued, and taken within the year and day, after
such murder and manslaughter committed, shall proceed against every such
accessorie, in the same county, where such appeal shall be so taken, in like
manner and form, as if the same offense of accessorie, had been committed in
the same county, where such appeal shall be so taken, as well by the trial of
the Jurors of the county, where such appeal shall be taken, upon the plea of
not guilty, pleaded by such offender, Accessories in other offenses saving
murder.
as otherwise. But note that no Appeal is given by this Statute, Stamford.
nor remedy provided against accessories in a foreign county, of other
felonies (saving for murder or manslaughter) but the same is left to the common
law.

In what cou^tie an appeal of Rape shall be brought.
38 An appeal of Rape ought to be brought in the county where the Rauishment
was done. And therefore if a man do take a woman against her will in one
county, and then carry her into another county, and there do ravish her,
the appeal shall be only commenced in the county where the rauishment was
committed. 3. H. 7. 12.
And though she do declare of the taking of her in another county, yet it
shall be tried only in the county where the appeal is brought: for the
declaring of taking of her in another county, was but surplusage, and needed
not to have been inserted, which does not cause her count to abate. And in
this case the woman appellant shall recover nothing but the defendants death
for the felony, which she shall obtain in respect of his rauishment of her in
the county, whereunto he forcibly carried her, wherein only the felony was
committed.

Appeal of Robbery.
39 By the same reason if a man do take another by force in one county, 3. H.
7. 12.
and then carry him into another county, and there rob him, or kill him: an
appeal of felony shall be commenced only in the county where the robbery or
murder was done: for the taking, and carrying him away out of the first county
was but trespass, and there was no felony committed, until the robbery or
murder was committed.

Threatening in one county to bring money into another.
40 If one man do threaten another in one county that he will kill him if he
do not bring him a sum of money into another county such a day: 44. E. 3.
14 4. H. 4. 3.
In this case, if he that is threatened, do in respect of that menace, carry,
and pay the said sum of money to him that threatened him, according to his
promise in the said other county: this is robbery, though the party needed
not to have paid the said money according to his promise, for that his said
promise was by menace, and not voluntary, nor upon cause. And there is reason
that the appeal of robbery shall be commenced in the county where the money
was paid, and not in the county where the menace was made: for the effect and
success of the matter makes it felony, which is the payment of the money;
and not the first cause, which was the threatening.

Goods robbed carried into diverse cou^ties
41 If a felon commit a robbery in one county, 7. H. 7. 44 4. H. 7. 5.
and then carry the goods stolen into diverse other counties, he that is
robbed may have his appeal of felony in which of those Counties he will: for
the felon commits felony in every of the Counties, Co. li. 7. 2. 26. As.
p. 32.
whither he carries any of the goods: And in which of those Counties the
party robbed does commence his Appeal of Felony, there it shall be tried: for
the property of those goods was always in the first and right owner of them.
But he that is robbed may commence his Appeal of Robbery only in that
County where he was robbed, for there is no robbery done but in that County
only. But if a man being in one County, do procure another man to commit a
robbery in another County, 29. H* 8. Dyer 40
which he does accordingly: in this case the party robbed shall have his
Appeal of Robbery against the said procurer, as accessorie to this felony,
in the County where the procurement was, and not where the robbery was
committed; for there was his felony committed, where he did persuade and
procure the robbery to be done.

42 He that may pursue an Appeal, is at his choice, whether he will have it by
writ, Britton.
or by bill. If he pursue it by bill, Before Who^e an appeal shall be brought.
then he must find to the Sheriff in the full County, two sufficient pledges,
being of the County where the felony was committed, and distrainable within
the said County, that he shall prosecute his Appeal according to the law of
the Realm, and he shall be thereunto received. And then the Coroner shall enter
his Appeal, and the names of his pledges: 22. As. p. 97.
and after the Baily of the place where the felony was committed, shall be
commanded, that he shall bring the bodies of those that be appealed, to the
next County Court, to answer to the plaintiff. And if the Baily do answer at
the second County Court, that he cannot find them, then it shall be ordained,
that they which be principal Appellees of the fact, shall be solemnly
commanded to yield to the Kings peace, and to appear, and stand to the answer
of such a felony, whereof they be appealed: And so they shall be demanded from
County to County, until they do appear, or be Outlawed. And yet because
the Statute of Magna Charta has ordained, That no Sheriff, Constable, St. 9.
H. 3. 17
Escheator, Coroner, or other Bailife of the Kings, shall hold plea of the
Crown, It is agreed for law, that upon an Appeal commenced before the Sheriff
and the Coroners, although they may award process against the Appellees until
the Exigent, yet they cannot award the Exigent against the Appellee, if he do
not appear: neither if he do appear, they can cause him to answer, but only
they may commit him to prison, and that by force of the said statute of Magna
Charta.

43 When an appeal is commenced before the Sheriff and the Coroners in the
county, it may be removed into the Kings bench by a Certiorari, Remoouing an
appeal out of the county.
which must be awarded out of the Chauncerie, or out of the Kings bench, and is
to be directed to the Sheriff and the Coroners: which proves that an appeal
is begun, and of Record, as well before the Sheriff, as before the Coroners:
according to the Statute of West. St. 3. E. 1. 10
1. which has ordained, That the Coroners shall lawfully attach, and represent
the pleas of the Crown, and that the Sheriff shall have counter-rolles with
the Coroners, as well of appeals as of Enquests, of Attachments, or other
things that do belong unto this office. And therefore a Certiorari to remove
an appeal directed to the sheriff only is void: 4. H. 6. 15
and an appeal of murder may be commenced, as well before the Sheriff, as
before the Coroners, as it is proved by these words of the Statute of 3. H. 7.
St. 3. H. 7. 1
viz. The wife or heir of the person slain, or murdered, as case shall
require, may commence their appeal in proper person, at any time within the
year after the felony done, before the Shirife and Coroners of the County,
where the said felony and murder was done, or before the King in his Bench, or
Justices of Jail delivery.

44 An appeal by Bill may be commenced before Justices of Jail delivery: An
appeal before Justices of Jail delivery.
but then the Appellee at the time of the Appeal begun against him, 13. H. 4.
10. 9. H. 4. 2.
must be prisoner in the same Jail, whereof those Justices are to make
delivery, or else such an appeal is not to be received: Or otherwise one of
them at the least, against whom and others the said appeal is entered, ought to
be prisoner in the same Jail, and if not, the same appeal is void. S.
Approuers 19. St. 28. E. 1. 9. H. 4. 2.
Yet an approuer may appeal others that are not in prison, but at large: which
is by force of the statute of 28. Ed. 1. de Appellatis. And when an appeal is
commenced before Justices of Jail delivery against diverse, whereof there is
but one in prison before them, this appeal ought to be removed into the Kings
bench by a Certiorari, and from thence process shall be awarded against them
which be at large. Anno 1. M. Dyer 99.
And Justices of Assise may hold plea of appeals of robbery, An appeal
before Iu. of Assise.
by the commission of Jail delivery.

An appeal before the I. of the Kings Bench.
45 As well as Justices of Jail delivery, and the Sheriff and Coroners have
authority to receive an appeal by Bill, 17. Ed. 3. 13
in like sort Justices of the kings bench have power to accept an appeal by
Bill: for they be the sovereign coroners of the Realm.

Appeal against one Bayled.
46 If one be in prison for felony in the Kings bench, 21. H. 7. 33. 32. H. 6.
4.
or before the Justices of Jail delivery, and after let to bail, yet an
appeal by bill may be comme^ced against him, for he is a prisoner
notwithstanding that bailement: for they which took him in batle, be his
guardians, and shall be charged if he escape: and some do affirm that they
may imprison him; and some do hold, that they shall be hanged for him. And upon
his bailement he shall find sureties to answer to all persons. No appeal
against him that is let by mainprise.
But an appeal is not to be pursued against him, 9. Ed. 4. 2. 39. H. 6. 27.
who is let at liberty by mainprise: for that he is not in ward.

No appeal before Justices of peace.
47 Some do affirm that an appeal may be commenced before Justices of peace,
for they have authority by their commission, 44. E. 3* 44.
and by the Statute of 18. Ed. 3. 2. to hear and determine felonies. But
others do hold, that they must only proceed upon indictment found by a Jury
before them, and not upon an appeal prosecuted at the suit of the party
grieved: for the words of their commission be, Ad inquirendum per Sacramentum
proborum and legalium hominum de comitatu praedicto, per quos rei veritas
melius sciri poterit, de omnibus and omnimodis felonijs etc. Et ad omnia and
singula felonias etc. indictame^ta praedicta, caeteraque omnia and singula
premissa, secundum leges and statuta regni nostri Angliae (prout in huiusmodi
casu fieri consueuit aut debuit,) audiendum and terminandum. By which words it
is to be inferred, that they shall enquire and punish at the Kings suit upon
indictment, and not at the parties suit by appeal, such felonies as shall be
committed within their Jurisdiction.

48 If one of the Kings subjects do kill another of his subjects in a foreign
Realm, the wife or next heir of him that was slain, as the case requires, An
appeal before the Constable and Marshall.
may have an appeal of the same death in England, before the Constable and
Marshall of England, St. 1. H. 4. 14
by force of the Statute of 1. H. 4. which does ordain, That all appeals of
things committed within the Realm, shall be tried and determined by the laws
of the Realm; and of things committed out of the realm, before the Constable
and Marshall of England for the time being. And no appeals fromhenceforth
shall be made or pursued in Parliament. No appeal in Parliament.


Bracton. Britton.
49 It does appear by Bracton and Britton, Where there shall be diverse appeals
for one felony, and where not.
that one might have had in former ages, one appeal against the principal,
and another against the Accessories: but since that law is changed, viz. The
appellant shall have but one appeal, Co. li. 4. 47.
in the which he must comprehend as well the principals as the accessories,
unless it be in special cases: and that is confirmed by the Stat. of West. 1.
St. 3. E. 1. 14
which does ordain, That no person shall be outlawed upon appeal of
commandment, force, aid, or receipt, until the principal be attainted. But
the appellant shall not let to attach his appeal at the next county, as well
against the accessorie, as against the principal: But the Exigent against the
accessorie shall stay until the principal be attainted, by outlawrie or
otherwise.

9. H. 4. 1.
50 In an appeal against two, if one do appear, One only appeal for one
felony.
and the other make default, yet the plaintiff shall count against them both:
and the same law which compels the appellant to count at one time against
them both, does enforce him to sue his appeal against them both: for if an
appellant do bring an appeal against one person, Co. l. 4. 47
and the appellee is attainted and hanged at his suit, and after he will bring
an other appeal against one, or two others, for the same offense, he shall
take no benefit by his suit, for he should have joined the^ all in his first
appeal. 47. E. 3. 16.
And the same law is, if the first appellee had been acquitted, or that the
appellant had bin Non, suit after appearance.

51 It seems that in some cases at this day, one may have diverse appeals for
one felony: Where diverse appeals for one felony.
as if one in one county do procure another to rob a man in another
county: In this case, the party robbed shall have one appeal against the
principal in one county, and another against the accessorie in another
county: or otherwise he should be without his remedy against the accessorie
by Appeal. St. 2. and 3. E. 6. 24.
But by the Statute of Anno 2. and 3. E. 6. if one in one county do procure
another to kill a man in another county, he to whom the appeal of murder is
given, shall commence his appeal in the county where the party shall die. S.
Br. 37.

26. Ass. p. 52 Co. li. 4. 48.
52 And so it is, Two appeals founded upon one felony.
if the Appellant do commence his appeal against the principal within a
year and a day after the felony committed, and after the said appeal
commenced, another will receive the same felon: In this case the appellant may
pursue another appeal against the said accessorie, for these two be several
felonies, which began at several times. S. Br. 35.

Robbery of several parcels of goods.
53 If a man be robbed of two several parcels of goods at one time, he cannot
have two several appeals for them, and put parcel of the goods robbed in one
appeal, and parcel in another: Fit. Cor. 100
but he must commence one appeal for the whole, or for parcel. And if he do
bring his appeal but for parcel, he shall loose the residue of the goods
robbed, and the king shall have them, for he cannot enlarge his appeal.

Where one shall answer to diverse appeals or indictments.
54 If one man rob several men, every of the persons robbed may have an
appeal against the felon. And although he be attainted at the suit of one of
them, yet he shall be tried at the suit of the others, upon their appeals, if it
be so that they have commenced their appeals before the said attainder. 4 Ed.
4. 11. 7. H. 4. 31. Fi. Cor. 379
And if he be found culpable at their several suits, and that they have made
fresh suite, they shall have their goods again which were taken from them by
robbery, as well as he shall, at whose suit he was first attainted. 4 Ed. 4. 11
And those last Enquests shall be taken at the suit of the parties, and not be
adjudged Enquests of office. But if the other who have cause of appeal, do
not commence their appeals, until the appellee be attainted, at the suit of
the first appellant, and that in the same county where they ought to have
prosecuted their appeals, after such attainder, they shall not be received to
commence them. But yet, Fi. Cor. 227 M. 10. H. 4.
if after such first attainder the king will grant to the party attainted his
pardon, then he shall answer to the said appeals so commenced against him after
his Attainder: yea and for the Kings advantage, a man attainted of felony,
shall answer to an offense committed before any pardon was granted unto him.
1. H. 6. 5.
As a man being attainted of felony, shall be put to answer to a treason before
committed, because in that case the King is to have the Escheat. But in an
appeal of murder, or rape, the law does differ from the before mentioned case
of appeal of robbery: for if in appeal of murder or rape, the offender be
attainted at the first appellants suit, he shall not be put to answer to other
appeals brought after for murder or rape, though they were commenced before
the appellees attainder: seeing the appellants are not to have any restitution
of goods, or other benefit thereby, but only the attainder of the appellee,
which is already attainted at the first appellants suit, and so to be hanged
therefore.

Answer to diverse indictments.
55 As several persons upon their several appeals commenced shall have
restitution of their goods stolen or robbed from them by one man; so by the
statute of an^ 21. H. 8. St. 21. H. 8, 11
a man shall have restitution of his goods robbed or taken from him, upon the
indictment and arraignement of the offender, and evidence given against him, by
the party robbed, or owner of the goods, or by some other by his procurement:
Therefore if one man do rob or steal goods from three men severally, and he
is indicted of the robbing or stealing from one of them, and arraigned
thereupon: In this case, though the other two would give evidence against the
offender, yet they shall not have restitution of their goods by the intention
or meaning of that stat. for the felon is not attainted of any other robbery
or felony, saving of that whereof he is indicted. But if he be indiced of all
the three robberies or felonies severally, and arraigned upon one of them, and
found guilty by the evidence given by one of the parties robbed or etc. yet
he shall be after arraigned upon the other two inditements, to the intent that
he may be also found guilty by the evidence of the other two persons robbed
or etc. and that they may have their goods stolen again, according to the
meaning of the foresaid statute. S. Restitution 4.

56 Whereas by the common laws of this Realm, He that is allowed his clergy
shall answer to former offenses.
and also by the stat. pro Clero, St. 25. E. 3. 5
made an. 25. E. 3. no clerk arraigned of felony before a secular Judge, which
was demanded by the Ordinary of the place, should be remanded to the jail,
but ought presently to be arraigned of all his offenses, or otherwise delivered
to the Ordinary: But because diverse persons did ofttimes commit and do sundry
detestable murders, heinous robberies, and felonies, and other capital
offenses, for the which clergy is not allowable by the laws and statutes of
this realm; and after the same offenses so done, either did fly out of the
county, or other parts of this realm, into the parts beyond the seas, or
keep themselves secret in other places, whereby they were not known for a
great time, and after did commit some other felony, for the which they might
have their clergy, and being arraigned of the same, had their clergy to them
allowed, and thereupon were committed to the custody of the Ordinary,
according to the law and custom of this realm, the former offense, wherein
clergy was not grantable, being then not known, and so by that means could
not after be impeached for the said other horrible and great offenses, by the
law and custom of this realm, to the great encouraging of offenders, using
such practices of foreknowledge and set purpose, for the discharge of the same:
Therefore for the reformation of the premises, St. 8. El. 4.
by the stat. of an. 8. Eliz. it was enacted, That every person which shall
upon his arraignement for any felony, be admitted to his clergy by the laws
of this realm, and shall before the same admission have committed any other
offense, whereupon clergy by the laws and stat. is not allowable, and not
being thereof before indicted and acquitted, convicted or attainted, Appeal of
former offenses.
or pardoned, shall and may be indicted or appealed for the same, and thereupon
ordered and used in all things according to the laws, in such manner, as though
no such admission of clergy had been.

St. 18. El. 6.
57 And after, viz. an. 18. Eliz. a more general stat. was made, A Clerk shall
answer to former offenses.
That all and every person and persons which shall hereafter be admitted to
have the benefit of his or their clergy, shall notwithstanding his or their
admission to the same, be put to answer to all other felonies, whereof he or
they shall be hereafter indicted, or appealed, and not being thereof before
acquitted, attainted, convicted, or pardoned, and shall in such manner and form
be arraigned, tried, adjudged, and suffer such execution for the same, as he or
they should have done, if as clerk or clerks convict, S. Indict. 52.
they had bin delivered to the Ordinary, and there had made his and their
purgation.

Britton.
58 If a man co^mence his Appeal of death before the Coroner in the county,
presently the Serieant of the county shall be commanded, The process in Appeal.
that he bring the bodies of the apellees to the next county, to answer the
plaintiff. And if the said Serieant do answer at the second county, that he
cannot find them, Process upon Appeal before the Coroner.
the^ an Exigent shall be awarded against the principals. But the Exigent
touching the accessories shall stay, until the principals be outlawed. And so
it appears by Britton, 22. Ass. p. 81 Fi. Cor. 234 Fitz. Process 226.
and some other authority, that an Exigent shall be awarded in Appeal of death
co^menced before the coroner in the cou^ty, after the first Capias returned.

Fitz. Process 226. Fitz. Cor. 184. St. 25. Ed. 3. 14.
59 But in an Appeal or Indictment of robbery, or other felony, Process upon an
Appeal or Indictment of felony.
there shall be two Capias awarded before the Exigent. And the same is confirmed
by these words of the stat. de proditionibus, made 25. E. 3. viz. It is agreed,
that after any man be indicted of feloni, ebefore the Just. to hear and
determine, in their Sessions, the Sherif^ shall be commanded to attach his body,
by a writ or precept called Capias. And if the Sheriff return in the said
precept, that the body is not found, another writ or precept of Capias shall
incontinently be awarded, returnable three weeks after, and in the same writ
or precept it shall be comprised, that the Sheriff shall cause to be seized
all his chattels, and safely keep them until the day of the writ or precept
returned. And if the Sheriff return, that the body is not found, and the
indictee comes not, S. Forf. 44.
the Exigent shall be awarded, and the chattels shall be forfeited, as the law of
the crown commands. But if he come and yield himself, or be taken by the
Sheriff, or other minister, before the return of the second Capias, then the
goods and chattels shall be saved. This statute does not make mention of the
death of a man, nor of robbery, but of felony generally, which includes all.
And yet some do affirm, that it was intended to be made only for robbery
and larcenie; Fitz: Process 226.
but it is provided for those which be indicted before Just. to hear and
determine, and not for those against whom an Appeal is commenced before the
Coroner: and it was rather ordained to seize the felons goods upon the second
Capias, than to give process.

Process against indictees in another county.
60 And because some persons appealed or indicted of diverse felonies in one
county, or outlawed in the same county, were dwelling or received in another
county, whereby such felonious persons indicted and outlawed, have been
encouraged in their mischief, for that they might not be attached in another
county: for the redress whereof, by a stat. made anno 5. E. 3. it was
ordained, St. 5. E. 3, 11
That the Just. assigned to hear and determine such felonies, shall direct
their writ to all the counties of England, where need shall be, to take such
persons indicted.

61 Because diverse persons for their singular revenge, and not of right,
maliciously, of their subtle imagination, have caused and procured, falsely to
indict and appeal several of the Kings subjects, of diverse, treasons,
felonies, and trespasses, before I. of peace and other commissioners, and other
Just. having authority to take indictments or appeals, in diverse foreign
counties, liberties, and franchises of England, wherein the said liege people
neither be, nor ever were conversant or dwelling: By force of which appeals
and indictments, and the processes thereupon made in the said counties,
franchises, and liberties, the said persons so indicted have been put in
Exigent, and after outlawed, and thereupon their goods and chattels, lands and
tenements have bin forf. and they in great peril of their lives, whereas the
said persons so indicted, appealed, or put in Exigent, or outlawed, had never
knowledge of such indictme^ts, appeals, Exigents, or Outlawries: For the
prevention whereof, it was ordained by the stat. of an. 8. H. 6. St. 8. H. 6. 10
That upon every indictment or appeal, by the which any of K. liege people
dwelling in other counties Appeal of indictments of persons dwelling in
foreign Counties.
than there where the indictment or appeal shall be taken, of treason, felony,
and trespass, before I. of peace, or any other having power to take such
indictments or appeals, or other Commissioners or Justices in any county,
franchise, or liberty, within England, before any Exigent awarded, upon any
indictment or appeal to be taken in form aforesaid, immediately after the
first writ of Capias, upon every such indictment, or appeal, awarded and
returned, another writ of Capias shall be awarded, directed to the Sheriff of the
county, whereof he which is indicted is or was supposed to be conversant by the
same indictment, returnable before the same Justices or Commissioners, before
whom he is indicted or appealed, at a certain day, containing the space of
iij. months, from the date of the said last writ: by the which writ of second
Capias, it shall be contained and commanded to the same Sheriff, to take the body
of him which is so indicted or appealed, if he may be found within his
bailiwike: and if he cannot be found within his bailiwike, that the Sheriff
shall make proclamation in two counties, before the return of the same writ,
that he which is so indicted or appealed, shall appear before the same Just. or
Commissioners, in the county, liberty, or franchise where he is so indicted or
appealed, at the day contained in the said last writ of Capias, to answer to
the K. or to the party, of the felony, treason, or trespass, whereof he is
indicted or appealed: After which second writ of Capias so served and returned,
if he which is so indicted or appealed, does not come at the day of the said
writ of Capias returned, the Exigent shall be awarded against such indictees or
appellees, and every of them. And if any Exigent be awarded upon any such
indictment, or appeal, against the foresaid form, or any outlawrie thereupon
pronounced, the said Exigent and the Outlawrie thereupon pronounced, and every
of them shall be void. And the party against whom such Exigent is awarded, or
outlawrie pronounced, against the foresaid form, shall not be endamaged in
his life, lands, goods, etc. And every one which is indicted or appealed in
form aforesaid, after he is acquitted by verdict, in form of law, may have an
action upon the case, against every procurer of such indictments or appeals:
in which actio^ there shall be like process as in an action of trespass vi and
armis. And if the said procurers be attainted, the plaintiff shall recover
treble damages. But this stat. extends not to indictments or appeals taken in
the county of Chester: Nor to any indictment or appeal of felony or treason,
taken of any of the K. liege people, which at the time of the same felony or
treason supposed, is, and was conversant within the county, whereof the
indictment or appeal makes mention, but the like process shall be made against
such indicted or appealed person as has been used.

62 And because after the making of the said Statute of Anno 8. H. 6. some
intending to defraud the said Statute, did sue to remove such appeals and
indictments, out of the hands of the Justices or Commissioners aforesaid, into
the Kings bench, and elsewhere, by Certiorari, or otherwise, unknown to the
party so indicted, and thereupon sued the process used at the common law before
the making of the said Statute, in the Kings Bench, and elsewhere, after the
remoouing thereof, to the great impouerishment of diverse the kings subjects:
Therefore by the Statute made Anno 10. H. 6. St. 10. H. 6. 6
it was enacted, Process upon an indictment or appeal removed into the K. bench.
That if any such indictments taken before any Justices of peace, or any other
having power to take such indictments or appeals, or other Justices or
Commissioners, in any county, franchise, or liberty of England, shall be removed
into the Kings Bench, or elsewhere, by Certiorari, or otherwise, then after
such remoouing, before any Exigent awarded upon any such indictment or appeal,
in form aforesaid taken, immediately after the first writ of Capias, upon every
such indictment or appeal awarded and returned, another writ of Capias shall
be awarded, directed to the Sheriff of the county, whereof he that is indicted
or appealed, is, or was supposed to be conversant, by the same indictment or
appeal returnable in the K. Bench, at a certain day, containing the space of
three months, from the date of the said last writ of Capias, according to the
manner and form that the I. of peace and others ought to have done before such
removing. And if any Exigent be awarded upon any such indictment or appeal
after such removing, against the form aforesaid, or any outlawrie thereupon
pronounced, as well the same Exigent as the outlawrie, and every of them, shall be
void.

In the Appeal he must be supposed to be of a foreign County.
63 The foresaid stat. of 8. H. 6. does not take place, St. 8. H. 5. 10.
but where by the Appeal or by the Indictment it is precisely supposed, that
the defendant was dwelling in a foreign county: for if he be supposed to be
dwelling there by an Alias dictus, it is out of the compass of the stat. 1. E.
4. 1.
As in an appeal or indictment in the county of Middlesex against A.B. in
comitatu tuo yeoman, alias dictum A.B. de C. in comitatu Sussex yeoman: Because
that which is supposed by the Alias dictus is not trauersable, nor material.
And likewise it is in an appeal or indictment against I. of S. in comitatu H.
nuper de L. in comitatu K. nuper de R. in com^ T.

An appellee dwelling in no place certain.
64 If a man be appealed to be dwelling in no place certain the day of the
Appeal commenced, but in this manner, Fitz. Process 192.
viz. nuper de S. in comitat^ L. and nuper de B. in comit^ T. then process
shall be awarded into all the counties whereof he is so supposed to be of late
dwelling.

Process into a County Palantine.
65 The foresaid stat. of 8. H. 6. has ordained, That after the first Capias,
St. 8. H. 6. 10
another Capias shall be awarded to the Sheriff of the county whereof he which is
so indicted is, or was supposed to be dwelling by the same indictment. And
therefore if an appeal or indictment be exhibited against one in the county
of M. naming him of D. in the county of Chester, or of some other place, which
is a county Palantine: In this case, no process can be awarded upon this Stat.
which may be directed to the Sheriff, according to the words of the Statute.
But process shall be awarded upon this statute to the prince, or his lieutenant:
19. H. 6. 2 31. H. 6. 11.
for it is in like mischief, and the statute is general in all the Realm,
which does bind as well those which be of a County Palantine, as others. But
if they of the County Palantine will not serve, and return the writ directed
to them upon this statute, then without further delay the Exigent shall be
awarded, otherwise the party should be infinitely delaied.

Process against principal and accessory
66 The foresaid Process specified in the before rehearsed stat. of 8. H. 6. shall
extend as well to accessories, as to principals, saving that the Exigent as to
the accessories, shall be stayed until the principals be outlawed: And that by
the Statute of West. 1. the words whereof be these. St. 3. E. 1. 14
Because men have used in some counties to outlaw such persons as be appealed
of commandment, force, aid, or escape, within the same term that they do
outlaw him which is appealed of the fact, it is ordained, that none shall be
outlawed for an appeal of commandment, force, aid, or receipt, until he that
is appealed of the deed be attainted, so that one law shall be thereof through
the whole Realm. But the appellant shall not let to attach his appeal at the
next county against them, as well as against the appellees of the deed. But
the Exigent against the Accessorie shall stay until the appellee of the deed be
attainted by outlawrie, or otherwise. And Britton Britton.
does affirm, That as soon as the principals be outlawed, the Exigent shall be
awarded against the accessories.

St. 3. E. 1. 14
67 The before rehearsed statute of West. 1. seems only to extend to Appeals
commenced by bill: The stat. of W. 1. exte^deth only to Appeals commenced by
bil.
for in an Appeal commenced by writ, it appears not until the declaration
made thereupon, that there be any accessories in the Appeal, but, for any
thing contained in the writ, all do appear to be principals, 43. Ed. 3. 17.
and for that cause the Exigent is awarded against them all at one time. And
therefore the plaintiff must be advised, how he does pray the Exigent, and
against whom: for if he do pray the Exigent against them all, he is thereby
concluded after to count against any of them as accessories: for the law
intends that he must take knowledge which were accessories, and which not.
And therefore in that case he should have staid the demanding of the Exigent
against them, until the principals had been attainted. And that is the
difference between the principals and the accessories, as touching the time of
the awarding of the Exigent.

68 If an Appeal be brought against diverse, and one does appear and plead, In
Appeal one does appear, and another makes default.
yet process shall be continued against the residue. But if he which appears
does plead in abatement of the Appeal, or matter in bar, which proves that
the Appeal does not lie: in those cases the court shall stay the awa^ding of
the Exigent against the others, until the court be advised whether the Appeal
will lie or not: 9. H. 4. 2.
for if the Appeal do abate, it does abate against them all, as well
principals as accessories.

69 The process to remove an Appeal out of the county, Process to remove an
Appeal.
or from the Justices of jail delivery, is a Certiorari awarded out of the
Chauncery, or the K. Bench, 10. H. 4. 4.
and it may be sued as well by the def. as the plaintiff: which Certiorari must
agree with the Appeal or the Indictment that is to be removed: for if the
Appeal or Indictment be of two horses, 3. Ass. p. 3.
and the Certiorari is but of one, this is no good writ.

4. H. 6. 15. Register. Ind. fo. 76.
70 If an Appeal be attached within the county, Certiorari into the County.
before the Sheriff and the Coroners, the Certiorari must be directed to them
both, viz. as well to the sherif as to the coroners, for a Certiorari directed
to the sheriff only, is void.

71 After an Appeal is removed, Process against the p^^ after an Appeal removed.
the parties be without day before the sheriff and the coroners. And therefore
if the plaintiff do not proceed with his Appeal in the K. Bench, yet he shall
not be nonsuit thereby, until a Scire facus be awarded against him, and that he
be thereupon returned warned, and does make default: for if a Nihil be returned
upon him, an Alias shall be awarded against him before he shall be nonsuit: upon
which writ, if at another time a Nihil be returned, 48. E. 3. 32.
another Scire facus shall be awarded, returnable at a certain day, and in the
mean time the appellee shall be let to mainprise.

72 After an Appeal is removed, if the plaintiff pursue his Appeal, Process
against the def. after an Appeal removed
he need not sue a Scir^ facus against the def. if he do make default, but a
Capias and Exigent. And if the defendant does appear and plead, and after at
another day makes default (either because he is escaped out of prison, or
being let to mainprise does not appear) yet the Enquest shall not be taken in
his default, nor in any case of Felony. But Process shall be awarded against
him ad audiendum Iudicium, in such manner, that if he come not at the beginning
by the Exigent, 16. Ass. p. 13
then Exegi de nouo shall be awarded, 26 Ass p. 51 Fitz. Exigent 1^.
by the which the Sheriff shall be commanded to take him, if etc. to hear his
judgment. And if not etc. that he be outlawed. But if he do not come at the
first by Capias, then a Capias de nouo shall be awarded, and after the Exigent,
or another Capias, according to the nature of the offense, whereupon the
appeal is grounded.

Process against one that by the Sherifes return is escaped.
73 A woman brought an Appeal against another of the death of her husband: 30.
Ass. p. 23
upon process awarded against the appellee the Sheriff returned Cepi corpus, and
at the day had not the body, whereupon he was amerced, and also was commanded
to bring the body, and so twice or thrice, and did nothing: whereupon the
plaintiff prayed an Exigent, affirming that the prisoner escaped, as the
Sheriff was carrying him to the jail: But the Justices would not award the
Exigent against one, which appeared to them to be in prison: And therefore
they sent to the Sheriff to have the body, and if he returned this escape, then
the plaintiff should have his request, and not otherwise.

Process with a prouiso for the appellee.
74 In an Appeal, if the parties be at issue, 15. H. 7. 9.
and the plaintiff will not sue forth process against the Enquest, in that case
the defendant may sue forth process with a prouiso, as well as he may in other
actions: which writ when it is returned served, the plaintiff may pray a Tales,
notwithstanding that the Venire fac' was pursued by the defendant, and shall
have it by common course, whether the defendant do agree thereunto or not.

Process to remove prisoners or records.
75 By the Statute of Anno 1. and 2. P. and M. it is ordained, St. 1. and 2. P,
and M. 13.
That no writs of Habeas co^pus, or Certiorari shall be granted to remove any
prisoner out of any jail, or to remove any Recognisance, except the same writs
be signed with the proper hands of the chief Just. or in his absence, of one
of the Just. of the court, out of the which the same writs shall be awarded or
made, upon pain that he which writes any such writs, not being signed as
aforesaid, shall forfeit to the K. for every such writ v. l.

How the appellee shall be led to the bar.
76 He that is appealed or indicted of felony, and imprisoned for the same,
Bracton de Corona, cap. 18. Britton.
when he comes before the Justices to the place of judgment, to answer for
the same felony, shall come bare headed, loose, at liberty, without any yrons
or bonds (saving with shackles about his legs, for fear of escaping) so that
no pain shall take away or weaken his reason to defend himself, nor
constrain him to make any other answer, but such as best stands with his
own free will.

Count in Appeal.
77 When the Appellee is at the bar to answer to the Appellant, the Appellant
must count or declare against the Appellee, the which count does vary
according to the variety of Appeals; for some be of death, some of rape, some
of robbery, and some other of other felonies. The form of Appeal of Murder
is in this manner: An Appeal of Murder.
A. hic instanter appellat B. de morte C. fratris sui, de eo quod cum
praedictus C. fuit in pace Dei, and Domini Regis apud D. tali die, hora, and
anno, ibi venit B. vt felo domini regis in assultu praemeditato, vi and armis
etc. and in ipsum C. felonice adtunc and ibidem insultum fecit, and cum quodam
gladio precij xij. d'. quem ipse in manu sua dextra adtunc and ibidem tenuit,
praedictum C. super caput suum percussit, et vnam plagam mortalem, in
longitudine duorum pollicium, in anteriore part capitis sui, vsque ad
cerebrum, eidem C. adtunc and ibidem felonice dedit: de qua quidem plaga
praedictus C. per tres dies proxime sequentes languebat, and tunc ibidem obijt:
vel immediate ibidem obijt. Et sic ibidem B. vt felo domini Regis praedictum C.
felonice interfecit, and murdrauerit, contra pacem dicti domini Regis, coronam,
and dignitatem suas, and quod hoc fecit nequiter, and vt felo, contra pacem Dei
and Domini Regis, praedictus A. offert hoc dirationare, prout curia Domini
Regis hic considerauerit. And so it appears, that the ancient Law in diverse
points touching Appeals is changed by the st^tute of Gloucester Ann. 6. Ed.
1. which has ordained, St. 6. Ed. 1. 9.
That if the appellant in appeal do declare the deed, the year, the day, the
hour, the time of the king, and the Town where the deed was done, and with
what weapon he was slain, the appeal shall be of force. The year, day, hour,
time of the king, and the town material.
This statute makes the year, the day, the hour, the time of the king, and
the town, things material; Bracton.
and that upon good cause: For if the appellee can prove by certain
demonstration, and the testimony of credible persons, that he was the same day
in another place, so that by no means it can be presumed, that he was present
the same day at the committing of that fact, in respect of the great distance
of the place, then the appellants suit shall fail. And the same reason is of
the hour: if for he that is supposed to kill the man, was twenty miles from
that place where the deed was done, the same hour wherein that murder was
committed, he cannot be guilty of that fact, and yet it may be he was there
sometimes the same day, but not that hour: Where the hour may be left out.
But a man is not of necessity compellable at this day by the common law, to
put into his declaration the hour. Stamf.
which declaration by the common law any man may yet make, notwithstanding the
foresaid stat. of Gloucester, because the same statute does not forbid it, for
it is in the affirmative.

78 The plaintiff is to make special care, The place where the fact was done.
that he put into his declaration the place where the fact was done, for the
said statute of Gloucester does specially command it by express words. And
therefore if an appeal be brought against diverse, 21. E. 4, 25.
naming them of several Towns, or Villages, and after in his Count he will
say, at the place aforesaid, this is not good, for no man can tell to which of
the places aforesaid, to refer it: and seeing there be diverse of them in
number, he ought to express the place by name, or otherwise it is not good. If
a man be stricken mortally in one place, whereof he dies shortly after in
another place, Co. lib. 4. 42
the appellant must count in his appeal, that the def. did commit the murder
in the place where the party died, and not in the county, town, or place,
where the stroke was given.

44. E. 3. 38
79 There be diverse other forms of declarations in appeals of death: as in
appeal of death against three as principal, Count in appeal of death against
three as principals*
and the appellant does count, that such a day and such an hour one of them
did strike her husband (of whose death she does bring the appeal) in the
neck, whereof he died: and the same hour another did strike him to the heart:
so that if he had not died of the first blow, he would have died of the second:
and that the third did strike him in another part of his body, and so count
severally against them, that every of them gave him a mortal wound, and show
the manner of the wound, according to the fact: for the statute of Gloucester
does ordain, That he shall count of the fact, The fact must be declared.
and according to the difference of the fact the count in an appeal shall
differ, for of necessity the fact must be declared as it was done, or as the
law does expound it to be done. And therefore, 21. E. 4. 71. 4. H. 7. 18
if two be present at the death of a man, and one does not strike him, but
commands the other to strike him, in regard whereof he does kill him, in this
case, in an appeal against them, the appellant shall count, that either of
them did strike him mortally: and in like sort, in an appeal of Rape against
two, where one was present, 11. H. 4. 13 Fit. cor. 228
and did abbet the other to ravish the woman, in that case the count shall be,
that they both did ravish her, for in that one there was the rauishment of them
both.

Count in appeal of Robbery.
80 In an appeal of death, as cousin and heir, 45. E. 3. 25 27. Ass. p. 25
the appellant must show in his count, how he is cousin: and in appeal of
Robbery, he must express the things robbed: as whether they were his own
goods, or another man's: Bracton.
and if it were in money, he must show how much, and what kind of money: if it
were bullion, the value: if it were coined, the quality and the price: if it
were a garment, the color, and the price: if it were Cloth, the color, price,
and number of else: if it were Cattle, the kind, the color, and price: and
in an appeal of Rape, he must count of the tearing of garments, and sheading
of blood.

Where in appeal of Rape the stat. must be rehearsed in the count.
81 There be two appeals of Rape, St. 13. E. 1. 34 St. 6. R. 2, 6
one upon the stat. of West. 2. which makes it felony to ravish a married wife,
maid, or other woman: and another upon the stat. of 6. R. 2. which gives the
forfeiture, where the woman ravished does consent, and assigns who shall
prosecute the suit against the rauishers. In an appeal brought upon the stat.
of Westminster. 2. the appellant need not rehearse the statute. But otherwise it is
in an appeal brought upon the stat. of 6. R. 2. for there he must rehearse the
statute in his count: and if in appeal of Rape brought upon the said stat. of
6. R. 2. the plaintiff do count, 11. H. 4. 13
that the defendant did ravish his wife, contrary to the form of the said
statute, he shall not need to allege, that his wife did consent to the
rauisher: 14. El. Dyer 312.
for that is implied in those words, contra formam statuti, which words be in
the declaration: and although there be not in the declaration these words, viz.
carnaliter cognouit, yet if there be these words, viz. felonice rapuit, they
do imply the other words: for it can be no felony, if there be not carnal
knowledge: and so it is to be noted, that in felony a count may be by
implication. S. Felonies by Statute 2.

82 The defense which the appellee Defense in appeal.
is to make in an appeal is, viz. 44. E. 3. 38.
That he does defend all manner of Appeals, Awaights, Assaults, Pretenses, and
whatsoever is against the peace of the King, his Crown, and Dignity, and to
say, that he is not guilty. Bracton Bracton.
writes, That he which is appelled of the deed, does come and defend all
manner of felony, and that the peace of the king is not broken, and whatsoever
is against the K. peace, and the death, and whatsoever is objected against him:
and that he does put himself upon the country, of good and evil, that he is
not guilty thereof, if he do choose the country: Or that he is ready to defend
himself by his body against the appellant, as the kings court shall consider:
for if he will simply say, that he will defend himself as the kings court
shall consider, unless he will say more he shall not be defended: for the kings
court must not instruct him, in what manner he ought to defend himself: and if
he do say, that he is ready to defend himself either by his body, or by the
country, as the kings court shall consider, he seems thereby to take from
himself election: And the kings court ought not to compel him to the one,
more then to the other, nor to enforce him how he shall defend himself, seeing
he has free choice: and therefore he must hold him to one of them: But if he
make his election to be tried by the country, it shall not be in his choice
what country he will take.

Fi. Cor. 121
83 A writ of Appeal shall abate for false Latin, or for lack of form: Pleas
to the writ in appeal
as in a writ of Appeal this word Habeas did want, and therefore the appeal
abated, without amendment. In an appeal brought against a principal and
accessorie of the death of A. B. of C. in the County of D. the accessory
pleaded, 18. El. Dyer 348.
that there was no such A. B. at the time of the writ brought, neither was
there ever any such, as the writ supposes, and demanded judgment of the
writ: and this was adjudged a good plea, in abatement of the writ, if there
were no such A. B. in the said County of D. though there was one at that time
of the name of A. B. in another County: Or if the said A. B. dyed before this
appeal commenced.

84 In an appeal of Rape the writ shall be, The form of the writ of appeal
of Rape.
ad respondendum appellanti secundum formam statuti, quare vxorem suam rapuit,
and not vnde eum appellat secundum formam statuti: because the statute does not
give the appeal: for the appeal was at the common Law: but he ought to
answer according to the Statute, to this intent, that he shall not wage
battle: for the Statute says, St. 6. R. 2. 6
Ad duellum vadiandum minime recipiatur. And though in his writ of appeal of
Rape, he does not use these words felonice Rapuit, yet is the writ good,
notwithstanding that, for in this word Rapuit, felony is implied. If in an
appeal of Rape the writ has not this word Rapuit, 3. Eli. Dyer 202.
it shall abate, Rapuit material.
although it has words amounting to the same effect, as carnaliter cognouit,
and such like. S. Felony by Statute 4.

7. H. 7. 6 Co. li. 4. 47.
85 One shall not have diverse writs of Appeal, Not two appeals for one offense
against one person.
depending at one time against another, of one felony. But yet before the writ
be abated, it is requisite, that the court be satisfied, that both those writs
were pursued by the plaintiff, which must be proved by some act that the
plaintiff has done, as if he has appeared to them both, and counted upon
them: for notwithstanding, that one of them has bin delivered of record to the
shirife to serve, yet seeing that may be done by a stranger, as well as by the
plaintiff, it shall be no conclusion to the plaintiff to say, that the said
writ so delivered of record, was not his suit. And the like law is, 4. H. 6. 15.
if an appeal by bill be commenced in the county before the shirife and the
Coroners, and is removed out of the county into a court of record, and there
depending, the plaintiff does purchase another appeal by writ, this appeal by
writ shall abate. But it is otherwise, if ye appeal by writ be purchased before
the appeal by bill removed out of the county: 10. H. 4. 4.
for there the Court ought to send for the appeal in the county, without
abating the appeal, which is co^menced by writ: and this is more worthy, and
of an higher nature, then is the appeal by bill commenced in the county, which
is but as a plaint, until after it be removed: for it is a common course in
the K. Bench, when an appeal is depending there by Writ, to send for the
appeal co^menced by bill in the county: and yet if the appellant be nonsute in
his appeal depending in the county, his Writ shall abate.

86 In an appeal brought against two, Pleading of one in appeal against two
one of them may plead, 21. E. 4. 71. 7. H. 4. 27.
that his companion, that was named with him in the Writ, died at such a place,
before the Writ purchased: Or that there was none such in Rerum natura, as the
other which was named with him in the Writ, the day of the Writ purchased: for
if he that does appear, should not plead these pleas, there is none to plead
them: and in the foresaid cases, and in all other cases of appeals against
several persons, if the appeal does abate against one of them, 9. H. 4. 2.
it does abate against them all.

87 In an appeal, if the def. do plead, that the plaintiff is misnamed, The
plaintiff misnamed.
9. H. 5* 1*
if the plaintiff will confess it, the couin shall be examined, viz. whether he
does it by couin between him and the plaintiff, or not. But if it be proved
true, that the plaintiff is misnamed, the appeal shall abate.

88 In an appeal the defendant may have two or three pleas to the writ, Two or
three pleas to the writ.
as the tenant shall have in an assise: But he must take care, that one of them
be not contrary to the other.

89 To make a bar in appeal, Bars in appeal.
is to run over the foresaid title to whom appeals be given, and according
thereunto to frame his plea in bar: for if an appeal be commenced by one
that has no title to maintain it, that is good matter to plead in bar
against the appellant. As, if a woman do bring an appeal of the death of her
husband, it is a good plea to plead, 28. E. 3. 9. 27. Ass. p. 3 50. Ed. 3. 15^
that after the death of her husband she has married another husband: Appeal
of death brought by the wife.
Or that she was never accoupled in lawful marriage to him, of whose death
she does bring the appeal.

90 If an appeal of death be brought by the heir, Bars in appeal of death
by the heir
it is a good plea to plead, 20. H. 6. 47. Kel. fol. 120 Fi. Cor. 384 27. Ass.
p. 25
that he which is dead, has a wife living, to whom the appeal is given: or
that the plaintiff who supposes himself to be heir, is not next heir to him
that was slain, but that he has an elder brother, or that he is a bastard: or
to plead, that the plaintiff in this appeal of death has surceased his time,
for that the appeal was not brought within the year and day after the death
of him, who is supposed to be killed: or to say, 8. H. 4. 18
that he of whose death this appeal is brought is living at such a place: or to
bring the party supposed to be slain, into the court, that he may be seen,
and known to be living.

Fi. Cor. 17 11. H. 4. 14
91 In an appeal of Robbery it is a good plea to plead, that the plaintiff is
his villain. And in appeal of Rape brought by the husband and wife, Robbery
Rape.
it is a good plea to plead, never accoupled in lawful marriage, or to plead
villenage in the plaintiff. In an appeal of Robbery it is no good plea for
the defendant to plead in bar, Co. lib. 4. 43 2. R. 3. 14
that the appellant brought an action of Trespass against him for the same goods
carried away, and recovered: for the appeal of Robbery is of a higher nature,
and concerns the life of a man.

92 There be some other pleas in bar in an appeal, which be general,
General pleas in bar in appeal.
and will serve for all manner of appeals of Felony: Fi. Cor. 32 2
as to plead, that the plaintiff is attainted of Treason or Felony: Or that he
is a Monk, a Priest, not of perfect memory, dumb, deaf, a lazar, a natural
fool, or that he is maimed by another, and not by the defendant. But if the
plaintifes attainder be but by Outlawrie, which is erroneous, then his
attainder is no bar but for the time, Fit. Vtlarie 47.
viz. until he has reuersed the Vtlary. S. Approuers 10. 14.

93 It is a good plea in bar in an appeal, The plaintiff brought another
appeal.
to say that the plaintiff at another time brought an appeal of the same
felony against the defendant, 9. H. 4. 2. 47. Ed. 3. 16.
in the which he was Nonsute, or made a Retraxit: Or that the plaintiff did at
another time pursue an appeal of the same felony against another, who was
attainted or acquit at his suit. If a man be indicted of Manslaughter, and upon
his arraignment he confesses the felony, and prays, and has his Clergy: If
after an appeal of murder be brought against the said offender, Co. li. 4.
40. 45.
of the murder of the same man, it is a good plea for him to plead, that he
was at another time convict of the same felony. And the same law is, if one
bring an appeal of Murder against another, and the defendant pleads not
guilty, and is found guilty of manslaughter, and has his Clergy, if after he
be indicted and arraigned of the same offense, and he does plead the former
conviction, it is a good plea in bar. S. Indictments 47.

Fit. Cor. 98.
94 It is a good plea in bar in an appeal for the defendant to plead, The
plaintifs release in bar.
that the plaintiff made unto him a Release of the same offense: for it will
not serve to plead a Release made to any other, saving to himself, though the
other to whom the Release is made, be named with him in the appeal. And in
like sort, though the plaintiff made a Retraxit against one of them, this shall
not bar him against them both, but the appeal shall stand good against the
other.

95 And when the defendant has pleaded any of the foresaid pleas, Pleading not
guilty after other pleas.
yet (in favor of life) the law does permit him to plead over to the felony (
viz. not guilty) and his plea by that means shall not be adjudged double, 22.
E. 4. 39.
unless it be in the case of a release: for there he shall not be allowed to
plead over to the felony, because it is contrary to his foresaid plea: Neither
shall he plead over to the felony, when the defendant in an appeal of Robbery
does plead Villenage in the plaintiff, for if he should plead over to the
felony, the plaintiff by that means should be infranchised. 28. E. 3. 91. 18.
E. 3. 32
But if the Villenage be found against the defendant, he shall have this plea
of not guilty, as well as he shall have, when he pleads any of the foresaid
bars, without concluding over to the felony: yet notwithstanding if the bar
be found against him, he may plead over to the felony, viz. not guilty, saving
in pleading of a release, for by that plea he confesses the felony by
implication.

Where the K. may prosecute an appeal begun by another.
96 If the appellant do surcease to prosecute his appeal against the defendant,
the king may pursue it: for the appellant may by several means leave off, and
omit to prosecute his appeal, as by Nonsute, Release, Retraxit, 3. H. 6. Fi.
Cor. 3
or a woman by taking a husband during the suit of Appeal: and because in all
those cases the suit does cease by the act of the party plaintiff, therefore in
which of them soever it does cease, after declaration in the appeal, the
defe^dant shall not go at liberty, but shall be arraigned at the kings suit, upon
the same declaration, for that it does appear by the declaration there is a
felony committed, and the year, day, and place, where and when the said felony
was committed, and the same is not yet tried, and the law will not allow such
great offenses, whereof she takes notice, to be concealed, and remain
unpunished. And the same law is, if the appellants appeal do cease by the act
of God, 21. E. 3. 18.
as if the appellant do die: Or if it cease by the act of the Law, as if the
appellant be hanged: Or if the appellant do take the privilege of his Clergy,
Fi. Cor. 369
in which cases the defendant likewise shall be arraigned at the K. suit. But in
every arraignment, which is to be at the K. suit, upon an appeal begun by an
appellant, the declaration in the same appeal must be once good and true: for
if it were never good, and abated for that cause, Fit. cor. 1^1
the appellee shall not be arraigned at the kings suit, notwithstanding the
abatement be after declaration. And therefore if the appeal be abated by
misnaming of the defendant, 4. H. 6. 16
he shall not be arraigned at the kings suit: Or if it be abated by misnaming
of the plaintiff, or of the town, or for want of a material word. And so it
is, if the defendant in an appeal do plead, that the plaintiff is outlawed,
17. Ass. p. 26 11. Ass. p. 27 18. E. 3. 35 Fi. Cor. 3
or is attainted of Treason or Felony, or otherwise is disabled to maintain an
appeal: as if a woman do bring an appeal of the death of her husband, and
the defendant does plead, that she and her said husband were never accoupled in
lawful marriage, or that she has married another husband: Or that the appeal
was not co^menced within the year and day, after the offense committed: Or
that the appellant has an elder brother living, to whom the appeal is given,
Fit. cor. 384 387.
and not to the plaintiff. And all those matters which shall be a bar to the
plaintiff to bring the appeal, shall also be a bar to the K. to take any
advantage against ye appellee upon the same appeal: for in all these cases it
may appear, yt the appeal was co^menced without cause, and grounded upon
false and insufficient matter. And the king shall be in no better condition
than the appellant, for the defendant is arraigned upon the declaration of the
appellant: and yet it is otherwise, where the Appeal was at the first grounded
upon sufficient and true matter. But in all the cases aforesaid, though the
king can take no advantage of the Appeal against the defendant, yet he may
compel him to answer to an indictment of the same felony: for that by these
pleas the defendant is not discharged of the felony, though he be discharged
of the Appeal. S. Approuers 15. 17. 18. 19.

No appeal of Treason.
97 If an act which was murder, felony, or other offense, by the common law, be
after made treason by stat. and then one does offend in the same, no Appeal will
lie against him therefore, for that no Appeal will lie of High or Petit
Treason. And therefore whereas wilful poisoning was wilful murder by the
common law, and after by the stat. of 22. H. 8. 9. the same was made high
treason, and ordained, that the offender therein should be boiled to death:
(which stat. was sithence repealed by the stat. of 1. Ed. 6. 12. and 1. M.) yet
during the said stat. of 22. H. 8. in force, the son and heir of a man
poisoned, brought an appeal against a woman for poisoning her husband, and
because the offense was then high Treason, M. 33. H. 8. Dyer 50.
and no appeal will lie of Treason, the appeal was adjudged not maintanable.
And yet by the ancient laws of this realm (as Bracton affirms) the accusor
might have pursued an appeal of high Treason against the defendant or party
accused, Bracton, de coron^, c. 3
and the defendant might have thereunto pleaded not guilty, and waged battle
with the accusor: But that Law is sithence altered.

Indictments.
What an Indictment is.
1 AN Indictment of Treason, Felony, Trespass, or other offense, is an
inquisition taken, and made by twelve men at the least, thereunto sworn,
whereby they do find and present, that such a person, of such a name, and
surname, dwelling in such a place of such a County, and of such a degree, has
committed such a Treason, Murder, Rape, Burglarie, Robbery, Felony, Trespass,
or other offense, at such a place, upon such a day, and in such a manner,
against the Kings peace, his Crown, and Dignity, and contrary to the Laws of
this realm: and so it is an accusation by the Jury of the offender, and an
information of the Court, from whence they receive their charge, of his
offense, and of all such necessary circumstances thereof, and in such
certainty, that thereupon the same Court may proceed to the trial or
arraignement of the party accused, if he be present, or otherwise may award
Process against him to appear, and to make answer thereunto, if he be absent.
And because this Indictment and accusation does sometime concern the life or
member of man, sometime his liberty, sometime his fame and credit, sometime
his Lands and Tenements, and some other time his Goods and Cattels: Therefore
the Law has a special regard, that the proceedings therein may be effected
with all sincerity and upright dealing, and does carry a vigilant and
watchful eye, not only upon the Jurors which are returned and sworn in those
Enquests, that they may be men of integrity, sufficiency, and indifferency,
but also upon Shirifes, and Baylifes of Liberties, who have authority to
return the same Jurors: for she has provided by several Statutes, That they
shall take no Indictments by Commissions procured at their own suit, but in
their Turns: That they shall hold their Turns, St. 28. E. 3. 9 St. 31. E. 3.
14 St. 13. E. 1. 13 St. 1. E. 3. 16
and take Indictments but in convenient and usual times: That they shall take
Indictments by twelve men at the least, and then by Roll indented: That they
shall take their Indictments by men of good name, and credit, and sufficient of
estate: St. 1. R. 3. 4 St. 1. E. 4 3.
That they shall bring their Indictments and Presentiments found and made in
their Turns to the Justices of Peace of the same County, that they may award
Process against those that be indicted, and set fines upon them: That Jurors
impanelled to make inquiries, St. 11. H. 4. 9
shall be lawfully returned by shirifes, or baylifes of Franchises, without the
denomination of any other person: That Panels returned by the Shirife to make
inquiries, St. 3. H. 8. 12 St. 3. H. 7. 1
may be reformed by the Justices: and that one Enquest may be impanelled and
charged to inquire of concealements of offenses made by another Enquest: So
that the Law has provided, that Indictments may be found by men of worth, and
upon just causes. And as touching Commissions, because in times past Shirifes
of diverse Counties, by virtue of Commissions and general Writs granted unto
them at their own suit, for their private gain, did take diverse Enquests to
indict people at their own pleasures, Commissions to shirifes to take
indictments.
and then took fines and ransomes of them to their own uses, and after set at
liberty the parties, and never brought the same persons so indicted before the
Kings Justices, to be delivered there, according to the form of Law: It was
therefore by a Statute made Anno 28. Ed. 3. St. 28. E. 3. 9
ordained, That all such Commissions and Writs should be from thenceforth
repealed, and that none such should be at any time after granted. By force of
which Statute the Shirife is restrained to make any inquiry by Writ or
Commission: The shirife may inquire of Felonies
But yet by virtue of his office he may at this day make inquiry in his Turn
of Felonies, observing such orders as by the statutes hereafter limited be
expressed.

St. 9. H. 3. 36
2 Whereas by the statute of Magna Charta, it was ordained, That no Shirife or
his Baylife shall hold his Turn by Hundreds but twice in the year, in a due
and accustomed place, that is to say, once after Easter, and another time after
the Feast of Saint Michael. And because some Shirifes did hold their Turns in
Lent, when men should attend their devotion, and other works of charity: and
sometimes after the Gule of August, when most men be occupied in felling and
carrying in their corn, contrary to the foresaid statute of Magna Charta, St.
31. E. 3. 14
therefore by a statute made Anno 31. E. 3. it was enacted, That every Shirife
should hold his Turn When the shirife shall hold his Turn.
yearly once within a month after Easter, and at another time within a month
after the feast of Saint Michael: and if they hold their Turn in any other
manner, that then they shall loose their Turn for that time. And so, An
indictment found in an unlawful time
if any man be indicted of Felony or other offense in the Shirifes Turn after
the month of Easter, 38. H. 6. 7. 6. H. 7. 2
and Saint Michael, the Indictment shall be void, because it is against the
form of this statute: for the words of the statute be, they shall loose their
Turn for this time, which is as much, as if it had been said, their Turn
holden at this time is void. And by this statute it does appear when the Turn
shall be holden to make a good Indictment.

3 Because Shirifes did feign diverse times certain persons to be indicted
before them in their Turns of Felonies, and other Trespasses, and did
apprehend certain persons that were not culpable, nor lawfully indicted, and
imprisoned them, to the intent to exact money from them, whereas they were not
lawfully indicted by twelve men: For the prevention whereof, by the statute of
Westminster. St. 13. E. 1. 13
2. made Anno 13. Ed. 1. it was provided, That Shirifes in their Turns, and in
other places where they have authority to inquire of Trespasses by the Kings
Precept, or by their Office, shall cause inquisitions to be made of malefactors
by twelve lawful men at the least, Shirifes shall inquire by xij. lawful men
at the least.
which shall put their seals to such inquisitions. And the said Shirifes shall
apprehend those which shall be found culpable by such inquisitions, and
imprison them, as they have used to do. And if they do imprison any other but
such as be indicted by the inquisitions aforesaid, they which be imprisoned
shall have their action of false imprisonment against the Shirife, as they might
have against any other person that should imprison them without warrant: and
what is said of the Shirife, shall be observed of every Baylife of Liberty.

4 Because the said Inquisitions taken by the Shirife should not be concealed,
imbesilled, or mistaken, but that the truth of them should be showed to the
Justices, when they come to deliver the Jail, Therefore by the Statute of Anno
1. Edw. 3. it was established, St. 1. E. 3. 16
That Shirifes and Baylifes of Franchises, Indictments by roll inden^ed before
the Shirife.
and all others who take Indictments at their Turns, or elsewhere that
Indictments should be made, shall take those Indictments by Roll indented,
whereof one part shall remain with the Indictors, and the other with him that
does take the Enquest: So that the Indictments shall not be imbesilled, and
that one of the Enquest may show one part of the Indenture to the Justices,
when they shall come to make deliverance. This Statute by general words does
extend to Stewards in Leetes, and all others.

5 For that great inconveniences and Periuries were in several Counties of
this Realm, by false verdicts given in inquisitions and inquiries before
Shirifes in their Turns, by persons of no substance, nor behavior, nor
fearing God, nor respecting the world: by which means many persons of several
parts of this Realm, by the inticement and persuasion of their enemies, were
wrongfully indicted: and some others, which ought to have been indicted by
such procurement, Of what sufficiency Jurors returned in the Shirifes Turn,
shall be.
were spared: For the avoiding whereof, by a Statute made Anno 1. R. 3. it was
enacted, That no Bailey, St. 1. R. 3. 4
or other Officer shall return in any pannell any such person in any County
within this Realm of England, to be taken or put in or upon any such inquiry
in any of the said Turns, but such as be of good name and fame, and have lands
and tenements of freehold within the same County, to the yearly value of
twenty shillings at the least, or otherwise Lands and Tenements, holden by the
custom of the Manor, commonly called Copyhold, within the said Counties, to
the yearly value of six and twenty shillings eight pence at the least. And if
any Bailey or other Officer within the said Counties shall return or impannell
any person contrary to this ordinance, he shall loose for every person so
impanelled or returned, not being of the sufficiency aforesaid, so often as he
shall offend, forty shillings, and the shirife other forty shillings, whereof
the one half shall be to the King, and the other to such as will sue for the
same. And every person that will sue for himself, shall have several actions
of Debt at the common Law, as well against the Shirife, as against the Bailey.
And like and the same Process shall be had and used in those actions, as be had
and used in other actions at the common Law, and no Protection or Essoine
shall be allowed therein: and every such Indictment otherwise taken before the
Shirife in his Turn, shall be void: which foresaid statutes were made, to
avoid the corrupt and evil demeanor of Shirifes and other officers, which take
Indictments in shirifes Turns and Leets.

6 Because diverse persons were greatly vexed and troubled by the inordinat and
immeasurable Indictments and Presentiments, as well of Felony and Trespasses,
as of other things which were taken and used before shirifes, their
Vndershirifes, Clerks, Baylifes, and other Ministers at their Turns or
Law-daies holden before them severally in their Counties: Which indictments and
Presentiments were often affirmed by Jurors, having no conscience, nor freehold,
and small wealth, and sometime by the meniall servants and Baylifes of the said
Shirifes or Vndershirifes. By reason of which Indictments and Presentiments many
people were attached, arrested, and put in prison by the said Shirifes, their
Vndershirifes, Clerks, Baylifes, and Ministers, and then they were constrained
to pay unto them great fines and ransomes, to deliver them out of prison: and
also the said Indictments and Presentiments were imbesilled, withholden, and
concealed. And further, the said Shirifes and other Officers had amongst
themselves the awarding of Process upon such Indictments when they were found,
and the assessing of fines: So that all the corrupt misdemeanors sought to be
reformed by the before specified statutes, were little or nothing amended. And
therefore for the reformation of the enormities aforesaid, St. 1. E. 4. 3.
by a statute made Anno 1. Ed. 4. it was ordained, That upon all Indictments
and Presentiments which shall be taken before any of the Shirifes of Counties
for the time being, their Vndershirifes, Clerks, Baylifes, or Ministers at
their Turns, or Law-daies, they nor any of them shall have power or authority
to arrest, attach, or put in prison, or to leuy any fines or amerciaments of
any person or persons so indicted or presented by reason or color of any such
Indictment or Presentment taken before them, or any of them, or to leuy or take
of any such person or persons so indicted or presented, any fine or ransom.
But the said Shirifes, vndershirifes, Baylifes, or Ministers shall bring,
present, and deliver all such Indictments and Presentiments taken before them,
or any of them in their Turns, or Law-daies, to the Justices of the Peace,
Indictments taken in ye shirifes Turnt shall be delivered to the Iu. of peace.
at their next Session of the Peace, which shall be holden in the County or
Counties where such indictments and presentiments shall be taken. And if any of
the said Shirifes, Vndershirifes, Clerks, Baylifes, or Ministers do not
bring, deliver, or present all such indictments or presentiments so taken before
them and every of them in their Turns, or Law-daies, as is aforesaid, to such
Sessions of the peace, before the said Justices: then the said Shirifes,
Vndershirifes, Clerks, Baylifes, and their Ministers, and every of them which
shall fail of the bringing, delivering, or presenting of such Indictments or
Presentiments, shall forfeit to the king forty pounds, so often as they or any of
them shall do the contrary. And the said Justices of peace shall have power
and authority to award process upon such Indictments and Presentiments as the Law
does require, Process upon Indictments awarded by I. of peace
and in such like manner, as if the said Indictments and Presentiments had bin
taken before the said Justices of Peace in the same County or Counties: and
also to arraigne and deliver all person and persons so indicted and presented,
before the said Shirifes, Vndershirife, their Clerks, Baylifes, or Ministers,
or any of them in their Turns or Lawdaies, and to set such fine upon every
person or persons indicted or presented of Trespass, as it shall seem good to
their discretions. And the Estreats of the same fines and amerciaments shall be
enrolled, and by Indenture delivered to the said Shirifes, Vndershirifs,
Clerks, or Ministers, or to some of them, to the use and profit of him which
was shirife of the County at the time of the taking of such indictments or
presentiments. And if any of the said Shirifes, Vndershirifes, Clerks,
Bailifes, or ministers shall cause to be arrested, attached, or put in prison,
or shall cause to be raised or taken any fine or ransom, or leuy any
amerciament of any person or persons so indicted or presented, by reason or
color of any such indictment or presentment before him taken at his foresaid
Turn, or Law-day, before they have process from the said Justices of Peace, or
Estreats delivered out of the said indictments or presentiments so brought,
delivered, or presented unto them: then the shirifes which do so shall forfeit
an hundred pounds, whereof the one moitie shall be employed toward the expenses
of the kings house, and the other to the party or parties that shall be
enda^maged: And he or they shall have an action of Debt at the common law, and
like process as is used in an action of Debt at the common law, wherein the
defendants shall not be essoined, wage their law, Indictments in London.
nor have any protection. But this Ordinance shall not extend or be
prejudicial to the shirifes of the city of London, touching indictments or
presentiments to be taken before them in the said city: Neither shall this
ordinance extend or be prejudicial to any person or persons that have grant
of any fines, or other amerciaments by any letters patents of the king, or of
any of his progenitors or predecessors, bearing date before the x. day of
December next after the beginning of this Parliament, being An. Dom. 1461.

B
This statute does give authority to Justices of peace to award process upon all
indictments taken in the shirifes Turn, when they be brought and delivered
unto them: But yet it is always intended, That those Indictments shall be
lawful, The shirife inquiring of things not in^uirable in (...) Turn.
and contain matter whereof the Shirife has jurisdiction in his Turn, and
power to make inquiry: For if the Shirife in his Turn will make inquiry of
the statute of Liueries, 4. E. 4. 31. 8. E. 4. 5.
or indict one who did feloniously ravish a woman, or such other matters, which
be not inquirable in the shirifes Turn, although he will bring the indictments
before the Iu. of peace, and deliver them according to the foresaid stat. of 1.
Ed. 4. yet they ought not to award process upon them, for they were taken coram
non iudice, and so void.

7 And for that Enquests were sometimes taken, without being duly returned by
the shirife, of such persons as were outlawed before Justices of Record, and of
some such as were fled to sanctuary for Felony or Treason to have refuge, by
whom sometimes not only offenders were indicted, but also several of the kings
liege people not guilty, by the conspiracy, abbetment, and false practice of
others, for their own special advantage and private gain: for the avoiding
whereof there was a statute made Anno 11. H. 4. which does enact, St. 11. H. 4.
9
That no indictment shall be made by any such persons, but by enquests of the
kings liege people, as it has bin used in the time of the kings progenitors,
duly returned by shirifes, or bailifes of Franchises, without any manner of
denomination before made to the said shirife, or bailifes of Franchises, by any
person of the names of those who shall be impanelled by him, Jurors in
indictments shall be returned by the shirife without denomination
unless it be by the officers of the said shirifes, or bailifes of Franchises,
known or sworn thereunto, and other ministers to whom it appertains by the
law of England to make the same. And if any indictment be made in any point to
the contrary, the same shall be void, revoked, and of no force.

According to this statute, some have been discharged of their Indictments, B.
because certain of the Indictors were before that outlawed of Felony. This
statute of Anno 11. H. 4. is altered by the next statute of Anno 3. H. 8. for
so much only as does concern denomination to be made by the Justices, 11. H.
4. 40. St. 3. H. 8. 12.
for the reformation of Panels returned before them by the Shirifes, when the
said Justices will have the same Panels reformed: But for all the residue it
continues in force.

8 The whole authority of returning of Enquests to make Indictments, without
the denomination of any person before made, being by force of the foresaid
statute of 11. H. 4. in shirifes and bailifes of Franchises, several great
extortions and oppressions were done in diverse Counties of this Realm by
subtilty and untrue demeanor of shirifes and their ministers to many persons by
making and returning at every Sessions holden within the said Counties for the
body of the shire, names of such persons, as for the singular gain of the said
shirifes and bailifes would be wilfully forsworn, by the sinister labor of
the said shirifes and their ministers: By reason whereof, by their couin and
falsehood, many true and substantial persons were diverse times wrongfully
indicted of Murders, Felonies, and other misbehauiours, to the utter loss of
their lives, goods, and lands: and sometime also by the labor of the said
shirifs great Felonies and Murders were concealed, and not presented by the
said persons, partially returned by the same shirifs, or their ministers, to
the intent to compel the offenders to make fines, and give rewards to the said
Shirifes and their ministers: For the prevention of which enormities, by a
stat. made Anno 3. H. 8. it was established, St. 3. H. 8. 12
That all panels to be returned, which be not at the suit of any party, Panels
for indictments reformed by the Justices.
that shall be made and put in by every shirife and their ministers before any
I. of Jail delivery, or I. of Peace (whereof one to be of the Quorum) in their
open Sessions to inquire for the king, shall be reformed by putting to and taking
out of the names of the persons which so be impanelled by every shirife and
their ministers, by the discretion of the same Justices before whom such panels
shall be returned. And the same Justice and Justices shall command every
shirife, and their ministers in his absence, to put other persons in the same
panels by their discretions. And the same panels so reformed by the said
Justices, be good and lawful. And if any shirife, or any of their ministers at
any time do not return the same panels so reformed, then every such shirife or
minister so offending for every such offense shall forfeit xx. l. the one half
to the king, and the other to him or them that will sue for the same by action
of Debt at the common law, or Bill etc. wherein no W.E. or P. shall be allowed:
and the kings pardon shall be no bar against the party or parties that shall
sue the same.

9 It is to be thought, that by force of the statutes before rehearsed
sufficient, honest, and indifferent Jurors were returned by the shirifes of
Counties, or that the Panels by them returned were reformed by the Justices; so
that if any defect were committed in Indictments, or in concealing of offenses,
or offenders, then the same was in the Jury, which were charged for the body of
the Shire to make inquiry: for the searching forth of the truth whereof, and
for the punishment of the said offenders according to their demerites, by a
statute made Anno 3. H. 7. it was ordained, St. 3. H. 7. 1
That the Justices of peace of every Shire of this Realm, for the time being,
may do to take by their discretion an enquest, Enquest to inquire of
concealments.
whereof every man shall have Lands and Tenements to the yearly value of
forty shillings at the least, to inquire of the concealements of other Enquests
taken before them, and before other, of such matters and offenses as are to be
inquired and presented before Justices of Peace, whereof complaint shall be
made, by Bill, or Bills, as well within Franchise, as without: and if any such
concealment be found of any Enquest had or made within the year after the
same concealment, every person of the same Enquest shall be amerced for the
same concealements, by the discretion of the same Justices of Peace, the said
amerciaments to be assessed in plene Sessions.

10 For as much as several persons upon great grounds of vehement suspicions,
as well of high Treasons, petit Treasons, and misprision of Treason, as of
Murders, were many times sent for from diverse Shires and places of this
Realm, and other the Kings Dominions, to the Kings great charges, to be
examined before the Kings Council upon their offenses, to the intent that
conviction or declaration of such persons should speedily ensue, as the merits
of their cases should require: And albeit that after great travail taken in
the examination of such persons, it appeared to the said Council, by
confession, witness, or vehement suspect, that such persons were rather guilty
of such offenses whereof they were examined, then otherwise, yet nevertheless,
such offenders so examined by the course of the common Laws of this Realm,
must be indicted within the Shires or places where they committed their
offenses, and also tried by the inhabitants and freeholders of such Shires and
places, although by their confessions, or by sufficient witness their offenses
were certainly known to the Kings Council: By reason whereof, besides the
travail of the Kings Counsel, the King was often put to great charges, in
remaunding such persons to the countries where they offended, there to be
indicted and tried of their offenses. And sometimes the inhabitants and
freeholders of the Shires or places where such offenses were done, were
compelled to appear out of their shires or places for such causes, to their
great charges, for the trial or declaration of such offenses. And sometime by
occasion of the charges for remaunding such offenders to be indicted and tried
by the course of the common Law, such offenders did lie still in prison, and
were forgotten: whereby many times, by the help of their confederats, they
escaped unpunished, to the great courage and evil example of evil doers. For
the reformation whereof, by a statute made Anno 33. H. 8. it was enacted, St.
33. H. 8. 23.
That if any person or persons, being examined before the Kings Council, or
three of them, upon any manner of Treasons, misprision of Treasons, or
Murders, do confess any such offenses, or that the said Council, or three
of them upon such examination shall think any person so examined to be
vehemently suspected of any Treason, misprision of Treason, or Murder: then in
every such case, by the Kings commandment, his Majesty's Commission of Oyer
and Terminer under his great Seal shall be made by the Chancellor of England to
such persons, Indictments and trials where the king will.
and to such Shires and places as shall be named and appointed by the Kings
Highness, for the speedy trial, conviction, or deliverance of such
offenders: Which Commissioners shall have authority to inquire, hear, and
determine all such Treasons, misprisions of Treasons, and Murders, within the
Shires and places limited by their Commission, by such good and lawful
persons as shall be returned before them by the Shirife, or his ministers, or any
other, having power to return Writs and Process, for that purpose, in
whatsoever other Shire or place, within the Kings Dominions, or without, such
offenses of Treasons, misprisions of Treasons, or Murders so examined, were
done or committed: and that in such cases no challenge for the Shire or Hundred
shall be allowed. After which Statute there was a Statute made Anno 1. and 2.
Ph. and Ma. whereby it was ordained, St. 1. and 2. P. and M. 10.
That trials to be hereafter had, awarded, Trial of Treason.
or made for any Treason, shall be had and used only according to the due order
and course of the common laws of this Realm, and not otherwise.

12. El. Dyer fol. 286
The foresaid stat. of 33. H. 8. is repealed by the said stat. of 1. and 2. Ph.
and M. touching the indictment and trial of Traitors: B
for they are to be indicted and tried in the county where the offense was
committed, or by freeholders of that county, according to the course of the
common law, notwithstanding that they have confessed their offenses before iij.
of the K. Council. But for the trial of Murder the said stat. of 33. H. 8.
does continue in force.

11 For as much as some doubts and questions were moved, whether certain kinds
of Treasons, misprisions and concealements of Treasons committed out of the
Realm of England, and other the Kings dominions, can or may by the common
laws of this Realm be inquired of, heard, and determined within the Realm of
England: Therefore for a plain order, remedy, Indictments and trials of
Treasons committed out of this Realm
and declaration therein to be had, St. 35. H. 8. 2
by a statute made Ann^ 35. H. 8. it was enacted, That all manner of offenses
being already made, or declared, or hereafter to be made, or declared by any of
the Laws and Statutes of this realm to be Treasons, misprisions of Treasons,
or concealements of Treasons, and done, perpetrated, or committed, or hereafter
to be done, perpetrated, or committed by any person or persons out of this
Realm of England, shall be from henceforth inquired of, heard, and determined
before the kings Justices of his Bench, for pleas to be holden before himself,
by good and lawful men of the same shire, where the said Bench shall sit, and
be kept: Or else before such commissioners, and in such shire of the realm as
shall be assigned by the kings commission, and by good and lawful men of the
same shire, in like manner and form, to all intents and purposes, as if such
treasons, misprisions of treasons, or concealements of treasons had bin done
and committed within the same shire, where they shall be inquired of, heard, and
determined, as is aforesaid. But if any peer of this Realm shall be indicted
of any such Treasons, or etc. he shall have his trial by his Peers.

B
If any subject of this Realm being beyond the sea, does practice with the
Prince or Governor of another country to invade this Realm of England with a
great power, and in his practice does declare by what means, how, and in what
place the same may be done; 13. El. Dyer 298.
and though there be no such invasion, yet this practice is high Treason:
Treason practiced beyond the sea.
for an invasion with power may tend to the destruction or great peril of the
person of the King. And this offense shall be tried according to the foresaid
Statute of 35. H. 8. which Statute does remain in force, and is not repealed
by the before rehearsed Statute of 1. and 2. Ph. and Ma. 10.

Indictment in the County of Lancaster of a foreign.
12 For the conservation, tranquillity, and peace of the Kings liege people as
well within the County Palantine of Lancaster, as of other his liege people out
of the said County, within the Realm of England, by a statute made Anno 33. H.
6. it was established, St. 33. H. 6. 2
That every Indictment to be taken before any of the Kings Justices in the
County Palantine of Lancaster, or before any Shirife in his Turn in the said
County, whereby any person or persons be supposed by the same Indictment to be,
or to have been inhabiting or conversant out of the said County, and within
any other County within England, shall be taken by verdict of twelve men,
whereof every of them, or some other to their use, shall have Lands and
Tenements to the yearly value of an hundred shillings, and no process shall be
made out of such Indictment, before it be duly examined before the Justices
within the said County, whether the said Indictors and every of them, at the
time of such Indictment taken, had lands and teneme^ts within the said County
of Lancaster, to the yearly value of an hundred shillings, above all charges.
And if it be found, that every of the said indictors at the time of the said
Indictment taken had not lands etc. to the said yearly value of 100.
shillings, then the Indictment, as to such persons so indicted, supposed by the
said Indictment to be inhabiting or conversant out of the said County of
Lancaster, shall be void.

Indictment in a foreign County of a Lancashire man.
13 And by the same statute of Ann^ 33. H. 6. it was likewise enacted, St. 33.
H. 6. 2
That every Indictment from henceforth to be taken within any County of the
said Realm, and out of the said County of Lancaster, before any Justice, or
the shirife in his Turn, whereby any person or persons supposed by the same
indictment to be, or to have bin conversant or inhabiting within the said
county of Lancaster, and without such county where such indictment shall happen
to be taken, shall be taken by verdict of twelve men, whereof every of the^, or
some other person or persons to their own uses, shall have lands and tenements
to the value of 100. shillings. And that no process be made out of any such
indictments, before it be duly examined and inquired before the K. Justices,
having power to award any process upon such indictments, whether the said
indictors and every of them, at the time of such indictments taken, or any
other person or persons to their use, had any Lands or Tenements, to the
yearly value of an hundred shillings within the same County above all
charges, where such Indictments happen to be taken. And if it be found before
the King, or any of his Justices, that the said Indictors, or any of them, had
not at the time of such Indictment taken, nor that none other to their use had
Lands and Tenements to the yearly value of an hundred shillings, that then the
said Indictment, as to any such person or persons supposed by the said
Indictment to be, or to have bin inhabitants or conversant within the said
County of Lancaster, shall be void, and of none effect.

14 Though by the rules of the common Law every offender shall be tried in that
County wherein he is indicted, and he shall be both indicted and tried in the
County where he does commit the offense whereof he is so indicted: yet for the
preservation of man's life, and condignely to punish such persons as unlawfully
and wilfully murder, slay, or destroy men, and to prevent the practice of
those Thieves and Robbers, that do steal or rob in one County, and convey
their spoil or part thereof to some of their adherents knowing thereof in
another County, St. 2. and 3. Ed. 6. 24.
by a Statute made Anno 2. and 3. Edw. 6. it was enacted, That where any person
or persons shall be feloniously stricken, or poisoned in one County, A man
stricke^ or poisoned in one county, dies in another.
and dye of the same stroke or poisoning in another County, that then an
Indictment found by Jurors of the County where the death shall happen (whether
it shall be found before the Coroner upon the sight of any such dead body, or
before the Justices of Peace, or any other Justices, or Commissioners, which
shall have authority to enquire of such offenses) shall be as good, and
effectual in Law, as if the stroke or poisoning had been done or committed
in the same County where the party shall dye, or where such Indictment shall
be so found. And by the same Statute it was further ordained, That where any
Murder or Felony shall be committed and done in one County, and another
person or more shall be accessarie or accessaries in any manner wise to any
such Murder or Felony in any other County, Indictment of an accessory in one
county, to an offense done in another.
that then an Indictment found or taken against such accessarie or accessaries,
upon the circumstance of such matter before the Justices of Peace, or other
Justices or Commissioners, to inquire of felonies in the County where such
offenses of accessarie or accessaries in any manner of wise shall be committed
or done, shall be as good and effectual in the Law, as if the principal
offense had been committed or done within the same County where the same
Indictment against such accessory shall be found.

6. H. 7. 10 7. H. 7. 8
Before which Statute made, the manner was, B
to carry the body of the offender to the County where the first offense was
committed, and there to indict and try him. A man was indicted in the County of
Middlesex, for that he in the same County procured another man to kill a third
man in the County of Essex, Fi. Cor. 33
by force whereof he did kill him accordingly. This was a good and sufficient
Indictment: for he was indicted in the county where he committed his offense,
Kel. fol. 67.
viz. the procurement. And if a man being in one county, does procure another
to kill a third person in another cou^ty, whereby he does kill him accordingly,
in this case a Jury of the county where the murder was committed, may indict
this procuror as accessory, for that this murder was begun by his procurement.

Insidiatores viarum depopulatores agrorum.
15 By the Statute of Anno 4. H. 4. it was ordained, St. 4. H. 4. 2.
That the words Insidiatorum viarum, and Depopulatores agrorum shall not be
from henceforth used, or put in Indictments, Arraignements, Appeals, nor other
impeachments: Nor that by force of any such word, or term, any of the kings
people shall be arraigned, appealed, impeached, nor grieved before any secular
Judge. But the Justices may take and receive before them Indictments,
Arraignements, and Appeals of Felony, containing in them the effect of the
said words and terms, if any shall be hereafter indicted, arraigned, or appealed
before them of any such Felonies. And if in time to come any Clerks shall be
indicted, arraigned, or appealed, and their indiments, arraignements, or
appeals do purport the effect of the said words, or other words of the like
effect; notwithstanding, they shall enjoy the privilege of their Clergy.

Words not necessary in Indictments.
16 By a Statute made Anno 37. H. 8. the words vi and armis, viz. St. 37. H. 8. 8
cum baculis, cultellis, arcubus, and sagittis, or such other like (before time
commonly used and comprised in all Indictments and inquisitions of Treason,
Murder, Felony, Trespass, and other offenses) shall not of necessity be put
or comprised in any Inquisition, or Indictment: Nor the party being indicted of
any offense, shall take advantage by Writ of Error, Plea, or otherwise, to
avoid any such Inquisition or Indictment, for that the said words or any of
them shall not be put in the said Inquisition or Indictment: But the said
Inquisitions or Indictments lacking the foresaid words, or any of them, shall
be taken to all intents as good and effectual in Law, as if the said words
were in them.

No more shall be in an indictment then is true.
17 By these two last Statutes it does appear, St. 4. H. 4. 2. St. 37. H. 8. 8
that the Realms was offended because Indictments were stuffed with more words
then the offense required, and that of purpose to aggrauate the offense more
then it was grievous in it self. For the circumstances of every offense do
augment, or diminish it, according to the qualities thereof. And therefore it
is requisite that there shall be no further circumstance put in Indictments,
more then the fact, saving that which is true, least Perjury should ensue, and
Justice be subverted thereby: for such words be not words of form, but as
material and necessary, as Proditorie, or Felonice, which ought to be put in
every Indictment of Treason, or Felony, or otherwise the Indictment is not
good, for they do express the intent wherewith the fact was committed,
Felonice omitted in an indictment of felony.
which makes the offense to be known. As, one was indicted, That he took
his father being sick, Fi. Indict. 3.
and carried him against his will from town to town in a great frost, whereof
he died: and for that this word Felonice was not in the indictment, it was
adjudged void. And if one be indicted of murder, or manslaughter, 1. M. Di. 99.
there must be of necessity in the indictment a stroke supposed viz. tali die
and anno felonice and ex malitia praecogitata interfecit and murdrauit, etc.
without saying percussit. And if a man be indicted of Piracy, Piracie in an
indictment.
there ought to be in the indictment not only this word felonice, Stamf. 114.
but also this word piratice.

18. E. 3. 32. Fitz. Cor. 122. 13. Ass. p. 6
18 In an action of trespass brought for the taking away of a man's wife, Where a
verdict shall be an indictment.
and the goods of the husband, the def. pleaded not guilty, and was found by
verdict guilty: in this case the same verdict shall serve as an indictment for
the K. and the def. shall be thereupon arraigned of felony. And in like sort, ^n
an action of trespass brought for the taking away of his goods, Fitz. Indict. 31.
the defendant pleaded not guilty, and it was found by verdict, that the
defendant with other his companions did steal those goods from the plaintiff:
whereupon the defendant was awarded presently to answer to the felony at the K.
suit. But it was then affirmed, that if the enquest had passed in any other
place saving the K. Bench, nothing ought to have been done touching the
felony, until the Air of the Justices.

1. H. 7. 6.
19 If the Sheriff return a Rescous made unto him of one which he did arrest
for felony, and was taken out of his possession: The Sherifs return no
indictment.
In this case notwithstanding this return be matter of record, yet it is not
sufficient to serve as an indictment against him that made the Rescous. And the
same law is, if the Sheriff return, 2. E. 3. 1.
that the party arrested did escape from him. And the reason of the difference
between the two former cases and these, is, for that in the first cases there
is a verdict of twelve men, which will always serve for the King, if they
contain matter that will entitle him. For the King is ever present in court,
and if the parties in pleading, or the Jury in their verdict, do disclose any
matter which shall entitle the King, the court shall adiudge for the King,
though he be none of the parties to the action. But in the other case of the
Sherifes return, it is not so: for the Sherifes return will rather attaint
him, than put him to answer, for that it is a common rule, that against the
Sherifes return there is no Trauerse, nor answer. S. Breaking of prison 7.

25. E. 3. 43. 8. H. 1. 8. 2. H. 7. 7. 3. H. 7. 5. 5. E. 6. Di. 69
20 An Indictment which is uncertain is not good, The year, day, and place,
necessary in an indictment.
and therefore to make a good Indictment, it is necessary to put in the year,
day, and place, when, and where the felony was committed: And it ought to be
such a day as is not doubtful, nor uncertain: for if it be so, it is as much
as if no day had bin put in. And therefore if a man be indicted, Certainty in
the day.
that he committed felony in the Feast of Saint Paul, without addition, and
there be two Feasts of Saint Paul in the year, this is an uncertain
indictment, and so void. A man was indicted, for that the first day of May, and
the fourth day of May, at Dale he did beat and wound I.S. and then and there
did take and steal from him feloniously, 2. H. 7. 7.
a white horse: and this was adjudged a void indictment, for it is uncertain
whither these words adtunc and ibidem shall have relation, for a felony can be
committed but at one time and place.

21 An Indictment ought to be certain not only in the day, Indictment
certain in the matter.
but also in the matter. 8. E. 4. 3.
As if one be indicted for apprehending of a man for suspicion of felony, and
that he did after voluntarily and feloniously let him go at liberty, and the
indictment does not show in certainty for suspicion of what felony he was
taken, this is a void indictment.

Indictments certain in the persons received.
22 If a man be indicted as accessory to four men, in this manner, viz. 30. H.
6. 2.
that he knowing those four to have committed felony, did receive them
feloniously at D. and the indictment does not show which of them he received,
this indictment is void for the incertaintie: for the indictment should have
bin, that he did receive them all four by name, or three, two, or one of them
by name.

Indictment uncertain at which court.
23 If an indictment be, 49. H. 6. 15 31. H 8. Dyer 46. 4. and 5. P. and M. Die.
164 33 H. 8. Dyer 50.
Ad magnam curiam cum leta tentam tali die and anno extitit praesentatum quod
etc. this is a void indictment, for that it is uncertain to which of those
courts a man will refer the presentment, whether to the Leet, or to the Court
Baron. And so must the words of an indictment be certain in every addition of
the county, Indictment uncertain in the addition.
town, place, time, person, mystery, etc. and in an Alias dictus etc. and in
the placing thereof.

Indictment for making of money.
24 If a man be indicted, that he made C. s^. by Alchimy, Fitz. Indict. 10.
like the money of our Sovereign Lord the K. and it is not alleged in the
indictment what money it was, viz. pence, grotes, or etc. this is a void
indictment for the uncertainty.

A common thief.
25 If a man be indicted, that he is a common evil doer, or a common thief,
22. Ass. p. 73 29. As. p. 45.
without showing specially in what thing, this is a void indictment, because it
is uncertain in what things the transgressor has offended. By the stat. of
anno 25. E. 3. 9. pro Clero, it is ordained, That no Ordinary, St. 25. E. 3.
or any minister of his, shall be indicted of extortion or oppression generally:
but it must be declared and put in certain in the indictment, in what thing,
of what, and in what manner the said Ordinaries or their Ministers have done
extortion and oppression: Indictment of the Ordinary must be certain.
or otherwise the said Ordinaries and their ministees shall not be impeached by
the K. Justices for the said indictment.

The foresaid A. where none is named.
26 If a man be indicted for the stealing of the goods of the foresaid A. where
there is no such A. before named in the indictment, this is a void indictment:
9. E. 4. 1.
for that words subsequent cannot have relation to words precedent, where there
be none such.

Indictment for the killing of a man unknown.
27 No man is bound to answer to an appeal of felony touching the death of a
man, if the appellant do not name the name of the party that was killed. 22. As
p. 94
But a man may be indicted quod interfecit quendam hominem ignotum: 2. E. 3.
26. 9. H. 6. 64. 1. Ass. p. 7.
for he that is slain may be so mangled in the face, or was dwelling so far
off, that he cannot be known by name. Indictment for stealing the goods of a
man unknown.
And in like sort a man may be indicted for the stealing of the goods of
cuiusdam hominis ignoti. And the reason is, Fitz. Indict. 12. 1. M. Di. 96. 11.
Eliz. Dyer 285.
for that this indictment is not the suit of the owner of the goods, but is the
Kings suit, who is to have the goods, if no man do claim them: And it were
not expedient that the King should loose the goods, for that the name of the
owner is not there known, which owner peradventure for fear will not claim
the goods as his own, or who (it may be) is dwelling in another County, far
distant from the place where the goods were stolen: so that the country where
the goods were stolen, does neither know his name or surname. And therefore
for the K. advantage, and for to print a greater terror into the hearts of
malefactors, to commit such heinous crimes, such Indictments be allowed good.
And yet a man being indicted for stealing of the coat of a dead man unknown,
Fitz. Indict. 27.
the Indictment was not allowed: for it was holden, that the executors of the
dead shall have this coat, or the Ordinary, or else it shall be delivered to the
church, or otherwise be employed to charitable uses. Quaere differentiam.

28 If a man be indicted Quod bona Capellae in custodia etc. The goods of a
chapel or church.
aut bona domus and ecclesiae tempore vacationis felonice furatus est etc. this
is a good Indictment: 7. E. 4. 14. 9. E. 4. 33.
And yet in this case there is no owner here, but because the property can be
in no other, neither can it be otherwise done, for that cause the Indictment is
allowed to be good.

29 An Indictment the force whereof does depend upon an argument, An indictme^t
depending upon an argument or implication.
or implication, 2. Ed. 3. 1. Fitz. Indict. 8.
is not good: As if one be indicted, Quod felonice abduxit vnum equum, he did
feloniously lead away a horse: this is not a good Indictment without saying
felonice cepit and abduxit, viz. that he feloniously took and led him away,
Co. li. 4. 42. 44.
for it may be that the horse was lent him, and so he led him away, in which
case then it is no felony: and yet in these words felonice abduxit is implied,
that he did steal the horse.

18. E. 4. 10.
30 If an Indictment be, Quod furatus est vnum equum, viz. Furatus est without
felonice.
that he did steal one horse, and says not felonice, this is a void
indictment, though felonice be implied in these words, furatus est. And in like
sort it is, if a man be indicted of a rape, 9. Ed. 4. 26.
and the indictment is, quod eam carnaliter cognouit, without using the word
rapuit, this is no good indictment, and yet carnaliter cognouit is an argument
of a rape, though it may be that he did carnally know her by her own will and
consent, 9. Eliz. Dyer 261. 13. Eliz. Dyer 304.
and so not ravish her. And in an indictment of murder, if these words be in
the indictment, ex malitia praecogitata, and voluntary, and felonice
interfecit, and not this word murdrauit, it shall not be adjudged a murder,
Murdrauit.
but homicide.

31 If an indictment of felony be found before A.B. Just. of peace, Indictment
before I of peace.
without making mention of any commission that they have to hear and determine
felonies, this is no good indictment: St. 18. E. 3. 2
for by the stat. of an. 18. E. 3. they have power by commission to hear and
determine felonies, and not by virtue of their office only, and yet it is to be
implied, that all Just. of peace by force of their commission, 5. E. 6. Di. 69
have authority to hear and determine felonies: And they have authority to
inquire of murder, for that it is felony.

^2. E. 4. 12
32 If one be indicted upon the sight of the body before the Mayor of London,
Mayor of London Coroner.
without adding thereunto this word Coronatore, this is no good indictment: and
yet he that is Mayor of London is always Coroner, and so by implication it may
be taken. But such an indictment is not good, which must have an argument or
implication.

33 If one be indicted as accessorie for the receipt of a felon, Indictment of
the receipt of a felon, as accessorie.
2. H. 6. 42.
there must in the indictment mention be made of the manner of the felony, and
that the party indicted knowing the principal to have committed such a felony,
did feloniously receive him. But it is otherwise, if a man receive one
attainted of felony in the same county where the felony was committed: for in
that case, 8. E. 4. 3.
if he be indicted of the receipt of the felon, Indictment of the receipt of one
attainted of felony.
mention need not be made of the manner of the felony, because it is sufficient
that the party attainted of felony was received, though the attainder be
erroneous: seeing it is not lawful for any to receive him, for every person is
bound to take notice of this attainder which is in the same county where he
dwells. But it is otherwise, Fi. Cor. 377
if the attainder were in a foreign county, for there none be bound to take
knowledge thereof but the inhabitants of the same county, and therefore in that
case, notwithstanding the attainder, mention ought to be made of the manner of
the felony.

Receipt of the goods stolen and felon.
34 It is no good indictment of an accessory, to say, 25. Ed. 3. 3^. 27. Ass. p.
69 9. H. 4. 1.
that the said accessory did receive the goods stolen, without affirming that he
received the felon also, for he is not accessory to a felony, which does
receive goods stolen only, except he does also receive the felon. S. Principal
and Accessorie 14. and 17.

Indictments void to one purpose, will serve for another.
35 Although in the cases aforesaid, the indictments be void touching felony,
18. E. 4. 10. 2. H. 7. 7. 6. H. 7. 4.
yet diverse of them shall serve as indictments of trespass, to cause the party
offending to make a fine, and specially such indictments that do not want any
certainty, but only words which make the offense felony. And in those
indictme^ts which do want certainty, the Just. may award a Scire fac' against
the indictors to amend that which wants. And so may the Just. of the K.
Bench, 8. H. 5. 8.
if the indictment be taken in the same county where the said bench is sitting.
Or otherwise, if the indictment were taken before the sheriff, coroner, or
Just. of peace, 2. E. 3. 1. and 18.
the court may direct a writ to the said sheriff, coroner, or Just. of peace,
to know if they have any other indictment before them.

A prisoner discharged, retained in prison.
36 If the court upon the arraignme^t of a prisoner, Fitz. Indict. 27.
does discharge him of the indictment, paying his fees, because at that time
they do think the indictment to be insufficient, yet if after at another day,
or time, they alter their opinion, then they may send to the jailer, and charge
him, that the prisoner shall not depart forth of prison, but stand again at his
deliverance, notwithstanding their judgment before, if so be that the
judgment be not entered: And this is by the kings prerogative, who is party
to the suit.

The differences between Appeal and Indictment.
37 And seeing I have treated first of Appeals, and now of Indictments, 22. As.
p. 94
it is to be considered, what differences there be between them. In an Appeal
of the death of a man, the name of him which is dead must be contained, or
otherwise it is not good. And therefore there lies no Appeal of the death of
an infant in his mothers womb, No name.
for that infant had neither name nor surname: and moreover that manner of
killing is no felony. But if one be indicted of the death of a man unknown, it
is a good indictment: M. 2. E. 3. 26 9. H. 6. 45. 1. Ass. p. 7.
for he that was slain may be so mangled in the face by the murderer, Killing
of a man unknown.
or some other, or by some other means, that he cannot be known. And though in
that case no man can be of kin to him who is utterly unknown, by which mean
no Appeal can be maintained by any, yet seeing offenses must not remain
unpunished, the offender in this case shall be indicted: and the enquest which
shall pass upon his arraignment, 2. Ed. 3. 26. 11. Eliz. ^^ Dyer 285.
shall deliver to the court a name of him that was slain, to the intent, that
if the party arraigned, or any other, shall vouch that record, he shall not
depart from thence without acertaine name. In an indictment of treason or
felony, the party indicted shall not plead misnaming Misnaming.
of his surname, but he must answer to the indictment, 1. H. 5. 5. 11. H. 4. 40
11. H. 7. 5. Fi. Cor. 113
whether he have one name or other: And yet in an Appeal it is otherwise: But
in an Appeal and also in an Indictment, the prisoner may plead misnaming of
his name of baptism, and it being proved, the indictment shall be quashed. In an
indictment the party indicted may become an approuer, Approuer.
and so cannot an appellee in an appeal. 22. Ed. 4. 19.
In an appeal the defendant may have his trial by battle, Trial by battle.
if he will, but so he cannot have which is indicted. A felon may be indicted in
the county where he did steal the goods, or in any other county whither he
carried them. 4. H. 7. 5.
And in like sort an appeal may be pursued against a felon, in the county
where he did first steal the goods, or in any other county whither he carried
them.

Fi. Cor. 232 41. Ass. p. 9. Co. li. 4. 45.
38 It is a good plea in an appeal or indictment of felony, to say, Pleading
another time acquit of the same felony.
that he was at another time arraigned of the same felony, before such Just.
and acquitted, and to vouch the record: for he shall not be compelled to have the
record in hand, because his plea is not dilatory, but in bar, and that plea
shall be a good bar (if it be a lawful acquitall) for that by the common law a
man shall not put his life in ieopardie of trial twice for one and the same
felony, saving in certain special cases. But it ought to be of one offense,
or else his plea is to no purpose. And therefore if two men be indicted of
felony, as principals, Another offense.
and after by another indictment it is found, that one of them committed the
felony, and the other did but feloniously receive him after the felony
committed, and upon the first indictment they be both arraigned and acquitted,
and after he which was indicted as accessorie, 8. H. 5. 6. 27. Ass. p. 10 Bro.
Cor. 185. 2. E. 3. 26. Fitz. Cor. 424.
is arraigned, and pleads, that he was at another time acquitted of the same
felony: this plea will not discharge him, because it is not of one offense, but
of diverse, for it was done at several times. But if he had bin indicted as
accessory before the offense committed, this acquitall of him as principal,
would have discharged him of his offense also, for they be in manner one
offense, although they be done at several days: For when a felony is
committed by force of commandment, the commander in that case is party to the
principal fact, so is not the other which is accessory after the felony
committed. Bracton Bracton.
says, that force and commandment be as the foundation of the principal
fact, and so annexed and conjoined unto it, that they cannot be severed from
it: because a wound, a deed, and commandment, do procure one only fact, and
it may be there should have been no wound, except there had been force,
neither wound nor force, unless commandment had gone before, and bidden it to
have been done. But force and commandment (which in the time of Bracton were
but accidents to the fact, and made the offenders therein but accessories) be
now the principal fact, if the giver of that commandment be present when the
felony is done. S. Appeals 94.

26. As. p. 15 11. H. 4. 41. Fi. Cor. 336
39 If a man be indicted and arraigned of the death of I. Style, Indictment of
the death of a man known by two sirnames.
which I. Style was also known by the name of I. Noke, as well as by the name
of I. Style, in this case the def. may plead, that he was at another time
indicted and acquitted of the death of I. Noke, and auerre, that the said I.
Noke and John Style, were one person, and not diverse, and demand judgment, if
he shall be put to make answer to that indictment: in which case, notwithstanding
this variance of names, he shall be discharged, because he was indicted and
acquitted of the death of the self same man, of whose death he is now again
indicted and arraigned.

Indicted of the same man's death.
40 If a man be killed two years past, 3. Ass. p. 15 22. Ass. p. 55 Fi. Cor. 336
and one is indicted and arraigned of his death, and acquitted, and after he
that was acquitted is again of new indicted and arraigned of the same man's
death, supposing that he killed him this present year: yet notwithstanding
this variance, the party indicted shall show the truth of the case, and plead
his first acquitall for his discharge, and be discharged: And the reason is,
because one man cannot be twice killed; for the Court in this case does use to
charge the enquest with the time of the death of him who is supposed to be
slain, and also whether there were any other which was killed, as the last
indictment does suppose, or not.

Indictment in two counties of one offense.
41 If a man be indicted in one county of the death of another, and thereupon
arraigned, and after he is indicted in another county of the same parties
death, he may plead the same acquitall in bar, for that no man's life shall be
twice put in ieopardie of trial for one offense, and one man can be but once
slain. But it is otherwise in an indictment of robbery, for a man may be
robbed by one person at several times, and in several counties, and so the
acquitall of one of the same robberies will not serve him for the other. And
therefore if one be indicted of robbery in one county, the defendant cannot
plead, 4. H. 7. 5.
that he was indicted of the same robbery in another county, and acquitted, for
no man can be indicted or arraigned for a robbery, but in the cou^ty where the
same robbery was committed: and though the def. does surmise, that it is but
one and the same felony, yet that cannot be tried, for the county where the
first indictment was taken, and the county where the last was taken, cannot
join to make trial thereof. But some do affirm, that it is a good plea in an
Appeal of robbery, for by the Appeal the plaintiff is to recover his goods by
the common law, and so he is not upon an indictment. Indictment of rape.
A man was indicted in the K. bench of a rape and robbery committed in the
county of C. and he pleaded, 41. As. p. 9.
that he was before indicted of the same rape before the Just. of Assise in the
county of C. and arraigned and acquitted of the same fact: And for that it was
of the same fact, he was discharged.

Arraigned upon an insufficient indictment or appeal.
42 It is not a sufficient plea in bar in an Appeal or Indictment of felony, to
plead, that he was at another time acquitted, if there were not sufficient
matter of felony in that apeale or indictment whereof he was acquitted: Co. li.
4. 45. Fitz. Cor. 414.
for if there were not sufficient matter of felony in the first appeal or
indictment, and the same party is again indicted of new, by an indictment
which does comprehend sufficient matter of felony, he shall be again arraigned,
because in that case he never put his life in ieopardy. For when an offender is
discharged upon an insufficient indictment, the law has not had his end,
neither was the life of the party in the judgment of law at any time in
ieopardie: And the law will not suffer great offenses to go unpunished.

Acquit upon an erroneous appeal.
43 If one be acquitted upon an erroneous appeal, which acquitall is reuersed by
error, he shall now be arraigned at the K. suit, upon an indictment, 9. H. 5.
2.
for that by the reuersall he is become in that state, as if he had not been
acquitted. But until that reuersal be made, it shall be a good plea to plead,
Fitz. Cor. 444.
another time acquit. And it seems, that the same is when the error is in
Process that is not material, which the defendant does appear and answer to
the original writ. But the def. shall not any more make answer to the
appellant, although the first acquitall be reuersed, for so the appellant might
delude the court infinitely, and the defendant should never be delivered.

21. H. 6. 20
44 If one do bring an Appeal, which has no cause to maintain the same:
Acquit upon an Appeal brought by one that has no right.
As if one which is not the lawful wife, or the next heir of him that was
slain do bring an Appeal, and the defendant does take no advantage thereof,
but pleads not guilty, and is acquit, yet this acquitall will not serve to
bar the lawful wife, or next heir of the dead, when they shall bring their
Appeal, neither in this case the king shall be barred to arraigne him upon a
indictment, or upon a new appeal, when the party plaintiff is nonsuit therein.

16. Ed. 4. 11. 8. H. 5. 6.
45 If one be arraigned upon an Indictment at the Kings suit, One arraigned
upon an indictment before the parties appeal be determined
and acquitted (where, by the order of law, the King ought to have tarried
until the Appeal which was depending had been determined) yet this is no
error: but the foresaid plea, viz. another time acquit of the same felony,
shall serve him that does plead it.

Fitz. Cor. 375.
46 If a man be indicted of felony, and arraigned at the Kings suit, Acquit by
battle in an Appeal.
it is no plea for him to say, that at another time he was acquitted of the same
felony in an Appeal, if so be that the same acquitall were not by enquest, but
by battle. And the reason is, because trial by battle lies not against the
King, and therefore it is not meet that he should be bound by that trial,
whereunto he neither was, Bracton.
nor could be party. And yet Bracton says, that if the appellee in an Appeal
does make his choice, to defend himself by his body, and all things be ready
which do join the Appeal, battle shall be presently waged, and if in that
case he that is appealed by diverse, of one fact, and of one wound, do defend
himself against one of them, he shall go acquit against all the residue of
the appellants. And so it is at the Kings suit, for by this means he does
purge his innocence against them all, as much as i^ he had put himself upon
the country, and the country had clearly acquitted him. Ideo quaere.

47 Because, by the common law, A murderer indicted and arraigned at the K.
suit.
within a year and a day after any murder or homicide had been done, the
felony should not have been determined at the kings suit, for saving of the
parties Appeal, wherein the party was ofttimes slow, and also agreed with,
and by the end of the year all was forgotten: And also for that he which will
sue an Appeal, must sue it in proper person, which suit is long and costly,
and makes the appellant diverse times weary thereof, which were occasions of
murder and manslaughter: for the reformation whereof, by a statute made Anno 3.
H. 7. St. 3. H. 7. 1.
it was enacted, That if any man be slain, or murdered, and the slaiers,
murderers, abettors, maintainers, and comforters of the same be indicted
therefore, the same slayers and murderers, and all other accessories of the
same, shall be arraigned and determined of the same felony and murder at any time
at the K. suit, within the year after the same felony and murder done, and
not tarry the year and day for any appeal to be taken for the same felony or
murder. And if it happen any person so named as principal or accessorie to be
acquitted of such murder at the Kings suit, within the year and day, then the
Justices before whom he is acquitted, shall not suffer him to go at large, but
either shall remit him again to prison, or else let him to bail after their
discretion, till the year and day be passed. And if the same Felons,
Murderers, and Accessories, or any of them so arraigned, be acquitted, or the
principal of the said felony, or any of them be attainted, the wife, or next
heir to him so slain, as case shall require, may take their Appeal of the
same death and murder, within the year and day after the same felony and
murder done, against the said person so arraigned and acquit, and all other
their accessories, or against the accessories of the said principal, or any of
them so attainted, or against the said principal so attainted, if they be then
living, and the benefit of the Clergy thereof before not had. And the
appellant shall have such advantages, as if the said acquitall and attainder
had not been, the acquitall or attainder notwithstanding. The wife or heir of
the person so slain or murdered, as case shall require, may commence their
Appeal in proper person, at any time within the year after the felony done,
before the Sherif and Coroners of the County where the said felony and murder
was done, or before the King in his Bench, or Justices of jail delivery. And
though that by force of the said statute of 3. H. 7. at another time acquitted
is no plea in an Appeal of death at this day, Another time acquit, no plea in
Appeal, but in Indictment.
yet in an indictment of death, it is a good plea, to plead that he was at
another time acquitted in an Appeal brought of the same parties death. S.
Appeals 93.

48 And so it appears, that the before rehearsed enormities that were at the
common law, and some others, touching the indicting and arraigning of murderers
and manquellers, be remedied by the foresaid statute of 3. H. 7. but in other
Appeals the rules of the common law do continue in force: For if a man be
indicted of robbery, and he that was robbed has an Appeal depending of the
same robbery, No indictme^t of robbery until the Appeal be tried.
against the party indicted, in which Appeal he has proceeded so far, that
the Just. may perceive that it is of the same robbery, they ought to surcease
to try the Appellee upon the indictment, 31. H. 6. 11
until the plaintiff has made his declaration: For in an Appeal by writ the
robbery cannot be certainly known until he has made his declaration, though it
be otherwise in an Appeal commenced by bill.

49 Though at another time convicted or attainted of the same felony, Another
time convict of the same felony.
was and is a good plea for him that is the second time, or more often,
indicted and arraigned again upon the same felony, yet by the common law, if
one had been indicted and arraigned of felony, and delivered to the Ordinary
as a Clerk convict, and before he had made his purgation of the same felony,
he had broken the Ordinaries prison, and escaped, he might have bin another
time arraigned upon the same indictment. And it was no plea for him to plead,
Fitz. Cor. 232.
that he was another time convict of the same felony, and delivered to the
Ordinary, or that he was a Clerk, and could not answer without his Ordinary,
because he remained unpurged of the felony, and did loose the benefit of his
Clergy, by the breaking of prison. And yet at that time, if he had not broken
the Ordinaries prison, but departed by his license, then at another time
convict should have bin a good plea for him upon his second arraignme^t. But now
sithence by the stat. of an. 18. El. St. 18. El. 6.
every person which shall be admitted to have the benefit of his clergy, shall
not thereupon be delivered to the Ordinary, as has bin accustomed, but after
such clergy allowed, and burning in the hand, shall forthwith be enlarged and
delivered out of prison by the Just. before who^ such clergy shall be granted.
Therefore at this day, if one be convicted of felony, and has the benefit of
his Clergy, Co. li. 4. 40. 45.
and is burned in the hand, if after in any case he shall be indicted and
arraigned of the same felony, it shall be a good plea for him to plead, that he
was another time convict of the same felony (because the life of a man shall
not be twice put in ieopardie for one offense) yea though he shall break the
prison, and depart from thence within that time after his conviction which the
Justices shall think convenient to detain him in prison for his further
correction: for now he is not in prison for felony, but for correction.

50 It is a good plea for him that is arraigned of felony, to plead, that he
is attainted of felony, Another time attainted of felony.
and to demand judgment, if during this attainder he shall be put to answer to
that felony whereof he is attainted, or to any other felony: for if he should
be put to answer, no more could be recovered of him than is recovered, 28. E.
3. 90
neither can he forf. more than he has forfeited, having forfeited life,
lands, goods, and all that he has: and therefore it should be to no purpose
to trouble him any more. But it is otherwise, where it is to any end or purpose
to put him to answer, and plead again to a new indictment, as in some special
cases it may be done: As a man attainted of felony, has also committed treason
at the time of the felony committed: in this case he shall answer to the
treason for the K. advantage, 1. H. 6. 5.
notwithstanding his attainder of felony before: because, if he be attainted of
treason, the king shall have the escheat of his lands, of whomsoever they be
holden: but if the treason were committed after the felony, or at the least
after the attainder of felony, then it were otherwise: for then the title which
was vested in the chief Lord of whom his lands were holden, 4. E. 4. 11.
cannot be deuested by a matter accrued, ex post facto. And also where diverse
men have several Appeals of robbery against one man, though he be attainted at
the suit of one of them, yet to the intent that every of them may recover his
goods which were robbed and taken from him, upon his fresh suit, he shall be
again arraigned at every of their suits. And it is no plea for him in this
case, to plead, that he was another time attainted of felony.

51 In all cases where the defendant would discharge himself by pleading that
he was attainted of another felony the^ this whereof he is now arraigned, The
K. pard^ objected against another time attainted.
it may be replied for the party, or the king, that after the same attainder
the K. did pardon him that felony, whereof he says he was attainted, and his
attainder thereof, 6. H. 4. 6.
whereby he was restored to the law: and so he ought to answer to all other
felonies, notwithstanding they were committed before this whereof he pleads
that he was attainted: but of that felony whereof he is attainted, he shall not
answer any more, after that he has the K. pardon thereof.

52 A man attainted of felony is he, Who is said attainted, and who convict of
felony.
which upon his arraignement submitting himself to be tried by the country, is
found guilty of felony by the verdict of xij. men, or does confess the felony
in court of Record before the Judge, upon his arraignment, or is indicted of
felony, and for default of appearance is outlawed, and in any of the said three
cases has his judgment of death. A man convict of felony, is he, who being
indicted of felony, upon his arraignement does submit himself to be tried by
the country, and is found guilty of felony by the verdict of twelve men, and
then before judgment prays his clergy, and has his clergy, and is burned
in the hand. This difference there is between a man attainted of felony, and
a man co^uicted of felony, as touching their arraignments again for other
offenses: for a man attainted of felony, shall not be arraigned again of any
other offenses whatsoever, whether clergy were allowable in them or not
(unless it be in some special cases before declared) because there can no
more be recovered of him than is recovered, neither can he forfeit more than he
has forfeited. But because of a clerk convict, there may be more recovered
than is recovered, and he may forf. more than he has forfeted: therefore by the
stat. of An. 8. El. and 18. El. it was ordaind, St. 8. El. 4. St. 18. El. 6. S.
Appeals 56. 57.
That every person which shall upon his arraignment for any felony be allowed his
clergy, shall answer to all former felonies, as though no such admission of
clergy had been. If a man that is indicted of piracie does stand mute, or will
not answer directly, or etc. whereupon judgment of pain fort and dure is
given against him, but he is not put to execution: and after by a general
pardon by act of parliament, 14. El. Dyer. 308.
all contempts, pains, and executions, be pardoned (but all piracies be
except) in this case the same party may be indicted and arraigned again for
another robbery upon the sea, or piracie committed upon the sea at the same
time that he did the first.

Mainprise and Bail.
1 WHen the defendant in case of felony is taken and arrested, he will ofttimes
desire to be let to bail or mainprise: and therefore it is to be considered in
what cases the prisoner by the law is mainpernable, and in what not. In what
case a prisoner is mainpernable in what not.
There be two sorts of offenders in felony, viz. the Principal and the
Accessory. The Accessorie is repleuisable by the common law until the
Principal be attainted, but not after, as it appears by Bracton, Britton,
and diverse judgments. But sithence that time the law has bin put in ure to
the contrary, 40. E. 3. 42 43. Ed. 3. 17. 27 Ass. p. 10 2. and 3. P. and M. Die.
120 St. 3. E. 1. 15
viz. That after plea pleaded (notwithstanding the principal be attainted) yet
the accessorie shall be let to mainprise, The accessory let to mainprise.
and though it be in appeal of death: And the reason is, because the stat. of
W. 1. affirms expressly, That they which be indicted of receipt of thieves, or
felons, or of commandment, or force, or aid of the felony committed, shall be
let out by sufficient suertie: which stat. is expounded so favorably toward
the accessory, that those be used to be let to bail which be indicted of
abetment, consent, or procureme^t. And yet such accessories be not expressly
contained in the said stat. Register. fo. 270.
And so the accessorie as well in case of the death of a man, as in other
felony, is to be let to mainprise.

25. E. 3. 44. 44. E. 3. 38. 21. E. 4. 71. 21. Ed. 4. 25.
2 The principal in case of the death of a man, is not to be let to mainprise,
The principal in death.
either by the common law, nor by the stat. (but in some special cases) for if
an appeal of death be commenced, which is not grounded upon an indictment (but
is suggested to be begun upon malice) and that some others were indicted of the
same persons death, yet because the appeal was of the death of a man, and the
malice suggested was not confessed of the K. or appellants part, the Just. would
not let the appellee to mainprise. 48. E. 3. 22.
And so it seems, that notwithstanding it be an appeal of death, yet if
there be no indictment to affirm the same appeal, The principal in appeal of
death let to mainprise.
the Just. upon the consideration aforesaid, 2. and 3. P. and M. Die. 120
or such like, may let the defendant to mainprise, though he be appealed as
principal.

3 An Appeal of death was removed out of the county into the K. Bench by a
Certiorari, 48. Ed. 3. 22.
and a Scire fac' was sued against the plaintiff in the appeal, which was
returned Nihil, and so it was returned upon the Sicut alias. And thereupon the
Just. considering that it was a mischief to the plaintiff to loose his suit,
and to yield damages, whereas he was never warned, and peradventure has
somewhat in another county: and on the other side it was inconvenient for the
appellee to remain continually in prison: The principal in appeal of death
let to mainprise.
therefore they awarded another Scire fac' against the appellant, returnable at
a certain day, before which day they would be advised what was by law to be
done, and in the mean time they did let the appellee to mainprise.

Excommunication in the plaintiff;
4 If in an Appeal the def. do plead Excommunication in the plaintiff, the
appellee shall be let to mainprise from day to day, until the plaintiff be
absolved, 3. As. p. 12. 13. E. 4. 8.
though it be in an Appeal of death: or otherwise the appellee should remain
in prison until the pl. were assoiled, which peradventure will never be. And
in respect of this mischief, it was ordained by the stat. of 3. H. 7. St, 3.
H. 7. 1.
That he which is within the year acquitted of murder at the K. suit, shall be
sent to prison again, or otherwise let to bail until the end of the year,
within which time the party is to have an Appeal, if he will.

5 Because Sherifs and others did take and keep in prison some persons accused
of felony, and presently did let out to bail such as were not repleuisable,
and kept in prison such as were mainpernable, to the intent to get of the one,
and to grieve the other. And forasmuch as it was not before determined, which
persons were mainpernable, Not bailable by the common law.
and which were not, but only they that were taken for the death of a man, by
the commandment of the K. or his Just. or for the forest: therefore by the
stat. of W. 1. viz. 3. E. 1. it was ordained, St. 3. E. 1. 15
That prisoners which before were outlawed, Who are mainpernable, and who not.
and they which have abiured the realm, prouers, and they which be taken with
the manner, and such as have broken the K. prison, thieves openly defamed and
known, and such as be appealed by prouers, so long as the prouer does live,
except he be of good fame: and such as be taken for burning of a house
feloniously done, or for false money, or for counterfeiting the Kings Seal: Or
persons excommunicat, taken at the Bishops request, or for a manifest offense,
or for treason touching the King, shall be in no wise mainpernable by a common
writ, nor without writ: But souch as be indicted of larceny by enquests taken
before Sherifs or Bailifs by their office, or of light suspicion, or for petit
larceny that amounts not above the value of xij. d. if they were not guilty
of some larceny before, or guilty of receipt of thieves or felons, or of
commandment, or force, or of aid in felony done, or guilty of some other
trespass, for which one ought not to loose life or member: And a man appealed of
an approuer, after the death of the approuer, if he be no common thief, nor
defamed, shall be let out by sufficient suertie, whereof the Sheriff will be
answerable, and that without giving any part of their goods.

Bailement by the Sheriff.
If the Sheriff or any other let one go at large by suertie, St. 3. E. 1. 1^
which is not repleuisable, if he be Sheriff, Constable, or any other Bailife
of fee, which has the keeping of prisoners, and is thereof attainted, he shall
loose his fee and office for ever. And if the Vndersherife, Constable, or
Bailif of such as have fee for keeping of prisoners, do it contrary to the will
of his Master: or any other Bailife being not of fee, they shall have iij. years
imprisonment, and make fine at the K. pleasure.

Withholding of prisoners repleuisable.
Whosoever does withhold prisoners repleuisable, St. 3. E 1. 15.
after they have offered sufficient suerty, shall pay a grievous amerciame^t to
the K. and he that does take any reward for the deliverance of such, shall pay
double to the prisoner, and also a grievous amerciament to the King.

6 By the foresaid Stat. of West. 1. 15. it does appear that in four cases a
man was not mainpernable at the common law, In what cases no mainprise at the
common law.
viz. they that were taken for the death of a man, or by the Kings
commandment, or of his Justices, or for the forest. Touching the death of a
man it is entreated of before. And as concerning the Kings commandment, this
is intended the Kings commandment, The kings commandment.
by his own mouth, or by his council which is incorporat to him, and do
speak with the Kings mouth, and by authority from him: Or otherwise, if those
words should be taken his general commandment, it may be said that every
Capias in a personal action is the Kings commandment, for it is Precipimus
tibi quod capias etc. and yet in that case the defendant is repleuisable by the
common law. And as touching the Justices commandment, The Justices
commandment.
this shall be intended their absolute commandment: for if it be their
ordinary commandment he is repleuisable by the Sheriff, saving in certain
cases prohibited by the statute.

7 Because in times past diverse persons that were indicted of felonies,
robberies, and larcenies did remove the same inditements into the K. Bench, and
there yielded themselves prisoners, and were presently bailed by the marshals
of ye same Bench, and after did lie in wait to kill or misuse their inditors:
And also for ye certain persons appealed of felony, after the Exigent awarded,
did yield themselves in the K. Bench, St. 5. Ed. 3. 8
and then were let to bail by the marshals of the said be^ch, for the
prevention whereof it was enacted by a statute made an^ 5. E. 3. The marshall
of the Kings bench shall bail no prisoner.
That such inditees and appellees shall be safely and surely kept in prison,
according to the charge which the said marshals shall have of the Justices. And
the marshals of the K. Bench shall not bail any felons, but shall keep them in
prison, and shall not suffer them to go wandering abroad by bail, nor without
bail. And if any such prisoner be found wandering out of prison by bail, or
without bail, and that be proved at the K. suit, or the parties, the marshals
which shall be found guilty thereof, shall be half year imprisoned, and ransomed
at the Kings pleasure. And the Justices shall inquire thereof when they see
cause. And if the marshals suffer the prisoner to escape by their assent, they
shall be at the law as before time they have bin. And so it appears by this
Stat. that imprisonment by commandment of a Justice, was not sufficient to
restrain bailement in all cases, where bailement was not prohibited by the
law, A Justices ordinary commandment, and absolute.
until the foresaid Stat. of an^ 5. E. 3. was made, and that is to be intended
of an ordinary commandment of a Iu. for if he do give an absolute
commandment, the prisoner is not baileable: As if the Justice command one to
prison, without showing cause why he does so command, or for misdemeanor done
in his presence, or for some other cause, which lies in the discretion of the
Justice more than in his ordinary power.

8 The fourth cause why a man is not repleuisable by the common law, is the
forest: St. Char. Forest. 16.
for whereas by the Statute of Charta forestae, made an^ 9. H. 3. and confirmed
by King E. 1. The king did grant for him and his heirs that of trespasses
committed in his Forests of vert, and venison, that the Forresters in whose
Bailiwickes such trespasses should be committed, should present the same
trespasses at the next Swanimot, before the Forresters, Verderers, Regardors,
and Agistors, and other ministers aforesaid, by the oaths as well of Knights,
as others, wise, and lawful men, and not suspicious of the parts next
adjoining, and nearest where those trespasses shall be so presented, and where
the truth may best and most certainly be inquired of, and the same truth being
once found out, those presentiments by the common assent and agreement of all
the Officers aforesaid, shall be solemnly written and sealed with their seals.
And if any indictment be made in other manner, it shall be accounted void. And
because the chief wardens of Forests did not observe the said order, but that
diverse people were disherited, ransomed, and undone by the chief wardens of
the Forest on this side Trent, and beyond, and by other ministers, against the
form of the foresaid great Charter of the Forest. Therefore by the Stat. made
an^ 1. E. 3. it was ordained, Punishment for vert or venison.
St. 1. E. 3. 8
That no man shall be taken or imprisoned for vert or venison, unless he be
taken with the manner, or else indicted in form aforesaid. And then the chief
warden of the Forest shall let him to mainprise, until the Eire of the
Forest, without taking any thing for his deliverance. And if the said warden
will not do it, there shall be a writ awarded out of the Chancerie (which was in
ancient time ordained for such persons so indicted) to let him to mainprise
until the Eire. And if the said warden after the receipt of the same writ will
not deliver to mainprise such person indicted, without delay, then the plaintiff
shall have a writ out of the Chancerie, to the Sheriff, to attach the said
warden to be before the K, at a certain day, to answer wherefore he has not
repleuied him that was so taken: And the Sheriff calling to him the Verderers
shall deliver him which was taken to mainprise in the presence of the
Verderers, and shall deliver the names of the mainpernours to ye same Verderors
to answer in Eire before the Justices. And if the chief warden shall be
thereof attainted, the plaintiff shall have his treble damage awarded unto
him, and the warden shall be committed to prison, and ransomed at the Kings
pleasure. And by the Statute of an^ 7. R. 2. it was ordained, St. 7. R. 2. 4
That if any officer of the Forest does imprison any person, or does compel
any person to make any Obligation, or ransom unto him, against the ordinance
aforesaid, and is thereof attainted, he shall pay to the party grieved his
double damages, and make fine to the King.

9 Whereas the before rehearsed stat. of West. 1. does begin with those
prisoners which before were Outlawed, St. 3. E. 1. 15
etc. yet there be some cases wherein such as be outlawed may be let to
mainprise: as where in an appeal of robbery or other felony (being not for
the death of a man) the defendant does come in by Capias vtlagatum, In what
cases he that is outlawed may be let to mainprise.
and plead misnaming of himself, 5. H. 7. 16.
and has a Scire facias against the appellant: In this case he shall be let to
bail. And the same law is, if he which is outlawed for felony be taken, and
brought to the bar, 19. H. 6. 2
and alleges error in the Record, the Court of favor will suffer him to find
mainprise, and to go and seek to purchase his writ of Error.

Mainprise during the Prouers life.
10 And ye foresaid stat. of West. 1. says further, St. 3. E. 1. 15
that they which be appelled by Prouers shall not be let to mainprise, so long
as the Prouers do live, if they be not of good fame: and yet in some cases he
yt is appealed by a prouer shall be let to mainprise during the Prouers life: as
where the Approuer does waiue his appeal, and that the defendant is not
appealed by another approuer, 25. Ed. 3. 42*
he shall be let to mainprise: for if he be appealed by another approuer, he
shall not be let to mainprise. And if the Appellee do vanquish one Approuer in
battle, yet if he be appelled by another Approuer, he shall not be let to
mainprise.

St. 3. E. 1. 15
11 Whereas by the words of the foresaid Statute of West. 1. such as be indicted
of Larcenie by Enquests taken before Sherifs or bailifes by their office,
shall be let at liberty upon sufficient surety. Registrum de manucaptione.
Yet it appears by the Register, yt they shall not be let to mainprise, if
they be not also of good fame. Mainprise upon good name.
But if they be of good fame, they are to be let to mainprise, notwithstanding
they be not indicted before Sherifes or Bailifes, but before any other Justice
that has authority to hear and determine felony, and that as well the
principals as the accessories: for the said Stat. of West. 1. does no more
restrain the principals, than the accessories, in those cases where the same
statute does not prohibit to let to mainprise. As if a man be indicted of
Burglarie as principal, The principal in Burglarie or robbery mainpernable.
yet he may be let to mainprise: 29. Ass. p. 44 Registrum.
And the principal in an appeal of Robbery may be let to mainprise. And in
the Register there is a writ de Manucaptione granted in that case.

12 Though it does not appear by any words of the foresaid stat. of West. 1.
that it does prohibit the bailement of those which be attainted by verdict: yet
it is to be intended, that the same Stat. does as well prohibit the bailement
of those which be attainted by verdict, as it does of the^ who be attainted by
Outlawrie: 15. H. 7. 9.
for seeing before the Statute of 18. El. 6. if a clerk convict had been
delivered to the Ordinary, he was not mainpernable, which is a stronger case
than a man attainted by verdict. Therefore it is clear, No bailement of a
prisoner attainted.
that a man attainted is not mainpernable: for if a prisoner after that he has
pleaded not guilty, be attainted by verdict, that he killed a man in his own
defense, or by misfortune, yet he shall not be let to mainprise: for it is in
the Kings pleasure whether he will grant him pardon or not. 25. Ed. 3. 42 Fi.
Cor. 354 297.
But in that case the Justices commanded the Sheriff to put no yrons upon the
same prisoner, and to show him as much favor as he could. And the Iu. are to
certify the King of the said verdict, who at his pleasure may write to the
Sheriff to bail the same prisoner. No bailement of a prisoner convicted.
And if a man that is arraigned of homicide does plead not guilty, and is
found guilty, and does pray his Clergy, 2. El. Dyer 179.
and is repried without judgment, he is not baileable, for he is more than
vehemently suspected, being convicted of felony.

St. 3. H. 7. 3.
13 Whereas by the stat. of an^ 3. H. 7. it was enacted, that no prisoner
arrested for felony should be let to bail or mainprise by any one Iu. of
peace, but by the whole Justices, or at the least by two of them, whereof one
to be of the Quorum: Since the making of which statute one Justice of peace in
the name of himself, and one other of the Justices his companion, not making
the said Justice party nor privy unto the case wherefore the prisoner should
be bailed, has often times by sinister labor and means set at large the
greatest and notablest offenders, such as be not repleuisable by the laws of
this Realm: and yet the rather to hide their affection in that behalf, have
signified the cause of their apprehension, to be but only for suspicion of
felony, whereby the said offenders have escaped unpunished, to the
encouragement of thieves, and evil doers: For reformation whereof by a stat.
made Anno 1. and 2. P. and M. it was ordained, St. 1. and 2: P. and M. 13
That no Justice or Justices of Peace shall let to bail or mainprise any such
person or persons which for any offense, Bailing of offenders by Just. of peace.
or offenses by them or any of them committed, be declared not to be
repleuisable or bailed, or forbidden to be repleuied or bailed by the stat. of
West. 1. made An^ 3. E. 1. And furthermore, that any person or persons arrested
for manslaughter or felony, or suspicion of manslaughter or felony, being
baileable by the law, shall not be let to bail or maineprise by any Iu. of
Peace, if it be not in open Sessions, except it be by two Iu. of peace at the
least, whereof one to be of the Quorum: and the same Justices to be present
together at the time of the said bailement or mainprise, which bailement or
mainprise they shall certify in writing, subscribed or signed with their own
hands at the next general Jail delivery, to be holden within that county,
where the said person or persons shall be arrested or suspected. And the said Iu.
or one of them being of the Quorum, when any such prisoner is brought before
them, for any manslaughter or felony, before any bailement, or mainprise,
shall take the examination of the said prisoner, and information of them that
bring him, of the fact and circumstances thereof, and the same, or as much
thereof as shall be material to prove the felony, shall put in writing before
they make ye same bailement: which said examination, together with the said
bailement, the said Iu. shall certify at the next general Jail delivery to
be holden within the limits of their commission. And every Coroner upon any
inquisition before him found, The Coroners duty upon an inquisition found.
whereby any person or persons shall be indicted for murder, or ma^slaughter, or
accessorie or accessories to the same, before the murder or manslaughter
committed, shall put in writing ye effect of the evidence given to ye Jury
before him, being material. And as well ye said Iu. as the said Coroner shall
have authority by this act to bind all such by recognizance, or obligation, as
do declare any thing material to prove the said murder, or manslaughter,
offenses, or felonies, or to be accessory or accessories to the same, as is
aforesaid, to appear at the next general Jail delivery to be holden within
the county, city, or town corporat, where the trial thereof shall be, then, and
there, to give evidence against ye party so indicted at the time of his trial,
and shall certify as well the same evidence, as such bond and bonds in writing,
which he shall take together with ye inquisition or indictment before him taken
and found, at, or before the time of his said trial thereof, Certificat of a
bond taken by a Iu. of peace.
to be had or made. And likewise the said Iu. shall certify all and every such
bond taken before him, in like manner as before is said of bailme^ts and
examination. And in case any Iu. of peace, or Quorum, or Coroner shall offend in
any thing contrary to ye true intent and meaning of this act, then the Iu. of
Jail delivery of the shire, city, town, or place where such offense shall
happen to be committed, upon due proof thereof by examination before them,
shall for every such offense, set such fine on every of the same Iu. of peace,
and Coroner, as the same Iu. of Jail delivery shall think meet, and shall
estreat ye same, as other fines, and amerciaments assessed before Justices of
Jail delivery ought to be. Provided always, that Iu. of Peace, and Coroners
within the city of London, and the County of Middlesex, and in other Cities,
Boroughs, and Towns corporat within this Realm, and Wales, shall within their
several jurisdictions have authority to let to bail felons and prisoners, in
such manner and form as they have bin heretofore accustomed. This act or any
thing therein contained to the contrary notwithstanding. And also shall take
examinations and bonds as is aforesaid upon every bailement by them or any of
them to be made, and shall certify every such bailements, bonds and
examinations by them, or any of them taken, or made, at the next Jail delivery
to be holde^ within the shire, city, borough, or town, where their several
jurisdictions exte^deth, upon like pain and forf. as is before limited in
this present act.

14 Because Sherifs and others did in times past let to mainprise notorious and
known thieves, being taken and imprisoned for murder, and other felonies, S.
3. E. 1. 15.
and such as be not mainpernable, contrary to the form of a Statute made
touching those which be repleuisable, and which not, and thereby such
malefactors as were not repleuisable were let to mainprise. And for to deliver
them deceitfully before the coming of the Justices in Eire, or other assigned
for their deliverance, they procured and suborned by themselves, and by their
friends, Jurors of the county, and some they threatened: And so partly for
fear of the Sherifs and others which did let them to bail, and partly for
fear of those felons which were so let to mainprise, many robberies and
homicides were hidden and concealed from the Justices of Jail delivery: for
the prevention whereof, by a Stat. made an^ 27. E. 1. An. 27. E. 1. 3.
entitled the Stat. of fines levied, it was ordained, That Justices assigned
to take assizes, in every county where they take assizes, presently after the
assizes taken, shall remain both together if they be Lay. And if one of them
be a Clerk, then one of the most discreet knights of that county being
associate unto him, by the kings writ, shall deliver the Jail in that county,
as well within liberties as without, of all the prisoners, according to the
usual form of delivering of Gaoles. Bailement of offenders by Sherifes.
And then the same Justices shall inquire which sherifs and others have let to
bail any prisoners that were not repleuisable, or have offended in any thing
contrary to ye Stat. of West. 1. and to punish and chasten them in every
respect, according to the form of the said Statute.

15 And for the causes aforesaid it was ordained by the stat. of an^ 4. E. 3.
St. 4. E. 3. 2
that good and discreet persons (other than of the places if they may be found
sufficient) shall be assigned in all the counties of England to take assizes,
Iuries, and certifications, and to deliver the Gaoles: And the same Justices
shall take the assizes, Iuries, and certifications, and shall deliver the
Gaoles thrice in the year at the least, and more often if need be: And there
shall be assigned good and lawful men in every County to keep the peace, and
at the said assignements mention shall be made that such as shall be indicted or
taken by ye said wardens shall not be let to mainprise by the Sherifs, nor by
any other, if they be not mainpernable by the law: Nor that such persons
indicted shall be delivered, Bailement of offenders by sherifes and others.
but according to the course of the common law. And the Justices assigned to
deliver ye gaoles shall have power to deliver the Gaoles of those that be
indicted before the gardens of the peace: And the same gardens shall send
before the said Just. their inditements. And the same Justices shall have power
to enquire of Sherifes, Gaolers, and others, in whose custody such persons
indicted shall be, if they delivered or let to mainprise any so indicted, which be
not mainpernable, and to punish the same Sherifes, Gaolers, and others, if they
have done any thing contrary to this Statute. This statute of 4. E. 3. does
make no mention that the Justices of Jail delivery shall punish sherifs and
others according to ye foresaid statute of West. as the other statute of 27. E.
1. does, but ordains generally that they shall be punished, without determining
in what manner: And yet it is to be intended that they shall be punished according
to the form of the said Stat. of West. 1. And moreover the said Justices of
Jail delivery may punish them by the common law, 25. E. 3. 39.
for a negligent escape: Where mainprise is a negligent escape.
for it is a negligent escape to let one to maineprise, who by law is not
mainpernable. And one Justice did in that case set a fine upon the Sheriff, for
the like Bailement, a hundred shillings.

16 In all cases where a statute does ordain that an offenders body shall be
imprisoned at the Kings pleasure, Imprisonment at the Kings pleasure.
the prisoner cannot be delivered or let to maineprise, until the King has
signified his pleasure of him. As, if one be imprisoned for going or riding
armed, contrary to the Statute of Northampton, made Anno 2. E. 3. 3. 24. Ed. 3.
42.


17 There is a difference between bailement in felony, and bailement in a
personal action: The difference between bailement in felony, and in a
personal action.
for in felony the bailement shall contain a certain sum of money to be
forfeited, if the prisoner do not appear at a day prefixed. And in a
personal action, it is but fineable. 21. H. 7. 20.
And the bailement in felony is Ad standum rectum de latrocinio praedicto
secundum legem and consuetudinem regni nostri Angliae, as it does appear by
the writs of Manucaptione in ye register, which do imply as much as they that
have him to bail, shall not only cause him to appear, but also to answer.

18 If one do find mainprise in Court, it is presently matter of Record,
Mainprise is matter of Record.
8. Ed. 4. 5.
though it be not entered into the Roll until the next Term.

Confession of the Offense.
WHen a prisoner is appealed, or indicted of treason, or felony, and brought to
the bar to be arraigned thereof, and his indictment is read unto him, he is
asked by the Court what he will say unto it: Then either he does confess the
offense, and the indictment to be true: or he estrangeth himself from the
offense, and pleads, Not guilty: An offendour pleads one of three pleas.
or else he does answer indirectly, and so in effect he stands mute, and
makes no answer. Of the which later two I will entreat hereafter.

2 And therefore beginning with the prisoners Confession of the offense upon
his arraignement: That confession may be made in two sorts, Confession in two
sorts.
and to two several ends, whereof the one is, he may confess the offense
whereof he is indicted openly in the Court before the Judge: and that he has
committed that act whereof he is indicted and arraigned, and submit himself to
the censure and judgment of the Law. Which Confession of the offense by the
prisoner himself in person, is the most assured answer, and best satisfaction
that can be delivered to the Judge to condemn the offendour, and to all the
hearers to give approbation thereof: So that the said Confession do proceed
freely, and of his own good will, without menace, Confession must be tree and
without menace.
threats, rigor, or other extreamities: For if the Judge do perceive that the
offenders confession does grow upon either of those extreamities, he ought not
to record the confession, but to cause the prisoner plead to the offense, not
guilty. As, a woman was indicted for the felonious stealing of bread to the
value of two shillings, 27. As. p. 40
and being arraigned thereof, she confessed the felony, and said that she did
it by the commandment of her husband, and the Judges for pity would not
record her confession, but caused her to plead, not guilty to the felony:
whereupon a Jury being charged, it was found that she did steal the bread by
the compulsion of her husband, against her will, by which means she was
discharged. And in like sort if the Judges do perceive that the offendour does
confess the offense in mistaking of the Law, they may show him that favor,
as not to record his confession, but cause him to plead to the indictment, not
guilty. As a man being indicted of the death of another man, pleaded, that he
and one B. having a quarrel, 22. As. p. 71
and fighting each with the other, the party of whose death he was indicted,
came between them to part the fray, and he against his will, by misfortune,
gave him a blow, whereof he died. For though by the Law this was felony in
him being fighting, and intending to hurt or kill B. yet he did mistake the
Law therein, and did not take it to be so, for that his quarrel was not
toward him which he slew, but to B. who had no hurt. And further, this
confession of the Offense is not so penal to the prisoner, (though he does it
freely, and without menace, or other extreamitie) that he is thereby presently
attainted or condemned of that felony, but in many cases he may be saved from
death, the most bitter rigor of the Law, by the benefit of his clergy, or
by the Kings pardon.

He that confesses does become an Approuer.
3 The other kind of confession of felony that is made by a prisoner at his
arraignement, openly in court before the Judge, is when the prisoner does
confess the indictment to be true, and that he has committed the offense
whereof he is indicted, and then does become an approuer, viz. an accuser of
others, who have committed the same offense whereof he is indicted, or other
offenses with him, and then does request the Judge to have a Coroner assigned
unto him to whom he may make relation of those offenses, and of the whole
circumstances thereof.

Confession before the Coroner.
4 There is also a third kind of confession made by an offender in felony,
which is not in Court before the Judge, as the other two be, but before the
Coroner in a church or privileged place, whereupon the offender by the ancient
Law of this Realm is to make his abiuration out of the Realm: Of which
approving, and abiuration, I will write in the two next chapters.

Approuer.
AN Approuer is a felon that has committed a felony, Who is an Approuer.
and after confesses the same, and then does appeal and accuse others, who
were helpers or coadiutours with him to commit the same felony: which thing
being done, he is thereby called an Approuer, who in latin is termed Probator,
for that he must prove that, which is contained in his appeal or accusation.
And the proof must be by battle, or by the verdict of twelve men, at the
choice of him who is appealed. And if he do prove it, the kings of this
Realm have used to grant him pardon of his life, Britton.
because he does fight for the peace of the Realm, and does deliver the
country of malefactors: for he is to make covenant or promise to the Judge,
who will be suitor to obtain his pardon, how many offenders he will convince,
and accordingly he is to vanquish them in battle, attaint them by verdict, or
cause them to flee, and so by that means to become outlawes. But yet he shall
be banished the Realm, Bracton de coron^, c. 34.
and not continue therein, An Approuer banished.
though he would find pledges for his good abearing.

19. H. 6. 47. 12. Ed. 4. 10 Fi. Cor. 231 387.
2 A man imprisoned for felony, may approve of treason, if he will, Of what
offenses approuement may be.
and in like sort, he that is imprisoned for treason may approve of felony, if
he will: for when the Justices do admit him to approve, they do swear him
upon a book, to approve of all felonies and treasons that he does know. And
yet many do affirm, that approuement must be only of the thing, whereof the
approuer is indicted, Bracton de coron^, c. 33. 25. Ed. 3. 39
and of none other, and of that treason or felony, which he himself with
others did commit, and that approuement of all other offenses is void. As if
one will appeal an other for robbing of him, viz. of the Approuer, it is
void: Or if one will appeal an other, for procuring the said approuer to
commit a felony: Or that where he the said Approuer had committed a felony,
the appellee knowing thereof did feloniously receive him and comfort him, 10.
E. 4. 14. 40. Ass. p. 39
it is void: because those offenses he could not commit, for he could not
rob himself, nor be accessorie to himself. Sed de hijs quaere: Quaere.
Seeing the approuer is sworn to approve of all the felonies and treasons that
he does know.

Approuement in an Indictment, and not Appeal.
3 A man may approve in an indictment of felony, 11. H. 7. 5. Fi. Cor. 113
but not in an appeal of felony, for if he should approve in an appeal of
felony, he should thereby delay the Plaintiff in the appeal to have execution
of him. And in like sort, if one that is indicted of felony, does become an
approuer, and after an appeal is sued against him, upon the same indictment:
Fi. Cor. 442
in this case he shall surcease to proceed any further in his approuement. But
upon an indictment of felony, the prisoner which is arraigned may confess the
felony, pray a Coroner, and so approve. And though some have thought, that if
a prisoner be not indicted, but does stand at the bar, as one that is to be
delivered by Proclamation, if he will refuse the benefit thereof, confess a
felony, Fi. Cor. 231
and pray to become an approuer, that he shall be thereunto received: And some
others have been of opinion, that if a man be in prison but for suspicion of
felony, he may confess the felony before a Coroner, and become an approuer:
But that cannot be by the Law, for a man cannot be attainted by his
confession, if he be not indicted or appealed thereof before: and it is always
requisite, for him which shall become an approuer, An Approuer must confess the
felony.
that his confession be made upon such matter, upon which the Judge at all
times at his pleasure, may give judgment to attaint him.

Before whom one may approve.
4 One may become an approuer before those, who have authority to assign him a
Coroner, as the Justices of the Kings Bench, the Justices in Eire, and the
Justices of jail delivery: But so can not Justices of Peace, and therefore a
man can not become approuer before them. 2. H. 4. 19. 9. H. 4. 1.
Neither can a man become an approuer in a Court Baron before the Steward and
Suitors: Nor in the County court before the Shirife and Suitors: Nor before any
other special Judge, unless his Commission does extend thereunto.

How an Approuer shall use himself.
5 He that will become an approuer, must when he is at the bar before the
Judge, confess the felony, whereof he is arraigned, and pray that a Coroner
may be assigned unto him to hear his approuement or appeal against others:
for without confession of the offense, whereof he is arraigned, Fi. Cor. 441 2.
H. 7. 3. 21. Ed. 3. 18 19. H. 6. 47. Fi. Cor. 440
he cannot pray a Coroner. No approuement after pleading.
And this confession must be at the beginning, before he has pleaded any plea
to the contrary thereof: For if he will plead not guilty, he cannot after waiue
that plea, and confess the felony, and pray a Coroner. And the reason is,
because it cannot be intended, that he will prove that, which he has affirmed
against others, when he has showed himself so false and unconstant in his
answer before: for he is called an Approuer, viz. Probator, to the intent that
he shall prove that which he alleges against others, whereof there is small
hope to be conceived, when in the beginning he has made a lie of himself: for
if he will have his approuement allowed for good, An Approuer must tell truth
he must always be found to speak truth, without any lying. And when the
Court does perceive that he has made a lie, 25. Ed. 3. 42
they presently take his approuement from him, and give judgment, that he
shall be hanged. As, an approuer did appeal diverse, and the Shirife and
Coroners did testify, that there were none such in that county, and without
further inquiry, the approuer was adjudged to be hanged. And if upon the
appeal of an approuer, 21. H. 6. 34
process be awarded against those which he does appeal, and the Shirife
returns non sunt inuenti, judgment shall be given, that the approuer shall
be hanged. And in like sort it is, Fi. Cor. 456
if an approuer do appeal several persons in several counties, and
processes be awarded against them, until some of them be attainted, and some
of them depend in process not attainted, and the Justices be informed by
credible persons of the same county, wherein they were appealed, that there be
no such men to their knowledge in rerum natura, the approuer shall be hanged.
An approuer did appeal two men in London, and process was awarded against them,
and it was returned, that there were no such men dwelling in the city of
London, and the approuer agreeing to the same return, Fi. Cor. 460
said that they were dwelling within the city of Lincoln, and he was not
thereunto received, but was adjudged to be hanged: So that if there be any
falsehood or lying in the approuer, be it before his approuement or after, and
that the court do perceive it, they will take his appealing from him, and
adiudge him to be hanged. And if they do otherwise, Approuement after pleading
not guilty.
it is more of favor than of right: 12. Ed. 4. 10
for of favor the court may allow the prisoner to waiue his plea of Not
guilty, and to confess the felony, and to become an approuer. 21. H. 6. 35
And if an approuer do appeal one, who by his own confession is out of the
Realm, he shall be hanged: for the appellee cannot be attainted at his suit;
for though he should be outlawed, yet he may reuerse it at his return for that
cause.

6 When a prisoner upon his arraignement does confess the felony, An
Approuers oath.
and prays a Coroner, which is assigned unto him by the court, he must be
sworn in the same court before his departing, to appeal of all felonies and
treasons which he does know: and the court shall appoint him a number of
days, wherein to make his appeal, in the which days, and in every of them
he ought to appeal: for if three days be appointed, and in two of them he
does appeal, 12. Ed. 4. 10. 26. As. p. 19. Fit. Cor. 439
and the third day he will affirm to the Coroner, that he can say no more, and
the Coroner does report the same to the court, judgment shall be given, that
he shall be hanged.

7 An approuer shall have wages of the King every day that is assigned him by
the court to approve in, viz. a penny a day. And some do affirm, An Approuers
wages.
that he shall have no wages, Fi. Cor. 439
until he has made his proof by vanquishing some appellee in battle, or by
conuicting him by verdict, and then he shall have wages of the King for every
day.

8 When a Coroner is assigned to an approuer, An Approuer set at liberty.
the approuer must he let out of prison, to the intent that he may approve or
appeal of his own free will being at liberty, without any dures: for if it be
by dures, when he comes again before the Justices, he may rehearse his
appeal, and disauow it for that cause, which shall be tried by the examination
of the Coroner upon his oath. Fi. Cor. 118 169. 255.
And if the Coroner do say, that the same appeal was not by dures, the appeal
shall stand, and the approuer shall be hanged. And when the approuer has made
his appeal before the Coroner, he shall come again before the Justices, and
rehearse his appeal before them (for they will not read his appeal unto him)
and if he do fail in the rehearsal of his appeal, 26. As. p. 19
in any word, otherwise than the Coroner has recorded it, he shall be hanged:
as if in his rehearsal he do say, that there was a black horse stolen,
where it it was recorded by the Coroner, a red Horse: An Approuers appeal
must be certain.
For the Approuer must declare the thing certainly, with all the
circumstaunces thereof, without any varying or alteration: Bracton.
and he must know the person, whom he has appealed, when he is brought into
question, for if he know him not, it is to be presumed, that they were never
companions.

Process against the appellees.
9 After an Approuer has made his appeal before the Coroner, if the appellees
be dwelling in the County, where the appeal is made, the Coroner has
authority to award process against them until the Exigent, and to direct his
process to the Shirife to serve. But so he cannot do, 29. Ed. 3. 42
if the appellees be dwelling in another county, for then he must not award
process against them, but refer it to the justices, before whom he is to
record the same appeal. And they may award process as the Justices of the
Kings bench and Justices in Eire may do, who may award process by the common
law, and Justices of Jail Delivery by the statute De Appellatis, made Anno
28. Ed. 1. which has ordained; St. 28. Ed. 1.
That whosoever shall be appealed by any Approuers remaining in the Gaoles, which
the Justices of Jail delivery shall deliver, in what places soever of the
Realm the persons appealed shall remain, immediately the Shirife of that
county, where such persons appealed be conversant, or may be found, shall be
commanded by the Kings Writs under the testimony of the same Justices, that
he shall apprehend those persons appealed, and convey them to the Jail, where
the approuers, by whose appeal they be apprehended, be imprisoned. And the
Shirife or Jailer of that prison shall receive them: and there they shall
answer before the same Justices. And if they put themselves upon the country,
the Justices shall send by a judicial Writ to the Shirife of the County,
where the felony was committed, that he shall return an Enquest before them,
at the place, where the approuers do remain, at a certain day.

Pleas for the Appellee against the Approuer.
10 It is a good exception for the appellee in his own defense to allege
against the approuer, that the approuer is a person attainted of treason, 11.
As. p. 27. Fi. Cor. 387 443 21. Ed. 3. 17
or felony, and to show how, viz. either by verdict, outlawrie, or abiuration,
or in any other manner: for such a person is out of the Law, and so disabled
to appeal or accuse others. And the same law is, if the approuer be a clerk
convict, for he comes now too late to confess a felony, 17. Ed. 3. 13.
when he has pleaded not guilty thereunto before, which was found false at
his own suit; and therefore it cannot be intended, that the thing he says
now is true. And although he had his clergy upon confession of the felony,
An Approuer convict of felony.
yet he shall not now become an approuer, for that he said nothing at that
time when he ought to have approved: and therefore the Law cannot intend,
that he has any thing to say now that is true, seeing he would not speak it
at that time, when he might have been heard. But in the foresaid cases, if
the approuer can show any sufficient matter, which does restore him to the
law, 21. Ed. 3. 17
as the Kings pardon, and such like, then the appellee shall answer to the
approuer. S. Appeals. 92.

An Appellee cannot appeal others.
11 If he which is appealed by an approuer will confess the appeal, and pray
that he may become an approuer, and appeal others, he shall not be received
thereunto, for several causes: one is, for that he is appealed of felony, and
not indicted of felony; and in an appeal, there lies no approuement: another
cause is, for that if his approuement should be of the same felony, he should
thereby falsify the appeal of the first approuer, in that he did not at the
first discover all his companions, being sworn thereunto. And a third cause
is, Fi. Cor. 113
for then by that means approuements would be infinite, and also the appellee
is in a sort out of the law, for that the approuer has deraigned an appeal
against him.

21. Ed 3. 18. Fi. Cor. 231
12 It is a good exception for the appellee to object against the approuer,
Approuer not in prison for felony, or at liberty.
that the approuer is not in prison for any felony or treason, but for debt,
or trespass, or some other offense: or to say, that the approuer is not in
prison, but at large; for he cannot be an approuer, unless he be first
indicted of felony, and does confess it before a Judge, and then become an
approuer.

Bracton.
13 It is a good plea (as some do affirm) for him that is appealed, The
appellee an honest and credible man.
to say, that he is a lawful man, and in the frank pledge, and in the Assise
of our sovereign Lord the King, and that he has a Lord, which will be his
pledge. And if that be trauersed, and found for the appellee, he shall be
discharged thereby. Sed quaere.

Fi. Cor. 322
14 In an appeal by an approuer, the appellee may plead, General plees in
Bar of the appeal.
that the same approuer is a priest, not of perfect memory, deaf, dumb, a
lazar, a natural fool, a woman, a man above threescore and ten years of
age, or within age, or that he is mayhemed by some other, and not by the
appellee, for that in these cases the approuer cannot deraigne or wage battle
with him. S. Appeals. 93.

15 In diverse cases, if the appellant do surcease to prosecute his appeal,
Where the King may pursue an appeal begun
the king may pursue it: for the appellant may by several means leave off to
prosecute his appeal, 3. H. 6. 50.
as by Non-suite, Release, Retraxit, or a woman by taking a husband during the
suite of appeal: for in all these Cases the appeal does cease by the act of
the party; and therefore in which case soever that Cesser is after declaration
in the appeal, the Defendant shall not go at liberty, but shall be arraigned
at the Kings suite upon the same declaration: for that it does appear there is
a felony committed, and the same is not yet tried. And the same Law is, if the
appeal do cease by the act of God, as if the appellant do die: 21. Ed. 3. 18
Fit. Cor. 369
Or if it cease by the act of the Law, as if the appellant after his appeal
made be hanged: Or if the appellant do take the privilege of his Clergy;
for an appeal by an approuer is a great presumption against the Defendant,
that he is guilty of the offense whereof he is appealed, and that is for the
great punishment which the appellant is to suffer, if he at any time do fail
of his appeal, viz. death. And an appeal does work a greater presumption
against the Defendant than an Indictment does: 4. Ed. 4. 10
for that it is used, if a man be appealed and indicted of one offense, and the
Plaintiff in the appeal after declaration is Non-suite; the Defendant shall be
arraigned at the Kings suit upon the declaration in the appeal, and not upon
the Indictment: But this presumption rises where the appellant has appeared
to his suite, 8. Ed. 4, 25.
and declared: for until that time, it carries not with it any presumption.
Because any man may sue a Writ of appeal out of the Chauncerie in a
strangers name, and find pledges to prosecute it, and cause the Writ to be
delivered to the Shirife of Record, that stranger not knowing thereof; in which
Case it shall not be said that strangers suite, until he has appeared in
proper person thereunto, and declared: 7. H. 7. 5. Fi. Cor. 384
for until that time, Non-suite in the appeal is not peremptory to the
stranger. Neither shall the Defendant be arraigned at the Kings suite, by this
Non-suite any more than if he had not been Non-suite. But in that Case, if a
stranger do bring a new appeal against the Defendant, the Defendant shall
answer him as he should have done if no such Non-suite had been. But the
Law is otherwise in an appeal commenced by Bill, for that suite of necessity
must be made by the party himself in his own proper person, 22. As. p. 97
and his appearance must be recorded by the Shirife and Coroners, and the year,
day, and place expressed, where, and when the felony was committed, and who
were principalles in the same felony, and who were accessories. And so in an
appeal by Writ, the Plaintifes Non-suite before declaration, does give the
King no advantage against the Defendant: but in an appeal commenced by Bill
before the Shirife and Coroners, or in an appeal by an approuer it is
otherwise, for in such an appeal, all the certainty of the felony is
declared and comprised. 2 and 3. P. and M. Die, 121.
In an appeal of murder against three, if one of them plead Not guilty,
ready to defend himself, by his body, and so wageth battle, upon which plea
the Plaintiff demurreth in law, which demurrer is adjudged against him; in
this Case the same appellee shall be arraigned at the Kings suite: for that the
felony is not yet tried, nor he acquit thereof. And if one of the other
appellees do plead, Not guilty, and that the Plaintiff does demurre
thereupon, and it is adjudged a good plea, and the same appellee is acquit
against the appellant, yet he shall be arraigned at the Kings suite of the same
murder. S. Appeals. 96.

The Appellants release to the Appellee.
16 If the Defendant in an appeal do plead a Release enrolled, Fit. Cor. 12
and of record, made unto him by the appellant before the appeal commenced, he
shall be presently delivered: But if it be made after the appeal commenced,
the the Court will intend, that it is of purpose to defraud the King: and
therefore in that case he shall be arraigned at the Kings suit, though he be
acquit against the appellant by his release.

An Approuer confesses his appeal to be false.
17 If an approuer, 21. H. 6. 34.
when an Enquest does appear upon the issue joined between him and the
appellee, and be ready to try the same issue, will confess his appeal to be
false, yet notwithstanding the appellee shall be arraigned at the Kings suite.
But if the approuer, when the appellee is in the field ready to deraigne
battle, will confess his appeal to be false, the appellee shall go quit,
and not be arraigned at the Kings suite, and the approuer shall be hanged: for
it is as much as if the appellee had vanquished the approuer in battle.

The appeal abating before declaration.
18 If an appeal commenced by Writ do abate before declaration, so that the
Court can not be informed of the year, day, and place, where, and when the
felony was committed: In that Case the Court does use to examine the Coroner,
if he be present, if there be any indictment depending of the same felony, or
not: and if he say no, then to send to the Shirife of the County, where the
felony was supposed to be committed, to know if he have any indictment, or
not, and in the mean time to let the Defendant to mainprise: or otherwise the
Court will set the Defendant at liberty. There was a time, when if a felon had
bin taken with the manoure, A felon taken with the manoure.
and that the felon and the manoure had been brought into the Court, the
Judges would have arraigned the offender upon ye manoure without appeal or
indictment: Sed obsoletum.

19 In every arraignement which is to be at the Kings suit upon an Appeal
begun by the appellant, No arraignement at the Kings suite upon a false
declaration.
the declaration in the same appeal is intended to be once good, and true: for
if it were never good, and abated for that cause, the appellee shall not be
arraigned at the kings suite, notwithstanding the abatement be after
declaration. And therefore if an appeal be abated by mis-naming of the
Defendant, 4. H. 6. 16
he shall not be arraigned at the kings suit, though the abatement be by the
Plaintifes own confession. And yet in that case it might be said, that the
appeal abated by couin, for that the said exception was not tried, but
confessed by the Plaintiff. And the same Law is, if the appeal shall be
abated by mis-naming of the Plaintiff, or of the Town, or for lack of a
material word. And so it is, if in an appeal, the Defendant do plead, Fi.
Cor. 121 17. As. p. 26. 11. As. p. 27 18. Ed. 3. 35. Fitz. Cor. 3. 384. 387.
27. Ass. p. 25
that the Plaintiff is outlawed, or is attainted of treason, or felony, or
otherwise is disabled to maintain an appeal: As, if a woman do bring an
appeal of the death of her husband, and the Defendant does plead, that she
and her said husband were never accoupled in lawful marriage, or that she
has married another husband: Or, that the appeal was not commenced within the
year and day after the offense committed: Or, that the appellant has an elder
brother living to whom the appeal is given, and not to the Plaintiff: And all
those matters which shall be a Bar to the plaintiff, to bring the appeal,
shall also Bar the king to take any advantage against the Appellee, upon the
same appeal: for in all these Cases it may appear that the appeal was
commenced without cause, and grounded upon false matter. S. Br. 15.
And yet it is otherwise, where the appeal was at the first grounded upon
sufficient and true matter. But in all the Cases aforesaid, though the king
cannot take an advantage of the appeal against the defendant, If not an
Appeal, yet an Indictment at the Kings suite.
yet he shall compel him to answer to an indictment of the same felony, for
that by these pleas the defendant is not discharged of the felony, though he
be discharged of the appeal. And further, if the appellee be discharged both
against the party and also against the King, yet the Court may bind him to his
good Abearing, Good abearing.
Fi. Cor. 387
if they shall think it meet.

13. Ed. 4. 8 3. Ed. 3. 10
20 If an Excommunication be pleaded against the plaintiff in appeal, The
plaintiff in appeal excommunicate.
notwithstanding the plea be thereby delayed, yet the Defendant shall not be
arraigned at the kings suit, for the Plaintiff may be absolved, and then
proceed in his appeal. And therefore the appeal shall be continued until a
certain day, to the intent that the Plaintiff may in the mean time procure
his absolution: and during that time the Defendant shall be let to mainprise.
But if the appellant be outlawed, The plaintiff in appeal outlawed.
though the Outlawrie be not for felony, but for trespass, 17. As. p. 26 Fit.
Vtlawrie 47.
yet by that means the Defendant shall be set at liberty, as well against the
king, as against the appellant. Notwithstanding in that case, there is no
impossibility, but the Plaintiff might purchase his charter of pardon, or
reuerse the outlawrie for that it is erroneous, and thereby be enabled to
pursue his appeal.

An Approuer pardoned, the Appellee shall be discharged.
21 If one be appealed by an approuer, 47. E. 3. 5. 47. E. 3. 16.
and the King does pardon the approuer, he that is appealed by the approuer,
shall be set at liberty, without being arraigned at the Kings suite: for by
the pardon the felony is extinct in him, and so he cease to be an approuer,
for the approuement shall continue no longer then the approuer is partaker of
the felony, whereof the approuement is made.

Vanquishing one approuer.
22 If three men do become approuers severally against one man, 7. Ed. 3. 11.
of one and the same felony, and he joins battle with them all, and does
vanquish that approuer which first joins with him; by that means he shall be
acquit against them all, and likewise against the King, and the other two
approuers shall be hanged. But it is otherwise, if the approuement be of
several felonies: for in that case, though the appellee does join battle
with them all, 25. Ed. 3. 42
and after vanquish that approuer which first joins with him, he shall be
remaunded to prison, until he has joined battle with the other two: for that
there must be several trialls, where there be several felonies, and several
issues.

Examining an offender condemned.
23 If a man would become an approuer, 21. Ed. 3. 18
and cannot be suffered by the Law for some disablement, or for the
impediments before mentioned, yet before he shall be put to execution, the Court
will send the Shirife unto him, to hear who they be that he can accuse, and
thereupon cause the Shirife to indite them at his next Turn.

Sanctuary, and Abiuration.
Sanctuary in Greek called Asylum, What Sanctuary is.
and by some in Latin termed Templum misericordiae is a place privileged by
the King or chief governor of a country, for the safeguard of the life of such
a person as does offend the king, his Laws, crown, and dignity royal. Which
privileged places were devised and instituted by the law of mercy upon
devotion, and the great reverence and honor that Princes and chief Rulers had
to such places, wherein they granted such privileges. As, first almighty God
himself the chief Author of mercy gave in charge to his servant Moses (when
the children of Israel were in their peregrination toward the land of Promise)
that certain Cities or places of refuge or Sanctuary might be provided for
those to fly unto, Deuteronomy. 19.
By whom Sanctuaries were instituted.
and to escape the hands of the reuengers of blood, who should by mischance and
not willingly slay others: And after, Joshua. 20
the same people being settled in the same Land, he caused Joshua to execute the
same commandment by assigning six cities to that purpose. And, long time after
that, Mulmutius Dunwallo one of the renowned kings of the Brittons, who made
many most worthy laws for the well governing of his subjects (which were
called Mulmutius Laws) at the least 440. years before the nativity of our
Savior Christ ordained for Sanctuaries, places of privilege or defense of man's
life, certain Temples, and the four great high ways which he before had
caused to be made, or begun, at his own charges, viz, Fosse, Watling
street, Erming street, and Ikeneld street, and in some cases, and for some
purposes every plough: which Franchises or Liberties Belinus his son did
after more fully effect and confirm. And some of the ancient Princes, Kings,
or Governors in this Realm, granted places of defense, or sanctuary to such
as should commit treason, and some others to such as should commit murder,
robbery, burglarie, or other offenses whatsoever, which in that point was
further than the privilege which God gave to his own Sanctuary, Exodus 21
that was ordained only for him which should kill another unwillingly: for God
commanded, that if any did slay his neighbor upon malice prepenced, or by
assault, he should be taken from his Altar, and put to death.

2 Abiuration is an oath that a man or woman does take, What Abiuration is.
when they have committed felony, and do fly to a Church, or churchyard for
the safegarde of their lives, choosing rather to be perpetually banished out of
the realm, than to stand to the Law, and to be tried of the felony: and this
was one of saint Edwards Laws that was King of this Realm before the
Conquest, and instituted by him, which is also founded upon the Law of Mercy,
that the Kings of this Realm did extend, for the great reverence that they did
bear to the Temple of God, and to places dedicated to him, which was always
used sithence that time without alteration until the one and twenty year of
King Henry the eight. St. 21. H 8. 2
And this abiuration is an attainder in it self of felony that is confessed;
which attainder by confession is the most strong that may be, for the vehement
presumption that it has of truth: for it should be very absurd to say that he
has not committed such a felony when the party himself has confessed it to
the overthrow of himself and all his posterity.

All Sanctuaries be extinguished.
3 By the Statute of Anno 32. H. 8. it was enacted, St. 32. H. 8. 12.
That all Sanctuaries and places privileged, which have been used or taken
for Sanctuary (except parish churches and their churchyards, cathedral
churches, hospitalls, and churches collegiate, and all chapels dedicate, used
as parish churches, and the Sanctuaries to every of them belonging: and except
such places and territories as hereafter be appointed to be places of tuition
and privilege, viz. Wells, Westminster, Northampton, Norwich, York, Darbie,
Launceston, and Westchester) shall be utterly extinguished, adnulled, and void
for ever. And by the Statute of Anno 22. H. 8. it was ordained, St. 22. H. 8.
14.
That if any person fly or resort to any parish church, Cemitorie, or other
like hallowed place for tuition of his life, by occasion of any murder, robbery,
or other felony by the same person committed, and thereupon confess any
murder, felony, Abiuration by the common Law out of the Realm.
or other offense before the Coroner, wherefore the same person by the Laws of
this Realm heretofore used, should abjure and pass out of the same, The same
person thereupon shall abjure from all his liberty of this Realm, and from
his liberal and free habitations, resorts and passages, to, and from the
universal places of this Realm, which appertain to the liberty of the Kings
subjects vndefamed, and shall forthwith be directed by the Coroner, Abiuration
to a place within this Realm.
taking and recording such abiuration, to any one Sanctuary within this Realm,
which the same person will elect and choose, there to remain as a Sanctuary
person abiured during his life, and to be sworn before the Coroner so to do,
and to be marked with a hot iron upon the brawne of the thumb of the right
hand, according to the statute of Anno 21. H. 8. 2. St. 21. H. 8. 2
And by the statute made Anno 1. Iac. 25. St. 1. Iac. 25
it was enacted, That so much of all Statutes as concerns abiured persons,
and Sanctuaries, or ordering or governing of persons abiured, or in Sanctuaries
made before the five and thirtieth year of the late Queen Elizabeth's reign,
shall stand repealed, and be void. And so all Sanctuaries being adnulled and
extinguished by the foresaid statute of 32. H. 8. 12. saving churches, and
churchyards, which were Sanctuaries by the common Law, and saving Wells,
Westminster, Northampton, etc. erected and made by the said Statute of 32. H.
8. 12. and 33. H. 8. 15. which are also sithence extinguished and adnulled by
the foresaid statute of 1. Iac. 25. And therefore by no Laws or Statutes that
we have in force, there be any Sanctuaries remaining: neither can any person
take the benefit of Sanctuary in any place, or in any case, where there is no
such thing in rerum natura (saving churches and churchyards) which never were
Sanctuaries above forty days at the uttermost, and that but in certain
Cases, and yet now out of use. But whether by the strict course of the common
Laws or any Statute in force, they be now to any intent in force, or not.
Quaere. And for that so much of all stat. as concerns abiured persons, or
ordering, or governing of abiured persons, made before an^ 35. El. be repealed
and made void by the before rehearsed Statute of 1. Iac. 25. viz. the statute
of 21. H. 8. 2. 22. H. 8. 14. 27. H. 8. 19. 32. H. 8. 3. 32. H. 8. 12. And by
that means abiuration at the common law is restored to his former course, I
will therefore write so much of abiuration, and abiured persons, as is
warranted by the common laws of this Realm only, and not by any Statute,
saving by the statute of Articuli cleri, made an^ 9. Ed. 2. 10. which is rather
a confirmation or exposition of the common law, than a new law, and except so
much as is contained or mentioned in the statute of 35. Eliz. 1. and 2. or in
any other law made sithence that time, which I do rather set down that the
Reader may know what the law has been, or is, then how it is used, and put
in practice.

4 Abiuration does not lie for him which offends in high treason, No
abiuration for high treason.
because the Coroner cannot attaint him upon his confession thereof, for that
he is not his Judge of that offense, neither can he be Judge as Coroner, though
he have a commission from the King to do it. And if the offender being in a
Church would of purpose confess a felony, to the intent to escape Treason,
yet if the Coroner be informed that he is charged with treason, he ought not
to suffer him to abjure, and that for the Kings advantage: for it is better for
the King to attaint him of Treason, than of felony, in respect of the Escheat,
which in case of Treason does wholly belong to the King, of whomsoever the
offenders lands be holden. And the same law is in petit Treason; for the
Coroner ought not to record his abiuration thereof, No abiuratio^ for petit
treason.
any more than he may do of high Treason: Neither the Coroner ought to let
him pass by abiuration of another felony, if he be informed that the offender
has committed petit treason, and that for the grieuousnesse of the offense,
though the king shall receive no more benefit in petit treason, than in
felony. And the statutes which were made in the time of k. H. 8. St. 21. H. 8.
2 22. H. 8. 14. 27 H. 8. 19 32. H. 8. 12
touching abiuration, be a special argument and proof thereof, which do
only make mention of abiuration for murder and felony, but not for petit
treason.

Fi. Cor. 420 9. Ed. 4. 28
5 If a man do rob a Church and fly to another Church for the said offense,
and there would abjure, No abiuratio^ for the robber of a Church.
he shall not be received thereunto, but shall violently be pulled forth of the
Church, and thrust into prison. Quia frustra legis auxilium inuocat, qui in
lege delinquit.

Fit. cor. 313 9. E. 4. 28.
6 If a man that is attainted of felony, and in carrying to the gallows to be
put to death, do escape from the Sheriff, and fly to a Church, No abiuratio^
for a man attainted.
he cannot abjure, and though the Coroner would take his abiuration, and let
him go at liberty, the Sheriff may take him again, and put him to execution,
notwithstanding the said abiuration, for it is void, and the Coroner in that
case shall be grievously amerced for this escape, and so shall the town where he
was let at liberty; and the reason is, for that a man cannot have two
Judgments for one offense. Fi. Cor. 335
And so it is, and for the same reason, if a man that is attainted of felony,
and is carried to the gallows, and hanged, breaks the halter, falls down,
and then rises up, and does fly to a Church, he cannot abjure, but must be
taken again by the sheriff, and hanged until he be dead, according to his
judgment.

No abiuratio^ for a man before abiured.
7 If a man do abjure the Realm before a Coroner for felony, 9. Ed. 4. 28 8.
H. 4. 3. Fi. Cor. 410
and after does return into the Realm without the Kings pardon, and then fly
to a Church, and would abjure again, he shall not be allowed so to do, but
shall be taken forth by violence, and put to execution, for that he was before
attainted of felony upon his own confession, and had his judgment of
abiuration, and cannot be twice attainted, or have two judgments.

Where an offender may by violence be drawn out of a Church.
8 If a man do fly to a Church, claiming the privilege thereof for the
safeguard of his life, in some cases he may be drawn forth of the same by
violence: as, if he come into the Church to claim the benefit thereof for an
unlawful cause at the beginning, viz. for treason, robbing of a Church, being
formerly abiured, or such like, in those cases he may be drawn forth of the
Church by violence, by the people of the same town: and in like sort, 3. H. 7.
12. Bro* Cor. 180.
if he do fly to a Church, and says he does take it for the safeguard of his
life, and will not declare that he has committed felony, and that therefore
he claims the privilege of the Church: in that case the officers of the
town may by strength take him out of the Church. But if he do say that he
does take the Church for felony, that is sufficient, without declaring what
felony, or the manner thereof: for he is not bound to show that but to the
Coroner before whom he does make his abiuration, The offenders confession
before the Coroner.
and then he must confess and show the year, day, and place, where, and when
the felony was committed, for that judgment is to be given upon his
confession, which must be grounded upon certainty.

Tarrying in a Church above the time appointed.
9 If an offenders being in a Church were once lawful, although he tarry there
above the time which the law has appointed him, yet he ought not for that
cause be drawn out of the Church by violence, Fi. Cor. 313
but meat and drink shall be withholden from him, and every person shall be
forbidden to succor him: and he that does relieve him shall be punished at the
Kings suit: which punishment some do affirm shall be, for a lay man death,
Britton. Bracton.
and for a Clerk banishment; for he that takes a Church for felony, ought
not to tarry there above one night, if a Coroner will come unto him, and be
ready to take his abiuration, otherwise he may tarry there forty days.

The manner of abiuration.
10 The manner of abiuration is, that he who takes a Church, ought to declare
that he does take it for felony which he has committed: and when the Coroner
comes, he must confess before him the felony certainly, viz. the year,
day, and place, where, and when he committed the felony, and pray to abjure
the Realm, and to have the tuition of the Church until he can provide for his
journey: and this confession must be taken by the Coroner himself, and not by
his deputy. And then he shall take an oath, which is his abiuration, The oath
of abiuration.
in this manner: viz. Hear you this Master Coroner, Bracton, Britton.
That I A.B. am a thief of two beasts (or a killer of a man) and a felon of
the kings of England: and because I have committed many offenses and thefts in
this Realm, I do abjure the Kingdom of our Sovereign Lord King James: And I
must make haste toward the port of S. which thou have given me: And I must
not go out of the high way; and if I do, then I yield to be taken as a
thief and felon of our Sovereign Lord the Kings, and at ye port I will
diligently seek passage, and will not tarry there but one flowing and ebbing
if I may have passage: And if I cannot have passage in this time, I will go
every day up to the knees into the sea, assaying to pass over. And if I cannot
do it within forty days together, I will return to the Church as a thief
and felon of our sovereign Lord the King: So help me God, etc. And
notwithstanding the words of the said oath, the offender and not the Coroner
ought to make the election of the port, whither he will go, and where he will
make his passage, and he must make his abiuration at the door of the
Churchyard.

Fi. Cor. 407 Britton.
11 He that does abjure the Realm must have upon him but his coat, The attire
of an abiured person.
his shirt, and his breeches, and his head shall be uncovered, and he must carry
a cross in his hand, which (as Polidore says) is a token that his life is
saved by religion: and whatsoever he has beside, is forfeited to the King, and
neither the Coroner nor any of his servants shall take any thing of the
offenders for their fee.

St. 9. E. 2. 10
12 By the Statute of Lincoln made an^ 9. E. 2. The using of persons abiured.
They they that abjure the Realm so long as they be in the high way shall be in
the Kings peace, and be troubled of no man. And whilst they be in the Church,
their keepers shall not tarry in the Churchyard, except necessity, or peril
of escape do require it: and so long as they be in the Church, they shall not
be compelled to depart, but may have those things which be necessary for their
liuelihood, and may go forth to discharge nature. 7. H. 7. 7. Fi. Cor. 14
But if an abiured person be molested in the high way, and drawn out of the
way, and imprisoned, yet that will not excuse him when he is again at
liberty, if he do not within convenient time after his liberty, return to
the way leading him to the port or place whereunto upon his abiuraration he
made choice to go. But if he do go out of the high way upon ignorance, or to
ease nature, that shall not hurt him, so that he do return to the high way in
convenient time, or do his good will to return.

13 After abiuration if the offender do any thing contrary to his oath, After
abiuration broken, death.
viz. contrary to his abiuration, he shall be put to execution, unless he be a
Clerk, and in that case shall be saved from death by his Clergy: and because
the Prelates and Clergy did complain in Parliament, that though a Clerk
ought not to be judged by a temporal Judge, nor any thing may be done against
him that concerns life or member; nevertheless temporal Judges caused
Clerks flying unto the Church, and confessing their offenses to abjure the
Realm, and for that cause admitted their abiurations, although hereupon they
cannot be their Judges, and that so power was wrongfully given to Lay persons
in the punishment of such Clerks. And if such should chance after to return
into the Realm, the said Prelates and Clergy desired such remedy to be
provided therein, that the immunitie or privilege of the Church may be
preserved unbroken. St. 9. E. 2. 15
Upon which request by a Stat. made an^. 9. E. 2. entitled Articuli cleri, it
was enacted, That a Clerk flying to the Church for felony, to obtain the
privilege of the Church, shall not be compelled to abjure the realm, but
yielding himself to the law of the realm, shall enjoy the privilege of the
Church, according to the laudible custom of the Realm heretofore used. Which
said Statute being but a rehersall, restoring, and confirmation of the common
law, is thought not to be repealed by the words of the foresaid stat. of 1.
Iac. ^^. 1. Iac. 25.
And so it appears by this stat. that if he which does fly to a Church, will
say that he is a Clerk, A Clerk need not abjure.
he shall not be compelled to abjure, and if he do abjure of his own good
will, and thereby does lose his lands, yet to save him from execution he shall
have his Clergy. S. St. 28. H. 8. 1. Clergy 5.

Where no felony no abiuration for felony.
14 A married wife being desirous to be delivered from her husband, Fi. Cor. 425
did fly to a Church, and acknowledged a felony, where she never had
committed any felony, and desired to abjure: and her husband understanding of
it came to her, and then she fled out of the Church and escaped, and town or
person were amerced for this escape: for there could no felon escape where no
felony was committed. Neither can there be any abiuration where no felony is
committed. And therefore an offender cannot abjure for petit larcenie. Br. Cor.
182


The abiured pleads that he is not the same person.
15 He that does abjure, and is taken again, and arraigned, Fi. Cor. 124
may plead that he is not the same person which did abjure, and then that
shall be tried by the Coroner who took his abiuration: Or he may plead the
Kings pardon The Kings pardon.
granted to him of the felony and abiuration: 9. E. 4. 28.
for if the pardon make no mention of the abiuration, it is not good. S. Pardon
7.

A Recusant using conuenticles shall abjure the realm
16 By the statute of an^ 35. El. it was ordained, St. 35. El. 1
that if any person or persons above the age of sixteen years, which shall
offend against the said Act (in persuading others to impugn the Queens
Ecclesiastical laws) shall not within three months after they shall be
convicted for their said offense, conform themselves to the obedience of the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm, in coming to Church to hear divine
Service, and in making such public confession and submission, as in the said
Act is expressed, being thereunto required by the Bishop of the Dioces, or any
Justice of the Peace in the same county, where the said person shall happen to
be, or by the minister or Curat of the Parish: In every such case, every such
offender being thereunto warned or required by any such Justice of Peace of
the same County where such offenders shall happen to be, shall upon his or
their corporal Oath, before the Justices of the Peace in the open Quarter
Sessions of the same County where such offenders shall then be, or at the
Assizes and Jail Delivery of the same County, before the Justices of the
same Assizes and Jail Delivery, abjure the Realm of England, and all other
the Queens Dominions for ever (unless her Majesty shall license the parties
to return:) and thereupon shall depart out of the Realm, at such Haven or
Port, and within such time as shall in that behalf be assigned and appointed
by the said Justices, before whom such abiuration shall be made, unless the same
offender be let or stayed by such lawful and reasonable means or causes,
as by the common laws of this Realm are permitted and allowed in cases of
abiuration for felony. And in such cases of let or stay, then within such
reasonable and convenient time after, as the common law requireh in case of
abiuration for felony, as is aforesaid. And the Justices of peace before whom
any such abiuration shall happen to be made, as is aforesaid, shall cause the
same presently to be entered of Record before them, and shall certify the same
to the Justices of Assizes and Jail delivery of the said County at the next
Assizes or Jail delivery to be holden in the same county. And if any such
offender which by the tenor and intent of this act is to be abiured as is
aforesaid, shall refuse to make such abiuration as is aforesaid, or after such
abiuration made, shall not go to such haven, and within such time as is before
appointed, and from thence depart out of this Realm according to this present
act, or after such his departure shall return or come again into any the Qu.
Realms or Dominions without her special license in that behalf first had and
obtained: Then in every such case the person so offending shall be abiudged a
felon, and suffer as in case of felony, without benefit of Clergy. If any
person or persons that shall at any time offend against this act, shall before
he or they be so warned or required to make abiuration, according to the tenor
of this act, repair to some parish Church on some sunday, or other festival
day, and then and there hear divine service, and at Service time before the
Sermon, or reading of ye gospel, make public and open submission and
declaration of his and their conformity to her Majesty's laws and statutes, as
in this act is hereafter declared and appointed: That then the same offender
shall thereupon be clearly discharged of and from all the penalties and
punishments inflicted or imposed by this act for any of the offenses aforesaid.
Provided that no Popish Recusant or seem covert shall be compelled to abjure by
virtue of this act: Provided also that every person that shall abjure by force
of this act, or refuse to abjure, being thereunto required, as is aforesaid,
shall forfeit and loose to her Majesty all his goods and cattels, and all his
lands, tenements, and hereditaments, during his life only, and no longer. But
his wife shall not loose her dower, neither shall his blood be corrupt. S.
Felony by stat. 9.

17 By a statute made an^ 35. El. 2. St 35. El. 2.
(entitled an act for the restraining of Popish Recusants to some certain
place of abode) it is ordained, Popish Recusants shall abjure the Realm.
That Recusants not conforming themselves to the obedience of the laws of this
realm, in coming to the Church to hear divine service, which shall not upon
the request of two Justices of peace, or Coroner of the same county, abjure ye
realm, and depart for the same, and not return without the Queens license,
shall be adjudged felons, and suffer and loose as in case of felony, without
benefit of Clergy. S. Fell. by St. 10.

St. 3. E. 1. 10
18 By the stat. of West. 1. made an^ 3. E. 1. it is enacted, Abiuration of a
Trespasser.
That he which commits trespass in parkes or ponds shall abjure, if he
cannot find surety no more to do the like offense. But that abiuration is not
for felony, neither shall he forfeit his lands or goods.

Pleading not guilty.
Having made mention of one of the pleas which a prisoner brought to the bar
to be arraigned of Treason or Felony does plead, viz. of the Confession of the
offense, and showed how many sorts of Confessions of felony the law does take
notice of, and by what means she does proceed against the parties confessing:
I am now to treat of a second, or one other plea, that the prisoner upon his
arraignment does plead in his own defense, which is the plea of Not guilty.
For when a prisoner by an appeal, or an Indictment, is charged with treason,
or felony, he may estrange himself from the offense, if he will, and join
the same issue, which the defendant often times does in an action of trespass,
and some other personal actions, viz. he may plead and take for his issue, Not
guilty. This plea of not guilty is the most common and usual plea, Pleading
not guilty the most common plea.
that he which is arraigned of treason or felony, has to plead upon an
indictment, or an appeal: and it is ye plea whereunto every person that is
arraigned shall be enforced, unless it be in special cases, viz. where he
has matter of Justification, or matter in Law to plead. And this plea of Not
guilty does tend to the fact, that is to the felony, and therefore it
receives great favor in Law: 7. Ed. 4. 15. 4. H. 6. 15 4. H. 7. 5. 10. H. 4.
4. 9. H. 4. 2.
for the Law does allow this plea to him who is arraigned after he has pleaded
in abatement, or bar of the appeal, or indictment, so that his bar do not
comprehend such matter as does confess the felony (as a Release of the
appellant, or the Kings pardon.) And that plea he shall have also, though one
of his pleas were matter in law: for though those pleas do require diverse
trials, 29. Ed. 3. 91. 22. E. 4. 39. 27. As. p. 3 14. Ed. 4. 7
yet in favor of life he shall have both those pleas, as well as he shall
have when he does plead matter triable by the Bishop, or by Record, viz. and
moreover not guilty. Which pleas he shall have notwithstanding he do not
conclude, moreover not guilty, that is to say, Pleading not guilty after other
pleas.
he shall come time enough to plead not guilty after the matter triable by the
Bishop, or by Record, is found against him. And the manner of pleading in all
those cases is to plead his plea, and to pray allowance thereof, and over to
the felony not guilty.

Upon the plea of not guilty no counsel allowed.
2 Upon this plea of only not guilty, the party indicted shall not have
counsel learned in the law to plead for him, or to say any thing in his
behalf in the same plea (unless it be in an appeal, which is the suit of the
party) for when ye offender is put to answer to an indictment of treason or
felony, he must answer it in proper person, and not by attorney, or council
learned: For this plea of Not guilty does tend to the fact, yt which the party
himself does best know, and therefore he can best make answer unto it. And if
his council learned should plead his plea for him, and defend him, it may be
that they would be so covert in their speeches, and so shadow the matter with
words, and so attenuate the proofs and evidence, that it would be hard, or long
to have the truth appear. Also if the party himself defend it, peradventure
his conscience will prick him to utter the truth, or his countenance, or
gesture will show some tokens thereof, 9. Ed. 4. 2.
or by his simple speeches somewhat may be drawn from him to bolt out the
verity of the cause, which would not be won of men learned in the law, who
endeavor to speak prouidently, and artificially, which be the causes that the
offender shall answer in his own person, and not by council learned. And yet
if the plea of the party indicted be such that it does exceed his learning and
knowledge to answer, 1. H. 7. 15 12. El. Dyer 296. 7. H. 4. 36.
and plead unto, Where council shall be allowed. Informing the Court of a
default.
then he shall have learned council assigned unto him, though it be against
the King. And one that is in the Court at the time of the indictment or
arraignment of a prisoner, may as Amicus Curiae, inform the Court that there
is a defect in the indictment, to the benefit of the prisoner.

Trial by Battle.
THere is an ancient trial of the plea of Not guilty by the common law, much
used in former ages, which is trial by combat, viz. by Battle, which trial
the defendant in an Appeal of felony may choose, and combat with the
Appellant, for the trial if he be guilty or not of the felony whereof the
appellant has commenced his appeal against him. And if the Appellee has so
good success in that battle, that he does therein vanquish the appellant, he
shall bar him of his appeal for ever. And though this trial by battle is
not so much in use as it was in the reigns of king Edward the 3. king Richard
the 2. and king Henry the 4. yet is it at this day lawful, Trial by battle,
or by the country.
and not so much disused, but it may be put in practice in an appeal, if the
defendant will, and that there be no lawful counter-plea thereof: Or else the
defendant in an appeal may at his choice plead not guilty, and refer
himself to be tried by the country. This trial in an appeal by battle
shall be between the appellant and the appellee themselves, in their own
persons, and not by Champions (as it is in a writ of right.) And this trial by
battle is an ancient law of this realm, 37. H. 6. 3
and it is also put in practice and allowed by the civil law; which it is
thought the Romans learned and embraced, ever since that renowned combat that
was fought in the time of Tullus Hostilius third king of the Romans, and of
Metius Suffetius dictator of the Albans, Tit. Liu. l. 1
between the three brethren Horatij Romans, and the three brethren Curiatij
Albans, by the consent and in the presence of both the Captains and Armies,
for the perpetual government of both the kingdoms: wherein M. Horatius
vanquished, and slew in the field the three Curiatij, who presently before had
killed his other two brethren, and by that means obtained to the Romans the
perpetual government of the city and country of the Albans, and delivered
his own nation from continual servitude.

The form of trial by battle.
2 The order and form of trial by Battle is this: when the defendant in an
appeal has pleaded not guilty, ready to defend the same by his body, he
must cast his gauntlet into the court, and if the Pl will reioyne to the Battle,
he must take up the Gauntlet: Fit. Cor. 385
But if the Plaintiff will counterplead the Battle, then he must let the
Gauntlet lie: and then the Defendant may demurre in law thereupon, if he do let
his gauntlet lie. If it be in an appeal of death, and that the appellant and
the appellee do join in wager of Battle, the Appellant shall rehearse his
appeal word by word, as he did at the first, and the appellee shall likewise
make his defense, as he did at the first: and then the defendant shall wage the
battle in this manner, 17. E. 3. 2. 17. Ass. p. 1 9. H. 4. 4
viz. Thomas the appellee shall with his left hand take I. the appellant by the
right hand, and lay his own right hand upon a book, and say thus: Hear you
this, you man, which do call your self John by your name of Baptism, that I
man, which do call my self Thomas by name of Baptism, such a day, and such
an year, did not kill William your father by name, as you do surmise, neither
am I guilty of this felony, so help me God, and shall kiss the book: and
this I will defend against you by my body, as this Court will award. And after
I. the Appellant shall with his left hand take T. the appellee by the right
hand, and lay his own right hand upon the Book, and say in this manner: Hear
you this, you man, which by name of Baptism do call your self Thomas, that
you furiously such a day, and in such a year, did kill William by name, my
Father, so help me God, and shall kiss the Book: and this I will justify
against you by my body, as this Court will award. And the Court shall appoint
them a day to make their combat, and the appellee shall put in pledges to the
Court, to perform the battle, and to defend himself: and the plaintiff shall
put in pledges to deraigne the battle at the day assigned: And the Appellant
shall go at liberty, and the appellee shall be kept in prison at ease, and
have sufficient meat and drink. And the Marshall shall apparel the appellant
and the appellee both alike at their own costs, the night before the combat
shall be fought, to the end that they may be in the field the next morning,
ready to perform the combat, by the sun rising. And the appellees head
shall be polled, but not the appellants: and the Marshall shall bring them
attired into the field ready to perform the Battle. Which combat shall be
tried before the Justices, 19. H. 6. 15 Br. Battle 16 Bracton de cor. ca. 21
who shall cause Proclamation to be made when they be set, and the Appellant
and the Appellee be within the lists, ready to atchieue the combat, That none,
but the two combaters shall be so hardy to stir, or make any noise,
whatsoever he shall see, or hear, whereby the battle may be disturbed: And
whosoever shall do any thing contrary to the said Proclamation, Britton.
shall be imprisoned a year and a day. And they shall fight with weapons of
small length, being bare headed, and having their hands and feet bare, with
two staves of one length, horned at both ends. And either of the^ shall have a
Scutchian four cornerd, without any iron, for that one shall not hurt the
other with the iron. Bracton de coron. c. 21.
And if the appellee can defend himself until Stars may be seen in the
firmament, then he shall go quit from the appellant. And also when the
appellant and the appellee be in the field ready to join battle, or in the
Battle, it is a sufficient vanquishment if the appellant will confess his
appeal to be false: 21. H. 6. 34. Fi. Cor. 98
for by this acknowledgement, he shall be adjudged to be overcome in the field,
and barred of his appeal for ever. And on the other side, if the appellee do
confess himself in the field to be vanquished, Bracton de coron. c. 21.
he shall be presently hanged: As in an appeal the defendant pleaded not
guilty, and made his choice to try it by Battle, and as they were in the
combat, ye appellant cast ye appellee to the ground, and did grievously beat
him, 19. H. 6. 35.
and the Justices sent for the appellee, and when he was brought unto them,
they demanded of him, if he would any more of the battle, or not: who
answered, that he would not: and said further, that by the oath which he had
taken, he was not guilty of the felony whereof he was appealed: to whom the
Justices said, That if he would any more of the battle, he should be laid in
the same sort that he was when they sent for him: but he answered, that he
would no more of the battle, and therefore he was presently hanged.

The reason why the def. may be tried by battle in appeal.
3 The reason why in an appeal the Defendant shall be admitted to try his
cause by Battle is, for that no evident or probable matter does appear
against him to prove him guilty of the felony whereof he is appealed, but
only the bare accusation of the Appellant, which is no witness of credit in
his own cause. And therefore seeing the appellant does demand judgment of
death against the Appellee by an appeal, and has no other probable evidence
to attaint him, but his own accusation, it is more reason, that the appellant
shall adventure his life with the appellee for the trial thereof, if the
defendant do require it, than to put the trial thereof upon the country
(which for default of evidence may be ignorant of the truth thereof, and so
give a false verdit) and by that means to leave it to God (to whom the truth
of all things be known) to give the verdit in this cause, by attributing the
victory or vanquishment to which party it shall please him.

Counter-pleas to the battle.
4 If the appellant have any vehement presumption, or sufficient testimony, to
prove that his appeal is true, it will be a good counter-plea, and
sufficiently serve him to put the appellee from his trial by Battle: As, if
the Defendant were indicted of this Felony before the appeal commenced, 22. E.
4. 19. 20. E. 4. 6 14. E. 4. 7. 4. Ass. p. 1 Bracton de coron^ c. 18. Britton.
or was taken with the manoure, or was taken with a bloody knife, or other
weapon, over the body of him that was slain, or near unto him, whereby there
was vehement suspicion that he killed him, or that the defendant did lie alone
in the house with him that was killed, or that he and others did lie in the
house with him that was slain, and received no blows or wounds in his
defense, or that he made no Huy and Cry after the thieves or murderers to
apprehend them, or that he will not confess which of those that were in the
house with him, did kill the man that was slain, or committed the felony that
was done, or that he received the man that was slain into his house, which was
seen to go in alive, and after was found dead there, and no mean proved how
he came by his death.

Taken with the manoure.
5 If the Defendant be taken with the manoure (as in an appeal of death, with a
bloody knife, or other weapon) he shall be barred from waging of battle. And so
it shall be if he be taken with the manoure in an appeal of Robbery, 7. H. 4.
44 Fit. cor. 230 4. Ed. 3. 9
which manoure the plaintiff must bring into the Court at the time when the
Appellee does offer to join in battle, or otherwise he must plead that the
Appellee was taken with the manoure, which manoure he would have brought into
the Court, but that he was not able to bring it: or else he may say that the
manoure is in the possession of another, and pray the Court to write for it. To
which manoure when it comes into the Court, the defendant shall have no
trauerse, or other exception, if the thing brought into the Court for the
manoure, do not vary from those goods, or things which be contained in the
Appeal. 22. Ed. 4. 19
And in appeal of robbery, if the Appellee be apprehended upon fresh suit by
Huy and Cry, and some of the money robbed be taken in his custody, this is a
sufficient taking with the manoure to put him from waging of Battle, Fi. Cor.
375
though the money cannot be known from other money. And the reasons why in an
appeal of robbery, the defendant being taken with the manoure, shall not wage
battle against the appellant be, for that by the Appeal the plaintiff does
endeavor to attaint the Appellee of felony, and also to have his goods
again. And it may be, that if it should be tried by Battle, the Appellee
might vanquish the Appellant in combat (though the appellee be guilty of the
felony) and by that means also retain his goods stolen, without cause.
Taken with the manoure.
And the manoure was accounted so pregnant an evidence in former ages, that the
Justices would as readily arraigne a prisoner upon the manoure taken in his
possession, as upon an indictment.

6 It is also a good counter-plea to the battle, for the Appellant to say,
Breaking of prison.
that the defendant when he was taken or arrested for that felony whereof the
appeal is sued, Fi. Cor. 251 281 1. As. p. 6.
and therefore imprisoned, did break the prison, and escaped, or did what he
could to escape: for it is a very great presumption against him, that he is
guilty of the felony whereof he is appealed, in that he did break the
prison and fly, or would have fled for the felony: and that he did not rely
upon, and trust to his innocence, and be justified and tried by the law. And
the Appellee may reply to that counter-plea, and trauerse the arrest for
felony, or the breaking of the prison, if he will, or he may plead the Kings
pardon for the breaking of the prison: 1. As. p. 3 Fi. Cor. 154 157.
which trauerse or pardon being tried, or allowed, he shall be restored to his
trial by battle.

7 As there be impediments of the defendants part, Lets of trial by battle on
the plaintifes part.
why he may not wage battle against the appellant, so be there lets of the
appellants part, that the appellee cannot wage battle against him: for as
vehement presumptions of the defendants guiltiness be causes to put him from
waging of battle, so be vehement presumptions of the appellants infirmities,
or weakness, sufficient bars to exclude the appellee from trial by battle
with him. As, if the appellant be within the age of fourteen years, or above
the age of threescore and ten years, Fi. Cor. 230 268. 22. E. 4. 20
or within orders, or a woman, or be maihemed; whether he were maihemed by the
appellee at the time that the said appellee robbed him, or at any other time;
or (as some do affirm) whether he was maihemed by the appellee, or by any
other. And some do hold it for Law, that if the appellant be above the age
of threescore years, the appellee shall no more wage battle against him, than
against an infant within age, or a woman. But if the appellee will wage battle
being of that age, he may, for though he may discharge himself of battle, in
respect of his said age, if he will, Bracton.
yet in that the Law has given him his choice, whether he will be tried by
battle, or by the Country, he may refuse the benefit of his age, and wage
battle.

Privilege of the Appella^ts person.
8 In some cases the privilege of the person of the appellant shall put the
appellee from the trial by battle with him: as the person of the King, when
the defendant is arraigned at his suit in an appeal; for in an arraignment
upon an Indictment at his suit, The King.
the party indicted shall not wage battle, for the vehement presumption that
the Indictment is true, being found by the oaths of twelve lawful men of the
Country. Plo. com. 335.
And as the person of the King shall be exempt from battle, so shall all
other, to whom the King shall please to grant such an exemption: As in former
ages such a grant has been made by some King of this Realm, to the Citizens
of London, that battle shall not be waged against any of them in any appeal
whatsoever, brought by any of them. Fi. Cor. 125 157.
And if a citizen of London Citizens of London.
will bring an appeal against another, and the defendant will offer to wage
battle with him, though the Appellant would refuse the benefit of this
privilege, and join battle with him, yet the battle shall not be performed;
for the Mayor and Comminaltie of London must sue a writ out of the Chauncerie,
directed to the Judges, where that trial should be made, rehearsing their
liberty, and pray allowance thereof, to stay the trial by battle, And though
in the foresaid case (and other cases, Fi. Cor. 125
where counter-pleas to battle be pleaded) the plaintiff does count, that if
the defendant will deny it, he is ready to prove it by his body, yet the
defendant in his plea cannot take advantage thereof, for those be but words of
form, and not of substance: and notwithstanding this conclusion, he may make
his trial by the country, or otherwise as the law will.

9 By the Statute of an^ 6. R. 2. St. 6. R. 2. 6.
it was enacted, That if any Noble man's daughters, Ladies, or other women be
ravished, and after the same rape committed, do consent to the Rauishers, the
husbands of such women (if they have husbands) or if they have no husbands
living, then their fathers, or other their next kinsmen in blood, shall have
the suit to prosecute, and may pursue against the same offenders and rauishers
in this behalf, and to convict them of felony, No wager of battle in appeal
of Rape.
though the same woman after the rape do consent to the rauishers. And in this
case the defendant shall not wage battle, but the truth of the matter shall be
tried by the country. S. Felonies by Stat. 2.

One fighting with several men.
10 If one man do appeal diverse men of one felony, 47. E 3 5. 19. H. 6. 35
and they all join in battle with the Appellant, he must fight with them all,
one after another, if it do not so chance that he is slain by one of them,
before he can perform the battle with the residue: which if it happen, all
the residue of the defendants shall be discharged of the appeal. But if when
the Appellant does come into the field to fight with one of the Appellees, Fi.
Cor. 98
he will then confess his appeal to be false toward him, yet that shall not
discharge the residue of the appeal, but they shall proceed in their trial
with the appellant. And likewise if one man be appealed by three men of
several felonies, and he do plead not guilty, ready to try it by his body,
in this case he must fight with them all, one after another, and though he do
vanquish or kill one of them, this will not discharge him against the other.
Bracton de cor. ca. 19
But if three men do appeal one man but of one felony, then if the Appellee
do vanquish one of them, he shall be discharged against the other two. And in
that case if the said three Appellants be Approuers, 7. Ed. 3. 12
then the other two shall be hanged.

11 And all that is before written touching Trial by Battle, may be applied,
as well to the appeal of an approuer, An Appeal by approuer.
who confesses himself to be a felon, as to an appeal commenced by a true
man.

Fi. Droit. 57
12 If a man be appealed of felony, The Appellee wageth battle, and then
becomes blind.
and wageth battle with the appellant, and after he does become blind by
infirmity, and not by his own procurement, he shall be discharged of the
battle: and so it is in a writ of Right:) for in this case the appellee has
pleaded such a plea as the Law does allow him: and his disabilitie to
perform it comes by the act of God. But if after the Defendant has waged
battle with the appellant, the same appellant shall become blind, by what
means soever, the appellee shall be arraigned at the Kings suite. S. Appeals.
96.

Trial by Peers.
WHen the Defendant has pleaded Not guilty to an appeal, or an indictment,
then the matter comes to be tried between the King and him, or the appellant
and him, whether he be guilty, Trial of the plea Not guilty.
or not. If it be in an appeal, it may be tried by Verdict, or by Battle, as
the appellee will, saving in certain Cases: But upon an Indictment there is no
trial by battle, nor otherwise, saving only by verdict. In an Indictment of
treason or felony against one of the Peers of the Realm, the trial is by
his Peers, which manner of trial in an appeal is not allowable.

The arraignment of a Peer of the Realm.
2 When a Peer of the Realm, 1. H. 4. 1. 13. H. 8. 13. 10, Ed. 4. 6.
and Lord of the parliament is to be arraigned upon any treason, or felony
whereof he is indicted, and whereunto he has pleaded Not guilty, the King by
his Letters patents shall assign some great and sage Lord of the parliament to
be high Steward of England for the day of his arraignement: who before the same
day shall make a precept to his Serieant at Arms, that is appointed to serve
him during the time of his Commission, to warn to appear before him eighteen
or twenty Lords of the parliament upon the same day. And then at the day
appointed, when the high Steward shall be set under the cloth of Estate, upon
the arraignement of the prisoner, and has caused his Commission to be read,
the same Serieant shall return his precept, and thereupon the Lords shall be
called, and when they have appeared, and be set in their places, the Constable
of the Tower shall be called to bring his prisoner into the Court, who then
shall bring the prisoner to the Bar. And then the high Steward shall declare
unto the prisoner, the cause why the King has assembled thither those Lords
and him, and persuade him to answer without fear. And then he shall cause the
Clerk of the Crown to read his Indictment unto him, and to ask him if he
be guilty, or not; whereunto when he has answered Not guilty, the Clerk
of the Crown shall ask him how he will be tried, and then he will say, by God
and by his Peers. And then the K. Serieants and Attorney will give Evidence
against him, whereunto when the prisoner has made answer, the Constable shall
be commanded to retire the prisoner from the Bar to some other place, while
the Lords do secretly confer together in the Court: and then the Lords shall
rise out of their places, and consult among themselves, and what they affirm,
shall be done upon their honors, without any oath to be ministered unto them.
And when they all, or the greatest part of them be agreed, they shall return
to their places, and sit down. And then the high Steward shall ask of the
youngest Lord by himself, if he that is arraigned be guilty, or not, of the
offense whereof he is arraigned; and then of the youngest next him, and so of
the residue, one by one, until he has asked them all: and every Lord shall
answer by himself. And then the high Steward shall send for the prisoner
again, who shall be led to the Bar; to whom the high Steward shall rehearse
the verdict of the Peers, and give judgment accordingly. But if an Earl the
son and heir apparent of a Duke, or a Lord the son and heir apparent of a
Marquis, or Earl, 38. H. 8. Br. Treason 2
be indicted of high treason, he shall be tried by Knights and Gentlemen, and
not by Peers: for he is not an Earl by Creation, but by Nativity. But if he
be of dignity by creation, and a Lord of the Parliament, he shall be tried by
his Peers.

3 The foresaid manner of Trial seems to be appointed by the Statute of
Magna Charta, St. 9. H. 3. 29.
which has ordained, That no free man shall be taken, or imprisoned or
disseised of his freehold, liberties, or free customs, nor shall be outlawed,
banished, or by any means brought to destruction: Neither we will pass or
sit in judgment upon him, but by the lawful judgment of his Peers, or by
the law of the Realm: We will not sell, deny, or defer justice or right to
any. It appears by this statute of Magna Charta, By whom Peers appealed shall
be tried.
that a Peer of the Realm shall be tried by his Peers only, in case where
he is indicted at the Kings suite of treason, or felony, for the words of the
statute be (we will not pass or sit in judgment upon him but by his Peers:
10. Ed. 4. 6
) But if an appeal of murder or other felony be sued by any common person
against a Peer of the Realm, he shall be tried by common persons, and not by
his Peers. And because there was no mention made in the said statute of Magna
Charta, how women, Ladies of great estate, because of their husbands Peers of
the Realm, married, or sole, viz. Duchesses, Countesses, or Baronesses, should
be put to answer, nor before what Judges they should be judged upon indictments
of treasons or felonies by them committed: and for that the said statute of
Magna Charta does only make mention of a man: Therefore by a statute made Anno
20. H. 6. 9. St. 20. H. 6. 9
it was enacted, By whom ladies shall be tried.
That such Ladies of great estate, viz. Duchesses, Countesses, and Baronesses,
which shall be indicted of any treason, or felony by them committed, whether
they be married, or sole, shall be brought to their answer, and put to answer,
and judged before such Judges and Peers of the realm, as Peers of the realm
should be, if they were indicted or impeached of such treasons or felonies
committed.

4 None of the foresaid statutes have been put in practice to extend to
Bishops, Bishops
though they enjoy the name of Lords of the parliament, for they have that name
of Bishops in respect of their office, or function, and not in respect of their
nobility; neither have they places in parliament in respect of their
nobility, but in regard of their possessions, being ancient Baronies annexed
to their dignities. If a Peer of the Realm be indicted of treason, or
felony, he may be thereupon arraigned in parliament, Arraignment in parliament.
if it shall please the King: 10. E. 4. 6
and then the Lords spiritual shall make one Procurator for them, for that by
the Cannon law they cannot condemn any man to death. A Bishop was arraigned
in the Kings Bench, (and not by any Lords of parliament) for that he came to
the parliament by summons, and departed without license: 3. E. 3. 19
and because this was an offense, as well to the King, as to the Peers; and
the King may comemnce a suite where he please for a trespass done to him,
therefore this was accepted a lawful indictment, though the complaint was made
in an inferior Court, for an offense done in an higher.

Trial of treason committed in Ireland.
5 If an Earl, 19. and 20. El. Die. fo. 360
or a Lord of Ireland does commit treason in Ireland by open rebellion, he
cannot be arraigned and put to his trial therefore in England: for he can
neither be tried by his Peers, nor by any Jury of twelve men in England,
because he is not a subject of England, but of Ireland; and therefore his
trial shall be in Ireland. And the custom there is to attaint a Peer by
parliament, and not by his Peers.

Misprision.
6 This order of trial by the Peers is likewise to be observed, where one of
the Peers of this realm is indicted but of misprision of treason or felony:
in which trial the same form shall be kept, as it shall be, where any Peer
is indicted of treason or felony, and arraigned thereupon. And the number of
Peers which shall be to try a Peer indicted of treason, The number of Peers
at the Trial.
felony, or misprision, shall be twelve at the least, and more if it shall
please the King.

Trial by Peers in all cases of treason and felony
7 In every case where any offense or fact is of new made treason by any
Statute, the Lords of the Parliament, and Peers of the Realm offending
therein, shall have their trial by their Peers, though the Statute does not
provide for it by special words: as other inferior persons offending in the
like crimes, shall have their trial by the verdict of twelve men, their peers,
viz. their equals; so that the words which be commonly put into new Statutes,
that Peers of the Realm offending therein, shall be tried by their Peers, be
not of necessity inserted. But because the course of the common law is in some
sort altered by the statute of an^ 33. H. 8. 23. St. 33. H. 8 23.
authorizing the King to grant a commission unto such persons, and into such
shires as he will, for the trial of any murder committed in any other county
or place of the Realm whatsoever: And also by the Statute of 35. H. 8. 2. St.
35. H. 8. 2
giving the King like power to direct a commission into any county of this
Realm, and to any persons that he will, for the trial of treasons, and
misprisions of treasons, committed out of the Realm: yet for that the trial
in both those cases might be made by such persons, as the common law has
appointed, viz. of peers by their peers, it is so provided and ordained by
the special words of both those statutes.

Trial by the Country.
Trial by the Country, Trial by the Country.
is a trial by twelve common persons of that vicenage or neighborhoode, where
the treason or felony was committed: which kind of trial seems also to be
warranted and approved (though not at the first begun) by the before
rehearsed Statute of Magna Charta, St. 9. H. 3. 29
which says: Neither shall any pass or sit in judgment upon him, but by the
lawful judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the realm. And thereupon it
is accordingly used, that Knights, Esquiers, and Gentlemen of great estate
being indicted of treason or felony, be tried by their peers, viz. by their
equals in degree, being also Knights, Esquiers, Gentlemen, or Merchants of
good estate: 1. M. Die. 99
and inferior persons be likewise tried by their peers or equals, viz. by
men of their own degree, or (most commonly) by men of better or greater estate
or degree.

2 If he that is charged to be an offendour in petit treason, murder, or
felony, do plead to an Indictment found against him matter triable by an
other County, than the County which did indict him, although by the common
law he ought to have been tried in that foreign county; yet now by the
Statute of Anno 22. H. 8. St. 22. H. 8. 14. 32. H. 8. 3
he shall be tried by the county which did indict him; the words of which
Statute be these, viz. For more speedy trialles of murders and felonies, Be it
enacted, etc. That all manner of foreign pleas, Trial of foreign pleas.
triable by the Country, hereafter to be pleaded by any person or persons
arraigned upon any Indictment for any petit treason, murder, or felony, shall be
forthwith tried before the same Justices, before whom such persons shall be
arraigned, and by the same Jurors of the same county, that shall try the
petit treason, murder, or felony, whereof he shall so be arraigned, without
any further respite or delay in whatsoever county, or counties, place or
places of this Realm, the matter of the same pleas be supposed or alleged.
This statute makes no mention of high treason, and therefore foreign pleas in
high treason remain to be tried in those foreign counties, as they were at the
common law; And so be they in an appeal: Appeal.
for this statute extends to Indictments only. But if A. do strike B. upon
the Sea, and there give him a mortal wound, whereof B. dies in the County of
L. in this case A. Coke 2.93
shall be discharged of the death of B. for they of the County of L. cannot
inquire of the death without inquiry of the wound, A man stricken upon the Sea
dies upon the Land.
and of the wound they cannot inquire, because it was given upon the Sea, and
not in any County or place in this Realm. And they of the Admiralles
Jurisdiction can not inquire as of a felony of the wound, without inquiring of
the death, and of the death they can not inquire, because it was within the
body of a County, where by the statute of 13. R. 2. and 15. R. 2. St. 13. R.
2. 5 St. 15. R. 2. 3.
they are forbidden to meddle.

3 The process which shall be awarded against the Jury The Process against the
Jury.
to try an issue in an appeal, is commonly a Venire facias, Habeas corpora,
and Distringas, as it is used in other actions, saving in the Kings Bench, 27.
H. 6. 10
for by the custom of that Court, the first process against the Jury, is an
Habeas corpora, and after a Distress, without suing a Venire facias. And some
say, that in the K. Bench they use to have no Habeas corpora at the first day,
but a Venire facias, and then a Distress, leaving out the Habeas corpora. The
process which is to be awarded against the Jury, Process in an Appeal, not
in an In-
is for the most part intended in an appeal: for in an Indictment though they
may grant process against the Jury, yet it is not used by the Justices of
Jail delivery, Fit. Enquest 55
because they do take the pannell, which is returned by the Shirife, without
making any precept unto him, for that they give a general commandment to the
Shirife before their coming, to cause the Country to appear before them. But
so do not Justices of Oyer and Terminer.

Nisi prius for the defendant in appeal.
4 Although by the common Law a Nisi prius is grantable for the king, but not
grantable against the king, where he is party to the suite, or where the
matter in question does touch the kings right, or where he is party thereunto
(but by aid prayer,) unless his Attorney will assent thereunto: yet in an
appeal of felony, when the appellant and appellee be at issue, the Defendant
may have a Nisi prius to pursue the same issue, 21. H. 7. 34
if there be any default in the Plaintiff, that he does not pursue it with
effect, though the K. be in a sort party to that suite: for otherwise the
appellee should continually remain in prison to his utter undoing, and never
have remedy. Neither the Defendant in an appeal shall not have a Venire facias
with a prouiso, 14. H. 7. 7. 15 H. 7. 9 21. H. 6. 36
until he has assigned some default in the Plaintiff in the pursuit of it.
And yet the Plaintiff may at his pleasure stay the Defendant in proceeding
further with his process, in praying a Tales upon the Defendants process.

Remaunding of prisoners out of the K. Bench to be tried in the Country
5 Because diverse felons and murderers upon untrue surmises did oftentimes
remove as well their bodies, as their Indictments, by Writ, and otherwise,
before the King in his Bench, and could not by the order of the Law be
remaunded, and sent down to the Justices of Jail delivery, or of the peace,
nor other Justices or Commissioners to proceed upon them, after the due course
of the common law (for that a Record which is once removed into an higher
Court, can not by the common Law be sent back to a more base and inferior
Court:) For the redress whereof by a statute made An^ 6. H. 8. it was
ordained, St. 6. H. 8. 6
That the Justices of the K. Bench (for the time being) have authority by
their discretions, to remaund and send down as well the bodies of all felons,
and murderers, brought and removed, or that shall be removed or brought before
the king in his Bench, as their indictments, into the counties whereas the same
murders or felonies have been committed or done, and to command all Justices
of Jail delivery, Justices of Peace, and other Justices and Commissioners, and
every of them, to proceed and determine upon all the foresaid bodies and
indictments so removed, after the course of the common law, in such manner as
the same Justices of jail delivery, Justices of peace, and other
Commissioners, or any of them, might or should have done, if the said prisoners
or indictme^ts had never bin brought into the said K. bench.

St. 4. Iac. 1.
6 By a stat. made Anno 4. Iac. it was enacted, Trial of felonies committed by
English men in Scotland.
That all offenses of coniurations, witchcraft, and dealing with evil and
wicked spirits, murder, manslaughter, felonious burning of houses and corn,
burglary, robbing of houses by day, robbery, theft, the detestable vice of
buggerie committed with mankind, or beast, and rape, heretofore done and
committed since his Majesty's coming to the crown of England, or hereafter to
be done or committed by any his Majesty's natural borne subjects of this
realm of England, or the dominions of the same, within the realm of Scotland,
or the dominions thereof, and the accessories of, and to the same, shall be from
henceforth inquired of, heard, and determined before his Majesty's Just. of
Assise, or his Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, or Jail delivery, being
natural borne subjects within this realm of England, and none other, by good
and lawful men of the Counties of Cumberland, Northumberland, Westmerland, or
any of the said counties, at the election of the said Just. of Assizes, or
Commissioners, in like manner and form to all intents and purposes (the
alterations hereafter in this Act expressed, only excepted) as if such offenses
had been done and committed within the same Shire where they shall be so
inquired of, heard, and determined, as is aforesaid. At which trials, for the
better discovery of the truth, Witnesses allowed to him that is arraigned.
and for the better information of the consciences of the Jury and Justices,
there shall be allowed unto the party so arraigned, the benefit of such
witnesses only to be examined upon oath, that can be produced, for his better
clearing and justification, as hereafter in this Act are permitted and allowed.

St. 4. Iac. 1.
7 Every Justice of peace of the counties aforesaid, The prosecutors and
witnesses bound to give evidence.
unto whom complaint shall be made, shall have full power and authority by
virtue of this Act, to bind over by recognisance in a convenient sum taken to
his Majesty's use, as well the party prosecuting, as any witnesses which he
shall desire to produce (so as the said witnesses may have their reasonable
charges first tendered unto them) to prosecute and give in evidence before such
his Majesty's Justices as aforesaid, as the case shall require.

St. 4. Iac. 1.
8 Every commander, procurer, counselor, abettor, comforter, receiver, The
accessory tried, though the principal be not.
or other accessorie of, or to any the offenders or offenses aforesaid, so
committed in Scotland, as aforesaid, offending within the realms of England or
Scotland, shall be produced, withal indicted, tried, judged, and executed
without delay, notwithstanding the principals, or any of them be not convicted
or attainted. And that no such offender either accessorie or principal shall
be allowed the benefit of his clergy, No clergy. No peremptory challenge
above v. The words of the Indictment.
nor admitted to his peremptory challenge of above the number of five. And that
every indictment of any of the offenses aforesaid, so committed as aforesaid,
shall be adjudged of as good force in law, notwithstanding the words (contra
pacem, coronam, and dignitatem nostras) be omitted, as if the said words had
been therein contained.

Every Iuror must have v. l. of freehold.
9 No Sheriff, Vndersherife, or other Minister, to whom it appertains, St. 4.
Iac. 1.
shall return any Iuror to enquire of, or try any of the offenses aforesaid,
so committed as aforesaid, except every such Iuror shall have freehold in
possession, to the value of v. l. by the year in the county where such
inquiry and trial shall be, upon pain to forf. for every Iuror that shall be
returned contrary to this Act, the sum of xl. l. to the K. and I. to be
recovered by A. of debt, B. P. or I. in any of the K. courts at West. wherein
no E.P. or W. etc. And the offender shall or may challenge any Iuror that shall
pass upon his life, for want of such freehold, as aforesaid.

The offender shall forf. no lands.
10 No natural subject of his Majesty, of the realm of England, St. 4. Iac. 1.
or of the dominions of the same, shall for any the offenses aforesaid,
committed within the realm of Scotland, or for being accessory to the same,
forfeit any lands, tenements, or hereditaments, either free, copy, or
customary hold, neither shall the blood of such offender be corrupted, nor the
wife lose her dower, yet nevertheless the said offenders shall forf. to his
Ma. his heirs, and successors, their goods, chattels, and credits whatsoever.

A like Act made in Scotland.
11 And forasmuch as it is intended, St. 4. Iac. 1.
that an Act like unto this shall be ordained in the realm of Scotland, for the
trial and punishment of offenders, being his Ma. natural born subjects of the
same realm, which shall commit any of the offenses aforesaid within the realm
of England, or the dominions thereof, and shall after escape, or return back
into Scotland: therefore be it enacted, that upon complaint made by any of his
Ma. subjects of the realm of England to any of the Just. of Assise,
Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, or jail delivery, or Just. of the peace
within the precincts of their several commissions respectively, being natural
borne subjects within the realm of England, concerning any such offenses
committed by any his subjects of the realm of Scotland, within the realm of
England, in case where the offender is returned into the realm of Scotland, as
aforesaid, the said Just. or commissioner, shall have full power and authority,
Binding the complainant or witnesses to give evidence in Scotland.
to bind over as well the said party complaining, or prosecuting, as any
witnesses that he shall desire to produce (so as their reasonable charges be
first tendered unto them) by recognisance in a convenient sum to his Majesty's
use, to prosecute and give in evidence within the realm of Scotland: wherein
if default shall be made, and the same proved by certificat, or otherwise, before
the Lord Treasorer, Chauncellor, and Barons of the Exchequer, or any of them in
the Exchequer chamber, and a decree there made, that the same recognisance
shall stand forfeited: then the court of Exchequer shall thereupon proceed for
the leuying of the debt of the said recognisance, as if it were adjudged
forfeited by the course of the common law.

St. 4. Iac. 1.
12 On the other part, Scottish men repairing into England to give evidence,
shall be free from arresting.
every of his Majesty's subjects of the realm of Scotland, either party
grieved, or witness, which shall prosecute in any the cases aforesaid, within
the realm of England, and thereby shall have occasion to make his repair
hither, either voluntary, or by the like bond (as is before expressed on the
part of the realm of England) shall have and enjoy privilege and immunitie
from all manner of arrests, concerning all offenses, or other causes, as well
capital as others, committed, done, or occasioned, before he shall come into
England as aforesaid (except treason or wilful murder) so long as he or they
shall be necessarily going, coming, or abiding within the said realm of
England, for the prosecution of the said offenders.

St. 4. Iac. 1.
13 Provided nevertheless, The offense shall be laid where it is done.
that every such offense so committed as aforesaid, shall be laid and alleged in
the indictment or other declaration, to be done and committed in the realm of
Scotland, according to the truth of the fact, and not in the counties where the
trial is limited, to be had and made as aforesaid: any thing in this Act
formerly contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

St. 4. Iac. 1.
14 Provided, He that is once tried, shall not be eftsoons called into question.
that if any of his Majesty's subjects of the realm of Scotland, shall be
proceeded with, and tried in the Realm of Scotland, upon the prosecution of
any party grieved, and upon evidence in open court, for any offense done or
committed within the Realm of England, that no such person shall be eftsoons
called into question, or proceeded with for the same fact within the realm of
England, but that it shall be lawful for every such persons, to plead and
allege for himself, upon his arraignment, that he was formerly lawfully
acquitted, convicted or attainted of the same offense within the realm of
Scotland, and that thereupon all further proceeding shall stay, until the Court
have sufficiently informed themselves by certificat from the realm of
Scotland, or by any other good ways, and means of the truth of the said
allegations, which if they shall find true, the said person shall be forthwith
discharged of all further impeachment or proceeding.

St. 4. Iac. 1.
15 No natural borne subject of the Realm of England, None shall be sent out of
England to receive his trial.
or the Dominions of the same, shall for any High Treason, Misprision, or
concealment of High treason, Petit treason, or any other whatsoever offense or
cause committed within Scotland, be sent out of England, where he is
apprehended, to receive his trial, until such time as both Realms shall be
made one in laws and government.

St. 4. Iac. 1.
16 At all such trials the Jurors then and there sworn, The Jurors shall allow
of, or reject the witnesses.
or the greater part of them (who in respect of the great trust and charge
which must now be laid upon them, are by virtue of this Act, as before
appears, to be persons of better conditions and quality, than the law
required heretofore for Jurors in trial of like offenses) shall have in their
power and election according to their consciences and discretion upon their
oaths, to receive and admit only such sufficient, good, and lawful witnesses
upon their oaths, either for, or against the party arraigned, as shall not
appear to them, or the greater part of them, to be unfit and unworthy to be
witnesses in that case, either in regard of their hatred and malice, or their
favor and affection, either to the party prosecuting, or to the party
arraigned, or of their former evil life and conversation.

Trial by Peers.
17 Provided, that if the offender in any the cases aforesaid, St. 4. Iac. 1.
shall be a Peer of the Realm, then his trial therein shall be by his Peers,
as is used in case of Felony or Treason, and not otherwise.

1 Trial of him which wounds a man in one county, whereof he dies in
another. S. Principal etc. 16.

2 Trial of a felony committed in one county, and accessorie thereunto in
another. S. Principal etc. 17. 18.

3 Trial of Treason, Misprision of Treason, and Murders, where the King will.
S. Indictments 10.

4 Indictments and trials of Treasons committed out of the Realm. S.
Indictments 11.

Challenge.
1 WHen the prisoner standing at the bar has pleaded not guilty, and that
the same issue is to be tried between the King and him, or the appellant and
him, the law does allow him to challenge, viz. calumniari, to take exception
unto, or to desire to have removed, or put out of his Jury certain persons:
And he may therein have more favor than either of the parties to a suit shall
have in other trials between party and party: For being arraigned of
felony, he may have a peremptory challenge Peremptory Challenge.
in favor of life, which is to say, challenge without showing cause. And
though he can show no cause to challenge him that he does challenge, yet if his
fantasy or affection does not stand unto him, by this peremptory challenge
he may cause him to be removed and put from the Jury. And by the common law
this peremptory challenge was permitted to the number of 35. persons, viz. to
so many as would make up full three Iuries (saving one man) But sithence by a
Statute made Anno 22. H. 8. St. 22. H. 8. 14. Anno 32. H. 8. 3.
it is enacted, That no person arraigned for any petit Treason, Murder, or
Felony, shall be from henceforth admitted to any peremptory challenge above
the number of twenty. And so by this statute, the number is abridged in three
special cases, viz. in Petit treason, Murder, and Felony: And so for High
treason peremptory challenge did remain as it was at the common law, until
it was wholly taken away by the Statute of Anno 33. H. 8. St. 33. H. 8. 23.
which did ordain, That peremptory challenge should not thenceforth be
admitted or allowed in cases of High treason, or Misprision of treason: And yet
after that, challenge was again revived in cases of High treason, by a statute
made Anno 1. and 2. P. and M. St. 1. and 2. P. and M. 10.
whereby it was enacted, That all trials hereafter to be had, awarded, or made
for any Treason, shall be had and used only, according to the due order and
course of the common Laws of this Realm, and not otherwise. And then if all
trials in Treasons shall be according to the common Law, peremptory challenge
shall be allowed upon trial, according to the course of the common law, as well
in Petit treason, as in High treason. A man being arraigned of High treason,
32. H. 6. 20 14. H. 7. 19
and pleading not guilty, certain of the Jurors were sworn and tried, the
residue being drawn forth by challenge, and the Enquest remaining for default
of Jurors, at another day the defendant did peremptorily challenge some of
those that were first sworn, and the challenge was allowed in favor of life.
2. R. 3. 13.
And in an Appeal of Robbery the defendant challenged a Iuror for a cause
which was tried against him, and then the Jury remained for default of Jurors,
and at another day he challenged the same Iuror peremptorily, and he was
allowed so to do. This peremptory challenge is not to be taken, but where the
life of the prisoner is in ieopardie by the trial. And therefore if a man be
outlawed of treason or felony, and brought to the bar, and there does plead
misnaming, or some other plea in auoidance of the said outlawrie: in that case
he shall not have his peremptory challenge, for that neither treason nor
felony is to be tried by this issue, because they were at an end before by the
outlawrie. Seuerance in challenge.
If two, three, four, or more persons, be indicted or appealed, and arraigned
of one offense, 9. Ed. 4. 27. Pl. Com. 100.
and one enquest is charged to try them al, if one of those persons arraigned
do challenge peremptorily any of those Jurors, he shall be drawn, and put out
for them all, though one or some other do desire that he may be sworn: for
though they be all arraigned together, yet in the judgment of law it is
several arraignments, for that their offenses be several, and not one, though
they be indicted of one offense, and so every of the prisoners shall have his
challenge, so that he do not challenge peremptorily above the number of twenty
persons. But if the Court will, it may divide the panell, and also the Tales,
and make them several for every of the prisoners, and then every prisoners
challenge shall be by it self, and avail himself only that makes it.

2 Besides the foresaid peremptory challenge, which is grounded upon opinion
or fantasy, without cause, there is another kind of challenge, which is
called Challenge upon cause, Challenge upon cause.
and is not allowable but upon reasonable and good cause, ordained by the
common laws or statutes of this Realm: Whereof one challenge which was at the
common law, and is also confirmed by statute, is a challenge of the indictors:
for as Britton Britton.
says, when the defendant does submit himself to be tried by the country,
and the Jurors do appear at the bar, they may be challenged, and the
prisoner may say, 27. As. p. 13.
This man ought not to be of my Jury, for he did indict me, and I do presume
of him, and of all my indictors, Indictor.
that they do carry the same affection toward me now, which they did when
they indicted me: and this exception is to be allowed in case of death. And the
same law is confirmed, and in a sort augmented by the statute de proditionibus,
made Anno 25. Ed. 3. St. 25. E. 3. 3
by the which it was accorded, That no indictor shall be put in Enquests upon
the deliverance of the indictees, of Trespass, or of Felonies, if he be
challenged for that cause by him that is indicted. And as it may appear, this
Statute is but a confirmation of the common law in this point, and so to be
taken favorably, 8. H. 4. 3. 7. E. 4 4
and by that means it may be extended as well to Treasons as to Felonies. And
also it may be construed, as well where the prisoner is indicted and arraigned
upon an Appeal, as where he is indicted and arraigned upon the indictment,
though the same be not contained within the express words of the said statute.

Challenge for want of medietate^ linguae.
3 There is another challenge upon cause, which is to the Array, and that is,
when an Alien is arraigned of Felony, and pleads to an Issue, and the
Enquest is returned all of English men, this is a cause of challenge, by force
of the Statute of Anno 28. Edw. 3. St. 28. E. 3. 13
which did ordain, That in all manner of Enquests and proofs which be to be
taken or made amongst aliens and Denizens, be they Merchants, or others, as
well before the Mayor of the Staple, as before any other Justices or Ministers,
although the king be party, the one half of the Enquest or proof shall be by
Denizens, and the other half of Aliens, if so many Aliens be in the Town or
place where such Enquest or proof is to be taken, that be not parties, nor
with the parties in contracts, pleas, or other quarrels, whereof such enquests
or proofs ought to be taken. And if there be not so many aliens, then shall
there be put in such enquests or proofs as many aliens as shall be found in
the said Towns or places, which be not thereto parties, as before is said, and
the remnant of denizens, which be good men, and not suspicious to the one
party, or to the other. At the common Law, before this statute, and the statute
of 27. Ed. 3. St. 27. E. 3. 8
this Trial per medietatem linguae might have been obtained by the Kings
grant: as, if the King had granted to a company of aliens, M. 22. Ed. 3. 14
viz. of Almaines, Frenchmen, etc. that when any of them was impleaded, the one
half of the Enquest should have been of their own language: and after, to
make that a general Law, the statute of 27. Edw. 3. was made. But seeing that
statute did not remedy the mischief, where the King was party, the before
rehearsed statute of 28. Edw. 3. was provided, which makes mention generally
of aliens: therefore it is not material of what Nation those aliens are, which
shall be of the Enquest, so that they be aliens, though they be of another
Nation then the party to the suit is. And because this Statute was ordained for
the benefit of aliens, and of none but of aliens, and for that there were in
this Realm of long time assembled some strangers together, with many English
vagrant Rogues and Vagabonds, calling themselves Egyptians, which by their
counterfeit speeches, apparel, and behavior, could hardly be discerned one
from the other: Therefore by a Statute made Anno 22. H. 8. St. 22. H. 8. 10.
it is enacted, That if it happen any outlandish person, calling himself an
Egyptian, Egyptians
or any such stranger, to commit within this Realm any Murder, Robbery, or
Felony, and thereof to be indicted and arraigned, and to plead not guilty, or
any other plea triable by the Country, then the Enquest that shall pass
between the King and such party, shall be altogether Englishmen. And by
another Statute made Anno 1. and 2. Ph. and Ma. St. 1. and 2. P. and M. 4.
it was ordained, That if any of the said persons, called Egyptians, which
shall be transported or conveyed into this Realm of England, or Wales, do
continue within the same by the space of one month, that then he or they so
offending, shall by virtue of this act be adjudged a Felon and Felons, and
shall suffer death, loss of lands and goods, as in cases of Felony, and shall
upon the trial of him or any of them be tried by the County, and the
inhabitants of the County or place where he or they shall be apprehended or
taken, and not per medietatem linguae, and shall loose the benefit of Clergy
and Sanctuary. And whereas the words of the foresaid Statute of 28. Edw. 3. be,
That in all manner of Enquests and proofs which are to be taken etc. those
words are not to be construed of an Indictment, for that may be taken all of
Denizens, though it do concern an Alien: But the Statute is to be intended of
such Enquests, where the party is admitted to his challenge, and so he is not
upon an Indictment: for the party which is an alien may upon his arraignement
have the said challenge in the array, 21. H. 7. 32.
to show that in the panel there is not medietas linguae, according to the
statute, for he has none other remedy being defendant. But if he were
plaintiff it should be otherwise: for then before the Venire facias awarded,
he must suggest, that he is an Alien, and pray Process to summon the Jury De
medietate linguae, according to the Statute: and further, he must surmise in
what parts beyond the seas he was borne, Lib. Int.
to the intent that men of the same country may be of his Enquest, if they
may be had: and if they will not signify that before the Venire facias
awarded, he shall not suggest it after: neither shall he challenge the Array,
or Polles for that cause, seeing it was his folly, M. 22. E. 3. 20.
that he took not the benefit of the Statute in due time, and specially when
he knew himself to be an Alien. And whereas the words of the foresaid
Statute of 28. Edw. 3. be (That are not parties, nor with the parties in
contracts, pleas, or other quarrels, whereof such Enquests or proofs ought to
be taken) By these words it does appear, that the makers of this Statute
would, that the parties should have their Challenges to the Polles in those
said cases. And therefore, though they have not expressed but certain cases,
which induce hatred, or malice, yet by the mentioning of them, it seems, that
they intended to allow all Challenges, which do induce favor, or otherwise.
And the foresaid Statutes of 27. Edw. 3. and 28. Edw. 3. do only extend,
where there is but one only of the parties to the suit an alien: for if they
be both aliens, the Enquest shall be all of Englishmen, and not de medietate
linguae, unless the plea be depending before the Mayor of the Staple, 21. H.
6. 4.
and both the parties be Merchants of the Staple, or officers of the Staple, in
which case then by the Statute of 27. Edw. 3. 8. the Enquest shall be all of
aliens. If an alien be indicted of high Treason, Treason.
P. 3. and 4. P. M. ^^ y. f. 144 St. 1. and 2. P. and M. ^0. Dyerf. 304,
he shall not have his trial per medietatem linguae, but the trial shall be
according to the due order and course of the common Laws of this Realm. And
if a Scot be indicted of Felony, he shall not have his trial per medietatem
linguae, A Scot.
for that a Scot was never accounted an Alien, but rather a Subject.

Challenge for want of sufficient freehold.
4 There is another Challenge upon cause, viz. for want of sufficient Freehold,
which is a Challenge of the Polles, and this Challenge was given by the Statute
of 2. H. 5. St. 2. H. 5. 3.
which does ordain, That no person shall be admitted to pass in any Enquest
upon trial of the death of a man: or in any Enquest between party and party
in plea real, or in plea personal, whereof the debt and damages declared do
amount to forty marks above all charges, if the same person has not Lands and
Tenements of the yearly value of forty shillings above all charges, so that
he be challenge for that cause by the party. And because many Merchants aliens,
and other aliens, which neither had nor could purchase any Land in this Realm,
were greatly discontented with the foresaid Statute of 2. H. 5. and were ready
to depart this Realm, for that the same Statute did take away, or was
expounded to diminish the chief force of the before mentioned Statute of 28.
Edw. 3. 13. and by that means to abridge aliens of their Trials in most cases
per medietatem linguae. Therefore the more to encourage Merchants to continue
here, and also others to come with their marchandizes into this Realm, by a
Statute made Anno 8. H. 6. St. 8. H. 6. 29
it was declared, That the same Statute made Anno 2. H. 5. should be no ways
prejudicial to the foresaid first statute made 28. Edw. 3. nor was not meant
that it should extend to any, but only to Enquests to be taken between
Denizon and Denizon, and not to the other Enquests or proofs mentioned in the
said Statute of 28. Ed. 3. viz. to Enquests to be taken between Denizons and
Aliens. And that the first statute of 28. Ed. 3. should be effectual, stand
in force, and be put in execution, according to the form thereof,
notwithstanding the later Statute of 2. H. 5. and notwithstanding that Aliens
have not lands or tenements of the yearly value of forty shillings, according
to the purport of the said later statute of 2. H. 5. And so by this statute,
want of sufficient freehold is the cause of Challenge to Aliens which be
impanelled with English men. But yet it seems to be a cause to challenge
English men, who be impanelled with Aliens, for the perclose of this Statute
does wholly rely upon Aliens. This last rehearsed Statute of 8. H. 6. wills,
That the intent of the other Statute of 2. H. 5. should be preferred before
the words thereof, and so the Judges of the law have expounded it, 9. H. 6. 27.
for they have allowed a Iuror which had not forty shillings of freehold, to
be sworn in an Enquest, if others had so much land to his use. And where the
words of the statute be (If he has not lands or tenements of the yearly value
of forty shillings) and does not express in what County, yet they do take
it by intendment, that the lands must be in the County where the issue is to
be tried. 9. H. 7. 1. M. 12. H. 7. 4 H. 32. H. 8. 20. P. 21. H. 6. 39.
And for that the words be in the Present tense ( viz. if he has not) they
do expound it, that the Iuror must have so much land in the same County at
that time when he is sworn: for though he had so much land when he was
impanelled, yet if he has aliened it, or that the same was euicted from him by
an ancient title before the time he was sworn, the challenge of
insufficiency shall be allowed unto the prisoner. And whereas the foresaid
statute of 2. H. 5. has ordained (That no person shall be admitted to pass in
any Enquest upon the trial of the death of a man, if he has not lands of the
yearly value of forty shillings) this is not meant of the trial of the death
of a man which is slain, but of the trial of the death of a man which
stands at the bar upon the question of his life or death. And then will
this challenge serve for want of sufficient lands, upon the trial of all manner
of felonies and treasons. By the Statute of 33. H. 8. it is enacted, That he
which is arraigned of treason, St. 33. H. 8. 12.
murder, or manslaughter committed within the Verge, shall have no manner of
challenge to any of the Jury, malice only excepted (and so shall have no
challenge for want of sufficient freehold.) And in like sort it is ordained by
the Statute of Anno 3. H. 7. St. 3. H. 7. 14
That he which being the Kings servant sworn, and whose name is in the check
Roll of the Kings household, under the degree of a Lord, which is arraigned for
conspiring with any other, to destroy any Lord of this Realm, or any other
sworn to the Kings Council: Or the Steward, Treasurer, or Controller of the
Kings house, shall not have any challenge but for malice (and so shall have no
challenge for want of sufficient freehold.) By a Statute made Anno 33. H. 8.
St. 33. H. 8. 13.
it was enacted, That if a Commission of Oyer and Determiner be directed into
any County, for the trial of any person which does confess any Murder to
three of the Kings Council, or is vehemently susspected thereof, no challenge
for the Hundred or Shire shall be allowed unto him. But the challenge of any
Iuror for lack of Freehold, of the yearly value of forty shillings, shall be
allowed, as has been accustomed. And because Trials in Murders and Felonies,
in Cities, Boroughes, and Towns corporat within this Realm, having authority
in the deliverance of such offenders, were oftentimes deferred and delayed, by
reason of challenge made by such offenders, of Jurors, for lack of sufficiency
of freehold, to the great hinderance of justice: for the redress thereof, by a
statute made Anno 23. H. 8. St. 23. H. 8. 13.
it was enacted, That every person, being the kings natural subject borne,
which either by the name of a citizen, or a freeman, or any other name, does
enjoy the liberties of any City, Borough, or Town^ corporat, where he dwells,
being worth in mooueable goods to the clear value of forty pounds, shall be
admitted in trial of Murders and Felonies, in every Sessions and Gaoles of
delivery kept in and for the liberty of such Cities, Boroughes, or Towns
corporat, albeit he has no freehold. But this act extends not to any Knight
or Esquire dwelling, abiding, or resorting to any such City, Borough, or Town
corporat: any thing in the same act to the contrary hereof notwithstanding.

5 Upon the arraignement of a prisoner, the king by his prerogative might have
challenged every of the Jurors peremptorily by the common law, without showing
of any cause thereof, and by that challenge the same Iuror should have been
presently drawn. But this was a great mischief and offense to the subject,
who by that means was infinitely delayed, and had often put out of the Jury
the most discreet and indifferent men, which were returned for his trial: For
the remedy whereof, by a Statute entitled Ordinatio de inquisitionibus,
Challenge for the king.
made Anno 33. Edw. 1. St. 33. E. 1.
it was established, That touching Inquisitions to be made before any
Justices, wherein the king is any way a party, although it be alleged by
those which do prosecute for the king, that the Jurors of those Inquisitions,
or any of them, be not good for the king, those Inquisitions shall not
therefore remain to be taken: But if they which do pursue for the king, will
challenge any of those Jurors, they shall show a certain cause of their
challenge, and the truth of that challenge, whether it be true, or not, shall be
inquired of, according to the Justices discretion. But he that does prosecute
the suit for the king, need not presently show the cause upon his challenge
(as a common person should do, if he were party against the king) for he may
show that cause when he has perused the whole pannell. But if he that is
arraigned, 1. H. 5. 10 Fit. Chall' 105. 38. Ass. p. 22
do challenge any of the Polles, he must show the cause upon his Challenge,
which must be presently tried, for that it is in a plea of the crown, wherein
the king is a party.

6 A man outlawed of Felony An Outlaw of Felony.
shall have his challenges upon an Issue taken, for the auoidance of the
Felony: Fi. Chall' 153. 165.
For though he cannot challenge a worse man then himself, being outlawed for
Felony, yet seeing it is in Issue to try, whether he be an Outlaw, or not,
and by this trial, if it be found for him, to defeat the same Outlawry, that
opinion of him ought to be holden in suspense, until the said issue shall be
tried against him.

21. H. 6. 30. 14. H. 4. 19.
7 It is a good Challenge upon cause, to say, that one of the Jurors is an
Alien, or a Villain, or an Outlaw; A Iuror, an alien, villain, or outlaw.
for then he is not Liber and legalis homo: For though an Alien borne has
dwelt in this Realm from his childhood, and be sworn in a Leet, or other
Court, to the Kings obedience, yet he is not the Kings liege man: for the
Steward of a Leet, nor any other, can make an Alien Legalis homo, but only the
King.

Evidence.
1 WHen a prisoner is indicted of Treason, or Felony, has pleaded not guilty,
is thereupon arraigned, and finished his challenges, then evidence is to be
given against him to prove him guilty, which every person shall be admitted to
do for the king. And because the evidence of those, that took the said
offender with the manner, did first accuse him, or brought him before the
Justices of Peace to be examined of the supposed offense, has been always
adjudged most pregnant and effectual: Therefore by a statute made Anno 1. and
2. Ph. and Ma. St. 1. and 2. P. and M. 13.
it was ordained, That two Justices of Peace at the least, Evidence against an
offe^dor let to batle
whereof one of them to be of the Quorum, when any prisoner is brought before
them for any manslaughter, or felony, before any bailement or mainprise, shall
take the examination of the said prisoner, and information of them that bring
him, of the fact, and circumstances thereof, and the same, or as much thereof,
as shall be material to prove the felony, shall put in writing, before they make
the same bailement: which said examination, together with the said bailement,
the said Justices shall certify at the next general Jail delivery to be
holden within their Commission: and that every Coroner, upon any inquisition
before him found, whereby any person or persons shall be indicted for murder,
or manslaughter, or as accessorie or accessories to the same, before the
murder or manslaughter committed, shall put in writing the effect of the
evidence given to the Jury before him, being material. And as well the said
Justices, as the said Coroner, shall have authority by this act to bind all
such by Recognisance or Obligation, as do declare any thing material to prove
the said murder, or manslaughter, offenses, or felonies, or to be accessories
or accessories to the same, as is aforesaid, to appear at the next general
Jail delivery to be holden within the County, City, or Town corporat, where
the trial thereof shall be, then and there to give evidence against the party
so indicted at the time of his trial, and shall certify as well the same
evidence, as such bond and bonds in writing as he shall take, together with
the Inquisition or Indictment before him taken and found, or before the time of
his said trial thereof to be had or made. And likewise the said Justices
shall certify all and every such bond taken before them, in like manner, as is
before said of baylements and examination. And in case any Justice of peace, or
Quorum, or Coroner, shall offend in any thing contrary to the true intent and
meaning of this act, then the Justices of Jail delivery of the Shire, City,
Town, or Place, where such offenses shall happen to be committed, upon due
proof thereof by examination before them, shall for every such offense set
such fine on every such Justice of Peace, and Coroner, as the same Justices of
Jail delivery shall think meet, and shall estreat the same, as other Fines
and Amerciaments assessed before Justices of Jail delivery ought to be. S.
Mainprise 13.

2 Because the foresaid statute of 1. and 2. Ph. and Ma. 13. does not extend to
any such prisoners, as shall be brought before any Justice of Peace, for
Manslaughter or Felony, and by such Justice shall be committed to ward, for the
suspicion of such Manslaughter or Felony, and not bayled: in which case the
examination of such prisoner, and of such as shall bring him, is as necessary,
or rather more, then where such prisoner shall be let to bail: For the
reformation whereof, St. 1. and 2. P. and M. 10.
by a statute made Anno 2. and 3. Ph. and Ma. it was enacted, That such
Iustic^s or Justice, before whom any person shall be brought, Evidence against
an offender committed to prison
for Manslaughter or Felony, or for suspicion thereof, before he or they shall
commit or send such prisoner to ward, shall take the examination of such
prisoner, and information of those that bring him, of the fact and
circumstances thereof, and the same, or as much thereof, as shall be material
to prove the Felony, shall put in writing within two days after the said
examination, and the same shall certify in such manner and form, and at such
time, as they should and ought to do, if such prisoner so committed or sent to
ward, had been bayled, or let to mainprise, upon such pain as in the said
former act is limited and appointed, for not taking or not certifying such
examinations, as in the said former act is expressed. And the said Justices
shall have authority by this act to bind all such by Recognisance or
Obligation, as do declare any thing material, to prove the said Manslaughter,
or Felony, against such prisoner as shall be so committed to ward, to appear
at the next general Jail delivery, to be holden within the County, City, or
Town corporat, where the trial of the said Manslaughter or Felony shall be,
then and there to give Evidence against the party. And the said Justices shall
certify the said bands taken before them, in like manner, as they should and
ought to certify the bands mentioned in the said former act, upon the pain,
as in the said former act is mentioned, for not certifying such bands, as by
the said former act is limited and appointed to be certified.

3 And for that men should be the readier and more willing to give Evidence
against Robbers and other Felons, Restitution upon attainder by evidence.
by a statute made Anno 21. H. 8. St. 21. H. 8. 11
it was established, That if any Felon or Felons do rob or take away any
money, goods, or cattels from any of the kings subjects, from their person, or
otherwise, within this Realm, and thereof be indicted, and after be arraigned
of the same Felony, and found guilty thereof, or otherwise attainted by reason
of Evidence given by the party so robbed, or owner of the said money, goods, or
cattels, or by any other by their procurement, then the party so robbed, or
owner, shall be restored to his said money, goods, and cattels. Before which
statute the party robbed or owner of the goods stolen could not have had
restitution, without suing of an Appeal against the Felon.

Evidence given by a stranger.
4 If the servant be robbed, the master may give evidence against the Felon, and
have restitution by this statute, if so be, that the goods robbed were the
goods of the master: for the words of the statute be (The party so robbed, or
owner.) Also if he that was robbed does not give Evidence himself, but procure
another to give the evidence, this is sufficient by the words of the statute,
to obtain restitution of his stolen goods.

There must be two accusors to give evidence in Treason.
5 By a Branch of a statute made Ann^ 5. Ed. 6. St. 5. E. 6. 11
it was ordained, That no person or persons shall be indicted, arraigned,
convicted, condemned, or attainted, for any Treasons that now be, or hereafter
shall be, unless the same offender or offenders be thereof accused by two lawful
accusors, which said accusors at the time of the arraignment of the party
accused (if they be then living) shall be brought in person before the party so
accused, and auow and maintain that which they have to say against the said
party, to prove him guilty of the Treasons or offenses contained in the bill of
indictment laid against the party arraigned, unless the said party arraigned
shall willingly without violence confess the same. But after by the statute of
An. 1. and 2. P. and M. St. 1. and 2. P. and M. 10. T. 2. and 3. P. and M. Dyer
132.
it was ordained, That all trials to be had, awarded, or made for any Treason,
shall be had and used only, according to the due order and course of the
common laws of this Realm, and not otherwise. Quaere whether the said stat.
of 1. and 2. P. and Ma. do take away the force of the foresaid stat. of 5. Ed.
6. which it is thought it does not, but that the said statute of Anno 5. Ed. 6.
does remain in force, seeing it was ordained only for the accusation or
evidence, and not for the time, place, or order of the trial.

Evidence in high Treason.
6 If there be an accusor of high Treason of his own knowledge, 1. M. Die. 98.
or of his own hearing, and he does utter it to another, that other may well
be an accusor or witness. And likewise if the second man do utter it to the
third, and the third to the fourth man, every of them may be an accusor or
witness.

Evidence against abettors to offenses
7 By the statute of Anno 5. Eliz. St. 5. El. 1.
it is ordained, That no person or persons shall be indicted for assisting,
aiding, maintaining, comforting, or abetting of any person or persons, for any
of the offenses mentioned in the said statute, in extolling, setting forth, or
defending of the usurped power, and authority of the bishop of Rome, unless he
or they be thereof lawfully accused by such good and sufficient testimony or
proof, as by the Jury, by whom he shall be so indicted, shall be thought good,
lawful, and sufficient, to prove him or them guilty of the said offenses. S.
Treasons 15.

8 By the Statute made Anno 31. Eliz. St. 31. Eli. 4.
it is ordained, Evidence on the def. part.
That such person and persons as shall be impeached for any offense made
Felony by that Statute (being entitled an act against imbesilling of armor,
habiliments of war, and victuals) shall by virtue of this act be received and
admitted to make any lawful proof that he can, by lawful witness, or
otherwise, for his discharge and defense in that behalf: any Law to the
contrary notwithstanding. S. Felonies by Statute 33.

Verdict.
1 AFter the prisoner has pleaded not guilty, has been thereupon arraigned,
and evidence given against him in open court, before the Judges and the Jury,
the same Jury do depart from the bar to consider of their evidence and
proofs, which being done, they return again to the court to give up their
verdict, which as the issue of not guilty is general, so may they deliver
their verdict guilty, or not guilty, if they will, and that their evidence be
clear, and do induce them thereunto. But it is not always requisite to give a
general verdict: for if the fact, whereupon the prisoner was arraigned, be
such, that the Jury do stand in doubt, whether it be felony, or not, they
shall best discharge their consciences to give a special verdict, that is to
say, a verdict at large, viz. a verdict, declaring at large the whole truth of
the matter, which may be done as well in case of felony, as in an assise, A
verdict at large in felony
or action of Trespass: as, they may deliver their verdict, 44. E. 3. 44 Fi.
Cor. 284 286. 287. 47. Ass. p. 31
that the prisoner which is arraigned for the killing of a man, did slay the
same man in his own defense: for he that is arraigned must plead not guilty
(seeing that in his plea he cannot justify the killing of a man) and then the
Jury in their verdict may declare the whole circumstance of the fact, and
conclude, that he killed him in his own defense: for it is not a sufficient
verdict for the Jury to say, that the prisoner killed the man in his own
defense, but they must show the cause, manner, and circumstance of the fact,
that the court may discern and judge, whether the fact which the prisoner has
committed, be felony, or not, whether the prisoner stands in the Kings mercy,
or not, and whether he shall loose his goods, or not.

The verdict less penal the^ the indictment
2 As a Jury may give a special verdict, touching a man that killed another in
his own defense, so may they give a special verdict, where he that is
arraigned killed another by misfortune: Or where he which committed the
homicide, was not of perfect memory, or deaf and dumb, or an infant without
discretion: Or that the thing which was stolen was not worth above x. d. Or that
he which is indicted and arraigned for committing of a murder, T. 26. H. 8. 5
P. 9. El. Die. 261. Pl. com. 101 Br. Cor. 221 Br. Appeal 122.
did kill the man by chance medley, or in his own defense, and not of malice
prepenced. And if two be indicted for committing of a felony, and do plead
thereunto not guilty, the Jury may find, that one of them committed the felony
by the procureme^t of the other, but that he which was the procurer was not
present at the committing of the felony.

3 And as a Jury may give a special verdict to attenuate an offense, The
verdict more penal then the Indictment.
and to make it less penal then is contained in the Indictment (as in the
cases aforesaid) so may they by a special verdict aggrauate the offense, more
then the Indictment did. As, a man was indicted and arraigned for the stealing
of linen Cloth to the value of two shillings, whereunto the prisoner pleaded
not guilty, Fi. Cor. 115
and the Jury found that he did rob the owner of the linen cloth, to the value
of x. s. and further, that he took it from the person of a man, whereupon he
was adjudged to be hanged.

4 When a man is indicted of the death of another man before the Coroner, Where
a Jury shall find who killed the dead man.
upon the sight of the body slain, and after is acquit, the Jury which
acquitted him must find one that killed him, 14. H. 7. 2. 13. E. 4. 3. 22. As.
p. 39 7. Eli. Dyer 238.
or else the means whereby he came to his death: and if they find that I.N.
killed him, this shall serve for an indictment against I.N. for it is certain,
that there is such a person dead, seeing the Coroner did see him, and so
recorded it, and therefore the manner of this persons death must not cease to be
tried until it be found. But it is otherwise, where the prisoner is indicted
before other Justices, because notwithstanding such an indictment, it may be
there was no such person dead: for the body was not seen by the Justices,
before whom that indictment passed, as in the other case it was by the Coroner:
and therefore their record in that case, touching the death of a man, cannot be
of so great force as the coroners is, unless it be where the death of the man is
notorious and generally known; then if he, which upon an appeal or indictment
of the death of that man is arraigned, 21. E. 3. 17
and pleads not guilty, is by the Jury found not guilty, the Jury shall be
charged to inquire who killed him: as, a man was indicted and arraigned for the
killing of another man, who thereunto pleaded not guilty, and the Jury found
him not guilty: and because the man was known to be killed in the presence of
many, the Justices charged the Jury to inquire and find who killed him, 37.
Ass. p. 13
and the^ they found, that the same man which was killed, was in a Tavern, and
drunken, and fell upon his own knife by mischance, and so was the cause of his
own death.

Clergy.
What Clergy is.
1 Clergy is an ancient liberty of the holy Church, and it is when a priest,
or one within holy orders, or any other in who^ there is no impossibility to be
a priest, is arraigned of Felony before a secular Judge, he may pray to have
his Clergy, which was as much (before the statute of 18. Eli. St. 18. Eli. 6.
) as if he had prayed to be dismissed of the temporal Judge, and to be
delivered to the Ordinary to purge him of that offense: and now sithence that
statute, it is as much as if he should pray (after the burning in the hand) to
be enlarged, and delivered out of prison. And it appears by the statute of
Articuli Cleri, made Anno 9. Ed. 2. St. 9. E. 2. 15
That a Clerk ought not to be judged by a Temporal Judge, nor any thing may
be done against him, that concerns his life, or dismembring of him: and
though this privilege had his beginning from the Cannon Law, and not from the
common Law of this Realm, yet it has bin confirmed by diverse parliaments, and
the temporal Judges have so favorably used it, that they have granted it to
all that can read, although they be no priests, nor within holy orders (which
is more then the Cannon Law requires: for the Cannon Law expects no more
then that it shall be granted to priests, and such as be within holy orders.)

Where no Clergy by the common Law
2 None of them in whom there is any impediment to be Priest, can by the common
Law have the privilege of Clergy: as, he that is blind or maimed, or one such
as by no dispensation by the Laws of the Church can be Priest, can have the
privilege of Clergy: Fi. Cor. 461
Neither can any woman have the privilege of Clergy.

Committer of Sacrilege
3 He that has committed Sacrilege, Fi. Cor. 120 283. 257 26. As. p. 1^ 27.
Ass. p. 42
shall not have the privilege of clergy by the common Law, if the Ordinary do
refuse him and the secular Judge do assent to his refusal: and yet it is
otherwise, if the Ordinary will claim him for a Clerk, and receive him. But
if one that has committed Sacrilege be arraigned of another felony then of
that Sacrilege, for the which he does pray his Clergy, and does read well, and
the Ordinary knowing that he has committed Sacrilege, or some other grievous
crime, does refuse him, the said offender shall be hanged, 21. Ed. 4.21
though the Ordinary does not show to the Judges the cause of his refusal. S.
Br. 24.

Fi. Cor. 233. 26. Ass. p. 19
4 If one that is a priest, or within holy orders, having not the habit or
tonsure of a clerk, Habit or tonsure of a clerk.
do demand his clergy, if the Ordinary do refuse him for it, he shall be hanged:
9. E. 4. 28.
and so shall he be, if the court do refuse him for that cause, though the
Ordinary do not refuse him. S. Br. 5.

5 He that had his clergy once, Clergy allowed but once.
should have had it again by the common law, and so, often times: but by the
stat. of 4. H. 7. St. 4. H. 7. 13
it was enacted, That every person (not being within orders) which once has
been admitted to the benefit of his clergy, being eftsoons arraigned of any
such offense, shall not be admitted to the privilege of his clergy. And every
person so convicted for murder, shall be marked with an M. upon the brawne of
the left thumb: and if it be for any other felony, he shall be marked with a T.
in the same place of the thumb; and those marks to be made by the jailer
openly in the court before the Judge, before the person be delivered. And after
by the stat. of 28. H. 8. and 32. H. 8. St. 28. H. 8. 1. St. 32. H. 8. 3
it was enacted, That such as be within holy orders shall be and stand under
the same pains and dangers for their offenses, and be used and ordered to all
intents, as other persons not being within holy orders shall be.

6 He that kills a man in his own defense, Killing a man by mischance, or in
his own defense.
or by misaduenture, by the common Law shall not have his clergy: Br. Cor. 183
Neither shall he who commits petite Larceny Petit larcenie
have his clergy, and the reason is, for that in those cases he shall not have
judgment of death.

19. H. 6. 47. Fit. Co. 283 St. 25. E. 3.4
7 He which had offended in high Treason Offenders in Treasons.
by the common law, should not have had his clergy, neither he which had
offended in petit Treason, until by the stat. of An^ 25. E. 3. pro Clero it
was enacted, That all Clerks, as well secular as religious, which shall be from
henceforth convict before the secular Justices for any manner Treasons and
Felonies touching other persons the^ the King himself, or his royal Majesty,
shall freely have and enjoy the privilege of holy Church, and shall be without
any impeachment or delay delivered to the Ordinaries demanding them. It
appears by the statute of Anno 4. H. 4. St. 4. H. 4. 3
That the Clergy promised to the King in Parliament, that a Clerk convict for
Treason touching the King himself, or for being a common thief notoriously
detected, and delivered to the Ordinary, shall not make his purgation.

8 He that had confessed a felony, Confession of felony.
could not have had his Clergy by the common Law, until the stat. of An^ 9. E.
2. St. 9. E. 2. 15
viz. Articuli Cleri, was made: Because after his confession he could not purge
him of that offense, and therefore it was in vain to have him delivered to the
Ordinary, to be tried of that offense. But the spiritual men at that time
intended, that the same confession of a Clerk before a Temporal Judge was
void, for that he could not be Judge of a Clerk: and therefore they obtained
remedy by the said articles in two special cases, viz. Abiuration and
Approuement: and by the equity of the said statute, and in favor of life, it
is now permitted in all other cases of attainders.

Clergy taken away by several statutes. A Cutpurse.
9 By the statute of An. 8. Eliz. St. 8. El. 4.
it is enacted, That no person or persons which shall be indicted or appelled for
felonious taking of any money, goods, or cattels from the person of any other
privily, without his knowledge, in any place whatsoever, and thereupon found
guilty by verdict of xij. men, or shall confess the same upon his or their
arraignment, or will not answer directly to the same, according to the laws of
this Realm, or shall stand wilfully, or of malice, or obstinatly mute, or
challenge peremptorily above the number of xx. or shall be upon such indictment
or appeal outlawed, shall be admitted to have the benefit of his or their
clergy, but be excluded thereof, and shall suffer death in such manner and
form, as they should if they were no clerks.

Forging of writings.
10 By the stat. of An. 5. El. St. 5. El. 14.
it is established, That if any person or persons being convicted or condemned
of any of the offenses specified in that Statute (provided against the forging
of evidences and writings) by any of the ways or means in the same statute
limited, shall after any such his or their conviction or condemnation
eftsoons commit or perpetrate any of the said offenses, in the form therein
mentioned, that then every such second offense or offenses shall be adjudged
felony, and the parties thereof convicted or attainted shall suffer death,
loss, and forfeiture of their goods, cattels, lands and teneme^ts, as in cases
of felony, without having any advantage or benefit of Clergy or Sanctuary. S.
Forging etc. 8. and Felonies by Statute 27.

11 By the statutes of An^ 25. H. 8. and An^ 5. El. St. 25. H. 8. 6 St. 5. El.
17.
it is enacted, That if any do commit Buggery Buggery.
with mankind or beast, the same offense shall be adjudged felony, and that no
person offending in the same shall be admitted to his clergy. S. Felonies by
Stat. 11.

12 By the statute of An^ 5. El. St. 5. El. 20
it is enacted, That every person and persons of the age of xiiij. years, or
above, calling himself an Egyptian, Egyptians.
or being in company with them, or counterfeiting or disguising himself by
his apparel, speech, or other behauior, like unto the vagabonds, calling
themselves Egyptians, and so does continue at one or several times by the
space of a month, shall be adjudged a felon, and shall loose the privilege and
benefit of Sanctuary and Clergy. S. Felonies by Stat. 15.

Relieuing of a Jesuit or Priest.
14 By the stat. of Ann^ 27. El. St. 27. Eli. 2.
it is enacted, That every person which shall wittingly and willingly receive,
relieve, comfort, aid, or maintain any Jesuit, seminary priest, or other
priest, deaco^, or religious or ecclesiastical person whatsoever, being borne
within this realm, or any the dominions thereof, and heretofore (sithence the
feast of S. John the Baptist an^ 1. Reg. El.) ordained, made, or professed, or
hereafter to be made, ordained, or professed by any authority or jurisdiction
derived from the Sea of Rome, being at liberty, or out of hold, knowing him to
be a Jesuit, Seminary Priest, or such other Priest, Deacon, or religious or
ecclesiastical person, as is aforesaid, shall for such offense be adjudged a
felon without benefit of Clergy, and shall suffer death, loose and forfeit as in
case of one attainted of felony. S. Felonies by Stat. 22.

15 By the Statute of Anno 18. Eliz. St. 18. El. 6.
it is ordained, That if any person or persons shall fortune to commit or do
any manner of felonious Rape, Rape.
Rauishment, or Burglary, Burglary.
or shall unlawfully and carnally know and abuse any woman child under the age
of ten years, and shall be thereof found guilty by verdict, be outlawed, or
confess the same upon his arraignment, he shall suffer pains of death, and
forfeit as in cases of felony, without any allowance or privilege of Clergy.

16 By the statute of An^ 3. H. 7. St. 3. H. 7. 2
it is enacted, Taking a woman against her will.
That if any person or persons shall take any maid, widow, or wife, which has
any lands or goods, or is heir apparent to her auncestor against her will
unlawfully, such taking, procuring, and abotting to the same, and also
receiving wittingly the same woman so taken against her will, and knowing the
same, shall be felony: and such misdoers, takers and procurators to the same
shall be reputed and taken as principal Felons. But this act does not extend to
any person taking a woman, only clayming her as his ward or bondwoman. Ward.
Bondwoman
And by the stat. of 39. El. St. 39. El. 9.
it is ordained, That every such person and persons as shall be convicted or
attainted of or for any offense made felony by the foresaid act of ann^ 3. H.
7. or which shall be indicted and arraigned of or for any such offense, and stand
mute, or make no direct answer, or challenge peremptorily above the number of
xx. shall in every such case loose his and their benefit of Clergy. Provided
always, that this act shall not extend to take away the benefit of Clergy, but
only from such person and persons as hereafter shall be principals, or
procurers, or accessaries before such offense committed. S. Felonies by Stat. 5.

17 By the statute of An. 1. Iac. St. 1. Iac. 12
it is enacted, Coniuration. Witchcraft.
That if any person or persons shall use, practice, or exercise any invocation
or coniuration of any evil and wicked spirit, or shall consult, covenant with,
entertain, employ, feed, or reward any evil and wicked spirit, to or for any
intent or purpose, or take up any dead man, woman, or child, out of his, her,
or their grave, or any other place where the dead body rests, or the skin,
bone, or any other part of any dead person, to be employed or used in any manner
of Witchcraft, Sorcerie, Charm, or Enchantment, or shall use, practice, or
exercise any Witchcraft, Enchantment, Charm, or Sorcerie, whereby any person
shall be killed, destroyed, wasted, consumed, pined, or lamed in his or her
body, or any part thereof: then every such offender or offenders, their aidors,
abettors, and counselors, being of any the said offenses duly and lawfully
convicted and attainted, shall suffer pains of death as a felon, or felons, and
shall loose the privilege and benefit of Clergy and Sanctuary: and if any
person or persons shall take upon him or the^ by Witchcraft, Inchantme^t,
Charm, or Sorcery, to tell or declare in what place any treasure of gold or
silver should or might be found or had in the earth, Telling where things lost
may be found.
or other secret places, or where goods lost or stolen should be found or
become, or to the intent to provoke any person to unlawful love, Provoking to
love.
or whereby any goods or cattels of any person shall be destroyed, wasted, or
impaired, or to hurt or destroy any person in his or her body, although the
same be not effected and done: and being once convicted of the same offenses,
Destroying of men or cattle.
as is aforesaid, do eftsoons perpetrate and commit the like offense, then
every such offender being of any the said offenses the second time lawfully and
duly convicted and attainted, shall suffer pains of death as a felon, and shall
loose the benefit and privilege of clergy and sanctuary. S. Felonies by Stat.
29.

18 By the statute of Anno 1. Iac. St. 1. Iac. 8 S. Murder 24.
it is enacted, That if any person or persons shall stabbe or thrust Stabbing
or thrusting.
any person or persons that has not then any weapon drawn, or that has not
then first stricken the party which shall so stabbe or thrust, so as the person
or persons so stabbed or thrust, shall thereof die within the space of six
months then next following, although it cannot be proved that the same was
done of malice forethought: yet the party so offending, and being thereof
convict by verdict of twelve men, confession, or otherwise, according to the
Laws of this Realm, shall be excluded from the benefit of his or their Clergy,
and shall suffer death as in case of wilful murder. S. Homicide 24.

A Recusant not abiuring, or returning.
19 If any such offender, which by the tenor and effect of the act made Ann^ 35.
Eliz. St. 35. El. 1.
(entitled an act to retain the Queens Subjects in due obedience) is to be
abiured the Realm, shall refuse to make such abiuration, as by that statute is
appointed: Or after such abiuration shall not go to such Haven, and within
such time as is appointed, and from thence depart the Realm, according to the
said statute: Or after his departure shall return again into any of the kings
Realms or Dominions, without his special license in that behalf first had
and obtained: then in every such case the person so offending shall be adjudged a
felon, and suffer as in case of felony, without benefit of clergy. S. Felonies
by Stat. 9.

Abiuration of a Popish Recusant.
20 If any such offender, which by the tenor and intent of the act made Ann^ 35.
Eliz. St. 35. El. 2.
(entitled an act for the restraining of Popish Recusants to some place of
abode) is to be abiured the Realm, shall refuse to make such abiuration: Or
after such abiuration made shall not go to such haven, and within such time as
is appointed, and from thence depart out of this Realm according to the said
act: Or after such departure shall return and come again into any of the
kings Dominions, without his special license in that behalf first obtained
and had: then in every such case the person so offending shall be adjudged a
felon, and loose as in case of felony, without benefit of Clergy. S. Felonies
by Stat. 11.

A Soldier departing from his captain.
21 By the statute of Ann^ 18. H. 6. St. 18. H. 6. 10.
it is enacted, That if any soldier, man of Arms, or Archer, which has taken
parcel of his wages of his Captain, and is entered of record the kings
soldier (except notorious sickness or impediment by Gods visitation does let,
which he shall imediately certify his captain, and repaie his money) or else
being in the enemies country in garrison, or else where, in the kings service,
where he is appointed to serve, does depart without license of the kings
lieutenant, deputy, high admiral, viceadmirall, captain, or in their absence
of their deputies, he shall be taken, judged, and executed as a felon. And by the
Stat. of Anno 2. and 3. Ed. 6. St. 2. and 3. Ed. 6. 2.
he shall not have advantage of his Clergy or sanctuary. S. Felon. by Stat. 21.

St. 39. El. 17
22 By the Stat. of An. 39. El. it is ordained, That if any idle and wandering
Soldier or Mariner Wandering soldiers and mariners.
do not settle himself to labor, service, or other lawful course of life,
without wandering; or otherwise repair to the place where he was born, or to
his dwelling place, and there remain, betaking himself to some lawful trade
or course of life: Or coming from his Captain, shall not have a testimonial
of a Justice of peace, etc. or shall counterfeit or forge such testimonial, or
have with him any such testimonial forged, knowing the same to be forged,
being retained into service, or shall depart within the year without the
license of him that retained him into service, Then he shall be judged as a felon
without the benefit of clergy. S. Fell. by Stat. 3.

23 By the Stat. of An. 43. El. St. 43. Eli. 13
it is established, Taking away any person against his will in Cumberland etc.
That whosoever shall without lawful authority take any of the kings subjects,
against his or their wills, and carry him or them out of the counties of
Cumberland, Northumberland, Westmerland, or the Bishopric of Durham, or to any
other place within any of the said counties, or detayne, force, or imprison him
or them as prisoners, or against his or their wills to ransom them, or to
make a pray or spoil of his or their person or goods upon deadly feude, or
otherwise, shall be taken to be felons, and suffer death without benefit of
Clergy, Sanctuary, or Abiuration, etc. S. Felonies by stat. 36.

St. 1. E. 6. 12.
24 By the stat. of Anno 1. Ed. 6. it is ordained, That no person or persons
that heretofore has bin, or that at any time hereafter shall be in due form of
the law attainted or co^uicted of murder Murder.
of malice prepe^ced, Burglary.
or of poisoning Poisoning.
of malice prepenced, or of breaking of any house by day or by night, any
person being then in the same house, where the said breaking has bin, or shall
be committed, heretofore has bin, or hereafter shall be thereby put in fear or
dread, or of, or for robbing of any person or persons in the high way, Robbery
in the high way.
or near to the high way, or for felonious stealing of Horses, Stealing of
horses Sacrilege.
Geldings, or Mares, or of felonious taking of any goods out of any parish
church, or chapel, or being indicted or appealed of any of the same offenses,
and thereupon found guilty by verdict of xij. men, or shall confess the same
upon his or their arraignment, or will not answer directly according to the
laws of this realm, or shall stand wilfully or of malice mute, shall not be
admitted to have or enjoy ye privilege or benefit of his Clergy or Sanctuary,
but shall be put from the same. Clergy allowed in all other felonies.
And that in all other cases of Felony (other then such as are before
mentioned) all and singular person and persons which shall be arraigned, or found
guilty upon his or their arraignment, or shall confess the same, or stand mute
in form aforesaid, or will not answer directly in form aforesaid, shall have
and enjoy the privilege and benefit of his or their Clergy and Sanctuary, in
like manner and form as he or they should or might have done before the 24. of
April, Anno 1. H. 8.

25 Because it was doubtful by the words mentioned in the foresaid act of 1.
Ed. 6. 12. whether that any person being in due form of Law found guilty, or
otherwise attainted or co^uicted for felonious stealing of one Horse, Gelding,
or Mare, ought to be admitted to have and enjoy the privilege and benefit of
his Clergy or Sanctuary: Therefore by a stat. made Anno 2. and 3. Ed. 6. St. 2.
and 3. Ed. 6. 33.
it is declared and enacted, That all and singular person and persons
feloniously taking or stealing any Horse, Stealing one Horse.
Gelding, or Mare, shall not be admitted to have or enjoy the privilege or
benefit of his or their Clergy or Sanctuary, but shall be put from the same, in
like manner and form, as though he or they had bin indicted or appealed for
felonious stealing of two Horses, two Geldings, or two Mares of any others, and
thereupon found guilty by verdict of twelve men, or confessed the same upon
their arraignment, or stand wilfully or of malice mute. But he that is
accessory to the stealing of Horses or Mares, Accessaries to stealing of Horses.
shall have the benefit of his Clergy, for that the foresaid statutes shall be
taken strictly, P. 1. M. Die. 99.
which makes mention expressly but of the principal.

26 By a statute made Anno 5. and 6. Ed. 6. St. 5. and 6. Ed. 6. 10. St. 25. H.
38. St. 23. H. 8.1
it was rehearsed and ordained, That where in the parliament holden at
Westminster 15. die Ianuarij An^ 25. H. 8. it is recited, That at the
parliament holden at West. an^ 23. H. 8. amongst other things it was ordained,
That no person or persons, which after that time should happen to be found
guilty after the laws of this land of any manner of petit Treason, or for any
wilful murder of malice prepenced, or for robbing of any Churches, Chapels,
or other holy places, or for robbing of any person or persons in their dwelling
houses, or dwelling places, the owner or dweller in the same house, his wife,
children, or servants then being within, and put in fear and dread by the
same: Or for robbing of any person or persons in or near about the high way:
or for wilful burning of any dwelling houses, or barnes, wherein any grain or
corn should happen to be: nor any person or persons being found guilty of any
abetment, or procurement, helping, maintaining, or concealing of or to any such
petite Treason, Murders, or Felonies, should not from thenceforth be admitted
to the benefit of his or their Clergy, but should be utterly excluded thereof,
and suffer death, in such manner and form, as they should have done for any
the causes or offenses abouesaid, if they were not Clerks. Which act extended
but only where such offender was convicted in such County or place, where such
offense was so committed and done, and not where he or they did such offense in
one County, and were taken with the manoure in another County. Wherefore it was
considered, That for as much as diverse and many Felons and Robbers, that commit
and do diverse and many great heinous robberies and burglaries in one shire, and
convey the spoil and robbery into any other shire, and there be taken,
indicted, and arraigned of felony, for the felonious stealing of the same
goods, in the same other Shire than where the same Robberies or Burglaries
where done and committed, and not of the same Robbery nor Burglarie, for that
it was not done nor committed in the same Shire where they be so indicted and
arraigned, and that by reason thereof such felons, robbers, and burglarers, had
and enjoyed the privilege and advantage of their Clergy: For redress whereof
it was enacted in the same Parliament holden in the said five and twentieth
year of the said late King, That if any person or persons, after that time,
after such robberies or burglarie by him or them done in one County, should be
indicted of Felony, for stealing of any goods or cattels in any other County
within this Realm, and thereupon arraigned, and found guilty, or stand mute
of malice, or challenge peremptorily above the number of twenty persons, or
would not upon his or their arraignment directly answer to the same felony,
that then the same person and persons so arraigned, and found guilty, or
standing mute of malice, or challenging peremptorily above the number of
twenty persons, or that would not directly answer to the law, should loose and
be put from the benefit of his or their Clergy, in like manner and form as
they should have been, if they had been indicted, arraigned, and found
guilty in the same County where such robbery or burglarie, as is aforesaid
was done or committed, if it should appear to the Justices before whom any
such felons or robbers should be arraigned by evidence given before them, or by
examination, that the same felons or burglarers should have been put from
their Clergy, in case they had been indicted, arraigned, and found guilty in
the same county where the same robberies or burglaries were committed or done,
as in the same statute made in the safd five and twentieth year among other
things more plainly appears. And where in the Parliament holden at
Westminster, St. 1. E. 6. 12
the fourth day of November, in the first year of the reign of our Sovereign
Lord the King that now is, it is ordained and enacted amongst other things,
That no person or persons that before that time had been, or at any time
hereafter should be in due form of law attainted or convicted of murder of
malice prepensed, or of poisoning of malice prepensed, or of breaking of any
house by day, or by night, any person being then in the same house when the
same breaking had bin, or after that time should be committed, being put in
fear or dread, or of or for robbing of any person or persons in the high way,
or near the high way, or for felonious stealing of Horses, Geldings, or Mares,
or of felonious taking of any goods out of any Parish Church, or other Church
or Chapel, or being indicted or appealed of any of the same offenses, and
thereupon found guilty by verdict of twelve men, or should confess the same
upon his or their arraignement, or would not answer directly according to the
laws of this Realm, or should stand wilfully or of malice mute, should not
be admitted to have or enjoy the privilege or benefit of his or their Clergy
or Sanctuary, but should be put from the same. And that in all other cases of
Felony (other than such as be before mentioned) all and singular person and
persons, which after the first day of March then next following, should be
arraigned or found guilty upon his or their arraignement, or should confess
the same, or stand mute in form aforesaid, or would not answer directly in
form abouesayd, should have and enjoy the privilege and benefit of his or
their Clergy, and the liberty and privilege of Sanctuary, in like manner
and form, as he or they might or should have done before the four and
twentieth day of April, in the first year of the reign of the said late King
Henry the eight, as in the said Act made in the said first year, among other
things more plainly appears. By reason of which article and clause,
contained in the said Act made in the said first year, the said Statute made
in the said five and twentieth year of the said late King, which did put such
felons and burglarers from their Clergy, that do such offense in one County,
and after are taken with the goods stolen in another County, and there
indicted, arraigned, and found guilty, was made void: By reason whereof diverse
and many persons that sithence the said first year, have committed such
Robberies and Burglaries in one County, and after have been taken with the
manner in another County, and there indicted, arraigned, and found guilty,
have had and enjoyed their Clergy, which they could not have had, in case the
said Act made in the said five and twentieth year had stood in force, to the
great boldening and comfort of such offenders: Stealing of goods in one County,
and carrying them into another.
Be it enacted, St. 5. and 6. E. 6. 10.
That the said Act made in the said five and twentieth year, touching the
putting of such offenders from their Clergy, and every article, clause, and
sentence contained in the same, touching Clergy, shall from henceforth
touching such offenses to be committed and done, stand, remain, and be in full
strength and virtue, in such manner and form, as it did before the making of
the said Act made in the said first year of the reign of our said Sovereign
Lord that now is, any clause, article, or sentence comprised in the said Act
made in the said first year, to the contrary thereof notwithstanding. This
Statute of 5. and 6. Ed. 6. does not revive the whole before rehearsed Statute
of 25. H. 8. (being before repealed by the last branch of the before
specified Statute of 1. Ed. 6. 12.) but reuiueth only so much thereof, as
concerns the stealing of goods in one County, and after carrying them into
another County, as it appears by the words of the same Statute. And neither
the said Statute of 25. H. 8. nor this Statute of 5. and 6. Ed. 6. do extend
to Appeals, but only to Indictments: so that in an Appeal brought in the
County whither the goods robbed or spoiled were carried, if the defendant be
convict thereof, the defendant may have his Clergy at this day.

27 By a Statute made Anno 5. and 6. E. 6. St. 5. and 6. E. 6. 9.
it was rehearsed and established, That whereas at the Parliament holden at
Westminster by prorogation anno 23. H. 8. St. 23. H. 8. 1
it was then and there among other things ordained, That no person or persons,
which after that time should happen to be found guilty after the laws of this
Realm, for any manner petit Treason, or for any wilful murder of malice
prepensed, or for robbing of any Churches, Chapels, or other holy places, or
for robbing any person or persons in their dwelling houses, or dwelling places,
the owner or dweller in the same house, his wife, his children, or servants
then being within, and put in fear or dread by the same, or for robbing of any
person or persons in or near about the highwayes, or for wilful burning of
any dwelling houses, or barnes, wherein any grain or corn shall happen to be:
nor any person or persons being found guilty of any abetment, procurement,
maintaining, or concealing of any, or to any such Petit treasons, murders, or
felonies, should from thenceforth be admitted to the benefit of his or their
Clergy, but utterly to be excluded thereof, and suffer death in such manner and
form as they should have done, for any the causes or offenses abouesaid, if
they were not Clerks (such as be within the holy orders (that is to say) of
the orders of Subdeacon, or above, all only excepted, as by the same act among
other things more plainly appears) the which act was made to endure until
the last day of the next parliament, and after that at the Session of the
parliament holden at Westminster by prorogation in the 32. St. 32. H. 8. 3
year of the reign of the said late king, the same act with other acts was
made to continue for ever. Sithence the making of which statute it has been
doubted, that if such robberies and felonies have bin committed and done in
dwelling houses and dwelling places, the owner or dweller in the same house,
his wife, his children, or servants, being then put in fear or dread by the
same, shall not lose the benefit of their clergy, if the offenders be therein
found guilty by the laws of this Realm, unless the same robbery or felony be
committed and done in the very chamber, house, or place, where the owner or
dweller in the same house, his wife, children, or servants shall happen to be,
or lie at the time of such robbery and felony committed and done, and put in
fear and dread, although the owner or dweller in such house and houses, his
wife, his children or servants at the time of such robbery and felony committed
and done, were or lay in other places within the precinct of the same dwelling
houses, nigh unto the house or place where such robbery and felony shall happen
to be done: Or if it happen that the owner or dweller within the same house
where such robbery and felony shall happen to be done, his wife, children, or
servants to be asleep at the time of such robbery and felony committed and
done, although the same robbery were done in the chamber or place where the
owner or dweller in the same house, his wife, children, or servants, then lay,
the offenders being found guilty thereof, according to the laws of the land,
should not loose the benefit and advantage of his clergy. And where also it
has bin in question, and doubted, that if such robberies and felonies happen
to be committed and done in any booth or boothes, tent, or tents, in any fair
or market, the owner of the same, his wife, children, or servants happen to be
within the same at the time of the committing of such felonies, and put in
fear and dread, the offenders therein being found guilty, after the laws of
this realm, should not loose the benefit of their Clergy. For the true
declaration and explanation of the same doubts or questions before recited, St.
5. and 6. E. 6. 9.
be it enacted, Robbing of houses.
That if it happen any person or persons to be found guilty according to the
laws of this realm, for robbing of any person or persons in any part or
parcel of their dwelling houses or dwelling places, the owner or dweller in
the same house, or his wife, his children, or servants, being then within the
same house or place, where it shall happen the same robbery and felony to be
committed and done, or in any other place within the precinct of the same
house, or dwelling place, that such offe^dors in no wise shall be admitted to
their clergy whether the owner or dweller in the same house, his wife, or
children, the^ and there being, shall be waking or sleeping. And that no person
nor persons which shall happen to be found guilty after the laws of this
realm, of, and for robbing any person or persons in any booth or tent in any
fair, Robbing of booths or tents
or market, the owner, his wife, his children or servants, or servant, then
being within the same booth or tent, shall not from henceforth be admitted to
the benefit of his or their clergy, but utterly be excluded thereof, and suffer
death in such manner and form as is before mentioned in the said act, made in
the said 32. year of the reign of the same late king for robberies and
felonies committed and done in dwelling houses and dwelling places, the owner
or dweller in the same, his wife, children or servants then being within the
same, and put in fear and dread, without having any respect or consideration,
whether the owner or dweller in such boothes and tents, his wife, children, or
servants being in the same boothes or tents, at the time of such robberies and
felonies committed, shall be sleeping or waking.

This statute mentions only where one is found guilty after the laws of
this Realm: and therefore it is to be considered, if the offender do confess
the felony, or stand mute, or challenge peremptorily above twenty persons, or
will not answer directly to the felony, whether he shall have his clergy or
not, because he is out of the words of this statute. Also this statute does not
take away the benefit of Clergy from the offender, but where the owner, his
wife, children, or servants were within the house at the time of the offense
committed: for if none of them but a stranger did lie within the house by the
license of the owner, at the time of the offense committed, then is the
offender out of the danger of this Statute. And so he that is attainted by
outlawrie, or by battle, Attainder by outlawrie, or by battle.
is out of the cases of all the foresaid statutes which do take away Clergy.

One was indicted, for that he did feloniously take xl. s. in money nu^bred, 5.
El. Dyer. 224,
from the person of I.S. and he had his Clergy in this case, for that it was
not robbery, because it was not found by the indictment, that the person of
I.S. was put in fear by assault and violence.

28 Because diverse lewd persons, understanding that the penalty of robbing of
houses in the day time (no person being in the house at the time of the
robbery) is not so penal, as to do a robbery in any house, any person
being therein at the time of the robbery, which has and does imbolden
several lewd persons to watch their opportunity and time to commit and do
many heinous robberies, in breaking and entering diverse honest persons houses,
and specially of the poorer sort of people, who by reason of their poverty are
not able to keep any servant, or otherwise to leave any body to look to their
house when they go abroad to hear divine service, or to follow their work to
get their living: For the prevention whereof, by a statute made Anno 39.
Elizab. S. 39. El. 25
it was enacted, That if any person or persons shall be found guilty, and
convicted by verdict, confession, or otherwise, according to the laws of this
Realm, for the felonious taking away in the day time, Robbing a house in the
day time.
of any money, goods, or cattle, being of the value of five shillings or
upward, in any dwelling house, or houses, or any part thereof, or any outhouse,
or outhouses, belonging and used to and with any dwelling house or houses,
although no person shall be in the said house or outhouses, at the time of
such felony committed: then such person and persons shall not be admitted to
the benefit of his or their clergy, but shall be utterly excluded thereof.

Commandment or counsel of felonies.
29 By the statute made Anno 4. and 5. P. and M. St. 4 and 5. P. and M. 4.
it was enacted, That al and every person and persons that shall maliciously
command, hyre, or counsel any person or persons to commit or do any Petit
Treason, wilful murder, or to do any robbery in any dwelling house or houses,
or to do or commit any robbery in or near any highway in the Realm of
England, or in any other the Queens Dominions: or to commit or do any
robbery in any place within the Marches of England, against Scotland: or
wilfully to burn any dwelling house, or any part thereof: or any barn then
having corn or grain in the same: then every such offender and offenders, and
every of them, being outlawed of the same, or being thereof arraigned and found
guilty by the order of the law, or being otherwise lawfully attainted or
convicted of the same offense, or being arraigned thereof, do stand mute of
malice or froward mind, or do challenge peremptorily above the number of xx.
persons, or will not answer directly to such offense, shall not have the
benefit of his or their clergy. Every Lord and Peer of the realm having place
and voice in Parliament, upon every indictment for any of the offenses
aforesaid, shall be tried by his Peers. A man was indicted of the robbery of
another in his mansion house, P. 2. Eliz. Dyer 183.
he being in his house, and put in fear: And another was indicted, for that he
did feloniously before the said robbery procure and counsel the principal to
commit the said robbery: in which indictment of the accessorie, this word
(maliciously) was omitted: Maliciously omitted in the indictment.
for the default of which word, this accessorie had his clergy, for this word
(maliciously) shall have relation to all the aforesaid offenses of Petit
treason, murder, robbery, and burning of houses.

30 By the before specified Statute of Anno 1. Ed. 6. St. 1. E. 6. 12
Where a Lord of the Parliament shall have the benefit of his Clergy.
among other things it is enacted, That in all and every case and cases, where
any of the kings subjects shall and may upon his prayer, have the privilege of
Clergy, as a Clerk convict that may make purgation: in all those cases, and
every of them, and also in all and every case and cases of felony, wherein
the privilege or benefit of Clergy is restrained, excepted, or taken away by
this Statute (wilful murder and poisoning of malice prepenced only excepted)
the Lord and Lords of the Parliament, S, Br. 24.
and Peer and Peers of the Realm having place and voice in Parliament, shall
by virtue of this Act, of common grace, upon his or their requests and prayer,
alleging that he is a Lord or Peer of this Realm, claiming the benefit of
this Act, though he cannot read, without burning in the hand, loss of
inheritance, or corruption of his blood, be adjudged, deemed, taken, and used,
for the first time only, to all constructions, intents, and purposes, as a
Clerk convict, which may make purgation, without any further or other benefit
of Clergy, to any such Lord or Peer from thenceforth, at any time after, for
any cause to be allowed, adjudged, or admitted: Any law, custom, statute, or
other thing to the contrary notwithstanding. By this Statute a Lord of the
Parliament shall have the privilege of his Clergy, where a common person
shall not, viz. for the breaking of a house by day or night, or for robbing of
any in the highway, and in all other cases excepted in the said statute of Anno
1. Ed. 6. saving in wilful murder and poisoning. But in all other cases
wherein Clergy is taken away by any statute made sithence the said statute of
Anno 1. Ed. 6. he is in the same degree that a common and inferior person is.
But the Court will not give him the benefit of this statute, if he does not
require it. If a Lord of the Parliament does confess his offense upon his
arraignment, or does abjure, or is outlawed for felony, it seems that in
these cases he may have the benefit of this statute, viz. his Clergy: for that
by the Statute of 18. Elizab. 6. he nor any other need to make his purgation,
but shall be forthwith delivered out of prison by the Justices: sed quaere.

31 In all the foresaid cases of wilful murder, breaking of houses, The
indictment must bee^ according to the statute.
robbing in or near the highway, buggerie, stabbing, and such like, where a
man is put out of his Clergy by statute, it is necessary, that in the
indictment mention should he made of the offense, in such manner as the same
offense is expressed in the statute, P. 9. Eliz. Dyer 261.
or otherwise the offender shall have his Clergy: for if the indictment be
only murdrauit, without adding ex malitia praecogitata, the party meant to be
indicted of wilful murder, shall have his Clergy; and so of all the residue:
for his attainder or conviction is upon the matter contained in the appeal or
indictment: and if in the appeal or indictment no matter is contained which
does put him out of his Clergy, then it cannot be said that he is attaint or
convict of any matter contained in the Statute, which should cause him to loose
the benefit thereof. And the Judge is to have special regard and
consideration, when those words be put into the indictment, that they which do
give evidence do prove the same words well and substantially, The words of the
indictment to be proved.
as well as the principal fact: and if they do not, the Judge is to admonish
the Jury thereof, viz. that there is no proof of those words by the evidence,
and that therefore they are not bound to find them, if they do not know them
of their own knowledge. Or otherwise for default of good examination, the life
and lands of any man may be lost by the malice of another which will put false
words in an indictment, that cannot be proved by evidence.

When Clergy shall be demanded.
32 By the ancient law of the Realm, if a Clerk of any order or dignity had
been taken for the death of a man, or other felony or offense, and
imprisoned, and the Ordinary had demanded him, Bracton.
the temporal Judge ought to have delivered him presently to the Ordinary,
his Official, or to some other by his warrant, without inquiring of him, viz.
before his indictment: Not to the intent that the Ordinary should set him at
liberty, but keep him in prison until the offender were purged of his crime:
For it was then holden for law, that the King could not keep him in prison,
whom he could not judge, neither could he disgrade any of his Clergy,
because he could not admit any to his Clergy. But because the Statute of
Westminst. 1. St. W. 3. E. 1
does ordain, That they which be indicted of Felony in the Kings Court, by
the solemn oath of lawful witnesses, shall be delivered to the Ordinary
upon his request, according to the privilege of holy Church, but yet in no
manner without due purgation: Fitz. Cor. 233. 386. 417. M. 40. E. 3, 42.
Therefore they that came after this Statute, changed the said ancient law,
for they would not deliver the prisoner unto the Ordinary, until he was
indicted, and also arraigned, and that it was enquired by an Enquest of Office,
whether he were guilty or not. In which case, if he were found not guilty,
they would discharge him: and if he were found guilty, his goods should be
forfeited, his lands taken into the Kings hands, and his body delivered to the
Ordinary. And the cause of changing this law was, that the Ordinary might
take greater charge of the prisoner, being now indicted, than before, and to
benefit the King by the forfeiture of the prisoners goods, and to breed a
greater fear in Clerks after, that they should not offend. Which alteration
was observed for law, until the reign of King Henry the sixth, at which time
the Judges would not admit a prisoner to demand his Clergy upon his
arraignment, but put himself first to answer to the Felony, and if he were
found guilty of the Felony, at his own suit, then to hear him demand his
Clergy, and not before: 3. H. 7. 1. and 12.
which is a more reasonable law than the former: for before he should have
forfeited his goods upon an Enquest of Office, whereunto he could have no
challenge: and now he shall be tried at his own suit, and shall have his
challenge to the Enquest: and then if he be found guilty, he shall forfeit
his goods: and for the saving of his life and his lands, he is to pray his
Clergy. Which has bin used ever sithence, and is observed for law at this
time, unless the prisoner himself will refuse the benefit thereof, and pray
to have his book, without hearing the verdict: As if a prisoner after an
Enquest is charged upon him, Clergy demanded before verdict.
and before their return again, will say that he is a Clerk, and desire his
book at his peril: in this case the Court has allowed him his Clergy, and
yet after has received a verdict, as well in favor of life, as in favor of
the King, for if he be found not guilty, the prisoner shall be discharged, and
if he be found guilty, the King shall have his goods as forfeit: And the
request of his book in that case, is more for the prisoners disadvantage than
the Kings, for it may be a mean that the Jury understanding thereof, will
the rather find him guilty of the felony, than otherwise they would have done.

26. Ass. p. 19
33 If a prisoner do say, that he is no Clerk, Denying to be a Clerk, and
yet is.
yet after if before judgment he do pray his Clergy (where Clergy is
allowable by the law) and then does read as a Clerk, he shall have his
Clergy, notwithstanding his former words. But it has been a question,
Whether clergy is allowable without request.
whether the Judges ought to allow any man his Clergy without praying of it,
though the offender be indicted by the name of Priest, Fi. Cor. 254
Clerk, etc. or that by some other means the Judges themselves do know that
he is a Clerk, or that without praying of his Clergy they shall give
judgment of death against him. And in this case some do affirm, that if the
prisoner does not pray his Clergy, he shall not have it, though the Judge
does upon his own private knowledge understand that he is a Clerk: for the
Judge must in those cases proceed according to his judicial knowledge, and as
by record things be found, proved, and tried before him, and not according to
his own natural knowledge, And they be the rather so induced to think by
the words of the aforesaid statute of 1. Edw. 6. St. 1. E. 6. 12
which ordained, That a Peer of the Realm shall (upon request) have the
benefit of his Clergy, and so infer, that without request he shall not have
it, nor any other without request, which is to have it upon request.

34 The temporal Court shall be Judge to allow or disallow of Clergy, Who
shall allow of clergy.
and not the Ordinary: 15. H. 7. 9.
for it was entered into the roll of the court, legit vt Clericus, ideo tradatur
Ordinario, by which words it does appear, that the court does give allowance
thereof: for the felony being the act which is committed is temporal, and the
Judge which did commit him to the Ordinary is temporal, and so is the authority
whereby he did commit him. And the Ordinary should have bin punished if before
the stat. of 18. Eli. St. 18. El. 6.
he had letten to bail or at liberty any prisoner committed to him, or if he
had imprisoned him too straightly, or too easily, or would not have suffered him
to have made his purgation: and in that case the king might have sent his Writ
unto the Ordinary, commanding him to suffer his prisoner to make his
purgation, or might have pardoned him, or set him at liberty, Fitz. Cor. 44. 17
without making his purgation: and if one read as a Clerk, and yet the
Ordinary will refuse him, notwithstanding he shall have the benefit of his
Clergy: and on the other side, if the Ordinary will say that he does read as
a Clerk, whereas in truth he does not read as a Clerk, the Court must give
judgment that he shall be hanged, and cause execution to be done of him.
And further to prove, that the Temporal Court is Judge of the reading, the
Court does appoint the verse or place to the prisoner to read, and not the
Ordinary: And also does set a fine upon the Ordinary, 34. H. 6. 49. 21. Ed. 4.
21. 9. E. 4. 28.
for saying that the prisoner does read as a Clerk, where he does not, which
the court could not do, if the reading were referred to the Ordinary.

A felon does read under the gallows.
35 If a felon does not read as a Clerk before the Judge at the time of his
arraignment, whereupon he is adjudged to be hanged, yet in favor of life, 34.
H. 6. 49.
if he arraignment, whereupon he is adjudged to be hanged, yet in favor of
life, if he do demand it at another time under the gallows if any of the
Judges do pass that way, and does read as a Clerk, he shall have the benefit
of his Clergy, although there be no Ordinary there to demand him: But this is
in case where the felon is arraigned and judged before the Just. of the K.
Bench; 3. and 4. El. Die. fo. 205.
or else in case where he is arraigned and judged before the Just. of jail
deliucrie, and it is entered by the Court, non legit vt Clericus, and then for
some cause he is repried until the next Session, and then again he is
demanded if he can read, and then he can and does read: in this case he shall
have his Clergy in favor of life. And though he was taught to read in the
jail, this shall save his life, but the jailer shall be punished for it.

36 The Court upon the suit of the prisoner may allow him the privilege of his
Clergy in the absence of the Ordinary, or without the advice of the
Ordinary, or without demanding of the Ordinary, vtru^ legit vt Clericus an
non: 9. E. 4. 28
and so the court need not expect the presence of the Ordinary, if he fail of
his attendance: for the court does use the Ordinary but as a minister in this
cause, to confirm their judgment in allowance of Clergy, and to hear his
opinion, if the prisoner be worthy of Clergy or not: To what use the Ordinary
is employed.
Because the manner and order is, for the Ordinary to deliver a book to the
Just. who open it, and assign the verse that the prisoner shall read: and the
Ordinary receiving the book of the Justices, does come to the prisoner, and
command him to read that verse, which being done, the court does demand of the
Ordinary, vtru^ legit vt Clericus an non? and the Ordinary does answer, legit,
or non legit: and then the court does allow that which the Ordinary says, if
it be true, or otherwise not. And moreover the Ordinary was in former times
used by the Justices to another purpose, viz. to know if the prisoner were
within orders or not, which the temporal court could not take knowledge of,
for if he were within orders, he should have had the privilege of the church,
whether he did read or not, by showing the letters of his orders, or by the
Ordinaries certificat, until the stat. of anno 28. H. 8. St. 28. H. 8. 1
was made, by the which it was ordained, That such as be within holy orders,
shall be and stand under the pains and damages for their offenses, and be used
and ordered to all intents, Clerks within Orders shall be used as others be.
as other persons not being within holy orders shall be. And further, it may be
that the offender has bin a committer of sacrilege, an heretic, or an
Apostata, or some other grievous offender, so that the court hearing the
Ordinary willing to refuse him, would also refuse him.

What is reading as a Clerk.
37 There is a difference of reading, for it may be that the prisoner may read
two or three words of the verse that is assigned unto him by the court, but not
the whole verse, which is a kind of reading, 9. Ed. 4. 28.
but not such a reading as a Clerk ought to make: for if he will read as a
Clerk, he must read the whole verse. But although at the first he begins
with spelling, and after does read as a Clerk, yet in favor of life he shall be
allowed for a Clerk, and the form of entry upon request of Clergy, 4. Eliz.
Dyer 215.
is, Et tradito ei libro, legit vt clericus.

38 Though the Court may give allowance of Clergy in the Ordinaries absence,
yet that shall not excuse the Ordinary of his attendance The Ordinaries
attenda^c^
in proper person, or by his deputy, upon pain of a fine to be assessed upon
him by the Court: which deputy ought to have and bring with him sufficient
letters of the Ordinary, under his seal, testifying the authority which the
Ordinary has given him: 25. E. 3. 40.
And though his warrant be but to challenge Clerks arraigned (and not Clerks
convicted) yet the warrant is good enough, and shall be allowed. Contention who
is Ordinary.
And if two several persons do claim to be Ordinaries, the Court ought not to
allow either of them, but must write to the Metropolitan to make certificat who
of right ought to be Ordinary.

Fi. Cor. 432
39 He that is indicted by the name of a Clerk, A Priest shall have ^o fetters.
or appears to the Judge to be a Priest, shall not upon his arraignment stand
at the bar in fetters. And so was the law in ancient time for every prisoner,
as Britton Britton.
reports.

40 Bigamie in times past was a counterplea to clergy, viz. to allege, that he
who demands the privilege of his clergy, was married to such a woman, at such
a place, within such a dioces, and that the said woman dyed, and that he married
another woman in such a place in the same or another dioces, and so he is
Bigamus: Or if he has been but once married, to say, that she which he married
was a widow, and before had bin the wife of such a man: which allegation should
have bin tried by the bishop of the dioces where the marriage was alleged to be
solemnized: And it being certified by the bishop, that he was Bigamus, the
prisoner should have been put from his clergy: Which was by a Constitution
made at the Counsel of Lions, as it appears by the stat. of Bigamie, made
anno 4. Ed. 1. St. 4. Ed. 1. 5.
for before that Counsel of Lions, every man that had bin twice married, or had
married a widow, should have had the privilege of clergy. But that law was
sithence altered by the stat. of anno 1. Ed. 6. St. 1. E. 6. 12
whereby it is enacted, Bigamus shall have his Clergy.
That if any person or persons by this stat. or by any other stat. or laws of
this realm, S. Br. 24.
ought to have or to be admitted to the benefit of his or clergy, that the
same person or persons shall be from henceforth admitted and allowed to have his
or their clergy, although they or any of them have bin diverse and sundry times
married to any single woman or single women, or to any widow of widows, or to
two wives, or mo: Any law, statute, or usage, to the contrary notwithstanding.
And though, some have affirmed, that the foresaid stat. of 1. Ed. 6. St. 1. Ed.
6.
was abrogated by a branch of a stat. made 1. and 2. P. and M. 8. which did
repeal all stat. provisions, and articles made against the sea of Rome, since
the xx. year of K. H. 8. and the Pope by his decretals brought in the same
exception of Bigamy, which was observed and obeyed as a common law, until the
said stat. of 1. E. 6. But that foresaid stat. of 1. and 2. P. and M. 8. was
also after repealed by the stat. of an. 1. El. 1. for the which and some other
causes, it is agreed and holden for law, 3. Eliz. Dyer fol. 201.
that the before rehearsed stat. of 1. Ed. 6. does stand and remain in force,
and Bigamus shall have his Clergy.

41 It is a good counterplea to him who demands his Clergy, to say, Another
time convict.
that he had another time the benefit of his Clergy, when he was arraigned of
another felony, and show the certainty thereof, when and where he was arraigned,
and had his Clergy, to demand judgment if he shall have his Clergy again:
Which counterplea was ordained by the statute of Anno 4. H. 7. St. 4. H. 7. 13
for by the common law, if a man had once enjoyed the benefit of his Clergy
for felony, and after committed felony again, yet he should have had the
privilege of his Clergy again, and so often as he had committed felony,
until the said statute did restrain him by these words: viz. Where upon trust
of the privilege of the church, diverse persons have bin the more bold to
commit murder, rape, robbery, theft, and all other mischiuous deeds, because
they have been continually admitted to the benefit of their clergy, as often as
they did offend in any of the premises: In auoidance of such presumptuous
boldness, it is ordained, That every person (not being within orders) which
once has bin admitted to the benefit of his Clergy eftsoons arraigned of any
such offenses, be not admitted to have the benefit or privilege of his clergy:
and yt every such person so convicted for murder, How the convict shall be marked.
to be marked with an M. upon the brawne of the left thumb, and if it be for
felony, the same person to be marked with a T. in the same place of the thumb:
and these marks to be made by the jailer openly in the court before the Judge,
before such person be delivered to the Ordinary. Provided always, if any
person at the second time of asking his clergy, because he is within orders,
has not there ready his letters of his orders, or a certificat of his
Ordinary witnessing the same, that then the Justices before whom he is so
arraigned, shall give him a day by their discretion, to bring in his said
letters or certificat. And if he fail, and bring not in at such a day his said
letters, nor certificat, then the same person to loose the benefit of his
clergy, as he shall do that is without orders. By which stat. it does
appear, that he that is within orders is excepted, and that he may have his
clergy the second time, upon the showing of his letters of orders, or his
Ordinaries certificat of the same, this statute notwithstanding. But after by
the statute made Anno 28. H. 8. and 32. H. 8. St. 28. H. 8. 1 and 32. H. 8. 3
it was enacted, How offenders that be within orders shall be used.
That all such persons as be, or shall be within holy orders, which by the
laws of this Realm ought or may have their clergy for any felonies, and
shall be admitted to the same, shall be burned in the hand, in like manner and form
as lay Clerks been accustomed in such cases, and shall suffer and incur
after, all such pains, damages, and forfeitures, and be ordered and used for
their offenses of felony, to all intents and purposes, as lay persons admitted
to their clergy, be, or ought to be ordered and used by the laws and statutes
of this Realm: Any laws, statutes, provisions, customs, etc.
notwithstanding. The force and effect of part of which said statutes of 28. H.
8. and 32. H. 8. is in some sort attenuated by a branch of the stat. of Anno
1. Ed. 6. St. 1. E. 6. 12 S. Br. 24.
(as some do conceive it) which does ordain, That in all other cases (saving
such as be mentioned in the said Act) all and singular person and persons,
which shall be arraigned, or found guilty upon his or their arraignement, or
should confess the same, or stand mute, or would not answer directly, should
have and enjoy the privilege and benefit of his and their clergy, the
liberty and privilege of Sanctuary, in like manner and form, as he or they
might or should have done before the four and twentieth day of April, Anno 1.
H. 8. at which time a man within orders should have had the privilege of his
clergy several times: And by this Statute he shall not be burned in the hand
as a lay man shall. But yet in all those cases wherein a man is put out of his
Clergy, by the Statute of Anno 1. Ed. 6. and also in all other cases wherein
Clergy is taken away by any Statute made sithence Anno primo Edw. 6. a man
within orders is as well put out of his Clergy, as a lay man, every of those
Statutes being general and without exception.

42 Because diverse persons have been in times past indicted, arraigned, and
some of them Clerks convict, and some of them Clerks attainted, and some of
them outlawed for Murder, Burglarie, Robbery, and other Felonies, before
Justices of Peace, Justices of Jail delivery, and Justices of Oyer and
Terminer, within diverse, Cities, Counties, Franchises and Liberties within this
Realm: The records of which attainders, outlawries, and conuictions, many
times by the negligence of the Clerk of the Crown, Clerk of the Peace,
Clerk of Assise, and such other as have had the order, rule, keeping, and
governance of the same Records, have been imbeciled, and not ready to be
objected against such persons as have been newly arraigned before the King in
his Bench, or before other the Kings Justices, for the like and such other
offenses by them committed or done: And for that it has not been known
certainly, whither to resort for the same Records, because they were not
certified into any place certain, by reason whereof sometimes such persons and
like offenders, which have been newly arraigned, as is aforesaid, have had the
benefit of his or their Clergy, where they ought not, ne should have had the
same, if the said Records had been then present in the same place where such
person or persons were so newly arraigned, or else certified into some other
place certain, where the same Records might have bin seen, sent for, or
written for, to have been objected against such person or persons so newly
arraigned, whereby as well the King, as also all other persons, have many times
lost their Escheats, and other advantages and forfeitures, that they should
have had by mean of the said attainders, to the great losses of the King and
other persons: and also the said offenders have had their Clergy, where they
ought not to have had, to the great boldness and encouragement of like
offenders: For the reformation whereof by a Statute made Anno 34. and 35. H. 8.
St. 34. and 35. H. 8. 14.
it was enacted, That the Clerk of the Crown, Certificat into the K. bench of
outlawries, attainders, and conuictions.
Clerk of the Peace, and Clerks of Assise for the time being, where any such
attainder, outlawrie, or conviction shall so be had, shall not only certify
a Transcript briefly and in few words, containing the tenor and effect of
every such indictment, outlawrie, or conviction, and Clerk attainted, before
them so to be had, made, or pronounced, that is to say, the name, surname, and
addition of every such person and persons, as shall be so indicted, and
thereupon outlawed, convicted, or Clerk attainted: and the certainty of the
said felony, or other offense, whereupon he or they shall be so outlawed,
convicted, or Clerk attainted, and the day and place of his outlawrie,
conviction, and attainder, and the day and place where and when the said felony
or other offense whereupon the said person or persons shall be so indicted,
outlawed, or Clerk attainted, shall be made and done, before the K. in his
bench at West. in the county of Midd. there to remain of record for ever,
among other the K. records there, within xl. days next after any such
attainder, conviction, or outlawrie shall be had, made, or procured (if the
term be the^) and if not, within xx. days next after the beginning of the
term next following the said xl. days, but also shall deliver a transcript of
every such indictment, whereupon the said person and persons shall fortune
hereafter so to be convicted, or Clerks attainted, to the Ordinary, to whom
the body of the said person or persons shall be committed, at the time that the
said person or persons shall be committed, the said Ordinary paying to every
such Clerk as shall write the said Transcript, for every copy of such
indictment, twelve pence for his pains, upon pain that every Clerk of the
Crown, Clerk of the peace, and Clerk of Assise for the time being, before
whom such Indictment, Attainder, Outlary, or Conviction shall be so had, made,
pronounced, or remain, for the non-certifying of every such record, and
delivering of the copy of such Indictment to the said Ordinaries, according to
this statute, to loose and forfeit forty shillings, the one moity thereof to be
to the king, and the other moity to him that will sue for the same, by action
of Debt, Bill, Information, or otherwise, in any of the kings Courts of Record,
wherein no Wager of Law, Essoine, or Protection shall be allowed: and the clerk
of the Crown in the kings Bench shall receive the said certificats and
transcripts at such time as they shall be tendered and proffered unto them by
the said clerks of the Crown, clerks of the peace, and clerks of assise, or
by their deputy or deputies, without taking any thing for the same, upon pain
of forfeiture of forty shillings for every such certificat by him refused.
Provided always, that if there be any more persons contained and named in any
such Indictment other then such person so attainted, convicted, or outlawed,
that then such clerk of the crown, clerk of assise, or clerk of peace, with
whom the record of such attainder, outlary, or conviction shall remain, shall
within the time before in this act limited certify the transcript of such
indictment, outlarie, or conviction only concerning such person or persons so
indicted and attainted, outlawed, or convicted into the kings Bench at
Westminster, as is aforesaid: which transcript so certified shall be had and
taken as good, effectual, and available in the Law, to all intents and
purposes, against such person and persons, against whom it shall be so
objected, alleged, or pleaded, as if the very record thereof, whereupon he or
they were so indicted, were there present. And be it enacted etc. That the said
clerk of the crown in the kings Bench, for the time being, shall at all such
times as the Justices of Jail Delivery or Justices of Peace in every County
within this Realm of England do write unto him for the names of such persons,
which be so attainted by Outlarie, or clerks attainted or convicted, and
certified into the said Bench, shall incontinently without delay certify the
said names and surnames of the said persons, with the causes why and wherefore
they were convict or attainted, unto the Justices of Jail delivery, or
Justices of Peace, upon pain and penalty to forfeit for every name of such
persons which shall be so written for, and not certified by the said Clerk of
the Crown in the Kings Bench to the said Justices, forty shillings. Provided,
that this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall not extend to the Clerks
of the Crown, Clerks of the Peace, Clerks of Jail delivery, neither to any
of the Prenotaries within the Counties of Wales and Chester, or within the
Counties Palantine of Lancaster and Duresme, or any of them, to make any
transcript of any such attainder, conviction, or outlawrie of any person or
persons convicted, attainted, or outlawed, before the Kings Justices of his
Counties of Wales nor Chester, or County of Lancaster, Duresme, or any of
them, but that the same Records shall and may remain and be in the custody
and keeping of the said Clerks and Prenotaries, in such manner and wise as they
are at this day: this Act or any thing therein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

43 Though the delivering of him to the Ordinary who has the benefit of his
Clergy, and making of purgation, be taken away the Statute of 18. Eliz. 6.
yet because both delivering to the Ordinary, and making of purgation were used
by the space of many generations in this realm, and several laws, statutes,
and some provincial counsels were made and ordained, touching the ordering,
direction, and governance of those which as Clerks convict or attaint were
committed to the Ordinary, and were to make purgation, or not: I will therefore
briefly set down the effect of some of those laws, as antiquity did retain
them. He which had the privilege of his Clergy, and was delivered to the
Ordinary that did demand him, was not set at liberty, to go wandering up and
down the Country, but was safely and straightly kept in the Bishops prison,
In what sort a clerk delivered to the Ordinary was used.
having for food upon the Sunday bread, ale, and pease, and upon all the
other days, courser bread, and small drink once in the day only (or in the
Kings prison, if the Bishop would have it so) until he had purged himself of
the crime wherewith he was charged, or otherwise had failed of his purgation
and could not make it. And if the Bishop would not admit him to make his
purgation, then the King would direct his Writ to the Bishop, commanding
him to suffer the same prisoner to make his purgation: 15. H. 7. 19.
or the King at his pleasure might pardon the prisoner, or cause him to be set
at liberty without making any purgation. And when a Clerk was to make his
purgation, the King was to be made privy thereunto, who did direct his Writ to
the Shirife of the county where the offender was prisoner, commanding him to
make proclamation through his County, that if any man could show cause why
such an offender, viz. A. B. prisoner in the Kings or Bishops prison should
not make his purgation, that then he should appear such a day, and in such a
place, and show the same cause. And in London the Preacher at Paul's Cross did
likewise notify, that A. B. The manner of making purgation.
prisoner in such a prison was to make his purgation in such a Diocese, at
such a place, upon such a day: at which day assigned, whether any crime or not;
to give evidence against him, they used to bring forth the prisoner, and to
arraigne him of the principal fact, and if he pleaded or said that he was
not guilty thereunto, then an Enquest of Clerks was charged. And if by the
said Enquest of Clerks he was found not guilty of the same offense, then he
was set at liberty: and if he were found guilty, he was disgraded.

There be two sorts of Clerks, whereof the one is a Clerk convict, and the
other is a Clerk attainted. A Clerk convict A Clerk convict.
is he who prays his Clergy before Judgment be given against him of death,
and has his Clergy allowed unto him: such a Clerk before the Statute of 18.
Elizab. might have made his purgation, saving in certain especial cases. As a
common thief could not make his purgation, Fi. Cor. 247
notwithstanding that he were but a Clerk convict: for it is better for the
common wealth to have such an incorrigible person continually to remain in
prison than to go at liberty to do more hurt. Fi. Cor. 417
And likewise, a Monk that was a Clerk convict, should have been delivered
to his Abbot, to have remained in the Abbey continually, without making his
purgation. Fi. Cor. 109 147.
And also in an appeal, if the Defendant had been convict by verdict, and had
enjoyed his Clergy as a Clerk convict, he should not have made his purgation:
for if he had made his purgation, then the Plaintiff in the appeal should
have recovered his goods without cause, for that by the purgation it does
appear that he was not guilty of the felony. A Clerk attainted Clerk
attainted.
is he who prays his Clergy after Judgment of felony given of him: Such a
Clerk could not have made his purgation, for that when he was condemned of
felony by judgment, he could not contrary to that Judgment be purged
thereof; that judgment remaining in force: and therefore there was none other
remedy for him, but to purchase the Kings pardon, or else he must have
remained in prison during his life. And whether this Judgment of death did
follow either upon Confession before the Coroner, Clergy after Confession.
upon abiuration, or before the Justices upon his arraignement, or upon trial
by verdict of twelve men, if this judgment were once given, he should not
after make his purgation. And though, after his confession of the felony, and
before Judgment given against him thereupon, he does pray his Clergy, he
shall have it, and might have made his purgation: for that the confession being
before a secular Judge, who is not his Judge, is void. And for that cause the
statute of Articuli Cleri cap. 16. does ground, St. 9. E. 2. 16
That an approuer Approuer.
shall have the benefit of his Clergy: and yet he has confessed his offense
before a secular Judge. And it is not to be interpreted that the benefit of
this Statute is to be extended only to save the approuers life, and not to set
him at liberty by making his purgation, for then he should have but part of
the benefit of Clergy, and not the whole which is contrary to the said
Statute of Articuli Cleri: If an approuer had waiued his appeal, and holden
him to his Clergy; he should have made his purgation, Fi. Cor. 128
because the Temporal court does dismiss him, as a man in whom it has no
jurisdiction: which waiuer of the appeal did not waiue the confession that he
had made before. 27. H. 6. 7 13. E. 4. 3 Fi. Cor. 56 247
And though an approuer in some Cases should not have made his purgation, yet
that was in such cases only, where he did not pray his Clergy until
Judgment was given against him of felony. If one that shall abjure the Realm
for felony, had come again into the Realm without the Kings license,
whereupon he was taken and brought to the Bar, and that it was demanded of
him, why he should not be put to death, and he had demanded his Clergy, and
that was allowed: yet he should not have been delivered to the Ordinary, but
sent to prison again, Fi. Cor. 155
until he had obtained the Kings pardon. For Clergy would have served him
for the felony, but not to excuse the contempt which he made by coming again
into the Realm without the Kings license: But it had been otherwise if he had
prayed his Clergy at the time when he fled to the Church. By the entry into
the Roll of the Court which made mention of the prisoners delivery to the
Ordinary, In whom rested the making of purgation.
it appears, that the making, or not making of purgation did rest much in the
Temporal Court, and not in the Ordinary: for if he were not to make his
purgation, then the entry was, Quod talis commissus est Ordinaria absque
purgatione facienda: and if he were to make his purgation, then the words,
Absque purgatione facienda were omitted: and in all cases where the Temporal
court had determined that purgation did not lie (as in the case of Clerk
attaint, or such like) if the Ordinary had admitted the prisoner to have made
purgation, and thereby set him at liberty, Escape for suffering purgation.
he should have bin charged with an escape: for the authority whereby he was
committed to prison, was temporal, and he received him from the temporal
court, or otherwise the Ordinary could not have retained him in prison. And
therefore the temporal court had somewhat to do with setting him at liberty
out of prison. If one had been convicted of diverse felonies, and had been
admitted to his Clergy, in that case he ought to have made purgation for them
all. But the force of the foresaid Laws, Fi. Cor. 232
touching committing of clerks to the Ordinary, and making of purgation is
alterd by the before mentioned statute of Anno 18. Eliz. St. 18. El. 6
whereby it was enacted, That every person and persons which shall be admitted
and allowed to have the benefit or privilege of his or their Clergy, shall
not thereupon be delivered to the Ordinary, as has been accustomed, but
after such Clergy allowed and burning in the hand, St. 4. H. 7. 13
according to the statute in that behalf provided, shall forthwith be enlarged
and delivered out of prison by the Justices before whom such Clergy shall be
granted, that cause notwithstanding. Clergy allowed without delivery to the
Ordinary.
Provided nevertheless, that the Justices before whom any such allowance of
Clergy shall be had, shall and may for the further correction of such persons
to whom Clergy shall be allowed, detain and keep them in prison, for such
convenient time, as the same Justices in their discretions shall think
convenient, so as the same do not exceed one years imprisonment: Any law or
usage heretofore had to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

The Kings Pardon.
THe Kings Pardon is a bar to an Indictment of treason or felony: which
granting of Pardon is one of the most ancient and honorable prerogatives that
is annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, being an authority in a
sort to revive a dead man, and to continue him in life, whom the Law adjudged
to die. And it is only granted upon a good hope that the king has of the
amendment of the life of that subject, who has offended his laws, and whose
crime his own conscience does assure him that he may pardon, notwithstanding
his oath taken at his coronation, (which oath is, that he will to the uttermost
of his power, cause equal and right justice to be done in all judgments, and
discretion in mercy and truth:) for as Bracton Bracton
says: The King at his coronation, The Kings oath at his coronation
by an oathe taken in the name of Jesus Christ the son of God, ought to
promise his subjects three things: The first, that he will command, and do
his whole endeavor during his reign, that true peace may be performed to the
Church of God, and all his people: The second, that he will by all means
restrain every kind of rapine and oppression: The third, that in all
Judgments he will command justice and mercy to be observed, that by his
merciful dealing with others, the God of mercy may take commiseration upon
him, and that by his justice all his people may enjoy peace.

2 Because authority to remitt and pardon Treasons, Murders, Manslaughters and
other felonies, with diverse others of the most ancient prerogatives, and
authorities of Justice, appertaining to the imperial Crown of this Realm,
were severed and taken from the said Crown, by sundry gifts of the Kings of
this Realm, to the great diminution and detriment of the royal estate of the
same, and to the hindrance and delay of justify: For reformation whereof, by a
statute made Anno 27. H. 8. St. 27. H. 8. 25.
it was enacted, That no person or persons, of what estate or degree soever
they be, shall have any power or authority to pardon or remit any treasons,
None but the king shall pardon treasons, felonies, etc.
murders, manslaughters or felonies whatsoever they be: nor any accessories to
any treasons, murders, manslaughters, or felonies: or any outlawries for any
such offenses aforesaid, committed, done, or diuulged, by, or against any
person or persons in any parts of this Realm, or Wales, or the Marches of the
same. But that the King his heirs and successors kings of this Realm, shall
have the whole and sole power and authority thereof united and knit to the
imperial crown of this realm, as of good right and equity it appertains:
any graunts, vsages, Acts of parliament, or any other thing to the contrary
notwithstanding.

3 But because the Kings of this Realm have not had that circumspection in
granting of pardons, which Bracton does think fit, and have been many times
deceived in their grants by false suggestions: and for that offenders in times
past were greatly encouraged, and less feared to offend, in respect that
pardons of manslaughters, robberies, felonies, and other trespasses against the
Peace, were so easily granted: For the redress whereof, by a statute made
Anno 2. Ed. 3. St. 2. Ed. 3. 2
it was ordained, In which cases only the K. may grant pardon of felony, etc.
That no such charters should be granted, but where the King may do it by his
oathe, that is to say, in case where a man does kill an other in his own
defense, or by misfortune: which laid Statute was after rehearsed and
confirmed by an other Statute made Anno 4. Ed. 3. St. 4. E. 3. 13
And also by another Statute made Anno 14. Ed. 3. St. 14. Ed. 3. 10.
the effect of the same was rehearsed and confirmed, and it was moreover
ordained, That if any charter of pardon were from thenceforth granted
contrary to the purport of the said Statutes, that then the same should be
accounted as void.

4 And though there be words large enough in the foresaid Statutes to make
frustrate all those charters of pardon, which be granted against the form of
the same Statutes: Non obstante in a pardon.
yet by putting into the Charters of pardon these words, viz. Non obstante
aliquo statuto, actu, ordinatione in contrarium edito, the force of those
Statutes be clean taken away, and not only of those, but also of all other in
which this clause of Non obstante is inserted: for it is a dispensation of the
Statute, and commonly put in every Letters patents. But because the Kings of
this Realm, were often times deceived in granting of charters of pardon, by the
false and untrue suggestion of others: Therefore, to avoid those abuses, by a
Statute made Anno 27. Ed. 3. St. 27. E. 3. 2
it was accorded, That in every charter of pardon of felony, The suggestion
comprised in the pardon.
which shall be granted at the suggestion of any person; the suggestion, and
the name of him that makes it, shall be comprised in the same charter. And if
after the suggestion be found untrue, the Charter shall be disallowed, and
accounted nothing worth: And the Justices before whom such Charters shall be
alleged, shall enquire of the same suggestions, and if they find them untrue,
they shall disallow the Charters, and proceed further as the Law requires.

5 Because the Commons did complain in Parliament of the outrages, mischiefs,
and damages which did come to the Realm, by treasons, murders, and
rauishments of women commonly done and committed, and the rather, for that
charters of pardon were too easily granted thereof: and did desire the King,
that such charters of pardon might no more be granted in those Cases. Whereunto
the K. did answer, that he would yield to their petition, saving ye
prerogative, and regal authority, which his progenitors before that time had:
And to the intent that the King would be certainly informed before, of what
offenses he did grant pardon; Therefore by a Statute made Anno 13. R. 2. St.
13. R. 1. 1
Stat. 2. the King did grant with the assent of the Parliament, That no
Charter of pardon shall be allowed before any Justice for murder, The offenses
shallbe specified in the pardon.
for the death of a man slain by awaite, assault, or malice prepensed,
treason, or rape of a woman, unless the same murder, death of a man slain by
awaite, assault, or malice prepensed, treason, or rape of a woman be specified
in the same Charter. And if a Charter of the death of a man be alleged before
any Justice, in which Charter it is not specified, that he of whose death any
such is arraigned, was murdered or slain by awaite, assault, or malice
prepensed, the same Justices shall enquire by a good Enquest of the visne where
the dead was slain, if he were murdered, or slain by awaite, assault, or
malice prepensed. And if they shall find, that he was murdered or slain by
await, assault, or malice prepensed, the charter shall be disalowed, and further
therein shall be done as the Law requires: which said stat. was after confirmed
by the statute of Anno 16. R. 2. St. 16. R. 2. 6 1. Ed. 3. 24
And therefore, whereas, if a man before this Statute, had counterfeited the
Kings great or privy Seal, and the King had pardoned him all felonies,
homicides, robberies, and other trespasses; by the common Law his pardon
should have been allowed, and he discharged, which sithence would not be
allowed, unless the treason were specified in the charter of pardon.

6 For that many common and notorious Thieves indicted of several felonies,
murders, and rapes in diverse countries, and upon the same, as well before the
Kings Justices, as before the King himself, being arraigned of the same
felonies, for the saving of their lives, did in times past become approuers, to
the intent, that in the mean time by Brocage, and great gifts bestowed upon
certain persons, they might purchase and obtain their charters of pardon: and
then after their deliverance became more notorious Thieves, than they were
before: for the redress whereof, and to the intent to punish him with
discredit and forfeture who pursues such a charter, there was a statute made
Anno 5. H. 4. St. 5. H. 4. 2
which does ordain, Suit for an Approuers pardon.
That if any man or woman do desire or pursue, or cause to be requested or
pursued for any charter of pardon, for any felon arraigned of felony, murder,
or rape, which for the safeguard of his life does become an approuer: then the
name of him or her which pursues such charter, shall be put in the same charter,
making mention that the same charter is granted at his request and instance.
And if he to whom the charter is granted, after his deliverance becomes a
felon, the same person who pursued for his charter, shall forfeit a hundred
pounds, to be levied to the Kings use.

Pardon of the felony, but not of the attainder
7 If a man be attainted of felony, 9. Ed. 4. 28. 11. H. 4. 15 46. Fi. Cor. 124
S. Abiuration 15
and the King does pardon him all feloni^s, this is not sufficient, neither will
it avail him, because in the charter there is no pardon of the attainder. As
one abiured the Realm for the death of a man, and returned again without the
Kings license, and being brought to the bar, he pleaded the kings pardon,
and because it made no mention of his a^iuca^ion, which was his attainder, it
was disalowed. If the King do by Act of parliament grant a general pardon of
all felonies, except burglarie, Co. l. 6. 13
and an offender is attainted of burglary, he shall have no benefit of this
pardon: for ye offense of burglarie does remain notwithstanding the attainder
thereof.

(...)
8 If a man commit felony, and is attainted thereof, 8. H. 4. 22. Co. li. 6. 13
if the King do pardon him the attainder, and the execution, this will not
avail him, because the felony does yet remain unpardoned.

22. Ed. 4. 7 28 and 29 H. 8. Dyer f. 34
9 If the king do pardon two, three, A joint pardon to two or three
or more men, all felonies by them, or any of them committed, this will not
avail them, because felony is always several: and though the sequel of the
Charter be several, yet it shall not make that which in the beginning of the
Charter was joint, to be several: But it is otherwise if the beginning of the
Charter had been several, and the sequel joint.

3. H. 7. 15
10 If the King grant to a man, Grant to be quit of escapes of felons.
that he shall be quit of the escape of prisoners out of his prison, being there
for felony, or Treason: yet this will not discharge him of voluntary escape,
but only of negligent escape: for voluntary escape is felony, and the King
cannot license a man to commit felony, but he ought to restrain him of the
doing thereof.

11. H. 4. 41.
11 Every prisoner shall take advantage of a general pardon granted by Act of
Parliament, A general pardon by Parliament.
without pleading of it. And the court shall give him the advantage thereof,
though he does waiue and refuse the benefit of the same Act: but yt is to be
intended, where the act is general, without any exception: For if there be any
persons excepted in ye same pardon granted by Act of Parliament, 8. E. 4. 7 Pl.
com. 401
then he ought to plead, that he is not any of those which is excepted, and
that he was not adherent to E. and so must plead to every point and thing
excepted in the said Act of Parliament, to the intent to prove himself
enabled to enjoy the benefit of the said pardon: (unless in the said Act of
Parliament there be mention made, that every person may take advantage of it,
without pleading of it:) And if he that does plead that pardon be of the same
name that any of those is, which is excepted in the pardon, he then must in
pleading declare the same, and show that he is another man, and not he which is
excepted in the pardon: or otherwise he shall come too late to plead it after.
And if he plead it before the Justices in the country, where the Kings
attorney is not present, the Justices shall cause proclamation to be made, that
if any will speak for the King, let him come forth, etc.

12 The party whom it does concern ought not only to plead the Kings pardon
granted unto him by his Charter, without Parliament, but he must also show it
under Seal, The Kings pardon must be she^wed under seal
for that the custody thereof belongs only to him, and to none other: And
therefore though he will say that he was at another time arraigned of the same
felony, at the Kings suit, in such a county, where he pleaded the said
Charter, H. 11. H. 4. 41.
and that was allowed, which allowance is of Record: yet that is no good plea
without showing the Charter. But the court of favor will respite the party
that pleads it, to bring in the Charter at ye day assigned.

13 When a man does plead the Kings pardon of any homicide, robbery, A writ of
allowance of the Kings pardon
felony, or other trespass, he ought also to bring with him a writ of
allowance, testifying that he has found surety, according to the Statute of
an^ 10. Ed. 3. St. 10. E. 3. 3
which has established, That if the King do grant to any person any Charter
of pardon of any homicide, robbery, or felony, then he to whom the same is
granted shall come within three months next after the making of the same,
before the Sheriff and Coroners of the County where the felony was done, and
shall find six good and sufficient mainpernors, for whom the said sheriff and
Coroners will answer, He that has a pardon shall find sureties for his good
abearing
that he from thenceforth shall bear himself well and lawfully. And the
maineprises shall be sealed, and returned into the chancerie, within three
months after the end of the said three months. And if he which has such
Charter will aid himself thereby, and has not found such mainprises, or after
such mainprise found, does bear himself otherwise against the peace, than he
ought, his charter shall be accounted void, and of no force.

The good behavior broken after a pardon.
14 A prisoner that was indicted and outlawed of felony, 3. H. 7. 7.
pleads the Kings pardon of the same felony and outlawrie, but showed no
writ of allowance, testifying that he had found surety in the Chauncerie
according to the foresaid Statute of 10. Ed. 3. neither did he make mention in
his plea, that he had found surety according to that Statute: nor yet did he
vouch the Record thereof in the Chauncerie: therefore the Justices had no cause
to allow of his Charter of pardon. And the same offender after his pardon
granted was indicted before the Justices of peace of the county where he
dwelt, that he did beat and wou^d A.B. against the Kings peace, and thereof was
convict before the same Justices of peace, by his own confession, which Record
of his conviction was sent into the Kings Bench by the said Justices of peace:
and for that he had borne himself otherwise than he ought toward the peace,
his charter of pardon was adnulled, he had judgment of death, and was hanged.

A pardon must agree with the indictment
15 A Charter of pardon ought to agree with the Indictment, in the name,
surname, and addition of the party, to whom the same Charter is granted, to
the intent, that he may be known to be the same person which is indicted: or
otherwise it is not allowable, saving in some special cases: As, 11. H. 4. 3^
in appeal of death, where the plaintiff was nonsuit after declaration, and
the defendant was arraigned at the Kings suit upon the declaration, whereunto
he pleaded the Kings pardon, which did not agree with the appeal, in the name
of him yt was slain, Where a charter may vary from the indictment
nor in the day, but agreed with the indictment in the death of the self same
man, to the which indictment this pardon had before time bin pleaded and
allowed. And for that it may well be intended of the same death, seeing one man
cannot have two deaths, it was allowed, notwithstanding the variance. Two men
were outlawed in appeal of murder, 28. and 29. H. 8. Die. 34.
and they purchased their pardon, and had a Scire facias against the Plaintiff
in the appeal, and also a Scire facias against the Lords mediate or immediate,
and the pardon did not agree with the indictment in the additions, but the
parties took an auerment, that they were the same parties which were indicted:
and an exception was taken to the pardon, for the words of the pardon were,
Pardonauimus etc. W.B. and L.B. omnes and omnimodas vtlagarias versus praefatos
W.B. and L. B. seu versus eorum alterum promulgatas: which words in the
premises of the pardon be joint, where they should have been Pardonauimus etc.
W.B. and L.B. and eorum alteri, because that every felony is several, and for
these several felonies they should have had several pardons: And yet the
pardon was allowed. If a man be indicted of felony by the name of A.B. yeoman,
and after the King does pardon him by the name of A. B. gentleman, esquire, 20.
H. 7. Kel. fol. 58.
knight, or etc. all manner of felonies; he may plead this pardon, and auerre
that A. B. yeoman, and A. B. gentleman, or etc. be one person, and this pardon
will discharge him: for it may be he was a yeoman at the time of the
indictment, and after made gentleman by the King, or by some office.

4. E. 4. 10
16 When after nonsuit in appeal the Kings pardon is allowed, it is used to
enter the pardon and alowance upon the bill of appeal: The pardon and alowance
entered upon the appeal.
and therefore if there be any indictment of the same felony against the
defendant, it shall be good for him to cause these words to be entered and
indorced upon the indictme^t, viz. Cesset processus faciendus super
indictamentum, eo quod defendens acquietatus recessit ab Appello.

4. Ed. 4. 10
17 All this matter of pardons is (in effect) to be referred to indictments,
because the Kings pardon is no plea to the parties appeal, A pardon no plea to
an appeal.
for the felon shall be put to death notwithstanding that: But it is a good plea
against the King, when the appeal is determined. And if it be determined by
act in law, and not by the act of the party, the pardon shall not be allowed
without warning of the party: as in appeal, the plaintiff does pursue it,
until he has outlawed the defendant, in this case by the Outlawry the appeal
is determined: and yet if the king do pardon the defendant, the pardon shall
not be allowed, until he has sued a Scire facias against the party, at
whose suit he was outlawed: And if at the day of the Scire facias returned, the
party do appear, the Appellant may pray execution of him, notwithstanding
the pardon: but if the Appellant be returned warned, and does make default, ye
Charter shall be allowed without further suit. Co. l. 50. and 100 3. El. Dyer 201
261
The Kings pardon of burning in the hand.
In an appeal of murder the defendant pleaded not guilty upon his
arraignment, and by the enquest was found guilty of manslaughter, and then
prayed, and had his Clergy: Whereupon by force of the Statute of an^ 4. H. 7.
13. St. 4. H. 7. 13
he being a convict person, ought to be marked by the Jailer openly in the
Court: which marking or burning in the hand the king did and may pardon, though
it be in an appeal; for burning in ye hand is no part of the judgment, but
only a mean to notify to the Judge, upon an offenders second conviction,
that he once before had his Clergy upon a former conviction. And for that it
was ordained by the Statute of an^ 18. El. 6. St. 18. El. 6
That after Clergy allowed, and burning in the hand, the prisoner shall be
forthwith enlarged, and delivered out of prison: which act does extend as well
to the case of the Appeal, as to the case of an Indictment: Therefore the King
having pardon the burning in the hand, the party was also discharged of his
imprisonment.

2. R. 3. 8
18 A Scire facias upon a Charter of pardon may be granted against an
appellant, Upon a pardon, a Scire facias against an appellant.
though the appellee, which does pray it, shows not any release of the
appellants made unto him, or any such other matter in discharge of ye appeal;
for he shall come time enough to show that, when the appellant does appear
upon the Scire facias. And the appellee may have a Scire facias against the
appellant, though in the Charter there be not this clause, viz. ita quod stet
rectus in curia.

Fi. Char. 17
19 An appeal was brought against a principal and accessorie, Non-sute does
not aid an appellee that is outlawed.
the principal was pursued to an Outlawrie; whereupon an Exigent was awarded
against the Accessorie, returnable at a certain day, at which day the
Plaintiff was Nonsuit in his Appeal, and then the Principal came with a
Charter of Pardon, and prayed allowance thereof, for that the plaintiff was
Non-suite, which would not be granted by the Court, for that the nonsuit did
not aid him, seeing the appeal was determined before against him by the
Outlawrie.

20 A man being arraigned of felony pleaded not guilty, 8. Ed. 4. 29
and being demanded how he would be tried, he showed forth the Kings
protection, The Kings protection.
and said that the same was a sufficient discharge for him, and would make none
other answer: whereupon the Justices agreed, that he should be put to his
penance, viz. to his pain fort, and dure. And yet at another time, Fi. Cor. 239
one being found guilty of felony, showed the Kings Charter, which did not
contain any pardon, but only that the King had retained him to go with him
into Gascoigne, and that was allowed, and the Justices did surcease to proceed
any further against him.

Pardon of a felony before it was committed.
21 A. was indicted for that he did the 13. day of February, Plo. com. 401.
an^ 13. Regin^ Eliz. strike B. whereof the said B. died ye 18. day of June
then next following. A. upon his arraignme^t pleaded the general pardon by
Parliament, by which all felonies, offenses, misdemeanors etc. in the act not
excepted, which might be pardoned, before, and until the 14. day of February
were pardoned, released, and discharged against the Queen: and auerred, that
neither he, nor the said offense were excepted in the said pardon, and prayed
to be discharged. And he was discharged by the said pardon, for that the wound
given by the prisoner was the cause of the felony, the giving of which wound
was an offense and misdemeanour against the Crown, the which was pardoned by
the Act of Parliament, and by that means all acts ensuing upon the same
offense were pardoned.

Standing mute, or answering indirectly.
AT some time he that is arraigned of felony is so far both from making
confession of the felony whereof he is indicted, and also of pleading not
guilty thereunto, that he will make no answer at all, but stand mute of
malice, and evil will: or otherwise plead such matter which is no answer to
the felony whereof he is arraigned, or such a perverse plea, which is no
direct answer to the offense whereof he is indicted: Stand mute, or not
answering directly.
Or if he do answer to the offense, yet he will so conclude his plea, that the
same plea can have no trial: Fi. Cor. 233 283, 359 4. Ed. 4. 11 Kel, fol. 70.
In all which cases he shall be put to his penance for contemning the law, and
refusing of the ordinary trial devised by the law, that is to say, he shall
be put to pain grievous, and durable, otherwise termed, to pain fort and
dure, and as it is commonly termed, he shall be pressed to death. Which pain is
called grievous, for that it is so heavy and weighty that he is not able to
endure it: and it is called durable, because the offender shall never have ease
or relief of it, but shall die in it.

2 The pain grievous and durable was not at the common law, but Felons
refusing lawful trial.
ordained by the Statute of Westminst. 1. made an^ 3. Ed. 1. St. 3. E. 1. 12
whereby it was enacted, That notorious felons openly known of evil name, who
will not put themselves upon enquests of felonies which men do prosecute
before the Justices at the Kings suit, shall be put in hard and strong prison, as
they which refuse to be tried by the law of the Realm: But this is not to be
intended of prisoners which be taken for light suspicion. By which Statute it
does appear, that none shall be adjudged to this pain, if there be not evident
or very probable matter to convince him of the offense whereof he is arraigned,
or otherwise that he is a notable thief, or openly known to be of an evil
name: which the Judge ought strictly to examine before he proceed to judgment
against him.

^^nnance on^^ upon an indictment, and not upon an appeal.
3 The judgment of penance is only to be given when a prisoner is arraigned at
the Kings suit, and not where he is arraigned at the parties suit: 21. Ed. 3. 18
for the words of the Statute be (and will not put themselves upon enquests of
felonies which men do prosecute before the Justices at the Kings suit:) and
therefore in an appeal prosecuted at the suit of the party, the judgment of
penance, viz. of pain grievous and durable, shall not be given, but another
judgment, that is to say, that the offender shall be hanged. And an offender
shall have this judgment of penance at the K. suit, 40. Ass. p. 40
although that suit be begun before his due time, viz. within the year after
the offense committed, where the king ought to have tarried until the years end
for the interest of the party, who was to pursue his appeal within the year.

Penance for piracie.
4 If a man be indicted and arraigned before Commissioners to hear and
determine, for Piracie and Robbery committed upon the sea, 7. El. Dyer 242.
and he will stand mute, and not answer directly, he shall have judgment of
penance, viz. of painefort, and dure: and that is by force of the statute of
Anno 28. H. 8. St. 28. H. 8. 15.
which has ordained, That all Treasons, Felonies, Robberies, Murders, and
confederacies committed upon the Sea, or in any other Haven, River, Creek, or
place, where the admiral has, or pretends to have jurisdiction, shall be
inquired, heard, cried, determined, and judged in such shires and places in the
realm, as shall be limited in the kings Commission or Commissions, to be
directed for the same, in like form, as if any such offenses had been
committed upon the land. And such Commissions shall be had under the great Seal
directed to the Admiral, or his Lieutenant and Deputy, and to three or four
such other, as shall be appointed by the Lord Chancellor, as often as need shall
require, to hear and determine such offenses after the common course of the
laws of this land, used for Treasons, Felonies, Robberies, Murders, and
Confederacies of the same, committed upon the land within this Realm. And if
any person happen to be indicted for any such offense done upon the Seas, or in
any other place above limited, then such order, process, judgment, and
execution shallbe used and made to and against every such person so indicted,
as against Traitors, Felons, and Murderers, for Treason, Felony, Robbery,
Murder, or other such offenses done upon the land: and such as shall be convict
of any such offense by verdict, confession, or process, shall suffer such pains
of death, loss of lands, goods, and cattels, as if they had bin attainted and
convicted of any of the said offenses done upon the land.

No penance for high Treason.
5 The foresaid statute of West. 1. makes mention only of felons and felonies:
and therefore in high Treason, whether it be by indictment, 15. E. 4. 33 M. 3.
and 4. El. Die. 205 300
or by any other means whatsoever, the offender shall not have the said
judgment of penance, viz. of pain grievous and durable, but shall have
another judgment, that is to say, as of a Traitor convict.

No penance for a man before attainted.
6 If a man that is attainted of Felony be brought to the bar, 8. H. 4. 2 26.
As. p. 19
and asked what cause he can show, why he should not be put to death, and he
will stand mute: in this case he shall be hanged, and not put to his penance, for
he cannot put himself upon an Enquest of felony, because he was attainted
thereof before, and so he is out of the case of the stat.

7 If a man upon his arraignement does confess the felony, Standing mute after
confession.
and before judgment at another day he will stand mute by fraud, and so it is
found: in this case he shall be hanged, 14. E. 4. 7.
and not put to his penance, for his judgment shall be given upon his
confession. And so it is, Demurring in law.
if he do demur in law upon any point which is adjudged against him, he shall be
hanged: for in both those cases he is out of the puruiew of the foresaid stat.
of West. 1. And in like sort he shall be hanged and not put to his penance, if he
be indicted and arraigned for a murder, or manslaughter committed within the
Kings Palace, or where he does abide, according to the stat. of Anno 33. H. 8.
St. 33. H. 8. 12.
if he do stand mute, or will answer indirectly.

8 In all cases where a man upon his arraignement does stand mute, Inquiry of
him that stands mute.
before he shall be hanged, put to his penance, or otherwise suffer death, it
shall be inquired, if he do stand mute by fraud, or by the act of God: for if it
be by the act of God, 43. Ass. p. 30
the Court ex officio ought to inquire, if he be the same person, and of all
other pleas that he might have pleaded, if he had not been mute, to have
staid execution. M. 8. H. 4. 1.
And this inquiry is but of office, and shall be made by the Marshals
servants, and others. But if it be in case where an issue is joined by the
consent of the parties, and after when the Enquest does come, the prisoner does
stand mute, there the Court shall charge the Enquest which appears therewith,
without putting any of the Marshals servants unto them, and so change that
which was a Jury by the consent of the parties, to an Enquest of office. And
their charge shall be to enquire of the time when he did speak, and if he be
mute of malice, or in delay of his execution, or by the act of God. But this
charge or inquiry, ought not to be made or given, where the prisoner did speak
to the Court when he was at the bar, and after the same day, because he would
not join issue, or challenge peremptorily above the number appointed to him by
the law, be adjudged to his penance: for then it does appear to the court that
he does it of malice. 10. E. 4. 19
And the same law is, if a prisoner after his confession, or attainder, has
continually remained in prison, and is brought before the same Justices before
whom he did confess his felony, or was attainted, to answer why execution
should not be done of him, and he will stand mute: in this case there needs
no inquiry to be made, if he be the same person or not, for that does appear
to the Justices by his continual remaining in prison. But it is otherwise if
he go at liberty after his attainder, by abiuration, outlawrie, and such like.

4. E. 4. 11. 14. Ed. 4. 7. 8. H. 4. 2.
9 The judgment in the said penance, The Iudg^ment in penance.
viz. in the said pain heavy, and grievous, is, That the prisoner shall be
sent to the prison from whence he came, and put into a mean house, stopped
from light, and there shall be laid upon the bare ground, without any litter,
straw, or other covering, and without any garment about him, saving something
to cover his privy members, and that he shall lie upon his back, and his head
shall be covered, and his feet bare, and that one of his arms shall be drawn
with a cord to one side of the house, and the other arm to the other side, and
that his legs shall be used in the same manner, and that upon his body
shall be laid so much iron and stone as he can bear, and more, and that the
first day after he shall have three morcels of barlie bread, without any
drink, and the second day he shall drink so much as he can three times of the
water which is next the prison door, saving running water, The forfeiture.
without any bread: and this shall be his diet until he die. Fitz. Escheat. 10.
And he against whom this judgment of penance shall be given, shall forfeit to
the king his goods, but he shall forfeit no land.

Judgment and Execution in Treasons, Felonies, etc.
Having written of Treasons and Felonies, and showed who be principals, and who
be accessories therein, how the offenders therein are to be pursued by
Appeals, or inditements, what pleas they may plead, and how they are to be
tried, that the truth of each persons innocence, or guiltiness may appear: I
am now to treat of ye judgment and execution which by the laws and statutes
of this Realm must follow thereupon. As first, Judgment where the prisoner is
acquit.
if he that is arraigned of treason or felony, be acquit thereof, there is
none other judgment, but that the Court does discharge him, paying his fees.

2 The judgment of a man attainted of high Treason is, Judgment in high
treason of a man.
that he shall be led back again to the place from whence he came, and from
thence be drawn upon a hurdle to the place of execution, and there be hanged by
the neck, and then be cut down alive, and his intrals and privy members be
cut from his body, and be burned in his sight, and his head to be cut off, and
his body to be divided into four parts, 6. El. Dyer 230.
and then to be disposed at the Kings pleasure: Saving that the judgment of a
man which is attainted for clipping the Kings money, contrary to the Statute
of an^ 25. Ed. 3. 2. shall be only, that he shall be drawn and hanged; though it
was high treason by ye common law, and so is expounded and confirmed by that
Statute. But if any man shall be attainted of treson, for committing any of the
offenses made high treason by either of ye Stat. of an^ 1. M. 6. 1. and 2. P.
and M. 11. 5. El. 11. 18. El. 1. 5. El. 1. 13. El. 2. 23 El. 1. 27. El. 2. 3.
Iac. 4. he shall be adjudged a traitor, S. Treasons
and shall have judgment, and suffer, as in cases of high treason, viz. he
shall be drawn, hanged, and quartered, as is before mentioned. And though there
be no mention made thereof in the judgment, yet he that is attainted of
treason or felony by verdict, confession, outlawrie, or abiuration, shall also
forfeit his lands and goods, his wife shall loose her dower, and his blood
shall be corrupted, saving in certain cases.

3 The judgment of a woman, which shall be attainred of high Treason, or petite
treason, The judgment of a woman traitor.
is, 1. R. 3. 4
That she shall be led back again to the place from whence she came, and
from thence be drawn upon a hurdle, to the place of execution, and there be
burned to death. 8. El. Die. 254.
But if one man do murder an other, and the wife of him that was murdered be
accessorie to her husbands death, the murderer and the wife both shall be
hanged, and she shall not be burned, because she was but accessory.

4 The judgment of a man attainted of petit treason, Judgment of a man in
petit treason.
is, That he shall be led back again to the place from whence he came,
and from thence drawn upon an hurdle to the place of execution, and there to
be hanged by the neck, until he be dead.

Judgment in felony.
5 The judgment of a man attainted of murder, burglarie, robbery, or other
felony, is, That he shall be led back again to the place from whence he
came, and from thence carried to the place of execution, and there be hanged by
the neck until he be dead. And the like judgment is given against a woman,
being attainted of any of the same offenses.

6 The judgment in misprision Misprision.
of treason, is, That the offender shall forfeit to the King his goods and his
lands during his life, and shall be perpetually imprisoned during his life.

Attainder of treason by the common law
7 In the foresaid judgment given in high treason by the order of the common
Law, there can be no error assigned, St. 33. H. 8. 20.
but it is as strong as if it had been done by Act of Parliament: For the
Statute made Anno 33. H. 8. has ordained, That if any person or persons shall
be attainted of high treason by the course of the common Laws or Statutes of
this Realm, that in every such case, such attainder by the common Law, shall
be of as good strength, value, force, and effect, as if it had been done by
authority of Parliament.

Judgment of penance.
8 The judgment of him who being indicted of felony, will stand mute of malice,
or not answer directly, or will refuse lawful trial, P. 4. E. 4. 11.
being called Pennaunce, or pain fort and dure, is, That the prisoner shall be
sent to the place from whence he came, etc. S. Standing mute, etc. 9.

Judgments in felony by Justices of Nisi prius.
9 As touching those who shall give judgment against the offenders aforesaid,
it is ordained by the Statute of Anno 14. H. 6. St. 14. H. 6. 1
That the Justices before whom Inquisitions, Enquests, and Iuries shall be
taken by the Kings Writ called Nisi prius, according to the form of the
Statute thereof made, have power of all the cases of felony, and of treason,
to give their judgments, as well where a man is acquitte of felony, or of
treason, as where he is thereof attainted, at the day and place, where the
said Inquisitions, Enquests, and Iuries shall be taken, and then from
thenceforth to awarde Execution to be made by force of the said Judgments.

10 Because it often times falls out, that an offender is found guilty of
treason or felony before some Justices of Jail Delivery, for the which
Judgment of death should or might ensue, and yet that person is reposed to
prison, without judgment at that time given against him; and then before the
next Jail delivery the same Justices of Jail delivery do die, or be
removed, and others be assigned Justices of Jail delivery in their places by
the Kings Commission, which (as many did conceive it) could not give judgment
of that prisoner, so repried by the former Justices, by warrant of the
foresaid Statute of 14. H. 6. 1. or for some other cause: For the remedy
whereof by a Statute made Anno 1. Edw. 6. St. 1. E. 6. 7.
it is enacted, Judgment by new Justices.
That in all Cases where any person shall be found guilty of any Treason,
Murder, Manslaughter, Rape, or other felony whatsoever, for the which
judgment of death should or may ensue, and shall be repried to prison without
judgment at that time given against him: Those persons that at any time shall
by the Kings Letters patents be assigned Justices to deliver the Jail, where
any such person found guilty shall remain, shall have full power to give
Judgment of death against such person so found guilty, and repried, as the
same Justices before whom such person was found guilty might have done, if
their Commission of Jail Delivery had remained in full force.

11 The Judgment in petit Larceny Judgment in petit larcenie.
is, that the offender shall be led back again to the Jail, Stocks, or
place from whence he came, and there to remain a week, a month, or, etc.
and then in such a City, Borough, Market town, Village where the fact was
done, or other place assigned by the Justices, to be tied to a carte, stripped
from the girdle upward, and whipped until his body do bleed, once, twice,
or thrice, etc. according to the Justices discretion.

12 If a woman be indicted and arraigned of felony, Stay of a woman's execution
being with child.
it is no plea for her to say, that she is with child, but she must plead to
the felony, Not guilty; and if she be found guilty, then she may allege,
that she is with child: and then the Marshall or Sheriff shall be commanded
to return an enquest of twelve women before the Justices, 22. As. p. 71 25.
Ed. 3. 42. 12. As. p. 11 23. As. p. 2. Fitz. Cor. 240. 253.
who being then sworn to examine and try the truth, shall take that woman
into a chamber, and search and try whether she be quick with child, or not:
and if she be found to be quick with child, then execution of her shall be
stayed until she shall be delivered: But if she be not quick with child, she
shall be hanged presently, for it will not avail her to be young with child: And
yet whether she be with child, or not, Judgment shall not be delayed, but
shall be presently given against her, that she shall be hanged: but only the
execution of that judgment shall be stayed. If after she is repried and
delivered of her child, and before the next Jail delivery she be with child
again, though she be quick with child, execution shall not be stayed, but
she shall be put to execution presently. And yet in that case the truth of the
matter being inquired of, and found, the shirife, marshall, or jailer which had
the custody of her, shall be fined, for keeping her so slackly, that she had
the company of a man.

13 If a man attainted of felony, be adjudged to be hanged, Fi. Cor. 335
and the sheriff does carry him to the place of execution, and does hang him,
and he breaks the Rope, and falls down before he be dead: A man hanged
falls down before he be dead.
In this case the sheriff must take him, and hang him again, for his judgment
is, that he shall be carried to the place of execution, and there be hanged
until he be dead: And so until he be dead, the judgment is not fully
executed.

Forfeiture.
AFter an offender is attainted of treason, or felony, A felon shall forfeit
lands and goods
and has had judgment of death, he shall presently thereby forfeit his
goods, and also his lands (saving in certain cases hereafter expressed) though
it be not mentioned in the judgment. And notwithstanding there is a difference
between treason and felony, concerning the forfeiture of lands; yet touching
the forfeiture of goods, they be all one, for they shall be forfeited to the
King, St. 17. Ed. 2 16
as it appears by the Statute entitled Prerogatiua Regis, which has
ordained, That the King shall have all the goods of felons which be condemned,
and which be fugitive, wheresoever they be found: and if they have any
freeholde, it shall be forthwith seized into the Kings hands, and the King
shall have the profits thereof, by the space of a year, and a day, and the
land shall be wasted and destroyed in the houses, woods, and gardens, and in
all things belonging to the same, (except men of certain privileged places.)
And after the King has had the year, day, and waste, the land shall be
restored to the chief Lord of the same Fee, unless that before he redeem
the same year, day, and waste of the King, by payment of a fine. But there is
a custom in the county of Gloucester, that after a year and day, the lands
and tenements of felons in that Shire, shall reuert, and be restored to the
next heir to whom they ought to have descended, if the felony had not been
committed. And in Kent in Gauelkinde (the Father to the Bough, the Son to the
Plough,) there all the heirs males shall divide their inheritance, and
likewise women: but women shall not make partition with men: And a woman after
the death of her husband, shall be endowed of the moitie: And if a woman do
commit fornication in her widdowhoode, or take any husband, she shall loose
her Dower.

22. As. p. 96 Fit. forfeiture 35.
2 A man being indicted before the Coroner of the death of an other man,
Forfeiture of goods.
and if it be further found by the same indictment, that he did fly for the
said felony, although after he be acquitte of the same felony, 7. Eli. 35.
Die. 238. Co. l. 5. 109
and notwithstanding that the Enquest which did acquitte him, do say that he
did not fly for the felony, yet his goods shall be forfeited to the King:
For the King shall take hold of that Record which is most for his benefit, and
that is the Coroners Record. And in like sort, if one that is indicted of
felony, Fitz. forf. 32. Fi. Cor. 290 344.
is acquitte thereof by verdict, Flying for felony.
if the Jury which did acquitte him will say, that he did fly for the felony,
he shall forfeit his goods, which he had at the time of the verdict given:
which being an ancient law of this Realm, is grounded upon this reason, that
notwithstanding his acquitall of the felony, yet he is to be suspected of the
felony, for the vehement presumption which is risen of him, as well in respect
of his flying away, as by the indictment. And though the Enquest which did
find, that he fled for the felony, be as touching that part of their verdict,
but an Enquest of office, yet it is not trauersable, because it is only
touching goods, for the which goods no trauerse against the King is allowed
by the Law, for the Law does account goods inter minima, and de minimis non
curat lex. And though goods be in comparison of man's life, or his lands, in the
eye of the Law called and accounted Minima, yet they be not of so small value,
or so little to be regarded, but the Judge, or the Coroner ought with all due
circumspection foresee, that the Jury be not upon ignorance or small evidence
seduced to find an untruth, to the utter undoing of the party indicted or
accused. Fi. Cor. 308 338.
And in like sort, if a man be indicted and arraigned of felony, and it is
found by the Enquest, or the Coroners Roll, that he fled for the felony; he
shall forfeit his goods, though he has the Kings pardon of the felony: for
the charter of pardon does contain the presumption of him, that he is guilty
of the felony.

An accessorie fled for the felony.
3 If a man be indicted before the Coroner as accessorie to the death of an other
man, and it be found, that he fled for the felony: 4. H. 7. 18
in this Case he shall forfeit his goods, if he were accessorie before the
felony committed. But if it be found before the Coroner, that he was
accessorie to the felony after the offense committed, and that he fled for the
felony, he shall not forfeit his goods: for the Coroner has no authority
to meddle with any that was accessorie after the homicide committed, but only
with such, by whose means the dead man was slain, or who were the causes of
his death, which the accessorie after the offense committed could not be. And
therefore when he indicted one for receiving of a murderer, and that he fled,
this indictment of the receipt of the murderer was void, and consequently the
finding of the flying. The diffrence of the Coroners and the Justices
authority.
But if one man be indicted of felony as principal, and another as accessorie
after the offense committed before Justices; and the principal is attainted by
verdict, and the accessorie is acquitte, and it is found, that he did fly for
the felony, he shall forfeit his goods: for that Justices assigned have
authority to enquire, as well of accessories after the felony committed, as of
accessories before the felony.

The forfeture for petit larcenie.
4 If one be indicted but of petit larceny, Fi. Cor. 406
and upon his arraignement be thereof acquit, and it is found, that he did
flee for the felony, he shall forfeit his goods. And likewise if he be
attainted of petit larceny, he shall forfeit his goods, but not his lands.

5 This flying away, whereupon the forfeiture of goods does ensue, may be as
well, where the offender does fly before arrest, Forfeiture upon flying before
arrest.
as where he does fly after arrest: as if a man that is vehemently suspected
to have committed a murder, or other felony, is attempted to be arrested by
the Shirife, Coroner or any others, and he does fly away, and is pursued,
and because he will not yield himself to the Kings peace, Fi. Cor. 289 290.
312.
and be taken, is slain in the pursuit, by those that would have arrested
him, or by some others, that did come to assist them, and that be presented of
record before the Justices, having authority to enquire thereof: Forfeiture
without attainder.
In this Case his goods shall be forfeit to the King: although being slain,
he could neither be acquit, nor attainted of the felony, whereof he was
suspected. And yet if this man had been taken alive, and that it had been
found, that he had fled for the felony: 42. As. p. 5.
if he had not also been indicted of the felony, he should have forfeited
nothing: for without an indictment it could not be proved, that a felony was
committed, and he could not fly for a felony, if none such were done. S. Bra.
30.

22. Ass. p. 81 41. Ass. p. 13 Co. l. 5. 110
6 If Process be awarded upon an appeal or indictment of felony against any
person, who does absent himself, and not appear, until the Exigent shall be
awarded against him; Forfeiture upon the Exigent awarded
this long absence, which is a flieing in Law, shall cause him to forfeit his
goods, although after he be acquit of the felony. And the reason is, for that
it does appear of Record, that he did fly, or withdraw himself, when he
absented himself until the Exigent was awarded against him. But if he has
any reasonable excuse of his absence, as that he was in prison at the time of
the Exigent awarded, or beyond the Sea, Fitz. forf. 19. 31.
or such like reasonable excuse, then he shall not forfeit his goods: and yet
if the Defendant in an appeal, were out of prison, at the time of the awarding
of the Exigent against him, and after when the Outlawrie was pronounced against
him, he was in prison, by his imprisonment he may reuerse the Outlawrie, but he
can not reuerse the awarding of the Exigent, which was lawfully awarded against
him, whereupon the forfeiture of his goods did accrue to the King. And the like
Law is, if the King had pardoned the felony, before the Exigent awarded, and
the offender had found surety in the Chauncerie according to the Statute of
Anno 10. Edw. 3. 3. yet if the Exigent were after awarded against the offender,
43. E. 3. 18.
the offenders goods should not be forfeited: for it does appear of Record,
for what cause the goods were saved, viz. because the felony was pardoned,
and therefore the awarding of the Exigent against him, upon an indictment of
felony, is reuersable, whereupon he should forfeit his goods.

7 If an appeal be pursued against two, viz. against one of them as
principal, and against the other as accessorie, and the Exigent is awarded
against the accessorie, 43. Ed. 3. 17
before the principal is outlawed, the accessorie shall not forfeit his
goods, St. 3. E. 1. 14
though he did fly for the felony: for the Statute of Westminster 1. has
ordained, That no person shall be outlawed upon appeal of commandment,
force, aid, or receipt, until the principal shall be attainted. No
forfeiture by the accessorie until the principal be attainted.
And yet the appellor shall not let to attach his appeal at the next County,
as well against the accessorie, as against the principal. But the Exigent
against the accessorie shall stay, until the principal be attainted by
Outlawrie, or otherwise. But this is intended of an appeal commenced by Bill,
and not by Writ; for in an appeal by Writ, it does not appear who is
principal, and who is accessorie, 43. Ed. 3. 17.
until the appellant has declared against them.

Forfeiture notwithstanding appearance and pleading.
8 If an Exigent be well awarded against the defendant, 43. Ed. 3. 17.
and then he does appear, and the appellant does count against him,
notwithstanding there be a default in the Writ or Count, whereupon the
Writ does abate, yet the defendants goods shall be forfeit: for by the
awarding of the Exigent, the goods shall be forfeit, and no Count which the
plaintiff can make after, shall cause the defendant to have his goods again.
And when the defendant has appeared and pleaded, the process is determined,
which process is the Kings title, and thereunto the defendant has made no
answer.

The forfeture of a Clarke convict.
9 A Clarke convict shall forfeit his goods, viz. (he that is indicted or
appealed of felony, and thereunto pleads Not guilty, and upon his
arraignement does desire to be tried by his Country, which finds him guilty
of the felony, and then he prays his Clergy before judgment of death is
given against him, is called a Clarke convict.) He that commits homicide by
misaduenture, Pomicide by misaduenture.
shall forfeit his goods: 4. H. 7. 2.
And so shall he which does kill a man in his own defense, Killing in his
own defense.
forfeit his goods: And likewise he that kills himself, and is felo de se,
Felo de se.
shall forfeit his goods: And he that being indicted of felony will stand
mute, Standing mute.
not answer directly, or challenge peremptorily above twenty persons, shall
forfeit his goods.

Forfeiting of a right or action.
10 In some cases an offender shall forfeit a right, or a thing whereof he has
no possession but only an action, or title thereunto: As if goods be
wrongfully taken, or holden from the possession of the owner, and after the
owner is attainted of treason or felony, those goods shall be forfeited to
the King: 6. H. 7. 9.
and the Court of the Kings Exchequer may award process against the possessor
of them, to bring them into the same Court. And so the King shall have the
benefit of an action of trespass, Forfeiture of a trespass.
which the party attainted might have had against the other for those goods
wrongfully taken, or holden away. But if he that was attainted, were beaten or
mayhemed by another, the King shall not have an action of trespass of battery,
29. As. p. 63 30. Ed. 3. 4
appeal of mayheme, or other remedy against that party, which did the
foresaid injury to the person attainted, for that the money to be recovered by
the action of trespass is reduced to no certainty. And if money be owing to a
man by obligation, or simple contract, Forfeiture of a debt.
and after he to whom the money is payable, is attainted of treason or
felony, Fi. Cor. 343.
that obligation and duty shall be forfeited to the King. And if one man or
more be bound by obligation to two men, or more, for the payment of a sum of
money, or any other duty, Joint debt forfeited.
and one of the Obligees is outlawed, or attainted of treason or felony, the
King shall have the whole Obligation, and the money or duty arising or payable
thereby; 19. H. 6. 47. 28. H. 8. Die. 30.
and the King, or he to whom the King will give the same debt, shall have an
action in his own name to recover it: which action shall be maintainable,
though there be variance between the action and the specialtie. 50. As. p. 5
28. Ed. 3. 92
And in like sort, if a man be Receiver to another of his money, An account
forfeited.
and he to whom he is receiver be attainted of Treason or Felony, after
office found thereof, the King may have a Scire facias against the Receiver to
receive this money, and by that means the King shall have the benefit of the
action of account, which the party attainted might have had. Forfeiti^g of an
interest.
And in some cases an offender in treason or felony shall forfeit an interest
in lands, whereof he himself never had, or could have possession, but an
authority to dispose: As if he that has the reuersion of lands in fee
simple, whereof another has the possession for the term of years, 14. El.
Die. 309
does grant and assure this land to others, to the use of himself for term
of his life, and after his decease, to the use of the Executors and Assigns of
the grauntor, for the term of twenty years next after the death of the
grauntor, the remainder over in tail, and after the grantor is attainted of
treason by Act of Parliament, and all his lands, tenements, goods, and cattels
which he had to his own proper use, were forfeited to the King, and vested in
his actual possession without office, and the grauntor died intestate without
assignement of this lease: In this case, the King shall have this term of
twenty years as forfeit to him, for it was an interest in the grauntor, and
did, and might well remain in him in expectancie, notwithstanding his estate
for the term of his life; and if the grauntors executors should have had this
lease, they must not have enjoyed it to their own use, but as assets in their
hands. And though the King shall have such goods, The King shall not pay the
attainted persons debts
debts, money due upon accounts, and interest in lands, as were due to the
party attainted of treason, Fi. Cor. 317 334.
or felony, yet he shall not pay such debts as the said person attainted did
owe.

11 As in the cases aforesaid, and some others, a person attainted may forfeit
goods, debts, and rights, whereof he has no possession, but only an action,
or title: so in some other cases, he may forfeit goods, whereof he has no
property, but only a possession: As if a man deliver money out of a bag,
Forfeiting of goods wherein the offender has no property.
or corn out of a sack, to another to keep, and to restore again when the
owner will require it, if the party to whom the money or corn was delivered
be attainted of Treason or felony, the money or corn shall be forfeited to the
King, and the party who delivered the same, has no remedy to recover it, for
the first owner who delivered it cannot prove that it was his money when it
was out of a bag, or that it was his corn when it was out of a sack, for
that one sort of money cannot be known from another, nor one sort of corn
from another. Fi. Cor. 317 3^3
But if the money were delivered in a bag, or the corn in a sack, then the
owner that delivered it may come unto the Justices before whom the offender is
attainted, and show the delivery of it, and signify that it was to be
restored upon his request: whereof the Justices shall enquire by an Enquest of
office, and if his suggestion be found to be true, he shall have his money or
corn again: But if the money or other thing delivered by the owner be
converted to another commodity, then the law is otherwise: as if a man deliver
money to another to buy wool, or some such other commodity, and to work it,
lay it up, or to keep it in his house, Fitz. Cor. 334.
and the party to whom the money is delivered, does buy wool, or etc. and
brings it to his own house, and then is attainted of Treason or Felony, the
King shall have the wool, or etc. as forfeit, and the party who delivered the
money is without remedy to recover his money, or the wool, or etc. for though
he might have had an action of Account against the party to whom he
delivered his money, if he had lived, and remained unattained, yet he shall
have no action or remedy against the King.

Forf. for default of pursuit.
12 If a man do steal goods at diverse times from several men, and he is
attainted at the suit of one of them, for the goods stolen from him, 44. E. 3.
44.
but is not attainted at the suit of the others: by this attainder the felon
shall forfeit to the King not only his own goods, but also the goods stolen
from those other, at whose suit he was not attainted, though he had no
property, but only a possession in those goods: for a felon has no property
in goods stolen, A felon has no property in goods stolen.
but it does always remain in the right owner, which property in this case,
for default of pursuing the felon, is forfeited to the King.

Forf. of other men's goods and his own.
13 In like sort, if a man do steal goods from another, Fi. Cor. 318
and before his attainder, he does kill himself, he shall forfeit to the
King not only his own goods, but also the goods which he did steal from
that other, though he had no property, but a possession in the stolen goods:
for the owner of these goods having not prosecuted and given evidence against
the offender, to attaint him of Felony, either by Appeal or Indictment, can
neither have restitution of these goods by the common law, nor by force of the
Statute of 21. H. 8. 11.

14 In the time of King Edward the second, it was holden for law, That if a
wife did kill her husband, Forf. where a woman kills her husband.
and after did fly, all the goods within the house, and without, the corn in
the barnes, and yard, and that which was growing on the ground, should be
confifcat and forfeit to the King: And their reason was, for that when the
husband is killed, and no will was made by him of his goods, they ought to
remain to his wife, and then she being in case, that by the committing of
this treason she cannot have them, Anno 8. E. 2 Fi. Cor. 423
they be forfeit to the King, and confiscat. But that law seems to be
altered by the Statute of Anno 31. Ed. 3. which has ordained, That where a man
dies intestat, the Ordinary shall depute the next and most lawful friends of
him which dyed intestat, to administer his goods. And moreover, St. 31. E. 3.
11. St. 21. H. 8. 5
by the Statute of 21. H. 8. it is further enacted, That if any person die
intestat, or the Executors named in any such Testament, refuse to prove the
said Testament, then the Ordinary, or other person or persons having
authority to take probate of Testaments, shall grant the administration of
the goods of the Testator, or person deceased, to the widow of the same person,
or to the next of his kin, or to both, as by the discretion of the same
Ordinary, shall be thought good, taking suertie of him, or them, to whom
shall be made such Commission, for the true administration of the goods,
cattels, and debts, which he or they shall be so authorized to administer. By
which two Statutes it does appear, that the law does not cast the interest of
the husbands goods dying intestat upon the wife, nor give her such a title
thereunto, as she may either possess, alien, or forfeit them, until she be
authorized by the Ordinary. And in the mean time between the husbands death,
and that the administration of the goods of the intestat be granted to some
person or persons, the interest of the goods is in the Ordinary, as appears
by the Statute of Westminst. 2. 13. Edward. 1. 19.

P. 10. Ed. 4 1
15 If he that is made Executor, Executor shall not forfeit his Testators goods.
or which has taken letters of Administration of the goods of one which dyed
intestat, be attainted of Treason or felony, he shall not forfeit the goods of
the Testator, or intestat, because those goods be the Testator or intestats
goods in his custody, and he has not them to his own use, but a right of
disposing of them, toward the performance of the Testators will, or to pay the
intestats debts: And whereas the law does allow a woman covert to make a will,
and to ordain her husband her Executor thereof, or to make any other person
her Executor (by her husband consent) of her Parophanalia, 39. H. 6. 27. 12. H.
7. 22. 18. E. 4. 11. 4. H. 6. 31.
or Jewels of value, and of such debts as were due to her as Executrix to
another, and of such Obligations, Recognisances, and other specialties as were
before marriage made, or acknowledged unto her, and of such goods as were taken
wrongfully from her, before the marriage between her husband and her, for the
recovery whereof the husband may have his actions as Executor to his wife, but
not as husband to his wife, neither would they ever have been recovered, if
she had not made an Executor; and when they be recovered, the Executor shall
stand chargeable to others for debts due and payable by his wife, so far as
the same goods recovered will extend: In this case, if the husband, or that
other which is made Executor to the woman covert, M. 33. H. 6. 31.
shall be attainted of Treason or Felony, the goods of the wife, or the money
recovered, shall not be forfeited to the king, because the Executor has them,
but toward the performance of the woman's will, and to satisfy those debts and
legacies which she did stand charged to pay.

16 If any person that is ioyntenant, Iointenants forfeiture.
or tenant in common with another, of goods, be attainted of Treason, or
Felony, the whole goods shall be forfeited to the King. And if a lease for
the term of years be made to the husband and wife of certain lands, Fitz.
Trauerse 33. 50. Ass. p. 5. Ps. Com. 258.
and the husband be attainted of Treason, or Felony, the whole term shall
be forfeited to the King. And likewise it is of felo de se, if a lease be
made to him and his wife for the term of years, he shall forfeit to the King
the whole term.

17 The law in some cases does give another title to the King of goods that
late were another persons, and does not term it a forfeiture, but a
confiscatition of goods, Confiscation of goods.
and that is, when the goods were not claimed, or title pretended unto them by
any other: Fitz. Cor. 355. 368.
As if a man be indicted for the felonious stealing of another man's goods,
where in truth those goods were his own, and the goods be brought into the
Court as a manoure against him; and it is asked of him, whose those goods be,
and he does disclaim to have any property in them: by this disclaimer he
shall loose the goods, Confiscation by disclaimer in his own goods.
though they were his own: and though he be acquit of the felony, the goods
by this disclaimer shall be confiscat to the King: but if he had not
disclaimed in them, Fitz. Cor. 391.
the goods should have been restored unto him.

Confiscation by disclaiming in the goods of others.
18 If goods be found in the possession of a felon, which he does disauow, Fi.
Cor. 368.
and after he is attainted for the stealing of other goods, but not of those:
In this case the goods which he did disauow shall be confiscat to the King: But
if he had been attainted for the stealing of those goods, Fitz. Forf. 24.
they should have bin termed goods forfeit, and not goods confiscat.

Confiscation of goods left out of an appeal.
19 If one do bring an Appeal of Robbery against a felon, and leaves out of
his Appeal some part of the goods robbed: Fitz. Cor. 100. Co. li. 5. 110
in this case the King shall have those goods which be left out of the Appeal,
for the plaintiff cannot enlarge his Appeal, nor recover those goods left out.
And therefore seeing the felon can make no executor, nor any can be
administrator to him, and so no other person is entitled to have those goods,
the King shall have them as confiscat, according to the old text, Quod non
capit Christus, capit fiscus: And the appellant shall be thus punished, by the
loss of his goods, for his negligence, attenuating, concealing of the robbers
offense.

Confiscation by a false appeal.
20 If a man bring an Appeal of Robbery against another, which took the
Appellants goods lawfully, Fitz. Cor. 367.
and not feloniously ( viz. found them in the high way) and it is so found by
verdict: in this case, though the appellee has no cause to detain them
against the appellant, for that they were his own goods, yet the plaintiff
shall loose them for his false appeal, and they shall be confiscat to the
King; and also the appellant shall be committed to prison, for charging the
defendant with robbery, whom he did know came lawfully by the goods, Co. li.
5. 110
and so for malicious seeking of a man's blood without cause; and the defendant
shall be discharged.

21 There is another kind of forfeiture of felons goods to the King, which is
called a waif, A waife.
and that is, when a felon upon huy and cry, or other pursuit after him, or for
fear to be taken, er otherwise to ease himself of carriage, Co. li. 5. 109
does without Huy and cry wayue, cast away, or go from the goods that he did
steals, and has in his possession, or some part thereof, and does fly away,
whereupon the Kings Officers, or some other in the Kings right, does seize
those goods: Seizing of a waife.
In this case the goods so seized be called a waife, and the King shall retain
them to his proper use, if the owner of them does not make fresh suit after the
felon, to attaint him for those goods. And if the owner do make fresh suit
after the felon, he shall have his goods again, notwithstanding the waiuing
and seizing of them. And this forfeiture of goods by waife, is a penalty which
the law imposes upon the owner of those goods, for default of fresh suit
against the felon, and for omitting his duty in pursuing and apprehending of
the felon, being a pernicious and corrupt member of the Commonwealth. St. 21.
H. 8. 11.
And by the Statute of 21. H. 8. the Justices before whom any felon or felons
shall be found guilty, or otherwise attainted by reason of evidence given by the
party robbed, or owner of any money, goods, or cattels robbed, or by any other
by his procurement, have power to award from time to time, writs of
Restitution, for the said money, goods, or cattels, as though any such Felon or
Felons were attainted at the suit of the party in Appeal. But if a felon do
steal goods, Co. li. 5. 109
and carry them into a Manor, and there leave them, or leave them in his own
house, or in the house of any other, or in the custody of any other, or hide
them in the ground, or in any secret place, and after does fly, these goods
shall not be adjudged in law to be waiued, nor shall be forfeited: for if the
felon has not the goods with him when he does fly, or does waiue them for
fear to be taken, they shall not be accounted waiued or forfeited, but the
owner may take them again without fresh suit, for that there is no default in
him.

22 If a felon do steal goods, and after does waiue them, The owner seiseth
goods waiued.
the owner of them may reseise the same goods, and carry them away twenty
years after the waiuing of them, if in the mean time no Officer of the Kings,
nor of any Lord of a liberty, 21. Ed. 4. 16.
has seized them before the owner: But if any Officer of the Kings, or of any
Lord of a Franchise has seized them before, then the owner must sue an Appeal
against the felon, and so he may have his goods again, if he has made fresh
suit: or else the owner must procure the felon to be indicted, arraigned, and
found guilty, or otherwise, to be attainted by evidence given by himself, or
by some other by his procurement, and by that means obtain a writ of
Restitution to be awarded by the Justices before whom the said felon shall be
arraigned, according to the foresaid statute of 21. H. 8. 11. And the like law
is, if a felon do steal goods, and does not waiue them, nor any Huy and cry
is made upon him, but one in the Kings right does take the goods from the
felon, upon suspicion that he has stolen them, yet the owner upon fresh suit
shall have restitution of them again, for it may be, that the owner had not
intelligence of the stealing of his goods a long time after they were stolen,
and then could not make fresh suit, nor levy huy and cry.

23 There can be no waife but of goods stolen (saving in certain cases) for if
one do take goods as a trespassor, and does go from them, No waife but of
stolen goods.
no man can seize them as a waife: P. 13. E. 4. 5
And therefore in an action of Trespass of goods taken away, if the defendant do
justify for a waife, it is a good issue for the plaintiff to join, that the
goods were not stolen. And if a man do fly for a felony, and leave his house
and goods, yet those goods shall not be a waife, for that they were not stolen.
And in some special case there may be a waife, though there be no stealing,
Waif of goods not stolen.
as upon a huy and cry levied, 29. E. 3. 29.
a man that has committed no felony does leave his own goods, and does fly
to a church, those goods may be seized to the Kings use for a waife.

No waife of goods stolen from an Alien
24 If the goods of an Alien which has the Kings safe conduct both for body
and goods, be stolen from him, and by the felon be after wayued, and refused,
yet those goods cannot be claimed or seized by the Officers of the King, or of
any Lord of a Franchise, for a waife: for when the King has granted to the
Alien safeconduct both in body and goods, and this is a covenant between the
King and him; then if a felon do steal his goods, and after waiue them, it is
no reason that the Alien should loose them, and be put to sue against the
felon, but he must sue to the King upon his covenant: And therefore the K.
cannot have those goods as waife, and by the same reason he cannot grant them
to another, neither can any have them by prescription.

Forf. of lands
25 As he that is attainted of Treason or Felony, shall loose his goods, debts
and rights, Tenant for years.
so also shall be forfeit his leases for term of years of lands, the lands
which he holds by extent of Statutes, Recognisances, or Judgments, his
leases for the term of his own or another persons life of lands. T. for life.
And because tenant in tail is in diverse respects but tenant for the term of
his own life, T. in tail.
of his lands intailed, therefore if he commit Petit Treason, or Felony, he
shall forfeit his said intailed lands, but for term of his own life. And he
that has land in another right, shall forfeit for high Treason, petit Treason,
Murder, or other felony, no longer or greater estate than he has in the same
lands: as a man seized in the right of his wife of lands, T. in the right of
his wife, or church.
or in the right of his church, Fitz. Forf. 13.
shall forfeit no further estate in the same lands, but during his own estate
therein: as it does appear not only by the rules of the common laws, but the
same is also confirmed by the Statute of 5. Ed. 6. 11. hereafter rehearsed.

The forf. of lands in tail.
26 By the common law Tenant in tail being attainted of high Treason, should
have forfeited the lands whereof he was so seized of an estate in tail, but
only for the term of his own life, and the same, after his death, should
have descended to his heir: But now by the Statute made Anno 26. H. 8. and
Anno 5. Ed. 6. St. 26. H. 8. 16. St. 5. E. 6. 11
it is ordained, That every offender and offenders, being hereafter lawfully
convict of any manner of high Treason, by presentment, confession, verdict, or
Process of Outlawrie, according to the due course and custom of the laws of
this Realm, shall loose and forfeit to the King, his heirs and successors,
all such lands, tenements, and hereditaments, which any such offender or
offenders shall have of any estate of inheritance, in his own right, in use, or
possession, by any right, title, or means within this realm of England, or
elsewhere within any the Kings dominions, at the time of any such Treasons
committed, or at any time after: 16. El. Dyer 332.
As if the King give land to the husband and wife, and the heirs males of
their two bodies lawfully begotten, the remainder thereof to the heirs males
of the body of the husband lawfully begotten, reserving the reuersion to
himself: and the husband and wife have issue a son, and the husband
commits high Treason, is attainted thereof, and executed; and this attainder
is confirmed by Act of Parliament, and all the offenders lands be given to the
King: Saving to all Strangers their right, other than to the Donor in Tail,
and his heirs: In this case, after the death of the wife, the King shall have
the land: for that by reason of the fathers attainder of Treason the estate
Tail was forfeyted and extinguished by force of the said Statutes of Anno 26.
H. 8. and Anno 5. Edw. 6. and the blood corrupt, An estate tail forfeited and
extinguished.
and the heirs disabled, for that in his lineall conueyance of his descent to
the land, he must derive himself heir as well to his father as to his
mother. Br. Done 61 Co. li. 1. 103
And in like sort if a man seized of lands in fee simple, makes a feoffement
thereof to certain persons to the use of his wife for the term of her life,
the remainder thereof to the use of the heirs of his own body lawfully
begotten; and after the feoffor has issue a son, and is attainted of high
Treason, and executed: In this case his son shall not inherit this land as
heir to his father, whose blood was corrupt by his attainder, but the land
shall be forfeited to the King by the foresaid Statute of 26. H. 8. And as
tenant in tail by committing of high Treason shall by force of the foresaid
Statutes of 26. H. 8. and 5. Ed. 6. forfeit those lands whereof he has the
possession, reuersion, or remainder in tail: so shall he likewise forfeit to
the King by committing of high Treason, those lands whereunto he has but a
right in tail. Pl. Com. 547.
As if the King give lands to a man, Forf. of a right in tail.
and to the heirs males of his body lawfully begotten, reserving the
reuersion to himself, and the tenant in tail has issue a son, and dies,
and the son does enter and make a feoffement in fee to a stranger of the same
land, and then has issue a son, and commits high Treason, and is
attainted thereof, this land shall be forfeited to the King: for by this
feoffement made by tenant in tail to a stranger, there passed none other
estate from the same tenant in tail, but only an estate for the term of his
own life, and so the tail, and the right of the tail remained in the tenant
in tail, and by his attainder the estate in tail is extinguished in the Kings
reuersion in fee simple. And the King shall be said rather to have this land
reuerted unto him, as if all the issue of tenant in tail were dead, than by
forfeiture: for the words of the Statute of 26. H. 8. be, All persons attainted
of Treason, shall loose and forfeit to the King, his heirs and successors, all
lands and tenements which such offender shall have of any estate of inheritance
at the time of the Treason committed, or at any time after: Saving to all
others and their heirs (other than the offenders in Treason, their heirs and
successors) all their rights and possessions, etc. which they had at the day of
the Treason committed, or after. And by these general words, That they shall
loose and forfeit all lands and tenements, which they have of any estate of
inheritance, and by excluding the heir in the Saving, lands tayled shall be
forfeited: and the lands in this case cannot be aptly termed to be forfeited to
the King and his heirs, where he had the fee simple before, but are rather to
be said reuerted to the King, the tenant in tail dying without any issue,
which, by his attainder of Treason, and the corruption of his blood, Co. li. 7.
33.
could inherit this land. And if the King by his letters Patents under the
great Seal do create an Earl, Forf. of name or title of dignity intailed.
and give him the title and honor of an Earldom to him and the heirs males
of his body begotten, and the grantee has issue two sons by several women,
and then dies, and his eldest son does enjoy the same Earldom, and after
commits Treason, by leuying of war in the Realm against the King, and is
attainted thereof, and then dies without issue of his body begotten: by this
attainder the same shall be forf. to the K. and not descend to the brother of
the half blood, nor to his heirs: for this Earldom and name of dignity may be
intailed according to the stat. of W. 2. St. 13. E. 1. 1
De donis conditionalibus, for that it concerns land, and must be supported
and maintained with land to uphold the countenance and charge of ye owner
thereof: And therefore this Earldome being by the K. given to the Earl and the
heirs males of his body begotten, is an inheritance which may descend from one
heir male to an other, and then by the special words of the before rehearsed
Statute of 26. H. 8. and 5. Ed. 6. it shall be forfeited to the King by the
said heirs attainder of high treason: for it was in the same heir an
hereditament, and whereof he had an estate of inheritance. And moreover, when
the King at the first did give to this Earl, and the heirs males of his body
begotten, the foresaid great title of honor, though there was no condition
expressed in the same grant, yet there was a secret condition implied therein,
viz. that the said grauntee, and the heirs males of his body should be
assistant and serviceable to the King his heirs and successors by his Council
in the time of peace, and by his force and prowess in the time of war:
Therefore when the heir male of this Earl the first grauntee did take
Council to break the peace of the King, and levied wars and employed his
force and power against him, he first brake the same secret condition, which
was annexed to his ancestors grant of the Earldom: And so there is reason
and cause why his said title of honor depending upon the same condition
should therewith cease and determine, and that the same should return again
to the Crown from whence it was derived.

The forfeture of lands in fee simple.
27 Besides the forfeitures aforesaid, 30. H. 6. 5.
every person that is attainted of high treason, petit treason, or felony,
shall also forfeit his lands in fee simple, which he has in his own right, in
use, or possession: saving that the attainder of treason by force of the
Statute of Anno 5. El. 1. St. 5. El. 1.
(ordained against the maintaining of the authority of the Bishops and Sea of
Rome) shall not extend to make any corruption of blood, the disheritance of any
heir, forfeiture of any dower, nor to prejudice the right or title of any
person, other than the offender or offenders, during his or their natural
lives only. And saving that the attainder of treason, by force of the Statute
of Anno 5. Eliz. 11. St. 5. El. 11
(provided against the clipping, washing, filing, or rounding of money) makes
no corruption of blood in the heir, or forfeiture of dower in the wife. And
saving that the attainder of treason by force of the Statute established Anno
18. El. 1. (against impairing, diminishing, falsifying, skaling, St. 18. El. 1
or lightning of money) makes no corruption of blood, nor the wife to loose
her dower: for he that is attainted of that treason shall suffer death, and
forfeit all his goods, and chattels to the King, and all his lands during his
life only. And likewise saving that the attainder of felony by force of the
Statute made Anno 1. Iac. 12. (against coniuration, witchcraft, enchantment,
St. 1. Iac. 12
charm, and sorcerie) makes no corruption of blood, nor the forfeiture of the
heirs or successors inheritance of any land, nor of the wives title of dower.
And further saving that the attainder of felony by force of the Statute
provided Anno 1. M. 12. against unlawful assemblies, St. 1. M. 12
makes no corruption of blood. And moreover, saving that the attainder of
felony by force of the Statute ordained Anno 5. El. 14. against the forging of
Evidences, St. 5. El. 14.
and writings, makes no corruption of blood, nor forfeiture of land or dower.
And furthermore saving that the attainder of felony by force of the Statute of
Anno 31. Eliz. 4. St. 31. El. 4
(provided against the imbeseling of the Queens ordnance, armor, or
artillery) makes the offender to forfeit no lands, tenements, or
hereditaments, any longer than during his life, St. 4. Iac. 1. S. Trial by the
country 10. Co. li. 7. 34 S. Br. 56.
no corruption of blood, nor the wife to forfeit her dower. And the same law
is, if an Englishman do commit any felony in Scotland. And if a man have an
annuitie to him and his heirs, The forfeture of an annuity.
and he do commit high treason, and is attainted thereof, he shall forfeit to
the King the same annuitie by force of the before recited Statute of Anno 26.
H. 8. 13. for that the same annuitie is an inheritance.

28 He that is attainted of high treason, petit treason, or felony, Forfeiting
of a title to land.
shall also forfeit such lands, whereof he has neither possession, reuersion,
or remainder, but only a title, or right, or cause of action. As if a man be
disseised of lands, and then the disseisee commits high treason, Co. l. 3. 10
after an office found thereof, ye king may seize those lands as forfeited and
escheated unto him, in respect of the same persons attainder of treason. And if
the disseisee be attainted of petit treason, or felony, the Lord of the Fee,
of whom the same lands be holden, may enter into the same lands, as escheated
unto him, in respect o^ the attainder of his lawful tenant. But the Lord
cannot have a writ or escheat, or other action to recover the same land,
because his tenant died not, or was not seized thereof, but his only remedy
is to enter. 6. H. 7. 9
And if a man make a lease for the term of life of his land, and after
commits felony, and then the tenant for the term of life dies, the Lord
may enter, but cannot have a writ of escheat.

29 As he that is attainted of treason, or felony, shall forfeit his lands,
Forfeiting of evidence.
so shall the Lord to whom those lands be forfeited, 49. H. 6. 14
have the evidence of the same lands, as escheated or forfeited unto him, to
maintain his title in the same lands escheated, and to prove how his late
tenant came by and held the same lands.

St. 9. H. 3. 29
30 Though it is ordained by the statute of Magna Charta, That justice shall not
be sold, deferred, or denied to no man: neither shall any man be condemned but
by lawful trial: and that it be further established by the statute of Anno 5.
Edw. 3. St. 5. E. 3. 9
That no man shall be attached nor foreiudged of life, lands, or goods, against
the form of the great Charter, and the Law of the Realm: So that the Law of
the Realm does allow to every man that is an offender, his answer and lawful
trial, be his crime supposed to be never so great, and the proof thereof
never so manifest. But if a man that is arrested of Treason or Felony, or being
vehemently suspected to have committed Treason or Felony, is attempted to be
arrested, be so wilful, stubborn, or rebellious, Forfeiture without
at-attainder.
that he will not yield to be justified and tried by the Law, but will either
kill himself, or give cause to other men to slay him, Fi. Cor. 289 290 312. S.
Br. 5.
for resisting and not submitting his obedience to the Law, then he shall
forfeit his goods, so that this offense be found and presented by twelve men
before the Coroner, or some Justices after his death: for in this case the
default is in the offender, and not in the Law, that he came not to lawful
trial of his offense; for the law requires no more, but that the supposed
offender shall be safely kept sub custodia legis, by imprisonment or maineprise,
until it be tried whether he be an offender or not. But though the person thus
slain, shall for his disobedience forfeit his goods, being not attainted
either of treason or felony, yet in the like case, he shall not forfeit his
lands if he be slain in arresting or after arrest, or otherwise die before
he be attainted, St. 34. E. 3. 12.
as it appears by the Stat. of an^ 34. Ed. 3. 12. which has established,
That for forfeitures of dead persons not attainted, nor adjudged in their
lives, their heirs or land-tenants shall not be impeached, or challenged, nor
of any other forfeiture, except the forfeitures in old time adjudged, after the
death of the persons by presentment in Air, or in the Kings bench, or of
felons of themselves, or others. And yet some do affirm, if a man do levy
war, or open rebellion against the King, or is assistant to his enemies in
the field, and then is slain in battle, he shall forfeit his lands and goods:
And others do add thereunto, that the same his Treason and manner of death,
must also after his death be found by a Jury super visum corporis, Co. li. 4.
57 Pl. Com. 262. 263.
before the chief Justice of England, being the sovereign Coroner of the
realm, and he must return it into the Kings Bench, and make a Record thereof,
and then that person shall forfeit his lands and goods. And upon those words of
the said Statute of 34. Ed. 3. viz. (Except the forfeitures in old time
adjudged after the death of the persons by presentment in Eire, or in the Kings
Bench, or etc.) some do infer, that if a presentment in Eire, or in the
Kings Bench, be made of such an open rebellion, and battle thereupon foughten,
and of those that manifestly showing themselves to be open enemies or rebels
to the King, were slain therein, that by the words of the same Statute, they
shall forfeit their lands. But if a man be arrested for counterfeiting the K.
great or privy Seal, for forging of his money, or for a privy conspiracy of
the death of the King, or etc. and is slain in resisting the said arrest, or
for a rescous attempted before or after the said arrest, he shall forfeit his
goods, but not his lands. And if he be arrested for any of the said offenses,
and committed to prison for the same, and after does dye in prison before he
be attainted of any of the said offenses, he shall neither forfeit lands nor
goods, though he be taken with the manoure, viz. found hand having, and back
bearing: for though it is a mischief that a man committing high Treason, shall
forfeit neither life, lands, or goods, yet the law does rather bear with that
mischief, than to suffer such an inconvenience, that a man only accused, or
but only a supposed offender, should be attainted, and forfeit his lands and
goods, where being prevented by death, viz. by the hand of God, he cannot come
to answer, and defend himself, and by that means cannot be condemned by such
lawful trial which is meant and specified in the before rehearsed Statute of
Magna charta: But for the avoiding of question and doubt in the case aforesaid,
they which have been known parties to such open and manifest rebellions, St.
29. H. 6. 1 St. 12. El. 16 St. 29. El. 1 St. 35. El. 5. St. 3. Iac. 2.
have been of late years attainted by Act of Parliament, and their lands and
goods given as forfeit to the King: As it appears by the stat. of Anno 29. H.
6. 13. El. 29. El. 35. El. 3. Iac.

The forf. of the year, day, and wast.
31 There is another forfeiture besides the loss of life, lands, annuities, Fi.
Cor. 310 290. 327.
and goods, wherewith the law has devised to punish those that do commit
petit Treason, or Felony, and be attainted thereof, which is called in Latin
the forfeiture of Diem, annum, and vastum, the forfeiture of the year, day,
and wast, which is executed upon the houses and lands of the offender, that be
holden of any other, saving of the king: That is, the felons houses and lands
shall be seized into the Kings hands, where they shall remain by the space of
a year, and day, and then the houses shall be thrown down to the ground, the
trees shall be pulled up by the roots, the meadows shall be ploughed up, and all
things which the felon did build or plant, shall be cast down, dug up, Fitz.
Cor. 358.
and supplanted: Which punishment was ordained in despite of offenders, and to
show to others, how much the law does detest murderers, committers of
burglarie, robbery, and other felonies, and as much as may be to terrify and
discourage others to attempt or practice the like.

32 It appears by Bracton, that by the common law the King should have had
but only the wast of a Felons lands, viz. the benefit to pull down his
houses, root up his trees, plough up his meadows, and such other commodities,
as he could have raised by spoiling and wasting of the felons houses, trees,
and lands, and that then the land so wasted should have been presently
delivered to the Lord of the fee of whom the same lands were holden, which wast
and spoil was then made without redemption. And after by a composition made
between the King and the Lords, it was agreed, By what means the K. came by
the year, day, and wast.
That the King should have the benefit of the felons lands a year and a day,
to redeem the spoil and wast which he might make of the said felons lands.
And the K. grant by the great Charter made Anno 9. H. 3. St. 9. H. 4. 3 22.
tends to the same effect, viz. We will not hold the lands of those that be
convict of felony, but a year and a day, and then they shall be delivered to
the Lords of the fees. And so it seems, that King Henry the third, and King
Edward the first, did hold themselves satisfied with the year and day of the
felons lands, without taking the wast thereof. St. 17. E. 2. 16
But after Anno 17. Ed. 2. the Kings Prerogatives royal being expressed, or
enacted by Parliament, amongst others it is ordained, That the King shall have
all the goods of felons which be condemned, and which be fugitive, wheresoever
they be found: And if they have any freehold, it shall be forthwith seized
into the Kings hands, and the King shall have the profits thereof by the space
of a year and a day, and the land shall be wasted and destroyed in the
houses, woods, and gardens, and in all things belonging to the same (except men
of certain places privileged) And after the King has had the year, day, and
wast, the land shall be restored to the chief Lord of the same fee, unless
that before he redeem the same year, day, and wast, of the King, by the
payment of a fine. But there is a custom in the County of Gloucester, that
after a year and a day the lands and tenements of Felons in that Shire, shall
reuert and be restored to the next heir to whom they ought to have descended,
if the felony had not been committed. And in Kent in Gauelkind, the father to
the bough, the son to the plough, there all the heirs males shall divide
their inheritance, and likewise women: but women shall not make partition with
men.

33 By force of which stat. of Praerogatiua Regis, The year, day, and wast of
lands, of what title, shall be forfeited.
ever sithence that time the King has had all the three things aforesaid, viz.
the year, the day, and the wast of the lands of him which was attainted of
felony, as one of the prerogatives annexed to the Crown, in all cases where
the felon had such an estate in his land, Bracton de Corona, cap. 13.
that he might forfeit the same after his death, and that he himself might
lawfully have made wast in the same, without being impeached therefore. And
therefore if the felon be but tenant for the term of life, or for the term of
years of lands, the king shall not have the year, day, and wast of them,
after the felons death, for then he might wast another man's inheritance. But if
a man that is seized of lands in the right of his wife, do commit felony, and
is attainted thereof, the king shall have the profits of the land during the
husbands life if the wife do live so long. Fitz. Cor. 327.
And some do affirm, that the king shall have the year, day, and wast of the
said wives lands, after the felons death, because the felon during his life
might have committed wast therein, and for that the felon had such an estate in
his wives lands, that by the common law he might in his life have made
alienation of them, and driven his wife to her Cuiin vita, to have recovered
them. But that seems to be helped (if any such law were before) by the
Statute of Anno 32. H. 8. where it is ordained, That no fine, feoffement, or
other act, made, suffered, St. 32. H. 8. 28
or done by the husband only, of any lands, tenements, or other hereditaments,
being the inheritance or freehold of his wife, during the couerture between
them, shall in any wise be, or make any discontinuance thereof, or be
prejudicial or hurtful to the said wife, or her heirs, or to such as shall
have title, interest, or right to the same, by the death of such wife: But the
same wife, or her heirs, and such other to whom such right shall appertain
after her decease, shall and may then lawfully enter into such lands, etc.
according to their rights and titles therein, notwithstanding such fine,
feoffement, or other act (fines levied by the husband and wife, whereunto the
said wife is party and privy, only except.) By which Statute the wife after
the death of her husband, may enter into her own land, notwithstanding any
attainder, forfeiture, or other act done by her husband.

No year, day, and wast of lands holden by joint purchase.
34 A man seized of land in fee simple, holden of a common person, did infeoffe
thereof the husband and wife, and their heirs, the husband committed felony,
and was attainted thereof, the King seized the land into his hands, for his
year, day, and wast, and after the Kings said term expired, 4. E. 3. 47.
the Lord of the fee of whom the same land was holden, did sue in the
Chauncerie to have the same land restored to him, to whom, by warrant, the
Escheator did deliver the same lend, upon whose possession the wife of the
felon attainted did enter, and the said Lord of the fee reentred upon her,
whereupon the said woman brought an Assise against the said Lord, and recovered
the land: Because the fee simple of the same land being in the wife, by reason
of the joint purchase with her husband, the K. ought not to have had the year
and day after the felons death, nor the Lord of the fee the land after by
Escheat.

35 If tenant in tail Tenant in tail.
general or special, or tenant in frank marriage of land, do commit petit
Treason, or Felony, and is attainted thereof, and executed, the King after his
death shall neither have the year, day, or wast in the felons land; nor the
Lord of the fee shall have the land by Escheat, but after the felons death the
same land shall descend, reuert, or remain secundum formam doni, to the next
heir in tail of the felon, or to him in the reuersion or remainder thereof:
for in this case the felon was in effect but tenant for the term of his own
life, and thereby could not forfeit a greater estate in his land, than that
which he had. And in in like sort if he that has land by fresh disseisin, or
is tenant in fee farm of land, A disseiser. Tenant in fee farm. A mortgagee.
upon condition to pay the uttermost yearly value thereof, or has land in
Mortgage, to be redeemed by the Mortgager, upon condition of payment of money,
or other condition, does commit petit treason, or felony, and is attainted
thereof, the King shall not have the year, day, and wast, for that would tend
to the prejudice of others, not party to the offense, who have, or may have a
better right and title to the same lands than the felon attainted.

Fi. Cor. 310
36 If a man that is owner of land in ancient demesne, Tenant in ancient demesne.
which he may sell without consent of the Lord, do commit petit Treason or
Felony, and is attainted thereof, the King shall have the year, day, and
wast, notwithstanding that he has used to surrender the land into the Lords
hands by a rod in the Court, upon every alienation thereof. But if he be owner
of the land in ancient demesne of a base tenure, it is otherwise.

Fitz. Cor. 290.
37 A man that took a Church for felony escaped, and the town pursued, The
year, day and wast without attainder.
and killed him, because he would not yield himself; and this matter was
presented before the Justices in Air, and they adjudged, that his goods, and
the profits of his lands, should be forfeited to the King, from the time of his
flying until the presentment; and also that the King should have the year,
day, and wast. S. Br. 30.
But this land shall not come to the Lord of the fee by Escheat, because he
was not attainted of felony.

Pi. Cor. 332
38 The King shall not have the year, day, The year, day and wast of a Clerk
convict. Land of small value.
and wast of the lands of a clerk convict, neither shall the Lord of the fee
have the forseiture thereof, for that the offender is not attainted, but only
convict of felony. And if the land of the felon attainted, be but of the
yearly value of three or four shillings, or of so small value, Fi. Cor. 327
that it will cost more to obtain it by suit out of the Kings hands than it is
worth, then the King shall not have the year, day, and wast thereof.

St. 17. E. 2. 16
39 The words of the foresaid Stat. of Praerogatiua Regis be (If they have any
freehold, When the K. shall have the felons year, day, and wast.
it shall be presently seized into the Kings hands) This word presently, ought
to be intended immediately after the Office found, and not before: 49. E. 3.
11. Fitz. N. B. fol. 144.
And therefore if an Office of that land be not found until it be many
years after the felons attainder, yet from the time of the Office found,
until a year and a day after, the King shall have the Felons lands. And also
the King shall have the profit of the Felons lands, from the time of his
attainder, until the Office be found thereof, though it be twenty years
between the attainder and the Office: for the heir of the felon cannot have
it in respect of the corruption of blood: And the Lord must not have it by
Escheat, until the King be entitled unto it by Office, and until one year
and a day after, and until the King has wasted it, unless the Lord does
agree with the King in the mean time, for the said year, day, and wast. And
moreover, Fitz. Trauerse 48. 4. E. 3. 47.
the Lord cannot at any time enter into the same land as escheated unto him,
until he has sued a writ to have it delivered unto him out of the Kings
hands: for after a writ is awarded to find the land of him that is attainted of
Felony, another Writ shall be directed, to enquire if the King has had the
year, Regist. fol. 165.
day, and wast: and that being found, the Lord shall have the land out of the
Kings hands, and not before: because though the attainder of the Felon was
found, and that the King ought to have had the year, day, and wast, yet it may
be that the King never had the profit thereof, but was interrupted by some
p^^^on, or by some casual means.

40 This commodity to the King, and forfeiture of the felon, of the year,
Fit. Cor. 310
day, and wast, is such a benefit to the King, and so firmly and highly
annexed to the Crown, The year, day, and wast, not grantable from the Crown.
that it cannot be severed from it, or granted to any other: neither can any
person claim it by color of any franchise or liberty. But after the King is
entitled unto it by Office, he may grant or commit the land to another
during the year and day, and also give him authority to take the benefit of
the wast.

What goods of felons the king shall have
41 The words of the foresaid stat. of Praerog. Regis be (The K. shall have all
the goods of felons which be condemned, and which be fugitive) which is as
much to say, as he shall have all their goods, mouable and immovable: for the
King shall have the corn growing upon the land of the felon attainted, and the
issues and profits of the land, which he has in his own right, or in the
right of his wife, during the time of his life, or until he does purchase his
pardon. But touching the profit of fugitives lands, there is a difference
between a flying presented before the Coroner, and a flying found by verdict
upon an acquitall: for upon a flying presented before the Coroner, Forfeiture
upon flying.
Fi. Cor. 296 344.
he shall forfeit the profits of his lands, until his death, or until he be
acquit, or until he has purchased the K. pardon: but upon a flying found by
verdict, upon acquitall, he shall forf. no issues of his lands, for by his
acquitall the land is discharged, and consequently the issues thereof.

From what time forf. of land shall have relation.
42 The law has restrained offenders in Treason and Felony to certain times,
to make alienation of their lands and goods, and has prefixed limits whereunto
the forfeiture of their said lands and goods shall have relation; and yet with
this difference, That as soon as any Treason or Felony is committed, the
offender therein is restrained to make any alienation of his lands, for then it
is not his land, but by the committing of the Treason or Felony, Pl. Com. 263.
30. H. 6. 5. Bracton. Fitz. Forf. 30. Bracton l. 2. 13.
he has forfeited all the estate which he had therein. And therefore, if
between the time of the committing of the Treason or Felony, and of the
offenders attainder thereof, the offender does make any alienation or assurance
of his land, after the time that the offender shall be attainted of the same
Treason or Felony, the said assurance shall be void, whether the same
attainder be by verdict, confession, or outlawrie: for the forfeiture of the
land shall have relation from the time of the offense committed.

From what time the forf. of goods shall have relation.
43 The forfeiture of goods and chattels shall not look back so far as
forfeyture of lands, nor shall have relation from the time of the Treason or
Felony committed, but from the time of the Attaynder of the Treason, or
Felony: And therefore if one do commit Treason, or Felony, Fi. Forf. 30
and in the mean time between the Treason or Felony committed, and the
offenders attainder thereof, the offender does give away his goods, this is a
good gift, for as yet they be not forfeit, but be his own to maintain
himself and his family, until he be attainted of Treason, or Felony, and by
the Law adjudged not worthy to possess or enjoy goods, nor to have sustenance.
And therefore, if upon a fugam fecit presented before the Coroner, one do
forfeit his goods, he shall not forfeit those goods that he had at the time of
the Felony committed, but he shall only forfeit those goods which he had at
that day, when the fugam fecit was presented against him. And in like sort, if
one that is indicted of Felony be acquit thereof by verdict, and in their
verdict the Jury do find, Fi. Cor. 296
that the prisoner did fly for the Felony, in this case the same prisoner
shall forfeit those goods which he had the day of the verdict given, and not
any goods which he had before. And so it is, if one be convict by verdict, 7.
H. 4. 41.
the goods shall be forfeited which the offender had the day of the verdict
given, and not those which he had before. And he that is outlawed of Treason or
Felony, shall forfeit those goods which he has at the time of the Exigent
awarded, and not those which he had before, and has aliened. But if a man do
commit a Treason or Felony, and is arrested thereof, and as he is in carrying
to a Justice of Peace to be examined, or to the Jail by the Constables, or
others, do break away, or in making of rescous or resistance is slain by
those which do so carry him, because he will not yield, and be justified by the
law: Fi. Cor. 290
in this case those goods shall be forfeited, which he had at the time of the
felony committed. And so it is, if one commit a Felony, and when the Shirife,
Coroner, Constable, or others do attempt to apprehend him* he is slain because
he does resist, and will not yield to be arrested, the goods shall be forfeited
which he has at the time of the felony committed.

44 It appears by the statute of 3. Ed. 1. St. 3. E. 1.
entitled Officium Coronatoris, Who shall seize and keep Felons goods, and
when.
That if any person be found guilty before the Coroner of the death of another,
presently the Coroner shall go to his house, and inquire what cattle he
has, and what corn he has in his graunge, and what on the ground, and if he
be a Freeman, what land he has, and how much it is worth by the year: and
when they have so inquired of all things, they shall cause the land, the corn,
and cattle to be priced, as if they should be forthwith sold, and immediately
they shall be delivered to the whole Town, to answer for the same before the
Justices. And in like sort, when it is found before the Coroner, that one did
fly for a Felony, 22. Ass. p. 96
the Shirife shall presently seize his lands into the Kings hands by word,
without Enquest, and also shall seize all his goods into the Kings hands, and
shall appraise them by an Enquest (as well of Villains as of Freemen) and the
prices shall be enrolled in the Coroners Roll, and delivered to the Town, to
answer to the King for the same: for by that which is found before the
Coroner, the goods be forfeited, without further inquiry. 43. E. 3. 24
And so may another Officer of the Kings seize the goods of a Felon before
attainder, and if the Felon does find surety, the Officer must leave them in
his custody. But whether he does find surety, or not, the Officer ought not to
carry them away, but must leave them in the custody of the Felons neighbors:
For if one be indicted of Felony, his goods shall not be removed forth of his
house until he be attainted, 7. H. 4. ^1
but shall be kept by his neighbors all the time of his imprisonment, and the
Felon shall be maintained with them. And according thereunto there is a writ in
the Register, Registrum.
viz. Quod tenementa and bona taliter capta, videantur and imbreuiantur, and
saluo custodiantur per balliuum ipsius capti, qui securitatem Regiinueniet ei
respondendi, si etc. saluis inde ipfi capto and familiae suae necessarijs
quamdiu fuerit in prisona. By which writ it does appear, and also by the
assertions of Bracton and Britton, that one which is indicted or imprisoned for
Felony, shall not be put out of the possession of his goods, until he be
convict of Felony, but he must have reasonable maintenance of his goods for him
and his family, until he be convict, and then that which does remain shall be
the kings. And yet the felon must not disorderly sell or wast his goods: and so
this difference is to be observed in seizing of a Felons goods, viz. where the
goods be forfeited before the felony tried, and where they be not forfeited
until the felony tried: For if they be forfeited before the felony tried, they
shall be presently seized upon the forfeiture of them, though there be no
conviction of felony (as in the foresaid cases, where one is found guilty
before the Coroner of the death of another, or where it is found before the
Coroner, that one did fly for a felony:) But if they be not forfeited until
the felony tried, then they shall not be seized, until the Felon be convicted.

The goods of a prisoner shall not be seized until he be attainted.
45 And because that diverse persons were often arrested and imprisoned for
suspicion of Felony, sometime of malice, and sometime of light suspicion, and
were kept in prison without bail or mainprise; and for that sometime shirifes,
escheators, baylifes of Liberties, and others, did seize and take away the
goods of some persons arrested or imprisoned for Felony, before the same person
was convict or attainted of the same Felony, contrary to the common law:
Therefore partly to confirm the common law, and partly to give to the party
grieved a more ample recompense for his wrong received then the common law
before did, viz. to give him the double value of his goods so taken or seized,
where the common law gave him the single value, and partly to give him a speedy
remedy to recover the same, there was a stat. made Ann^ 1. R. 3. St. 1. R. 3. 3
by the which it is ordained, That no Shirife, Vndershirife, Escheator, Baylife
of Franchise, or other person, shall take or seize the goods of any person
arrested or imprisoned, before the same person or persons so arrested or
imprisoned be convict or attainted of such felony, according to the law of
England: or otherwise that the same goods be in some manner lawfully forfeited,
upon pain to loose the double value of the goods so taken, to him or them
which be endamaged thereby, by action of Debt in this behalf to be pursued, by
like process, judgment, and execution, as is commonly used in other actions of
Debt pursued at the common law, wherein no wager of law, essoine, or protection
shall be allowed: This stat. of 1. R. 3. exte^deth only to those that be
arrested or imprisoned: for notwithstanding this statute, the shirife may seize
the goods of them which be at liberty and indicted of felony, at the second
Capias, by force of the stat. of 25. E. 3. St. 2^ E. 3. 14
as it appears Appeals 59.

46 The custody of the goods of those which be convict of Felony, Who shall have
the custody of felons goods forfeited.
or which be Fugitives, after they be forfeited, does belong to the Town where
the same goods be, or where the Felon both dwell: and therefore upon a fugam
fecit presented before the Coroner, 22. As. p. 96.
the goods ought to be seized by the Shirife, and praised by an Enquest, and
the appraisement must be enrolled in the Coroners Roll, and the goods shall be
delivered to the town, to answer to the king for them: Fi. Cor. 366
and though the goods be not delivered to the town, yet if the goods were in
the Felons possession at the time of his conviction, or flying, the town shall
answer for them. And some do affirm, that the shirife and the Dozeners may
seize Felons goods into the kings hands, and the shirife shall deliver those
goods to the town, to answer to the king at the coming of the Justices in
Air: But if neither the Shirife nor the Dozeners do seize the same goods, yet
the town shall answer to the king for them at the coming of the Justices in
Air: For as soon as a fugam fecit is found before the Coroner, Fi. Forf. 32
the town shall be presently charged with the goods of him that did fly away.
And though it be presented before the Justices, that a Felon was delivered to
the shirife with the manoure, and with all his goods, yet the town shall be
charged with the said Felons goods, though the same was found, and presented
with intent to ease or discharge the same town. And in like sort,
notwithstanding it does appear by the Coroners Roll, Fi. Cor. 300
that the goods of a Felon were delivered to one man of the town, yet the king
shall leuy those goods of the whole town. But when the shirife does come to
leuy those goods of the town, by the shirifes consent they may be levied of him
only who had them in custody. Fit. Co. 181
One that was indicted of Felony, appeared at the Exigent, and pleaded, and was
acquit, and his goods being forfeited, because he did not come in before the
Exigent awarded, were praised by the Enquest, which acquitted him at forty
shillings: and the same Enquest found what town was charged with them, which
said presentment of the Enquest was enrolled, and it was adjudged, that the
same town may seize the same Felons goods in what place soever they can find
them. And because the town where the Felons goods be, shall answer for them,
therefore they which do take into their possession any of the same Felons
goods, and other goods which do belong unto the king as Deodands, and such
like, are to be amerced by the Justices in Air, if the same goods be not
delivered unto them by the town, which has the charge of them, for that the
same town has the custody of them. But by a Statute made Anno 31. Ed. 3. St.
31. E. 3. 3
the town shall be eased of this charge, if they can show what other person has
detained those goods, and that they could never have possession of them: the
words of which statute be: If any man or town be charged in the Exchequer by
the Estreats of the Justices, of the goods of Fugitives and Felons, and he will
allege in discharge of himself, another that is chargeable, he shall be heard,
and right shall be done. And therefore if it be found by office before the
Escheator, that the goods of a man attainted of Felony be in the custody of
such a person: in this case a Scire facias shall be awarded upon the same office
against the said person, to show if he has any thing to say why he should not
answer those goods. But if it be found by the Enquest, which did attaint the
Felon before Justices of Jail delivery, Justices of Oier and Determiner, or
Justices of Peace, that any person does detain the goods of a Felon attainted,
the said Justices cannot award process thereupon against the party, that does
detain the same goods, but they must send their Estreats into the Exchequer,
and the officers of the exchequer will award process against the same party to
leuy the same goods. And yet if he that is presented to detain the same goods,
do find himself grieved therewith, he cannot have a Trauerse in the Exchequer
to that which is found by the Jury, because the court of Exchequer has not the
record before the^, neither can he trauerse the same before the Justices of
Jail delivery, Justices of Oyer and Determiner, or Justices of peace, for
that they cannot award a Supersedeas to the Barons of the Exchequer to surcease
their Process. But his only remedy in this case is, to procure a Certiorari to
remove the Record into the Kings Bench, and there to tender his trauerse, and
auerrement, and to have a Supersedeas from thence to the Barons of the
Exchequer, to surcease their Process. And the same law is, if the like thing be
found by an Enquest in the Kings Bench, after they have delivered their Records
thereof into the Exchequer. And a man which was indicted for the taking of
goods of one that was attainted of Treason, was put to the answer thereof: So
that sithence the said statute of 31. Edw. 3. others have been charged with
felons goods, as well as towns. But the Sheriff was always charged with the
profits of felons and fugitives lands, Fi. Cor. 39^
according to the extent thereof, The Sheriff charged with felons lands.
and not any town: And so he was charged with goods co^fiscat: as, where upon
an indictment of felony, Fitz. Cor. 355. 368.
the manoure is brought into the Court, and the party indicted does disclaim
therein, by this disclaimer the King shall have the manoure, and the Sheriff
shall be charged therewith. And the same manoure shall be praised by the
Enquest that does try the felony: and if it be found by the same Jury, that
it was impaired by the Constable, or any other who had the same in keeping, the
Sheriff shall be commanded to levy so much in value, as it was impaired by the
said Constable, or other. And in some cases the Sheriff shall be charged with a
felons goods, Fitz. Cor. 290. 308.
and not the town where the felon did dwell, or where his goods remained: but
that must be by agreement between the said Sheriff and the town.

To whom the forf. of lands for high treason shall accrue
47 In High treason the King shall have the forfeiture of the offenders lands,
of whom soever they be holden, and that by the common law: for the offense
committed is not to any subject, but to the Sovereign governor himself, his
Crown, and Realm, which is an offense of so high a nature, that it cannot be
recompensed with all that the offender has, and then it should be less
counteruailed, if any other should be partaker with the King therein. And the
mean Lords shall receive no loss thereby, for they had nothing in the land
but a Seigniorie out of it: And if they hold over of the King by the like
services, then have they lost nothing, for that they be discharged of their
charge and services, which they did hold by, which was as much as they received
of the tenant perauaile: And if they held of the King by less rent than their
tenant perauaile held of them, they shall have the surplusage of that which was
holden of them, of the king, by the way of petition. Fitz. Assise 124. Fitz.
Petition 19.
And if the king do not keep the land so escheated unto him in his hands, but
will assure it to another, he must revive the tenure in the Mesne Lord, to
hold of them of whom it was holden before the attainder. It appears by the
statute of Praerogatiua Regis cap. 12. That the Kings and whole Court of
Parliaments meaning was at that time when it was published and established by
Parliament, which were the Prerogatives royal, annexed to the Crown of
England by the common law, That of such lands as did escheat to the King, the
service of the Lord of the fee should be reserved: for the words of the Statute
be these, viz. St. 17. Ed. 2. 12.
The King shall have escheat of the lands of Normans, to whose see soever they
belong: Saving the service appertayning to the chief Lords of the same Fee.
And King Henry the third gave the Escheates of Normans lands to be holden of
the chief Lords of the Fee, by Services and Customs due and accustomed
thereunto. Some of which Normans dwelling in Normandy at that time had lands
in England, and were subjects to the King of England, and did forsake their
obedience to the King of England, and became subjects to the K. of France, the
King of Englands enemy, and thereby did forfeit those lands which they had in
England, by the common law, and they did escheat to the king.

48 In Petit Treason, Who shall have the forf. in petit treason and felony.
and Felony the king shall not have the escheat of the offenders land, unless
it be holden immediately of him: but the king shall have the profits of the said
offenders land by the space of a year and a day, and the land shall be wasted
and destroyed in the houses, woods, and gardens, and in all things belonging
to the same, and then it shall be delivered to the chief Lord of the fee, of
whom the same land is immediately holden. And yet in some cases the King shall
have the forfeiture of the land of him which does commit Petit Treason, or
Felony, though the land be holden of others, and not of him, St. 17. E. 2. 14.
as it appears by the Statute of Praerogatiua Regis, which has ordained,
That the king shall have the escheates of lands of Archbishops and Bishops,
freeholders, when such tenants be attainted of Felony committed in time of
vacation, whilst their temporalties were in the Kings hands, to bestow in what
sort it shall please him: Saving to such Prelates the service that to them is
due and accustomed. And therefore saving in the cases aforesaid, the mesne
Lords of whom the lands be immediately holden, shall have their escheats of
their freeholders lands, that have committed Petit Treason or Felony, which
land after the King has has had the year, day, and wast thereof, they must
have delivered unto them out of the kings hands, by suing out of a writ. S. Br.
39.

49 If any stranger, The Lords remedy for lands escheated unto him.
or other (saving the King) does intrude into that land whereof the felon
attainted was seized at the time of the felony committed, the immediate Lord of
the fee of whom the same land is holden, may enter upon him, and put him out,
or else he may have his writ of Escheat against him: In the which writ he must
rehearse the judgment given against the person attainted, viz. if he were
attainted by outlawrie, to allege, Eo quod praedictus A. feloniam fecit pro
qua vtlagatus fuit, and if he were attainted by abiuration, to say, Pro qua
regnum nostrum abiurauit, and if he were attainted by confession or verdict, to
say, Pro qua suspensus fuit: and if he do allege one of those judgments,
Fitz. Escheat 14. Fitz. Escheat 8. Fitz. Escheat 6.
in the stead of another, his writ shall abate. And yet he need not rehearse
the manner of the felony in his writ, nor in his count, but generally that he
committed felony. And though there be error in the judgment, yet the Lord
shall have a writ of Escheat, and the tenant shall not falsify the judgment
by the error.

46. E. 3. 4.
50 Island escheat to the auncestor, The heirs remedy for land escheated to his
auncestor.
because his tenant was attainted of felony, and the auncestor dies before he
does bring his writ of Escheat, or does enter; In this case the heir may have
a writ of Escheat, and suppose that the party attainted did hold of his
auncestor.

Fitz. Escheat 17.
51 If a lease of land be made for the term of life, reserving to the lessor a
rent, and the lessor pays his services to the chief Lord, and then the
lessor is attainted of felony, Where the Lord shall have his writ of Escheat,
and where he may enter.
and after the tenant for term of life dies: In this case the Lord paramount
may have a writ of escheat of the land: for the rent which was reserved upon
the lease, does come in stead of the land, and so in the consturction of law he
died seized of the land. But if no rent had been reserved, the Lord might have
entered into the land as escheated unto him, 6. H. 7. 9.
but could not have recovered it by a writ of Escheat, no more than if his
tenant being disseised, had bin attainted of felony, in which case his only
remedy is to enter.

The form of a (...) of Escheat.
52 This is the form of the writ of Escheat. Rex vicecomiti B. salutem:
Praecipe A. quod just and sine dilatione reddat B. december acras terrae cum
pertinentijs in N. quas C de eo tenuit, and quae ad ipsum B. reuerti debent
tanquam Escaeta sua, eo quod praedict' C. feloniam fecit pro qua suspensus
fuit, vt dicitur: Vel pro qua vtlagatus fuit, vt dicitur: vel pro qua regnum
abiurauit, vt dicitur. Et nisi etc. And though the indictment was executed in
other manner than is rehearsed in the writ, yet the writ shall not abate,
Register. fo. 165.
as if he were Decapitatus and non suspensus, for the execution of the
judgment is not material, so that he had such a judgment, for the action is
true, though the writ be not true.

The K. remedy for land escheated to him.
53 In all cases of felony, if the king ought to have the escheat, he must have
an office found for him before he can enter: for until the office found, the
king has but a possession in law, and not in deed, notwithstanding the death
of him which is attainted. But by the stat. of an. 33. H. 8. the king shall have
the lands, St. 33. H. 8. 20.
goods, cattels, and all other things of the offenders attainted of high
Treason, without any office: the words of which stat. be these, viz. If any
person or persons shall be attainted of high Treason, by the course of the common
laws, or statutes of this realm, in every such case every such attainder by
the common law, shall be of as good strength, value, force, and effect, as if it
had bin done by authority of Parliament. And the K. his heirs and successors,
shall have as much advantage by such attainder, as well of uses, rights,
entries, conditions, possessions, reuersions, remainders, and all other things,
as if it had be done and declared by authority of Parliament, and shall be
deemed and adjudged in actual and real possession of the lands, tenements,
hereditaments, uses, goods, chattels, and all other things of the offenders so
attainted, which his Highness ought lawfully to have, and which they so being
attainted ought or might lawfully loose and forf. as if the attainder had bin
done by authority of Parliament without any office or inquisition to be found
of the same: Any law, statute etc. notwithstanding. By force of which stat. the
King shall be in actual and real possession of those lands which do escheat
unto him by any attainder of high Treason, An office of those lands which do
escheat for felony.
without any office or inquisition thereof found: though for those lands which
do escheat unto him by any attainder of felony, there must be an office found
for him, before he can enter, according to the ancient course of the common law.

Forf. of title of Dower.
54 By the common law any man attainted of Treason or felony, should have
forfeited that title which his wife had by their espousals to be endowed of his
lands, to the intent, that if the care of his own life could not stay him from
the committing of felony, or treason, yet the love which he did bear to his
wife and children, should restrain him thereof, whom he was assured by that
wicked act to undo, and utterly to deprive them of all likelihood wherewith to
maintain them. And some do affirm, that this law was at the first devised, to
punish the wise, and to avoid her dower, for that it was intended, that the
wife gave consent unto, or at the least did know of the Treason, or Felony,
which her husband committed, and either by entreaty, persuasion, or some other
means, might have withdrawn him from it. But the common law in that case is
altered by the stat. of Anno 1. Ed. 6. St. 1. E. 6. 12
whereby it is enacted, That albeit any person or persons, of what estate,
condition, or degree he or they be, shall fortune to be attainted, convicted, or
outlawed of any Treason, petit Treason, Misprision of treason, Murder, or
Felony whatsoever, yet that notwithstanding, every woman that is, or shall
fortune to be wife of the person so attainted, convicted, or outlawed, shall be
endowable, and enabled to demand, have, and enjoy her dower, in like manner and
form as though her husband had not been attainted, convicted, or outlawed:
Any statute, law, custom, etc. notwithstanding. But after, some part of the
foresaid stat. of Anno 1. E. 6. was altered by a branch of a stat. St. 5. and
6. E. 6. 11.
made Anno 5. and 6. Ed. 6. whereby it was provided and enacted, That the wise,
or wives, whose husband, or husbands hereafter shall be attainted of any Treasons
whatsoever they be, shall in no wise be received to ask, challenge, demand, or
have dower of any the lands, tenements, or hereditaments of any the person or
persons to be attainted of treason, as is aforesaid, during the said attainder
in his force. And yet sithence the foresaid stat. of 5. and 6. Ed. 6. it was
specially provided and ordained by the stat. made Anno 5. El. 1. and Anno 5.
El. 11. and An. 18. El. 1. That the husbands attainder of treason, by force of
any of the foresaid stat. should cause no forf. of dower in the wife S. Br. 27.

Br. Appeal 117. Fitz. Judge. 225 Plo. Com. 261.
55 If in an Appeal the Appellee do wage battle, What the Appellee that wageth
battle, shall forf.
and the Appellant does slay him in the field, the Appellee shall forf. all his
goods and chattels, but his land shall not escheat: for inheritance is so
greatly favored, that it shall not be forf. without attainder by judgment.
But if the Appellant do vanquish the Appellee, then his land shall be forf. for
when he is vanquished and not killed, judgment shall be given, that he shall be
hanged, and by that means he shall forf. his land.

6. H. 8. Dyer 2.
56 If a man seized of land in fee, A rent charge pro consilio not forfeited.
does grant a rent charge out of the same to another for the term of the life
of the grantee, pro bono co^silio suo impendendo, with clause of distres within
the same land, if the grantee of this rent charge be attainted of treason, and
committed to prison, yet he shall not forf. this rent charge to the K. for it
is incident to the cause for the which it was given, viz. to the counsel to be
given by the grantee to the grantor, which was a trust that the grantor reposed
in the grantee to give him counsel, which trust the grantee cannot assign or
forf. to another. And though the grantee of this rent charge be attainted of
treason, and imprisoned, yet the grantor may come or send to him for his
counsel, and he may give it him, and so there will be no fault in him. But if a
man do purchase a rent charge for the time of his life, out of another man's
lands, in consideration of a sum of money paid by the grantee to the grantor,
and after the grantee is attainted of treason or felony, the same rent charge
shall be forf. to the K. and paid to him during the life of the grauntee. S. Br.
27.

The forfeitures of an Outlaw.
57 Out of all which foresaid forfeitures, Bracton, de coron^, c* 13
the words of Bracton may be verified, who writes, That a man outlawed (or
otherwise attainted of Treason or Felony) shall forfeit his country and
kingdom, and shall become a banished man, who in English is called an Outlaw.
And in former times he has been termed a Friendlesse man, and so he has
seemed to forfeit his friends: for if any man after his Outlary does willingly
feed him, receive him, keep company with him, or hide him, he shall be punished
in the same sort that the Outlaw shall. Also he shall forfeit all things which
be peaceable, seeing that from the time he is an Outlaw, he carries a Wolves
head, so that all men may kill him without punishment, and specially if he
defend himself, or fly away, in such sort that he may be hardly apprehended.
But if he do not fly, or defend himself, then he that kills a man so
taken, shall answer for him, as for any other man, for that life and death be
in the kings hands, unless there be a custom to the contrary, as in the
Counties of Hereford and Gloucester. And he shall forfeit the benefit of Law: for
he which being outlawed will be so bold, as to return without the kings
license, shall die without law, or further examination in judgment. And he
cannot appeal others, for he has lost the benefit of law, and carries with
him his judgment upon his head, and he can have no defense, so long as the
Outlary stands in force. It is upright justice, that he shall perish without
law and judgment, who refuses to live according to the law. And he shall
forfeit his right and possession of all things that he has gotten, or may get.
And all bonds, obligations, homages, fealties, oaths, and other contracts made
with him, be dissolved, which can never be revived but upon a new contract,
though he be restored. And he shall forfeit all his tenements and hereditaments
from him and his heirs, and every action that was due to him before his
Outlary, though he be after restored by the kings pardon. And Outlary of
felony, and every other judgment of felony, does dissolve all the gifts and
sales of land that he made sithence the time of the felony committed. The
outlawes goods shall be the kings, for he cannot be outlawed in any other place,
but in the kings Court, as in the Country Court, or in the Hustings of London.

Corruption of Blood.
1 BY attainder of Treason, or Felony, comes corruption of Blood: that is to
say, that the offenders children cannot be heirs to him that is attainted, nor
to any other auncestor. Corruption of blood salued by Parliament only
And if the offender were a Nobleman, or a Gentleman before, by this attainder
he is become ignoble, and not only he himself, but also all his children,
having respect to the Nobility, which they had by their birth. And this
corruption of Blood is so grievous, that it cannot be salued otherwise then by
authority of Parliament. But if the King will pardon the offender, it will
cleanse the corruption of blood of those children, which be borne after the
pardon: and they which be borne after the pardon, may inherit the land which
their auncestor purchased at the time of the pardon, or after; but so cannot
they which were borne before the pardon. And also he that is attainted of
Treason or Felony, shall not be heir to his father, but his disabilitie shall
hinder others to be heir, so that during his life, the land shall rather
escheat to the lord of the fee, 27. Ed. 3. 77. Fi. Petit. 20
then descend to another. But if he that is attainted do die without issue of
his body, during the life of his auncestor, then his younger brother, sister,
or cousin shall inherit: for if the eldest son be hanged, Fi. Disce^t 6. 26.
As. p. 2.
or does abjure the Realm for Felony, during the fathers life, it is no
impediment, but that the youngest son may inherit. 29. As. p. 11 13. H. 4.
8. Fit. Descent 17.
And if he which is attainted of Treason or Felony in the life time of his
auncestor, do purchase the Kings pardon before the death of his auncestor, yet
he shall not be heir to his said auncestor, but the land shall rather escheat
to the lord of the fee. But if the eldest son be a Clerk convict in the life
of his father, and after his father dies, in this case he shall inherit his
fathers land, because he was not attainted of Felony, for by the common Law he
should have inherited after he had made his purgation. And now by the Statute
of Anno 18. Eliz. he shall be forthwith enlarged after burning in the hand,
Fi. Cor. 382 St. 18. Eli. 6.
and delivered out of prison, and not committed to the Ordinary to make his
purgation, and so he is in case, as if he had made his purgation.

Where corruption of blood shall prejudice tenant by the courtesy.
2 If a man that has land in the right of his wife, have issue, 13. H. 7. 17
and does commit Felony, for the which he is attainted, and the king does
pardon him: in this case, if his wife do die before him, he shall not be
tenant by the courtesy, for the corruption of blood of that issue. But it is
otherwise, if he has issue after the pardon, for then he shall be tenant by
the courtesy, although the issue which he had before the pardon be not
inheritable.

The eldest son attainted of felony during his fathers life.
3 If a man seized of lands has issue two sons, 32. H. 8. Dyer 48.
and the eldest is attainted of Felony in the life of his father, and is
executed for the felony, or otherwise dies during the life of his father, and
after the father dies seized of the land, the land shall descend to the
youngest son, as heir to his father, if the eldest son has no issue then
living. But if the eldest son, that was attainted, has any issue in life,
which should have inherited but for the attainder, the land shall escheat to
the lord, and not descend to the younger brother, for that the blood of the
eldest brother is corrupted.

Where an attainder, but n^ corruption of blood.
4 S. Forfeiture 27, That the attainder of Treason or Felony in certain cases,
shall not extend to make any corruption of blood, the disinheritance of any
heir, forfeiture of any dower, nor to prejudice the right or title of any
person, other then of the offender or offenders, during his or their natural
lives only.

Restitution of stolen goods.
1 Having written of Robberies, and other Felonies, and declared how Felons are
to be prosecuted by Arrest, Appeal, Indictment, Arraignment, Trial, and
Judgment, and what they shall forfeit, I mean now to show, how true men,
whose goods were robbed, stolen, or feloniously taken from them by such Felons,
shall be restored to their goods again. As it is necessary for the
Commonwealth, that Felons should be punished, least the impunity of some should
encourage them, and also allure others to commit the like offenses: so is it
fit, that they chiefly, whose goods were taken from them, and thereby have
tasted the smart, and received the loss by the Felons, and are more likely to
know who they be, and where they be, then others are, should do their
uttermost endeavor to procure those Felons to be apprehended, brought to their
answers, and to have them punished according to their demerits: that is to say,
he that was robbed, What is fresh suit.
or whose goods were stolen from him, ought presently after the felony
committed to pursue the Felon so hastily, that (if it be possible) he may take
him with the manoure, and thereupon bring his appeal against him, Fi. Cor. 379.
and convince him of the Felony. And the said speedy and diligent pursuit of
his, is called Fresh suit, which thing being found by a Jury, the king ought to
make restitution to the appellant of his goods contained in the appeal, which
his officer or any other to his use did seize. But if it be not found by a
Jury, that the owner did make Fresh suit, the said owner shall loose his goods,
and the king shall have them, although the Felon be convict at the same parties
suit. For as the Law does so abhor Felonies and Felons, that it punishes a
Felon with the loss of his life, his lands, goods, and all that he has: so
does it in such sort condemn the concealing, wincking at, or slack pursuit of
a felon, that it punishes a true man with the forfeiture of his goods stolen
from him, for omitting his duty in making fresh suit after, prosecuting, and
pursuing to death of a known Felon. If the manoure wherewith the Felon is taken
be portable, or otherwise may be conveniently done, it ought to be brought into
the Court before the Justices: and if it be in a chest, box, cloake-bag, Fi.
Cor. 392.
or male, the appellant must declare the goods particularly which be in it,
before it be opened, or that he can have it restored unto him again. And if
the Fresh suit be made by the servant of him that is robbed, and not by the
party himself, Fresh suit by the servant.
yet it is sufficient to procure him restitution of his goods. And if the Felon
which committed a Robbery or other Felony be not taken by the space of a year
after the Felony committed, yet if the party that was robbed, or whose goods
were stolen, do his endeavor to apprehend the Felon, and make diligent and
special inquiry for him, and after he is taken, 7. H. 4. 43.
though not at the suit of the party robbed, or etc. yet that shall be adjudged
a sufficient Fresh suit, and upon his appeal brought, and the offender
convicted, he shall have restitution of his goods robbed or stolen.

What conviction shall be sufficient to give the owner restitution of his goods.
2 Though in former times it was not adjudged sufficient for the appellant to
convict the offender of Felony, but he must have attainted him thereof, before
he could have had restitution of his goods: and if the Felon were in that case,
that he could not be attainted at the owners suit, he should not have had
restitution of his goods, but they should have bin forfeited to the king, Fi.
Cor. 319
were the suit never so fresh. As, if the felon being pursued by the party
robbed with huy and cry, did fly to a Church, and made his abiuration: H. 8.
E. 3. 10.
or that the Felon was in prison, and died before the owners appeal commenced.
But now the law is otherwise construed: for it is thought to be a great
extremity, that the party which was robbed should loose his goods, when he has
done all that he could, and that there was no default in him. And therefore it
is now agreed, Fi. Cor. 379 380. 26. As^. p. 32 Fit. Forfeit. 15. 8. H. 4. 1.
10. H. 4. 5
that if after the appeal commenced the Felon do die in prison, or do break
the prison, and fly to a Church, and there abjure, the Fresh suit shall be
inquired of, and if it be found, the party robbed shall have restitution of his
goods. And in like sort, if the offender will stand mute of malice, or
challenge peremptorily above the number that the law does appoint him, or will
demand his clergy: in all these cases the Fresh suit shall be enquired of, and
if it be found, the appellant shall be restored to his goods, and yet in these
cases the Felon is not attainted. But because the appellant has done his
endeavor, and all that is in him, to attaint the Felon, it is reason that he
shall have restitution of his goods.

When the owner shall have restitution.
3 Restitution shall be granted and made to the owner of his goods stolen, 21.
Ed. 4. 73. Fit. Co. 392
as soon as the Felon shall be attainted or convicted by his appeal, and the
Fresh suit shall be found, though the appellant does not pray, or sue execution
of the body of the appellee: for the appellant has prosecuted the suit so
far, that he has brought the felon to the kings mercy; so that the
appellant, nor any other for him, can stay or release the execution, but only
the king: and therefore it is reason, that he now should have restitution of
his goods. And some do affirm, that when the appellant has so far
prosecuted the appellee, 21. Ed. 4. 16.
that he is outlawed, that the appellant shall have restitution of his goods,
without inquiry of the Fresh suit, because he has pursued the suit against
the offender, so far as he can. If an appeal be sued against the principal
and accessorie, and the principal is attainted, and the Fresh suit is found,
21. E. 4. 16, 10. H. 4. 5.
the appellant shall have restitution of his goods, without suing against the
accessory. And though he do continue his suit against the accessory, yet that
shall not hinder his restitution, for that he has procured the attainder of
the principal Felon: and whether the accessorie be attaint, or acquit, yet
the appellant shall have restitution of his goods. And in like sort, if an
appeal be sued against two as principals, and one of them is attainted, and
the other is acquitted, and the Fresh suit is found, the appellant shall have
restitution of his goods, for that it does appear, that the appellant was
robbed of his goods, and had cause to sue: for though the appeal be found
false in part, touching him that is acquit, yet that shall not prejudice the
appellant, seeing that falsehood comes not of his own declaration, but by
the verdict of the Jury. If one man do rob diverse men, whereupon they do
bring their several appeals, and the Felon is attainted at the suit of one of
them, 4. E. 4. 11.
and that it is moreover found that he has made Fresh suit: in this case the
residue shall not have restitution, until the Felon be found guilty at their
several suites, and the Fresh suit also severally found.

4 Before Restitution can be awarded of Felons goods, Before whom and by whom
inquiry of fresh suit is to be made.
an inquiry is to be made of the Fresh suit before the Justices, and not
before the Shirife, (though it be but an Enquest of Office) and it is to be
done by the Jury, that does find the defendant in the appeal guilty of the
Felony, unless it be in case, where the defendant does confess the appeal
of the plaintiff, and then it shall be inquired by the Visne, where the Felony
was committed by the people of that County where the appeal is brought, except
it be brought in London: for London has such a privilege, that they shall
not be drawn to appear upon Iuries out of the City: and the Kings Justices
cannot go into the City, and take the same by Nisi prius, because it is but
an Enquest of Office: 1. H. 4. 5. 2. R. 3. 12.
and therefore in that case they do inquire of it by people of the County
where the Felon was taken, and from thence shall the Visne come. But first the
Court is to inquire of the Defendant in the appeal, Fit. Forfeit. 15.
if he do claim any property in the goods, or not, and if he claim
nothing therein, then it must enquire, if the goods were the plaintifes at the
time of the Robbery committed, and moreover inquire of the Fresh suit.

5 By the common Law there was no help for the party robbed by indictment of
the Felon to recover his goods again, or to have restitution of them:
Restitution upon attainder by indictment.
for although the enquest which tried the Felon upon his arraignment, would
after they had found him guilty of the Felony, Fi. Cor. 460.
have said, that the party robbed had made Fresh suit, yet that would not have
auailed to have procured him restitution of his goods. And therefore to
redress that enormitie, there was a statute made Anno 21. H. 8. by which it
was enacted, St. 21. H. 8. 11.
That if any Felon or Felons hereafter do rob or take away any money, goods,
or cattels from any the Kings Subjects, from their person, or otherwise within
this Realm, and thereof the said Felon or Felons be indicted, and after
arraigned of the same Felony, and found guilty thereof, or otherwise attainted
by reason of evidence given by the party so robbed, or owner of the said money,
goods, and cattels, and that as well the Just. of Jail delivery, as other
Justices, before whom any such Felon or Felons shall be found guilty, or
otherwise attainted, by reason of evidence given by the party so robbed, or
owner, or by any other by their procurement have power by this act to award
from time to time Writs of Restitution for the said money, goods, or cattels,
in like manner, as though any such Felon or Felons were attainted at the suit
of the party in appeal. And so by force of this Statute the party robbed shall
have restitution of his stolen goods, upon evidence given by him, or by any
other by his procurement against the Felon, though he never made any fresh
suit. S. Evidence 3. 4. Appeals 55.

Damages in Appeal.
1 Justice and reason do require, that when a man's life, his fame, and credit,
his lands, his goods, the disheritance of his posterity, the corruption of his
blood, and all that he has in this world to forfeit, has bin put in hazard,
and brought into question and trial, without just desert, or other ground, but
only upon the malicious accusation of some one or more persons, and that he is
found a true and lawful man, and duly acquit by the country of the offense,
whereof he was appealed, that he should have recompense for it against his
false accusor: and if his accusor be not sufficient, then against him or them
that did procure or abet him to pursue the appeal. And therefore the common
law did give damages to the defendant in an appeal, 48. Ed. 3. 22
and assigned him a mean to recover them, when he was acquit of the felony.
But because the damages which were to be recovered against the procurors, or
abettors, were to be recovered by writ original, viz. by a writ of Conspiracy,
and not otherwise, which was not so speedy a remedy, as the great malice and
wickedness of the offense required, the stat. of West. 2. was made for the
quicker redress thereof An^ 13. Ed. 1. the words whereof be these, St. 13. E.
1. 12
viz. For as much as many through malice, intending to grieve others, do
procure false appeals of homicide, and other felonies, to be sued by
appellants, having nothing wherewith to satisfy the king for their false
appeal, nor to answer to the party damages. It is ordained, that when any
which is appealed of felony imposed upon him, does acquit himself in the K.
Court in due manner, either at the appellants suit, or the kings, The
punishment of the appellant and abettors, when the appellee is acquit.
the Justices before whom the said appeal shall be heard and determined, shall
punish the appellant by one years imprisonment: and nevertheless, such
appellant shall yield to the appellee damages by the Just, discretion, having
respect to the imprisonment or arrest that the party has sustained by reason
of such appeal, and to the slander which he has received by the imprisonment,
or otherwise, and also he shall pay a grievous fine to the K. And if the
appellants be not able to recompense the damages, inquiry shall be made by whose
abetme^t the appeal was maliciously co^menced, if the appellee desire it. And
if it be found by the same Enquest, that any man is a^ettor through malice, he
shall be distrained by a judicial writ to appear before the I. at the appellees
suit: and if he be lawfully convict of such abetment by malice, he shall be
imprisoned, and restore damages, as is aforesaid of the appellant. In an
appeal of the death of a man there shall no Essoine lie for the appellant for
any cause, No Essoine for the Appellant in appeal of death.
in whatsoever court the appeal shall be determined.

The appeal must be commenced upon malice.
2 And whereas the words of the foresaid stat. of West. 2. be, St. 13. E. 1. 12
(For as much as many through malice) it does thereby appear, that if the
defendant in an appeal be to recover damages, it ought to be in respect, that
the appeal was grounded rather upon malice then upon good matter. 40. Ed. 3.
41. 22. Ass. p. 39 32. H. 6. 2.
And therefore if the defendant were indicted of that Felony whereof the appeal
was sued, before the suit of the appeal, although the def. be after acquit
thereof, yet he shall not recover damages, because it shall be intended, that
the indictment induced him to bring the appeal, and not malice. But the law is
mere contrary, if he were not indicted until after the appeal commenced: Or
if there be any such variance between the appeal and the indictment, that the
acquitall of him upon the one, is not the acquitall of him upon the other, as
if he be indicted as principal, and appealed as accessory, vel e conuerso. And
yet it is otherwise, 14. H. 7. 2
if the variance be not in a matter of substance: for such a variance shall not
so prejudice, but that the acquitall upon the one shall be also an acquitall upon
the other. By the letter of the said statute of Westminster. 2. this word (Malice)
does only refer it self to Abettors and Procurors, but yet it is commonly
taken to extend as well to the appellant, as to them.

The Statute extends to all felonies.
3 The said stat. of West. 2. says, when any is appealed of felony, St. 13. E.
1. 12
this word felony is not only intended of such offenses, which were felonies at
the time of making the said statute, but also of all other offenses which have
been made felony by stat. sithence the said statute. And therefore in an appeal
of rape (which was made felony by the same stat. of West. 2.) the plaintiff was
nonsute when the Enquest was to be taken, and the def. was arraigned at the
kings suit, Fi. Cor. 275 381.
and found not guilty, and the Jury was charged to inquire of the abettors.

The defendant acquitted by battle.
4 The words of the said statute of West. 2. be (When any does acquit himself
in due manner) which may be intended as well that the defendant shall recover
damages, where he does acquit himself by battle, St. 13. E. 1. 12
as where he does acquit himself by the country. But that acquital by battle
is to be construed in this manner, where the appellant when he is in the field
will acknowledge his appeal to be false; for that is a kind of vanquishment:
Fit. Cor. 98.
for it must not be intended, where the appellant is slain in the field,
seeing when the person of the appellant is dead, the damages be also gone for
ever, without any recovery to be had of them.

5 It is to be noted, that there is an acquitall in law, as well (...) an
acquitall in deed: for if two be appealed, one as principal, and the other as
accessory, and the principal is acquit, by this acquitall the accessory shall
recover his damages against the appellant, if the Enquest which tried the
principal, Where the accessory in appeal shall recover damages.
were also charged upon the accessory, 2. and 3. P. and M. Die. 120. 35. H. 6. 2.
though they gave no verdict of the accessory: for in this case the accessory
shall have a writ of Conspiracy by the common Law, because by a mean he put
his life in ieopardy. But it is otherwise, if the principal be acquit, and the
accessory did not appear, but depended in process: for in that case he ought
expressly to be acquit by verdict* 41. As. p. 24
or otherwise, he shall not recover damages by force of this statute, neither
shall he have a writ of Conspiracy by the common law.

St. 13. E. 1. 12
6 These words of the foresaid stat. of West. 2. be of great moment ( viz. when
any which is appealed of Felony does acquit himself in due manner) for if the
def. does bar the plaintiff of his appeal, Where the def. is said to acquit
himself in due manner, and where not
he cannot recover damages thereby against the plaintiff, except the bar be
such as does acquit the def. of the Felony. And therefore if the def. does
plead, that the appellant is a bastard, or has an elder brother, or was never
accoupled in lawful marriage, or such like pleas in bar, and by these pleas
does bar the plaintiff, yet he shall not recover damages against him, for the
def. may be indicted again of the same Felony, and attainted, 27. Ass. p. 25
Fi. Cor. 77.
notwithstanding by either of these pleas he is discharged of the appeal, as
well against the king, as against the appellant: for those pleas which do not
trythe def. innocence in the Felony, do never give him damages any more then
if he had pleaded in abatement of the writ of Appeal such a plea as had abated
it. For notwithstanding such a plea does discharge him of the appeal as well
against the K. as against the party, yet it does not discharge him of the
felony. Fit. Cor. 12.
And the like law is, if in an appeal the def. do bar the appellant by a
demurrer in law, yet he shall not recover damages against him, for the def.
innocence in the felony does not by that means come to trial. And so it is,
if in an appeal of the death of a man the def. do plead to issue, and is found
by verdict to kill the man in his own defense, 22. As. p. 77.
or by misaduenture, in these cases he shall recover no damages against the
appellant, for this is no acquitall of the Felony, because the def. is enforced
to purchase his pardon to purge him of the Felony: and besides it does appear,
that this appeal was not commenced upon malice. Fi. Cor. 386.
In like sort, if the def. in an appeal upon his arraignme^t will demand his
Clergy, and the Court will take an Enquest of office, to inquire whether he be
guilty, or not, and the enquest does find him not guilty, yet by this acquitall
he shall not recover damages, for in that he demanded his clergy before
trial, he did rather in a sort confess the Felony by implication, then
otherwise. But if he had refused his clergy, and put himself upon the enquest,
who had acquitted him, then he had bin acquit in due manner, according to the
foresaid statute, and should have recovered his damages. And so it is, if the
def. in an appeal has the release of the appellant, or the K. pardon, and will
waiue them, and plead not guilty, and put himself upon the country, and is
acquit, he shall recover damages, and yet he has done a thing of record ( viz.
by purchasing the K. pardon) wherein by implication he does confess the Felony.
But if it were a pardon by act of Parliament, 11. H. 4. 40
he could not weiue it. If the def. be acquit erroniously without due process,
he shall not recover his damages against the plaintiff, for that the words of
the foresaid statute of West. 2. be: Se acquietauerit in curia Regis modo
debito. As, 9. H. 52
where the def. does appear by the Exigent, upon whom the Shirife has
returned Cepi corpus defendentis, where he should have returned Exegi feci, and
the defendant does appear upon the Evidence, and without taking advantage
thereof, pleads not guilty to the appeal, and it is so found for him: yet
some do affirm, that he shall not recover his damages, because he is acquit
erroniously without due process. But others upon greater reason do hold, that
the Error in the process is not material, Fi. Cor. 444.
so long as there is no Error in the writ of appeal, declaration, or pleading:
for the def. is arraigned upon the original Writ, and not upon the mean
process.

Acquit at the K. suit is only upon an appeal
7 The foresaid statute of West. 2. has ordained, St. 13. E. 1. 12
(That when any which is appealed of felony, does acquit himself, either at
the appellants suit, or at the Kings suit:) This suit of the K. is always
intended upon an appeal, when the def. is arraigned upon an appeal, after
that the appellant has declared in his appeal, and is Nonsute: for if the
def. were acquit at the kings suit, upon an indictment of the same Felony, yet
he shall recover no damages. And the manner how he shall recover damages,
being acquit at the kings suit, does somewhat vary from recovering of damages
at the parties suit: for when it is at the kings suit, he shall not recover his
damages, though he be acquit, until he has sued a Scire facias against the
appellant, to bring him into the Court again, being out of the Court before by
his Nonsute. But if he be acquit at the appellants suit, he shall have his
judgment to recover damages, without suing of any further Process. And if a
woman that is appellant be Nonsute, and after does take a husband, Fit. Damag.
77.
the Scire facias shall be awarded against the wife only.

B. What Justices may inflict the penalty upon the appellant.
8 And though the foresaid statute of West. 2. has provided, St. 13. E. 1. 12
That the Justices before whom the said appeal shall be heard and determined,
shall punish the appellant by a years imprisonment: that punishment cannot be
inflicted by the Just. of Nisi prius: and yet by the statute of Anno 14. H. 6.
St. 14. H. 6. 1
the Justices of Nisi prius have power to give judgment in Treason and Felony
tried before them, and that as well where the defendant is acquit, as where he
is attainted. But yet they be not such Justices, as this statute does mean: 2.
and 3. P. and M. Die. 120. 14. E. 4. 14. 22. E. 4. 18.
For that all the plea of Appeal was not heard before them, but a parcel,
viz. the trial only.

The damages for several persons assessed severally
9 And whereas the said statute of West. 2. would have the Justices in assessing
of damages for the defendant in an appeal, St. 13. E. 1. 1^
to have respect to his imprisonment, arrest, and slander: Therefore in an
appeal brought against diverse, if they be all acquit, the damages shall be
taxed severally, that is to say, 8. H. 5. 6. Fi. Dam^. 77.
every of the defendants shall have his damages taxed by himself: for it may
be, that one has cause to recover more then the other: as, if one were
appealed as principal, and the other as accessory; or that the one were a
gentleman, or a man of greater estate, and the other of a meaner degree. But
yet this Recovery of damages must be intended in one, who is by the law
enabled to recover damages: for if an appeal be brought against a woman
covert only, Fi. Cor. 276.
without her husband (as it must be unless the husband committed felony with his
wife) the wife shall not recover damages, though she be acquit. And yet if
the appeal be brought against the husband and wife together, and they be both
acquit, Fitz. Judge. 108.
then the damages shall be severally taxed, that is to say, the husband shall
recover for his own imprisonment, and the husband and wife shall recover
jointly for the imprisonment of the wife.

St. 13. E. 1. 12
10 Though the foresaid statute of West. 2. does ordain, Where the appellant
shall pay a fine to the king.
That the appellant shall be grievously fined to the king, yet that is to be
intended, where the appellant shall yield damages to the defendant: 9. H. 5. 1
for if the case be such, as that the appellant shall not render damages to
the def. then he shall not pay a fine to the K. but shall be amerced only: as,
where an appeal does abate by misnaming, the appellant shall be only amerced.
And yet if the appellant be Nonsute after declaration, 41. Ass. p. 8.
he shall pay a fine to the king, and the Court will award process against him
for the same fine: and though the defendant be after acquit at the kings suit,
by which means he shall recover damages against the appellant, yet the
appellant shall not pay a new fine to the king, for that he has paid it
before. And if the defendant be found guilty, when he is tried at the kings
suit, the appellant has no remedy to recover the fine, which he has paid
before: for by the common Law, the plaintiff in an appeal should have paid a
fine for his Nonsute, which is the cause that a fine shall be paid by the
appellant presently upon his Nonsute.

St. 13. E. 1. 12
11 And for that the words of the said statute of West. 2. be, In what case
inquiry shall be of the abettors
If the appellants be not able to recompense the damages, inquiry shall be made,
by whose abetment the appeal was commenced: by those words it is to be
gathered, that if damages be not to be recovered against the appellant, there
shall never any inquiry be made of the abettors, as in ye cases aforesaid. And
where the words of the statute be, If the appellant be not able to recompense
the damages, it is intended all the damages: for if the appellant be
sufficient to render part of the damages, 8. H. 5. 6. 8. Ed. 4. 3.
but not the whole, inquiry shall be made of the abettors, and they shall pay the
residue.

St. 13. E. 1. 12
12 The foresaid statute does ordain, That inquiry shall be made of the abettors,
if the appellee do desire it: so that the Court of Office ought not to inquire
thereof, but at the appellees request. And if an appeal be brought against
two, and one of them is acquit by verdict, if the Court do inquire of the
abettors at the request of the same defendant, and the Enquest does find, that
there be no abettors, and after the other defendant is arraigned, and also
acquit, and if he do request also, that inquiry may be made of the abettors,
the verdict of the former Enquest, whereunto he was not privy, neither against
which he shall have any remedy, being but an Enquest of Office, shall not bind
him; but according to the words of the said statute, inquiry shall be made
again at his request of the abettors: for though it be commonly inquired of
the abettors, by the same Jury which does try the def. yet their inquiry
therein is but an Enquest of office: for if they do find abettors, the abettors
when they do appear, may trauerse all that the Enquest has found: As if they
have found that the appellant was not sufficient, What pleas the abettors may
plead.
or that such a man, or such a one were abettors: 8. Ed. 4. 3.
because they that be supposed abettors, may say by protestation, not
confessing the felony, for their plea, that the appellant is sufficient, or
that they were no abettors: for the words of the Statute be (And if they be
lawfully convict of such abetment by malice) which does prove that they shall
have their answer to that which was found by the Enquest. And also it is a good
answer for him that is charged to be an abettor, to show sufficient matter to
prove, Fi. Cor. 386
that the defendant ought not to recover his damages against the appellant, or
that the defendant was not lawfully acquit, but erroniously. But if the
abettors would take exception to the inquisition found, for that the enquest
did not find at what day, Fi. Cor. 45 M. 22. E. 4.
year, and place the abetment was made, that is no good exception: for in that
they have found the abetment, they have performed the words of the statute
(which be, That inquiry shall be made by whose abetment) and that they have
found: And touching the year day, and place, the defendant in the Appeal must
add to the inquisition, and so supply that which wants.

Process against the abettors.
13 Because the said statute has ordained, St. 13. E. 1. 12
that after by an Enquest an abettor is found, he shall be distrained by a
judicial writ at the appellees suit, to appear before the Justices: Therefore
it is to be gathered by words of the said statute, that the process against
abettors is distress infinite: for this process of distress is always pursued
by him that is acquit, who for his speedy remedy may prosecute it, although
the apppellant be not in the Court: as where the Appellant was nonsuit in the
Appeal, and the defendant was arraigned at the Kings suit, and acquit, and his
damages taxed, and the abettors found: Fi. Dam^. 77.
in this case the defendant shall have process against the abettors presently,
although the judgment of damages shall be suspended, until a Scire facias shall
be awarded and returned against the appellant. Nonsute in the process against
the abettors.
And the defendant who is acquit in an Appeal, may be nonsuit in the process
which he does pursue against the abettors, and begin again if he will, for
that nonsuit is not peremptory to him. Fit. Co. 386


A Writ against the abettors by the appellee.
14 There is an original writ to be purchased by the Appellee, who is acquit by
verdict, against the abettors, for their abetment, Fitz. Act. sur stat. 28.
wherein he may count abettors, of greater damages than were assessed by the
Justices in the Appeal: for of those damages taxed in the Appeal, there will
lie no attaint, because the inquiry touching them is but of office. And the
defendant in the Appeal cannot compel the Justices to increase those damages,
and therefore it is reason that he should relieve himself by this action.

Procurors of indictments for suits in spiritual Courts.
13 The same remedy which is given by the foresaid stat. of West. 2. to the
def. in an appeal of Felony, if he be acquit, is given by the stat. made An.
1. R. 2. to him who is falsely indicted for pursuing in a spiritual Court a
matter pertaining to the temporal jurisdiction, after that he is acquit
thereof: St. 1. R. 2. 13
The words of which stat. be these: The Prelates and Clergy of the realm do
greatly complain, for that people of holy Church suing in the spiritual court
for their tithes, and other things, which ought of right, and of ancient time
were wont to appertain to the same spiritual court, and that the Judges of
spiritual courts, and other persons dealing therein according to the Law, be
maliciously and unduly for that cause indicted, imprisoned, and by the secular
power horribly oppressed, and also enforced by violence, by oaths, by grievous
obligations, and by many other means unduly compelled to desist, and utterly
to leave off from the things aforesaid, contrary to the liberties of the holy
Church. Wherefore it is enacted, That all such Obligations made, or to be made
by duresse, or violence, shall be of no value. And touching those which do
procure by malice such indictments, and themselves to be indictors, after that
the same indictees be thereof acquit, such procurors and indictors shall have
and incur the same pain which is contained in the statute of West. 2.
touching those which do procure false appeals to be made. And the Justices of
Assise, or other Justices, before whom such persons indicted shall be acquit,
shall have authority to inquire of such indictors and procurors, and to punish
them duly, every person according to his desert.

A Writ of Conspiracy.
Where a writ of Conspiracy does lie.
1 A Writ of Conspiracy does lie, where two or three persons, or more, of
malice, and by co^ in, do conspire and devise to indict another person
falsely, and after he which is so indicted is acquitted, in this case he shall
have a writ of Conspiracy against those, who did so conspire to indict him. But
this writ does lie against two persons at the least, 28. Ass. p. 12 11. H. 4. 2.
which do so conspire: for if one person, of malice and his own false
imagination, does labor and cause one to be falsely indicted, the party which
was so indicted shall not have a writ of Conspiracy, but an action upon ^he
case against him, who caused him to be falsely indicted.

2 At the common law a writ of Conspiracy did lie as well upon an acquitall in
an appeal, as it does at this day on an acquitall upon an indictment. But
there has grown a question thereof sithence the stat. of West. 2. was made,
St. 13. E. 1. 12 Registrum
for that in the writ of Conspiracy, in the Register, it is noted for a rule,
and also it is affirmed by some others, That a writ of Conspiracy does not lie
upon an appeal, for that the said stat. of West. 2. gave to the def. damages
against the appellant and the abettors, Fit. Na. Bre. 114.
and so in a sort provided for him another remedy. But to say generally, that
the def. shall not have a writ of Conspiracy upon an acquital in an appeal,
for that he may have damages against the appellant and the abettors, is no
sufficient reason: for the said stat. does not give to the def. inquiry against
the abettors, but upon his own request, and therefore if he will omit to
desire it, he shall have the remedy ordained by the common law: which law is not
changed by the foresaid stat. of West. 2. that is in the affirmative, and does
not restrain the benefit given by the common law. And it may be, that the
damages assessed by the enquest of office, will not be so beneficial unto him,
as the damages which will be given by a Jury, that is taken at the parties suit,
whereunto he shall have his challenges, and an attaint, if they give a false
verdict. Also in a Writ of Conspiracy process is to be awarded by Capias and
Exigent, which process is not to be granted upon an inquiry, according to the
stat. of West. 2. So that if the abettors be not distrainable, the def. in an
appeal shall be without any remedy. And further, the damages which the abettors
are to pay by force of the said statute of West. 2. be the damages that the
defendant has recovered against the appellant, which damages the abettors are
to pay for the defendant, or for his insufficiency, or nonabilitie, and not
for themselves. And so it may be said, that they may satisfy for themselves in
a writ of Conspiracy to be brought against them, or otherwise their offense
shall be unpunished. Conspiracy maintenable upon acquitall in an appeal or
indictment.
And therefore notwithstanding the said statute of West. 2. a Writ of
Conspiracy does lie at this day, as well where the defendant is acquitted upon
an appeal, as where he is acquitted upon an Indictment. And accordingly there
is a Writ of Conspiracy in the Register devised for that purpose, 33. H. 6. 2.
40. Ed. 3. 42 22. As. p. 39 14. H. 7. 2.
amongst other Writs of Conspiracy. But in an appeal founded upon an
indictment, if the defendant be acquit upon the appeal, he shall not have a
Writ of Conspiracy, because it cannot be intended to be founded upon malice,
when it is founded upon an Indictment. And likewise, if an Appeal be founded
upon an Indictment, although the appellant be Nonsute after declaration, and
the defendant be arraigned, and acquit at the Kings suit, yet the defendant
shall not have a Writ of Conspiracy, causa qua supra.

3 He against whom a Writ of Conspiracy is to be brought, The indictment must
be false, which gives the writ of Conspiracy
must be charged, that he conspired with others to indict the plaintiff falsely
and maliciously, without any good or lawful cause, 22. As. p. 77 Fi. Co^sp.
21. 24.
or else the Writ will not lie: and therefore if by the conspiracy of two or
more one is indicted of Murder, and upon his arraignement it is found, that he
did kill the man in his own defense, or by misaduenture, or by any other
means which by the Law is justifiable, he shall not have a Writ of
Conspiracy: for the Indictment was framed upon good cause, viz. the death of a
man, and neither upon falsehood, or malice: and in like sort, if he that is
indicted or appealed of Felony, does purchase his Charter of Pardon thereof,
and pleads it, he shall not have a Writ of Conspiracy, for by that pardon
sued he does in a sort confess the committing of the felony, and so clear
the falsehood or malice of any which did devise to indite him. And yet
notwithstanding the obtaining of his pardon, he may waiue it, and plead not
guilty, and then if he be acquit of the felony, he may have his writ of
conspiracy. 11. H. 4. 40. 7. E. 6. Dyer 85. 28. H. 8. Dyer 28.
But if the pardon be by act of Parliament, he cannot waiue it: for the
Justices ought to allow him his pardon without pleading of it, if it be a
general pardon.

33. H. 6. 2
4 If two be indicted or appealed of felony, the one as principal, A
conspiracy doubtful.
and the other as accessorie, and the principal has his charter of pardon, or
does die before he be attainted, the accessorie shall not have a writ of
conspiracy against the parties that sued the appeal, or devised to indite the
principal and him, for that it is not yet discussed, but stands indifferent
whether the conspiracy were false or true.

21. E. 3. 17 7. H. 4. 31. 27. Ass. p. 12 30. Ass. p. 21 22. Ass. p. 77
5 If after a conspiracy for an indictment agreed upon, The conspirators do
become indictors
to be preferred by two or more, the same conspirators be sworn upon an
Enquest to enquire of felonies, and they with the residue of the Enquest that
be sworn with them, do indict him of felony, against whom they did before
conspire, in this case he shall not have a Writ of Conspiracy against them,
because it cannot be intended false and malicious, when they did it by virtue
of their oaths, and also did it with others besides themselves. And the same
Law is, if after the conspirators be sworn upon the Enquest of inquiry, and
have spoken and conferred with their companions, the Justices shall remove
them from the Enquest, yet in that they were once sworn, and the conspiracy
thereby discharged, this remoouing them from the Enquest which comes after,
20. H. 6. 5. and 35.
shall not make them to be again in danger, and charge of the Writ of
Conspiracy. And so it is of a Justice of Peace; A Justice of peace.
he shall not be charged by a Writ of Conspiracy, for any thing which he does
in open Sessions as a Justice of Peace, 27. Ass. p. 12 12. E. 4. 18 21. E. 4.
67. 47. Ed. 3. 17.
for he is a Judge of record, and sworn to execute his office duly, and may
inform for the kings benefit, and to punish offenders as well as he can. But
the Law is mere contrary, if one who is no Justice of record does it, for he
shall be charged by a Writ of Conspiracy, if he do it with others. And in like
sort, 35. H. 6. 14. 27. As. p. 12 20. H. 6. 5. 9. H. 4. 11. 21. H. 7. Kel. 81.
if one does come into the Court, A giver of Evidence.
and discovers a felony, and is sworn, and does give evidence to the Enquest,
he shall not thereupon be charged in conspiracy, if he does not before
conspire with others falsely and maliciously. In a writ of Conspiracy the def.
pleaded, that when the Jurors had taken their oaths upon the indictment, he
was sworn to inform them: But because an act done by him only without others,
cannot be said to be any conspiracy, 35. H. 6. 14. 27. As. p. 12
and so was no answer to that wherewith the plaintiff charged him, for that
cause he wayued his plea, and pleaded not guilty: for he that is to be charged
with a conspiracy, must be charged, in respect that he did it with others, and
falsely, and maliciously.

Who be conspirators.
6 And for that it might be known to all men, whom the Law did construe to be
conspirators, and were worthy to be punished as conspirators: Therefore there
was a stat. made An^ 33. Ed. 1. which defines them in this manner, viz. St. 33
E. 1.
Conspirators be they, which bind themselves by oath, covenant, or other
alliance, that every one shall help and maintain others purpose, falsely and
maliciously to indict, or to move and maintain suites: and also that cause
infants to appeal others of felony, whereby they are imprisoned, and much
grieved: and such as retain men in the country with liueries, or fees, to
maintain their lewd enterprises, and to subvert the truth, as well the takers
as the giuers. And Stewards and Bailifes of great Lords, who by their
seigniory, office, or power, do undertake to maintain or uphold other
quarrels or suites then such which concern their Lords, or themselves.

A conspiracy must be by more then one.
7 The foresaid statute does define conspirators to be those, St. 33. E. 1.
which bind themselves by oath etc. By which words it does appear, that a
conspiracy cannot be committed by one person alone, but by two at the least:
and therefore this Writ of Conspiracy will not be maintained against one alone,
though it were begun against diverse: for as soon as it shall appear, 28. Ass.
p. 12 22. Ass. p. 77 11. H. 4. 162
that all but one be discharged thereof, by their discharge, that one shall also
be discharged. But this discharge ought to be such a one, as may be a discharge
to all intents, as acquitall of all by verdict saving one, is an acquitall of
that one also. And so it is, if al but one be discharged by matter in Law, as
if they plead, that they were indictors, or such like matter in Law, which will
discharge them: for in those cases they be acquit of the conspiracy to all
intents. But if in a writ of Conspiracy sued against two, 14. H. 6. 25.
one of them is attainted, and the other does bar the plaintiff by a demurrer
in law, yet that shall not discharge the other which is attainted, Where one
only charged in Conspiracy
if the bar both not contain matter to prove that he did not conspire, or
could not conspire. And so it is, if in a writ of Conspiracy brought against
two, the one does appear and plead, and his plea is found against him: in this
case judgment may be given against him, 24. E. 3. 34.
though the other be not attainted: and yet in that case some do affirm, 27.
E. 3. 80.
that in a writ of Conspiracy against two, one of the^ shall not answer,
until his companion does appear, for the inconueniency which may ensue, viz.
that the one may be found guilty, and the other after may be acquit of the same
conspiracy. But if he that did first appear, will plead without his companion
(though the law does not enforce him thereunto) and that the verdict do pass
against him, and he found guilty of the conspiracy, judgment shall be given
against him, as is aforesaid, though after his companion be acquitted of the
same conspiracy: Nam volenti non fit iniuria.

8 As a writ of Conspiracy will not lie against one person only, no more will it
be maintained against two, who do represent but one person, No writ of
Conspiracy against the husband and wife
as the husband and wife: 40. Ed. 3. 19. 38. E. 3. 3.
for a writ of Conspiracy is not to be brought against them, seeing the husband
and wife by common intendment ought to have but one will, which will of the
wives is (or should be) subject to the will of the husband: So that when they
confer and speak together, all shall be intended the speech and act of the
husband, and nothing of the wife. But it is otherwise, if she do any act alone
without her husband, as if she do commit Treason or Felony etc. But a writ of
Conspiracy will lie against the husband, Fi. N.B. 116. L.
his wife, and a third person.

9 The common form of the writ of Conspiracy in the Register is this, The
form of the writ of Conspiracy,
viz. Register. fo. 134.
Rex vice comiti N. Salutem etc. Si A. fecerit etc. tunc pone etc. B. and C.
quod sintcoram nobis etc. ostensuri quare conspiratione inter eos apud M.
praehabita, praefatum A. de quodam equo furtiue apud R. capto and abducto
indictari, and ipsum ea occasion capi, and in prisona nostra N. quousque in
curia nostra coram dilectis and fidelibus nostris I. and S. iusticiarijs
nostris ad Gaolam nostram N. deliberandam assignatis, secundum legem and
consuetudinem regni nostri acquietauts fuisset detineri falso and malitiose
procurauerunt ad grave damnum ipsius A. and contra formam ordinationis in
huiusmodi casu prouisae. Et habeas ibi nomina plegiorum and hoc breue. Test
etc. Which foresaid writ is founded upon a verdict: but if it be a writ of
Conspiracy founded upon the plaintifes Nonsute in an appeal, then the words of
the writ be these, viz. Quousque idem A. per considerationem curiae nostrae
inde quietus recessit: Though in the Writ of Conspiracy it is not alleged,
35. H. 6. 46
that the place where the Conspiracy was devised, was within the County, and
within the jurisdiction of those Justices before whom the plaintiff was acquit,
yet the writ is good, notwithstanding the omission of that allegation: for it
shall be intended to be made within the same county, until the contrary shall be
showed. But it must needs be expressed in the writ, before which Just. the
acquitall of the pl. was, 3. H. 6. 52.
but not the manner of the acquitall, nor how he was acquitted. And neither in
this writ, nor in other writs of Conspiracy mentioned in the Register, all the
indictment need not to be rehearsed, 19. H. 6. 34. 47. Ed. 3. 16.
but briefly the substance thereof, and it is sufficiently in form, if the
writ of Conspiracy do agree with the indictment, which it ought to do.

10 In the Register there is a writ of Conspiracy for the Accessorie A writ of
conspiracy for the accessorie.
in felony, when he is acquit by verdict, and another writ for him upon the
acquital of the Principal (if his life were put in ieopardie by the same
Enquest that acquitted the principal) but yet these two writs do differ in
form, for the first is Quousque coram praefatis Iusticiarijs nostris inde
secundum legem and consuetudinem nostram acquietatus fuit: And the other is,
Quousque principal' secundum legem etc. acquietatus fuisset, and idem
accessorius quietus recessit. And it is sufficient, 33. H. 6. 1.
if in the writ brought by the accessorie he make mention of his own
imprisonment, and not of the principals. And this form of quietus recessit, is
used also when a writ of Conspiracy is brought upon an acquitall in an Appeal
at the Kings suit, after the parties nonsuit. 22. H. 6. 49.
In a writ of Conspiracy the plaintiff may suppose that the conspiracy was
made in two Towns, Conspiracy in two towns.
because in one day the Conspirators may meet in several Towns.

Bars in conspiracy.
11 In a writ of Conspiracy it is a good plea for the defendants to plead in
bar of the Action, a concord between the plaintiff and them: And so it is to
plead any matter which will prove the acquitall of the plaintiff erroneous, 21.
H. 6. 28
for then was not the plaintiff lawfully acquit according to the Statute of
Westminst. 2.

Judgment in conspiracy
12 When any is convict in a writ of Conspiracy at the suit of the party, the
judgment is none other, but that the plaintiff shall recover his damages, 43.
E. 3. 33.
and that the defendants shall be taken. But if one be indicted and convicted
of conspiracy, at the Kings suit, the judgment is more grievous, for then the
judgment is, That they shall loose their free law, to the intent, 27. As p. 59
46. As. p. 11. 24. E. 3. 34.
that they shall not after that time be put in Iuries or Assizes, nor otherwise
produced as witnesses to testify truth: and if they have to do in the Kings
Court, they shall make their Attorney to sue for them, and that they shall not
approach within twelve miles of the Kings Court, and that their lands, goods,
and cattels shall be seized into the Kings hand, and their houses wasted, and
their wives and children thrust out of doors, and their trees pulled up by the
roots, and their bodies taken and imprisoned. And this is termed a villainous
judgment, because it brings villainy and shame to him that receives it.

13 And because that wicked offense of conspiracy should be inquired of, and
punished, as well by indictment, as by writ, there was a Statute made Anno 28.
Ed. 1. called Articuli super chartas, whereby it was ordained, St. 28. E. 1.
That in right of Conspirators, false informers, and imbracers of Enquests,
Assizes, and Iuries, the King has provided remedy by a Writ out of the
Chauncery. And from henceforth the King will, that his Justices of the one
Bench and the other, and the Just. assigned to take Assizes, Inquiry of
Conspiracies by Justices.
when they come into the country to do their office, shall make enquiry
thereof at any man's plaint without writ, Register. fo. 118.
and shall without delay do right to the plaintifes. And the Justices may be
commanded by a writ directed unto them out of the Chancery, to execute the
same statute, although the statute of it self is a sufficient warrant and
authority for them so to do: which remedy mentioned in the foresaid statute,
was intended to be ordained by another statute, called the statute of
Conspirators, St. 20. E. 1.
made Anno 20. Edw. 1. at Berwike upon Tweed, which does provide a writ of
Conspiracy against conspirators, maintainers of false quarrels, and
champertors, and expresses the form of that writ.

St. 28. Ed. 1
14 But because the foresaid Statute of Articuli super chartas did provide only
a remedy at the plaint of the party, and did not give the Justices in the
said Statute mentioned power to enquire of, hear, and determine conspiracies,
at the suit of the King, neither did it give authority to the said Justices,
to adiourne the suit, if for shortness of time it could not be determined in
the country: St. 4. E. 3. 11.
Therefore by a statute made Anno 4. Edw. 3. Inquiry of conspirators at K. or
parties suit.
the same enormities were redressed by these words, viz. Where, in times past
diverse people of the Realm, as well great as other, have made alliances,
confederacies, and conspiracies, to maintain parties, pleas, and quarrels,
whereby diverse have been wrongfully disherited, and some ransomed and
destroyed, and some for fear being maimed, and beaten, durst not sue for
their right, nor complain, nor the Jurors of Enquests give their verdicts, to
the great hurt of the people, and slander of the Law, and common right:
Therefore it is agreed, that the Justices of the one Bench, and of the other,
and the Justices assigned to take Assizes, whenever they come to hold their
Sessions, to take Enquests upon Nisi prius, shall enquire, hear, and determine
as well at the Kings suit, as at the suit of the party, of such maintainers,
bearers, and conspirators, and also of champertors, and of all other things
contained in the said Article, as well as Justices in Eire should do, if they
were in the same County. And that which cannot be determined before the
Justices of the one Bench or of the other, upon the Nisi prius, for shortness
of time, shall be adiourned into the places whereof they be Justices, and there
shall be determined according to right and reason.

15 Notwithstanding the foresaid Statutes, there were such devises and
practices to execute malice and revenge, and desire to put others in peril of
their lives, lands, and goods, that some would frame indictments or appeals
against others of the K. good and obedient subjects, of Treason, Felony, or
trespass, in several foreign counties, liberties, and franchises, where the
said persons did never dwell nor converse, and there they were pursued to the
Exigent, and sometime outlawed, before that they could know of it: For the
remedy whereof there was a stat. St. 8. H. 6. 10
made Anno 8. H. 6. wherein amongst other things it was enacted, That if any
person shall be indicted or appealed of felony, Procurers of an indictment or
appeal in a foreign county
treason, or trespass, in a foreign county, he shall in an action upon the case,
recover treble damages against every procurer of such indictment, or appeal,
after he is duly acquitted by verdict. And the like process shall be in the same,
as in an action of Trespass vi and armis. S. Appeals 61.

An offense supposed to be in a place where there is none such.
16 Because diverse people upon malice, envy, and desire of revenge, did ofttime
cause the K. liege people to be appealed or indicted in diverse counties, of
Treasons or Felonies, supposing by the said appeals or indictments, that the
said Treasons or Felonies were committed in one certain place, whereas there
is no such place within the said county where the said indictme^t is found, nor
any such place in the county, as is declared by the said Appeal: Therefore by
the stat. made anno 7. H. 5. anno 9. H. 5. and anno 18. H. 6. it was ordained,
St. 9. H. 5. 1. St. 18. H. 6. 12.
That the said Appeals and indictments, and the process thereupon shall be void,
and adjudged of no force. And that the said Appellees and Indictees may have
their writs of Conspiracy against their indictors, procurors, and
conspirators, and recover their damages. And that the indictors, procurors, and
conspirators shall be punished by imprisonment, fine and ransom, for the K.
advantage, by the Justices discretion.

The Coroner and his Authority and duty in Felonies etc.
1 A Coroner is an ancient officer of trust in this realm, The Coroners Office.
ordained to be a principal preserver and keeper of the peace, to make record
of the pleas of the Crown, and of his own view, and of abiurations, and of
outlawries, and of Appeals and accusations of felons made before him, and of
nonsuits of plaintifes in Appeals, and of all things done in the County which
belongs to the Office of the Coroner. And also an Appeal shall be entered of
Robbery or Larcenie in the presence of the Coroner in the Court of any free
man which has a franchise of Infang thief. Election of the Coroner.
Which Coroner shall be chosen into the same Office upon the death, or other
auoidance of another, by force of the Kings writ directed to the Sheriff of
that County where that Office is void, by death or otherwise. And the same
election shall be in the full County Court by warrant of the Kings writ: The
tenor of which writ is as follows.

2 James by the grace of God etc. The writ de Coronator^ eligendo.
To the Sheriff of the County of Buckingham Salutation etc. Because L. one of
our Coroners of the County is deceased, as we are informed, we do command
thee, if it be so, that thou do cause another Coroner to be chosen in thy
full County, by the assent of the same County, in the place of the same L.
according to the form of the statute therefore made and provided: Who taking
his oath according to the custom, shall from thenceforth do and perform all
things which do appertain to the Office of a Coroner in the County
aforesaid. And cause such a one to be chosen which best can, and will attend
that Office. How long a Coroner shall continue in his Office.
When a Coroner is chosen he shall continue in his Office until the King has
otherwise determined his pleasure, 4. E. 4. 44
or that the King does dye, or that there be another King: for he is not
changeable every year, as the Sheriff and Escheator is. And then the Sheriff
shall give him an oath, That he shall lawfully and without demanding of any
reward, make his enquests and inrolments, and do all things which do belong to
the office of the Coroner.

3 And because many mean men, and of small discretion, were diverse times
chosen into the said Office of Coroners, and for that it is expedient that
discreet, lawful, and sage men should meddle in the same Office; therefore by
the Statute o^ Westminst. prim^, made Anno 3. Edw. primi, St. 3. E. 1. 10
it was ordained, Who shall be Coroners, and by whom they shall be chosen.
That all Coroners of Shires shall be chosen in the full Counties, by the
Commons of the same Counties, of the most meet and worthy people, which may
be found in the same Counties, to execute the said Offices, and of the most
sage and wise Knights, which do best know, can, and will attend unto the same
Office, and which will lawfully attache and present the Pleas of the Crown.
And the same Statute was after rehearsed and confirmed by the Statute of Anno
28. Edw. 3. by which it was ordained, St. 28. E. 3. 6
That Coroners of Counties shall be chosen in the full Counties, by the
Commons of the same Counties, of the most fit and lawful persons of the same
Counties: Always saving to the King and other Lords, which ought to make such
Coroners their Franchises. St. 14. E. 3. 8
But by the Statute of Anno 14. Edw. 3. no Coroner shall be chosen, A Coroner
must have sufficient land.
if he have not sufficient land in fee in the same County, whereof he may
answer all manner of people. And because this Statute is in the negative,
therefore the not satisfying of it, is a sufficient cause to remove a Coroner
from his Office. And he is said to have sufficient land, if he has land in
the County whereupon he may live according to his degree, to execute that
Office. And whereas the foresaid Statute of 28. Edw. 3. has ordained, Fi. N.
B. 164.
That a Coroner shall be chosen by the Commons of the said Counties, that is
intended by the freeholders of the same Counties, and by none other.

Whether Coroners ought to be knights.
4 The foresaid Statute of Westminst. prim^, St. 3. E. 1. 10
commits the Office of Coroners to Knights and none others: and therefore in
former ages it was a cause amongst others, to discharge a Coroner of his
Office, that he was no Knight: But because those words were put into the
Statute only to the intent that the Coroner should have sufficient within the
same County: for which cause, if that be performed, the intent of the Statute
is observed.

Causes to remove a Coroner.
5 And also the same statute does ordain, That such shall be chosen Coroners,
which do know, can, and will attend unto the said Office: And therefore if any
be chosen, which do not know, cannot, or will not attend unto the same office,
they shall be removed and discharged of that office by the K. writ, Co. l. 5. 57.
wherein the cause of his discharge shall be rehearsed: either because he is
employed in other affairs of the K. or that he is sick of some grievous and
long infirmity, or that he is lame, or that he is not meet for that office (
viz. by force of some clause contained in the said statute of West. 1.) or that
he has not sufficient lands within the same County, or that he has the
palsy, Fitz. N.B. 165. N.
or that he is dwelling in the uttermost part of the Shire, or that he is
chosen Sheriff, or verderer of a forest. But if any of those causes surmised
be false, whereby the Coroner is discharged of his Office by false suggestion,
then he may sue for a commission to be awarded out of the Chauncerie, to
enquire of the same suggestion. And if it be found false, and returned so into
the Chauncerie, then there shall be a Supersedeas awarded out of the
Chauncerie, to the Sheriff, that he shall not remove the said Coroner. And if
he be removed, that he shall suffer him to enjoy the said Office as he did
before. But it is sometimes used, and most commendable for him that is chosen
Coroner, if he perceive in himself any of the foresaid impediments, Register.
fo. 177.
to purchase a writ out of the Chancerie, to discharge him of the said Office.

6 And because the said Coroner should do justice and right to all persons,
Where a Coroner may take a fee, and where not.
without extortion or exaction, St. 3. E. 1. 10
the foresaid statute of West. 1. does further ordain, That Sherifes shall
have counter-rolls with the Coroners, as well of Appeals as of Enquests, of
Attachments, and other things which do belong to his Office. And no Coroner
shall demand or take any thing for the execution of his Office, upon pain of
a grievous forfeiture to the King. Which said Statute was also confirmed by a
statute made at Excester, St. 14. E. 1.
anno 14. Edw. 1. And by the statute made Anno 1. H. 8. it was enacted, St. 1.
H. 8. 7.
That upon request made to a Coroner to come and enquire upon the view of any
person slain, drowned, or otherwise dead by misaduenture, the said Coroner
shall diligently do his Office, upon the view of the body of every such
person or persons, without any thing taking therefore, upon pain to every
Coroner that will not endeavor himself to do his Office as is aforesaid, or
that he takes any thing of any person, for doing of his Office upon every
person dead by misaduenture, for every time forty shillings. And the Justices
of Assizes, and Justices of Peace, within the country where such default of
Coroners be, have authority to enquire thereof, and to determine the same, as
well by examination as by presentment. But by a statute made Anno 3. H. 7. it
was provided, St. 3. H. 7. 1.
That a Coroner shall have for his fee upon every Inquisition taken upon the
view of a body murdered, or otherwise slain, iij. s^. iiij. d. of the goods
and cattels of the murderer, if he have any, and if he have no goods, the
Coroner shall have his fee of such amerciaments as any towneship shall be
amerced for escape of any such murderer. And though by the common law the
Coroner has a fee, Fitz. Cor. 321. 372.
a penie of every Visinage, as appendant to his Office, at the coming of the
Justices in Eire, yet that fee is not repugnant to the foresaid statute of
Westminst. 1. for he takes not that to execute his Office, but as a fee of
right incident to his office, though he do nothing in the execution of the said
Office.

St. 3. Ed. 1. Bracton de Corona, cap. 5.
7 It appears both by the stat. entitled Officium Coronatoris, Of what things
Coroners shall inquire.
and by Bracton, that if any Coroners be advertised by the K. Bailifes, or
other honest men of the country, to come to those that be slain, suddenly
dead, or wounded, or to house breakers, or to any place where treasure is
found, they shall immediately come and forthwith command four, five, or six
of the next towns, that they appear before them in such a place: and when
they come, the Coroners upon their oath, shall inquire, Murder.
if they did know of that man that was killed, where he was first slain,
whether in the field, or in the house, bed, Tavern, or in any company, and
who were there. Inquiry of the offenders.
Likewise they shall inquire who were culpable, either of the act or force, and
who were present, either men or women, and of what age they be, so they can
speak, and have discretion: And they which be found guilty by inquisition in
the foresaid manner, shall be taken, delivered to the Sherif, and committed to the
jail: and as many of them as be not found guilty, shall be attached, until the
coming of the Justices, and their names enrolled. A man found slain.
And if any man be suddenly slain, and found in the fields or woods, it is to
be considered whether he were slain there or not: if he were brought thither,
their steps that brought him (if it may be) shall be followed, and so shall
the tracke of horse and cart. And also it shall be inquired, if he that was
slain were known or unknown, and where he lodged the night before: And if
any be found guilty of the death of such, immediately the Coroners shall come to
his house, and inquire what cattle he has, and what corn in his graunge, and
what on the ground; and if he be a free man, what free land he has, and what
it is worth by the year, beside the Lord of the fees service: but the land
shall remain in the kings hands, until the Lord of the fee has made a fine
for it. And when they have enquired of all things, then they shall cause them to
be priced, as if they should straight way be sold, and the body of him that is
dead shall be buried. Moreover, the Coroners shall enquire of them which be
drowned, suddenly slain, Suddenly slain.
or strangled by the sign of a coard tied strait about their necks, or about
any of their members, or upon any other hurt found upon their bodies, or some
other manifest token, and shall attache the finders, and al other in their
company. A Coroner ought to inquire of treasure that is found, Treasure trone.
who were the finders, and who are suspected thereof, which may be gathered by
some man's delicat living, and frequenting of Tauernes, which (upon suspicion)
shall be attached by four, or six, or mo pledges. If any be appealed of Rape,
Rape.
he shall be attached by four or six pledges, if the appeal be fresh, and
the sign of the truth apparent, or an open outcrie leuyed: But if it be
without any manifest token or outcry, two pledges shall suffice. Upon Appeal
of Maihem, if the wounds Maihem or wound.
be mortal, they which be appealed shall be forthwith apprehended, and kept
until it be known whether he that is hurt shall recover or not: if he dye
they shall be retained, if he live they shall be attached by four or six
pledges, according to the bigness of the wound: If it be for a Maihem, then
there shall be no less than four pledges: if a small wound be, then two will
serve. The length, breadth, and deepenesse of all wounds The length, breadth,
and deepnesse of wounds.
ought to be viewed, and with what weapons, and in what part of the body the
party was hurt, and also how many wounds there be: how many be culpable, and
who gave the wound: all which things shall be enrolled in the Coroners roll.
Horses, boats, carts, commonly called Deodands, Deodands.
whereby any person shall perish, shall be valued and delivered to the whole
township, which shall be answerable therefore. Whosoever lays hands upon the
wreck of the sea, Wrecke of the Sea.
shall be attached by sufficient pledges. The price of the wrecke shall be valued,
and delivered to the town to answer, etc.

8 It does first appear by the words of this stat. St. 3. Ed. 1.
that the Coroner ought to do his office in his own proper person, The Coroner
shall execute his Office in his own person.
and not by Deputy. viz. They shall presently come to those that be slain,
or suddenly dead. And so also it is declared by the Statute of Excester, St.
14. E. 1.
and proved by the foresaid definition of the Office or Authority of a
Coroner, viz. That a Coroner shall make a Record of his own view: which is,
that he shall see the dead body when he does make the inquiry, or otherwise
the inquiry is not good: Fi. Cor. 10^
For if he will inquire of any dead person without the sight of him, this is
without authority, and so void. The Coroner shall see the dead body.
And therefore if the body be buried before his coming, he must record it
in his Rolls, to the intent that the town where he was buried may be amerced
for it, Fitz. Cor. 329. Britton 4. 21. E. 4. 70. 2. R. 3. 2.
by the Justices in Eire upon the sight of the Coroners Rols. And yet
notwithstanding the Coroner must dig the body out of the ground, and make
his inquiry upon the sight of the body, as he should have done if it had not
been buried. If one be indicted before the Coroner upon the sight of the body,
and then the body is by the Coroners commandment buried, and after, for that
the indictment is not sufficient, the Coroner does take the body out of the
earth, A body buried taken up again.
and indict the offender again: this is lawfully done, being upon the sight of
the body, though the body had been buried fourteen days before. If a dead
body that is slain, or suddenly dead, Fi. Cor. 339
be suffered to lie upon the ground unburied to putrify, or to yield an evil
savor, without sending for the Coroner, the town where the same body did so
lie unburied, Fi. Cor. 421 Britton.
shall be amerced. And likewise if a prisoner do dye in prison, and the keeper
of the prison does not send for a Coroner, he shall be amerced. And though a
Coroner shall make a record of his own view, St. 9. H. 3. 17
and enter the same into his roll, Pleas of the Crown.
yet by the statute of Magna Charta no Coroner, Sheriff, Constable, Escheator,
or other Bailife of the K. shall hold pleas of the Crown.

St. 3. Ed. 1.
9 The said statute of West. 1. ordains, The Coroner must presently do his
office.
That if any Coroners be advertised by the Kings Bailifes, or other honest men
of the country, they shall presently come and make inquisition: whereby it
appears, that if the Coroner shall be slack and negligent in coming to do
his office, after the Bailifes or men of the country have sent for him, he
shall be punished. And if he omit to do his office, Fitz. Cor. 292.
as to make inquiry of, or to enter into his roll the death of a man, or any
other thing which by the law he is to do, or make a record of, he shall be
committed to prison. And by the statute of Anno 3. H. 7. St. 3. H. 7. 1.
If any Coroner be remiss in viewing of a dead body murdered, or slain,
Coroners shall inquire and certify at the jail delivery
and do not enquire of them that have done the murder, or death, of their
abettors, and consenters, who were present thereat, and their names: or so
found, do not inroll, certify, and deliver his inquisition to the Justices of
the next jail delivery in the Shire where the inquisition is taken, that the
same Just. may proceed against such murderers, if they be in the jail, or else
certify the inquisition into the K. Bench, the said Coroner shall forfeit to
the King for every offense v. l.

St. 3. Ed. 1. 35. H. 6. 27
10 The foresaid statute of West. 1. as touching inquisition, The Coroner shall
inquire only of the death of a man.
does only extend to a dead person: whereby it seems that a Coroner cannot
inquire of any other felony, but of the death of a man: Saving that in
Northumberland the Coroner does inquire of all felonies: But that authority
they maintain by prescription. A presentment was made before the Coroner, that
a felon being apprehended for stealing, was led to a church by certain
persons: and this was adjudged a void presentment, 27. Ass. p. 55
because he cannot inquire thereof by virtue of his office: but if he had
received the kings writ, or commission to have made inquiry thereof, he might
have done it. And yet some do affirm, that he may inquire of the rape of a
woman, and of breaking of prison (being other felonies different from the death
of a man) and of Sturgeon, and Whales taken. If a man be slain in the arms or
branches of the sea, Slain in an arm of the sea.
where one may see the ground on both sides, the Coroner shall inquire thereof,
and not the Admiral, because the country may take knowledge thereof: which
proves, Fi. Cor. 399
that by the common law the Admiral Admiral.
had no jurisdiction but upon the main Sea, before the Statute of 13. R. 2.
and 2. H. 4. were made. St. 13. R. 2. 5 2. H. 4. 11.
And though the Coroner cannot enquire of any other felonies, but of the death
of a man, yet by the Statute of West. 1. made Anno 3. Ed. 1. it was ord^ined,
St. 3. Ed. 1. 9
That if the Sheriff, Coroner, or any other Bailife within Franchise or
without, for reward, A Coroner concealing a felon, or not arresting him.
entreaty, or any affinity, do conceal, consent, or procure to conceal the
felonies done in their liberties: or otherwise will not attach or arrest such
felons, whereas they may, or will not do their offices for the favor that they
bear to such offenders, and be thereof attainted, they shall be one year
imprisoned, and make a grievous fine: And if they have not whereof to make
fine, they shall be three years imprisoned. So that a Coroner may attach or
arrest any manner of felon whatsoever, though he cannot inquire of him.

11 It is contained in the before specified Statute of Westminst. 1. That all
things ought to be enrolled in the Rolls of the Coroner: Which proves that
the same inrolment is the Coroners Record, The force of a Coroners record.
and that the said Record is of great force: for if the thing enrolled be
within the compass of the Coroners authority, it shall be of greater credit
than the Record of any other: Bro. Cor. 351.
For if a thing be found before the Justices in Air, contrary to that which
was entered into the roll of the Coroner, The first Coroner.
it shall be void. Fitz. Cor. 107.
And the Record of the first Coroner, viz. the Record of him which first
sits upon the view of the body, shall be preferred before the Record of the
second Coroner, who does after sit and inquire of him. If a man become an
Approuer Approuer.
before the Coroner, Fitz. Cor. 118.
and does appeal others, he shall dot be received to say after, That he did it
by dures Dures.
of imprisonment, but shall be estopped thereof by the Coroners Record. And in
like sort, if one has abiured the Realm before the Coroner, Abiuring before
the Coroner.
12. As. p. 29. Fi. Cor. 124
and after does return, and is arraigned, and does plead, that he is not the
same person: if in this case the Coroner does record him to be the same person,
he shall be condemned. And the same law is, if a man be arraigned of breaking of
prison, Confession of breaking of prison.
25. E. 3. 42. Fitz. Cor. 243. 435.
he shall be estopped, to plead not guilty thereunto, if the Coroner does
record, that he did at another time confess it before him. And if an Approuer
Approuer.
to prolong his life, do appeal others, where there be none such, and that
be testified by the Coroner, the Approuer shall be hanged, 25. Ed. 3. 24.
without further inquiry of the approuement.

Who ought to appear upon the Coroners inquisition.
12 By the Statute of Marlbridge made Anno 52. H. 3. St. 52. H. 3. 24.
it was ordained, That upon an inquisition to be taken by a Coroner of the
death of a man, every one of the age of twelve years ought to appear, except
they have a reasonable excuse of their absence.

The Coroner may take appeals.
13 And though the foresaid Statute of Officium Coronatoris do make mention but
of certain Appeals, as ^n Appeal of Rape, Mayhem, etc. yet the Coroner with
the Sheriff has authority to take Appeals of Robbery and other Felonies,
and also to take the Appeal of an Approuer, in this sort and manner following,
viz. he may take an Appeal of Robbery, or other felony committed in the same
county where he is Coroner, and not elsewhere. But he may take the Appeal of
an Approuer, of an offense committed in any county of England: and the reason
of this difference is, because by the approuement the Approuer is attainted of
Felony, but so is not the offender in the other case, and therefore if in the
former case he should receive such an Appeal of Robbery, Fitz. Cor. 437.
or other Felony, it could not be tried by a Jury of the county where he is
Coroner, for that the felony was committed in a foreign county. And yet in
the foresaid case of approuement in another county, the Coroner cannot award
Process thereupon, but he must enter it into his roll, and send it to the
Justices of Jail delivery, Fitz. Cor. 462.
who shall award Process unto the Sheriff of that foreign county, to apprehend
him which is so appealed. And as the Coroner may take the Appeal of an
Approuer in another county, so upon the same reason he may take the abiuration
of one which has confessed a felony committed by him in another county.

Fitz. Cor. 416.
14 If the Coroner shall find any person drowned in a dangerous pond or pit, he
must command the town where the same pond or pit is, to stop it up, Stopping
up a place of danger.
and enter the same his commandment into his Roll: And if after it be found
before the Justices in Eire, that the same pond, or etc. is not stopped up, the
whole town where it is shall be amerced.

15 Though there be diverse Coroners in a County, Where the presence of all the
Coroners is requisite, and where but of some one of them.
yet it is not requisite to have more than one to enquire upon the sight of a
dead body. And in like sort one is sufficient to give judgment upon an
Outlawrie, 14. H. 4. 35 39. H. 6. 41.
and in Redisseisin it is sufficient to have two Coroners. But where Process is
to be awarded to the Coroners, in default of the Sheriff, there all the
Coroners within the County ought to serve, or otherwise it is not good: for
they execute that office as ministers, and not as Judges, as they do in other
cases. And by the statute of Anno 23. H. 6. St. 23. H. 6. 11.
every of the Coroners shall be present in his proper person at the assessing
of the wages of the Knights of the same Shire for the Parliament, with the
Sheriff, Vndersherife, Baylifes, and others that will be present to assesse the
wages of the said Knights, after the deliverance of the Kings writ De solutione
feodi Militum Parliamenti, and proclamation thereof made, upon pain of
forfeiture of every of them making default, xl. s^. to the King.

St. 1. and 2. P. and M. 13.
16 By the Statute made Anno 1. and 2. P. and M. it is ordained, The Coroner
must record the evidence, and bind the parties to give it.
That every Coroner upon any inquisition before him found, whereby any person
shall be indicted for murder or ma^slaughter, or as accessory to the same
before the murder or manslaughter committed, shall put in writing the effect of
the evidence given to the Jury before him, being material. And he has
authority to bind all such by Recognisance, or Obligation, as do declare any
thing material to prove the said murder or manslaughter, or to be accessorie
to the same, to appear at the next general jail delivery to be holden
within the county, city, or town corporat, where the trial thereof shall
be, then and there to give evidence against the party so indicted, at the time
of his trial, and shall certify as well the same evidence, as such bond in
writing which he shall take, together with the Inquisition or Indictment before
him taken and found, at, or before his said trial to be made. And if any
Coroner shall offend in any thing to the contrary, then the Justices of jail
delivery for the Shire, City, Town, or place where such offense shall be
committed, upon due proof thereof by examination before them, shall for every
such offense, set such fine on such Coroner, as they shall think meet.

Inquiry of a man slain within the K. house and verge.
17 Forasmuch as heretofore many felonies that have been committed within the
Verge, have been unpunished, because the Coroners of the county have not been
authorized to inquire of felonies done within the Verge, but only the Coroner
of the Kings house, which never continues in one place, by reason whereof
there can be no trial made in due manner, nor the selons put in Exigent, nor
outlawed, nor nothing presented in the Eire, which has been great damage to
the King, and to the hindrance of his peace: For the redress whereof by a
Statute made Anno 28. Ed. 1. St. 28. E. 1. 3
entitled Articuli super chartas, it was ordained, That if the death of a man
(where the Coroners Office is to make view and Enquest) does chance in any
county where the Kings house is, and within the Verge, the Coroner of the same
county shall be commanded with the Coroner of the Kings house, to execute his
office, and to inroll it. And that thing which cannot be determined before the
Steward, shall be committed to the common law, so that Exigents, Outlawries,
and Presentiments, shall be thereupon made to the Justices in their circuits, by
the Coroner of the county, as well as of other felonies done out of the Verge:
Nevertheless they shall not omit by reason hereof, to make attachme^ts freshly
upon the felonies done. Which foresaid statute, for so much thereof as does
touch or concern the K. house only, is in part altered by the statute of Anno
33. H. 8. St. 33. H. 8. 12.
whereby it is ordained, Inquiry if a man be slain within the K. house and
verge.
That all Inquisitions upon the view of persons slain within any of the Kings
Palaces or houses, or any other house, at such time as he shall be abiding in
his royal person, viz. (within Edifices, Courts, places, gardens, orchards, or
houses within the Porters ward of any of the house or houses above rehearsed,
or within any gardens, privy walks, orchards, tylt-yards, woodyards, tenice
plays, cock fights, bowling allies, near adjoining to any of the houses
above rehearsed, and being part of the same, or within two hundred foot of the
standard, of any outward gate or gates of any of the houses above rehearsed,
commonly used for passage out or from any of the house or houses above
specified) shall be taken by the Coroner of the household of the King or his
heirs, without adjoining of any other Coroner of any Shire, by the oaths of
twelve or more of the Yeomen officers of the Kings etc. household, returned by
the two Clerks Comptrollers, the Clerks of the Check, Clerks Marshall, or
one of them for the time being, of the foresaid household, to whom the said
Coroner shall direct his Precept (which Coroner etc. shall be assigned by the
L. Steward for the time being.) And the said Coroner shall from time to time
for ever without delay, certify under his Scale, and the Seals of such persons
as shall be so sworn before him, all such Inquisitions, Indictments, and
Offices, upon the view of all dead bodies which shall be slain within any of
the K. Palaces or houses, or other house aforesaid, before the said L. Steward,
and in his absence before the Treasurer, Comptroller, and Steward of the
Marshalsey, or before two of them, whereof the said Steward of the Marshalsey
to be one. And such Inquisitions and Offices so certified, shall be taken as
good to all intents, as any Inquisition taken upon the view of the body of any
person being dead, by any Coroner of any county of this Realm, has been, or
shall be adjudged.

St. 28. E. 1. 3
18 Whereas the foresaid stat. of 28. E. 1. has ordained, One man Coroner of
the K. house, and of the county.
That if the death of a man does chance in any county where the K. house is,
and within the Verge, the Coroner of the same county shall be commanded with the
Coroner of the K. house to execute his office, and to inroll it. But if a
murder or manslaughter be found within the county of M. within the Verge, by
an Inquisition taken before one which is then both one of the Coroners of the
county of M. and also Coroner of the K. house, Co. li. 4. 46.
and then and there one is indicted of the same murder or manslaughter, this is
a good indictment: for the intent and meaning of the said stat. of 28. Ed. 1.
is performed, though not by two persons, yet by one man having two offices, and
also the mischief recited in the said Act, is avoided: for though the Court
does remove, yet the Coroner of the county may proceed.

Who shall be Judge of Treason and Felony.
1 Having written at large of Treasons and Felonies, and showed what sorts, and
how many of either of them there be, and which of those were delivered us by
the common law, and which ordained by statute: And declared who be principals,
and who be accessories in the said crimes: how the offenders therein, upon a
prick and guilt of conscience, do ofttimes break prison and endeavor to
escape, and how by Huy and cry, and other means they be apprehended, and
brought to be tried by the justice of the law: how they be accused by Appeals
or Indictments, in what sort they shall be restained and kept sub custodia legis,
in prison, or by mainprise, or bail, until they have answered their said
offenses: And also having expressed what pleas the party accused has to plead
for himself, or other helps to defend himself, by whom and what means those
pleas shall be examined, and what favors be affoorded him in the trial thereof:
and what judgment, execution, and forfeitures the law does inflict upon those
that in contempt of her do commit the said capital and most grievous offense:
And further, having dilated how a true man being upon malice, and falsely
charged with felony by an Appeal, or Indictment, shall, in some satisfaction
of his discredit and losses, recover damages against the appellant, his
abettors, or the conspirators: And having laid open the authority and duty of
the Coroner, who is a most ancient officer of trust in this Realm, and a
special preserver of the peace of the King and the kingdom, I am now lastly
to write who shall be Judge in the foresaid Treasons and Felonies, and shall
inflict punishment upon every transgressor of the said laws according to his
desert. Wherein is to be considered, that the dead letter of the common or
statute law, cannot be that Judge, to inquire of felons, examine them, commit
them to prison, indict them, arraigne them, allow them their lawful trial,
examine their causes, and yield them justice according to their several
demerits by acquital, or condemnation: but it must be Lex loque^s, viz. That
Judge must be a man of learning and uprightness, which by his mouth will
speak and attribute to every person, that which the wisdom and integrity of
his heart does conceive to be just, lawful, and due unto them. And though that
Judge ought so to be countenanced and protected by the regal authority, that
he shall not need to fear the face of any man for doing of justice, and shall
be enabled to crush and suppress all offenses within his jurisdiction; yet the
king himself cannot be that Judge, The K. cannot be Judge in Treason or
Felony.
nor sit in judgment in causes of treason or felony, because he is one of the
parties to the judgment: for all treasons and felonies be done, and be supposed
to be done contrary to the peace, crown, and dignity of the K. And further,
the escheates and other forf. of lands, leafes, goods, and cattels, which do
come by the attainder of any person of treason or felony, do for the most part
by the law accrue to the king: And so if the King might be Judge, he should
be Judge in his own cause, which Ius gentium does not permit. But the King by
his Commission may commit that authority to others, who may judge between him
and the supposed offender. What sort of men ought to be Judges.
And the King ought to make choice of such a man to be Judge as is wise, and
does fear God, who has truth in his mouth, and no covetousness in his heart,
who will neither decline from the trodden path of justice, to the right hand nor
to the left, for the hope of prosperity, or fear of adversity, nor will draw
the Kings sword to revenge his own wrongs; who will deny justice to none,
neither himself will expect or take reward of any; who will freely license all
persons to prosecute their right, give full ear to the widows complaint,
further the cause of the orphan and fatherless, and suffer none that he can
help to receive wrong; who will not fear the countenance of the mighty, nor
disdain the baseness of the poor, whom neither hatred, favor, or private
affection will move, but without respect of persons will yield to each wight,
that which his cause requires; who will remember, and never forget, that God
has endowed him with knowledge and understanding, Ecclesiast. 17
that he has made a covenant with him, to show him what true justice and
judgment is, that all his actions be continually in Gods sight, and that
every moment from heaven the King of Kings does behold them: And finally, who
duly respecting both the commissions which he has received from God and his
prince, will so indifferently temper justice with mercy toward the poor
prisoner standing trembling before him at the bar, as he will hope for mercy
when himself shall make his last and great account before the God of justice
and mercy.

2 Whereas diverse ancient Prerogatives and Authorities of justice, appertaining
to the Crown of this Realm, were severed and taken from the same by sundry
gifts of the Kings Progenitors, Kings of this Realm, to the great diminution
of the royal estate of the same, and to the hindrance and delay of justice:
St. 27. H. 8. 25.
for the reformation whereof, by a Statute made Anno 27. H. 8. it was enected,
That no person or persons, of what estate, condition, None shall make Justices
but the King.
or degree soever they be, shall have any power or authority to make any
Justices of Air, Justices of Assise, Justices of Peace, or Justices of Jail
delivery, but that all such Officers and Ministers, shall be made by Letters
Patents, under the Kings great Seal, in the name, and by authority of the
King and his heirs, Kings of this Realm, in all Shires, Counties, Counties
Palantine, and other places of this Realm, Wales, and the Marches of the same,
or in any other his Dominions, at their pleasure and wills, in such manner and
form, as Justices in Air, etc. be commonly made in every Shire of this
Realm: Any graunts, vsages, Acts of Parliament, or other thing notwithstanding.

The Judge upon the arraignment of a Peer^e of the Realm.
3 When a Peer of the Realm, and Lord of the Parliament, 1. H. 4. 1^ 13. H.
8. 13. 10. Ed. 4. 6.
is to be arraigned upon any Treason or Felony, whereof he is indicted, and
whereunto he has pleaded not guilty, the King by his letters patents shall
assign some noble and sage Lord of the Parliament, to be high Steward of
England for the day of his arraignement, who before the same day shall make a
Precept to his Serieant at Arms, that is appointed to serve him during the
time of his Commission, to warn to appear before him xviij. or xx. Lords of
the Parliament, upon the same day. etc. S. Trial 2.

4 Where Treasons, Misprisions of Treasons, Murders, Manslaughters, and other
malicious strikings, by reason whereof blood has been shed, against the K.
peace, were often committed within the limits of the Kings palace, or house, or
other houses where his Majesty was abiding in his royal person: which
offenses when they be done, be best known by his Highness Officers of his
household, and by his servants of his Check roll: And if his Majesty shall
happen to remove from such his palace, or house, or other house where such
offenses were done, before the trial and determination thereof, then such
offenses might not lawfully be tried, heard, and determined by and before the
said Officers, but be remitted to be tried and determined by the order of the
Common law, by reason whereof the punishment of the said offenders, in such
cases, has been long time delayed, and sometime their offenses forgotten, and
not remembered, and so they escaped unpunished: For the redress whereof, by a
Statute made Anno 33. H. 8. it was enacted, St. 33. H. 8. 12.
That all Treasons, Misprisions of Treasons, Murders, Manslaughters,
Bloudsheds, and other malicious strikings, by reason whereof blood shall be
shed, against the Kings peace, which shall be done within any the Palaces or
houses of the King or his heirs, or within any other house or houses, at such
time as his Majesty shall be then abiding in his royal person, shall be
inquired of, tried, heard, and determined within any of the Kings houses, or
other house where his Majesty shall be abiding, Judge of treasons and
felonies committed in the K. house.
before the Lord Steward of the Kings household, and in his absence, before the
Treasorer, and Comptroller of the K. household, and Steward of the Marshalsey
for the time being, or two of them, whereof the Steward of the Marshalsey to
be one, by virtue of their offices, without any Commission, or other
authority to them given. And whether the King shall be removed from the
house where such offenses shall be done, or not, before they be inquired of,
heard, and determined, yet such offenses shall be inquired of, tried, heard,
and determined before the Kings Officers of his household before named, or two
of them, by the Inquisition and verdict of his household servants in his Check
roll, at such Palace or house where his Majesty shall be at any time abiding,
in manner and form as is hereafter expressed. The two Clerks Comptrollers,
Clerks of the Check, and Clerks Marshals for the time being, of the K.
household, or one of them, upon a Precept to them, or any of them made by the
Lord Steward, or in his absence, by the said Treasorer and Comptroller of the
Kings household, and the said Steward of the Marshalsey, or by two of them,
whereof the said Steward of the Marshalsey to be one, shall have power to
summon, warn, and return the names of twenty four persons, being yeomen
officers of the Kings said household in the said Check roll, to inquire of such
Treasons, Misprisions of Treasons, Murders, Manslaughters, and other malicious
strikings, by reason whereof blood shall be shed, against the Kings peace,
before the said Lord Steward, and in his absence before the said Treasorer,
Comptroller, and Steward of the Marshalsey, or before two of them at the least,
whereof the Steward to be one. And it shall be lawful to the said Lord
Steward, and in his absence, to the said Treasorer, Comptroller, and Steward of
the Marshalsey aforesaid, or two of them, whereof the said Steward to be one,
before whom such Returns shall be so made as is aforesaid, to cause such
number of the said four and twenty persons so returned, above the number of
twelve persons, as to him or them shall seem expedient, to inquire of such
Treasons, Misprisions of Treasons, Murders, Manslaughters, or other malicious
strikings, by reason whereof blood shall be shed, against the Kings peace,
within the said Palaces, or other the said houses, at any time committed. And
if any person or persons be indicted by the said Jury so sworn before them
as is aforesaid, or by Inquisition before the Coroner of the said household, and
certified before the said Lord Steward, or in his absence before the said
Treasorer, Comptroller, and Steward of the Marshalsey, or two of them, whereof
the said Steward of the Marshalsey to be one, Then immediately the said Lord
Steward, or etc. Treasorer, Comptroller, and Steward of the Marshalsey, or two
of them, whereof etc. before whom the said Presentment, Inquisition, or
Indictment shall be so found, or certified by the said Coroner, shall arraigne
before them every such person so indicted, according to the course of the
common law, and forthwith after issue joined between the King and the prisoner
so arraigned, the same day and place, or any other, shall make another Precept
to the said Clerks Comptrollers, Clerks of the Check, and Clerks Marshals of
the said household, or to one of them, to summon and return one Jury of four
and twenty persons, to appear before the said Lord Steward, or etc. Treasorer,
Comptroller, and Steward of the Marshalsey, or two of them, whereof the said
Steward of the Marshalsey to be one, at such day, time, and place, and upon
such pain as shall be then limited of the Serieants and Gentlemen Officers of
the Kings chamber, and of the said household, which shall take wages by the K.
Check roll. And the said Steward, or etc. Treasorer, Comptroller, and Steward
of the said Marshalsey, or two of them, whereof the said Steward to be one,
before whom such Jury shall be so returned, shall cause twelve of the same
Jury to be sworn, truly to try between the King and such person, as shall
be so indictected and arraigned of such Treasons, Misprisions of treasons,
Murders, Manslaughters, and other malicious strikings, by reason whereof blood
shall be shed, against the Kings peace, or any of them. And if any such person
or persons so arraigned be found guilty of any Treason, Misprision of Treason,
Murders, or Manslaughters, then he shall have judgment of life and member,
and suffer such pains of death, and shall forfeit all their manors, lands,
tenements, goods, and cattels, in like manner as if the same person and persons
had been found guilty of any of the said offenses by the order of the common
law, without the benefit of Clergy, or Sanctuary. Provided always, that the
trial of Peers for any offense before mentioned shall be as it has been used
in times past.

St. 3. H. 7. 14
5 By the stat. made Anno 3. H. 7. it was ordained, That the Steward,
Treasorer, Judges of conspiracy in the K. house.
and Comptroller of the Kings house for the time being, or one of them, shall
have authority to inquire by twelve sad men, and discreet persons, of the
Check roll of the Kings household, if any servant admitted to be his servant
sworn, and his name put in the Check roll of his household, whatsoever he be
(serving in any office or room reputed and taken under the estate of a Lord)
make any confederacies, co^passings, conspiracies, or imaginations, with any
person or persons, to destroy or murder the K. or any Lord of this realm, or
any other person sworn to the kings Counsel, Steward, Treasorer, or
Comptroller of the Kings house: And if it be found before the said Steward for
the time being, by the said xij. sad men, that any such of the K. servants, as
is abouesaid, has confederat, compassed, conspired, or imagined, as is
abouesaid, he so found by the inquiry, shall be put thereupon to answer. And
the Steward, Treasorer, and Comptroller, or two of them, have power to
determine the same matter according to the law: and if he put him in trial,
then it shall be tried by other twelve sad men of the said household. And if
such misdoers shall be found guilty by confession, or otherwise, the said
offense shall be judged felony. S. Felony by Stat. 1.

Judges within the Verge.
6 The Justices of the Kings Bench, the Justices of Oyer and Terminer, Co. li.
4. 47.
Justices of Jail delivery, and Justices of Peace, have power to inquire,
hear, and determine all murders and felonies within the Verge, for that their
authority and jurisdiction is general through the whole county, and so it
has been always used.

7 The Justices of the Kings Bench, Judges of the K. Bench.
without having Commission, may hea^e and determine all manner of Treasons and
Felonies. And by the Stat. of Anno 35. H. 8. and Anno 5. Ed. 6. it is enacted,
St. 35. H. 8. 2 St. 5. E. 6. 11
That all manner of offenses being already made or declared, or hereafter to
be made or declared, by any laws and statutes of this Realm, to be Treasons,
Misprisions of Treasons, or concealments of Treasons, and done, perpetrated, or
committed, or hereafter to be done, Judges of Treasons committed beyond the Sea
perpetrated, or committed by any person or persons, out of this Realm of
England, shall be inquired of, heard, and determined before the Kings Justices
of his Bench, for Pleas to be holden before himself, Die. fol. 287 and 298.
by good and lawful men of the same Shire where the said Bench shall sit, and
be kept, or else before such Commissioners, and in such Shire of this Realm,
as shall be assigned by the Kings Commission, and by good and lawful men of
the same Shire, in like manner and form to all intents and purposes, as if
such Treasons, Misprisions of Treasons, and concealements of Treasons, had
been done and committed within the same Shire where they shall be so inquired
of, heard, and determined. Provided always, that if any Peers of this Realm
shall be indicted of any such Treasons, or other offenses, then they shall have
their trial by their Peers, as heretofore has been accustomed.

8 By the Stat. entitled De finibus, St. 27. E. 1. 2. St. 4. E. 3. 2
made Anno 27. Ed. 1. and also by the stat. of Anno 4. E. 3. it is ordained,
That good and discreet persons (other than of the Benches, Judges of jail
delivery
if they may be found sufficient) shall be assigned in all the shires of England,
to take Assizes, Iuries, and Certifications, and to deliver the gaoles. And the
Justices assigned to deliver the gaoles, shall have power to deliver the same
gaoles of those that shall be indicted before the gardens of the peace. And the
said gardens shall send their indictments before the Justices. And they shall
have authority to inquire of Sherifes, Gaolers, and others, in whose ward such
indicted persons shall be, if they make deliverance, or let to mainprise any so
indicted, which be not mainpernable, and to punish the said Sherifes, Gaolers,
St. 3. H. 7. 1
and others offending against this Act. And by the stat. of An. 3. H. 7. it is
enacted, That the wife or heir of any person murdered, or slain, Judges in
appeal of murder or manslaughter
as case shall require, may commence their Appeal in proper person, at any
time within the year after the felony done, before the Sheriff and Coroners
where the said felony and murder was done, or before the King in his Bench, or
Justices of Jail delivery.

9 To the intent to enable the Just. Justices of Nisi prius Judges in felony
and treason
of Nisi prius to give judgment of such persons as be either attainted or
acquit of treason or felony, by a stat. made an. 14. H. 6. it was established,
St. 14. H. 6. 1
That the Just. before whom Enquests, Inquisitions, and Iuries shall be taken by
the K. writ of Nisi prius, according to the form of the stat. thereof made,
shall have power of all the cases of felony, and of treason, to give judgment.
Though this stat. of 14. H. 6. does give authority to Justices of Nisi prius
to give judgment as well upon acquital, 10. Ed. 4. 14
as upon attainder of treason, or felony, notwithstanding if in an Appeal the
defendant be acquit before them, they cannot award damages against the
plaintiff, Awarding of damages, and inquiring of abettors.
nor inquire of abettors: for their power by this stat. extends but to
treason and felony only, whereof they may give judgment, and of nothing else:
for the awarding of damages, and inquiring of abettors, does yet remain as it
was at the common law.

St. 33. H. 8. 23.
10 By the stat. of Anno 33. H. 8. it is ordained, Judges of murders by
special commission.
That if any person or persons, being examined before the K. Counsel, or three
of them, upon any manner of murders, do confess any such offenses, or that the
said Counsel, or three of them, upon such examination, shall think any person
so examined, to be vehemently suspected of any murder, then in every such
case, by the kings commandment, the K. Commission of Oyer and Terminer, under
the great Seal, shall be made to such persons, and to such Shires, or places, as
shall be appointed by his Highness, for the speedy trial, conviction, or
deliverance of such offenders: which Commissioners shall have authority to
inquire, hear, and determine all such murders within the Shire, and places
limited by their Commission, by such good and lawful persons as shall be
returned before them by the Sheriff, his minister, or other having power to
return writs and process for that purpose, in whatsoever other Shire or place
within the K. dominions, or without, such offenses were committed. But Peers of
the realm being indicted of the said offense, shall be tried by their Peers.
This stat. was also made for the trial of treasons, and misprision of
treasons, by special commission. But by the stat. St. 1. and 2. P. and M. 10.
of an. 1. and 2. P. and M. it was enacted, That all trials to be made for any
treasons, shall be only used according to the course of the common law.

11 Where Traitors, Pirates, Thieves, Robbers, Murderers, and confederators upon
the Sea, many times escaped unpunished, because the trial of their offenses
has heretofore been ordered, judged, and determined before the Admiral, or
his Lieutenant, or Commissarie, after the course of the Civil laws, the
nature whereof is, that before any judgment of death can be given against the
offenders, either they must plainly confess their offenses (which they will
never do without torture or pains) or else their offenses must be so plainly
and directly proved by witnesses indifferent, such as saw their offenses
committed, which cannot be gotten but by chance at few times, because such
offenders commit their offenses upon the Sea, and many times murder and kill
such persons being the ship or boat where they commit their offenses, which
should be witness against them in that behalf: and also such as should bear
witness, be commonly Mariners, and shipmen, which, because of their often
voyages and passages upon the Sea, depart without long tarrying and protracting
of time, to the great costs and charges as well of the King, as such as would
pursue such offenders: For reformation whereof, by a Statute made Anno 28. H.
8. it was enacted, That all Treasons, St. 28. H. 8. 15.
Felonies, Robberies, Murders, and Confederacies, committed in, or upon the
Sea, or in any other Haven, River, Creek, or place where the Admiral or
Admirals have, or pretend to have power, authority, or jurisdiction, shall be
inquired, tried, heard, determined, and judged in such Shires and places in the
Realm, as shall be limited by the Kings Commission or Commissions, to be
directed for the same, in like form and condition, as if any such offense or
offenses had been committed or done in and upon the land: And such Commissions
shall be had under the great Seal, directed to the Admiral or Admirals,
Judges in piracie where the Admiral has jurisdiction.
or to his or their Lieutenant, Deputy and Deputies, and to three or four
other such substantial persons as shall be named or appointed by the Lord
Chauncellor for the time being, from time to time, and as often as need shall
require, to hear and determine such offenses, after the course of the common
laws of this land, used for Treasons, Felonies, Robberies, Murders, and
Confederacies of the same, done and committed upon the land within the Realm.
And such persons to whom such Commission or Commissions shall be directed, or
four of them at the least, shall have authority to inquire of such offenses,
and every of them, by the oaths of twelve good and lawful inhabitants of the
Shire limited in their Commission, in such manner and form, as if such
offenses had been committed upon the land within the same Shire. And every
Indictment found and presented before such Commissioners, of any Treasons,
Felonies, Robberies, Murders, Manslaughters, or such other offenses committed
or done in or upon the Seas, or in, or upon any River, Haven, or Creek, shall
be good and effectual in the law. And if any person or persons happen to be
indicted for any such offense done upon the Seas, or in any other place above
limited, then such order, Process, Judgment, and execution shall be used, had,
done, and made, to, and against every such person and persons so being
indicted, as against traitors, felons, and murderers, for treason, felony,
robbery, murder, or other such offenses done upon the land, as by the law of
this Realm is accustomed. And the trial of such offense or offenses, if it be
denied by the offender or offenders, shall be had by xij. lawful men inhabited
in the Shire limited in such commission, which shall be directed as is
aforesaid, No challenge for the hundred
and no challenge to be had for the Hundred. And such as shall be convict of any
such offense or offenses, by verdict, confession, or process by authority of
any such commission, shall have and suffer such pains of death, losses of
lands, goods, and cattels, as if they had been convicted of any treasons,
felonies, robberies, or other the said offenses done upon the land, without
benefit of Clergy, or Sanctuary. Provided always, that this Act shall not
extend, or be prejudicial to any person or persons, for taking of any
victuals, Taking things upon necessity.
gables, ropes, anchors, or sails, which any such person or persons compelled
by necessity, takes of, or in any ship which may conveniently spare the same,
so the same person or persons pay out of hand for the same victual, gables,
ropes, anchors, or sails, money, or money worth, to the value of the thing so
taken, or do deliver for the same a sufficient bill obligatorie, to be paid
in form following, viz. if the taking of the same things be on this side the
straits of Marrok, then to be paid within four months: and it beyond the
said Straits, then to be paid within twelve months next ensuing the making of
the said bill. And that the makers of the said bills well and truly pay the
same debt, at the day to be limited within the said bills. Prouid^d always,
Commissions directed into the fine ports.
that whenever any such Commission for the punishment of the offenses
aforesaid, or of any of them, shall be directed or sent to any place within the
jurisdiction of the five Ports, that then every such Commission shall be
directed unto the Lord Warden of the said Ports for the time being, or to his
deputy, and unto three or four such other persons as the Lord Chauncellor for
the time being shall appoint. And that when any Commission shall be directed
unto the five Ports, for the inquisition and trial of any of the offenses
expressed in this Act, that every such inquisition and trial to be had by
virtue of such Commission, shall be made and had by the inhabitants in the said
five ports, or the members thereof: Any thing in this Act to the contrary
notwithstanding. So much of this stat. as concerns the trial of treasons, is
altered by the stat. of Anno 1. and 2. P. and M. 10. and the same made triable
only by the course of the common law.

St. 18. E. 3. 2
12 The Justices of peace of every county by virtue of the K. commission to
them directed, and by force of the stat. of Anno 18. Ed. 3. be Judges in
felony, Just. of peace Judges in felony.
and have authority to hear and determine felonies: the words of which stat.
be these, viz. Two or three of the most worthy men of counties, shall be assigned
keepers of the peace by the K. commission: and at what time need shall be, the
same, with otherwise and learned in the law, shall be appointed by the K.
commission, to hear and determine felonies, and trespasses done against the
peace in the same county, and to execute punishment reasonably, according to
law, reason, and the manner of the fact. And the words of the kings commission
which does authorize Justices of peace to be Judges of Felony, and to hear
and determine felonies, amongst others, be these, viz. Iacobus Dei gratia
Angliae, The words of the commission of the peace.
Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Rex, fidei defensor etc. Praedilectis A. B.
C. D. E. H. etc. Salutem. Sciatis quod assignauimus vos, and quoslibet duos,
vel plures vestrum (Quorum aliquem vestrum A. B. C. D. vnum esse volumus)
Iustitiarios nostros, ad pacem nostram in comitatu nostro Buckingham
conseruandam, and ad inquirendum per sacramentum proborum and legalium hominum
de comitatu praedicto (per quos rei veritas melius sciri poterit) de omnibus
and omnimodis felonijs, transgressionibus etc. ac de omnibus and singulis alijs
malefactis and offensis de quibus Iustitiarij nostri pacis legitime inquirere
possunt aut debent per quoscunque aut qualitercunque in Comitatu praedicto
factis sieve perpetratis, Vel quae in posterum ibidem fieri, vel attemptari
contigerit, etc. Et ad omnia and singula Felonias etc. indictamenta praedicta,
ceteraque omnia and singula praemissa secundum leges and statuta Regni nostri
Angliae (prout in huiusmodi casu fieri consueuit and debuit) audiendum and
terminandum. And though it does plainly appear by the words of the foresaid
Commission, that the King does give authority to Justices of Peace, to inquire
of, hear, and determine all manner of Felonies, viz. as well of such as be
made Felonies by Statute, as of such offenses as were Felonies by the Common
law: yet because there has been a scruple and question moved by some, that
the foresaid Statute of Anno 18. Edw. 3. did mean, and was to be expounded to
give authority to Justices of Peace, to inquire of, hear, and determine those
felonies only which were at the time of the making of that Statute, felonies,
viz. That were felonies by the Common law, and not to give them authority to
inquire of, hear, and determine those offenses as felonies, which were made
felonies by several Statutes ordained sithence that time, and that the Kings
Commission authorized by that Statute, did give them no further authority than
that Statute meant: Therefore not to add to the law, but to satisfy every
reader, and to make that thing more plain and perspicuous to all men, which to
some did seem doubtful, the makers of the stat. of anno 8. El. 3. touching
the transporting of sheep, and of the stat. of anno 25. H. 8. 6. ordained
against buggery, and of the stat. of anno 18. H. 6. 19. established to punish
Soldiers that depart from their Captains without license, and of the stat. of
an. 39. El. 4. and an. 1. Iac. 7. touching dangerous and incorrigible rogues,
and of the stat. provided an. 39. El. 17. against wandering soldiers and
mariners, and of the stat. of an. 22. H. 8. 11. established against the cutting
down of powdike, and of the stat. of an. 43. El. 13. enacted against the
carrying away of any persons against their wills out of Cumberland,
Northumberland, Westmerland, or the Bishopric of Durham, did by special
words ordain, that the I. of the peace of the counties wherein any of the
foresaid several offenses were committed, should have authority at their
general Quarter Sessions, to inquire of, hear, and determine the said
offenses. And the like authority was given by the said several stat. to the
Just. of Assise, and Just. of Jail delivery, to inquire of, hear, and
determine the said offenses in the counties where the same were committed
within their several commissions. And by the stat. of an. 1. E. 4. it wa^
ordained, That the I. of peace of every county, St. 1. E. 4. 2
shall have authority and power to arraigne and deliver all person and persons
indicted or presented before the Sherifes, Vndersherifes, their Clerks, Bailifs,
or Ministers, or any of them, in their Turns or Lawdayes. And as of other
felonies, 3. H. 7. 5. 5. E. 6. D. 69 9. H. 4. 1.
so I. of peace may inquire of murder, Murder.
because wilful murder is felony. But Just. of peace cannot inquire of
treason, Treason.
for neither the before mentioned stat. of 18. E. 3. nor the words of their
commission, do authorize them so to do.

The Lord of a Manor Judge in felony.
13 There be some that have liberty of Soc and Sac, Tol and Them, Bracton de
Corona, cap. 35. 2. R. 3. 10.
Infangtheefe and Outfangtheefe: these in their own courts may give judgment
of him who is found within their liberty possessed of any manifest theft, as if
he be hand having, and back bearing, and that Sathaber ( viz. he whose the
goods be) do pursue him: Kel. fol. 150
for unless he be in possession of the goods (though another does pursue him
as a thief) yet that Court, Hundred, or Wapentake, cannot hold plea of such a
theft, nor make inquiry by the Country, whether such a man which was not
possessed of the goods, be culpable, or not. Neither shall any wage battle
without possession. It is called Infangtheefe, Infangtheefe.
where a Thief is taken possessed of goods stolen within any such Manor or
Liberty, who is commorant and dwelling within the same liberty, and one of
the said Lords own people. Outfangtheefe, Outfangtheef.
is a thief that is a stranger, coming from some other place into the Manor
of the Lord who has such a liberty, and is there taken with the manoure. And
yet he that has such a liberty, cannot fetch one of his own people who has
committed larcenie out of his liberty, and bring him into his liberty, and
judge him there according to his liberty; for every person must receive the
punishment of the law where he has offended the law: But he may give judgment
as well against his own people, as against strangers committing larcenie, that
be taken within his liberty. 46. Ed. 3. 15 14. H. 4. 15
And in this liberty of Infangtheefe and Outfangtheefe, and in waife and
stray, and wreck of the sea, a man may prescribe, but so he cannot do in goods
of felons and fugitives, for they do belong to the Crown, and cannot pass
without the Kings grant.

Fitz. Prescription 65
14 The custom of some country is such, A felon first executed, and then
judged.
that if one has committed burglarie, or other felony, and he be pursued by
huy and cry from town to town, and so taken flying, he must be beheaded in the
presence of the inhabitants of four towns, and so by the usage of that
country he is accounted a felon: And this must be recorded in the Coroners
roll, and after the Coroner must present it before the Justices, and they will
adiudge him a felon. And so he must be first put to death, and after judged a
felon.

FINIS.
The general Titles of this Book.
1 MEnace, Assault, Battery, Jmprisonment, Maiheming. 2 Riots, Routs,
unlawful and rebellious Assemblies. 3 Force, and Forcible Entries, and
Forcible detaining of possessions. 4 Forgerie. 5 Perjury, and Subornation of
Witness. 6 Maintenance, Champertie, Embracerie. 7 Deceit, Couin, Collusion,
Fraud. 8 Extortion, Exaction. 9 Oppression. 10 Treasons. 11 Homicides. 12
Felonies by the common Law. 13 Felonies by Statute. 14 Principal and
Accessorie. 15 Breaking of Prison, and Rescous. 16 Escapes of Felons. 17
Pursuit by Huy and Cry. 18 Appeals of Felony. 19 Jndictments. 20 Mainprise and
Bail. 21 Confession of the offense. 22 Approuer. 23 Sanctuary and Abiuration.
24 Pleading not guilty. 25 Trial of the plea of not guilty by Battle. 26
Trial by Peers. 27 Trial by the Country. 28 Challenges. 29 Evidence. 30 The
Verdict. 31 Clergy. 32 The Kings Pardon. 33 Standing mute, or answering
indirectly. 34 Judgment and Execution. 35 Forfeitures for Treason or Felony.
36 Corruption of Blood. 37 Restitution of stolen goods. 38 Damages in an
Appeal. 39 A Writ of Conspiracy. 40 The Coroner and his authority and duty
in Felonies. 41 Who shall be Judge in Treason and Felony.
A brief effect of every Branch or Chapter in this Treatise.
Menace, Assault, Battery, Imprisonment, Maiheming. Fol. 1.
1 THe evil fruits of menaces. Menacers shall be imprisoned. The enormitie of
libelling and defaming. 2 The differences of Menacing, Assault, and Battery. 3
The declaration in trespass of menacing. A rebuke accounted a Menace or Assault.
4 Menacing a servant, whereby he departs out of service. 5 Menacing a tenant,
whereby he departs from his tenancie. Menacing of a Lords Freeholder. 6
Menacing which is justifiable. 7 Menacing by going or riding armed. 8 Wearing
of a privy coat a Menace. 9 Laborers shall wear no weapons, to prevent
Menaces. 10 Assurances made by Menace. 11 What is an assault. What is a
battery. 12 Justifying of beating in his own defense. Bar in trespass of
Assault and Battery. 13 Justifying of beating in defense of others. The
mast^rs remedy for beating of his servant. 14 Battery in defense of his goods.
Battery in defense of his land, lease, or way. 15 Battery in resisting of a
Justice of Peace. 16 A Schoolmaster beats his Sholler. 17 A Master beats
his Prentice. 18 Beating of a man that is frantic. 19 Beating of one that
will not yield to arrest. 20 Beating of a servant departing out of service.
Beating of a Ward. 21 Commandment of Battery. 22 Battery or hurting at some
exercise or disport. 23 Battery by whipping of a vagabond. Punishments by the
order of Law. 24 Battery for disobeying of a writ or warrant. 25 Arresting one
in a Church that is doing divine service. 26 Disturbing of a Preacher in his
Sermon. 27 Chiding in a Church or Churchyard. Smiting in a church or
churchyard. Drawing or smiting with a weapon in a Church, or etc. 28 Drawing of
blood within the kings palace. 29 Assaulting one which comes to the
Parliament. Assaulting the servant of a Parliament man. The liberty of the
Clergy at a Convocation house touching assaults. 30 Assaulting a Judge or
Iuror. Striking in time or place of justice. 31 Arresting by watchmen. 32
Trespass for a battery before Outlawrie. 33 A man first indicted for battery,
and after sued for the same. 34 What imprisonment is. Voluntary consent no
cause of imprisonment. 35 Imprisonment by the commandment of the king or his
Justices etc. 36 Imprisonment for notorious and grievous offenses. 37
Imprisonment for offenses done vi and armis. 38 Imprisonment for Riots. 39
Imprisonment for holding land with force. 40 Imprisonment of one that is
pursued by huy and cry. 41 Imprisonment of him that does break the peace.
Arresting of suspected persons. 42 Imprisoning of him that does attempt to rob.
43 Assisting him to arrest that has a warrant. 44 Breaking of a house to
arrest, in what case lawful. 45 The shirife does arrest and does not return
his writ. 46 Arresting upon suspicion of felony. Causes of suspicion of felony.
47 Arresting upon doubt of Manslaughter. 48 A Justice of peace his Warrant to
arrest a felon. 49 Arresting of an offender, and committing him to the
Constable. 50 Imprisonment until he had made an Obligation. 51 The servant not
chargeable for the masters offense by imprisonment. 52 No imprisonment by force
of a Iusticies. 53 Imprisonment by force of a warrant upon a Supplicauit. 54
Arresting him that would break the peace. 55 Imprisoning of a servant that
does assault his master. 56 In what cases imprisonment is lawful, and in what
not. 57 Imprisonment for offenses done to the Justices of the realm. 58 What
is maiheming. 59 How many sorts there be of maiheming. 60 Examination of a
maihem by the Justices or Surgeons. 61 Where diverse appeals of maihem for one
offense. 62 Principal and Accessarie in maihem. The judgment in an appeal of
maihem. 63 Mainprise in an appeal of maihem. 64 Why maihem is supposed to be
done feloniously. 65 Bars in an appeal of maihem. 66 Execution in an appeal
of maihem. 67 An action of Trespass maintenable after an appeal of maihem. 68
The peace preserved, and affraies restrained by Justices of Peace. The
commission of the peace. 69 The commission does chiefly respect the peace. Why
they be called Justices of the peace. Binding suspected persons to their good
behauior. 70 A Justice of Peace may take surety of the peace. What the surety
of the Peace is. Certificat of a Recognisance. The surety of good abearing. 71
For whom and against who^ the surety of Peace is to be granted. 72 Upon what
causes the surety of peace is to be granted. 73 Surety of peace enioined by
word or writing. 74 The serving of Process for the peace. A warrant of the
peace. Who may serve it without writing, and who without showing it, and who
not. Refusing to obey the warrant. 75 To which Justice of Peace the party
arrested is to be brought. 76 A warrant to find sureties to keep the peace.
The party must offer his sureties. 77 Surety of Peace does dye with the king.
The Justices authority dies with the king. 78 The sureties of the Peace must
be named. 79 He that is bound to the Peace must appear at a day prefixed. 80
A Supersedeas for the peace. 81 Taking a Recognisance for the keeping of the
peace. Taking a Recognisance for the good abearing. 82 A Release of the surety
of Peace. The parties release of the peace. The Justices Release of the Peace.
83 Causes of the breach of the Peace, or good abearing. 84 The Sheriff,
Constable, and several other officers be conseruators of the Peace. 85 Every
able person, when need requires, must be a conseruator of the Peace. 86
Menaces, Assaults, Batteries, etc. in some cases are punishable in the
Star Chamber.
Riots, Routs, unlawful and Rebellious Assemblies. Fol. 24.
1 The enormity of Riots. Statutes ordained to prevent forces or Riots. 2 The
Court of Star Chamber authority to punish Riots etc. 3 What is a Riot. 4 What
is an unlawful assembly. 5 What is a Rout. Rout by wearing of armor. 6
Lawful assemblies of three persons, or more. An assembly lawfully begun, does
end riotously. 7 Disturbing of Riotors. 8 The Justices and Shirifes etc. shall
arrest Riotors. Recording of a Riot. 9 Inquiry of a Riot by the Justices etc. A
Precept to the Shirife to return a Jury to inquire of a Riot. The form of an
inquisition of a Riot. 10 Certifying of a Riot. Trauerse of a Certificat. 11
Process against offenders. 12 The forfeiture of Justices, which do not inquire
of Riots. 13 A Commission to inquire of the Justices etc. default. 14 Upon the
Commission the Coroner shall return the Jury. What issues shall be returned
upon the Jurors. 15 Where the Sheriff shall return the Jury, and not the
Coroner. 16 A Writ directed to inquire of Riots. 17 Riots shall be inquired of at
the Kings costs. 18 The punishment of Riotors. 19 Each man shall help to
repress Riots. 20 Baylifes of Franchises. Riots in Cities and Towns corporat.
21 A Jury to inquire of Riots. 22 Maintenance whereby a riot is not found. 23
What one Justice of Peace may do alone in a Riot. 24 The Justices must have
notice of a Riot. 25 The parties agreement no discharge of the inquisition of a
Riot. 26 What power of the County the Justices shall use to repress Riots. 27
The Justices record of a Riot, where no trauerse thereunto. 28 The credit of
the Justices Record. Certificat of a Riot. 29 The process against Riotors. 30
The penalty for not executing of this statute. 31 A trauerse to an indictment
of Riot. 32 Twelve or above assembled to change laws. 33 Practicing to destroy
Parks, Ponds, Conduits, Common, or Way. Destroying of Dear, Conies,
Douehouses, Fish. Pulling down houses, burning stackes of corn, etc. 34
Raising of unlawful assemblies by acts or words. 35 Relieuing them which be
assembled. 36 Unlawful assemblies above two, and under twelve. The remedy of
the party grieved. 37 Raising of power to suppress unlawful assemblies. 38 A
copiholder being required refuses to serve the king. 39 A farmer required
refuses to serve. 40 Disclosing a commotion, wherein one is moved. 41 An able
person required, refuses to serve. 42 Attendance upon a Lieutenant. 43 The
form of the Proclamation. 44 Hinderance of the Proclamation. 45 Other men's
rights saved. 46 Procuring others to offend. 47 Unlawful assemblies by xl. or
above. 48 A Lieutenant shall not appoint a deputy. 49 Aiding of the offender
before the offense. 50 The attainder of those offenses no corruption of blood.
Force, and Forcible Entries. Fol. 34.
1 Unlawful force is an enemy to peace. There shall be no forcible entry into
lands. 2 The penalty of forcible entry into lands or benefices. 3 Holding
possession by force. Feoffement of lands for maintenance. An Assise or action
of Trespass against a disseisor by force. The authority of officers in Cities
and Towns enfranchised touching force. 4 A special Assise against a disseisor
with force. 5 Several remedies for several offenses by force. 6 A Precept to
the Sheriff to impanell a Jury. The Shirifes forfeiture for not due executing
of a Precept. The process against offenders in force. 7 The form of a Precept
to the shirife, to impanell a Jury. 8 The form of an inquisition of forcible
entry. 9 A warrant to the Shirife to make restitution. 10 Restitution awarded
out of the Kings bench. 11 No restitution, but where forces is found by
inquisition. 12 Where no restitution against three years possession. Where
restitution notwithstanding three years possession. 13 A Supersedeas to stay
restitution. 14 Where force found, and yet no restitution. 15 A Mittimus to
send to the Jail such as do hold land by force. 16 A Justice may enquire of
Forcible Entries, without complaint. 17 In an action of forcible entry the writ
must be Vi and armis. 18 Who may bring an action of Forcible entry. 19 He that
has title, enters by force. 20 He that has possession, sueth a Writ of
Forcible Entry. 21 Forcible entry of a Rent or Common. 22 Forcible entry to the
use of another. Forcible detaining by words only. 23 Iointenants or Tenants in
common expelling each other by force. 24 Who may bring a Writ of Entry upon the
Statute of 5. Richard. 2. 25 Turning a watercourse by force. 26 The plea of
not guilty in Forcible entry The finding of the special matter does charge or
discharge the defendant of force. Presentment of Forcible entry. 27 One action
for entering and detaining with force. 28 A writ upon the Statute of
North-hampton. 29 What shall be said to be force. Force by number of servants.
Force by number of weapons. 30 Who may make a Forcible entry. 31 What force is
lawful to the persons of men. 32 Where the house of a man may be broken by
force, and where not. 33 A particular person may defend himself and his by
force. 34 The Writ of Vi laica remouenda. 35 Where force shall be removed for the
K. Incumbent, where not.
Forgerie. Fol. 43.
1 Forgerie, Perjury, and Maintenance do tend to the breach of the Peace. 2
The enormitie of Forgerie. A repeal of former Statutes of Forgerie. 3 Forging
of deeds, whereby another lands shall be troubled. 4 Forging a deed, whereby
a lease or annuity may be claimed. 5 Several remedies against a forger. 6 A
forger not twice punished for one offense. 7 The plaintifes release of forgerie
shall only discharge his own remedy. 8 The punishment for the second offense of
forgery. 9 The Justices of Assise shall hear and determine forgery. 10 Forging
of deeds before the statute of 5. El. Pleading of a forged deed made before
the said statute. 11 Persons not chargeable of forgerie by the said stat. of 5.
El. 12 Forging of a customarie book. 13 The process to levy costs and damages
of a forger. 14 The kings pardon of forgerie. 15 Forging of a Testament. 16
Inserting more in a will then is directed. 17 Pleas in bar of forgerie. 18
Where one shall have an action of Forgery, though he has but a right to the
land. 19 Where no title to land, lease, etc. no action of forgery. 20 Forging
of a deed touching iointenants lands. 21 One seals a deed by another
commandment. 22 One forgeth a deed, and another does publish it. 23 Forgery
by antedating of a deed. 24 Getting of other men's goods by forged letters or
tokens. 25 Suspected persons of that kind of forgerie called before the
Justices. 26 Forging of a Testimonial.
Perjury, Subornation. Fol. 48.
1 Truth is to be tried by the oaths of men. The credit of an oath. 2 What
sorts of persons are to be deposed, and what not. 3 All the parties to the
execution of justice sworn. Causes of suspicion in Sherifes in impanelling of
Jurors. 4 Every Iuror ought to be an honest and lawful man. Challenges of
Jurors suspected. 5 A witness cannot be a Iuror. 6 Perjury suspected by
delivery of his verdict before hand. 7 Perjury suspected by lying at the charge
of one of the parties. 8 Perjury suspected by being an arbitrator in the cause
in question. 9 Perjury suspected by combination. 10 Perjury suspected if one of
the parties and a Iuror be in suit of law. 11 Perjury suspected, for that the
Iuror passed against him before. 12 Perjury suspected in respect of subjection
or government. 13 Perjury suspected in respect of alliance, kindred, or
profit. One godfather to the others child. 14 Perjury suspected in respect of
ignorance of the cause. Want of Hundredors. Want of the View. 15 Perjury
suspected in respect of the poverty of the Jurors. 16 The judgment in an
Attaint at the common law, against a Jury proved perjured. 17 The judgment in
an Attaint in London. An Attaint where the thing in question amounts to 40.
pou^ds, and where not. 18 The meaning to commit Perjury punished. Decies
tantum. Embraceors. 19 The punishment of Perjury committed by an Enquest in
Wales. 20 Perjury committed by witnesses. A witness upon process served shall
appear. 21 The penalty for procuring of unlawful Perjury. 22 The penalty for
committing of wilful Perjury. 23 In what Courts Perjury shall be punished. 24
Proclamation of the statute of Perjury. 25 Perjury punished in the spiritual
Court. 26 Perjury punished in the Star Chamber. 27 Perjury punished in
Bankrupts. Perjury committed by witnesses for Bankrupts. 28 Perjury committed
upon an indictment of Riot. Perjury upon an indictment of Felony. 29 Perjury in
proving a Suggestion for a prohibition. 30 A suit upon Perjury in the
Chauncerie. 31 Where Perjury shall be punished in the temporal court, and
where in the spiritual.
Maintenance, Champertie, Embracerie, and buying of Titles. Fol. 56.
1 What Maintenance is, and the enormitie thereof. 2 Maintenance by men of
authority. 3 Maintenance by combination. Maintenance by Noblemens officers. 4
Maintenance by champerty. Who be champertors. Pleaders may give counsel for
their fees. The punishment of champertors. 5 What is Champerty, and what not. 6
Maintenance by Embracery. Maintenance by Jurors. The penalty of maintenance in
Jurors and Embraceors. 7 Maintenance punished by the writ of Decies tantum. 8
Maintenance by Ambidexter. 9 Maintenance of suits in law, and the penalties
thereof. 10 Maintenance by buying of pretenced Titles. 11 What is selling of a
pretenced Title. What is a pretenced Title. 12 Maintenance by giving of
liueries, and retaining of servants or officers. 13 The publishing, inquiring
of, and punishment of Maintenance. 14 Why the pursuing of maintenance is left
out of the statute of 18. Eliz. 15 Assurances to have maintenance void. Lands
gotten by force assured to have maintenance. 16 What maintenance is punishable,
and what justifiable. 17 It is no maintenance in a Iuror for giving of his
verdict. Maintenance in a Iuror, by suing for judgment. 18 What is Maintenance
in a Iuror, and what not. 19 Maintenance by speaking of words. Maintenance by
coming to the bar with one of the parties. 20 Maintenance by giving of money
to labor a Jury. 21 What is maintenance in witnesses, and what not. 22
Maintenance by procuring of an Indictment. 23 What is maintenance in a
Mainpernor. 24 Maintenance in respect of his interest in the land. Maintenance
in respect of his possibility to have the land. Maintenance in respect of his
warranty. 25 Maintenance in respect of his rent. A Lord may maintain his
tenant. 26 Maintenance in respect of his debt. 27 Maintenance in respect of his
title to goods. Maintenance by detaining of a writing delivered in trust. 28
Maintenance in respect of his joint estate with others. Maintenance by all the
inhabitants of a parish. 29 Maintenance of the poor in their suits. Clerks,
Counselors, and Atturneyes assigned to aid the poor. 30 Maintenance in
respect of kindred or alliance. Unlawful maintenance is continual during that
suit. Maintenance in respect of Gossiprie. 31 Maintenance in respect the party
could not speak English. 32 Maintenance in a professor of the Law. 33
Maintenance by an Attorney. 34 Maintenance in respect of neighborhood. 35 In
what cases the master may maintain his servant. In what cases the servant may
maintain his master.
Deceit, Couin, Collusion, Fraud. Fol. 67.
1 The multitude and enormities of deceits and frauds. 2 The reward for pains,
and punishment for deceits of officers toward the Law. A Judge. A Clerk. A
Serieant. A Pleader. A Philozer. An Exigenter. No office of Justice shall be
sold or bought. No man shall be Justice of Assise in his own County. 3 Who
shall be Atturneyes. Sollicitors. The penalty for following a suit in another
name. What acts done by Atturneyes in several cases shall be adjudged deceit.
4 The Law rejects deceitful and fraudulent acts. A fine levied of land to
defraud the right owner thereof, shall be void. 5 A fine levied of ancient
demesne land, to defraud the Lord of his Seigniorie, is voidable. 6 How a
recovery of land by deceit shall be avoided. 7 A Scire facias upon a recovery by
deceit avoided. A recovery of debt by deceit avoided. A judgment to avoid the
meaning of a Statute. The executors shall have remedy for a deceitful recovery
against the Testator. 8 Deceit upon a recovery in a Quare impedit. Deceit upon
a recovery in wast. 9 Deceit upon a recovery in a Praecipe in capite. 10 Where
a good Title shall be impaired by a couenous recovery thereof. 11 A Warranty
devised by deceit. 12 Deceit by getting of a Protection. 13 Deceit by
purchasing of a writ to charge another. 14 Deceit by purchasing of a writ in
another name. Deceit for procuring one to sue another. 15 Deceit by
acknowledging of a statute in another name. Deceit by doing of a judicial act
in another name. 16 Deceit by forging of a resignation of a Benefice. 17
Deceit by conueying of land to one man, which before was bargained to another.
18 Deceit by not performing of his Warranty. 19 Deceit by confession of an
action, wherein he has no interest. 20 Deceit by the aliening of the goods of
his wife, from whom he means to be divorced. 21 Sale of goods in open Market
by deceit and couin. 22 A fraudulent assurance to defeat the discontinuee in
tail of his plea of Assets per Descent. 23 Fraudule^t assurance to defeat a
Lord of his Ward, Marriage, etc. 24 He that is not party to a fraud shall
sustain no loss by it. 25 Deceit and collusion to bring land into mortmaine.
Lands assured in mortmaine to Churches, Chapels, etc. Collateral assurances
to defraud etc. Which be charitable and lawful uses. 26 Couin by a particular
Tenant, to deceive him in the reuersion. 27 Couin by him in the reuersion, to
deceive the lessee for years. Couin to avoid a Statute or Recognizance. 28
Fraudulent deeds to avoid other men's duties etc. The forfeiture of parties to
fraudulent deeds, who do justify the same. Common recoueries. Voucher in
Formedon. Estates made upon good consideration and bonafide. 29 Fraudulent
deeds to avoid forfeitures shall be void. 30 A deed without fraud must be made
upon good consideration and bonafide. Infallible marks of a fraudulent deed of
gift. How a deed of gift may be made without fraud. 31 Fraudulent assurances to
deceive purchasors. The forfeiture of parties to fraudulent conueyances, which
do justify the same. Conueiances made upon good considerations, and bona fide.
Conueiances with condition of reuocation, or alteration. Morgages. 32 A
purchasor does know before of a fraudulent deed. 33 The father makes a
fraudulent lease, and the son sells the land. 34 A woman's iointure made by
fraud. 35 Fraudulent deeds to avoid successors of dilapidations. 36 An action
popular sued by collusion and fraud. 37 Fraudulent possessing of Bankrupts
Lands, Goods, or Debts. 38 Fraudulent administration of intestate goods. 39
Fraudulent conueyances of Abbey lands. 40 Several deceits and frauds in
marchandizes and men of trade. 41 Deceit by selling of unwholesome victual.
Extortion, Exaction. Fol. 82.
1 What is Extortion. What is Exaction. 2 Exaction by taking of reward for a
report. 3 Extortion in the Shirife, Coroner, or other officers. 4 Extortion in
a Serieant, Crier, or Marshall of a Judge. 5 Extortion in a Coroner. 6
Extortion in a Sheriff, vnder-Sherife, or Baylife, for making of arrests etc. 7
Extortion in a Sheriff, for sparing to return a Iuror. 8 Extortion in a
Sheriff, for the serving of an Execution. 9 Extortion in the Chirographer of
the common place. 10 Extortion in the kings auditors, or their Clerks. 11
Extortion in the Kings Receivers. Extortion in them who do pay fees or
pensions. 12 Extortion in officers of the Exchequer. 13 Extortion in a Clerk
of the Signet or privy Seal. 14 Extortion by officers of the faculties. 15
Extortion by Governors upon such as be made prentices or freemen. 16 Extortion
by the officers of the Court of Wards. 17 Extortion in taking of Obligations
for the payment of first fruits. 18 Extortion by Escheators. 19 Exaction by the
Admiral etc. upon them who travail for Fish. 20 Extortion by the marshall of
the kings house. Extortion by a seruitor of bills in the marshals Court. 21
Exaction by Muster-masters to spare the taking of soldiers. Exaction by
captains of their soldiers. 22 Extortion by taking of Scauage of Merchants.
23 Extortion by the Clerk of the Statutes or etc. 24 A prevention of extortion
by atturneyes, in taking of excessive fees. An attorney delaying of a suit, or
demanding more then is due. 25 A prevention of Extortion in stewards of
Courts. 26 Extortion in gaugers, searchers, and packers of fish. Extortion in
Ordinaries and their Officers for probat of Testaments, Administrations, etc.
28 Extortion in an Ordinary for the seal of a Citation. 29 Extortion in
Parsons, Vicars, etc. for Mortuaries. 30 Exaction for presenting or collating
to a benefice. 31 Exaction for admitting to a benefice. 32 Exaction for
resigning, or exchanging of a benefice. 33 Exaction for making of ministers, or
giving license to preach. 34 Exaction for a voice in electing of a fellow or
scholar into a College, or etc. 35 Exaction by taking money to resign a
place in a College, etc. 36 Exaction by gathering money, which should
discharge the fifteen of a Town. 37 Extortion by taking of an amerciament in
a Court Baron. 38 It is no Extortion to take lawful fees. Taking of bar fees
of a prisoner discharged. Taking of gloves of an offender pardoned. 39
Extortion by taking of fees of him who does appear gratis.
Oppression. Fol. 91.
1 What Oppression is. Oppression by disseisins. Of what things one may be
disseised. 2 Oppression by approuement of common. Oppression by surcharge of
common. 3 Oppression by distresses. Powndage money. Distraining out of his fee.
Excessive distress. Several distresses for one thing. Distress for damage
fesant. 4 Oppression by trespasses. 5 Oppression by Nusances. 6 Oppression by
Rescous. 7 Oppression by encroachments. 8 Oppression by excessive amerciaments.
9 Oppression by committing of wast. Wast in land. Wast in houses. Wast in
gardens. Wast in men. 10 Oppressions redressed by an Audita querela. 11
Oppression by forestallers, Ingrossers, and Regrators. Who is a Forestaller.
Who is an Ingrosser. Who is a Regrator. The punishment of Forestallers, etc. In
what cases engrossing and regrating be tolerable. Changing of seed. Buying and
selling of cattle alive. The authority of I. of peace in these cases.
Trasporting allowed by Justices. When corn may be transported. Buying and
selling of fish near the Sea. Drouers licenced to buy and sell cattle. 12
Oppression by badgers, laders, etc. Observations necessary in all licenses. 13
Oppression of Printers and Stationers. Oppression by Printers and Stationers.
14 Oppression by transporting of gold and silver. 15 Oppression by transporting
of copper, etc. 16 Oppression by Pewterers. 17 Oppression of inhabitants of
Market Towns. 18 Oppression by taking of several farms. Taking of farms in
the Isle of Wight. 19 Oppression by keeping of many sheep. 20 Oppression by
spiritual persons in taking of farms. Oppression by them in buying and
selling. Oppression by them in farming of Parsonages. Oppression by them in
keeping of Tan-houses, or Brew-houses. 21 Oppression by taking of excessive
toll. 22 Oppression ought not to be done to aliens and strangers. 23 Oppression
by making of iron works. 24 Oppression by Brewers. 25 Oppression by bringing
into the Realm woollen cards. 26 Oppression by erecting of Wears. Oppression
by destroying of spawne or fry of fish. Oppression by fishing with unlawful
nets. 27 Oppression by buying and selling of fuel. 28 Oppression by
transporting of victual. 29 Oppression by usury. 30 Oppression by cutting out
the head of a conduit. Oppression by burning of a cart laden. Oppression by
cutting out the tongue of a beast. Oppression by cutting off the ears of a
man. Oppression by barking of trees. 31 Oppression by hawking or hunting in
corn growing. 32 Oppression by taking of other men's fish. 33 Oppression by
decaying of towns and houses of husbandry. 34 Oppression by decaying of
tillage. 35 Oppressions, and all the former offenses, punishable in the Star
chamber.
Treasons. Fol. 109.
1 What is Treason. 2 A repeal of former Treasons. Offenses made Treason by
Stat. 3 Compassing or imagining the death of the King, etc. A conspiracy by
diverse, executed by some of them. 4 Leuying of war, or adhering to the Kings
enemies. 5 Counterfeiting the K. Seal. Conspyrators and ayders in Treason. 6
Counterfeiting the Kings money. Coyners of money by warrant, do abuse it. 7
Petit Treason. A servant kills his master or mistress. The wife conspireth
to kill her husband. 8 The son kills father or mother. 9 Treason in
breaking of prison. An indictor discovers counsel. 10 Treason by statute.
Treason by forging the coin of other realms. Treason by forging the Kings
sign manuell. 11 Bringing into the realm money counterfeit. 12 Treason by
clipping, washing, or filing of money. 13 Treason by diminishing, scaling, or
lightning of money. 14 Treason by the maintaining the authority of the Bishop
of Rome. 15 The oath touching the Q. supreme government. Praemunire for the
first refusal of the oath. Treason for the second refusal of the oath. 16
Treason for giving or taking absolution from Rome. Treason to obtain Bulls
from Rome. 17 Treason to persuade to the Romish religion. Treason to be
persuaded to the Romish religion. Practicing to absolve, or reconcile. 18
Treason for Jesuits or Priests to come into the Realm. 19 Treason in Seminary
priests not returning. 20 What Misprision of Treason is. The forfeiture in
Misprision. 21 Misprision to counterfeit money not current. 22 Misprision to
aid persuaders to the Romish religion. 23 Misprision to conceal reconciliation
offered. 24 Misprision to inroll an indictment not found. 25 Misprision in
drawing of a sword to strike a Judge sitting in his place. 26 Misprision in
striking of a Iuror in a Judges presence. 27 Misprision by striking a man in
Westminster Hall, the Court sitting. 28 Misprision by rescuing of a prisoner
arrested by a Judge. 29 Shedding of blood within the K. house. 30 Trial of
Treasons committed out of the Realm. 31 Outlawrie of offenders in Treason
being out of the realm. 32 Trial of Treasons committed in Wales. 33 The force
of attainder of Treason by the common law. 34 No record of Attainder shall be
reuersed, where the offender is executed. 35 Felony made Treason by statute.
36 An English traitor subject to a foreign prince. 37 An Alien borne
commits Treason. 38 A subject joins the Kings Arms to his own.
Homicide. Fol. 120.
1 Homicide by Justice. By necessity. By chance or misfortune. By will. 2
Homicide by Justice. The order of law not observed in the execution of justice.
3 None may kill a man that is outlawed, or attainted in Praemunire. 4 Killing
of a felon that will not be arrested. Every person may arrest a felon. Killing
of such as be unlawfully assembled. 5 Killing of him that is in carrying to the
jail. 6 Killing of a prisoner attempting to escape. 7 Killing him that
attempteth robbery or burglarie. 8 Killing of an offender in a Park etc. 9
Unity of possession in a chase or manor. 10 One killing of another in combat.
11 Homicide upon necessity in defense of his house from burning. Homicide in
defending himself from robbery. 12 No forfeiture for Homicide upon necessity.
13 Killing of another in his own defense, in his own house. 14 Necessity
inevitable requisite in homicide in his own defense The definition of Homicide
in his own defense. 15 Where in Homicide in his own defense his goods shall
be forfeited, and where not. 16 Killing a man in his own defense, found by
verdict. 17 The prisoner indicted for killing in his own defense, must plead,
not guilty. 18 How he shall be discharged that kills a man in his own
defense. 19 What is Homicide by misaduenture. 20 The like order in
misaduenture, as in his own defense. 21 What is Homicide by murder. What is
Homicide by manslaughter. 22 The name of murder. Murder more grievous than
felony. 23 Wilful poisoning is murder. 24 Stabbing to death is murder. 25
Murder by killing of a Constable coming to part a fray. Murder by killing of a
Sheriff or his Officers in serving of Process. Murder by killing of a watchman.
26 Murder and Manslaughter committed in the death of one man. 27 A man bearing
malice to one, kills another. 28 A man gives poison to one, another takes
it, and dies. 29 Two agreeing to commit a Murder, one of them does it. 30
Meaning to kill, without the act, is not Homicide. Act in killing without
meaning, is Homicide. 31 Homicide by giving poisoned drink to another. 32 Many
do attempt to do an unlawful act, and one of them does kill a man. 33
Homicide by carrying a sick man into the air or cold. 34 A man dies under
the Physicians or Chirurgians care. 35 Homicide upon the evil words of
another. 36 Homicide by a Frantic man. Homicide by a man that is deaf and
dumb. Homicide by a drunkard. 37 Homicide by an infant. 38 Homicide by a
beast. 39 In Homicide the party killed must be in Esse. 40 In Homicide the
party hurt must dye within the year. 41 Homicide by felo de se. The cause of
the forfeiture of felo de se. 42 An infant or lunaticke cannot be felo de se.
43 Killing of himself in stead of another. 44 Forfeiture of a lease made to
felo de se and his wife. 45 No forfeiture of a debt upon contract made by felo
de se. 46 A villain is felo de se, and his Lord seiseth his goods. 47 One
mortgageth his goods and becomes felo de se. 48 Homicide by casualtie. 49 A
Deodand, and what it is. 50 A tree, and the bough of another tree does kill a
man. 51 Falling off a cart, or from a cart. 52 Falling from a cart laden.
Falling from a cart that is lading. 53 Falling from a horse into the water. A
horse or other beast kills a man. From what time a Deodand shall have
relation. 54 A beam of a bell in a church kills a man. 55 A wheel of a Mill
kills a man. 56 Falling from a horse against a Trunk. 57 Falling from a
houell or ricke. 58 Falling out of a ship that is sailing. 59 No Deodand for
him that is within fourteen years of age. 60 The Sheriff shall be charged with
a Deodand. 61 A man unknown found dead in the field.
Felony by the Common Law. Fol. 129.
1 What is Larceny. Petit Larcenie The intent of stealing must be at the time
of the receipt of the goods. 2 Stealing goods at several times of the value of
xij.d'. Felony in several persons. 3 The Jury may find an under value of the
goods stolen. 4 Felony where the goods be in the owners possession. 5 A
servant having use of his Masters goods, does steal them. 6 One having the
key, does steal the goods in the house, or chest. 7 A bargain with a Carryer,
but not a delivery of the goods. 8 A Carrier steals the goods committed unto
him. 9 A Carrier steals part of his charge. 10 Felony in a man for taking of
his own goods. 11 Stealing of the goods of a Church, or Corporation. 12 In
what case a married wife may commit felony, in what not. A woman taking her
husbands goods. 13 In what case an infant may commit felony. An idiot or
lunaticke cannot commit felony. 14 Burning of a house or barn, felony. 15
Felony in indictors to discover their counsel. 16 Rescuing of a prisoner
felony. 17 Wilful escape is felony. 18 Goods stolen from him that has the
custody of them. 19 Goods stolen from him that did steal them. 20 Of what
things Larcenie may be committed, of what not. 21 Felony must be of
personal goods, and of things real. 22 A thing made felony by Statute, which
is after repealed. 23 What Theefeboot ir. 24 Felony committed in one K. reign,
punished in another. 25 Stolen goods carried into several counties. In what
jail a felon shall be imprisoned. 26 Breaking a house to take a felon. 27
What is robbery. Robbery by threatening. Taking a man's money, but not putting
him in fear. 28 Robbery by taking an oath to bring money. Robbery by taking of
money given. 29 Robbery in will, but not in deed. 30 What is Burglarie. 31
Breaking of a house, but not entering. 32 No Burglarie may be committed in the
day time. 33 Breaking of a dwelling house wherein no person is.
Felony by Statute. Fol. 133.
1 Felony in conspiring to destroy the King, or any Lord, or Counselor. 2
Felony to ravish a woman. 3 Felony to abuse a woman child under the age of
ten years. 4 Felony in the rauisher, where the woman ravished does consent.
A woman ravished, conceived with child. The woman ravished, a concubine. The
woman not carnally known. Rapuit necessary in an Indictment of Rape. 5
Felony by taking a woman against her will. 6 Felony for transporting of
sheep. 7 Felony in marrying again, until the former husband or wife be
dead. 8 Felony in some such as be infected with the plague, for their abuses. 9
In what case a fantastical Recusant must abjure, upon pain of felony. 10 In
what cases a Popish Recusant must abjure, upon pain of felony. 11 The vice of
buggerie is felony. 12 Felony in servants that imbecile their masters goods.
Receiving money for wares. Receiving money upon on obligation. 13 Felony in
servants imbeciling their masters goods after their deaths. 14 Felony by
enforcing a prisoner to become an approuer. 15 Felony in those that
counterfeit to be Egyptians. 16 Felony by imbeciling of records. The penalty
of Judges or Officers abusing records. 17 Felony in cutting out of tongues, or
putting out of eyes. 18 Felony in practicing of multiplication of gold or
silver. 19 Felony in withholding of a hawke. 20 Felony in making of
congregations of Masons. 21 Felony for a soldier, mariner, or gu^ner to depart
from his captain. 22 Felony by receiving or releeuing of Jesuits or Priests.
23 Felony for making of purueiance without warrant. 24 Felony by unlawful
purueiance of sheep. 25 Felony by making purueyance without appraisement. 26
Felony by taking carriage contrary to his commission. 27 In what case forging
of evidence is felony. 28 In what case a banished rogue shall be a felon. 29
Felony by practicing of coniuration, witchcraft, invocation, etc. 30 Felony in
hunting in the night, or with visors, and denying of it. 31 Felony by unlawful
assemblies above twelve persons, etc. 32 Felony in wandering souldidiers or
mariners, that will not settle to work. 33 Felony in imbeciling of the Kings
Armor, Ordnance, Shot, etc. 34 Felony in cutting down Powdike. 35 Felony in
not taking the oath for the King, or not entering into bond. 36 Felony in
forcible carrying any person out of Cumberland, etc. 37 Felony in breaking of
prison.
Principal and Accessorie. Fol. 141.
1 There is no Accessorie in high Treason. 2 Accessory before the offense
committed. 3 Procurement of felony. 4 Coming purposely to do Manslaughter. 5
A will to assist a felon. 6 In company, but not assenting to a felony. 7
Holding a man until he be slain. 8 One thing commanded, and another
effected. 9 Counselling to rob one, and another is robbed. Commanding to beat
one, and another is killed. Commanding to burn one house, and another is
burned. Counsel to do one act, and another is done. The felony commanded,
committed in another manner. 10 The felony commanded, countermaunded. 11
Counselling to poison one and another is poisoned. 12 A commanding or ayding to
rape or robbery. 13 Accessories after the offense. What act of the Accessorie
makes him a felon. 14 Receipt of a felon attainted in the same county. 15
Receipt of a felon attainted in another county. 16 Indictment and trial of an
Accessorie in one county, to an offense done in another. 17 Receiving of
stolen goods. 18 Receiving of a felon. 19 Accessory to an Accessorie. 20 Rescue
of a felon. 21 A wife not accessory to her husband. 22 A wife may be a
principal felon. 22 Accessaries to offenses made Felony by Statute. 23 In Rape
the assistant principal. 24 Procurors and abettors in imbesilling of records.
25 Accessaries to offenders in rebellious assemblies. 26 Aidors and abettors in
coniuration. 27 Procurers to take a woman against her will. 28 In what cases
aiders be principals. 29 Acquitall of the principal, acquitall of the
accessarie. 30 Principal and Accessory in Manslaughter. 31 Two sorts of
Attainders, and which they be. The principal shall be attainted before the
accessory. 32 Accessory in an appeal co^menced by bill or writ. 33 The
principal shall be attainted before the Exigent shall be awarded against the
accessarie. 34 The principal makes default, and the Accessarie appears. 35
The Accessarie wageth battle. 36 The accessarie pleads in abatement of the
writ. 37 Both the principal and accessory do appear. Where the principals
plea shall be tried before the accessaries answer. 38 The principal pleads in
abatement of the writ. 39 The principal pleads not guilty. 40 Several
principals and one accessarie. 41 The attainder of the principal must be in
the same suit. 42 The principal attainted, and dies. 43 The principal does
stand mute. 44 Error in the attainder of the principal. 45 An abiured
accessarie returns. 46 The accessarie tried upon his own request. 47 The
principal found not guilty. 48 The principal dies in prison before
attainder. 49 The principal attainted of another felony. 50 The principal slew
the dead man in his own defense. 51 The principal has his clergy or pardon.
52 In an appeal the acquitall of the principal is no acquitall of the
accessory.
Breaking of Prison, and Rescous. Fol. 148.
1 Who is a prisoner. 2 A stranger breaks prison. 3 Letting a prisoner
escape. 4 Negligent escape. 5 Rescuing of a prisoner. 6 Disturbing of an
arrest. 7 The Sheriff returns a Rescous. 8 Whose the prison broken must be. 9
Escaping or rescuing of one attached of Trespass. 10 Rescuing of an offender
after judgment. 11 The imprisonment, and not the attainder respected in
escape. 12 Letting escape one imprisoned for Treason. 13 Disobeying of a
warrant to arrest Hunters. 14 Confession before a Coroner of breaking of
prison. 15 Opening the prison, but not escaping.
Escape. Fol. 149.
1 Voluntary escape, and what it is. 2 Escape of an offender not arrested. 3
It must be felony at the time of the escape. 4 Negligent escape, and what it
is. 5 Killing of him that escapes. 6 Taking again the party escaping. 7
Licencing the prisoner to go to another town. 8 Licencing the prisoner to go
into the same town. 9 Escape by bayling one not mainpernable. 10 Escape of one
arrested of petite Larcenie. 11 Escape by the return of Cepi Corpus. 12 What
is a double escape. 13 Where an escape may be without an arrest. 14 Who shall
be charged with an escape. 15 Escape in a Town walled. 16 Flying to a Church,
and escaping. 17 Escaping by making of abiuration. 18 Escaping before or after
arrest. 19 Where the Sheriff and where the Town shall be charged with an
escape. 20 Where the Hundred shall be charged with an escape. 21 Escape of one
imprisoned for a time. 22 Where the Town, Hundred, or County shall be charged
with an escape. 23 Who shall be charged with a prisoner, if the Jailer will not
receive him. 24 Who is prisoner by matter of Record. 25 Where a Town shall be
charged with an escape. 26 Where a Sheriff shall be charged with an escape. 27
A Coroner sent to the Marshalsea, to enquire of Escapes. 28 Confessing and
avoiding of an escape. 29 Who is a prisoner by matter in fait. Before whom an
escape shall be presented. 30 Justices of Peace and the Coronor shall enquire
of Escapes. 31 Trauerse to a presentment of an escape. 32 Escapes inquirable in
Leets and Turns. 33 The penalties of Escapes. 34 Where a man arrested may be
set at liberty, without further trial, and where not.
Pursuit by Huy and Cry. Fol. 152.
1 All men shall pursue the huy and cry. The punishment of concealment, and
not attaching of Felons. 2 Fresh suit and inquiry shall be made after Felons. The
penalty if a Felon be not taken. 3 Warding of towns that be walled. 4 When the
night watch shall be given and end. The penalty of resisting of arrest. 5 How
highwaies shall be enlarged. 6 The Hundred charged where Fresh suit upon huy
and cry shall cease. The clerk of the Peace shall prosecute the suit. 7 Who
shall prosecute the suit if the clerk of the Peace do die, or be removed. 8 A
remedy for equal contribution. 9 Delivering of the contribute money. 10
Leuying of contribution. 11 No penalty where any of the offenders be taken. 12
Within what time the suit shall be commenced. 13 In what manner huy and cry
shall be made. 14 Notice must be given of the robbery. The party robbed
examined and bound to prosecute the offenders. 15 A remedy for the inhabitants
of Benherst in Barkeshire. In what cases only their recovery shall be had. 16
Pursuit will not serve without apprehension, or descrying the Felons. 17
Arresting of him that is pursued by huy and cry.
Appeals of Felony. Fol. 156.
1 What an appeal is. Appeal by a woman of the death of her husband. 2 An
appellant conueyeth his title by a woman. 3 The declaration in an appeal of
Murder. 4 The woman appellant must be the dead man's lawful wife. 5 The woman
must live unmarried. 6 The woman marries between judgment and execution. 7
Where an appeal for a woman, but no dower. 8 Where the wife may have an
appeal, none other shall. 9 Who shall have the Appeal, if the man slain have
no wife. A bastard. Heir in borough English. 10 An Appeal dies with the
Appellant, or by his Nonsute. 11 The heir does release the appeal, and die.
12 The heir does recover and die before the appellees execution. 13 The eldest
son disableth himself to bring an appeal. 14 Who shall have the appeal for
killing of father, mother, brother, or wife. 15 A Lord kills his villain. 16
An infant may have an appeal. 17 A man of threescore and ten years of age
may have an appeal. 18 Disabilities to bring an appeal. 19 Disabilities in
the appellant. 20 Pleading that the appellant has an elder brother. 21 Atturny
for the appellant in appeal. 22 Who may pursue an Appeal of Robbery. Robbing
of a Carrier. 23 The appeal of a woman, of an infant, of executors. 24 A
villain shall not have an appeal of Robbery against his Lord. 25 An Appeal,
or an Indictment for the kings goods. 26 An Appeal of Robbery done to
another. 27 An Appeal of Rape. 28 Who shall have the appeal where a woman
ravished consents. 29 A lawful husband shall have the Appeal of Rape. 30
Where the father or kinsman shall have an Appeal of Rape. 31 An Appeal where
the Lord does ravish his Niefe. 32 Pledges in Appeal of Rape. 33 Within what
time an Appeal shall be commenced. 34 From what time the year shall have
relation. 35 The year shall have relation from the offense done. 36 Within
what time an appeal of Rape shall be commenced. 37 In what County Appeal shall be
brought. 38 In what county an Appeal of Rape shall be brought. 39 In what county
an Appeal of Robbery shall be brought. 40 Threatening in one county to bring
money into another. 41 Goods robbed carried into diverse Counties. 42 Before
whom an Appeal shall be brought. 43 Removing an Appeal out of the County. 44 An
Appeal before the Justices of Jail delivery. 45 An Appeal before the
Justices of the Kings Bench. 46 An Appeal against one bayled. No Appeal
against him that is let by mainprise. 47 Appeal before Justices of Peace. 48
Appeal before the Constable and Marshall. No Appeal in Parliament. 49 Diverse
Appeals for one felony. 50 One only Appeal for one Felony. 51 Where diverse
Appellees for one Felony. 52 Two Appeals founded upon one Felony. 53 Robbery of
several parcels of goods. 54 Where one shall answer to diverse Appeals or
Indictments. 55 Answer to diverse Indictments as well as to Appeals. 56 He
that has his clergy shall answer to an Appeal of former offenses. 57 A Clarke
shall answer to a former Appeal or Indictment of former offenses. 58 Process
in Appeal before the Coroner. 59 Process upon an Appeal or Indictment. 60
Process against indictors in another County. 61 Process against Appellees and
Indictees in foreign Counties. 62 Process upon an Appeal removed into the
Kings Bench. 63 The party appealed must be supposed to be of a foreign
county. 64 An appellee dwelling in no place certain. 65 Process into a County
Palantine. 66 Process against Principal and Accessarie. 67 The Statute of West.
1. extends only to Appeals commenced by Bill. 68 In Appeal one appears,
and others make default. 69 Process to remove an Appeal. 70 A Certiorari into
the county. 71 Process against the plaintiff after an appeal removed. 72
Process against the defendant after an appeal removed. 73 Process against one
that by the Shirifes return escaped. 74 Process with a prouiso for the
appellee. 75 Process to remove prisoners or records. 76 How the appellee shall
be led to the bar. 77 Count in an Appeal. An Appeal of Murder. The year,
day, hour, time of the king, and the town material. 78 The place where the
fact was done. 79 Count in an Appeal of death against three as principals. The
fact must be declared. 80 Count in an Appeal of Robbery. 81 Where in an
appeal of Rape the Statute must be rehearsed in the Count, and where not. 82
Defense in an Appeal. 83 Pleas to the Writ in Appeal. 84 The form of the
Writ in an Appeal of Rape. This word Rapuit material. 85 Not two Appeals for
one offense. 86 Pleading of one in an Appeal brought against two. 87 The
plaintiff in an Appeal misnamed. 88 Two or three pleas to the Writ. 89 Bars
in Appeal. Bar in Appeal of death brought by the wife. 90 Bar in Appeal
of death brought by the heir. 91 Bar in Appeal of Rape or Robbery. 92
General pleas in bar in Appeal. 93 Bar for that the plaintiff brought
another Appeal. 94 Bar by the plaintifes release. 95 Pleading not guilty
after other pleas. 96 Where the king may prosecute an Appeal begun. 97 No
Appeal of Treason.
Indictments. Fol. 169.
1 Commissions to Sherifes to take Indictments. 2 When the Sheriff shall hold
his Turn. An Indictment found in an unlawful time. 3 Sherifes shall enquire
by xij. men at the least. 4 Indictment before the Sheriff shall be by Roll
indented. 5 Of what sufficiency Jurors returned in the Sherifes Turn shall
be. 6 Indictments taken in the Shirifes Turn shall be delivered to the Justices
of Peace. 7 Jurors in Indictments shall be returned without the denomination of
any. 8 Pannels for Indictments may be reformed by the Justices. 9 An Enquest to
inquire of the concealment of other Enquests. 10 In what case indictment and
trial shall be where the King will. 11 Indictments and Trials of Treason
committed out of the Realm. 12 Indictment in the county of Lancaster of a
forrainer. 13 Indictment of a Lancashire man in a foreign County. 14
Indictment for the striking or poisoning of a man in one cou^tie, who dies in
another. Indictment of an accessory to an offense committed in another County.
15 Indictments lacking these words: Insidiatores viarum, and depopulatores
agrorum. 16 Words not necessary in Indictments. 17 No more shall be in an
Indictment then is true. Felonice or Piratice in an Indictment. 18 Where a
verdict in an action of Trespass shall be an Indictment of Felony. 19 The
Sherifes return is no Indictment. 20 The year, day, and place necessary in an
Indictment. 21 An Indictment must be certain in the matter. 22 An Indictment
must be certain in the persons received. 23 An Indictment uncertain at what
Court. 24 Indictment for making of money. 25 Indictment of a common thief.
Indictment of the Ordinary. 26 The foresaid A. in an Indictment, where none is
before named. 27 Indictment for the killing of a man unknown. Indictment for
the stealing of the goods of a man unknown. 28 Indictment for the stealing of
the goods of a Church, or Chapel. 29 An Indictment depending upon an
argument, or implication. 30 In an Indictment furatus est without felonice, or
in Rape carnaliter cognouit, without rapuit. 31 An Indictment before Justices
of Peace. 32 An Indictment before the Mayor of London upon sight of the body.
33 Indictment of the receipt of a Felon as accessarie. 34 Indictment of the
receipt of the goods stolen, and of the Felon. 35 Indictments void for one
purpose will serve for another. 36 A prisoner discharged, and after retained in
prison. 37 The difference between an Appeal and Indictment. 38 Pleading
another time acquit of the same Felony. 39 Indictment of the death of a man
known by two surnames. 40 Indicted of the same man's death. 41 Indicted in two
counties of one offense. 42 Arraigned upon an insufficient Indictment or
Appeal. 43 Acquit upon an erroneous Appeal. 44 Acquit upon an Appeal brought
by one that has no right. 45 Arraigned upon an Indictment, before the parties
Appeal be determined. 46 Acquit by battle in an Appeal. 47 A Murderer
indicted and arraigned at the Kings suit. Another time acquit no plea in an
Appeal, but in an Indictment. 48 No Indictment of Robbery, until the Appeal
be tried. 49 Pleading another time convict of the same Felony. 50 Another time
attainted of the same Felony. 51 The Kings Pardon objected against the plea of
another time attainted. 52 Who is said attainted, and who convict of Felony.
Mainprise and Bail. Fol. 180.
1 In what cases a prisoner is mainpernable, in what not. 2 The principal in
Appeal of death not mainpernable. 3 Where the principal let to mainprise. 4
Pleading excommunication in the plaintiff. 5 Who are mainpernable, who not.
Bailement by the Shirife. Withholding of Prisoners mainpernable. 6 In what
cases no mainprise by the common Law. The King or Justices commandment. 7 The
Marshall shall bail no prisoner. The Justices ordinary, or absolute
commandment. 8 Mainprise for offenders in Vert or Venison. 9 In what case he
that is outlawed may be bayled. 10 Mainprise during an approuers life. 11
Maineprise upon good name. The principal in Burglary and Robbery mainpernable.
12 No bailement for a prisoner attainted. 13 Bailement of offenders by Justices
of Peace. 14 Bailement of offenders by the Shirife. 15 Bailement by Shirifes
and others. 16 Imprisonment at the Kings pleasure. 17 The difference between
bailement in Felony, and in a personal Action. 18 Mainprise is matter of
Record.
Confession of the offense. Fol. 184.
1 An offender in felony pleads one of three pleas. 2 Confession of the
offense before the Judge upon the prisoners arraignement may be in two sorts.
Confession of the offense must be free and without menace. 3 He that does
confess his offense before the Judge, does become an approuer. 4 Confession of
the offense before the Coroner, whereupon abiuration does ensue.
Approuer. Fol. 185.
1 Who is an Approuer. An Approuer shall be banished. 2 Of what offenses
approuement may be. 3 Approuement in an Indictment, and not in an appeal. 4
Before whom one may approve. 5 How an Approuer shall use himself. No approving
after pleading. An Approuer must tell truth. 6 An Approuers oath. 7 An
Approuers wages. 8 An Approuer set at liberty. An Approuers appeal must be
certain. 9 Process against the appellees after the approuement. 10 Pleas for
the appellee against the approuer. An Approuer attainted or convict of Felony.
11 An appellee cannot appeal others. 12 An Approuer not in prison for felony,
or at liberty. 13 The appellee an honest and credible man. 14 General pleas in
bar of the appeal. 15 Where the king may pursue an Appeal begun. 16 The
appellants release to the appellee. 17 An Approuer confesses his Appeal to be
false. 18 An Appeal abating before declaration. A Felon taken with the
mannoure. 19 No arraignment at the kings suit upon a false declaration. Where,
if not an appeal, yet an Indictment may be at the kings suit. 20 The
plaintiff in the appeal excommunicat or outlawed. 21 An Approuer pardoned, the
appellee shall be discharged. 22 Vanquishing of one of the approuers. 23
Examining of an offender condemned.
Sanctuary and Abiuration. Fol. 189.
1 What Sanctuary is. 2 What Abiuration is. 3 All Sanctuaries be extinguished.
Abiuration by the common Law. Abiuration to a place within the Realm. 4 No
abiuration for Treason. 5 No abiuration for the robbery of a Church. 6 No
abiuration for a man attainted. 7 No abiuration for a man before abiured. 8
Where an offender may be drawn out of the Church by violence. The offenders
confession before the Coroner. 9 Tarrying in a Church above the time limited.
10 The manner of Abiuration. The oath of Abiuration. 11 The attire of an
abiured person. 12 The using of persons abiured. 13 The abiuration broken,
death ensues. A Clarke need not to abjure. 14 Where no Felony, no abiuration
for Felony. 15 The abiured pleads that he is not the same person. The Kings
pardon of Abiuration. 16 Abiuration by a Recusant. 17 Abiuration by a Popish
Recusant. 18 Abiuration by him that commits Trespass.
Pleading not guilty. Fol. 192.
1 The plea of not guilty the most common for a prisoner. One may plead not
guilty after other pleas. 2 Where, upon the plea of not guilty counsel shall be
allowed, and where not.
Trial by Battle. Fol. 193.
1 Trial of not guilty by Battle, or by the Country. 2 The form of trial
by Battle. 3 The reason why the defendant in an appeal may be tried by
battle. 4 Counterpleas to the Battle. 5 Taken with the manoure. 6 Breaking
of prison. 7 Lets of trial by battle on the plaintifes part. 8 Privileges of
the appellants person. The King. A Citizen of London. 9 No wager of battle in
an appeal of Rape. 10 One fighting with several men. 11 An Appeal by an
approuer. 12 The appellee wageth battle, and then becomes blind.
Trial by Peers. Fol. 196.
1 The trial of the plea of not guilty by Peers. 2 The form of arraignement
and trial of a Peer of this realm. 3 By whom Peers appealed shall be tried.
By whom Ladies shall be tried. 4 The trial of Bishops. Arraignement and Trial
in Parliament. 5 Trial of Treason committed in Ireland. 6 Trial of Misprision
of Treason. The number of Peers at the trial. 7 Trial of Peers by Peers in
all cases of Treason and Felony.
Trial by the Country. Fol. 198.
1 Trial of the plea of not guilty by the country. 2 Trial by the country of
foreign pleas. A man stricken upon the Sea, dies upon the land. 3 The Process
against the Jury. The Process in an Appeal, and not in an Indictment. 4 Where
a Nisi prius is grauntable in an Appeal. 5 Remaunding of prisoners out of the
Kings Bench into the Country. 6 Trial of Felonies committed by English men in
Scotland. 7 The prosecutors and witnesses bound to give evidence. 8 The
accessory tried, though the principal be not. 9 Every Iuror must have five
pounds of freehold. 10 The offender shall forfeit no lands. 11 A like Act made
in Scotland. 12 Scottishmen repairing into England to give evidence, shall be
free from arresting. 13 The offense shall be laid where it is done. 14 He
that is once tried, shall not be eftsoons called into question. 15 None shall
be sent out of England to receive his trial. 16 The Jurors shall allow of, or
reject the witnesses.
Challenge. Fol. 201.
1 Where the prisoner is allowed to challenge peremptorily. Seuerance in
challenges. 2 Which be challenges upon cause, for that he was an indictor. 3
Challenge for want of Medietatem linguae. 4 Challenge for want of sufficient
freehold. 5 Challenge for the king. 6 A man outlawed of Felony shall have his
challenge. 7 A Iuror challenged, for that he is an Alien, a Villain, or
Outlaw.
Evidence. Fol. 204.
1 Some bound to give evidence against an offender let to bail. 2 Some bound
to give evidence against an offender imprisoned. 3 Restitution of goods upon an
attainder by evidence. 4 Evidence given by a stranger. 5 There must be two
accusors to give evidence in Treason. 6 Evidence or accusors in high Treason. 7
Evidence against abettors to offenses. 8 Evidence on the defendants part in
Felony.
Verdict. Fol. 206.
1 A Verdict at large may be given in Felony. 2 The Verdict sometime less
penal then the Indictment. 3 The Verdict sometime more penal then the
Indictment. 4 Where the Jury shall find who killed the dead man.
Clergy. Fol. 207.
1 What Clergy is. 2 Who shall not have his clergy by the common Law. 3 A
committer of Sacrilege. 4 The habit or tonsure of a Clerk. 5 Clergy shall be
allowed but once. 6 Killing a man by chance, or in his own defense.
Committing of petite Larcenie. 7 Offenders in Treason. 8 Confession of the
Felony. 9 Clergy taken away by Statute. A Cutpurse. 10 Forging of Writings. 11
A committer of Buggerie. 12 Counterfeiting to be Egiptians. 13 Relieuing of a
Jesuit or a Priest. 14 Committers of Rape or Burglary. 15 Taking a woman
against her will. 16 Practicing of Coniuration or Witchcraft. 17 Stabbing, or
thrusting to death. 18 A Recusant not abiuring or returning. 19 Abiuration of a
Popish Recusant. 20 A Soldier departing from his Captain. 21 Wandering
Soldiers and Mariners. 22 Taking away any person in Cumberland. 23 Committing
of Murder, Poison, Burglarie. 24 Stealing of a Horse. 25 Stealing of goods in
one County, and carrying them into another. 26 Robbing of houses, booths,
tents. 27 Robbing of a house in the day. 28 Commandment or counsel of Felony.
29 A Lord of the parliament shall have the benefit of his Clergy. 30 The
Indictment must be according to the Statute. The words of the Indictment must
be proved. 31 When Clergy shall be demanded. Clergy demanded before
verdict. 32 Denying to be a Clarke, and yet is. Whether Clergy be allowable
without request. 33 Who shall allow of Clergy. 34 A Felon reads under the
Gallows. 35 To what use the Ordinary is employed. Clerks within orders shall
be used as others be. 36 What is reading as a Clerk. 37 The Ordinaries
attendance requisite. Contention who is Ordinary. 38 A Priest shall have no
fetters. 39 Bigamus shall have his Clergy. 40 Another time convict. How the
convict shall be marked. How offenders within orders shall be used. 41 Certificat
into the K. Bench of Outlawries, Attainders, and Conuictions. 42 A Clarke
delivered to the Ordinary. Clergy allowed without delivery to the Ordinary.
The Kings Pardon. Fol. 218.
1 The Kings oath at his Coronation touching pardons. 2 None but the King can
pardon Felonies. 3 In what cases the King may grant pardon. 4 Non obstante in
a pardon. The Suggestion shall be comprised in the pardon. 5 The offenses shall
be specified in the pardon. 6 Suit for an approuers pardon. 7 Pardon of the
Felony, but not of the attainder. 8 Pardon of the attainder, but not of the
Felony. 9 A joint pardon to two or three. 10 A grant to be quit of escapes of
Felony. 11 A general pardon by Parliament. 12 The Kings pardon must be showed
under Seal. A writ of the allowance of the Kings pardon. 13 He that has a
Pardon shall find sureties of his good abearing. 14 The good behauior broken
after pardon. 15 A Charter of Pardon must agree with the indictment. 16 The
pardon and allowance entered upon the appeal. 17 The Kings pardon in plea in
appeal. 18 Upon a Pardon a Scire facias awarded against an Appellant. 19
Nonsute does not aid an appellee that is outlawed. 20 The Kings Protection. 21
Pardon of a Felony before it be committed.
Standing mute, or answering indirectly. Fol. 222.
1 Standing mute, whereupon pain fort and dure does ensue. 2 Felons refusing
lawful trial. 3 Penance only upon an Indictment. 4 Penance for Pyracie. 5
No penance for High Treason. 6 No penance for a man before attainted. 7
Standing mute after confession. 8 Inquire of him that stands mute. 9 The
judgment in penance.
Judgment and Execution. Fol. 224.
1 Judgment where the prisoner is acquitted. 2 The judgment of a man attainted
of high Treason. 3 The judgment of a woman attainted of Treason. 4 The
judgment of a man attainted of petit Treason. 5 The judgment of a woman
attainted of Felony. 6 The judgment in misprision of Treason. 7 Attainder of
Treason by the common Law. 8 The judgment of penance, viz. of pain fort and
dure. 9 Judgment in Felony by Justices of Nisi prius. 10 Judgment by new
Justices. 11 Judgment in petit Larcenie. 12 The staying of a woman's execution,
being with child. 13 A man hanged, falls down before he be dead.
Forfeiture. Fol. 226.
1 A Felon shall forfeit lands and goods. 2 Forfeiture of goods. Flying for the
Felony. 3 The Accessarie fled for the Felony. 4 Forfeiture for petite Larcenie.
5 Forfeiture for flying before arrest. Forfeiture without Attainder. 6
Forfeiture upon the exigent awarded. 7 No forfeiture to the accessarie, until
the principal be attainted. 8 For^eiture notwithstanding appearance and
pleading. 9 Forfeiture of a Clarke convict. Of him that commits Homicide by
misaduenture. Of him that kills in his own defense. Of Felo de se. Of him
that does stand mute. 10 Forfeiture of a right or action. No payment of
Attainteds debts. 11 Forfeiting of goods, wherein the offender has no
property. 12 A Felon attainted at the suit of one, where more were to sue. 13
Forfeiture of other men's goods, and his own. 14 The forfeiture where a woman
kills her husband. 15 An Executor shall not forfeit his Testators goods. 16
The forfeiture of goods holden jointly. 17 Confiscation of goods. Confiscation
of his own goods by disclaymer. 18 Confiscation by disclaimer in the goods of
others. 19 Confiscation of goods left out of an Appeal. 20 Confiscation of
goods by a false Appeal. 21 A Waife, and the seizing thereof. 22 The owner
seiseth his goods waiued. 23 Sildome waife, but of stolen goods. When waife of
goods not stolen. 24 No waife of goods stolen from an alien. 25 Forfeiture of
lands. Tenant for years. Tenant for life, or in tail. Tenant in the right of
his wife, or Church. 26 Forfeiture of Lands intailed. 27 The forfeiture of
lands in fee simple. The forfeiture of an Annuitie. 28 The forfeiture of Title
to land. 29 The forfeiture of Evidence. 30 Forfeiture without attainder. 31
Forfeiture of the year, day, and wast. 32 By what means the King came by the
year, day, and wast. 33 The year, day, and wast of lands, of what title shall
be forfeit. 34 No year, day, and wast of lands holden by joint purchase. 35
Whether any Forfeiture shall be made by Tenant in tail. A Disseisor. Tenant
in fee farm. A Mortgage. 36 Forfeiture of tenant in ancient demesne. 37 The
year, day, and wast forfeited without attainder. 38 No year, day, and wast of
a Clarke convict. Lands of small value. 39 When the king shall have the year,
day, and wast. 40 The year, day, and wast not grauntable from the Crown. 41
What goods of Felons the king shall have. 42 From what time the forfeiture of
lands shall have relation. 43 From what time the forfeiture of goods shall have
relation. 44 who shall seize and keep Felons goods, and when. 45 The goods of
an offender shall not be seized until he be attainted. 46 Who shall have the
custody of Felons goods. 47 To whom the forfeiture of lands of a person
attainted of high Treason shall accrue. 48 Who shall have the forfeiture in
petite Treason and Felony. 49 The Lords remedy for lands escheated unto him.
50 The heirs remedy for lands escheated unto his auncestor. 51 Where the Lord
shall have a Writ of Escheat, and where he may enter. 52 The form of a Writ of
Escheat. 53 The kings remedy for lands escheated unto him. An office for those
lands which do escheat for Felony. 54 The wives forfeiture of title of Dower.
55 What the appellee that wageth battle shall forfeit. 56 A Rentcharge pro
consilio, not forfeited. 57 The forfeitures of an outlaw.
Corruption of Blood. Fol. 239.
1 Corruption of Blood salued by Parliament only. 2 Where corruption of blood
shall prejudice tenant by the courtesy. 3 The eldest son attainted during
his fathers life. 4 Where attainder, but no corruption of blood.
Restitution of stolen goods. Fol. 240.
1 Restitution of goods upon Fresh suit. 2 What conviction shall be sufficient
to give the owner restitution of his goods. 3 Where the owner shall have
restitution. 4 Before whom and by whom inquiry of Fresh suit is to be made. 5
Restitution upon attainder by indictment.
Damages in Appeal. Fol. 242.
1 The punishment of the appellant and the abettors, when the appellee is
acquit. No Essoine for the appellant in an appeal of death. 2 The appeal must
be commenced upon malice. 3 The statute of 13. Ed. 1. extends to all Felons.
4 The defendant in an appeal acquitted by battle. 5 Where the accessarie in an
Appeal shall recover damages. 6 Where the defendant is said to acquit
himself in due manner, and where not. 7 Acquitall at the Kings suit is only in
appeal. 8 What Justices may inflict the penalty upon the Appellant. 9 The
damages for several persons assessed severally. 10 Where the appellant shall
pay a fine to the king. 11 In what cases inquiry shall be made for the
abettors. 12 What pleas the abettors may plead. 13 Process against the abettors.
Nonsute in the process against the abettors. 14 A writ against the abettors by
the appellee. 15 Procurers of indictments for suits in spiritual courts.
A Writ of Conspiracy. Fol. 245.
1 In what case a Writ of Conspiracy does lie. 2 Conspiracy maintenable upon
an acquitall in an indictment or appeal. 3 The indictment must be false which
gives the Writ of Conspiracy. 4 Conspiracy doubtful whether true or false.
5 The conspirators do become indictors. A Justice of Peace. A giver of
Evidence. 6 Who be conspirators. 7 A Conspiracy must be by more then one.
Where only one shall be charged in Conspiracy. 8 No Writ of Conspiracy against
the Husband and the Wife. 9 The form of the Writ of Conspiracy. 10 The writ
of Conspiracy for the accessarie. 11 Bars in a writ of Conspiracy. 12
Judgment in Conspiracy. A villainous judgment. 13 Inquiry of Conspiracy by
Justices. 14 Inquiry of Conspirators at the kings or parties suit. 15 Procurers
of an indictment or an appeal in a foreign county. 16 An offense supposed to
be done in a place where there is none such.
The Coroner and his authority and duty in Felonies etc. Fol. 249.
1 The office and duty of a Coroner. 2 The Writ de Coronatore Eligendo. 3 Who
shall be Coroners, and by whom they shall be chosen. 4 Whether Coroners ought to
be knights. 5 Causes to remove a Coroner. 6 Where a Coroner shall have fee, and
where not. 7 What things Coroners shall inquire of. 8 A Coroner shall execute
his Office in his own person. A C^^oner shall see the dead body. A body buried
taken up again. 9 A Coroner must presently do his office. 10 A Coroner shall
only enquire of the death of a man. A man slain in an arm of the Sea. A
Coroner concealing, or not apprehending a Felon. 11 The force of a Coroners
Record. Which Coroners Record shall be preferred. Abiuring before the Coroner.
Confession of breaking of Prison before the Coroner. 12 Who ought to appear
upon the Coroners Inquisition. 13 The Coronour, with the Sheriff, may take
Appeals. 14 Stopping up of a place of danger by the Coroners commandment.
15 Where the presence of all the Coroners is requisite, and where but some one
of them. 16 The Coroner must record the evidence, and bind the party to give
it. 17 Inquiry of a man slain within the Kings House and Verge. 18 One man
Coroner of the Kings House, and the County.
Who shall be Judge in Treason and Felony. Fol. 253.
1 The King ought not to be judge in Treason or Felony. What men of condition
Judges ought to be. 2 None shall make Judges but the King. 3 Judges upon the
arraignement of the Peers of the Realm. 4 Judges of offenses that are done in
the Kings Palace. 5 Judges of Conspiracies made to destroy the King or any
Lord etc. 6 Judges within the Verge. 7 Judges of Treason committed out of the
Realm. 8 Justices of Jail delivery Judges in Felony. 9 Judges of Nisi prius
Judges in Felony etc. 10 Special commissioners Judges at the arraignement of a
Murderer. 11 Judges of piracie or offenses done upon the sea. 12 Justices of
Peace Judges in Felony. 13 The Lord of a Manor Judge in Felony. Infangtheefe.
Outfangtheefe. 14 A Felon first executed, and then judged.
FINIS.

