JOHANNES WHITGIFTVS ARCHEP' Whitgiftus ruptris vinclis Romana relinquens Sacra
pius, sese meliores vertit ad vsus

portrait of Archbishop John Whitgift

AN EPITAPH, On the Death of the late most reverend Father in God, JOHN: by his
providence the Arch-Byshop of Canterbury his Grace. etc.

Made to run upon the letters of his Names and Tytles. etc.

His Grace deceased at Lambeth in the year of his age 72. February 29. 1603.
And his Funeral rightes were kept at Croyden the 27. of March following. 1604.

The days of man are as Grass: as a Flower of the field, so flourishes he.
For the Wind goes over it, and it is gone, and the place thereof shall know
it no more.

Psalm. 103.15, 16. Imprinted at London by W. White. dwelling in Cow-lane near
Smith-fielde. 1604.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, RICHARD, by Gods providence Bishop of
London. etc.
To the right Worshipful M. George Whitegift, and to all the kindred and
friends of that name: I. R. wishes all health and comfort over their great
heaviness, for the death of the late Arch-Byshoppe of Canterbury his Grace.
etc.
NOt to be tedious to your good Lordship, and Worships (considering your
weighty affairs at this time) In few words (presuming upon your courtecies)
I present you with this poor Pamphlet or Epitaph, which I have made on the
death of the late most reverend the Lord of Canterbury his Grace: (to whom I
was much bounden and beholding, as many of his Gentlemen and others do well
know.) And now being driven with the stream of my love, duty, and good will
to his grace, as also to your good L. and Worships: I can not but do some
thing (with others) as the last part of service that I can do for his Grace in
this life: I most humbly beseech you all therefore, to accept well of the same,
and to protect it under the wings of your favors; and then I shall not need
to care for Zoylus, Momas, and the rest of that viperous brood. etc.

Your Lordship, and Worships most humbly to be commanded. I. R.

A Flovver for the day.
I I See that Death dares seize on Po-ten-tates,
O On Kings, on Bishop, and on all estates:
H How shall we marvel then, that this grave man,
N Now on the sudden is thus dead and gone?
John was his Christen name, most men do know,
John signifies Gods grace, mercy, and so:
John was the first Forerunner unto Christ,
John an Apostle was to the most Highest:
Some way we might report thus of his Grace,
Who preached and ruled, as best became his place.
W Well then, we see what our great sins have done,
H How God still frowns on every mothers son,
I In taking Queen, and sending Plagues withal:
T Thousands did die, which bred our grief and thall:
E Enforst with grief, for this man's death, I say,
G God help the Clergy; for whose good I pray:
I If many such should die, where should we find,
F For his poor Church, a man so well inclinde:
T To speak the truth, hardly comes such in place,
E, Except Gods aid; therefore hard is their case.
White-gift our Delium Pearl, or Sunshine bright,
Virgin-like Pillar, and Star shining light:
Is now Interred, and his soul at rest
Among the Saints, that are already blessed:
There to expect the Resurrection day,
When all the elect shall live with God for aye.
T The toil he took, in Church and Common wealth
H Hast-ned his death, and did impair his health:
E Even so it does all great men in the Land.
Yet this all persons will not understand.
A Ah woe is us, for thee; who can but moan,
R Repent thy loss and lack, now thou art gone:
C Come mournful Muses, and M^sirious eke,
H Help with your r^nes, Set dryrie doulfull like:
B Bring us your Shackbuts that will rent the ground,
Y Your Citters and Bandoras, with their silver sound:
S Sweet voyced Cliopae sing to our Vearse,
H Help us this day about his Sable Hearse.
O O England, let thy plaintes likewise appear,
P Power out thy sobs for this our friend most dear:
E Ecchous resounding voice in thee let ring,
For the Arch-byshops death, which is our hearts deep sting.
Arch-Byshop York, and Bishops of each See:
Archdeacons, Deanes, and Prebends in degree:
Churches Cathedral Quires of Boys and Men,
Keep you this Funeral both with tongue and pen.
Organistes all, on soft stops give the Kay,
And let Subchaunter keep good time all way:
Masters of Children, Vergers all attend,
Keep a Decoram till the Herralds end.
O Oh that our heads had Hieremy his tears,
F Fountains might then flow many months and years
C Crying for him that quaild Church Robbers still,
A And did defeat Dioniz'ous of his will.
N Nabals and Newtors, they the Church would nursse,
T Thewdas and Judas they would bear the Pursse:
E Even as the Sea that eats into the land,
R Right so did these; whom White-gift did withstand.
B Blessed King James, help now in this, and flourish,
E Else Learning, which does true Relig'on nourish;
R Reuolters will destroy, and thee withal:
Y Yea, bring in Barbarism, if we fall.
Come Canterbery, let us weep with thee,
For thou shall miss White-gift, as well as we.
Clad all our Quire and Church with black throughout,
Let City, Walls, and Streets be hung about:
Kent with her wealth, can not give Blackes to all,
That would be Mourners at this Fu-ne-rall.
H Hear me: his Grace wronged no man with good will,
I In all his ways he shund the Paths of ill:
S Such as disturbd the Church, he did assay,
G Godly to win, and lead an other way.
R Reu'rent he was, mild, gentle, and discreet,
A Affable, wise and sober, as was meet:
C Certain it is, mine ears did hear it plain,
E, Envy, that would him dead, wished him again.
His Grace was gracious unto every one,
Especially to Ministers, when they made moan,
His Grace won grace with men of each degree,
In Court and Country, all the world did see.
Graceless are they, that will my words control,
Garcelesse of credit, body, life, and soul.
M More might be said of him, if Time gave leave
E Each man to please, but Time does me bereave.
T The Vniuerseties, can speak of him,
R Report his life, and how he hated sin.
O Oh Cambridge thou, and Colleges in thee,
P Power out your plaintes, and sing this song with me:
O O Colle^ge faires, that men call Trin-ne-tie,
L L^^ke (...) thy loss, and lack of such an eye.
I I^^ w^d known, what pains of late he took,
T Touching the Clergy, and Communion Book:
A And how he showed our King the ready way,
N Now to provide for Church, and Scholars stay.
Most ^euerend Fathers, follow you this thing,
GOD is with you, and so is JAMES our King:
What though Laymen would swallow you, and all,
Yet stand you fast, and then their prides will fall:
Meet Metropol'tans you may grow in time,
Still to keep out the Wilde-Boore from this Vine:
Foxes and all, you shall drive hence at last:
Now is the time, there is no good time past.
Entreat and sue, that no Land go Tyth free,
And that Tyth Statutes may explayned be:
Seek that the Clergy be not wronged still
By every vpstart, that would have his will.
O O careful Croyden, now to thee I speak,
F For thine and Lambeths loss, our hearts will break.
A Ah! Who shall do as White-gift did for you?
L Lay up and build School and Alms houses too?
L Lord I know none, such Black Swans are too rare.
E Each man is bent to Au, rice every where,
N None but the Lord, can set such men in place,
G Gladly to pity the poor man and his case:
L Let White-giftes work, that stands thus in the eye,
O On each Arch-Byshop for like work still cry:
N No doubt but God will then bless them the more,
D. Daily increase their Basket and their store.
Of all Arch-Byshops that for Truth yet stood,
White-gift and Matthew Parker did most good:
As of all England therefore they had charge,
So in all England they did good at large.
England has great cause both to laugh and weep,
Laugh for our King, and Triumphs that we keep:
Wayle for our sins in Court and Country too,
Moorne for this Man, and walk as moorners do.
See how this years mind of late Q. comes in,
The Aarch-Byshops Fun'rall does the same begin:
God grant we have no more such doulefull years,
That should thus threaten death of Prince or Peers.
No English Chronicle does make relation,
Of such euentes, beyond all exspectation.
F Fear God therefore, and do well to thy power,
I In every thing prepare for dying hour:
N Never presume upon thy strength or youth:
I In any wise depend on God and Truth:
S. So shall thou come to heavenly joys at last,
I. Joyfully leaving life, and pleasures past,
R. Rest so, and pray for King and Kingdoms all:
C. Christ then will bless, and keep thee still from thrall
Finis this world, and worldly things we know,
Finis therefore our lives, when we must go:
Finis the tears that does run down men's eyes,
For White-giftes death, since they can not suffize.
Finis this Work, and Epitaph of mine,
Which to men's Charities I now resign.
Finis in him, that Finis once shall make
Of Sin and Death, for all his chosen sake:
Infinite then, shall be the mirth and joy,
That we shall have with him in that great day.
Unto which joys, soon bring us all O Lord,
And keep us always, steadfast in thy Word.
In every thing, look well unto the end,
Remember Death, and fear still to offend:
Count all things vain, unto Eter-ne-tie,
Live well, and thou shall live Eternalie.
Amen.
Short life by breath, the Learned still do say,
Long life by Death, if we go the right way.

FINIS.

