THE TREASVRE of Truth, touching the ground work of man his salvation, and
chiefest points of Christian Religion: with a brief sum of the comfortable
doctrine of God his providence, comprised in. 38. short Aphorisms.

Written in Latin by Theodore Beza, and nevvlie turned into English by John
Stockvvood.

Whereunto are added, these Godly Treatyses.

One of the learned and godly Father. Master I. Fox. In the which the
chiefest points of the doctrine of God his Election, are so plainly set
forth, as the very simplest may easily understand it, and reap great
profit thereby.

The other of Master Anthony Gylbie, wherein the doctrine of God his Election
and Reprobation, is both Godly and learnedlie handled.

Seen and alovved, according to the order appointed.

To the right worshipful ^yr John Pelham Knight, John Stockwood wysheth in
this life prosperity, and everlasting felicity in Christ our Savior.
AFter that I had turned into English, this godly, learned, and comfortable
Treatise of Master ^ Beza, of God his eternal Election and Pre^^ination: there
came to my hands another ^^e of the same, Englished by that learned ^ godly
Father, Master VVhytting^^ and printed at Geneua in the days of ^ne Marie.
Herevppon I determined ^ my self to have stayed the setting forth ^is my
Translation, as a thing both neede^^ and also not without suspicion of great ^,
and ouerwell lyking of my self, to vn^^ke the translation of that work, which
^lreadie so learnedlie translated, by so ^ and learned a Father. But as on the
^^e unto me, which (as God knows) never saw it, it was as it had not at all
been translated: So since the first Englishing of it, by Master VVh^ it has
been enlarged by the Author: and also divided into abetter order of Chapters:
every one of them consisting of brief sentences, and as it were articles:
whereof every several member, is proved with plain and plentiful
testimonies of the word of God^ set down directly after the end of every
sentence: the benefit that I am persuaded may come unto the Godly Reader by
my travail, has caused me to suffer this my translation also to come
abroad, and that the rather, because it has passed the censure and judgment
of the godly and learned, who have thought that the publishing of it may be
much profitable and comfortable unto God his children. This my simple labor,
such as it is I offer unto you (right Worshipful) as a small token of a
thankful mind toward your VV^ for your manifold friendship and courtesies,
sundry ways declared toward me: desiring you to accept it as a gift that
proceeds from such a one, who hartelie wishes you well, and would also if
ability served, present you with ^ better. Thus craving both pardon for my
boldness, and also requesting your favorable ac^epting of my simple travail:
I cease from fur^her troubling your VV. with my rudeness. ^aying God to
enriche you with the plentiful ^^crease of the gifts of his spirit, and to
con^inue you in health and welfare, both of soul and body, to his honor and
glory, to your own joy and comfort, and to the benefit and commodity of
your native Countreie for Christ's sake.

From Tunbridge this last of Iune^ 1576. Your VV. much bounden, and wholly in
the Lord to be commanded. John Stockwood.

To the godly Reader.
I Have taken pains for thy profit and comfort (godly and gentle Reader) to
turn into thine own Mother tongue, a singular and notable treatise, of God
his Election and Predestination. There are adjoined hereunto short, easy,
profitable and fruitful writings of other godly and learned Fathers of our
own country, of the same contents and argument, to the end that thou may
have in one little hand book, easy to be carried about with thee, a full and
plain discourse agreeable to God his word, upon this both needful and
comfortable point of Christian religion. These travails of God his ministers,
as on thy part I doubt not but they shall be both thanckfully and also
profitablelie to thy souls comfort received, so I am likewise assured that
there be others which are utter enemies unto this doctrine, and do (think
all writings hereof more meet for the fire, then for ^^e reading of God his
children. The ar^^ments which they use against it, look ^^ we many they be
(as they be in deed ^^nie, and by many godly and learned ^^n many ways
Godly and learnedlye ^^futed) so many evident bewrainges be ^^y of their
Autors follies and wilful set^^ge them selves to bark against the ^^^^dom of
God, who so plentifully in his ^^de has opened this doctrine to the ^^forte
of his children, and confutation ^^is adversaries. And truly in my sim^^
judgment it is ouertwharte curiositie^^ folish nisenesse in men to think that
^^neete to be uttered which God in his ^^tures has revealed? yea it sauoreth
^^verie strongly of great arrogancy, as ^^gh they took upon them to be
(...) wiser then God, who if he had known ^^ doctrine dangerous of unmeet for
^^eople, would never have so plainly ^^ared and set it for th^^ his word. It
(...) be needeles for me to spend time in ^^er confuting the objections of the
ad^^ries against this doctrine, or in stan^^ to show the commodities that do
by this doctrine arise to the church of God, for as much as in these Treatises
they are both plenti^ullie performed. Only this I am to put thee in mind of,
namely, that thou talk soberlie and in the fear of God, of this mystery,
and no further then he has declared in his word, avoiding all curious and
needless questions, considering that herein, whosoever wandreth farther then
he has the word of God for his warrant, the farther he wadeth, the farther he
wrappeth and entangleth himself. Farewell, and pray unto God that as this
pains was taken to do thee good, so thou by reading it, may receive profit,
instruction and comfort.

From my study at Tunbrige this last of June. 1576. Thy poor and loving
Brother in Christ. John Stockwood.

A short declaration of the Table going before.
The first Chapter.
That the question of God his everlasting Predestination, is neither curious,
nor vnneedefull in the Church of God.

AVgustine Angustine his answer to their vain objection, that are enemies
unto the doctrine of predestination, saying that it makes preaching to be a
thing needless.
in his Book of the good gift of perseverance, or continuance unto the end.
^p. 14. They say that the doctrine of destination is enemy unto Prea^^g, that
it should do no good. As ^^gh it had been an enemy unto the ^^stles
preaching. Has not that ex^ent teacher of the Gentyles so often ^es commended
Predestination, and ^ ceased not to preach the word of (...)

Also, Like as he which has received the gift, does truly exhort and
preach: even so he which has received the gift, does obediently hear him
that exhorts and preaches, etc. Therefore do we exhort and preach: but they
which have ears to hear: do obedientlye hear us: they which have not, that
thing comes to pass in them which is written, That hearing they should not
hear: hearing with the sense of their body, they should not hear with the
assent of their body. But why the one have (ears to hear) and the other have
not, that is to say, why it is given unto the one of the Father to come unto
the Son, and is not given unto the other, who has known the mind of the
Lord? Must that which is manifest be therefore denied, because that which is
hydden can not be comprehended or known?

Also Cap. 15. Whether if when this is heard, some are turned unto a sluggishe
heaviness and slownesse, and being readily bent to fall from labor unto
wantonness, do go after their lusts: must therefore that be thought false
which is ^ayd of the foreknowledge of God? And ^yll not we also speak that,
which the ^cripture being witness is lawful to ^peake? By lykelyhoode we are
afraid ^^ast he should be offended which cannot take it, and are not
afraid, least we ^lding our tongues, that he which can ^ke the truth, should
be discea^ed with ^^sehoode?

Also Cap. 20. If the Apostles, and the ^eachers of the Church which followed
^em, did both, that they might entreat ^odly of the eternal election of God,
and ^ight keep the faithful under the go^rnment of a godly life, what is it
^t these our men being shut up with ^in^insible force of the truth do think
^t they say well, that it is not to be ^eached unto the people, although it
be ^ue which is said of Predestinati^n? ^ay it must utterly he preached, that
he which has ears to hear, may hear. ^d who has (ears to hear) if he ^ue
not received of him which promy^th that he will give? verilye, let him that
receives not, refuse: yet so that he which desires, take and drink: drink
and live. For as godliness is to be preached, that God may be duly
worshipped, so also is Predestination: that he which has ears to hear, may
glory of the grace of God, in God, not in him self.

This is the mind of that most excellent man, Two things to be observed in
the doctrine of predestination.
which notwithstanding, puts two conditions: (1) One is, if these matters be
reasoned of, according to the rule of the word of God: (2) The other, if the
self same which the scripture declares as touching these matters, be
expounded aptlye and unto edifying, of both these points we have purposed to
speak in few words, and first of the doctrine it self: and then of the use
and applying of it.

The second Chap.
Of the everlasting counsel of God hyd in him self, which notwithstanding is
in the end understood by the effects.

The. 1. Aphorism.
^HE ways of (1) almighty God are (...) unsearchable, The counsel, decree
and will of God, the fountain of all causes.
(2) without whose e^^nall and unchangeable decree, nothing ^one any where of
any man, neither ^erally nor particularly, no not those ^^gs are to be
excepted, (3) which (albe^t in respect they are decreed of God, ^g always good
and just: but in re^^t they are done by Satan and other ^^l instruments) are
evil, and ther^^ to be detested and abhorred.

Proves out of the word of God.
Romans 11. 33. O the deep riches both

Rom 9. 20. But, O man, who art thou, which pleadest against God?

Job. 9. 10. 11. 12. Who does great things and unsearchable, yea, marvelous
things without number. Lo, he goes by me, and I see him not: he passes
hye, and I perceive him not. Doubtless he will take away, who will cause him
to restore again? who shall say unto him, what do thou?

Genesis 27. 20. And Isaac said unto his son, what is this, that thou has^
found it so quickly, my son? who said, because Iehoua thy God, made it to
come unto my hand?

Ephe. 1. 11. In whom also we are chosen, when we were Predestinate according
to his purpose, which brings to pass all things after the counsel of his
own will.

Exodus 21^ 13. But he that has not said wait for him, but God was the cause
that he came to his hand, then will I appoint thee a place whyther he shall
flee.

Prou. 16. 33. The lotte is cast into the lap, and all the judgment thereof
is from the Lord.

^Prouer. 20. 24. The steps of a man ^^re ruled by the Lord: and how shall
a ^an understand his own way?

^Prouer. 21. 1. As the ryuers of waters, ^^ is the Kings heart in the hand of
the ^orde: he turns it whether soever it ^leaseth him.

^Esa. 14. 27. Because the Lord of hoasts ^^th determined it, and who shall
disanull ^ his hand is stretched out, and who ^all turn it away?

^Iere. 10. 23. O Lord I know that the ^aye of man is not in him self,
neither ^it in man that walks, to make rea^^e his steps.

^Dan. 4. 32. And all the dwellers of the ^^th are coumpted as nothing, and he
^th according unto his will in the host ^heauen, and in the dwellers of the
^^rth: neither is there any that can ^aye his hand, and say unto him, that
do thou?

^Math. 10. 29. Are not two Sparrowes ^ld for a farthing, and one of them shall
not (...) on the ground without your Father?

Ephesians. 2. 1. 2. And you has he quickened, when you were dead in trespasses and
sins, wherein in times past ye walked, according to the course of this world,
after the Prince which has rule of the air, and of the spirit that now
works in men that are disobedient.

1. Sam. 16. 14. But the spyrite of the Lord departed from Saul, and an evil
spyrite sent of the Lord, feared him. 2. Tim. 2. 26. And being escaped out of
the snare of the Devil, of whom they are taken captives.
Genesis 45. 8. Now therefore you have not sent me hither, but God.

Genesis 50. 20. When ye thought evil against me, God disposed it unto good,
that he might do according unto this day, and save much people a live.

Exo. 4. 21. And I will harden his heart, that he shall not let the people go.

Exo. 7. 3. But I will harden Pharaos heart, and multiply my miracles, and
wonders in the land of Egypt.

Exodus 9. 12. And the Lord hardened the heart of Pharao, neither did he obey
them, according as the Lord had spoken unto Moses.

Exodus 10. 1. Go in unto Pharao: For I have hardened his heart, and the heart
of his servants.

20. And the Lord hardened the heart of Pharao.

Exodus 11. 10. But the Lord hardened Pharaos heart, and he suffered not the
children of Israel to depart out of his Land.

Exodus 14. 4. And I will harden Pharaos heart, and he shall follow after you,
and I will be glorified in Pharao.

17. And I, behold I will harden the heart of the Egiptians, and they shall go
in after them: and I will be glorified in Pharao, and in all his host, and in
his Charets, and in his horsemen.

Deuteronomy. 2. 30. But Sihon the King of Hesbon would not let us pass by him: for
the Lord thy God has hardened his spirit, and made stubborn his heart, that
he might deliver him into thine hand.

Ios. 11. 19. 20. There was not a City which made peace with the children of
Israel, besides the Hiuites, the inhabitants, o^ dwellers in Gibeon: all other
they (...) by battle. For it came of the Lord to harden their hearts, to
come against Israel in battle.

1. Sam. 2. 25. And they heard not the voice of their Father, because the Lord
was minded to slaye them.

2. Sam. 12. 11. So said the Lord, behold I will raise up evil against thee,
out of thine house, and will take thy wives before thine eyes, and give them to
thy neighbor, and he shall lie with thy wives, in the sight of this son.

2. Sam. 24. 1. And the wrath of the Lord was moreover angry against Israel,
and he styrred up David against them, saying, go, number Israel and Judah.

1. King. 12. 15. And the King heard not the people: for the cause was from the
Lord, that he might perform his word which he had spoken by the hand of
Ahiiah the Silonite unto Jeroboam the son of Nebat.

1. King. 22. 23. Now therefore behold the Lord has put a spirit of lying
in the mo^th of all these thy Prophets.

2. Kin. 18. 25. And now, have I comen up against this place without the Lord,
to destroy it? The Lord said unto me, go up against this Land and destroy it.

2. Chron. 11. 4. Thus said the Lord, Go not up, nor fight against your
brethren: return every man unto his own house: for this thing is done of me.

2. Chro. 22. 7. And the Or destructio^^
treading down of Ochozias came of God.

2 Chronicles. 25. 20. And Amazias held not him self contented, for it was of God,
that he might deliver them into the hand of the enemy.

Nehem 9. 36. 37. Behold we are servants this day, and that in the land which
thou gave unto our Fathers, etc. And it yields much fruit unto ye Kings
which thou have set over us for our sins.

Job. 1. 21. The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away: the name of
the Lord be blessed.

Job. 34. 30. Because a man that is an hypocrite reigns, and because of the
offense of the people.

Psalm. 105. 25. He turned their heart that they should hate his people: and
practice disceypt against his servants.

Esa. 10. 15. Shall the axe boast it self against him that he weth therewith?
or shall the saw set up it self against him that moves it? as if the rod
should lift up it self against him that takes it up: or as if the staff
should exalt it self, as though it were no woodde.

Esa. 54. 16. Behold, I have created the Smyth, that blows the coals in the
fire, and him that brings forth an instrument for his work: I, I say, have
created the destroyer to destroy.

Esa. 63. 17. Lord why have thou made us to err from thy ways? and made us
to depart from thy fear?

John. 12. 40. and Esa. 6. 10. He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their
hearts: least they should see with their eyes, and understand with their heart,
and should turn, and I should heal them.

Iere. 48. 10. Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord negligentlie, and
cursed be he which keeps back his sword from blood.

Act. 2. 23. Him, I say, when you had taken, being delivered by the determi^ed
counsel and providence of God, ye have slain with wicked hands being
fastened to the cross.

Act. 4. 27. 28. For doubtless against ^hine holy son Jesus, whom thou
had anointed, both Herod and Pon^tius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the^
people of Israel were gathered together, ^to do whatsoever thine hand, and thy
counsel had determined before to be done.

Romans 9. 18. Therefore he has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and hardens
whom he will harden.

19. Thou wylt say then unto me, why is ye yet angry? for who has resysted
his hill.

Romans 11. 32. For God has shut up all in disobedience, that he might have
mercy on all.

Gal. 3. 22. For the scripture has shut up all things under sin, that the
promise by the faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe.

^. These. 3. 3. That no man should be moved in these afflictions^ For ye your
selves know that we are appointed there unto.

Romans 8. 29. For whom he knew before, those he also Predestined to be made
like the image of his son.

1. Pet. 3. 17. For it is better, if the will of God will so have it, that ye
suffer for evil doing.

1. Pet. 4. 19. Wherefore let them that suffer according unto the will of God,
commytte their souls unto him in well doing, as unto a faithful creator.

The second Aphorism.
THe self same God Al things created unto God his glory.
from everlasting has purposed and decreed in himself, to create all things
at their seasons to his glory, but namely men, and that after two sorts
altogether diverse the one to the other, to wit in such manner, Men or dained,
some mercy to salvation, others of justice to damnation, and that both to God
his (...).
that some whom it pleases him according unto his secreete will, he makes
through mercy partakers of his glory, whom out of the word of God we do call
vessels of honor, elect or chosen, sons of the promise, and Predestinate
or foreordained unto salvation: Titles which the scripture g^^ueth to the
chosen.
and in other, whom also it pleases him to stir up to that end, he shows
his wrath and his power, that in them also he might be glorified, Names given
in the Scripture to the reprobates or cast avvayes.
whom likewise we call vessels of dishonor and wrath^ and unapt to every
good work.

Proves out of the word of God.
Prou. 16. 4. The Lord has made all things for his own sake, yea, even the
wicked for an evil day.

Esa. 43. 6. I will say unto the North, give: and unto ye South, keep not
back. Bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the uttermost part of
the earth.

7. All shall be called by my name: and I created them for my glory: I formed
them, and also made them.

Ephesians. 1. 5. 6. Who has predestinate or foreordayned us whom he would adopt or
chose into his sons through Jesus Christ unto him self, according to the
good pleasure of his will, unto the praise of his glorious grace, wherewith he
has made us to be accepted or to be lyked of in that his beloved.

Romans 9^ 23. And that he might make known the riches of his glory toward the
vessels of his mercy, the which he has prepared unto glory.

Romans 8. 29. For whom he has foreknown, those also has he Predestinate, that
they might be made like the Image of his son.

Romans 9. 7. 8. But in Isaac shall thy seed be called, that is, not they which
are the children of the flesh, are the children of God, but they which are
the sons of the promise, are coumpted in the seed.

To. 9. 21. Has not the Potter power over the claye, to make out of the same
lump, one vessel unto honor, and another unto dishonor?

1. Cor. 2. 7. But we speak the wisdom of God lying in a mystery, that is,
even the hyd wisdom, which God had determined before the world unto our
glory.

Ephesians. 1. 4. As he has chosen us in him before the fou^dations of the world
were laid, that we should be holy and without eame before him in love.

2. These. 2. 13. But we ought to give thanks always to God for you brethren
beloved of the Lord, because God has chosen you from the beginning unto
salvation through sanctification of the spirit, and faith given to the truth.

1. Pet. 1. 2. Chosen according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, unto
sanctification of the spirit.

Exodus 9. 16. And in deed for this cause have I appointed thee, to wit, to
show

Proverb. 16. 4. The Lord has made all things for his own sake: yea, even
the wicked for an evil day.

Romans 9. 22. What and if God minding to declare his wrath, and to make his
power known, has suffered with much gentleness the vessels of wrath^
couched together to destruction?

The third Aphorism^.
THis election Election lying hyd in the purpose of God.
and chosing, or Predestination, and forcordaining unto salvation being
considered in the purpose of God it self, that is to say, the decree it self
and purpose of electing or chosing, is the first fountain of the salvation of
the Sons of God, God has not chosen us unto sal^uation because he did
foresee that we would be faithful and do good works, but only because of
free mercy it so pleased him, and therefore also hau^ we fayt^ and do good
works because it is God his good pleasure to grannt us faith and ability, and
will to do good works.
and does not spring, as some would have it, from the for^knowledge either of
their faith, or works, but rather of that only which is in the good pleasure
of God it self, from the which afterward do both election or chosing, and
also faith, and all good works spring.

Proves out of the word of God.
Deuteronomy. 4 37. And because he loved thy Fathers, he chose their seed after them,
and has brought thee out of Egypt before him by his most mighty power.

Deuteronomy. 7. 7. 8. God has not loved you, and chosen you, because you were more
in number then al other people, but because the Lord loved you, etc.

Ios 24. 2. And Joshua said to all the people, Thus says the Lord God of
Israel: your Fathers dwelled beyond the floodde in old time, as Their the
father of Abraham, and the father of Nachor, and served other Gods, etc.

Psalm. 44. 3. For they possessed not the Land with their own sword, neither
did their own arm save them: but thy right hand and thy arm, and the light
of thy countenannce, because thou ^a^o^^edst them.

John 15. ^6. You have not chosen me, but I have chose^ you, and ordained you,
that ye go and bring forth fruit etc.

Act. 13. 48. And when the Gentyles heard these things, they rejoiced, and
glorified the word of the Lord and believed as many as were ordained unto
everlasting life.

Act. 22. 14. And he said, the God of our fathers has chosen thee, that thou
should know his will, and see that just one and should hear the voice of
his mouth.

Romans 5 6. For Christ when we were yet of no strength, at his time dyed for
the ungodly.

To. 9. 11. 12. For the children being not yet borne, when as they had done
neither good nor evil (that the purpose of God, which is according unto his
election, that is to say, not of works, but of him y^ calls) might remain
sure) it was said unto her, the elder shall serve the younger.

13. As it is written. I have loved Jacob, and have hated Esau.

14. What shall we say then? Is there any unrighteousness with God? God forbid.

15. For he says unto Moses, I will have mercy on him, on whom I will have
mercy, and I will have compassion on him, on whom I will have compassion.

16. So then Election is not in him that wylleth, neither in him that runs,
but in god that shows mercy.

18. Therefore he has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth.

25. And that he might make known the riches of his glory upon the vessels of
mercy, which he has prepared unto glory.

Rom 11. 7. What then? Israel has not obtained that which he seeks, but the
Elect have obtained it, and the rest have been hardened.

35. Or who has given unto him first and it shall be given unto him again.

1 Cor. 4^7. For who separateth thee? and what have thou, that thou have not
^eceaued? If thou have received it, why reioycest thou, as though thou had
not received it?

Ephesians. 1. 4. As he has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world were
laid, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love.

5. Who has Predestinate or foreordained us whom he would adopt or chose
into sons through Jesus Christ unto him self, according to the good pleasure
of his will.

11. In whom also we are chosen, when we were Predestinate or foreordayned
according to the purpose of him, which works al things after the counsel of
his own will.

Ephe. 2. 10. For we are his workmanshyp, created in Christ Jesus unto good
works, which God has ordained, that we should walk in them.

Colos. 1. 12. Giving thanks unto the Father, which has made us meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light.

2. Tim. 1. 9. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling: not
according unto our works, but according unto his own purpose and grace, which
was given us in Christ Jesus before the times of the world.

The fowrth Aphorism^.
THerefore the Scripture as often as it will strengthen the sons of God
with assured hope, The scripture uses to allege the eternal purpose of God
for conf^rmance of our hope of salvation, and not to stay in second causes a^
faith or calling, nor in the fruits of these causes, which. (...) assure us
that we have them.
stays not either in the testimonies or vvitnesses of the second cause^ that
is to say, in the ftuites of faith, nor yet in the second and next causes
them selves, to wit, faith and vocation, or calling, but ascends or clymeth
up unto Christ him self, in whom notwithstanding as in the head we are in very
deed, elect and adopted, and afterward goes up even unto that everlasting
purpose^ which God has purposed in no other than in him self.

Proves out of the word of God.
Math. 25. 3 Then shall the King say unto them which shall be at his right hand,
come ye blessed of my Father, possess the kingdom prepared for you before the
foundation of the world were laid.

John. 6. 40. And this is the will of him which sent me, that every one which
s^^th the son and believes in him, should have everlasting life: and I will
raise him up at the last day.

Act. 13. 48. Ioh. 6. 45. It is written in the prophets, and they shall be al
taugh^ of God, who so ever therefore has heard of the father and has
learned, comes unto me. Psa. 54. 13.
And the Gentyles hearing these things, rejoiced, and glorified the word of
the Lord: and believed as many as were ordained unto everlasting life.

Romans 8. 29. For whom he has foreknowen, the same also has he Predestinate
or foreordained that they should be like the Image of his son.

Romans 9. 8 Not they which are the children of the flesh, are the children of
God: but they which are the children of the promise, are coumpted in the seed.

11. For the children not being yet born, when as they had done neither good
nor evil, that the purpose of God, which is according unto his election, that
is to say, not by works, but by him that calls, might remain sure, etc.

16. So then the election is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs,
but in God that takes mercy.

23. And that he might make known the riches of his glory upon the vessels of
mercy, which he has prepared unto glory.

11. What then? that Which Israel seeks, etc.

Ephesians. 1. 4. As he has chosen us in him before the foundacions of the world
were laid, etc.

^5. Who has predestinat or fore ordained us whom he would adopte or chose
into his sons through Jesus Christ unto him self.

9. The mystery of his will being revealed unto us, acording unto his free
good will which he has purposed in him self.

11. In whom also wear chosen, etc.

2. Tim. 2. 19. Yeat the foundation of God remains sure, ha^ing this seal
the Lord knows who are his: and, let every one that calls on the name of
Christ depart from iniquity.

1. Cor. 2. 7. But we speak the wisdom of God, lying hid in a mystery, even
that hyd wisdom which God had determined before the world unto our glory.

10. But God has reveled those things unto us by his spirit. For the spirit
searches all things, yea the deep things of God.

1. Pet. 1. 19. 20. But (being redeemed) with his precious blood, as of a Lamb
without spotte and undefiled, to wit Christ: which was foreordained before the
fou^dations of the world were laid, but was declared in the last times for your
sakes.

The fifth Aphorism.
ALso when there is entreated of the destruction of the reprobats or ofcasts,
Reprobation or ofcasting lying hyd in the purpose of God.
(1) albeit the whole fault remain within them selves, (2) yet sometimes, as
often as it is so needful, the spirit of God to make known the riches of his
glory upon the vesselle^ of mercy, and his excellent power and also
gentleness the better by comparison, lifts us up even unto that high
mystery, which in order goes before all the causes of their damnation. Of
which secreete, doubtless there is no other cause known unto men besides his
righteous will, the which we ought reverently to receive, as coming
undoubtedly from him, vvh^ is naturally just, and can no other way be
conceived of men, nor of any other.

Proves out of the word of God.
Hos. 13. 9. Thy iniquity has destroyed thee O Israel: but in me is thy help.

John. 3. 19. And this is the condempnation, that light is come into the
world, but men have loved rather darkness than light.

Rom 9. 23. And that he might make known the riches of his glory upon the
vessels of mercy, the which he has ordained unto glory.

Exodus 9. 16. And in deed for this cause I have appointed thee, even to show
thee my power, and that they should declare my name in the whole earth.

Psa. 33. 15. Which has fashioned their hearts every one, considering al
their works.

Prou. 16. 4. The Lord has made all things for his own sake: yea even the
wicked man for an evil day.

Rom 9. 11. For the children not being yeat borne, when as they had done
neither good nor evil, that the purpose of God according unto his electon,
that is, not by works, but by him that calls, might remain sure, etc.

13. As it is written. Mala. 1. ^
I have loved Jacob, but hated Esau. Where he does not only say, that Esau
before he had done any good, was ordained unto ^atred (for after this sort he
might seem to touch none but actual sins (as they say) or unbelief, but
faith plainly, before he was borne. By which words he excludes or sh^tteth
out from the cause of hatred, original sin also, and whatsoever in the person
of Esau might be reckoned from his very birth. Therefore whereas a little after he
brings in the reprobates or ofcastes parting here against, he does not
attrybute unto them such like kind of speech, why does not God bear ye same
hatred toward others also, for as much as they are borne in y^ same corruption,
that we are? I say, there is no such thing read in the word of the Apostle,
but he sets this their exception against it: who shall withstand his will?
For herevppon man's reason gathers, that they are unworthily condemned.
Neither does Paul answer, that God did so will it, because he did foresee
that they would be corrupted, and so that the cause of the decree was
grounded upon their wickedness (which defense was plain and ready, if it
had been true) but whylste he confesses that it so pleased God, and that it
was not in their will to change it, doubtless he abateth the pride of man's
wisdom, that it may reuerentlye esteem of the secreetes of God, as is most
meet: But the elect or chosen he exhorts to behold the grace of God, the
which he sets forth with such comparison. So therefore must other
testymonies be expounded, in the which we go up unto the highest will of God,
which is the only rule of justice.

Esa. 54. 16. Behold I have made the Smyth that blows coals in the fire,
and brings forth an instrument for his work: I, I say, have made the
destroyer to destroy.

Ioh. 6. 44. No man can come unto me, unless the Father that sent me, draw
him.

John. 10. 26. But you believe not: for you are not of my sheep: as I sayd^
unto you.

Ioh. 12. 39. 40. and Esa. 6. 10 Therefore they could not believe, because
^saias has said again, He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their
hearts: least they should see with their eyes, and understand with their
hearts, and should turn, and I should heal them.

1. Pet. 7. 8. And a stone to stumble at, and a rock of offense, unto them
which stumble at the word, being disobedient, unto the which thing they were
even ordained. And in many other places.

Iud. 1. 4. For there have crept in certain men, being before of old ordained
unto this condempnation.

The sixth Aphorism.
FOr we must make a difference between the purpose of reprobating or
ofcasting, A differnce betvveene the purpose of electing and election and
betvveene the purpose of reprobating and reprobation.
and between reprobation or ofcasting it self. For the mystery or secret of
that, God would have to be hyd from us: But of this, and of the destruction
also that depends or hangs upon it, we have causes expressed in the word
of God, to vvyt the corruption, unbelief and sin (the which are necessary,
or must needs be in respect of the falling out of them) of the vessels mad^
unto dishonor.

Proves out of the word of God.
2. These. 2. 9. The coming (of the which wicked man) is by the working of
Satan, with all power and signs, and lying wonders.

10. And with all deceyu^ablenesse of unrighteousness among them that perish:
for that they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved.

11. And therefore God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe
^yes.

12. That all they might be dampened which have not believed the truth, but had
pleasure in unrighteousness.

Romans 11. 20. Well: through vnbeleef^ they are broken of, and thou stand by
^ayth be not hye minde^, but fear.

2. Cor. 4. 3. But if our gospel be hidden, it is hyoden to them that perish.

4. In whom the God of this world has blinded their minds, that is, in the
unfaithful, least the light of the gospel of the glory of Christ, which is
the Image of God, should not shine unto them.

Hebr. 12. 16. Let there be no fornicatour, nor profane, or unclean person,
as Esau, which for one mess of meat, sold his birth right.

17. For ye know how that afterward also when he would have obtained the
blessing by the right of inherytaunce, he was cast of: for he found no place
of repentance, although he sought that blessing with tears.

The seventh Aphorism.
SO when as the question of the sorting of the causes of salvation into
degrees, Gods purpose in him self in man his salvation, is the highest and
chiefest cause, and is to be divided, and also goes before our election,
which is grounded in Christ, and also before all other inferior causes that
follovv after it.
and placing of the^, as it were in a certain new order, in the salvation of
the elect, we do distinguish or make a difference between the purpose of
electing or chosing, the which God has decreed in him self, and the election
or chosing it self, the which is ordained in Christ, so that this purpose of
God in the rule and order of causes goes before this election, and all other
things which follow after.

Proves out of the word^ of God.
Romans 8. 30. And whom he has Predestinate or foreordained, those also has he
called, and whom he has called, those also has he justified or made
righteous: And whom he has justified or made righteous, those also has he
gloryfied.

Ephe 1. 4. As he chose us in him before the foundation of the world were
laid, etc.

5. Who has Predestinate or foreordained us whom he would adopte or ^^ose
for his sons through Christ vn^^ him self, according to the good plea^^re of
his will.

The third Chap.
Of the execution or fulfylling of the everlasting counsel, in that which is
common both to the elect or chosen, and also to the reprobates or ofcastes.

The first Aphorism^.
THe Lord to the end he might execute or fulfill that everlasting counsel
unto his glory, Why man was created in deed good, but yet such a one as
might of his own accord become evil.
prepared him self away according unto his infinite or endless wisdom,
which is common both to them which were to be chosen, and also to them which
were to be ofcastes. For when as he had determined to show forth a notable
example of his mercy, in the salvation of the chosen: and also to make
manifest his just judgment, in condemning the ofcastes, (1) It was of
neces^itie that he should shut up both of them under contumacie or
disobedience and sin that he might have mercy on all the believers, (2) that
is, on the elect or chosen, (3) for faith is a gift of God peculiar or proper
unto the elect:^ (4) and contra^y wise, that he might find matter of just
dampn^tion in those, unto whom it is given neither to believe, neither yet to
know the mysteries or secrets of God.

Proves out of the word of God.
Romans 11. 32. For God has shut up al under disobedience, that he might have
mercy on all.

Gal 3 22. But the Scr^pture has shut up all things under sin, that the
promise by the faith of Jesus Christ, might be given to them that believe.

Act. 13 48, And the Gentiles hearing these things, rejoiced, and glorified the
word of the Lord, and as many, as were ordained unto e^e^lasting life believed.

Ephesians. 2. 8. For ye are saved by grace through says, and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God.

2. These. 3. 2. Faith is not of all men, or all men, have not faith.

Tit, 1. 1. According to the faith of Gods elect or chosen and the knowledge of
the tr^th, which is according unto Godlynes:

2. Unto the hope of eternal life, the which God that can not lie, has
promised before the world began.

Phil. 1. 29. For unto you it is given in Christ his cause, not onely^ to
believe in him, but also to suffer for him.

Gal 3. 22. But the fruit of the spirit is. love, joy, peace, long suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, etc.

Math. 13. 11. For unto you it is not given to know the secreets of the kingdom
of heaven, but to them it is not given.

loh. 12. 37. And though he had done so many miracles before them, yet they
believed not in him:

38. That the saying of Esaias the prophet might be fulfilled, which he spoke,
Lord ^oho believed our saying, and unto whom ^is the arm of the Lord opened?

39. Therefore they could not believe, becau^ that Esaias says again,

40. He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts, that they should
not see with their eyes, and understand with their heart, and should be
converted, and I should heal them.

The second Aphorism.
THis therefore he did with such wisdom, that the whole faults of the
reprobates or ofcastes damnation rests in themselves: and that the whole
praise of the salvation of the elect or chosen, is wholy to to be referred
unto his mercy: for he did not create man Creation of man.
in sin (for so, which God forbid, should he him self have been the Author
of sin, and of his justice he might not punish it) but rather he made him
after his own Image, that is, in cleanesle and holiness.

Proves out of the word of God.
Gen 1. 27. Therefore god created man after his own image: after the Image of
god created he him, male and female created he them.

Ephesians. 4. 24. And put on that new man, which after God is created in
righteousness, and true holiness.

The third Aphorism.
HE afterward constrained by none at all, and driven also by no necessity of
concupiscence or luste^ as concerning his will (for as yet it was not bond
unto finne) of his own accord, corrup^ion.
and freely rebelling against God, bequeathed himself unto sin, and unto both
deaths: That is, of body and soul.

Proves out of the word of God.
Gen 2. 17. In the day that thou eatest of it, That is, thou shall most
assuredly die.
dying thou shall dye.

To. 7. 20. But yet if I do that I would not, then is it not I that do it,
but sin that dwells in me.

Romans 5. 12. Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world, and death
by the means of sin, and so death went over all men, insomuch as all men
have sinned.

The fourth Aphorism.
YEt we must confess that this fall The fall of man could no^ come to pass
without the vvy^ and ordi^^ of God.
(of man) happened not by chance, when as the providence of God is stretched
forth even unto the very smallest things, neither can any thing be said to
come to pass, God not knowing of it, o^ else altogether vvynking at it, for
so thinking (the which God forbid) we must be of the opinion of the ^VVho
where a sort of phi^losophers that among^ste other of their opinion^ held
that God has no care nor keep of the ^hinges which are done in the vvo^lde.
Epicures.

Proves out of the word of God.
Mat. 10. 29. Are not two sparowes sold for a farthing, and one of them shall
not fall on the ground, without your father?

50. But the very heirs of your hea^ are all numbered.

Prou. 16. 33. The lotte is cast into the lap, but the whole judgment of it
is from the Lord.

The fifth Aphorism.
Neither yet did it happen, by any ba^e, and idle pe^mission or suffering,
which is severed from his will and decree^ for when as he has ordained the
e^de, it must needs be also, that he has appointed the causes leadinge unto
that end: vnlesle we will affirm that the same end came to pass either
at all adventures or ^lse by ca^ses ^rdayned by some other God, after the
opinion of the Manichees. Moreover, it can not be ^nce so much as ^^ought^
that any thing ^ommeth to pass against the will of God, and whether he
will or n^, but that with great vngodl^ nesse, we must deny him to be
almighty: the which thing Augustine Aug. Euch^ ad laure^^^um
also lib. De correp et great. Cap. 104. cap 9^
has plainly noted. It does therefore remain that this fall did in such sort
issue from the wylling motion, or sturring of Adam, as that yet it happened not
against the will of God, whom after a certain vvonderfull and inconceivable
manner it pleases, that eue^ the same thing, which he does not allow in that
it is sin, comes not to pass with out his will: and that, as we have
said before, that the should show the riches of his glory upon the
vessels of mercy: and declare his wrath and power in those vessels which
he has made the^fore, that he might set forth his glory by their just
dampnation. The final end of God his counsel is neither the salvation of the
elect (...) damnation of the reprobats, but the s^tting forth of his glory.
For neither is the salvation of the elect or chosen, nor yet the dampnation of
the reprobates or ofcastes, the last end of the counsayles of God, but the
setting forth of his glory, as well in saving them of mercy, as in condemning
these by his just judgment.

Proves out of the word of God.
Romans 9. 21. Has not the pot^er power over the clay to make of the same lump
one vessel to honor, and an other to dishonor?

22. What and if God minding to show his wrath, and to make his power known,
did suffer with much patience the vessels of wrath, prepared to destruction^
etc.

1. Pet. 2. 8. And a stone of stumblyng, and a rock of offense to them which
stumble at the word, being disobedient, unto the which thing they were then
o^dained.

Exodus 9. 16. And in deed for this cause have I appointed thee, to wytt to
show thee my power, and to declare my name through out the whole world.

Prou. 16. 4. God has made al things for him self, yea even the wicked man,
for the day of evil.

Esa. 54. 16. Behold I have created the ^mith, that blows coals in the fire,
and ^ringeth forth a tole for his work: I, I say, have created the destroyer
to destoy.

Romans 9. 11. For the children being not yeat borne when as they had done
nothing neither good, nor evil, that the purpose of God. which is according
unto his election, that is to say, not of works but of him that calls, might
remain sure, etc.

13. As it is written Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated.

17. For the scripture says unto Pharao, for this same purpose have I styrred
the up, that I might show my power in thee, and that my name might be declared
thorough out all the earth.

18. Therefore he has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens.

The sixth Aphorism.
THerefore that we may avoid these blasphemies. into the which the
weakness of man's vvyt does draw us, let us confess, that the corruption of
the chief vvorkemanshippe made by God, came to pass neither by chance, nor
yet without his will, who of his incomprehensible or vnconceyueable
wisdom, makes and ordreth all things to his glory: let us nevertheless
grant, albeit that judgment of man wrestle never so much against it, the
which in the begy^ning was both compassed about with certain bounders, and
was also afterward miserably corrupted or made ill, that the whole fault of
destruction rests in man, because that between that secreete and vnceyueable
will of God, God is wholy blamed of the wicked for their corruption, where
as in deed the cause is not in him, but in their own vvylfull naugh^nesse.
and the same corruption of mankind, which properly is the true and the first
original or beginning of the destruction of the reprobat^ or ofcasts, the will
of that first man comes in the which will, vvheras it was created good, of
his own accord depraved or made it self naught, and therefore made open an
entry unto the just judgment of God to destroy al those, whom he will not
vouchsafe to show his mercy unto. Now if these pleading again ^^o obiecte,
that they could not be against this will of God, well, let us le^ ^em alone
unto their own destruction ^ reason against him, who will easilye ^efende his
own righteousness against their foolish quarellings. Let us rather ^euerence
that thing which is above the ^eache of our vvyt, and turn all the con^eites
and imaginations of our mind to the setting forth of his mercy, which of his
own only goodness has saused us, being no less wicked and worthy of any
kind of punishment, then they are.

Proves out of the word of God.
Romans 9. 13. As it is written, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated.

14. What shall we say then? is there any unrighteousness with God? God forbid.

15. For he says unto Moses, I will have mercy on him, to whom I will show
mercy, and I will have compassion on him, on whom I will have compassion.

19. Thou wylt then say^ unto me, why is he yet angry? For who has resisted
his will?

20. But, O man^ who art thou, which pleadest against God? shall the thing
formed say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus?

The fourth Chap.
By what order of causes God has opened the way to declare his election, and
in some part to extend or perform it.

The first Aphorism.
Now when as God had determined those former things with him self, The
foundation or ground work of election in very act or deed.
as we have said, afterward in the next, and yet eternal or everlasting rule
of causes, as all things are present unto him, he severally ordained all those
degrees or steps, by the which he would life up into his kingdom, those of
his which were to be chosen. Therefore because he is in such wise merciful,
that in the mean while, he neither ought, nor can ^orget his justice, first
of all there must ^eedes have been some one ordained to ^e a mediator, A
(...) needful.
by whom man might ^ee wholy restored into his former e^tate, and that of
free mercy which should appear in the salvation of his, But man besides
that he is more vveake then that he can sustain or bear the force of God his
wrath, (1) does also so please himself in that his most miserable blindness,
that he sees it not, (2) as being vvholye brought into slavery and bondage
unto the kingdom of sin, (3) insomuch that the law of God turns unto him
unto death: so far of is it that he should be able there to set him self at
liberty, or else to satis^ie or make answer unto the law of God, even in
the very least point. Man is so far bound unto sin that he can not any way
deliver him self, or yet sasatisfie the law of God in the least point of the
same.


Proves out of the word of God.
Ioh. 9 41. If ye were blind, ye should

Romans 1. 18. For the wrath of God is revealed and unrighteousness of me^,
which with hold the truth vnrighteouslie.

24. Wherefore also God has given them up to their hearts lusts, unto
uncleanness, to defile their own bodies between them selves.

Romans 7. 14. For we know that the law is spiritual: but I am carnal or
fleshly, soulde under sin.

Ephe. 2. 3. Among whom we also had our conversation in times past, in the
lusts of our flesh, doing such things as lyked our flesh and thoughts, and
were by nature the sons of wrath, as well as others.

1. Cor. 2. 14. But the fleshly man can not conceive the things of the spirit
of God for they are foolyshnes unto him, neither can he know them, because
they are spiritually discerned.

2. Cor. 3. 7. If then the ministration of death engraven with letters in
stones was glorious, so that the children of Israel could not behold the
face of Moi^es for the glory of his countenance, which glory is done away. etc.

9. For if the ministry of condemnation was glorious, much more does the
ministration of righteousness exceed in glory.

Rom 7. 10. But I dyed, and the same commandment which was ordained unto
life, was found to turn unto me, unto death.

The eleventh Aphorism.
GOd therefore the most gentle father of the elect and chosen, tempering that
his justice with infinite or endless mercy, God his justice tempered with
mercy.
appointed his only son of the same substance with him, and also God
everlasting, who at the time appointed should be made a very, or true man.

Proves out of the word of God.
Math. 1 20. Joseph thou son of David, fear not to take Marie thy wife. For
that which is conceived in her, is of the holy ghost.

Luke. 1. 35. The holy ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the
highest shall ouershadow thee: therefore also that holy thing which shall be
borne of thee, shall be called the son of God.

Ioh. 1. 14. And the word was made flesh, and dwelt amongeste us (and we saw
the glory thereof) the glory (I say) as of the only be gotten of the father.

Gal. 4. 4. But after that the full time came, God sent forth his son made of
a woman, made subject unto the law.

1. Ioh. 1. 1. That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which
we seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled
of the words of life:

2. (For the life appeared, and we have seen it and bear witness, and show
unto you that eternal life, which was with the father, and appeared unto us)

3. That (I say) which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, etc.

Romans 1. 3. Concerning his son made of the seed of David according the flesh:

4. And declared mightily to be the son of God touching the spirit of
sanctification, by the resurrection from the dead.

2. Cor. 5. 19. To wit because God was ^^ Christ reconcyling the world unto
^im self.

Philip. 2. 6. Who when as he was in ^e form of God, thought it no robbe^e to
be equal with God.

7. But he made him self of no repu^ation, taking upon him the form of a
^eruaunt, being made like unto man.

Colos. 2. 9. For in him dwelled all the ^ulnesse of the godhead bodily.

The third Aphorism.
First that two natures being joined The cause^ why Christ was made man.
that whole corruption of man might be wholly repaired and amended in one man.

Proves out of the word of God.
Romans 8. 3. For when as the weakness of the law could do nothing in the
flesh, God sending his own son being made like unto flesh, subject unto
sin, and that for sin, condemned ^inne in the flesh.

The fowrth Aphorism.
Secondly, which mighgt fulfill all Justification and Sanct^fication in
Christ.
and might be both able enough to sustain or bear the judgment of his
father, and also be an high priest, worthy enough to pacify his heavenly
father, dying righteous, for the unrighteous, and by his obedience doing away
the stubbornenesse of Adam, and cleansing all the iniquities of us all, being
laid upon his shoulders.

Proves out of the word of God.
Mat. 3 15. And Jesus answering, said unto him, let me alone now: for thus it
becomes us to fulfill al righteousness.

Math. 5. 17. Think not that I came to break the law, or the prophets, etc.

Romans 5. 18. To wit then likewise as by one offense the fault came on all men
unto condemnation, etc.

1. Cor. 1. 30. But ye are of him in Christ Jesus who of God is made unto us
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemtion.

The fyfth Aphorism.
^anctifie or make holy all them that were ^o be chosen, destroying and
burying (2) sin in them, by the communicating ^r imparting of his death and
buryall with them, and quickening them into^^ new life by his resurrection,
or rysing^ ^gaine, (3) insomuch that they do also ^^nde more in Christ, then
they lost in Adam. We find more in Christ then we lost in Adam.


Proves out of the word^ of God.
Esa. 53. 4. Surely he has borne our

^5. But he was wounded for our iniqui^ies, he was broken for our sins.

11. He shall see of the travail of his ^oule, and shall be satisfied: and by
his ^octryne shall my righteous servant ^ustifie, or make many righteous.

Romans 3 25. Whom God has set forth ^o be an appeasement through faith in ^is
blood to declare his righteousness, by ^he forgiveness of the sins that are
^assed.

Act, 20. 28. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock, in
the which the holy ghost has made you ouersaers, to feed the Church of God,
which he has purchased with his own blood.

Colos. 1. 20. And peace being made through his blood, by him, to reconcyle all
things unto him self, both the things which are in earth, and the things in
heaven.

21. And you which were in times past strangers and enemies, because your
minds were set in evil works, has he now truly reconcyled.

22. In the body of his flesh, through death, to make you holy, and
unblameable, and without fault in his sight.

Romans 5. 19. For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the
obedience of one, shall many also he made righteous.

1. Pete. 2. 24. Who bare our sins in his body on the tree, that we being
dead unto sin, should live unto rightcousnesse: by whose stripes ye are
healed.

1. Pe. 3. 18. For Christ also once suffere^ ^or sins, the righteous for the
vnrigh^eous, to bring us unto God, being in ^eede mortified, or become dead in
the ^^eshe, but quickened in the spirit.

2. Cor. 5. 21. For he has made him to ^e sin for us which knew no sin,
that we should be made the righteous^esse of God in him.

Romans 6. 3. Are you ignorant, that as

4. We are therefore buried together ^ith him through baptysme into his ^eath:
that as Christ was raised from ^e dead into the glory of his Father: so ^e also
should walk in a new life.

5. For if being graffed with him we ^aue grown in ye likeness of his death,
^^en so shall we grow in the likeness ^f his resurrection or rising again.

Colos. 3. 1. Therefore if you have ryn again with Christ, seek the things
which are above, where Christ is sitting ^ the right hand of God.

^. 12. Being buried together with him through baptism, by whom also you have
risen again with him through the faith of God working effectually, which has
raised him from the dead.

Ioh. 17. 17. Sanctify them with thy truth: thy werd is truth.

19. And for them do I sanctify my self, that they also may be sanctified by
the truth.

Heb 9. 13. For if the blood of Bulls and of G^ates, and the ashes of an
Heyser sprinckling the defiled, sanctified as touching the purifiing of the
flesh.

14. How much more shall the blood of Christ which through the eternal spirit
offered him self with out spotte of God, purge your conscience from dead
works, to serve the living God?

Heb. 10. 14. For with one offering has he consecrated for ever those which
are sanctified.

Romans 5. 11. But yet that which God does gratifye, benefyte, or pleasure us
with all, is not so as the offense, for if through the offense of that one,
many be dead, much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace, which is of
one man Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many.

16. Neither is the gift so, as that which entered in by one that sinned: for
the fault entered in of one offense unto condempnation: but that which God
gives, is given of many offenses unto justification.

17. For if by one offense, death reigned through one, much more shall they
which receive that abounding grace, and gift of righteousness, reign in life
through one, that is Jesus Christ.

20. Moreover, the law entreated that the offense should be increased: but
where sin increases, there grace abounds much more.

The syxt Aphorism.
AND least this remedy should be void and of none effect, Now God in his
everlasting counsel has wrought that the benefits offered unto us in his
son, should be effectual unto us, or turn to our profit.
(1) the Lord with all decreed to give this his son unto them, whom, as we
have said, he ordained from everlasting unto salvation, and in like manner to
give them unto his son: (2) that when as he shall be in them, and they in
him, they might be made perfect into one, by those degrees or steps which
do hereafter follow.

Proves out of the word of God.
Rom 8. 32. He verily that spared not his own son, but gave him for us all
unto death, how shall he not with him give us all things also?

Ioh. 3. 19. For God so loved the world, that he ga^e his only begotten son
that who soever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.

Ioh. 17. 2. As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give
everlasting life to so many as thou have given him.

9. I have declared thy name unto the men which thou have given me, which are
chosen out of the world: they were thine and thou haste given them unto me,
and they have kept thy word.

11. And I am no more in the world, but these are in the world, and I come
unto thee. Holy Father, keep them ^rough thy name, which thou have ge^en me,
that they may be one, as we ^re.

12. While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy name: those which
thou gave unto me I have kept and none of them is lost, but that child of
perdition.

Ioh. 17. 23. I in them, and thou in me,

The Seventh Aphorism.
FOr (1) first The first declaration of ^lection:
at what time it pleases him to reveal and open that secreete ordained from
everlasting, (2) at that time, I say, in which they think not of these
things, Out ward calling effectual.
(3) (as men that are very blind, and yet notwithstanding, they think that
they do most sharply see, (4) whereupon assured destruction hangs over their
heads,) (5) behold at unawares and suddenly he sets before their eyes the
great danger that they are in: and that they may be the more pearsed for a
witness unto their conscience, God lays, before us the haynousnes of our
sins and the danger like to ensue thereon, not to drive us to desperation, but
to make us run unto Christ. The law.
lying as it were buried and fornummed, (6) he joins thereunto the preaching
of his law, adding examples of his judgments, that they should be afraid and
tremble at the remembrance of their sins: (7) yet does he not this for this
intent, that they should remain in this fear and trembling: but rather that
turning to behold the greatness of the danger, which compasses them about,
they should fly unto that only mediator Jesus Christ.

Proves out of the word of God.
Genesis 3 15. Moreover, I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and
between thy seed and her seed. It shall break thine head, and thou shall
bruyse his heel.

Genesis 22. 18. And in thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed:
because that thou have obeyed my voice.

Romans 3. 25. Whom God has set forth ^ be an appeasement through faith, in
^is blood, to declare his righteousness, ^y forgiveness of sins that are
past.

Romans 16. 25. To him now that is able ^o establishe you according to my
Gospel, and preaching of Jesus Christ, by the revelation of the mystery, which
was kept secreete from times everlasting.

26. But now is opened, etc.

1. Cor. 2. 7. But we speak the wisdom of God, lying hyd in a mystere or
secreete, that is to say, that hydden wisdom which God has forcordayned
before the worlds for our glory.

Gal. 4. 4. But after the full time came, God has sent forth his son made of
a woman, made subject unto the law.

Ephesians. 1. 9. The mystery or secreete of his will being opened unto us according
unto his free good will, which he had purposed in him self.

10. To wit, that in the dispensation of the full time he might gather all
things in Christ.

Col. 1. 26. To wit, the mystery hid since the world began, and from all ages,
but now is made manifest unto his Saints.

2. Tim. 1. 9. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not
according unto our works, but according unto his own purpose and grace, which
was given unto us in Christ Jesus before the times of the world.

10. But is now made manifest by that glorious coming of our Savior Jesus
Christ.

Tit. 1. 2. 3. Unto the hope of everlasting life, which God that can not lie,
has promised before the times of the world, but has made it manifest in his
due time.

1. Pet. 1. 18. As those who know that you were not redeemed with corruptible
things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation, etc.

20. Which was foreordained before the foundation of the world were laid, but
was declared in the last times for your sake.

Joshua 24. 2. And Joshua said unto all the people: Thus says the Lord God ^f
Israel, your Fathers dwelt beyond ^he flood of old time, even Their the
Father of Abraham, and the Father of Nachor, and served other Gods.

3. And I took your Father Abra^am from the place which was beyond the flood.

Ezec. 16. 8. And I passed by thee, and saw thee, and behold thy time was as
the time of love, and I spread my garments over thee, I covered thy shame, etc.

Esai. 65. 1. I made my self manifest to them that asked not, I was found of
them that sought me not: I said, Behold me, behold me, unto a Nation that
called not upon my name.

Ephesians. 2. 3. Among whom also we all had our conversation in times paste, in the
lusts of our flesh, doing such things as pleased our flesh, and our minds,
and were by nature the sons of wrath, as well as they.

4. But God which is rytch in mercy, for his great loves sake, wherewith he
loved us.

5. Even when we were dead by sins, raised us up together through Christ, by
whose grace ye are saved.

11. Wherefore remember that ye being in times past Gentyles in the flesh,
which were called vncircum^icion of that which is called cyrcumsicion in the
flesh, and which is made with hands;

12. That ye were I say, at that time without Christ, and were al^aunts from
the common wealth of Israel, and were strangers from the covenant of promise,
having no hope, and were without God in the world.

13. But now in Christ Jesus, ye which once were far of, are made near by
the blood of Christ.

Romans 5. 10. For if when we were enemies, we were reconcyled or made friends
with God by the death of his son, much more being now reconciled or made
friends, we shall be saved by his life.

1. Pet. 2. 10. Ye which were sometime no people, are now the people of God:
which were not under mercy, have now ^btayned mercy.

Ioh. 9. 41. If ye were blind, you should

Ioh. 3. 19. And this is the condemnation, that light is comen into the world,
but men have loved darkness more then ^light: because their works are evil.

Rom, 1. 18. For the wrath of God is

Romans 2. 15. Who show the effect of the law written in their hearts, their
conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing one an other, or
excusing:

Act. 14. 17. All though he has not suffered him self to be without witness,
in that he does good unto us, giving us reign, and fruitful seasons from
heaven, filling our hearts with food and gladness.

To. 2. 14. For when the Gentyles which law unto them selves.

Act. 14. 17. Althought he has not suffered him self to be, etc.

Romans 7. 7. What shall we say then? Is the law sin, God forbid: nay, I had
not known sin, but by the law. For I had not known lust, except the law
had said, thou shall not lust.

1. Tim. 2. 5. For there is one God, and also one mediator of God and man, the
man Jesus Christ.

2. Tim. 2. 25. Instructing them which are contrary minded, if God at any time
will give unto them, that they may repent and know the truth.

19. And that being escaped out of the snare of the Diuyll, of whom they are
taken captive, they may receive health of mind to do his will.

Act. 2. 37. When they heard these things they were pricked in heart, and said
unto Peter, and unto the rest of the Apostles, men and brethren, what shall we
do?

38. And Peter said unto them: Repent, and let every one of you be baptized in
^he name of Jesus Christ, etc.

1. Ioh. 2. 1. Little children, these things ^ write unto you, that you should
not ^inne. But if any man sin, etc.

The Seventh Aphorism.
THerefore after that severe or sharp preaching of the law, (1) he sets
forth unto them grace and gentleness of the gospel: The gospel.
yet adding this condition: if they believe in Christ, (2) who alone can
deliver them from condemnation, (3) and give unto them power and right to
obtain the heavenly inheritance.

Proves out of the word of God.
Ioh. 1. 12. And as many as received him,

Ioh. 3. 16. For so God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son,
etc.

Romans 1. 19. For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ. For it is the power
of God unto salvation, unto every one that believes, to the Jew first, and
also to the Greek.

Romans 8. 1. Now therefore there is no condempnation to them which are in
Christ Jesus, that is, which walk not after the flesh, but after the spyrite.

1. Ioh 2. 1. My little children, these things, write I unto you, that you
sin not. If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous, etc.

Ioh. (...). And as many as received him, he gave unto them this dignity that,
etc.

Ioh. 3. 16. For God so loved ye world, etc.

Romans 1. 16. For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ, etc.

Romans 5. 1. Being therefore justified or made righteous by faith, we have peace
toward God through our Lord Jesus Christ.

The nynth Aphorism.
AND because all these things should be done in vain, if God did set
forth these secreetes unto men, only by the outward preaching Preaching is
the ordinary means whereby Christ is opened unto us, but yet not effectual
without the inward power of the spirit:
of his word vvrytten and openly published in the Church of God (1) (which
notvvithstanding is the ordinary and necessary instrument by supposition,
whereby Jesus Christ is communicated or imparted with us) (2) therefore when
as he has to do with his elect and chosen, together with the outward
preaching of the word, he joins the inward power of the holy spyrite,
The efficacy or forc^ of the spirit.
which does not, as Sophisters do suppose, repair or renew the remnau^tes
of their free will, (for whatsoever freevvyll is left unto us, it does
consiste or lie in this, (3) that we sin vvyllinglie, What manner of free
will is left after the fall.
(4) shunnishe God, (5) hate him, (6) yea, and moreover can neither hear him,
(7) nor believe him, (8) nor acknowledge the gift of God, (9) no nor once so
much as think any good thing: (10) and to be short that we be wholy
subject unto wrath, and the curse.) (11) But contrararywise, rather turns
their stony hearts into fleshie, (12) draws, (13) teaches, (14) lightneth
their eyes, (15) opens their sense, heart, ears, and understanding.

Proves out of the word of God.
Rmo. 10. 8. But what says it? the word is near the even in thy mouth and in
thine heart. This is that word of faith which we preach.

17. Then faith is by hearing: and hearing by the word of God.

2. Cor. 5. 18. And all these things are of God, which has reconcyled us unto
himself through Jesus Christ, and has given the mynistery of reconciliation
unto us.

19. For God was in Christ reconcyling the world unto him self, not imputing
or laying their sins unto them, and has put in us this word of
rec^ncyliation.

Iam. 1. 18. He because he would, begat us with the word of truth, that we
should be as certain first fruits of his creatures.

1. Pet. 1. 23. Being borne a new not of mortal s^^de, but of immortal, by
the word of the living God, which endures for ever.

25. But the word of the Lord endures for ever. And this is that word,
which is preached among you.

Act. 16. 14. Whose heart the Lord Paul.

Ephesians. 1. 9. The mystery or secreete of this will being opened unto us,
according unto his free good pleasure, which he had purposed in him self.

Colos. 1. 27. Unto whom God would make known what are the riches of this
glorious mystery or secreet among the Gentyles, that is, of Christ among you,
who is that hope of glory.

Romans 6. 20. For when as you were

Ioh. 6. 44. No man can come unto me, unless my Father which sent me, draw
him.

65. Therefore I said unto you, that no man can come unto me, unless it be
given unto him of my Father.

Genesis 3. 8. And by an by they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the
garden in the cool of the day: and Adam

Romans 5. 10. For if when we were enemies, we were reconcyled or made friends
with God, etc.

Romans 8. 7. Because that the understanding of the flesh, is enimyty against God.

Ioh. 8. 47. He that is of God, hears the words of God: ye therefore hear
not, because ye are not of God.

Esai. 53. 1. Who will believe our report: and unto whom is the arm of the
Lord reveled or opened?

Ioh. 12. 36. 40. Therefore could they not believe, because Esaias has said
again, he has blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts, lest they should
se with their eyes and understand with their heart: and ^^rne, and I should
heal them

Mat. 13. 13. Therefore speak I unto them by parables, because that seeing
they do not see, and hearing they do not hear, nor understand.

Mat. 13. 11. Because that unto you it is given to know the secrets of the
kingdom of heaven, but unto them it is not given.

Ioh. 3. 3. Uerily, verily I say unto thee, except a man be borne again, he
can not see the kingdom of God.

Ioh. 4. 10. If thou did know that gift of God, and who he is that says
unto thee, etc.

1. Cor. 2. 14. But the natural or fleshly man can not conceive those things,
which are of the spirit of God for they are unto him folyshnesse, and he can
not know them, because that they are spiritually di^cerued.

2. Cor. 3. 5. Not that we are able of

Ephesians. 2. 1. And you has he together

3. Wherein in times past ye walked, as is the course of this world, after the
prince that has power over the air, even the spyrite that now works in men
that are disobedient.

3. Among whom also we all had our conversation in time past, in the lusts of
our flesh, doing such things as lyked our flesh and minds: and were by
nature the children of wrath, as well as others.

Ezec. 11. 19. And I will give unto them one heart, and I will put a new spyr^ts
within their bowelles, and I will take away the stony heart from their flesh,
and will give unto them a fleshie heart.

Psalm. 51. 12. Create a clean heart in me O God, and renew a right spyrite
within my bowelles.

Ioh. 6. 44. No man can come unto me, except my father which sent me, draw
him.

Ioh. 6. 45. It is written in the prophets and they shall be all taught of God,
whosoever therefore has heard of my father and learned, comes unto me.

Psalm. 119. 130. The door or entrance of thy words does lyghten, and makes
the simple to understand.

Ephesians. 1. 17. That the God of our Lord Jesus Christthe father of glory, may
give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation, through the knowledge of
him.

18. That the eyes of your mind being lyghtened, ye may know what the hope is
of his calling.

Esai. 50. 5. The Lord God opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious: neither

Psalm. 119. 18. Open mine eyes, and I shall behold the wonders of thy law.

73. Thy hands have made me, and prepared me: make me to understand, and I
shall learn thy commandments.

130. The door or entrance of thy words lighteneth, it makes the simple to
understand.

Col. 1. 9. Wherefore we also since the day that we heard of it, cease not to
pray for you, and to desire that ye may be filled with all knowledge of his
will, with all wisdom, etc.

The tenth Aphorism.
AND first this spyrite in the elect or chosen What things God his spirit
works in the chosen.
causes that they be touched in deed with the feeling of that their calamity
or misery: secondly it creates Faith does lay hold on justification and
sanctification in christ.
is after a manner two fold. The one, by the which Christ is generally and
universally known, (1) to wit by the which we do give assent unto the
history of Christ, Two sorts of faith. An historical faith, and a true
faith.
and unto the Prophecies written of him, which faith is also sometimes
granted to the very reprobates or ofcastes. Another, which is proper and
peculiar unto the elect or True faith laying hold on justification in Christ.
Christ universally and indifferently offered to all men, and be every one
of us made assured of our election, which in deed before time from everlasting
was hidden in the secret of God, but was afterward declared unto us, (2)
partly by the inward te^^monie or vvytnesse of our conscience ^^rough the
spirit of God being ioy^^d unto the external or outward prea^^ing: (3) and
partly also by the power and effycacie or virtue of the same spi^^te, which
brings to this poiut eue^^e one of the elect or chosen, being set (...)
liberty from the bondage of sin, that they begin to will and to do the
^hinges which are of God.

Proves out of the word of God.
Ierem. 31. 19. For after that I conuer^ed,

Luc. 24. 4. 5. Then he opened their ^^ind, that they might understand the
scriptures.

Act. 16. 14. And a certain woman named Lydia which sold purple in the City
of the Thyatirians, which worshipped God, heard us: whose heart the Lord
opened, that she gave heed unto the things which Paul spake^

1. Cor. 2. 10. But unto us has God revealed or opened them by his spyrite^
For the spirit searches al things, eue^ the depthes of God.

11. For what man has known the^ things of man, but the spyrite of man^
which is in him? So also the things which are of God, no man knows but the
spyrite of God.

12. And we have not received the spirit of the world, but the spyrite which
is of God; that we may know those things, which God has given unto us.

16. For who has known the mind of the Lord that he might instruct him? But
we have the mind of Christ.

Colo. 1. 26. To wit, the mystery or secreete hyd since the world began, and
from all ages, but now is it made manifest unto his Saints:

27. Unto whom God would make known, what is the riches of his glorious
mystery or secreete among the Gentyles, that is, of Christ in you, who is
that hope of glory.

Ephesians. 1. 16. Making mention of you (...) my prayers.

17. That the God of our Lord Jesus christ, the Father of glory, would give
unto you the spyrite of wisdom and ^euelation, through the knowledge of ^im.

18. That the eyes of your mind being lyghtened, you may know what is that
hope of his calling, and what are ^he riches of the glory of his heritage ^n
the Saints.

^. Ioh. 3. 24. For he that keeps his ^ommaundementes, dwells in him, and
he in him: and by this do we know that he dwells in us, to wit, by the
spyrite which he has given us.

^. Ioh. 5. 20. But we know that the son of God is commen, and has given us
a mind to know him which is ^r^e: and we are in him that is true, that is,
in his son Jesus Christ, he is very God and life everlasting.

Romans 8. 15. For you have not received the spyrite of bondage unto fear, but
you have received the spyrite of adoption, by which we cry, Abba, that is to
say, father.

16. The which very spirit witnesses together with our spirit, that we are the
sons of God.

Gal. 4. 6. And because you are sons. God has sent forth the spirit of his
son into your hearts crying, Abba, that is to say. Father.

Romans 8. 14. For as many as are led by the spirit of God, these are the sonns
of God.

1. Ioh. 3. 10. By this are the sons of God and the sons of the Devil
manifes^, whosoever does not exercise, righteousness, is not of God, nor he
which loves not his brother.

1. Ioh. 4. 13. By this do we know that we dwell in him, and he in us, because
he has given us of his spirit.

14. And we have seen and bear witness, that the Father has sent his son,
to be the Savior of the world.

Phi. 2. 13. For it is God which works in you both to will and to do, or both
the will and the deed, even of his free good pleasure.

Romans 6. 18. And being made free from ^nnne ye are made the servants of
righ^eousnes.

The eleventh Aphorism.
THese are therefore the degrees or steps, by which it pleases the Lord
freely to create in his elect or chosen that precious and peculyar gift of
faith, whereby they may lay hold on their salvation in Christ. But because
faith is only begun in us, to the end we may be able, not only to
persevere or continue in it, but also to profit, which thing is altogether
necessary, (1) for this cause first of all, we are imitiated or entered as
it were into Relygion, by the Sacrament of Baptism: Baptism.
moreover, besides the hearing of the word, that faith is (2) again ^ealed
^n us by the sacrament of the Lord his Supper: The Lord^^ Supper.
of the which Sacraments this verily is the chief end, The chief end of the
sacraments.
that they are certain and effectual seals and also charters of the faithful
communicating or partaking with Christ, (3) who is made unto them wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption. (4) Wherefore it is very often
rehearsed in Paul, that we being justified or made righteous by faith have
peace.

Proves out of the word of God.
Mar. 16. 16. He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved.

Act. 2. 38. Repent and be every one of you baptized in the name of Jesus
Christ unto remission or forgiveness of sins? and ye shall receive the gift
of the holy ghost.

Romans 6. 3. Know ye not that as many of us as are baptized into Jesus Christ,
are baptized into his death?

4. We are buried then together with him through baptysme into his death: that
as Christ was raised up from the dead, unto the glory of his Father, so we
also should walk in a new life.

Gal 3. 27. For all ye that are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ.

Rom^ 4 11. And he received the sign

Colol^ 2. 12. Being buried with him through baptism, by which also ye have
risen again with him through the faith of God working effectually, who raised
(...) up from the dead.

Ephesians. 5. 25. 26. Like as Christ loved ^^ congregation and gave him self for
(...) sanctify it or make it holy, clensing (...) with the washing of water
thro^gh the word.

1. Pet. 3 21. To the which the figure of baptism now agreeing saves us also,
(not in that the filth of the flesh is cast away, but in that a good conscience
makes request unto God) by the resurrect^^n or rising again of Jesus Christ.

1. Cor. 10. 16. The cup of blessing

1 Cor. 1. 30. But ye are of him in Christ

Romans 3. 21. But now the righteousness of God is made manifest without the
law: being approbated both of the law and of the Prophets.

22. The righteousness I say of God, by the faith of Jesus Christ unto al, and
upon all which believe: for there is no dyfference, etc.

24. And they are justified or made righteouse freely, that is to say, by his
grace through the redemption made in Christ Jesus.

25. Whom God has set forth to be an appeasement through faith in his blood
to declare his righteousness, by the forgiveness of the sins that are
passed.

Romans 4. 2. For if Abraham were justified or made righteouse by works, he
has whereof he may glory, but not with God.

Romans 5. 1. Therefore being justified or made righteous by faith, we have peace
toward God through our Lord Jesus Christ.

The twelfth Aphorism.
FOR (1) whosoever has obtained the gift of true faith, the same also
trusting unto the like lyberalitie of God, ought in deed to be careful for
perceuerance or continuance to the end, Perceaueraunce or continuance to the
end.
but not to stand in doubt of the same, but rather in all kind of temptations
and afflictions to call upon God, (2) with assured hope Assured hope.
to obtain that which he asks, so far forth as is expedient or meet: for
as much as he knows him self to be the son of God, who cannot disceaue
him: (3) Furthermore, he does never go so far astray out of the right way,
but that through the benefit of the same grace, at the length he comes into
the way again. But, be it that sometimes faith lie buried in the chosen for a
season, insomuch that it may seem to be wholly extinguished or quenched, to
wit, that thereby they may know their own imbicilitie or weakness: yet it
never goes so far away, that the love of God and their neighbor is
utterly plucked out of their minds. Love. Faith is never plucked out of the
hearts of the chosen, albeit for a time it seem to be quenched.
For no man is justified or made righteous in Christ, but he is also
sanctified or made holy in him, (4) yea, and moreover is created unto good
works, the which the Lord has ordained, that we should walk in them.

Proves out of the word of God,
Numb. 23. 19. God is not man, that he can lie, nor the son of man that he
can repent: has he said, and shall he not do it? Has he spoken, and shall he
not perform it?

Psalm. 23. 6. Yet kindness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my
life, and I shall remain in the house of the Lord along season.

Psalm, 27. 1. The Lord is my light and my salvation, of whom shall I be afraid?
the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I stand in fear?

3. Though they pitch Tents against me, my heart shall not fear, if war be
raised against me, I do trust in him.

Ioh. 6. 37. What soever my father gives me, shall come unto me, and him
that comes unto me, do I not cast forth.

Ioh. 17. 15. I pray not that thou take the^ out of the world, but that thou
keep them from evil.

Ioh. 10. 28. And I give unto them everlasting life and they shall not perish
for ever, neither shall any man take them out of my hand.

29. My father which gave them unto me, is greater then all, and none is able
to take them out of my fathers hand.

Romans 5. 2. Through whom also we had this entrance by faith into this grace, by
the which we stand, and do glory under hope of the glory of God.

3. And not that only, but also we do

4. And patience experience, and experyence hope,

5. And hope makes not ashamed, because that the love of God is shed abroad is
given unto us.

Romans 11. 20. Thou stand by faith, be not hye minded, but fear.

1. Cor. 2. 12. But we have not received the spirit of the world, but the
spirit which is of God: that we may know what things God has freely
bestowed upon us.

16. For who has known the mind of the Lord, that he will instruct him? but
we have the mind of Christ.

1. Cor. 10. 12. He that seems unto him self to stand, let him take heed
least he fall.

Ephesians. 1. 9. The mystery or secreete of his will being opened unto us,
according unto his free good pleasure, which he had purposed in him self.

Phil. 1. 6. Being persuaded of this same thing, that he that has begone
this good work in you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ.

1. These. 5. 24. He is faithful which has called you, which also will bring
it to pass.

2. Cor. 1. 21 Moreover it is God, which confirms or strengthens us with you
into Christ, and which has anointed us.

Heb. 4. 16. Let us approach therefore with boldness unto the throne of grace,
that we may obtain mercy, and find favor to help in time of need.

Heb. 10. 22. Let us draw near with a true heart, and certain persuasion of
faith, having our hearts pure from an evil conscience: and washed in our
bodies with pure water.

23. Let us keep the confession of our faith without wavering, for he is
faithful which has promised.

Iam. 1. 6. But let him ask in faith, doubting nothing.

I. Ioh. 5. 14. And this the boldness which we have with God, to wit, that
he hears us, if we ask any thing according unto his will.

15. But if we know that he hears us whatsoever we ask, we know that we
have the requests that we have asked of him.

So erred Abraham, Moses, Aaron, David, Peter, etc.

1. Ioh. 1. 8. If we say, we have no ^^nne, we disceaue our selves, and
their is no truth in us.

10. If we say we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in
us.

Luc. 22. 32. But I have prayed for thee that thy faith should not fayle^
therefore when thou art converted, strenghthen thy brethren.

I. Ioh. 3. 9. Whosoever is borne of God, commits not sin, because that
his seade abides in him, and he can not sin, because he is borne of God.

10. By this are the sons of God, and the sons of the Devil manifest.
Whosoever exercises not righteousness, is not of God, nor he which loves not
his brother.

Romans 6. 1. What shall we say then? shall we remain in sin that grace may
the more abound:

2. God forbid, we that are dead in sin how shall we yet live in it? etc.

1. Ioh. 4. 20 If a man say, I love God, and hate his brother, he is a liar,
for he that loves not his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God
whom he has not seen?

2. Pet. 1. 5. And giving all dylygence unto this thing, join virtue unto your
faith, unto virtue, knowledge.

6. And unto knowledge temperance, and unto temperaunce patience. And unto
patience godliness.

7. And unto godliness brotherly kindness, unto brotherly kindness love.

8. For if these things be among you, and ^hou^d they will make you that you
neither shall be idle, nor unfruitful unto the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

9. For he that has not these things, is ^lynd, seeing nothing far of,
forgetting that he was cleansed from his old sins.

Ephesians. 1. 4. As he has chosen us in him before the foundations of the world
were laid, that we should be holy and without blame before him through love.

Ephesians. 2. 10. For we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good
works, the which God has ordained that we should walk in them.

The thirtene Aphorism.
THis therefore is the way whereby God ordains those his elect or chosen
unto the full execution or perfourmance of his counselles, whom it pleases
him to bring up amongste men, so long till they grow up to full age. But as
touching those whom he calls out unto his kingdom, being yet scarce borne,
or in their first years, the way is more compendious or shorter. (1) For
when as he comprehends in his free conenaunt, whereof Christ is mediator,
not only the faithful, but also their posterity unto a thousand
generations, so that he does plainly pronounce it to be holy, there is no
doubt but that he has given the children The adoption or chosing or Iytle
children.
of holy men, which pertain unto his election (whom he alone does know) unto
his son, who surely will not cast forth these also.

Proves out of the word of God.
Genesis 17. 7. And I will establishe my coue^aunt between me and thee, and
between they seed after thee, in their ^^eration with an everlasting
coue^^nt, to wit, to be God unto thee, and (...) seed after thee.

^^ Exodus 20. 6. And showing mercy vn^^thousandes that love me and keep
(...) commandments.

^. Cor. 7. 14. For the unbelieving hus^ande is sanctified by the wife, and the
^^nbeleeuing wife is sanctified by her ^usbande: else doubtless were your
^hildren unclean: but now are they ^olye.

Ioh. 6. 37. Whatsoever my Father ^eueth me, shall come unto me: and ^^im
that comes unto me, do I not ^cast forth.

The fifth Chapter.
In what order the Lord does beginn^ to execute or fulfill, and in deed are
effectually to declare his counsel of reprobation or of casting.

The first Aphorism.
IT may easily be understood by those things which we have said before
how the Lord does bring to pass, (1) that they may go unto their own
place, (2) whom he has created therefore, that he might be glorified in their
just condemnation. (3) For like as Christ the second Adam from heaven, The
old Adam is the foundation of reprobation or ofcasting in act or deed.
is the foundation and whole substance of the salvation of the elect or
chosen, so also the first Adam from the earth, because he fell, is therefore
the first causer of hatred and destruction, the which shall come upon the
reprobates or ofcastes.

Proves out of the word of God.
Act. 1 25. That he may take the rowme of this mynisterie and Apostlewyppe,
from which Judas has gone astraye, to go to his own place.

Romans 9 22. But what if he mynding to declare his wrath, and to make known his
power, has suffered with much gentleness the vessels of wrath ordained to
destruction?

Math. 25. 41. Then shall he also say to them that shall be on his left hand:
ye cursed, depart from me into everlasting ^yre, which is prepared for the D^^
^and his Aungelles?

Romans 5. 18. Likewise then as by one ^offence the fault came on all men to
condempnation, so by one justifying, the benefit abounded on all men, unto the
justification of life.

^. Cor 15. 21. For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection
or rising again from the dead.

22. For as in Adam all dye, even so in Christ shall all be made a live.

The second Aphorism.
FOr when as the Lord, being moved thereunto with such causes as he alone
knew, (1) had purposed to create them to this end, that he might show forth
his wrath and power in them, with all he ordained as it were by degrees and
steps, those causes, by the which it should come to pass that the whole
blame of their destruction should lie in them selves, according as we have
showed before Cap. ^. God his iudgemen^ upon little children.
. Man therefore falling vvyllinglie and of his own accord into that miserable
estate. (2) the Lord wh^^ vvorthelie hates the reprobate or of^castes, The
first declaration of reprobation or ofcasting.
for so much as they are corrupte^ shows forth his just anger upon some^ of
them, so sone as they are borne.

Proves out of the word of God.
Romans 9. 17. For the scripture says unto Pharao: for this same purpose have I
stirred thee up, that I might show my power in thee, and that my name might be
declared through out all the earth.

22. What and if God would, to show his wrath and make his power known suffer
with long patience the vessels of wrath prepared to distruction^

Exodus 20. 5. I the Lord the God am a gealous God visiting the sin of the
fathers upon the children unto the third and fowrth generation of them that
hate me.

Ephesians. 2. 3. Among whom also we al had our conversation in times past in the
lusts of our ^lesh, doing such things as lyked our flesh and minds: and were
the sons of wrath, as well as others.

Romans 5. 14. But death reigned from Adam unto Moises, even over them also which
had not sinned after the like manner of the transgression of Adam, which was
the figure of him that was to come.

The third Aphorism.
But in them that are grown to full age, he observes or uses two other
vvayes, No vocation or calling unto the gospel.
altogether diverse and contrary one to the other: for he vouchsaueth not
some once this much favor, as to hear any thing at all of Christ, (1) in
whom alone is salvation: Some of the reprobates or of castes are never called
unto the gosell.
(2) But lets them go in their own vvayes, and to make haste unto assured
destruction. (3) For such testimonies or vvitnesses of his Godhead, as he has
left unto them, are of force only thus far, that they have nothing to
pretend or allege for their excuse, (4) yet through their own fault, for
asmuc^^ as this their self same ignorance an^^ slaggishnesse, in which they
are, is a pu^nishment of that same corruption where in they were borne. And
truly whatsoever they can see in matters touching^ God, by this light or
rather darkness of^ nature, albeit they did not faint in the^ middle of their
race, yet it is such, as it can by no means be suffycient unto salvation. (5)
For it is necessary unto salvation that we know God not only as God, but also
as a father in Christ, (6) the which secreete flesh and blood does not
reveal or open, but the Son him self, to those only whom he has
received of his Father.

Proves out of the word of God.
Mat. 1. 21. And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shall call his name
Jesus. For he shall save his people from their sins.

Act 4. 12. Neither is their salvation in any other. For there is no other name
under heaven which is given among men, by which we must be saved.

Act 14 16. Who in the ages that are

Romans 1. 24. Wherefore also God gave them over unto the lusts of their own
hearts to uncleanness, etc.

Ephesians. 2. 11. Remember that you were sometimes Gentyles in the flesh, which
were called uncircumcision, etc.

^. That you I say were at that time without Christ, and were alians from the
common wealth of Israel, and strangers from the couenaunts of promise^ etc.

Romans 1. 19. For that which may be

Act. 14. 17. Albeit he has not suffered him self to be without witness, by
do^^ good unto us, etc.

Act. 17. 27. That they should seek God, if paraduenture they might find him
by feeling, etc.

Romans 1. 20. For his invisible things or his things which cannot be seen,
that is to say, his everlasting power^ and Godhead, are seen by the creation
of the^ world whylest that they are vnderstood^ by the things that are made: to
this end^ that they should be inexcusable.

Romans 2 12. Whosoever have sinned without the law, shall perish also with out
the law, etc.

Rom^ 1. 21. Because that when as they

22. When they counted them selves wise, they became fools.

Ioh. 17. 3. And this is everlasting life,

Ioh. 3. 36. He that believes in the son has everlasting life: but he that
believes not the son, shall not see life but the wrath of God abides upon
him.

Math. 11. 17. All things are given me

Math. 16. 17. Blessed art thou Simon the son of Iona^, because flesh and
blood has not opened this unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven.

Ioh. 1. 13. Which are borne not of blood, nor of the lust of the flesh, nor
of the lust of man, but of God.

The fowrth Aphorism.
But of some the fall is (1) greater, A calling not effectual.
(2) to wit, of them whom he vouchsaueth in deed to have the external or
outward preaching of the word, (3) but they being called, yet neither will nor
can answer, (4) for that they do so please them selves in their own
blindness, that they say they see? unto whom also it is not given to embrace
the spyrite of truth, and to believe. Sin in the reprobates or ofcastes in
necessary, that is such as ca^ nor be avoided, but yet they sin vvyllinglie
and vvyttinglie.
Therefore albeit their stubburnnesse be necessary, yet is it wylling or of
then own accord: (6) whereof it comes to pass that being bidden unto the
feast, they refuse to come, (7) insomuch that the word of life is unto them
foolisnesse and a stumbling block, yea finally, a deadly favor unto death.

Proves out of the word of God.
Luke 12. 47. But that servant which knows his masters will, and has not
prepared him self, nor done according to his will, shall be beaten with many
strypes.

Math. 22. 14. Many are called but few are chosen.

Luke 13. 34. Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, and stonest
them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy Children
together, etc.

Luke 19. 42. If thou had even known, at lest in this thy day, etc.

^erem 7. 28. And thou shall say unto them, this is the Nation which has not
obeyed the voice of the Lord their God^ etc.

Proverbs. 1. 24. Because that I have called, and ye have refused, I have
stretched forth my hand, and ther^ was none that gave any heed.

Ioh. 9. 41. If you were blinded you should have no sin: but now you say, we
see, and therefore your sin remains.

Ioh. 14. 17. That spirit of truth which the world cannot receive, because it
does not see him, nor know him, but ye know him, because he remains with
you, and will be in you.

Ioh. 12. 39 40. Esai. 6. 10.
Therefore could they not believe because Esaias has said again, he has
blinded their eyes and has hardened their hearts, etc.

These. 3. 2. And that we may be delinered from froward and evil men, for all
men have not faith.

Math. 13. 11. For unto you it is given to know the mysteryes or secreetes of
the kingdom of heaven, but unto them it is not given.

Math. 22. 2. The kingdom of heaven,

Luc. 14. 16. A certain man made a great supper, and called many, etc.

1. Cor. 1. 18. For the preaching of the

23. We preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block, and unto
the Greeks foolishness.

2. Cor. 2. 15. For we are unto God the sweet savor of Christ, in them that
are saved, and in them that perish.

16. To the one we are the savor of death: and to the other we are the savor
of life, unto life.

The fyfth Aphorism.
THere are others besides these, whose understanding he styrreth up to
perceyne and believe the things which they hear: (1) But this is wrought by
that general faith, wherewith all the Deuylles also being endued, do
notwithstanding tremble.

Proves out of the word of God.
Iam. 2. 19. Thou beleeuest that there is one God, thou do well: the Deuyls
also believe, and tremble.

The sixth and seventh Aphorism.
Last of all, they which are of all men most unhappy, do also clyme ^he
higher, that they may have the ^greater fall, (1) for by the benefit of a
^ertaine grace they are entered thus far, The very reprobates or ofcastes
sometimes do seem for a season to be planted in the Church of God, and do
reach others the^ way to salvation.
that they are also somewhat moved to ^ast of the heavenly gift, (2) in so
much that for a time, having received the ^eede, they do seem to be planted
^n the Church of God, (3) and do also ^hewe unto others the way to
saluati^^n. But this is certain that, that spi^ite of adoption, (4) which
we said to be proper unto them which are never cast forth, (5) and which
are vvrit^en in the secreete of the people of God, ^vvas never communicated^
Read Mar: 7. verse. 21. 22. 23.
or imparted with them, (6) for if they were of the elect or chosen, they
should doubtless remain with the elect or chosen.

All these therefore, The cause why some of the reprobates or ofcastes, which
seemed for a time to be of the Church of God, are finally destroyed, is their
vvylling departure from that state which before they were in, unto vvieked^es
and sin.
(7) because n^cessarylie, but yet voluntarylie, or vvyllynglie, as they who
are under the kingdom of sin, (8) do turn again unto their vomytte, (9)
and fall from faith, and are therefore pulled up by the root, to be cast
into ^he ^yre. They are forsaken (I say) of God? (10) who being moved with
h^^ own will, the which no man can with stand, (11) and with their
corruption^ and wickedness notwithstanding, (12) ^doeth harden them, makes
fat they^ heart, stops their ears, finally blin^ death their eyes, (13)
and for the performaunce of this thing, uses partly their^ own evil lusts,
whereunto he gives them up to the governed, The means which God uses in
^^dening the ofcastes.
(14) partly by that same spirit of lying, which keeps them bound in
chains, to wit, because of their corruption, out of the which, as cut of a
certain spring, there yssueth out a contine wall stream of infidelytie or
unbelief, ignorance, and iniquity: (15) whereof it comes to pass that
they having made shipwreck, as touching faith: can never escape the day
appointed for their destruction, (16) that God may be glorified in their just
dampnation.

Proves out of the word of God,
Heb. 6 4. For it is impossible, that they which have been one lyghtened, and
have tasted of the heavenly gift, and have been made partakers of the holy
ghost.

5. And have tasted to the good word of God, and of the powers of the world
to come.

6. If they fall a waiel, should be renewed again by repentance: as who have
crucified again unto them selves the son of God, etc.

Act. 8 13. And Simon also him self Phillip. etc.

Math. 13. 24. Read the Parrable of the Sower.

Act. 1. 16. Men and brethren, this David, as concerning Judas, etc.

17. For he was numbered with us, and had obtained part of his ministry.

Ioh. 6. 37. Whatsoever my Father gives

Ezec. 13. 9. And mine hand shall be upon the Prophets that see vanity, and
divine lies: they shall not be in the assemblye of my people, neither shall
they be written in the writing of the house of Israel, etc.

1. Ioh. 2. 19. They went out from us, but they were not of us: for if they had
been of us, they would doubtless have continued with us, etc.

Ioh. 8. 34. Uerily, verily I say unto you, whosoever commits sin, is the
servant of sin.

Romans 5. 12. Therefore like as by one man sin has entered into the world, and
by sin death: and so death went over all men, in as much as al men have
sinned.

Romans 6. 20. For when as ye were ser^auntes of sin, ye were freede from
righteousness.

Romans 7. 14. We know that the law is spiritual, but I am carnal or fleshly,
sold to be subject unto sin.

Romans 8. 7. Because that the understanding of the flesh is enmity against
God. For it is not subject unto the law of God, neither in deed can be.

2. Pet. 2. 22. But it happens unto the^, Prou. 26. ^^
which is wont to be said in the proverb,

1. Tim. 4. 1. For the spirit says plainly, that it shall come to pass that
in the

Math. 12. 43. Read the parable of the seven spirits.

Romans 9. 19. Thou will then say unto

2. These. 2. 6. Whose coming is by the

10. And with all diceit of unrighteousness in them that perish: for that they
have not received the love of the truth, that they might be saved.

11. And therefore God shall send^ them strength of disceyuing, that they
should believe lies.

Ioh. 3. 19. And this is the condemnation, that light is commen in the world,
but men have loved darkness more then light: because their works are evil.

Esa. 63. 1^. Wherefore have thou O Lord made us to goo a straye from thy
ways? thou haste made our heart goo back from thy fear.

Exodus 4. 21. See that thou do all the wonders before Pharaoh, which I have
put in thine hand: and will harden his heart, that he shall not let the
people go.

There are also moe^ places which we have rehearted above. Chap. 2.
Aphorism. 1.

Esa. 6. 10. Harden the heart of this people and make his ears heavy, and
daube his eyes: lest happyly he should see with his eyes, and hear with his
ears, and his heart should understand, and when he is converted, there should
(...) ^^aling unto him.

Romans 11. 32. For God has shut up all (...) under dissobedience, that he might
(...) mercy on all.

Exodus 8 32 And Pharaoh hardened his

(...). 9^. 8. Harden not your hearts as (...) Meri^ah, as in the day of
Massah in the Wilderness.

Act. 7. 42. And God turned him self away, and gave them up into the service
of (...) host of heaven, as it is written in book of the prophets.

Romans 1. 29. Wherefore the Lord gave th^^ over unto filthy lusts.

2. Reg. 22. 23. Now therefore behold

^oh. 1. 3. 2. The Devil put in the heart of Judas, to betray Jesus.

2. Cor. 43. 4. But if our gospel be hidden, it is hidden in them that
perish: in whom the God of this world has ^^nded their minds, that is to
say, in the Infidelles or unbelievers, that the light of the glorious gospel
of Christ, who is the Image of God should not shine upon them.

2. Tim, 2. 26. And that being escaped out of the snare of the Devil, by whom
they are kept prisoners, they might receive health of mind to his will.

1. Tim. 1. 19. Having faith and a good conscience, which some have put away,
and as concerning faith, have made ^hypwracke.

Prouer. 16. 4. God has made al things for him self, yea, even the wicked man
for an evil day.

Exodus 9. 16. And truly for this cause have I ordained thee, that I might show
unto thee my power, and that they should declare my name in the whole earth.

Romans 9. 21. Has not the potter power over the clay, to make of the same lump
one vessel unto honor, and an other to dishonor?

22. What and if God wyllyng to show forth his wrath, and to make known ^is
power, suffered with much gentle^esse the vessels of wrath, prepared to
^estruction?

The sixth Chap.
Of the last and full execution or performing of the counsel of God^ both in
the chosen, and also in the ofcastes.

The first Aphorism.
FOrasmuch as God is very righteousness it self, The full performing of the
judgments of God.
it is meet that he should save the ryghteous, and condemn the unrighteous.
(1) But they only amongste men are righteous, Who are righteous.
who being united and graffed in Christ by says, yea, and also rooted in
him: and being made one body with him, (2) are in him and by him justified
and sanctified, that is, made righteous and holy. Whereby it is proved, (3)
that the life whereunto they are ordained to the glory of God, does by a
certain right appertain unto them only.

Proves out of the word of God.
Ioh. 17. 21. That all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee,
that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou have
sent me.

Romans 9. 5. For if being planted with him, we have grown in the likeness of
his death, even so shall we grow in the likeness of his resurrection, or
rising again.

Col. 2. 7. Rooted and buylt in him, and stablished in the faith, as ye have
been taught, abounding therein with thanks giving.

1. Cor. 10. 16. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion
of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of
the body of Christ?

Romans 8. 50. And whom he has predestined or foreordained, these also has
he called: and whom he has cal^ed, those also has he justified or made
^ighteous: And whom he has justified (...) made righteous, those also has
he ^^lorifyed.

1 Cor. 1. 30. But ye are of him in Christ jesus who of God is made unto us
wis^om, and righteousness, and sanctiu^ca^on, and redemtion.

2 Cor. ^. 5. Moreover it is God that

Romans 6. 23. And that he might make known the riches of his glory toward ^he
vessels of mercy, which he has ord^^ned unto glory.

Romans 3. 25. Whom God has set forth ^o be an ap peasement through faith in
his blood, to declare his righteousness, ^y the forgeuenes of the sins that
are p^ssed:

29. Through the patience of God, to show at this time his righteousness that
he might be righteous, and a maker ryghteous of him, which is of the faith of
Jesus.

Ephesians. 1. 5. Who has foreordayned us Whom he would adopte or chose unto
sons through Jesus Christ in him self, according to the good pleasure of his
will:

6. To the praise of his glorious grace, wherewith he has freely made us
acceptable or to be lyked of in that beloved.

The second Aphorism.
ANd contrariwise, they that remain in the pollution or fylthinesse and death
of Adam, are worthelie hated of God, that they may be damned by him, He
^eaneth Infants, who although they die before they commit actual sin, yet
are they from their mothers vvom^e defiled with origi^al sin, which is enough
to condemn them.
those not being so much as once excepted, which have died before that they
could sin after the likeness of Adam, that is to say, in act or deed.

Proves out of the word of God.
Romans 5. 14. But death reigned from Adam unto Moses, over those also which had
not sinned after the lykenes of the transgression of Adam, which was the
figure of him that was to come.

Ephesians. 2. 3. Amongst whom also we in times paste had our conversation in ^^e
instes of our ^lesh, doing such things (...) liked our flesh and thoughts, and
^^ere by nature the sons of wrath, as ^ell as others.

Ioh. 3. 36. He that believes not the ^^nne, shall not see life: but the wrath
of ^od remains upon him.

The third Aphorism.
BOth these executions or perfourminges of the judgments of God, ^^e brought
to pass by three degrees, as ^ell in the one as in the other, whereof ^^e
first has been by us declared al^eadie. For as touching the elect or ^hosen,
(1) the very self same moment that they have received the gift of ^ayth,
after a sort they have passed from ^eath to life, (2) a sure pledge whereof
^hey have. In the ch^^sen.
But this their ly^e is altoge^her hid in Christ, until such time ^s that
first death set them one degree ^^rewarde, (3) by which death the soul ^eeing
loosed from the chains of the ^odie, enters into the joy of his ^orde.

(4) Finally at the day appointed for the judgment of the quick and the
dead^ when as this corruptible shall pu^ on immortality. and God shall be all
in all, then shall they at length in presence see his Mai^stie, and shall
inioye that unspeakable joy, which was prepared for them from everlasting,
to wit, a rewards due unto the righteousness and holiness of Christ, which
was delivered for their sins, and raised again from the dead, for their
justification or righteous making, by whose power and spirit, they have
vvalked from faith to faith as by their whole life shall plainly appear.

Proves out of the word of God.
Ioh. 5. 24. Uerily, verily, I say unto you, he that hears my word, and
believes him that sent me has everlasting life, and shall not come unto
condemnation: but has passed from death to life.

2. Cor. 1. 22. God has sealed us, and has given the earnest of the spirit
in our hearts.

^. Cor. 5. 5. Moreover it is God who has created us for this thing, who also
has given us the earnest of the spirit.

^ Cor. 1. 4. I thank my God always on your behalf, for the grace of God
which is given you in Christ Jesus:

5. that in all things ye are made rich in him, in all kind of speech, and in
all knowledge.

6. According as the testimony or witness of Jesus Christ has been confirmed
in you.

7. So that you are not destitute of any gift, waiting until our Lord Jesus
Christ be revealed.

8. Who shall also confyrme you unto the end, etc.

Romans 8. 24. For we are saved by hope. And hope if it b^e seen is no hope. For
that which a man sees, why should he hope for?

25. But if we hope for that which we see not, we wait for it by patience.

Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom also after that you have believed, ye are sealed with
that holy spirit of promise,

1^. Which is the earnest of our inheritance, until that we are set at liberty
to the praise of his glory.

Romans 5. 2. By whom also we have entrance through faith into this grace, by
which we stand, and rejoice under the hope of the g^ory of God.

Luc. 23. 43. Uerely, verily, I say unto thee, this day shall thou be with me
in paradise.

Math^ 22. 31. And concerning the resurrection or rising again of the dead,
have you not read what is spoken unto you of God, saying.

32. I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God
is not the God of the dead, but of the living.

Luke 16. 22. And it came to pass that the beggar died, and was carried of
Angels into Abraham's bosom.

Phillip 1. 23. For I am in a strait on both sides, desiring to go hence and
to be with Christ: for that is best of all.

Act. 3. 21. Who must be contained in heaven until the times of the restoring
of all things, which God has forespoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets
since the world began.

Romans 8. 21. And the creatures themselves shall be delivered from the bondage
of destruction into the lyberty of the glory of the sons of God.

Look. 1. Cor. 15 In the whole chapter.

2. Cor. 5. 10. For all we must appears before the tribunal or judgment seat
of Christ, that every man may receive the things which he has done, in his
body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or evil.

Romans 14. 10. For we shall all appear before the judgment seat of Christ.

Math. 25. 34. Then the king shall say to those that shall be on his right
hand, come ye blessed of my Father, possess the kingdom prepared for you from
the laying of the foundations of the world.

The fowrth Aphorism.
NOw contrariwise (1) the reprobates or ofcastes In the ofcas^e^.
being conceived, borne, and brought up in sin, death, and the wrath of God
remaining upon them, (2) when as they go out of this world, do fall into another
gulf of destruction, they^ souls being thrown headlong into an^ everlasting
horror or trembling, (3) until that day, when as their body and soul being
joined together again, they shall go into that everlasting fire, prepared
for the Devil and his Angels.

Proves out of the word of God.
Psalm. 51. 7. Behold, in iniquity was I borne and in sin has my mother
conceived me.

Ioh. 3. 36. He that believes not the son, shall not see life, but the wrath
of God remains upon him.

Romans 5. 12. Wherefore like as by one man sin has entered into the world, and
by sin death: and so death has gonne over al men, in that al men have sinned.

Romans 7. 14. For we know that the law is spiritual: but I am carnal or
fleshly, soulde to be subject unto sin.

Ephesians. 2. 3. Amongst whom also we some times had our conversation in the
lusts of our flesh, doing the things that like^ (...) flesh and thoughts: and
were by na^^re the sons of wrath as well as others.

Luck. 16. 23. And being in hell, lifting up his eyes, when as he was in
torments, Abraham a far of, and Lazarus in his bosom:

24. Then he crying said: Father Abraham take pity upon me, and send Lazarus
that he may dip the typpe of his finger in water, and c^^le my tongue,
because I am tormented in this flame.

Math. 25. 41. Then he shall also say to those which shall be one his left
hand, ye

The fyfte Aphorism.
AFter these two ways then, and the same being clean diverse one from
another, shall the last end of the judgments of God, lay open his glory
The glory has of God.
unto all men: as who in his elect or chosen has declared him self to be
both most exceeding just and also most exceeding merciful: M^st exceeding just
and ^e^cifull.
to wit, just in that he has with greatest severity, or sharpness punished
all the sins of his chosen in the person of his son, and has not received
them into his fellowship, before that he has fullye and wholly made them
righteous and holy in him: and in this infinitely, or without end merciful,
that he has purposed to chose them freely in him self: and afterward as he
p^rposed, has freely adopted them in his son: to wit, by calling,
justifying and glorifying them, that faith coming in between, the which he
(being moved with like gentleness) has granted unto them. Now on the other
part, which concerns the reprobates or ofcastes, the^r corruption and
unbelief, with the fruits springing from the same, and the testimony or
vvytnesse of their own conscience shall so reprove them, that a beit they
wrestle never so much against it, yet God his exceeding Most ex^eeding just
justice in their just condempnation^ all men approving it, may, appear.

The seventh Chap.
What way this doctrine may profi^ablie be openly set forth and taught.

Having declared the sum of the doctrine it self, there remains that we
show what we think is espatiallye to be observed or marked in the Preaching
and also peculyar applying of it. For where as it seems to many to be so
hard, The cause why this most necessary and comfortable doctrine of God his
election seems to many to be so hard and strange.
that they flee from it as from a rock, this is to be attributed, or given
partly to the lewdness and arrogancy, or pride of men: partly also to the
lack of foresyght in some, which go about to open these secreetes
unadvisedly, and without any choice: and fynalli^, to the vnskylfulnesse of
some, which know not orderly to apply unto them selves the things, which
otherwise are faithfully and truly declared.

Therefore as concerning those first, which sin of malice, it belongs unto
God alone to amend their fault, which doubtless he has always done in his
time, and will likewise do hereafter in those, who me in the end he has
purposed to have mercy on: and as for the others which abide stubborn We
must not fear to utter God his truth, because ey^her of the number or
authority of the obstinate and stubborn.
and stiff in their wickedness, there is no cause why we should be so moved
either with their number or authority, that God his truth should be dyssembled.
Now as touching the others, these things I had, which I thought needeful to be
observed or taken heed of, in the preaching and setting forth of this mystery
or secreete.

First that, A choice in matter and words.
as in other points (1) so especially in this secreet of predestination or
foreordeining, they diligently take heed least in steed of the plain truth
of God they bring vain and curiouse Curious and vain questions in this
doctrine especially to be avoided.
speculations, which they must needs do, who, to make these hidden judgments
of God to agree with man's brain, do not only distinguishe or make a
diff^rence between the foreknowledge and the purpose of God, as it is
altogether needful for to do, but do also separate or sever them: or else
do imagine a naked and idle permission or sufferaunce: or else make a double
purpose of God: from which errors, when as they must n^edes fall into other
endless and fond errors, they are partly constrained to deny such things
as do wholly cleave fast together, partly also they do invent both folishe
and many dark distinctions or differences, in the which the farther they wade,
the more do they entangle them selves, so that they can never get out of these
Labyrinthes or ma^ees. These therefore must be dilygentlie taken heed of, in
this argument espetially, than the which none other is more meet in the
Churchof God, to be purelye and sincerelye, Such mane^ of speeches as are
unusual in the scriptures, ought as^ muchas ma^e be, to be refrained from.
or vncorruptlye taught. Moreover, that there be no kinds of speaking, so
far as may be, (for, for teaching sake, we may sometimes godly and
relygiously adventure some thing) used, which are strange to the scriptures,
and that such as come to hand in the word of God be expounded with an apt
interpretation, lest some ignorant person take any occasion of offense.

Also (2) there must be great regard had of the Auditors or hearers, A
choice in ^ersons.
where in again we must make a difference between the craftye and the
simple, between those that are wilfully ignorant, and them that are taken
with simple ignorance, and such as is usual unto man. (3) For unto the one
the Lord is woonte plainly to denounce or threaten the judgment of his
Father, (4) and the other we must lead by little and little unto the knowledge
of the truth. This also in this case must be looked unto, that we have not so
much regard of the weak, that whylest we have care of them we take no keep
of others: of which wisdom we see notable examples in Paul, especially in
the Epistle to the Romans, Chap. 9. 10. 11. 14. and. 15.

Also that, unless some very great reason let them, they go up from the
lowest degrees unto the ^yghest, a^ Paul does in the Epistle to the Romans,
(which is the Method or orderly manner of teaching of all Divinity) he
proceeds from the law to forgiveness of sins, and from thence by little
and little, unto the highest degree: or that they stay in that which shall
be most fyttest for the place of Scripture, which they have taken in hand
to handle, rather then to come down from the highest degree unto the lowest.
For the brightness of God his Majesty suddenly offered, is wont mightily
to stryke the eyes, in so much that afterward they are dymme in beholdinge
other things, unless they have been used a long season, and oftentimes to
behold that light. How vve^ must go forevvard.


Moreover, whether they go up from the lowest vpwardes, or contrariwise come
down from the highest downewardes, you must take heed that you r^nne not out
from one extreme unto the other, The middle causes are
ouerpassing the mids, not to be without great confideration ouerpassed.
as for example from purpose to salvation, and much more from salvation to
purpose, also from purpose to dampnation, or contrariwise, over hipp^^ ye
nearer causes of the judgment of God: (5) unless peradventure yen have to ^oo
with open dispysers of God, whom it avails not once to teach, sau^ that they
may be strooken with the judgment of God, that there can be no just
suspicion of offense.

Furthermore, this doctrine How this doctrine is to be applied.
must never be in such sort set forth, that it be applied to any person
severally, albeit some be otherwise, either to be comforten or rebuked then
othersome, (6) unless peradventure some Prophet of God be admonished by some
peculyar word from God: which notwithstanding is not rashly to be believed,
for as much as it comes to pass out of order, or not ordinarily.

But in visityng the sick, and in famylyar admonitions, it seems to be the
duty of the Minister, How the Ministers must deal with troubled
conscience.
so far as he may, to comfort the conscience of the ^^oubled, with the
declaration of elec^ion: and contrary wise to strike those that are obstinatly
wicked and disobe^ient with that fearful judgment of God, but yet so that
they keep some measure, and re^rayne from that last sen^ence whereunto is
added no condition. For this jurisdiction pertayneth unto God alone.

Proue^ out of the word of God.
Math. 28. 18. Go therefore and teach

20. Teaching them to keep all those things, which I have commanded you.

2. Tim 2. 23. Foolish and unlearned questions put away, knowing that they
breed stri^es.

2. Tim. 2. 15. Study to show thy

Math. 25. In the whole chapter.

Ioh. 8. 44. You are of your Father the Devil, and therefore you wyllful^ fill
the lusts of your Father.

Ioh. 9. 41. If you were blind yo^ should have no sin, but now you say, we
see, and therefore your sin remains

Ioh. 10. 26. But ye believe not, for ye^ are not of my Sheep, as I have told
you.

Luke 20. 46. Be ware of the Scribes which desire to goo in long ^o^es, and
long greetyngs in the markets, and the highest seats in the Synog^es, and the
chief roumes at feasts.

47. Which deuowre widows houses, and use long prayers for a show: these
shall receive the greater judgment.

Math. 23. 38. Behold your house is le^te unto you desolate.

1. Cor. 3. 2. I have given you mylcke to drinck, and not strong meat, for ye
were not yet able to bear it, neither yet now are ye able.

Romans 14. 1. Him that is weak in the ^ayth, receive unto you, but not for
controversies of disputations.

Ioh. 8. 33. They answered him, we Abraham, and were never bond to any man,
how say thou then that we shall be made free.

34 Jesus answered them, verily, verily I say unto you, he that commiteth
sin, is the servant of Sin.

Phyllyp. 3. 2. Beware of dogs, beware of evil workmen, beware of con^ysion.

1 Timothy 6. 3. 4. If any man teach contrary doctrine, and consents not to the
wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is
according unto godlynes, he is puffed up, knowing nothing, etc.

Gal. 5. 12. I would to God also that

2. Tim. 4. 14. Alexander the copper smith has done me much harm: the Lord
reward him according to his deeds.

Ioh. 6. 64. But there are some of you from the beginning, who they were which
believed not, and who should be^ tray him.

Ioh. 8. 24. Therefore I said unto yo^ that you should dye in your sins. For
unless ye believe that I am he, you sha^ die in your sins.

The eight Chap.
How every several person may apply with some profit this general
doctrine to himself.

The first Aphorism^.
THey that teach that man his salvation is grounded upon vvorkes^ either
wholy, or in any part, (1) it is manifest that they do utterly overthrow
the gospel of God. The doctrine of faith is vnp^ofitable if it be separated
from ^lection.
But they that teach free justification or righteous making by faith, they
stay upon a sure foundation, (2) but yet in such sort that they ^aie under
faith the everlasting purpose of God, wherein finally both Christ him self.
(3) and also the Apostle following his steps, does rest and stay. (4) For
when as perceiueraunce or continuance of faith is required unto salvation, to
what purpose have I faith, (5) if I be not certain of the gift of
perceiueraunce or continuance to the end? And yet is there no need to fear
least this doctrine should make us negligent and dissolute or careless. (6)
For this peace of conscience, whereof we speak, does greatly differ from
foolish security or carelessness, peace of conscience depends upon
predestination.
and he that is the son of God, (7) for as much as he is led by the spirit
of God, will never take occasion of slothfulness, by the consideration of
God his benefits. Therefore if this doctrine bring but this one fruit, that
by the aid thereof we may learn to strengththen our faith against all
things that happen, it is manifest rhat the chief ground of our salvation is
overthrown by them, which because they measure God after the small measure of
their brain, do oppugn or reason against this Article of Religion.

Proves out of the word of God.
Gal 2. 21. I do not make void the grace of God: for if righteousness be by
the law, then has Christ dyed without cause.

Romans 11. 6. And if it be of grace, it is not now of works: or else were grace
no more grace; but if it be of works, it is no more grace: for else were work
no work.

Ioh. 6. 44. No man can come unto me, unless my father, which sent me draw
him: and I wylll raise him up at the last day.

45. It is written in the Prophets, And they shall be all taught of God,
whosneuer therefore has beard of my Father, and has learned, comes unto me.

Romans 8. 29. For whom he has foreknowen, those has he foreordeyned, that
they might be made like unto the image of his son, that he might be the
first borne amongst many brethren.

30. And whom he has foreordeined those also has he called, etc.

Look the same Epistle Chap. 9. 10. and. 11.

1. Cor. 2. 10. But God has reveled, or opened those things unto us by his
spirit. For the spirit searches al things even the depthes of God.

Ephesians. 1. 4. As he chose us in him before the foundations of the world were
laid, that we might be holy and unblameable before him by love.

5. Who foreordeyned us whom he would chose unto his sons through Jesus
Christ in him self, according to the good pleasure of his will.

2. Tim. 1. 1. According unto the promise of life which is in Christ Jesus.

9. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to
our works, but according unto his purpose and grace, which was given us in
Christ before the times of the world.

1. Pet. 1. 2. Chosen according to the ^oreknowledge of God the Father vnt^
sanctification of the spirit, etc.

Mat. 10. 22. And ye shall be hated o^ all men for my names sake, but he tha^
abides unto the end, shall be saved.

Luke 21. 19. But possess your souls by your patience.

Romans 2. 7. To them that continue, glory and honor, and immortallitie of well
doing, that is, to them that seek everlasting life.

Ioh. 6. 37. Whatsoever my Father gives me, comes unto me: and him that
commeeh unto me, do I not cast forth.

39. This is the will of my Father, that whatsoever he has given me, I should
lose nothing of it.

Ioh. 10. 28. I give unto them everlasting life, and they shall never perish:
neither shall any pluck them out of my hand, etc.

Act. 13. 48. They believed, as many as were ordained unto everlasting life.

Romans 8. 30. Whom he has iustif^ed, those also has be gloryfied.

39. No thing created can separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord.

2. Tim. 2. 19. But the foundation of God remains sure, having this seal,
the Lord knows who are his.

^. Ioh. 2. 19. They went out from us. but they were none of us: for if they
had been of us, they would doubtless have tarried with us.

Romans 5. 1. Being therefore made righteouse

5. And hope does not make ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in
our hearts, by the holy ghost, which is given unto us.

Math. 5. 2. Be glad and rejoice, because your reward is great in heaven.

Romans 8. 14. For as many as are led

The second Aphorism.
Now this is the way to apply this doctrine. The works of God, even the
very last of them, are such, that a man can not judge of them, but after two
sorts, to wit, either after they are paste, or else by the disposition of the
second causes, which by long use he has known to portende or give a token
of some certain end, as is wont to come to pass in things that fall out
naturally, in which notwithstanding^ men are vvonderfulle dymme sighted.
Therefore in this point, that is of all other most hard, it is no marvel
though the judgment of man be driven into such a narrow strait, ^. Cor. 2.
14.
that he cannot but in this order understand what is determined of him in
the secre^te counsel of God. And now because this whole judgment consists,
or stands in the observation, and marking of those causes, which do exceed
or pass all power of nature, we must needs flee some vvhither else, to
vvyt^ to the sentence of God set forth in his word, which whereas it is in
infinite points, more certain then all man his conjectures or gesses, it
does no doubt bring us also a more certain judgment.

(1) The Scripture therefore bears witness, How a sure witness of our
election may be had.
that whomesoeuer God has Predestinate or foreordained in his eternal
purpose, to adopte or choose unto sons through Jesus Christ in him self, the
same also at the time appointed are so effectually called, that they hear and
embrace the voice of the caller: by which faith being made righteous and holy
in Christ, (2)they must also necessarily be glorified.

VVylt thou therefore who so ever thou art, be assured of thy Predestination or
foreordaining, and so consequently of salvation which thou look for,
against all the assaults of Satan: be assured, I say, not with doubtful
conjectures, and such as are gathered out of man his brain, may with such
as are no less certain and sure, than if thou had gone up into heaven
it self, and understood that secreet decree from the very mouth of God? Tak^
dilligent heed that thou begin not a^ that highest degree: for else it will
come to pass, that thou vvilt not be able to abide the exceeding great
brightness of God. Begin therefore at the lowest degrees, (3) and when thou
hear the voice of God soundinge in thine ears and mind, By what ^okens
true faith may be known.
which calls thee unto Christ the only mediator, consider by little and
little, and search diligently, (4) whether thou be justified and sanctified,
that is, made righteous and holy, by faith in Christ, for these are the
effects by the which faith, the very cause of the^ in deed is known. And
this thou shall know, The effects of the holy ghost in the elect.
(5) partly by the spirit of adoption crying within: Abba, Father: (6)
partly also by the power and vvorking of the same spirit in thy self:
namely if thou feel, and also indeed show, that although sin do dwell in
thee, yet it does not reign in thee. For why? Is not the holy ghost he,
which makes that we do not purposelie let lose all the raines unto
ungodly and wicked lusts, as they use to do whose eyes the Prince of this
world has blinded? for else who moves us unto prayer, albeit being never
so cold and lyther? Who stirs up in us those unspeakable sighs and
gronings? (7) who after that we have sinned, and that sometimes vvittinglie
and willingly, engendereth in us that hatred of the sin that we have
committed, yea and that not for fear of punishment, but because that we have
offended our most merciful Father. (8) Who, I say, bears us witness,
that our sighinges are heard, and moves us hereunto, that we dare boldly
call God, our God, and also Father, even after that we have offended him? (9)
Is it not, I pray you that spirit, whom we have freely received, The
efficacy or virtue of our calling is understood by faith, and by our calling,
our predestination, or foreordaining.
being freely given for a sure pledge of our adoption? Now if we may gather
faith by these effects, it remains that we were called and drawn
effectually, and by this calling again, the which we have showed to be
proper unto the sons of God, is that which we seek for thoroughly
understood, to wit, that we are therefore given unto the Son, because in the
^uerlasting counsel of God^ which he has purposed in him self, we were
predestined or foreordained, whom he would adopt in his Son. (10)
Whereof finally ensues, when as we are predestinate or foreordained by that
most steadfast will of God, which is grounded only upon it self, (11) and
that no man can pluck us out of the hand of his son, and that continuance
in faith is necessary unto salvation, that the expectation or hope of our
continuance, and so consequently of salvation There is certain hope in the
chosen of continuance and salvation.
is also certain, so that it is ungodliness any more to doubt of it.

So far of therefore is it, that this doctrine should make us slothful and
careless, The doctrine of predestination over throvveth vain secu^itie or
carelessness.
(12) that contrarily this alone does open an entry unto us, to search the
very depthes of God by his spirit, and also to understand them: as the
Apostle does plainly witness, that when as we know them (13) (and we
know them only but in part, so long as we live here,) (14) so that we
must fight daily against distrust, with heavenly armor) (15) we may
learn, not to behave our selves negligentlie, but to continue stoutly, to
honor him, to love, fear, and call upon him, (16) so that we may daily
more and more, as touching us, as Peter says, Make our calling and election
sure. Only election mynistreth sur^ comfort.
And moreover, how shall he abide sure and steadfast against so many noisome
temptacions, within and without and against so many (as the world terms
them) assaults of Fortune, which has not first assuredly grounded in his
mind, that which is most true, to vvyt, that God according to his good
pleasure, does all things, whatsoever they be, and what instruments so
ever he use, to the profit of those that are his, amongst whose number he
must be reckoned, which is set in this danger?

Proves out of the word of God.
Romans 8. 29. For whom he has fore^

30. And whom he has forehordeined, those also has he called: an whom he
has called those also has he justified, or made righteous: and whom he has
justified, those also has he glorified.

Ephesians. 1. 4. As he has chosen us in him before the foundations of the world
were laid, that we should be holy and un blameable before him through love.

5. Who has foreordeined us whom he would adopt or chose unto his sons
through Christ in him self, according to the good pleasure of his will.

9. The mystery or secreete of his will being opened unto us, according unto his
free good will which he had purposed in him self.

Ioh. 10. 27. My sheep hear my voice, and I know they follow me.

Romans 5. 2. Through whom also by ^aith we had this entry into this grace, ^y
which we stand and glory under the hope of the glory of God.

Romans 8. 38. For I am persuaded, that neither death nor life, neither Angels
^or principalities, neither powers, neither things present, nor things to come.

39. Neither height nor depth, neither any other thing creat^d can separate us
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

^. Cor. 2. 10. But God has revealed or op^ned them unto us by his spirit. For
the spirit searches all things, even the depthes of God.

1. John. 3. 24. He tht keeps his commandments, dwells in him, and h^
in him: And by this do we know that he dwells in us, towyt, by his spirit
which he has given us.

Psalm. 95. 7. 8. To day if ye will hear Meriba, as in the day of Massa in the
wilderness.

Ioh. 10. 27. My ^heepe hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me.

2. Cor. 13. 5. Try your selves, whe^ther you be in faith or no, prove your
selves, Whether you know your sel^es or no, to wit, Jesus Christ to be in you?

Gal. 4. 6. Because you are the sons of God, God has sent forth the Spirit
of his son into your hearts, crying Abba, Father.

1. Ioh. 3. 24. He that keeps, his commandments, dwells in him, and he
in him: and by this do we know that he dwells in us, to wit, by the spyryt
which he has given us.

1. Cor. 2. 10. But unto us has God reveled or opened them by his spirit. For
the spirit searches al things, even the very depthes of God, etc.

Romans 6. All most in the whole Chapter.

1. John. 3. 9. Whosoever is borne of God, does not commytte sin? because
his seed abides in him, neither can he sin, because that he is borne of God.

Romans 6. 11. Likewise gather ye also, that ye your selves are both dead unto
s^nne and do also live unto God through Christ Jesus our Lord.

12. Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that you should obey
sin in the lusts of the body.

Ephesians. 4. 29. Let no filthy speech come forth of your mouth, but if any be
profitable for the use of edifying, that it may mynyster grace unto the
hearers.

30. And do ye not make sad that holy spirit of God, by which ye are
sealed unto the day of redemption.

Romans 8. 26. Likewise the spyrite also helps our infirmyties or we
a^^enesses: for we know not what to pray as we ought: but the spyrite it
self ma^eth request for us, with sighs that can not be expressed.

Romans 7. 24. Wretch that I am,

Romans 8. 15. For ye have not received have received the spyrite of adoption,
through whom we cry, Abba, Father.

16. Which very spirit bears witness together with our spirit, that we
are the sons of God.

Romans 8. 27. But he that searches the hearts, knows what is the meaning of
the spirit, because that he makes request for the Saints, according to the
will of God.

Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom ye also have hoped, having heard the word of truth, etc.

14. Which is the earnest of our inheritance, etc.

Ephesians. 4. 30. And make not sad that holy spirit of God, by whom you are
sealed unto the day of redemption.

2. Cor. 1. 22. Who also has sealed us, and has given the earnest of the
spirit in our hearts.

Romans 11. 29. For the gift and calling of God are such, that he can not repent
him of them.

Hebr. 6. 17. Wherein God wylling abundauntly to show unto the heyre^ of
promise the v^chaungeablenesse of his counsel, bound him self by an oath.

2. Tim. 2. 19. But the foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, The
Lord knows who are his, And, let every one that names the name of of Christ
depart from vnrightousnesse.

Romans 8. 38. For I am persuaded, that

39. Neither height, nor depth, neither any thing created can separate us from
the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Ioh. 3. 33. He that receives his witness, has sealed that God is true.

Romans 4. 20. But he was made strong by faith, giving the glory unto God.

21. And being fully persuaded, that h^ was also able to do that which he had
promised.

Romans 5. 5. Hope makes not a shamed, because the love of God is shed abroad
in our^ hearts by the holy ghost which is given us.

Heb. 4. 16. Let us therefore boldly approach unto the throne of grace, that we
may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.

1. Cor. 1. 9. God is faithful, by whom ye are called into the fellowshippe
of his son Jesus Christ our Lord.

1. These. 5. 24. He is faithful which has called you, who also will bring it
to pass.

Heb. 10. 22. Let us approach with a true heart, and certain persuasion of
faith, with pure hearts from an evil conscience.

23. And having our body washed with pure water, let us hold fast the
confession of faith, not wavering: for he is faithful which has promised.

1. Cor. 2. 10. But God has revealed or opened them unto us by his spirit.
For the spirit searches all things, even the very depthes of God.

11. For who has known the things that are of man, save the spirit of man
which is in him? So also no man has known the things that are of God, save
the spirit of God.

12. Now we have not received the spirit of the world, etc.

Romans 8. 16. Which self same spirit bears witness together with our
spyrite, that we are the Sons of God.

1. Ioh. 3. 24. He that keeps his commandments, dwells in him, and he in
him: and hereby do we know that he dwells in us, to wit, by the spirit,
which he has given unto us.

1. Cor. 13. 9. For we know but in part,

1. Tim. 6. 12. Fight the notable fight of

Gal. 5. 17. The flesh lusts against the spyrite, and the spyrite against
the flesh: and these are contrary one to another, that you do not whatsoever
ye will.

Romans 6. ^ What shall we say then? may be more plenteous?

Hebr. 10. 23. Let us hold fast the con^ession of faith not wavering, (for he
is faithful which has promised.)

24. And let us consider one another, to prouooke one another unto love, and
unto good works.

Iam. 3. 18. The fruit of righteousness is sown with peace to the
peacemakers.

2. Pet. 1. 10. Wherefore brethren, study rather to make your calling and
election sure. For if ye do these things, ye shall never fall.

Romans 8. 28. And we know that unto them that love God^ all things work
together for the best: even to them that are called of his purpose.

31. What shall we say then unto these things? if God be with us, who can be
against us?

Job. 13. 15. Although he ^yll me; yet will I trust in him, not withstanding,
I will reprove my ways in his sight.

Romans 5. 3. And not this only, but we do also rejoice in troubles, knowing
that trouble works patience.

1. These. 3. 3. That no man be moved with these troubles. For ye know that we
are appointed thereunto.

1. Pet. 4. 19. Therefore they which are afflicted or troubled by the will of
God^ let them commend their souls unto him in well doing, as unto a
faithful creator.

Iam. 1. 2. Br^thren accoumpt it for exceeding great joy, as often as ye fall
into sundry temptations.

Romans 8. 16. Which self same spyrite

Romans 8. 38. For I am persuaded, that neither death nor life, neither Angels
nor principalyties, nor power, neither things present, nor things to come,

39. Neither heyghte nor depth, nor any thing created can separat us from the
love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

The third Aphorism^.
Now as touchi^g the other part, in as much as the purpose of electing or
chosing can not come into any ma^^ his mind, but therewith the contrary o^ it,
and that in like degree, must needs run in his thought, that in the mean
season I say nothing of that which is manifest, The doc^^rine of reprobation
or ofcasting is not to be buried.
to vvyt, that these two are very oftentimes knitte together in the word of
God, it appears (I think) that they do great wrong unto the spi^ite of God,
which would have this part buried, as curious or not necessary. This therefore
is also to be considred, Reprobatio^ or ofcasting vvarelie to be considered.
but yet such moderation being used, that the depth of God his judgments may
put a byt into man his curiosity: and in such finally, Reprobatio^ or
ofcasting neither can or ought to be particularly applied, not adding any
condition.
that it be not applied priuatlie, either to any man, or unto any certain
multitude. For in this point it does also differ from election, that
election, as we have showed before, is revealed or opened, unto us by the
spirit of God, not in others, whose heart we can not see, but in our selves:
and reprobation A difference betvveene election and reprobation.
or ofcasting, is alwaie for the most part hidden from men, unless it be
opened by God out of order, or more then ordinarily. For who knows,
whether God ^aue d^termined (1) at the very last moment of his life to have
mercy on him, which has spent all his whole life ^n wickedness and
sin? And yet there is no cause why this hope should strength then any man
in his wickedness, when as I speak of those things which we ought to
observe and mark in others, and such examples of God his goodness are but
rare or seldom, and no wise man will promise him self upon vain security
or reachlesnes, that which is not in our hand. (2) It is therefore suffycient
that we know generally that there are certain vessels prepared to
destruction, (3) which for as much as God has not showed unto us, We must
labor to win allmen.
we ought dilligentlie according to our power, to call every one to
salvation, both with example of life, and also with words, yea even those of
whom we are almost past hope, when as we behold their naughty acts.

Proves out of the word of God.
Luke 23. 43. Jesus said unto him, be^

Romans 9. 21. Has not the potter power^ over the clay, to make of the same
lump^ one vessel unto honor, and an ^ther unto dishonor.

2. Tim. 2. 20. Furthermore in a great house not only vessels of gold and
silver, but also of earth and wood, and some for honor and some for dishonor.

Math. 5. 16, Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works and glorify your Father which is in heaven.

1. Cor. 9. 22. I became to the weak as one that was weak, that I might
win the weak. I became all unto al, that I might by all means save some.

2. Tim. 2. 25. With gentleness teaching them which are of a contrary mind,
etc.

1. Pet. 2. 12. And have your conversation honest among the Gentyles: that they
which speak against you as evil (...), may by your good works which they
shall see, gloryf^e God in the day of ^^utation.

The fowrth Aphorism.
THis mean if we keep, we also shall receive much fruit by this doctrine.
Of the co^^sideration of reprob^tion or ofcasting h^militie is learned.
For (1) first by the knowledge thereof we shall learn willingly to yield
our neck under the Majesty of God, that the more we shall fear and reverence
him, the more we may labor to make sure in us the vvytnesse of our election
in Christ. It causes the goodness of ^od to be the better vnderstood^ of the
chosen^
(2) Secondly, when as we shall ^^ygentlie consider the difference of ^od
his mercy made between men otherwise subject unto the like curse, it can not
be chosen, but that we must much more vvyllinglie acknowledge and embrace
that singular goodness of God, than if we should make this grace of his
common unto all men, or should seek the cause of this inequalytie of grace in
men only. The con^ideration of reprobation or ofcasting engenders a godly
carfulness in the chosen.
Furthermore, when as we know this gift of faith to be special ( That is
such as is not given genera^lie unto all, but particularly to some) sha^ we
not take it more cheerefullie when it is offered, and be much more careful
for the increase of it, than if vvit^ many we should surmise it, to be i^
all men's power, as often as they vvy^ repent, because God, as they say, vvy
have all men saved, and will not the death of a sinner? It strengthens them
against all offenses.
Finally when as we see the doctrine of the gospel, not only to be
despised almost of the whole world, but also to be most cruelly persecuted,
when as we behold the notable treachery and falling away of so^many men,
what shall better strengththen us, then if we make our sure reckoning that
nothing comes to pass at all adventures, that God knows those that are
his, and that those that do these things, unless it be given to them to
repent, are they which are ordained, not by chance, but by the assured and
everlasting counsel of God, in whom as in looking glasses, the just wrath
and power of God should appear.

Proves out of the word of God.
Philip. 2. 12. Wherefore my beloved,

1, Pet. 1. 17. With fear be y^e conuersaunt in the time of your dwelling
here.

Romans 11. 20. Well, through unbelief they are broken of, and thou stand by
says, be not high minded, but fear.

Romans 9. 23. And that he might make

The fifth Aphorism.
YEt a man can never speak so fytly of these things, but that man his reason
will pratle against it, yea, and also will call the Lord him self as the
chief Author of all, into accoumpts for it. But albeit the Devil chafe, and
all the wicked kick against the prick, (1) yet their own conscience shall
reprove them, and condemn them: (2) But our mind being strengthened with the
mercy of God^ shall acquit us in that day of Christ, t^ whom with the
Father and the hol^ ghost, be given glory, praise and honor for ever. Amen.

Proves out of the word of God.
Romans 2. 15. As they which show the

1. Pet. 3. 21. To the which also the figure of Baptism agreeing, saves us
also: (not the putting away of the fylth of the flesh, but in that a good
conscience makes request unto God) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ.

FINIS.
For the stopping of the mouths of the s^landerous, as also for the further
instructing of the ignorant, in this both necessary and comfortable doctrine
of God his election, I have thought good here to set down a short sum of
the whole matter, contained in certain brief and plain Aphorisms,
Translated out of a learned Treatise of Theodorus Beza, against Castalion.
GOD works effectually,

This counsel does God execus^ (...) fulfill at certain moments of times: the
quallyties of things foreseen an^^ foreknowen, and dr^^^g God to take this or
that counsel, should prescribe or appoint a rule to the will of God.



Pallas is feigned of the Poet to turn away Pandarus Dart from Menelaus breast
unto his nether parts fenced with his belte: but has a workinge and
effectual strength in all things, which Paul has declared by this word,
(...), Energein which signif^eth to work effectually.

Efficacy or strenght.
is not declared any natural power given by God the cr^atour, to the things
he has created, that they should do this or that ^^ but by this word is
understand the power of God, which he has in him self to do all things.

This universal particle, All, in the Paul, can by no manner of exception at
all be restreyned, but that God in that point must be made to be ^dle,
according to the opinion of Epy^urus. And if we shall say that any thing is
done against his will he shall be robbed of his infinite, or endless power.

The conclusion therefore stands,

Yet of these things does there fol^owe Blasphemies that we are most falsely
charged vvithal, the which notvvithsta^ding cannot any way be truly proved
to grovve of our doctrine.
to ^^yt, either that God is the Author of ^^^ne, either is delyted with
iniquity, either wylleth iniquity: or that Satan (...) men in doing of evil,
do obey God, (...), in that they do evil, they do that that God will, and
therefore are without blame. Let all such blasphemies ^^ these, be most ^arre,
not only from o^^ tounges, but also from our cogitation or thougthes.

Stoikes did suppose, but freely and mightylye making moving, and guiding them,
as it pleased him.



The instruments which are

Instruments endued with reason

Such things a^ are of this sort, efficient or working causes.





motion and not simply, as the hammer or Are in the hand of the Smith.

Yea, for this double respect, a

Now let us apply these things unto

Whatsoever God does is good, good, no evil can proc^^. But he dot^ all
things. All things therefore ar^ good, so far forth as they are done by
God. And that difference of good and evil, has only place in the
instruments, and in those of whom we have spoken in the thyrteenth
proposition.





Now he so works by those instruments,

For as often as one evil man sins

But so often as wicked men do hurt strengthens his own, and (...) by the
open enemies of his Church makes his Church glorious.

A n^cess^ry note to be marked.
For all be it what soever God works by the wicked (...) good, yet what
soever the wicked work is evil.



^niust work of man.

Yet God works otherwise by the

Augustine, therefore do we s^atly refuse it.



And God works in respe^^^e of

Neither is this consequence or suffers them, not because he simplye aloweth
of them, but after a certain sort, for he aloweth them, so far as he
suffers them, even so far as they are no sins, as we said even now: But
he disaloweth and punishes them, so far as he has respect or looks unto
the evil instruments, whose actions they are.

These are Augustines words, Enchirid. ad Laurent. Cap. ^00. Calu. instit.
lib. 1. Cap. 18. Sec. 3.
Great are the works of the Lord, for they are excellent in all his vvylles,
so that after a wonderful and unspeakable manner that comes not to pass
besides his will, which is done against his will: because it should not come
to pass if he would not suffer it: and doubtless he suffers it not
vnwylling, but vvylling. The same Augustine, Lib. 5. Contr. Julian. Cap. 3.
When as he had of purpose disputed against them which make an idle
foreknowledge or suffera^ce, at length he bursteth forth into these wordes^ We
doubtless ( says he) if we suffer those over whom we have power, to do
wickedness before our eyes, shall be guilty with them. But how innumerable
things does he suffer (speaking of God) To be done before his eyes, which
doubtless if he vvoulde not, ^e would by no means suffer? And yet he is both
just and good.

The whole Scripture bears witness, Genesis 27 20. God is said quickly to have
brought the pray unto Jacob his hands. And ^xod. 21 ^3. As often as murder
is committed at unawares, the Lord, says Moses, caused him to come into
thine hands. The self same thing is taught ^s concerning the falling out of
Lottes, Proverb. 16. 33. As concerning all the ^ounselles of men, Dan. 4. 32.
Of the falling of Sparrowes, Math. 10. 29. To be short, of all things
without exception, Ephe. 1. 11.

And that the will of God, yea and ^teppe in, when as he works by the
wicked, may plainly appear almost i^ every leaf of the scripture. So is ^e
sai^ to have sent Joseph into Egypt. Genesis 45^ 8. So he stirred up Pharao to
declare hi^ power in him. Exodus 4. 21. So he gau^ David his wives unto his
son Absalom, 2. Sam. 12. 11. So he moved the heart of David to number the
people, 2. Sam. 24. 1. So he commanded Semei to curse David, 2. Sam. 16. 10.
So David calls his enemies the sword and hand of the Lord, Psalm. 17. 13. 14.
So the Lord calls the Medes and Persians his sanctified, and the
instruments of his wrath, Esa. 10. 5. and, 13. 6. So he calls the falling
away of the ten Tribes his work, 2. Paralip. 11. 4. So Job says, the Lord
geneth, and the Lord has taken away, Job. 1. 21. So the King of Babylon is
compared unto an Are and a Saw, to wit, because the Lord executed or brought
to pass his work by him, thinking on no such thing, Esa. 10. 1^. So the godly
are afflicted or troubled, by the will and Predestination, or foreordayning of
God, Romans 8. 29. and. 1 Pet. 3. 17. and. 4. 19 So there is no evil in the
City w^^ch the Lord has not done, Amos. 3. 6. and Ierem. Lament. 3. 37. 38.
Who is ^he then, (^ayeth he) which has said, and it comes to pass, and the
Lord (...) not commanded? out of the mouth of the Lord proceeds there not
good and evil.

Go to then, let for example be Judas, the Jews, Pylate, and Herod. This
deed ( we speak of) is, the death of the ^^nne of God, full of cruelty and
re^^^che. In this fact, if we deny the everlasting counsel of God to have
stepp^d in, we shall be convinced or proved to speak false by infinite
testymonies of the Scripture. For sure it is, that we were not chosen before
the foundations of the world were laid, but only in him appointed to dye,
Ephesians. 1^ 4^ and. 1. Peter. 1. 20. Wherefore he is also called the Lamb slain
from the beginning of the world, Apoc. 13. 8. T^wyt, not only by the fore
knowledge but especially by the determined counsel of God, in so much that
Herod and Pylate, alt^ough thinkyng of no such thing, yet therefore came
togeather^ to fulfill such things as the hand and counsel of the Lord had
decreede to be done, Act. 4. 28. Therefore he could not be taken but at his
hour, John. 7. 30. and 8. 29: and. 12 27. For he was delivered by the
determined counsel o^ God, and decree before going, Act. 2. 29^ And was
wounded of God for our iniquityes, Esai. 53. 5. For God is he who spared not
his own son, but gave him for us all. Romans 8. 32. Therefore if there were but
this one example of God his everlasting providence, which never is idle, it
were abundantly enough to suffice to convince or reprove al those which falsely
cry out, that God is made the Author of sin, when as we say that nothing
comes to pass, but by the righteous will of God.

And yet do we not therefore excuse, Ephesians. 2. 2.) Even then also when as the
Lord most effectually, or strongly, and most justly brings his work to
pass, both by Satan him self, and also by the bond slaves of Satan, 2. Tim.
2. 26. Wherefore we do every where acknowledge and reverence the goodness
and judgments of God, albeit the reason of them many times do not to us
appear. And we condemn both the instruments which are ^uyll, and also
naughty and wicked actions, to wit, all the counsels and subtilties of Satan:
the envy of Iosephes brethren, and the selling of their brother: the
ungodliness and hardness of Pharao: Absalom his mind bent to kill his Father,
and his detestable incest: the unadvisedness also of David him self: the
wickedness of Semei: the malice and treachery of David his enemies: the
wicked falling away of Ier^boam, and the ten Trybes: the rauennie of the
Chaldeans: the insatiable covetousness, incredible Leacherie, intolerable
arrogancy of the Babylonians? to be short, all the wicked counselles, and most
savage cruelt^e of the ungodly against the Church.

Nehem. 9. 37. and Job 34. 30. It is he that causes to err, Esa. 63. 17.
Because he mingleth among them the spyrite of erro^r, Esai. 19^ 14. It is he
which hardens and turns the hearts which blinds the eyes, which makes
druncke with the wine of gyddinesse, Exodus 4. 21. and 7. 3. and. 9. 12. and.
10. 1. and. 11. 10. and 14. 4. Deuteronomy. 2 29. Ios. 11. 20. and. 1. Sam 2. 2, and.
2. Paral. 22. 7. Psalm. 105. 25. It is h^^ that punishes his contempt, giving
men up into a reprobate mind, Romans 1. 28. And sending the strength of ^rrour to
believe a lie, 2. These. 2. 11. It is he which disceaueth Prophets, Ezech. 14.
9. Finally, it is he that sends also evil spyrites, giving them
commandment to hurt, and granting them also efficacy or power to disceaue,
as. 1. King. 22. 22. 23. and. 2. Chro. 18. 21. 22. Job. 1. 12. and. 2. 16.

These things being thus manifest by these so plain testimonies, let the
Pellagians, Freewyllians, Annabaptystes, Papists, and the rest of that fylthie
rabble, cry out if they list, till they wax hoarse, and their hearts ache
again, that we make God the Author of sin, from which blasphemy we are
as far, as they are void of Christian charity, in so judging of us,
ascribyng unto God his providence the whole swinge in all things, which as
they proceed from him (as has been showed before) are very good, albeit in
respect of the instruments, whereby it pleases him in justice sometime to
work by, they may be very evil.

FINIS.
Notes appertayning to the matter of Election, gathered by the godly and
learned Father. ^. Fox.
AS touching the doctrine of Election, three things must be considered.

First, what Gods election

Secondly, how Gods election proceeds

Thyrdly, to whom Gods election pertayneth, and how a man may be

Between Predestination and election, this difference there is. Difference
betvveene predestination and Election.
Predestination is as well to the reprobate, as to the elect: Election only
pertayneth to them that are saved.

Predestination, Definition of predestination.
in that it respects the reprobates, is called reprobation^ in that it
respects the saved, is called election, and is thus defined.

Predestination is the eternal decreeme^t of God, purposed before in himself,
what shall befall on al men, either, to sal^ation or dam^ation.

Election is the fr^e mercy and grace of God in his own will, Election
defined.
through faith in Christ his son, chosing and preferring to life, such as
pleases him.

In this definition of election, first goes before the mercy and grace of God,
as the causes thereof, whereby are excluded all works of the law, and merytes
of deserving, whether they go before faith, The parts of defi^^tion examined.
or come after. So was Jacob chosen and Esau refused, before either of them
began to work, etc.

Secondly, in that this mercy and grace Mercy and grace.
of God in this definition, is said to be free, thereby is to be noted, the
proceeding and working of God, Free mercy and grace.
not to be bound to any ordinary place, or to any succession of chair, not
to state, and dignitye of person, nor to worthynesse of blood, etc. But all
goes by the mere will of his own purpose, As it is written: Spiritus vbi
vult spirat, etc. And thus was the outward race, and stock of Abraham after
the flesh refused. Which ^^^med to have the preeminence. and their ^^^de after
the spyrite raised ^p to Abraham of the stones, that is, of (...) Gentiles. So
was the outward Temple of Jerusalem, and chair of M^yses, which seemed to be
of price, forsaken, and Gods chair advanced in other actions. So was talle
Saul refused, and little David accepted: The rytche, the proud, the wise of
this world rejected, and the word of sal^ation daily opened to the poor, and
miserable abiectes: The hye Mountains cast under, and the low valleys
exalted, etc.

Thyrdly, The free mercy and grace of God in his own will.
where it is added in his own will, by this falls down the free will and
purpose of man with all his actions, counsayles, and strength of nature:
According as it is written: Non est volentis neque currentis sed miserentis
dei, Romans 9.
etc. It is not in him that wylleth, nor in him that runs, but in God that
shows mercy. So we see how Israel ran long, and yet got nothing: the
Gentyles uneath began to set out, and yet got the game: Ma^h. 20
So they which came at the first hour, did labor more, and yet they which
came last, were rewarded with the first, Mat 20. The will of the Pharisee
seemed better, but yet the Lords will was rather to justify the Publicane,
Luke. 18. Luke. 18
The elder son had a better will to tarry by his Father, and so did indeed:
and yet the ^atte Calfe was given to the younger son that ran away, Luke
15. Luke. 15
Whereby we have to understand how the matter goes not by the will of man,
but by the will of God, as it pleases him to accept, According as it is
written: Non ex voluntate carnis, Ioh. 1.
neque ex voluntate viri sed ex deo nati sun^, etc. Which are borne not of the
will of the flesh, ^ods mercy in sau^ng the elect over in^ludeth the condition
of faith in ^n Ch^^st.
nor yet of the will of man, but of God. Furthermore, as all then goes by the
will of God only, and not by the will of man. So again here is to be noted,
that this will of God, never goes without faith in Christ Jesus his son.

And therefore, The free mercy and grace of God in his own good will through
faith in christ his son o^r Lord.
fowrthlye is this clause added in the diffinition through ^ayth in Christ his
son: which faith in Christ to us ward makes altogether: For first it
certifyeth us of Gods election: for whosoever will be certain of his election
in God: let him first begin with this faith in Christ, which if he find
in him to stand fyrme: He may be sure, and nothing doubt, Faith is the
only condition whereby Gods grace does save us.
but that he is one of the number of Gods elect. Secondlye, the said faith
and nothing else, is the only condition and means whereupon Gods mercy,
election, vocation, and all Gods promyses to salvation, do stay according to
the words of S. Paul: Si permanseritis in fide, etc. If ye abide in the faith.
Colos 1. Thyrdly, this faith also is the immediate and next cause of our
iustifycation simply without any other condition annexed. For as the mercy of
God, his grace, election, vocation, and other precedent causes, do save and
justify us upon conditon: if we believe in Christ, so this faith in Christ
without condition, is the ne^t^ and immediate cause, which by Gods premyse
works our iustifycation. According as it is written: Creed in dominum Iesum
and saluus eris t^ and do^us^tua. Act. 16.
Believe in the Lord Jesus, Faith only is the immediate cause of our
iustifiyng.
and thou shall be saved, thou and thy whole house, Act. 16. And thus much
touching the definition of election, with the causes thereof declared, which you
see now to be no merytes nor works of man: whether they go before or come
after faith, but only y^ mere mercy of God through faith: for like as all they
that be borne of Adam, do taste of his malediction, though they tasted not his
Apple: So all they that be borne of Christ which is by faith, take part of the
obedience of Christ: Although they never did that obedience themselves, which
was in him. Romans 5.

Now to the second consideration: The second consideration
Let us s^e likewise how and in what order this election of God proceeds in
chosing and electing them which be ordained to salvation, which order is this.
In them that be chosen to life first, Gods m^rcye and free grace brings
forth election: Election works vocation, or Gods holy calling: Which vocation
through hearing brings knowledge, Grace. Election. Vocation. Faith.
Justification. ^lo^ification.
and faith of Christ. Faith through promise obtayneth justification:
Justification through hope wayteth for glorification. Elec^tion is before
vocation, and ^ayth comes in time: Justification and glorifycation is without
end.

Election depending upon Gods free grace and will, Man's fr^^, will.
excludes all man's will, blind fortune, Blind fortune.
chance, and all peraduentures vocation standing upon Gods election, excludes
all man's wisdom, Man's wisdom.
cunning, learing, Man's learnning.
intention, power and presumption: Faith in Christ proceedyng by the gift of
the holy ghost, and freely justifying man by Gods promise: excludes all other
merits of men, Man's merits.
all condition of deserving, all works of the law: Works of the law
excluded from the causes of our salvation.
both Gods law and man's law, with all other outward means, what soever.

Justification coming freely by faith, stands sure by promise without
doub^^feare, or wavering in this life.

Glorifycation perteyning only to the life to come, by hope is looked for.

Grace and mercy preuenteth.

Election ordayneth.

Uocation prepares and receaueth the word whereby comes faith.

Faith justifies.

Iustifycation brings glory.

Election is the immediate and next cause of vocation, vocation which is the
workyng of Gods spyrite by the word, is the immediate and next cause of faith.

Faith is the immediate and next cause of justification, Papi^ts ^onfound the
doctrine of election.
and this order, and connection of causes is dylygenly to be observed, because
of the papists which have miserably confounded and converted this doctrine
thus, that almighty God so farreforth as he foreseeth man's merits before to
come: so does he dyspence his election, Vt Dominus pro cuiusque meritis fore
preuidet, ita dispensat electionis gratiam. And again: Nullis preccedentibus
meritis dominum rependere electionis gra^iam, futuris tamen concedere: That is,
that the Lord recompe^seth the grace of election not to any merits going
before: But yet grants the ^^^n to the merits which follow after, (...)
though we had our election by our holiness that follows after and not rather
have our holiness by Gods election going before.

But we following the Scripture, Election^
^aye otherwise that the cause only of Gods election is his own mercy, and
the cause only of our justification is our faith in Christ, and nothing
else. As for example, first concerning election, if the question be asked: Why
was Abraham chosen, and not Nachor: Why was Jacob chosen, and not Esau: Why was
Moses elected, and Pharao hardened: Why David accepted and Saul refused: Why
few be chosen, and the most forsaken. It cannot be answered other wise,
but thus, because it was so the good will of God.

In like manner touching vocation That vocation he means here which is after
purpose.
and also faith if the que^^ be asked: Why this vocation and gi^^ of faith
(...) given to Cornelius the Gentile. and (...) Tertullius the Iew^ Why (...)
the babes and little ones of this wor^^ of whom Christ sp^aketh: I thank (...)
Father, Vocation brings ^ayth.
which have ^yd (...) from the wise, etc. Math. 11. Why to the (...) the simple
abiectes, and outcastes in this world, of whom speaks Saint Paul. 1. Cor.
1. Ye see your calling my brethren how not many of you. etc. Why to the
sinners and not to the just: Why the beggars by the hye ways were called, and
the bydden gestes excluded: we can go to no other cause but to Gods purpose
and election, and sa^e with Christ our Savior: Quia pater sic complacitum est
ante te. Yea Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. Luke. 18.

And so for justification like wise, Justification by faith only.
if the question be asked: why the Publycan was iustyfied, and not the
Pharisce. Luke. 18. Why Marie the sinner, and not Simon the Leeper: Luke. 11.
Why harlottes and Publicans, go before the Scribes and Pharysees in the
kingdom. Math. 21. Why the son of the free woman was received, and the
bondwomans son being his elder rejected. Genesis 21. Why Israel which so long
sought for righteousness, found it not: and the Gentyles which sought not for
it, found it. Romans 9. We have no other cause hereof to render, but to stay
with Saint Paul: because they sought for it by works of the law, and not by
faith: Which faith as it comes not by man's will, as the Papists falsely
pretends, but only by the election and free gift of God: so it is only the
immediate cause, whereunto the promise of our salvation is annexed, according
as we read: The ^apist^ falselie pretends that Actus credendi, is in man's
power. Col. 1. lyn. 4.
And therefore of faith is the inheritance given. As after grace, that the
promise might stand sure to every seed. Romans 4. Item in the same Chapter:
Faith believing in him which iustifyeth the wicked, is imputed to
righteousness.

And thus concerning the cause of ou^ salvation, ye see how faith in Christ:
only and immedyatlie without any condition does justify us, being so lynked
with Gods mercy and election: How faith and el^ction are linked together in
the act of justifying.
that whersoeuer election goes before, there faith in Christ must needs
follow after. And again, whosoever believes in Christ Jesus through the
vocation of God, he must needs be partaker of Gods election.

Whereunto resulteth now the third not^ or consideration, The third
considera^^n.
which is to consider^ whether a man in this life may be certain of his
election. To answer this question, we have first to understand: that although
our election and vocation simply in deed he known to God Election knovvn^ to
^od ^^mply.
only him self a Priore: yet not withstanding it may be known to every
particular faithful man a Posteriore: that is, by means: Election known to
man by means.
which means is faith in Christ Jesus crucified, for so much as by his faith
in Christ, a man is justified, and therebye made the child of salvation,
reason must needs leads the same to be then the child of election chosen of
God unto everlasting ^yfe: for how can a man be ^aued but by consequence, it
follows that he must be elected.

And therefore of election is truly said, Faith is the means whereby we be
certified of our salvation.
De electione indicandum est A posteriore: De electione iudicandum est A
posteriore^
that is to say, We must judge of election by that which comes after, that
is, by our faith and belief in Christ: which faith although in time it
follows after election: yet is it the proper and immediate cause assygned by
the Scripture: which not only iustifyeth us, but also certifyeth us of the
election of God.

Whereunto, likewise well agrees this saying: Election albeit in God, it be
the first, yet to us it is the last opened. Election first known to God, and
last opened to man.
And therefore beginning first with creation: I come from thence to redemption,
and justification by faith, and so to election. Not that faith is the cause
efficient of election: being rather the effect thereof, but is to us the cause
certifycatorie, or the cause of our certifycation: whereby we are brought to
the feeling and knowledge of our election in Christ. For albeit that election
first be certain in the knowledge of God, yet in our knowledge faith only
that we have in Christ, is the thing that gives to us our certyficate and
comfort of this election.

Wherefore whosoever desires to be assured that he is one of the elect number
of God: let him not clyme up to heaven to know, but let him descend into
himself, and there search his faith in Christ the son of God: Which if he
find in him not feigned, by the working of Gods holy spyrite accordingly:
thereupon let him stay, and so wrappe himself wholly, both body and soul,
under Gods general promise, Every man to sta^e him self upon Gods general
promise.
and ^umber his head with no farther speculations: knowing this, that whosoever
believes in him, shall not perysh, loh 3. Shall not be confounded. Romans 9.
Shall not see death. Ioh. 8. Shall not enter into judgment. Ioh. ^. Shall have
everlasting life. John. 3. 7. Shall be saved. Math 28. Act. 16. Shall have
remyssion of all his sins. Act. 10. Shall be instifyed. Romans 3. Gal. 2. Shall
have flooddes flowing out of him of water of life. Ioh. 7. Shall never dye.
Ioh. 11. Shall Be raised in the last day. Ioh. 6. Shall find rest to his soul,
and shall be refreshed, Math. 11.

Now then for so much as we see faith to be the ground whereupon depends
the whole condition of our justifying: let us discuss in like manner, ^^vvhat
faith is^^
what is this faith, whereof the scripture so much speaks of, for the more
plain understanding of the simple. For many kinds there be of faith: Diverse
kinds of faith.
As a man may believe every thing that is true: yet not every truth does
save, neither does the believing of every truth justify a man: He that
believes that God created all things of naught, believes truth: He that
believes that God is a just God, that he is omnipotent, Every truth has his
faith, But every truth justifies not
that he is merciful: that he that is true of promise believes well, and
holds the truth. no more does every faith^
So he that believes that God has his election from the beginning, and that
he also is one of the same elect and Predestinate, has a good belief and
thinks well. But ^et this beleef^ alone, except it be seasoned with another
thing, will not serve to saluation^ As it a^ayled not the old Jews, which so
thought of themselves, and yet think to this day: to be only Gods elect
people.

Only the faith which avails to salvation is that, Faith the action ^^ vv
Christ the^ obiect^ of faith.
whose object is the body and passion of Christ Jesus crucified: so that in the
a^te of justifying these two: faith and Christ have a mutual relation, Faith
and Christ are relatiues.
and must always concurrs together faith, as the action which apprehends:
Christ as the object which is apprehended.

For neither does the passion of Christ save without faith: Christ with out
faith saves not.
neither does faith help, except it be in Christ. As we see the body of man
sustained by bread and drinke^ not except the same be received, Faith without
Christ^ saves no^.
and conveyed into the stomach, and yet neither does tho receiving of any
thing sustain man's body, except it be meat and drink, which have power to
give nourishment. In like sort it is with faith: for neither does the
believing of every thing save. But only faith in the blood of Christneyther
does again the same blood of Christ profit us, except by faith it be
received: And as the son being the cause of all light, ^^y^eth not but to
them only which have eyes to see: nor yet to them neither, ^^esse they will
open their eyes, to receive the light: So the passion of Christ is the
efficient cause of salvation: But faith is the condition whereby the said
Passion is to us effectual.

And that is the cause, why we ^aye with the Scripture, that faith only
iustifyeth us, not excludinge thereby all other e^terne causes, that go before
faith: As grace, mercy, election, vocation, ^^orace Election. Vocation
Christ's death, causes externe of our salvation.
the death of Christ, etc. All which be externe causes working our salvation
through faith. ^aith only intern cause of man's salvation.
But when we say that faith only iustifyeth us: the meaning thereof is this,
that of all internal actions, motions, or operations in man, given to him of
God, there is no other that contenteth, and pleases God, or stands before
his judgment, Faith is an action in man, but not of man.
or can help any thing to the justifying of man before him: but only this one
action of faith in Christ Jesus the son of God.

For although the action of praying, fasting, Virtues and works of charity,
though they be good gifts of God in man, yet they serve not to justification.
alms, patience, charity, repentance, the fear and love of God be his
gyfts in man, and not of man, given of God to man: yet be none of all these
actions in man, imputed of God to salvation, but only this one action of faith
in man, upon Christ Jesus the son of God. Not that the action it self of
believing: As it is a qualyty in man does so deserve: but because it takes
that dignity of the object. For as I said in the act of justifying: Faith, as
it is an action in man, is not to be considered alone: but must ever go with
this object, and takes his virtue thereof. Like as the looking up of the old
Isralytes, Faith looks his dignity of his object.
did not of it self procure any health unto them: but the promise made in the
object, which was the brazen Serpent, whereupon they looked: gave them health
by their looking up. Looking up to the brase^ Serpent, and believing upon the
body of Christ compared.
Even so after like sort, are we saved by our faith, and spyrituall looking
up to the body of Christ crucified, which faith to defyne, is this.

To believe Jesus Christ to be the son of the living God, sent into this
world: by his death to satisfye for our sins, and so to receive the same.

And thus much touching election and faith, The error of the Papists,
periecting the mind of Gods Testament, how and wherein.
with the order and explycation of the causes necessary to be considered in
our salvation: whereby may appear how for tho pretenced Catholics do
swerve from the right mind of the Scriptures. For where the Scriptures in
declaring the causes of salvation, do send us only to faith, as the only
condition, whereby these causes have their workyng: these Catholics do quyte
leave out faith, and in steed^ thereof, place in other conditions of merytes,
wylworkes, pardons, masses, and especial auricular confession, with penance,
and satisfaction for our sins. etc.

FINIS.
A brief Treatise, wit^ certain Answers to the Objections of the Adversaries
of this doctrine, written by Anthony Gylbie.
^Hereas three years ago, dearly beloved. I did write of this matter of
Election and Reprobation, which is called Predestination, in a certain
Commentary upon the Prophet Malachie, by the occasion of this text:

I have lou^d Jacob, and I have hated Esau. The which Treatise by the rage of
persecution, partly perished, and part did come of late to my hands:
accompting this doctrine so necessary, that upon all occasions it ought with
reverence to be vttred to the glory of God, which so wonderfully, appears
in this his rich mercy toward us, whom he chooses from the fylthe of
sin, to serve him in righteousness, and to the beating down of our corrupt
nature, which without this, either mou^teth by pride, unto presumption, or
falls by infidelyty to desperation. Because that without some taste of this
divine providence in Predestination, there can be no faith, but either a
doubtful wavering, leading to despair, which we have left in the Papisterye
wyles we looked to our own weakness and infirmity, not able to endure one
hour in the way of righteousness: or else a vain presumption of feyned
holiness, whiles we beeholde our own belief and good works, or the
perfection that we do imagine in our own selves, as do the Annabaptistes.
Therefore I thought it good according to my simple Talent, to testify this
truth again unto the world, at the Printing of this worthy Table of the
great learned man, Master Beza, which is set forth in French, Latin, and
Italian, and now into English, translated by our brother VV. VVhittingham:
wherein is most euide^ntly set forth before our eyes the chyefe ground of this
doctrine, and the principal points thereof are so deeply opened, that there
seemed to want nothing that was possible in few lines to be uttered, yet for
the shortness therein all things can not be contained, but that some brief
lessons for the unlearned (who has not their senses fully exercised with such
deep sentences) may well be adjoined, as every man hereafter shall hereunto
be moved by the spirit of God working in their hearts (that many bearing
witness to the truth of this most profitable doctrine now revealed) the
mercies of God in choosing his children, may more and more, day by day be
disclosed: and by the witness of diverse consentyng together in one, God the
father of our Lord Jesus Christ may be gloryfyed. For herein chyefly stands
his praise, honor, and glory, that these his wonderful mercyes toward his
Elect may be praised. Now there is no mean more apt, nor doctrine more
convenient to establysh the faith of the Sayncts, than to certyfye by the
Scryptures, that God has chosen them before the beginning of the world^ to be
holy to him self, and so written their names in the book of life in the
heanens, that all their saluatyon rests wholly upon his hands and holy
counsel that can by no means be altered or changed, so that neither death,
Devil, no^ ^ell, dare now accuse them that are by adoption grafted in Christ,
who are called of the eternal purpose: because it is God that justifies, and
who dare condemn them? It is Christ that is given for them, and how shall not
all things with him be given to them also? For them that he knew before, them
he ordained before, that they should be like fashioned to the image of his
son, and whom he appointed before, those also he called, and whom he
called those also he justified, and whom he justified those also be glorified,
that his eternal purpose and counsel of God, being once revealed to his
Saints, by the effectual vocation and calling, which is the iustifycation of
faith wrought in their hearts by the holy spirit, they can no longer doubt
neither of Election, Predestination, salvation, or glorifycation. Neither can
any thing more beat down man's nature, and the pride of his vain heart, than
to behold the majesty of God, making them by grace so far unlike one to the
other, who were both one, altogether by nature the children of wraths of
vengeance, and damnation: as the wonderful example of Jacob and Esau does
declare, of whom the Lord pronounces that he loves the one, and hates the
other, before they were borne, and the terrible sentence against Pharao, whom
the Scripture affyrmeth that God raised up to show upon him his power, and
hardened his heart, to make his name known, and such like, which every where
are set before our eyes, to cause man to fall down before God, and to fear
his judgments. But our Adversaries object against us, that this doctrine is
an offense to many, and that some abuse it to carnal liberty. I do answer,
that Christ (...) ^^umbling stone to many, and all the (...) of the Gospel is
likewise slaundered by the evil conversation of others: yet may we not
prohibit the sweet flowers from the Bees, because Spiders suck thence their
poison, no more than we may stop the sun to shine, because it hurts
sore eyes. But that it may be the glad tidings of salvation to the assurance
of the faith of the one, and a clear testymony of condemnation of the other,
to the beating down of the pride of man, this glorious counsel of the mighty
God, ought unto all in this clear revelation of the Gospel, to be offered,
opened, and publyshed.

Wherefore by the good will of God, we entende to speak of this great matter,
none other ways, neither in any other sort, then the open Scriptures shall
approve our sayings. Therefore we say with the holy Apostle Sayncte Paul:
Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which has blessed us
with all spirytuall blessings in heavenly things unto Christ, like as he
has elected and ch^sen us in him before the foundations of the world were
laid, that we should be holy and blameless before him by love, who has
predestinate us, that he might freely choose us to be his children by Jesus
Christ. Ephesians.^. And though there come some wicked men, which were long
before appointed to this judgment, which do turn the grace of our God to
lasciviousness and wantonness, as holy Jude says: yet know we that we
are chosen by Jesus Christ that the glory of his grace, his favor and mercy
toward us might be praised. For we are the elect and chosen kyndred, and his
people by purchase, that we should show the virtue of him which has called
us forth of darkness into this marvelous light.

This people ordained to salvation only believes. Act. 13. For this Elect
people only was Christ sent into this world. To them only is the word of
salvation sent, as Peter says: To the Elect by the foreknowledge of God the
Father. 1. Pet. 1. Then to know what this election of God is, and what in the
Scriptures it does signifye. We describe and define election to be the free
choice of the good will of the almighty God, appoynting and prescribing in the
book of life before the beginning of the world, whom he will have to be
saved, and coumpted amongst the just. Whom he will have holy and without
fault before him to be his children, by adoption to set forth his glory. This
choice, his choosing, this aforeappoynted purpose and ordinance of God, is
aboundauntlye set forth in the first chapter to the Ephesians. That this
comes of the free will of God and his only grace, freely without our
deserving (contrary to the vain opinion of the Papists and Anabaptists) ^he
same chapter and the next chapter following does plainly testify. Ephe. 1. 2.
And most evidently, the Lord in his majesty, speaking to his servant Moses.
Exodus 33. declared all this to stand of his mercy, saying, I will have mercy
upon whom it likes me, and I will show mercy where it shall be my pleasure,
for so is the meaning of those words, I will have mercy upon whom I will
have mercy. Paul also declaring in this place the work of God beetwixte these
two children Jacob and ^sa^. Romans. 9. says thus of this fr^^ Election,
when Rebeca was with child with one and the same father Isaac, before ^he
children were borne, when they had neither done good nor bad, that the purpose
of God which is by Election might stand, it was said to her, not for the
cause of works, but by the grace of the caller, the elder shall serve the
younger. As it is written, says he: Jacob I loved, but Esau I hated. Of the
book of life, Moses speaks, Exodus 32. And Christ himself, Luk, 10. Saying
to his Apostles: Joy you and be glad, for your names are written in the book
of life in the heavens. And in the. 69. Psalm it is spoken against the wicked.
Let them not be written amongst the Just, and put them forth of the book of
life. And against the false Prophet. Ezechiel. 13. He shall not be in the
counsel of my people, nor written in the book of the house of Israel. There
be two final causes also of this eternal purpose of the election, the which
Paul rehearses in the first chapter to the Ephesians, the one touches God,
the other perteyneth to man. He has El^cted us be fore the foundations of the
world (says the Apostle) that we might be holy and without blame. And this
an^wereth the wicked, which would abuse the mercies of God to their lust.
Again it follows. He has Predestinate us, that he might choose us to be his
children, that his name may be praised. And this stops the mouths of all
our adversaries that say, that this doctrine is not to the praise of God: so
that they must cease to sclaunder this doctrine, unless they will hinder the
glory of God, and deny the open Scriptures.

Now it is to be noted and marked dylligently, that this word election is
taken after two sorts in the Scripture, sometimes as it sygnifyeth absolutely
the free choice, will, and appointment of God, without the respect of the
revelation of the word and message of salvation. And thus speaks the holy
Apostle Saint Paul of Election, saying of the carnal Jacob: They were enimyes
concerning the gospel for your cause, but concerning the Election, they are
beloved for their parents. For the gifts of God, and his calling are such,
that he can not repent. Even as you once were mysbeleeuers from God, but now
have attained mercy, by their mysbeleefe, that they should attain mercy also.

This Election expresses absolutely the secret purpose of God, without the
respect of revelation of the word, or any of our works following. Under this
first kind of Election were those hundredth and twentye thousand, which God
did choose and keep unto himself in Niniuie amongst the Idolaters, and the
seven thousand which God did leave for himself in Israel, in the third book
of Kings the. 19. chap. Yea, those that yet are not, are thus elect, chosen and
amongst al nations both Jews in this long blindness, and banishmente from their
country amongst the Turks in their Idolatrous wickedness, yea amongst the
Edomites, the Sabees, the Indians, and Ethiopians.

And in the late blyndnesse of the Popish church, wherein we together with
our fathers were altogether Idolatrous, all Hypocrites and counterfaite
Christians, this absolute Election whereby the merciful Lord God did reserve
and keep his chosen unto him in all places, all ages, all countries, without
respect of persons did most euydently appear. Howbeit this secreete of
Election must only ^ee left to the Majesty of God, where, when, how, and
whom he thereby saves and shows his mercy. For, to the blind judgment of
man all these people rehearsed, and such like seems reject, reprobate and
cast away, as appears by Jonas condempning the Ninevites, by Elias
condempning the Israelites, and a long while, until God had by miracle from
Heaven delivered him from that error, unto the chyefe Apostle Peter, judging
all the Gentyles to be a polluted people, far from the favor of God.

The second kind of Election is set ^oorth and known, euydent and open by
the spirit of God, working in the hearts of the Elect and chosen by faith, and
trust in God his promyses through Christ, teaching us that we are the children
of God chosen to him self by Jesus Christ, from the beginning, and therefore
preparing us to an holy and blameless life, to the lawde and praise of the
grace of God. The which Election besides the daily e^perience of our
consciences may be approved by the testymonies of these Scryptures compared
together. Esa. 59. Rom 8. Ephesi. 1. Colos. 3. and a very brief and perfect
description of this Election. 2. These. 2. in these words. We ought to thank
God that he has chosen you from the beginning, by the sanctifying of the
spyrite and the belief of the truth, to the which he has called you by our
Gospel, to attain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. By this gracious
election was Jacob dearelye beloved in his Mothers womb, and Jeremy known
unto God before he was fashioned in his Mothers womb. Jeremy. 1. And to be
short, all other the Elect of God are thus chosen, sanctified, and beloved
from the begyning from before the foundations of the world, from everlasting to
everlasting. For there is no change of time with God, seeing that all things
are present in his sight. For unto him a thousand years are but one day, but
the course and change of times are in us, our deeds, our knowledge, in man's
chaungeable wisdom.

This Election must of necessity drive down the pride we have of our own
strength, our own power, our own nature, our own free will, our own merits,
our own justification of our own works, and bring us to the feelynge of the
mighty power of God, which works all in all things, to the restoring of all
things in our Christ, both in Heaven and Earth, by whom we are called into
this state, long before appointed according to his purposed pleasure, by whose
power all things are wrought, that we may boldly say with the Apostle, who dare
lay any thing to the charge of the Elect of God? It is God that justifies,
who is he that can condemn? Who can separate us (which are this chosen
Jacob) from the love of God.

Can affliction? Can anguish? Can persecution? Can hunger? Can nakedness? Can
peril? Can the sword? For I am persuaded, says he, that neither death nor
life, nor Angel, nor power, nor things present, either things to come, neither
heyght, nor depth, neither any creature can separate us from the love of God in
Christ Jesus our Lord. Lo, this is the love wherewith the Lord loves his
Jacob, whereby we say: O heavenly Father, Lord of heaven and earth, it has
pleased thee that thou might show thy great goodness most lyberally and
freely toward us, before that we were, and therefore before we had done either
good or evil, without any our merytes or deseruinges only through thy free
mercy to elect and choose, ordain and appoint us heirs of everlasting life,
and thereby to make all things pertaining to our salvation, so fyrme and sure,
that they cannot stagger, waver, nor fail. Where contrariwise if they did hang
of our worthynesse, we should ever be doubtful, because every man is a liar,
and al our righteousness is like a spotted cloth, and nothing but
counterfayte hypocrisy, wayed in the ballaunce of thy severe justice. But the
grace of this thy free Election makes us most certain and sure, seeing no
creature is able to take out of thy hand, O God. Wherefore we do lawde and
magnifye thy name, world without end. So be it.

Now after this doctrine of election, and love of God toward Jacob, the hating
and Reprobation of Esau, must likewise be declared, and though the adversaries
of this doctrine do seem to deny that there is any such Reprobation of the
wicked, yet the words are so plain in Malachie and Romans. 9. that nothing
can be more evident. For what can be more plainly spoken for this purpose,
then that God should say before the children were borne, that he hated Esau.
What was this b^tred, but the Reprobation, Reiection, and condemnation by God
his own mo^th of this wicked Esau, like as in the last verse of the first
Psalm, where it is said, that the Lord knows the ways of the ius^e^ (that
is) he has them written in his book in the Heavens, ^e loves them as is said
of Jacob, he has such care over them, that they can not fall, but unto the
glory of God, and their own commodity, and by the course of the contraries
compared together in that Psalm: it should be added, the Lord knows not the
wicked, like as Christ says it shall be answered unto them, I know you not:
the latter part of the verse is that the way of the wicked shall perish, so
that it appears to be all one, not to be elected, accepted, and known of
God, and to perish, and to be as a Reprobate condemned. And Felinus forth of
Kimhy does note, that that part of the last verse of the. 2. Psalm: God
being angrye, you shall perish forth of the way, does expound this of
the first Psalm, so that the Election, knowledge, love, and favor of God,
and eternal salvation cannot be separate: Like as his anger and hatred,
reprobation and condemnation consequently do follow, in Caine, Esau, Pharao,
Judas, the Pharisees, and like obdurate persons, so manifestly uttering them
selves to be of that sort whom God always hated: The children not of
Abraham, but as Christ answers unto them, of their father the devil, who was
a murderer from the beginning, like as his children have been also ever sith
the beginning of the world, and therefore must of necessity be hated of the
most merciful Lord, who is compelled by the order of his works, to use these
wicked rods and cruel scourges, for the chastisement of his children, doing
many times the works strange from his nature, that he may do his work of his
mercy, peculyar unto his nature: And than utterly break, hate, reject, and
cast away into everlasting fire and utter destruction this rod and scourge,
like a most merciful Father, favoring his children and hating the rod. Like
as he says by his prophet: Woo unto Assure the rod of my fury, and the staff
of my indignation, and after promyseth to break the staff and cast away the
rod. Psalm. 10. Suffering in the mean season, yet these instruments of his
wrath prepared unto destruction, with great patience, for this end that he
may utter the riches of his glory, toward the vessels of glory, which he has
prepared unto glory.

Thus was Pharao the manifest scourge and rod of God, to correct, to
chastise, and to exercise the Israelytes, and to spreads the power of God
through all the world. Therefore was Moses sent unto him, with the rod of
God his mighty mercy, to break in sunder this rod of chastisement. And the
Lord said unto Moses, I have appointed thee to be the God of Pharao, and
Aaron thy brother shall be thy Prophet, thou shall speak unto him all that I
command thee. And he shall speak unto Pharao, to let go the children of
Israel forth of his land. But I will harden his heart, says the Lord, and I
will, multyplie my signs and wonders in Egypt, and he shall not hear you.
And I will bring mine Army and people ^oorth of the Land of Egypt, by most
great judgments, and the Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord. Exodus 12.

Again the Lord says, Now shall I stretche my hand to stryke thee, and thy
people with a plague, and thou shall peryshe from the earth, for therefore have
I caused thee to stand (for so is the Hebrewe word) that I may show in thee
my strength, and that my name may be renowned through all the earth. Exodus 9.
Then the Lord sends a great hayle, so that feelyng the hand of God the
tenth time, Pharao was compelled to cry: The Lord is just, and I and my
people are sinners, as follows in the same Chapter. Yet for all this the
Lord hardens his heart, that he pursues the children of Israel to his own
destruction. Exodus 14. So that resysting the power of God, he perysheth in this
world, and in the world to come, he is appointed to the everlasting fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels, by the just judgment of the almighty
Lord: who being refused and so openly resysted, iustlye does give over the
wicked to their own Reprobate minds, with greedynesse to fulfill their
fleshly desires, and obstinate purpose to prosecute that which the Devil and
the world wylleth them to do, and causes them to heap upon their own
heads their own dampnation, treasuring and storing up al their life long,
works deserving the wrath of God against the day of his wrath and vengeance,
as the Apostle says to the Romans.

This Reprobation then is the declaration of God his severe justice and just
judgment, against the Serpent and his seed, whom, by the word of his
eternal wisdom he has accursed from the beginning, and appointed to
everlasting torment. The which work necessary for the proceeding of God his
holy providence, Eternal and never ceasing regyment, and governance, because
it is the work of the will of the myghtie God, which is the very law,
equity, and justice it self, free from all affections, far from all fault,
crime or sin: It ought to be known unto us all, that all flesh may
tremble, and consider before whom it stands, even before that great Lord and
mighty God, who has power both over the body and Soul to cast into hell
fire. To whom no man may say: what do thou? Being like the claye in the
Potters hand, or the staff or axe in the hand of the smyter. Who offends
against no law, because his godly will is the law it self, and to know his
pleasure, is to know the law, to follow his will, is to do the law, so that
of necessitye this great Lord is so far and free from al sin, that nothing
is good but that which is wrought by him, nothing can be evil that he works
in his creatures. No, the fall of Lucifer the father of the reprobate, does
utter his majesty, does show his justice, which old Satan and Father Devil,
was worthily cast down into the bottom of Hell, and eternally condemned to
everlasting pain and torment, because he did so ambiciously and proudly climb
up above his appointed place in the heavens. And where the malice of this old
serpent, caused Adam the first man to mount above his estate, to desire to know
good and evil, like a God, the marvelous mercy of God, and inestimable love
toward mankind caused and compelled this wicked work of the Serpent to serve
his glory, and to turn to our great commodity and profit, in that he rayseth
of the seed of man another Adam, most innocent and holy, against whom no
Devil, neither any helly power may prevail, by whom we are not only
reconciled unto God, and do obtain pardon for this offense, but we are borne
a new, and as it were again created into greater glory by far, than we
were at the first: for the first man had only a promise to live in (...)
earthly garden to long as (...) did (...) of the for bidden fruit, we have the
^^ of the heavenly Paradise, and everlasting pleasures. He had earthly meat
and fru^^, we have the heavenly (...) which ^^deth into life everlasting. He
was created to work in the Garden works natural, we are renewed unto works
supernatural, above nature, heavenly and celestial. He was (...) by the
Serpent^ we do overcome and triump^e over the Serpent, s^nne, Devil Death,
and Hell. He had the gift of reason and understanding, we have the rich
wisdom of God his holy spirit, whereby we discern our own infirmity and
weakness, and his almighty power, mercy, and goodness. To be short, where
he did run from God, ^id him^ and sowed Fig leaves to cover his shame,
following his ^ond fantasy. We do boldly behold the course of Gods working
in our nakedness, sin, and infirmity, and magnify, renown, and praise our
Lord God, which shows his grace by our sin, which utters his power by our
weakness, his wisdom by our foolishness, which sets forth his elect
vessels, his chosen^ Abels, by Caynits ye vessels of his wrath. In which Cayn
the first murderer, and therefore manifestly of the serpents seed, appears
evidently the just judgment of the Almighty God, accu^sing and condemning in
Satan and Cayn, all sins and wickedness. To utter that he abhors sin,
and hates it, being so far contrary from his nature, which is justice it
self, contrary from his will, which is equity, and his law which is
judgment. In Pharao a child of the same father, reprobate, indurate, and
accursed, whom God stirred up for the declaration of his great power and
mighty arm, as well in the manyfolde miracles wrought for his people, which
nothing had needed, neither had been occasioned, if there had not been such a
tyrant so indurate and so obstinate, to withstand God and his servants, as
also by the subversion and drouning of him and his people in the red Sea, a
sign and taken first of the eternal and i^e^itable destruction and damnation,
whereunto the wicked are appointed, than of the salvation assigned and sealed up
for the elect and chosen^ we do learn heerby also y^ power of God, which the
very Sorcerers, the enemies of God were compelled to confess before Pharao.
Exodus 8. We do learn moreover the justice of God, which justice Pharao him
self was compelled against him self, to denounce and affirm. Exodus 9. And
finally we may see expressed most manifestly the fatherly mercy of the God of
Jacob, which did give the king and the whole people of Egypt a price for his
chosen Jacob. ^o the love toward Jacob, and the hatred toward Esa^. What
shall we speak of Judas and other, manifestlye reprobate, which are
compelled by the testimonye of their own consciences to pronounce them selves
wicked, and therefore to fear god his severe justice and just judgment, and
to fly the refrom by the terror of their evil consciences, which is more
sore than a thousand witnesses, against such as God does leave to their own
selves The which terrible examples, the elect of God^ having before their eyes,
has great cause to praise their heavenly father, through his son Christ, who
has sent them his holy spirit of comfort, which will never suffer them to be
tempted above that they are able to suffer and to bear.

But where we have two kind of men that be adversaries to this doctrine of
Reprobation. The one sort uttering them selves most manifest Reprobate,
obstinate, and wylfully wicked, crying and blaspheming: we will follow our
lusts, what need we to care how we live, or what we do? If we be elected
with Jacob, we shall be saved, if we be reiecte and cursed with Cham, we
shall be damned. These Lucifers, not submitting themselves to the governance
of God, careless what becomes of them, must be heat^ down with the
consideration of the majesty and mighty power of God, which suffers not
one sparrowe to fall upon the earth without his will and providence, neither
one hear to fall from the head of his elect and chosen, how fiercely so ever
they shall rage against them.

Wherefore (O you Serpents seed) how soever you shall be offended with this
that I shall speak, know this, that as the mighty God has made the
scattered sands able inoughe to stay the raging Seas: so shall your proud
waves of your boiling stomachs and our busy, heads, be broken and brought
full low where and when it shall like the Lord of all flesh by these his
weak vessels. And license must you ask, as did your father the diuel^
executing his tyranny upon the good man Job, as we read in the first chapter
of that History, before you can lay hands either of body or goods of his
chosen, and therein shall you be limited and appointed (as there appears)
how far you shall be able to extend your violence. For God holds your
hearts in his hand be you never so great tyrants, and can soon cause you to
faint and fail from your fury, turning your hearts round about as him likes
best. And because you thus blaspheme God in words and deeds, following your
father Lucifer, abusing Gods creatures, and despising his benefytes, his
tollerance, and his long sufferan^e, which might move you to repentance (as
holy Paul warns) you treasure up for your selves, even wrath and vengeance
against the day of vengeance. I do fear nothing at all to offend you with my
writing, neither do you pass any thing at all what is written or spoken,
though you use to swear, stamp, and stare for a little space in a furious
rage, when you hear and feel things contrary to your poison. But the
scriptures of God, all good writings, all truth, unto such dogs and hogs are
uttered to this purpose, that they may be a testimony of condemnation of the
light of Gods truth rejected and despised. Therefore for the elect of God that
they may understand the course of Gods working in all his creatures, and
reverence his majesty, and magnify and renoume his holy name is this written.
Yet doubtless do I know amongst the chief vessels and chosen children of
God, there be many which have not attained to this point of doctrine of
Election and Reprobatio^, whom I am very loath to offend, and therefore I desire
the^ for the love of God to suffer me quietly without their grief to utter
unto other the comfort of my conscience, which I have hereby undoubtedly
received: like as I have many times harkened unto them in the contrary. First
praying thus both of us together unto our heavenly father, knowledging our own
infirmity and weakness. O father in the heavens, whatsoever we are,
whatsoever we have, whatsoever we know, it is only by thy free grace, for we
were by nature the children of wrath, and we are not borne a new of flesh and
blood, either of the seed of man, or of the will of man, flesh and blood can
not reveal the mysteries of thy heavenly kingdom unto us. But by thy blessed
will, are we that we are, and by the same know we that we know: therefore (O
father) do we commyt into thy hands only our salvation. If our knowledge be
small, yet we doubt nothing but that we are the children of thy everlasting
kingdom, and therefore by thy mighty power, we shall grow when it shall be
thy pleasure, to a more full and river knowledge of a more perfyte age, wherein
our faith shall be fully able to comprehend and receive the breadth, depth,
heyght, and largeness of thy great mercyes, and gracious promyses. But seeing
this power of full knowledge and perfect revelation, passes all power
natural, and remains only in thy power, and the light of thy spirit (O
Lord). Do thou what shall please thee, to open to us thy servant and
children, depending of thy hands, so much of the light of thy countenance,
and at such times as shall seem good to thy wisdom and fatherly mercy. In
the mean time thus re^tyng wholly upon thee, neither can we despair, neither
will we ^be too much careful, although we can not attain to the knowledge of
many of thy works, neither to the understanding of many places of the
scriptures, but we will confess unto the^ the weakness of our faith, waiting
always for further revelation of thy glorious light to be vttred unto us, when
thou shall think of thy Fatherly benevolence and goodness meet and
convenient, knowing most surely that thou wylt pity our chyldishe infanci^,
and cause the same to serve for thy glory and our great commodity, seeing
that we do err and are chyldishe, as sons before such a Father which can
not put off his Fatherlye pytie, but rather as thou have brought us unto thee,
to be the heirs of thy kingdom by the blood of thy natural son, so we be
most sure that thou wylt lighten us in the end, with the full fruition of the
bright light of thy countenance, that we may see thee and know thee as this
thy son our redeemer knows thee, yea, see thee our Father, face to face,
and know as we be known. Thus rest we only of thy hand to increase our
knowledge at thy good pleasure, O mighty Lord and most mercyful Father. So be
it.

If you can thus submytte your selves, good brethren, to the wisdom of God,
working in us weakelyngs what him lyketh. All the stumblyng stocks which
might offend you, may eas^ly be remoue^. There be two things especially which
do seem to stand against this doctrine of Election and Reprobation, or of
God his governance and providence, for all is one in effect, the one touches
God, the other man. The first and pryncipall is, least that the wicked do
make God the Aucthour of sin in the Reprobate^ the which doubt, we may
remove four manner of ways.

First, by the authority of Scriptures. Secondlye, by the testimony of their
own consciences which be the reprobate. Thirdly, by the nature of sin.
Fowrthly, by the majesty of God, which is bound to none of his creatures, to
make him this or that vessel. For the first, Saint James says: Let no man
say when he is tempted, that he is tempted of God, for God, as he can not be
tempted with evil, so neither does he tempte any man. But every man is
tempted, drawn away, and entysed of his own lust and concup^scence. Then
the lust when it has conceived, brings forth sin. James. ^. And even
thus it appeared in the first fall of mankind. First, though the Lord our
God had warned and commanded the contrary, our old enemy styrreth the
concupiscence and lust of the Woman, with the goodness, pleasantness and
beauty of the Apple, then her lust conceyuing this, brings forth sin,
entysing also her husband, to the breaking of God his commandments. Genes.
3. But contrariwise, says James in the same place. Iam. 1. least you should
err and conceive any evil opinion of God, every good gift and every perfyte
gift is from above, descending from the Father of light, with whom is no
variableness, neither change into darkness, that he should give now good
things, now evil, now light, now darkness. No, says the Apostle Paul,
let God be true, and all men liars. Can God be unjust? How shall he then judge
the world? Romans 3. Again, God says by his Prophet Ezechiel: I will not the
death of a sinner, but I will rather that the sinner convert, repent and live.
And unto wicked Jerusalem says our savior Christ: O Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
which slayest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee: How
often would I have gathered together thy children, as the Hen gathers her
Chickins under her wings, and thou would not. Lo, thy house therefore is
left desolate. Mat. 23. Lo, here appears the goodness of the living Lord,
so dillygently calling the wicked to him by his word, by his Prophets, by his
messengers, and at the length by his own son, that he can not in any case be
accoumpted the Aucthor of their evil, nor cause of their fall. But contrary
wise, their own wylfull and wicked stubbernesse is the cause of their evil,
and the only occasion of their fall, as it is written: Thy perdition and
destruction is of thine own self, but only of me is thy salvation. And
infinite scriptures to the same purpose appertayning. That we may say with
Daniel: unto thee O Lord, belongs righteousness, and to us the shame and
covering of our faces. Daniel. 9. Secondly, The testimony of the consciences of
the wicked, which shall accuse or excuse them at the great day^ which is
always of the force and valor of a thousand witnesses, which is the worm
that shall never dye, but gnawe the wicked for ever. Esai. 46. This conscience,
I say, of theyrs shall condemn the wicked, and what shall God then do? Or
wherein is his dreadful majesty to be charged? Caine by his own conscience,
is compelled to confess: greater is my wickedness then can be r^^ytted. Thou
castest me from the face of the earth, says he, and I must hyde me from thy
face. Lo, the just judgment of God, and his worthy condempnation, openly
confessed. Who dare then blame God? Caine dare in no wise do it. Neither yet
proud Pharao, who condemned in his own heart and conscience, accuses him
self and his people, and iusti^yeth God, delyuering all men from this wicked
blasphemy, saying, openly: I have sinned now, the Lord is just, and I and my
people are wicked. Exo. 9. What does Judas? Does he not cry likewise, I
have sinned, betraying this innocent blood. Math. 27. And to utter in d^^de
that thing he felt within his br^ast, he is compelled to take aduengaunce, and
execute a judgment most terryble against him self, uttering to all the world
him self most wicked, and that the justice of God, punishing such wicked
Traitors and murderers, ought most worthily to be feared, magnifyed, and
re^erenced, throughout the whole world. Like as all the other wicked and
desperate persons, which for anguishe of heart, and terror of conscience, do
murder themseluos, does evidently and continually witness unto the worlds
end, that there is a just Lord, the God of judgment, whom they do fear,
and before whose face they dare not appear to accuse him of any sin, but
rather taking the crime blame, shame, and punishment, unto them selves, who
worthily by their own conscience, have deserved it, does thus torment
themselves, and with violent hande^ aduenge the sin they have committed in
their own sinful soule^ and bodies. Thus must God always be found just,
and overcome when he is judged, by the testimony of our own conscience, which
shall accuse or excuse us at the great day. Roma 2. Wherefore let no man be so
foolyshe to say, that God is the Author of evil, unless he will be
accounted worse than Cain, more proud than Pharao, more wicked than Judas, or
any other the Reprobate from the begynning^^

Thirdly, the nature of sin being de^yned by the authorytie of Scriptures, to
be a thought, word, or deed, contrary to the will of God. For such things
only defyle the man, as Christ our master says, Math. 15. And therefore are
only to be accounted sin. No such thought can be attrybuted or ascrybed
unto God, as can be against his will, therefore no sin can be his work.
Neither can he be the Aucthour of evil, which therefore is called God,
because he is the Aucthour and geuer of all good, and so far from evil, that
he turns all our evil to some good, our sin to the uttering of his grace,
our lies to the declaration of his truth. No, this is the perfect workemaster
which works all things without fault or trespass, all other do fail,
faul^e, and ^^espasse and sin in all their works, that he may be justified in
all his doings, and al creatures fall down before his face and presence. Who
though he do work al in all things, yet does he work the same to such godly
end and purpose, known only to his majesty, that though we be compelled to
say, God is the author of the fa^t, yet must we answer: but not of the crime.
Because he is the Master of the house, and Lord over the family, and
therefore may do any thing without the blame of his servant.

And like as that which is no fault in the master of the house, is a great
fault many times in any of his servant, because it is the breaking of their
masters commandment: Even so doubtless the self same work is sin in God
his servant and creatures, which to God is no ^^nne, but an ordinary work
appointed ^or some special purpose, either for the manifestation of his power,
as was the hardeninge of Pharao, or for the declaration of his mercy, as was
the fall of David, of Peter, of Marie Magdalen, and all other repentant
sinners. And where^ore, I pray you, may not this Lord thus use his own
servants, without any blame of sin, seeing that he has created and made
them all only to serve his glory, his justice, and his mercy. Or how can
he be unjust, or the author of any sin, by whom all the world must
be judged and brought to the balance of justice and equitye. When the first
world shall be condemned for their sin and iniquitye, and we now lyuinge
shall be judged for ^ure sins: specially all those which not only do
evil them selves, but are Authors and ^aultors to wicked doers. Romans. 1.

Fourthly, The majesty of God can be subject to no sin, because it can be
under no law. And that only is worthily called sin which is done against a
Law, therefore no work that God does ought to be accounted evil, either
that he is the occasion of any evil, which only is the mind, sense,
spirit, and power of the Law, without whom no law of it self is good. For
every good law is the mind, will, and commandment of God, and what so ever
law is not the mind, will, and commandment of God (as was the laws of the
Scribes and Phariseys, and of the cursed Papists) the same be wicked: who of
necessity were set up the body of Antichrist, to utter their unrighteousness,
that Christ the son of righteousness, the head of his body, in his
manyfolde mercies, more plainly might appear, and shine with more glory.
Again to define sin to be the affection, motion, or operation of any
reasonable creature, against the law of God: his majesty must needs be
secluded and excused, who is the law maker, the creator, no creature, having
no evil motion, nor led with any affection, which might make his work
evil. Like as the creature is for the most part blame worthy because even
when it does the best of all. It is subject to some affection, either
selfeloue, or hatred of some other, yea the Lord God may use any of his
creatures in any work, without the blame of any evil, as well as the Smith
may make his coals to flame, or to quench them, either the same piece of iron,
sometimes his hammer, sometime his tongs or stithy.

Wherefore though very much might be said in this part, that as the potter
may make of one piece of clay what him likes, the Smith mays make of his iron
diverse instruments, yet following the godly wisdom of S. Paule^ I think it
more meet to beat down man's subtilties, with the contemplation of the
Majesty of the mighty God, pronouncing boldly that such as say (if my lies
and sin set forth his glory, why am I then judged as a sinner, let us do
evil that good may come, and so in their wicked words dare make God the author
of evil) has their worthy damnation already, as Paul says. Romans 3. For of
necessitye which their eyes can not see, such diversity of sin and grace,
of righteousness^ and unrighteousness, of the contrariety and change of
things, must be in this wonderful creation of heaven and earth, by the high
majesty of God appointed and ordained. For what needed the goodly creature of
light? If there had been no darkness, or how should this benefit have been
felt or perceived? what matter or cause of uttering justice might have been
found without sin and unrighteousness? how should grace have been showed, if
no wrath had been deserved? No the mighty God thereby most evidently utters
his majesty, in that he shows how the heavens fall into darkness without
him, the earth into dust, the Angels into deuyls, the men into sin, and so
finally without him all things to come to naught, that he might be magnified,
creating all things, his son our savior renowned, who has redeemed us all,
his holy spirit exalted, who has renewed all us that be his elect and chosen.
Now to what creature is the majesty of God bound and found debtor of his
spirit. If he withholde it from any, his dreadful majesty may rightly
withhold it, for who has given him first, to ask any thing again of debt or
duty? If his majesty do give his spirit, it is of his free mercy and grace.
If the earth fall into dust, if man fall into sin, that all things may be
known to be nothing without God: what blame deserves God, or who dare accuse
him? No, let all flesh fall down before his majesty and confess: All things
does only rest upon thee, O Lord, thou have created all things of nothing, so
that without thee they all do fall to their original, to she we them selves
vain and nothing worth^, weak, wretched, and miserable, wherefore if we have
any good thing it comes of thy mercy, if we have any weakness, sin, or
infirmity, it comes of our own con^^piscence, lusts, and vanity, our
perdition is of our selves, our sin is of our selves, only of thee is our
salvation, thou made us clay, potts and vessels to thine use. Do thou with us
as thou shall think good in thine eyes, and the shame shall fall upon our own
faces. The second cause which concerns man (whereby many mistake this doctrine)
is that God exhorts man always in his Scriptures to good, and forbids
evil with many terrible threatenings, which things seems not to be needful
(say they) seeing the Ele^^e shall be saved, and the Reprobate condemned, by
decree and sentence given upon them before they be borne. To this we do
answer, that these exhortatio^s and co^munications are very necessary to both
twain, because God leads us men always like reasonable creatures, not like
insensible ste^ks or stones. And to the Elect they are most necessary pricks
and spurs, to stir the dull flesh toward his duty, as all good men feels
and can bear witness. To the Reprobate they are testimonies of the good will
of the almighty God to them opened and uttered, but openly resisted, and
refused, and rejected, according to the saying of our Savior Christ: If I
had not come and spoken to them, they had had no sin, but now they have no
pretense or excuse for their sin. Paraduenture you will answer me: They can
not obey unto it. What is the cause thereof I pray you? because they lack the
spirit of Christ to lead them, you will say: I dare easily grant you, but
will they grant this? will they (think you) submite them selves under poor
Christ, and the foolyshnesse of the cross, and not rather boast and brag
their wisdom, their knowledge, and their upright dealyng, and righteousness.
Are not these the men that dare thus boast? We know as well as the Preacher
can tell us. Is the spirit of God departed from us to speak with him? As was
said to Micha. 2. of the Kings. 22. chapter. Or as the Pharisees did answer
unto Christ: are we blind? To whom our Savior says again: If you were
blind you had no sin, but now you say you see, therefore your sin
remains. Ioh. 9. Thus doubtless they are so far from the submission and
subjection to poor Christ, that contrariwise they do willingly and naturally
follow their Father Lucifer, who did lift him self arrogantly above Christ
the son of righteousness, and evermore fyghteth against Christ, though the
mighty power and high wisdom of God turns his evil will and all theyrs to
his glory and good purposes. None other ways than bodily and natural
darkness, which by the wonderful wisdom of God, clearly sets forth the
bright Sunshyne, and yet labors by continual course to shadow the Sun,
and to cover the whole earth. Wherefore the Lord God to driu^ away this
natural darkness from man, exhorts to justice and equity, which is his
nature, and the Image which man ought to counterfayte. And always commands
things thereunto agreeable. And forbyddeth that he is not, that is to s^ye,
iniquity, and dehorteth therefrom by his Prophets and Preachers, publyshing
his will and pleasure, which is the light and law most perfect to man his
noble creature, whom he has made for his honor and glory, whom he has
appointed to bear his Image upon earth, of justice, righteousness and
innocence. But because this Image could by no creature perfectlye be
expressed, unless the same were fully replenished with the self same Godhead,
because that all things besidesfoorth had some imperfection, bewraying their
original the darkness, as John calls it, the Tohu and Bohu, as Moses does
it name. The vain vanity, and wild deformity, whence they were by creation
altered, recovered, and brought into light and life, as appeared in Adam
falling from truth to lies, straight at the beginning: now of necessity the
son of God (who only is good of nature) becomes man, and takes this
office to bear the Image of God invisible. Colo. 1. And to be the head of that
spyrituall perfection which was to be wrought in mankind, by his
aforeappointed purpose, and becomes the first begotten of all creatures, for
by him were all things created both in heaven and earth, visible and
invisible, majesty, Lordshyp, rule, and power, by whom, and in whom all
things are created, and he is before all creatures, and in him all things
have their being. And he is the head of the body, he is the beginning and
first begotten of the head, that in all things he might have prehemine^ce. For
it pleased the father that in him should dwell al fullness, and by him to
reconcyle all things to himself. And to set at peace by him through the blood
of his cross, both things in heaven and things in earth: for even you, says
Paul, which in times paste were strangers, because your minds were set in
evil works, has he now reconcyled in the body of his flesh through death, to
make you holy and blameless, and without fault in his sight. Seeing then that
this cannot be denied to be the course of God his holy working, to drive away
this darkness, and to bring man to his light, to take away sin, and to bring
man to a life blameless, the state of innocencie^ and his own likeness: shall
it not be most necessary to have Preachers and Teachers, to tell us the same,
and to admonish us whereunto we be called, seeing of our selves and our own
reasons no such thing can be perceived? Therefore have we preachings and
exhortations, as Paul says: for when the world through wisdom knew not God
in the wisdom of God, it pleased God through the foolyshnesse of Preaching, to
save them that believed. 1. Corin. 1. And as he also says of him self in
another place: We do Preach this riches in Christ the hope of your glory,
warning all men, and teaching all men in all wisdom, to make all men perfyte
in Christ Jesus.

Thus serves then exhortations, dehortations, comminations, and publycations
of the laws and will of our Lord God: that he may be known the Lord and
governor over all the things he has created, and the only law maker
amongst his creatures, publyshing unto all that perfect equity and justice,
which ought in no case to be resysted. Whereunto if they can not attain, they
must confess and knowledge their own infirmity and weakness, and submyt
them selnes under the mighty hand of God, and so doing they shall be
received as children of the most loving and most merciful father, in such
degrees of perfection as he has appointed to the beautifying of the body of
his son our head. So that the Lord God does teach all, and lyghten all men
that come into the world, both chosen and Reprobate, with such a knowledge as
does the good Prince, which unto all his Subjects proclaims his statutes, and
publysheth his laws: but like a good and tender father, he leads his
children, regenerate and borne a new, neither of flesh nor blood, nor the
will of man, and guydeth them with his fatherly spyrite, in the paths of the
same laws, writing in their hearts what is his good will and pleasure.

In the which course of God his wonderful work, the wicked has no cause to
complain, for as their father whom they do follow, is named the Prince of
this world, so they have the world at will, and are rich roysters and welthy
worldlings, tramplyng under their feet, poor Abel, and the despised
Christians: neither will they change their estate with any such, no when they
are called from darkness to be partakers of light, of life, and the heavenly
daynties, laid up in poor Christ, they despised that estate, excusing their
purchases, their marchaundice, and their earthly lusts and delyghtes. Luke.
14. Wherefore in the other world they that here are ^ppressed shall have
comfort, and the other forment.

Such is the order then of God his working, that by the contrariety of the
chosen and reprobate, of Jacob and Esau, of Pharao and Israel, and the wisdom
of God, and the wisdom of the world, he will set for^h his majesty, his
power, his diuinity^ his Godhead, so much as may be known unto man (that is to
say) in his wisdom, justice, mercy, and almightynesse. For, comparing his
wisdom to any other wisdom, now appears the contrary, that it is very
foolishness, even darkness compared unto light, death unto life, lies unto
truth, as Paul says: When they accoumpted themselves wise, they were made
very fools, and changed the truth with lies: the glory of the immortal God,
to mortal and corruptyble creatures. They following their own righteousness
could not come to the righteousness of God in Jesus Christ.

Wherefore of necessitye God did shut all under sin, that his mercy might
flow over all. And that his mighty power might appear, he has created the
heavens and earth, wherein we do see light and darkness, death and life,
shame and glory, weakness and strength, lies and truth, righteousness and
unrighteousness, to serve to the settying forth of his glory, that man may
be driven to say with Paul: O the depth of the riches of the wisdom and
knowledge of God. How incomprehensyble are his ways? How unsearchable are his
judgments? For who has known the mind of the Lord? Or who has been his
cou^seller. Or who has given him ought aforehand, that he might be repayed?
For by him, and through him, and in him, are all things, to him be praise for
ever. Amen.

And as this holy Apostle Paul does submytte him self to the great depth of
the wisdom of God, and his wonderful Regiment and providence, and would
^eate and drive down all flesh by the consideration of the same. So also all
our Fathers from the beginning has laid this the only foundation of their
faith: Wherefore Moses begins to stablish the faith of man at the history
of the creation, and so forth by the order of God his present governance
about the things made and created. And David for a confession of his faith,
pronounces of this providence. Psalm. 95. I do know that thou art a great
Lord, and a Lord above all Gods. All things whatsoever the Lords pleasure
was, he has made in the Heavens, the earth, the Seas, and the bottomless
waters. Again, by the word of God all things were set in their places, and by
the spyrite of his mouth all the powers that be in them. And Paul consydering
m^st deeply, and pronouncinge most plainly this divine governance of the
creatures, and godly providence of the creator, in all things for his Elect
and chosen, says thus. Roma. 8. We know that all things work for the best
unto them that love God, who also are called of purpose: for those which he
knew before, he also predestinate, that they should be like fashioned to the
shape of his Son. Moreover, whom he has predestinate, those has he called,
and whom he called, the^ he also has justified, whom he has instifyed,
those also has he glorified.

So that this appears to be no new learning or vain doctrine of Gods
providence and Election. But the only ground of faith and certainty of
conscience in all conflictes against the world, the flesh and the devil,
against Sin, Death, and Hell, as the Apostle uses it in the latter end of
the same chapter, and all the Fathers from the beginning has felt it. For how
could Adam by any other work or creature, either by comfort of any other
doctrine, stay his conscience? But in that the Lord God promised to provide
for him, and to save him from his enemy (who once had overcome him) by the
blessed seed, which not by merits, but by mercy and grace, and therefore of
his free purpose before appointed, should be sent unto him, to break the
headde of the Serpent: Why? Should Abraham have left his country and his own
Father^ house, if he had not felt this divine providence: fatherly care, free
choice, and Election of him and his s^de? By the which lively feling of God
his careful providence, and free choice, sending him seed when he was past
hope of seed (concerning his dead body all the works of nature) and by the
stedfastnes of faith in the temptations about the same ^eede, to be made a
slain sacrifice, other grievous temptations and adversities from time to time
laid upon him, this chosen vessel Abraham is called the father of all
faithful. As by his history appears a fatherly care of our God, for all his
people, both for bodies and souls for wife and child, and all together. And
Isack his son, that chosen seed, in whom all the Nations of the earth were
promised to be blessed long before the child was borne, has this promise of
enheritaunce given him by favor, that the promise might be sure to all the
seed as Paul says Romans 14. unto whom and his faithful seed, this free
promise and fatherly Election and Predestination (or what else you will call
it) was again revealed and opened Genes 26. In these words: through thy seed
shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. And the lively sense and feelyng
of this Election and fatherly care of God for him, did then especially shine in
his heart, when the Lord said unto him: Go not into Egypt, ^arie here, I will
be with ^hee, and will bless thee, and through thy seed shall all the nations
of the earth be blessed. Ge. 26. And after that grievous temptation undoubtedly
wherein he was compelled for fear of the Philistines, to deny his wife and
call her sister, and after the manifold contentions with the Philistines,
wherein his God did preserve him, and at the end, in the wonderful miracle of
his children, whose byrthright was altered by the unsearchable providence of
God, the manifest notes and tokens of the free Election and choice of God did
appear. And Jacob chosen and beloved in his mothers womb, felt this free
work of God his great favor, who had chosen him before h^e was borne, and
taking occasion of the necessity of his brother, seeks the byrthright, the
which God had unto him before appointed and promised, renouncing the course of
nature, then does he leave and forsake his fathers house, and patiently takes
all troubles offered unto him. In the which often times undoubtedly he feels
the heavy and grievous temptations that his fathers Abraham and Isaac had
before (for no creature more often suffers trouble than the very Elect of
God) for the experyment of his faith, whereby the lively sense and undoubted
tokens of his favorable election after many battles and victories, might be
made certain and sure, thorough present comfort always ministered unto him,
either by secret inspiration or manifest revelation, witnessing the singular
care of his heavenly Father over him his dearly beloved and chosen child, as
his wonderful vision of the ladder and the Angels descending from heaven does
declare, and the other vision wherein the Angel did show him the party
colored sheep for his portion, to multiply and increase his substance: as
also when God bids him go into his own countreye from his d^^eytfull
Laban, and defends his Jacob from him: And finally the glorious victory given
unto him over the ^^gell, comforting him against the feate of his brother Esau,
does bring forth unto his heart and conscience the assured sign and token of
the favor of his heavenly father, first election and choosing, and after
evermore governing, g^i^ing, and preserving by the free mercy of his divine
providence.

Ieremye also chosen in his Mothers womb, as appears in the first chapter of
his Prophecy, where it is said from the mouth of God: before I fashioned thee
in thy Mothers womb I did know thee, and or ever thou wast borne I did
sanctify thee and ordained thee to be a Prophet unto this people, then felt
the most lively signs and t^kens of his Election, when his ^leshe repined,
grudged and feared to take in hand the execution of this great and da^ngerous
embassage, and the power of God his spirit does touch his heart, and opens
his mouth to the planting and rooting up of all people and kingdoms to break,
destroy, and make waste, and raised him as a fenced town, a brazen wall, and
iron pyller against the kings, priests, and people of the land. Now though
sometimes his flesh does grudge for the burden, of his office, and anguishe of
heart, as though he had been an abiecte or Reprobate, yet always after the
brunt of temptations uttering his weakness, he finds the merciful
providence of his heavenly father, to take a continual care of him, and not
only comfort and assist him, but also most evidently to punish his enemies.

And to be short, all the elect of God are thus chosen and called, guided, and
governed from their mothers womb, according to the saying of the princely
Prophet: Thou art he that takeste me from my Mothers womb, thou wast my
hope, yet when I hanged upon my Mothers breasts. I have been left unto thee
ever since I was borne, thou art my God even from my Mothers womb. And then
do they feel most sensibly and lively this their Election, when temptations
and adversities does a^aile and assault them, in the which conflicts of the
flesh, and the spirit, of sin and grace, of light and darkness, they are
compelled to cry and call, to sigh and sobbe before their heavenly Father for
the deliverance of this mortal and sinful booy subdued to vanity: and though
they do most evidently perceive how they are called from darkness to light,
from love of iniquity, to the hatred of the same, from obedience sometime given
to Satan and to the lusts of the flesh, to the obedience of the spirit,
which fights against the flesh, and though, I say, they perceiving this, be
not able to quench these raging lusts yet do they mourn and daily lament,
calling for the grace of their heavenly father, which lamentations, sighings
and sorowyngs of their sins, be the sensible feelings and lively signs and
tokens of Gods infallible and sure Election. Wherefore whosoever shall feel
these secret sighs and mournings, thereby hating ^^nne and desiring therfro^
to be delivered, considering their own weakness, and by the fruit, and a good
man forth of the good treasure of his heart does bring forth good works, and
the evil man evil works. This does James bid us, to show our faith of our
works, and says, that Abraham did thus utter his faith by his works, and
Rahab by her works, and were justified. Where we are compelled with all the
godly learned to expound the word justified, declared to be just, or else we
do make James contrary to him self, contrary to Moses, whose sentence he in
the same place alleges, contrary to Paul, and the whole course of
Scriptures. And thus must all the general sentence of works be
understood, that by these works wherein God will have us to walk, we are
known to have his spirit to be good trees, and so judged by our fruits: as
is the good Apple tree by the Apples, not that the Apples make him good, but
testifye that he is good, and that it has within it self a kindly power of
good iui^^ and norishment. So we feeling the power of the spyryte workinge in
our hearts. Godly motions, and so brynging forth good fruits of faith and
good works, do confirm our Election and vocation, as Peter speaks, to our
selves and others.

The second use of works is, that God in us by them may be gloryfied. Whereof
our savior Christ says, Mat. 5. Let your light so shine before men, that they
seeing your good works, may glorify your father which is in heaven. And this
is the chief use of good works, the laud and glory of God, where unto we
were first created in the earthy Adam, and now are a new restored by the
heavenly Adam, Christ Jesus, to walk in good works, and to be holy, blameless
and without fault. And to this end, that God in them might be gloryfied, does
scripture commend unto us good works, and sets forth the crown of glory to
them that therein are exercised. So ru^ne that ye may obtain, says the
Apostle, labor for the crown incorruptible. 1. Cor. 9.

Now because these latter days are the times wherein our Savior Christ did
say, that ^ayth should fail, and charytie should ware cold, we that have so
clear revelation of Gods great mercyes wishing always to be of more
perfection, let them with all thanks geeuinge unto God rejoice, knowing that
this proceeds not from flesh nor blood, but from the spirit of our head Jesus
Christ, who makes intercession for his afflicted members (who are his
Saints) with unspeakable gronings. Whom though for a time he do permit to
be afflicted, both in spirit and body, as sometimes he did Job, Jonas,
Jeremy, and other: yet at the end he gives unto them most triumphant
victory, according to the everlasting purpose of his divine providence, who
is to be feared, reverenced, renowned and praised for ever. So be it.

Heretofore have we answered generally to them that would make God the Author
of evil, and to them which do say, that this doctrine takes away exhortations
and threatninges, and the preaching of the word. Now by the grace of God, we
will more briefly answer to some arguments which they bring forth of the
scriptures, setting aparte all such cauyllations as man's reason (which in Gods
mysteries can never be satisfied) by the craft of the devil does excogitate,
and inue^t. But first we will speak something of good works, and the true
understanding of those scriptures which commend them unto us, lest we should
seem to dissuade men from the same, or exte^^ate the meaning of the holy ghost
in such sentences as our adversaries do wickedly pervert for the maintenance
of man's power against this doctrine of grace and free Election, which dare
affirm that by works they purchase part of their salvation, the which (as we
have said) is freely given by this Election in Christ Jesus before the
foundation of the world was lay^^.

The good works which are so in deed, that is to say, which proceed of the
spirit of adoption, and the feeling of Gods mercies in electing, calling and
justifying, first of all have this use, y^ they declare the power of God to be
in us, and the spyrite of Christ, which does conform us to his image: and this
is the end whereunto we are Elected and Predestinate to be conformed to the
Image of his son. Romans 8. Elected before the foundation of the world, to be
holy and blameless. Ephesians. 1. Created unto good works, which God has prepared
for us to walk therein. Ephesians. 2. These have the reward, as Paul says, not
only of this life, but of the world to come. Therefore says our Savior
Christ. Math. 25. Come ye blessed of my father, possess the kingdom prepared
for you from the beginning of the world. I was hungry, and ye gave me meat: I
was thyrstie, and ye gave me drink. etc.

Of this excellent commendation and reward of good works, we do learn the
dignity of the same, not of the worthiness of themselves, which are never able
to stand in Gods judgments: for our very righteousnesses are, as Esaias says,
as clothes fylthily polluted, but of the dignity of the grace of the promise
of God, who works them in us. For it is God, says Paul, that works in us
both the will and also the work, even of his purpose. Phi. 2. Therefore all is
of grace, not of works, least any should glory. Ephesians. 2. For if there were any
power in our selves, or dignity in the works, then had we some thing to glory,
but now that all is confessed to be of Gods free mercies, and nothing of our
selves, we conclude that God crowns and rewards his own works in us, that
who so gloryeth should glory in the Lord. 1. Cor. 1. ^n^ where some ^^edge this
place. Ma. 26 so to commend works that they should be the cause of the
Election and the favor of God, they do not consider the first words: Come you
blessed of my Father, inheryte the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning
of the world. Wherein we may note, that they being the blessed and beloved of
the father, are called to the inheritance of the heavenly kingdom, not won by
works, but prepared by the heavenly Father for his children, before they did
any works at all: Like as the wicked have their place of eternal torment, there
named for them before, prepared and appointed. And in both twain the works
both only declare what the trees are where out they spring, and testify what
the fountain is whence they flow: according as^ our savior Christ says: the
tree is known in Jesus Christ may give no occasion to the slothful flesh,
either in our selves or others: but after the example of the Scriptures, we
must always exhort to good works, and so tame our bodies and bring them into
subjection (as Paul says) least whiles we preach to others, we our selves be
found Reprobates. 1. Corin. 9. The which sentence is evil aledged of the
adversaries of Election, as though Paul might have become a Reprobate, or as
if that he had not been certain of his salvation, but that it should hang of
his well doings. For he says first in the same sentence, I do so ru^ne, not
as at an uncertain thing, and so fight, not as one that beats the air: but
as he says to the Romans. chap. 8. I am sure that neither death nor life,
neither Angels, nor rule, neither power, neither things present, neither
things to come, neither high, neither low, neither any other creature, shall be
able to depart us from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord. Likewise they
allege forth of the second Chapter to the Phillippians, that Paul wylleth
us to work^ our own salvation: but they do not consider that he straight
ways adds, that it is God which works both the will and the work. And
in the chapter before, he says, that it is God which has begone y^ good work,
and will finish it. So that such Scriptures may never be alleged for works
against grace, for ^o set up our salvation of our selves, which only comes
of mercy in the free Election, whereby we were chosen in Christ Jesus, and
created a new in him, by his only spirit to bring forth good works.
Therefore do we conclude with Paul. Romans. 11. that we are saved and
justified freelye by grace, not by works, for so grace were no grace, and that
all are shut up under sin, that mercy may be upon all, upon whom it
pleasethe him to show mercy. And for the consideration of these great
mysteryes of Election and Reprobation, we cry with Paul: O ^he depth of the
riches of the wisdom ^f God. How unsearchable are his judgments? and how
inco^prehensible his ways? For who has given him first, and he she be
recompensed? For of him, and through him, and for him are all things. To him
therefore be glorye^ for ever and ever. So be it.

Romans 9. I will show mercy upon whom I will show mercie^ and I will have
compassion upon whom I will have compassion.

Imprinted at London for Thomas Woodcocke, d^^^ling in Poules Church yard, at
the sign of the black Bear.


