Two very learned Sermons of M. Beza, together with a short sum of the sacrament
of the Lords Supper:

Whereunto is added a treatise of the substance of the Lords Supper, wherein is
breflie and soundly discussed the p^incipall points in controversy,
concerning that question. By T. W.

2. Corinthians. 13.5. Prove your selves whether ye are in the faith: Examine
your selves. Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you,
except ye be reprobats? AT LONDON Printed by Robert Walde-graue, for T. Man,
and T. Gubbins. Anno. 1588.

TO THE RIGHT honorable and very virtuous lady, Brigit, countess of Bedford:
and to the right worshipful and his very good friends, sir CHARLES MORISINES
knight, and the lady DOROTHIE MORISINES his wife, T. W. wishes together
with all outvvard abundance of worldly blessings the continual comfort of a
good conscience here, and the eternal salvation of their souls at the last
through Christ.
THe consideration of the christian favors, which you (right honorable, right
worshipful, and my very dear friends) have carried toward me, and the
memory of some benefits that I have received from you, has sundry times so
affected my heart, that I could not, but in the good remembrance thereof, in
some measure of vnfeinednesse, as in respect of God, praise his holy name for
those his mercies, and as in regard of you, with earnestness pray unto him,
for your prosperous estates, and that in the best things especially, and as in
consideration of my self, think upon some good mean, whereby I might at the
least show my self, in some sort mindful of, and thankful for the same.
Whatsoever I write in this behalf, I utter it (I humbly thank God for it)
not vain gloriously to boast, before God or men, in any thing I have done,
for I know and feel in my self, that (over and besides my gross and grievous
iniquities) even in the best services that ever I performed in piety toward
God, or in charity toward his people, there was by reason of mine own
corruption, and the imperfections that through the same did cleue thereunto,
matter sufficient enough, in truth to abase and to humble me indeed: neither
yet as cunningly to crave daily and new kindnesses (a vice too common in this
corrupt age) the Lord having bin pleased in that behalf, to bestow upon me
more simplicity, than by fawning flattery to fetch from my friends, any
thing that might satisfy large affections, or relieve present want. But to
these ends I protest, and that in singleness of heart, have I declared the
same, namely that all my christian acquaintance, and amongst others your
honor and worships especially might be assured, that the good you have done
me, though at the first it might seem to be cast away, in as much as present
testification of my grateful mind were not then pressed and ready, has not
yet utterly been lost, because now at the length God has enabled me by some
small means to declare the contrary: and again, that I my self feeling my
self now and then, by Gods grace I doubt not (for as I know, so I freely
confess, that in my flesh, that is to say, in my self, dwells nothing that
is good) stirred up to such holy duties, might receive, not in the things as
performed by my self, but as they are graces of God, flowing from his
goodness, and wrought by his word and spirit, both some comfort in the days
of my great grief and heuinesse of heart, and some encouragement to goodness
also, when mine own dullness and backwardness to the same, not only arises
up in me, but stands against it, as with force and might, to stop and hinder
me therein. In regard whereof also, I do at this time humbly offer and
present unto you (right honorable and right worshipful) together, first a
sound discourse or two, which that learned man M. Beza wrote, and I long ago
translated, and withal a short sum, that I my self penned heretofore, and
have enlarged again all of them touching that great question of the Lords
supper. For that worthy man's worthy works, I dare protest and aver, that if
the excellency, either of the man, or matter, or manner, may purchase a
fruitful commendation, and procure favorable acceptance (with them that fear
God I mean, and love his truth sincerely) it shall not want either the one or
the other. For as concerning the writer himself, he is one of the woonders and
woorthies of the world at this day, a man of rare parts every manner of way
(whatsoever some, either of ignorance in themselves, or pride of themselves,
bark out against him to the contrary) whether we respect sound knowledge and
judgment, in the toongs and truth of God, or faithful pains, and fruitful
travels in his ministry and place. And as for the work, it concerns a
great ground of our christian faith, and the same controuerted, not only
between the superstitious papists and us, in the question of
transubstantiation, but with such also as in the common profession of Gods
holy word and religion, we charitably take for our brethren, though otherwise
in this point, ouershot as we say, and ouerseene also. The manner of handling is
deep and profound, and not shallow or mean, after the manner and dealing of
other men, there being for the more full explication of the question, deducted
and laid out, sundry of the fundamental points and principles of our
christian faith, and namely touching the several and distinct natures of God
and man, and the personal union of them in our savior Christ. But for mine
own I mind not to say much, specially as in commendation thereof. That which I
think, I will plainly express, and protest also, namely that as nothing of
mine, is in any respect meet, to behold the light of this learned age, both by
reason of mine own wants and insufficiency, and also by means of the great
ripeness of knowledge and judgment, that God has shed abroad into the hearts
of many men: so I confess my self and my writings, much more unworthy,
either the same day to be named with that worthy man of the world, or any
manner of way to be joined with his. And yet if the church approve that which I
do, and the godly receive some profit by it to spiritual edification, I
shall much rejoice therein, not as in respect of that I have done (for I
acknowledge my self to have nothing save that which I have received) but as in
regard of the good effects, that it has through Gods almighty and secret
blessing, brought forth in the hearts of them, that have bin or shall be
acquainted therewith: in which treatise, I have specially labored two things.
First in the days of so great blindness and ignorance, amongst the multitude
and common sort of people, as now prevails, to instruct the simple as much as
I could in the sound knowledge of these most holy mysteries, that so neither
with the idle and unskillful conceits of their own heads, nor with the
superstitious and erroneous opinions of other men concerning the same, cast
abroad into the world as baits to catch them, they might be deceived, and
carried away into untruth, as if it were with a violent tempest and whirlwind.
And secondly, that in the midst of so great and general carelessness, of
fitting and preparing men for such worthy graces, as be exhibited and offered
there (howsoever a common corruption that way, has almost carried all away) I
might at the least, by reaching them my weak hand and feeble arm, if not
altogether pull some out of that puddle, and so bring them to more comfortable
and sanctified use of these pledges of Gods grace, and their faith in the same,
yet let them behold my love and sound affection for the effecting thereof to my
uttermost. How I have pursued these points, and atteined that I aimed at, let
the godly judge, to whose good censures, I do willingly submit my self, and
all things that shall come from me praieng charitable construction in that I
have done, and brotherly admonition if any thing I have failed. How it shall
prevail, either with many or any I know not: the gracious issue and blessing
thereof I leave to the Lord, who if our sins hinder not, standing between
him and us, as a huge and high wall, can and will no doubt make it effectual
in the minds of many, to their spiritual good. But if your honor (good
madame) and you (right worshipful and my very good friends) together with
them that depend upon you, and belong unto you, may reap christian
instruction, and holy comfort thereby, and having faith and a good conscience
in all things, may by this and other holy means graciously grow, and
mightily continue, with the increaces of God, even unto the fruition of
eternal life at the last through Christ, I shall have that, which I greatly
wish and desire, and shall think my poor pains well satisfied and answered,
in the good that shall light upon them, whom I do (as duty also requires)
unfeignedly both reverence and love in Jesus Christ. Thus humbly praieng
pardon of my boldness for this dedication, and earnestly craving acceptance
of my simple travels, according to that accustomed courtesy that you are wont
to show to them, that come to shroud themselves under you, I do in the most
dutiful manner that I may or can for this present time end. At London the sixth
of this February: 1587.

Your honors and worships alvvaies dutiful and bounden in Christ Jesus T.W.
the Lords vnvvoorthie servant.

THE FIRST HOMILY, made the seventh day of April, in the year 1574.
I Being about to speak of the Lords supper, will begin with the words of our
savior out of the seventeenth chapter of the gospel after John. John. 17.3.
This is (says the Lord Jesus) life everlasting, that they know thee to be the
only true and very God, Two things principally to be observed in the text.
and him whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. Out of these words therefore we
understand or gather two things: The first is, that our salvation The knowledge
of God without Christ, is nothing to salvation.
so that he that perceives somewhat of God, or knows him without Christ,
perceives or knows nothing at all to salvation. Whereupon also this
necessarily follows, that if we once perceive the person and office of
Christ (for these two things must be joined together) we do withal understand
the true and only way of eternal life.

And forasmuch as the controversy touching the Lords supper must be directed
to this end or mark, this must also be confessed, that the controversies
sprung up and arisen touching these points cannot be taken away or ended,
neither can we understand or perceive what we should truly and rightly
determine concerning the lords supper, except we begin with these things, which
must needs be known, touching Jesus Christ. Therefore before we come to
entreat of the matter it self, that is to say, of the supper of the Lord, we
will show what we ought by the word of GOD to believe concerning Christ. Sound
knowledge of Christ's person and offices, will overthrow many heresies.
Certeinelie the thing it self will declare, that that foundation or
groundworke being once laid, it will come to pass, that many errors will of
their own accord, without any other help, fall down together and vanish
away: for it is certain and manifest, that many questions tossed to and fro,
and handled touching this point, have sprung from hence, Ignorance and
hypoc^isie, two great means to maintain error.
because that some, which do so stiflie defend this their opinions, either have
not understood, or else dissembled, what we ought to judge and believe touching
Christ. Wherefore some points being first put down, we will afterward by this
rule examine diverse, yea, repugnant and contrary opinions touching the Lords
supper, and will affirm such as are agreeable to these steadfast and
immovable principles, to be true, and such others as shall swerve from them,
to be false.

In Christ we have, I say, Two things cheeflie to be considered in Christ.
specially to consider two things: his person, and his office. By the word
person we understand His person: of which he speaks in this homily.
And his office we call that duty or charge which the father laid upon him,
to save us, which thing he himself did most perfectly and His office: of
which he speaks in the next homily.
Now in the first place we must speak of Christ's person, which we must of
necessity determine to be such a one, that he was fully and thoroughly able
to endure and fulfill that duty: for unless it be certain that Christ was
such a one, as was able to accomplish all things necessary, meet and
apperteining to his charge, we shall in vain reason or dispute concerning his
office. In Christ's person two things.
In Christ therefore there are to be considered these two things, to wit, the
The whole person it self.
and the very person it self, compacted as a man The two natures whereof it
consists.

First he shows what we must understand by natures in Christ.


of these natures. By the natures we understand not natural power as when we
say, this is the nature of a man, of a beast, of a plant, of this or that
thing, neither formal power (for so they should be two persons, of which
Christ should consist) but these two substances whereof Christ's person
consists, and is as it were compacted. A similitude.
As for example, if we say that man is made of two natures, the one spiritual,
which is the nature of the soul, the other bodily, which is the nature of the
body: Eutyches affirmed, that Christ had but one nature, that is to say, divine
or of God, like as he was but one person. He was about the year 450, as some
think. His error was condemned in the Ephesine council.

Nestorius deemed our savior to be God. He was as some suppose, about the
year 419.


so we also say and affirm, that Christ consists of two natures, of which
one is the Godhead, and the other is the manhood.

By the way I will speak this thing, that we are constreined to use new
speeches, that we may avoid new errors, or else old ones new polished and
trimmed, with which many men at this day do entangle and snare themselves:
for, as in proper place hereafter we will show, there have risen and sprung up
within our remembrance certain men, who renewing partly the error of
Eutyches, and partly of Nestorius, have in stead of the word Godhead, brought
in divinity, and therefore we are enforced to distinguish Godhead from
divinity. And verily Paul spoke not rashly where he says that the fulness
of the godhead dwells in Christ, where he uses also, Colloss. 2.9.
not the word (...), that is divinity, but (...), that is deity or Godhead:
The Gretians do in their terms more fitly express religion than the
Latinists.
for the Gretians, I know not by what mean, do much better and more
effectually express these things than the Latins do, as also in this
argument, or matter, I would more gladly and willingly for plainness sake say
and use (...), that is hominitas, if it be lawful to speak so in Latin, or
as you would say, man's nature, or the very state and condition of man's nature,
rather than humanity or manhood,

Then we perceive and understand, that in Christ's person, there are two
substances, to wit, the Godhead and the manhood, Athanasius.
as we say. So speaks Athanasius in that famous confession of his, saying
that he was consubstantiall, that is, of the self same substance with the
father, and as he himself expounds it, God of the substance of the father,
and man of the substance of his mother, that is, of the same substance that we
are. Afterward the church used the word (...), Synodus Chalcedonensis.
that is nature. We confess, says the Chalcedon synod, that the son
consists of two natures. Neither in deed was the term nature unadvisedly
used, or rashly taken up, albeit it if we would narrowly consider the
property of the word, the word (...), that is nature, does not agree to the
divinity, for it is derived or comes (...), that is, The reasons moving the
fathers to use the word, Nature.
to be borne or sprung up, which agrees well to a thing created, but not to
God himself, the creator. Wherefore this seems to be the reason, which led
and moved the fathers to use this word, because they reasoned and disputed
against Eutyches, by whom not only the very natures themselves, but also
the proprieties of the natures were confounded and shuffled together. Now
because Eutyches did maintain and defend both these errors, and the word
(...), does beside the substance comprehend and set out the proprieties also,
by which proprieties, that nature is defined, and made to differ from others,
therefore it seems that the fathers used the word nature. In sum, let us
resolve upon this, and set it down as an undoubted truth, that when we say,
Christ consists of two natures, we mean his deity and humanity, that is his
Godhead, and man's nature.

Let us now come to the word Person. Touching the term person.
The later writers have called that person, which the former called (...), and
the Latin writers have retained and kept in use this word person. Now amongst
divines, and in their writings (...) that is substance, and (...), that is
person, are distinguished after this sort: Substance and person distinguished.
under the word (...); or (...) in the plural number, are meant the persons
which are in the common essence or being, having the propriety joined
thereunto, whereby one (...) a person is separated or distinguished from the
other, and by the word (...), that is substance, God or the Godhead it self is
signified and meant, but the Father, the son, and the Holy spirit, are
called (...), that is persons. Neither was it rashly or unadvisedly done,
that the church has used the name of person, Boethius.
which Boethius has defined thus, saying that it is ye communicate property of
a reasonable substance, because many did through very great error, freely and
indifferently use these two words (...), that is person, and (...), for one
and the self same thing. So the Latin writers for (...) or person, used and
said substance, even as the logitians are wont so to call it: wherefore that
this doubtfulnesse might be avoided, the word (...) began to be used.

Now let us speak more plainly what we call person, or mean by that name,
when we entreat of Christ, whether that, which is as it were compounded, of the
Godhead taking, and of the flesh taken, so that, if it might be lawful for us
to divide Christ into his parts, one part of his person should be his Godhead,
and the other part his manhood? Christ's manhood cannot properly be called a
person, and the cause thereof.
Not so at any hand, for Christ is not said or called a person properly in
respect of his humanity or manhood, but of his divine nature only, and yet
that not to be separated from his manhood. This is the cause or reason thereof:
If Christ's humane nature had been, before it was taken of the divine nature:
that is to say, of the word, there should then be an vnton of two persons, and
not of two natures, and therefore Christ should be a person compact of two
persons, whereupon would ensue many absurd, unprofitable, yea altogether wicked
and ungodly matters, whereof now there is neither time nor place to speak.
Therefore thus it must be determined, that the divine nature took on it the
humane nature, forming and fashioning it: and even whiles it was formed and
fashioned, to have taken it unto it self, that is to say, that Christ's
humane nature was never extant, or had being, but in the Godhead: wherefore the
humane nature in Christ, Christ as he is God, is a person, and his godhead is
a nature, as also his manhood.
is not a person, but the humanity subsisteth, and has his being in this
person of the word, and therefore Christ is not either in imagination or in
deed, a double person, but one person consisting of two natures. For the word
is both a nature and a person, but the manhood is not of it self, any other
thing than a nature, which (as they speak in the schools) is become a person,
There is but one son of God, as there is but one Christ.
and is vpholden in the godhead taking it unto it self, so that now there are
not two sons, to wit, one eternal and natural, or of the substance and
being of the father, and another created and adopted, but that only eternal
son of GOD, sustaining and upholding the nature united to himself, so that
also there are not two Christ's, but one only, God and man together, from the
time that he knitte or united to himself the nature which he took. Now we
learn what we may call the person of Christ, What the person of Christ is.
to wit, the son of God manifested in the flesh.

Let us come now to the word union: for uniting is that whereby these two
natures, to wit, the godhead or the person of the word, and the humanity or
manhood are coupled together. The Grecians call this (...), What union or
uniting is.
that is, the coupling or joining together of two things or more, in such
sort, that of those many things coming together, some one certain thing is
compounded or made. There are diverse sorts of uniting.
And there are diverse kinds of vnitings: for sometimes nature Uniting, and
union, or unity differ much.
Wherefore uniting is one thing, and unity or oneness (as a man might say)
is an other thing. For one or oneness is not a number, neither does it
necessarily presuppose a number^ except in things compounded, but is the
beginning of a number. Therefore we hold, that there is in christ, a unity or
oneness indeed of the person, and an uniting of the natures.

These words are diligently to be marked, and so much the more, because ye
neglect thereof brings forth great confusions and troubles in these
disputations and matters. Certainly, (...), that is, uniting, and (...), that
is, unity, or oneness, are altogether diverse matters. For in the mystery of
the Trinity, there is unity or oneness of the essence, and a Trinity in the
persons. Again, on the other side, there is in Christ an uniting of the
natures, and an unity or oneness of the person. Wherefore the Fathers said
well, that in the divinity, there is not an other thing, and an other thing,
that is to say, In the godhead there is but one simple being.
two things (for in the divinity there is but one only and most simple
essence or being) but an other and an other meaning persons. For the Father is
one, an other is the Son, and the Holie-ghost is an other. The reason is,
because when we say another, we mean the person: when we say an other thing,
we mean the nature. Wherefore there is not an other thing in the divinity,
for so there should be multiplication or multitude of Gods. In Christ on the
other side, there is an other thing, In Christ there is two natures, but not
two persons.
and an other thing (because the godhead is an other thing than the manhood)
and not an other, and an other, because Christ is but one subsistence or being,
consisting not of two persons, but of man's nature being taken, which has his
subsisting and being in the divine nature.

Let us now come to a more full and large declaration of the word union, or
uniting. This kind and manner of union or uniting, Errors cannot be well
confu^ted, til the personal union be well known.
is called personal: upon the true definition of which personal union
depends the confutation of most great errors, wherewith too many at this
present are sick and infected, as we shall well perceive, when we shall come to
the matter it self: wherefore we must describe the personal union out of the
very word of God. Isaiah. 7.14. Matthew. 1.23.
First Isaiah says, that this our savior is Immanuell, that is, God with us.
John. 1.14.
John expounding the fulfilling of this prophecy, says, that the word became,
or was made flesh. Now because a thing may be said to be made many ways,
that manner of being made is declared by the Apostle, in the epistle to the
Hebrews, Hebr. 2.1^.
when he says, that the son took the seed of Abraham. Therefore the word
taking, opens and declares this saying of John: And the word was made flesh,
and both these laid together do also declare, how Christ is God with us: and
all these things laid or joined together do show and determine what the
personal union is. They which have not interpreted that place of John, Three
errors by misinterpreting the words of John.
out of the place in the epistle to the Hebrews, have fallen into diverse
errors: for some have expounded it thus, the word was made flesh, because
Apollinaris taught that the son of God took only the body of a man, and
not a reasonable soul. Tripartit. hist. lib. 5. cap. 44. and lib. 9. cap. 3.
Basil. epist. 74. August. lib. and Hier lib. 9. He was about the year 380.
But beside that this opinion of Apollinaris is by almost infinite plain
testimonies of scripture refuted, this also necessarily follows, that except
the word had taken the soul unto it, likewise our souls should of necessity
be lost, because that only shall be saved which Christ restored in his own
person, neither could Christ properly have suffered (that I may let slip
many other most absurd points) seeing that the soul properly is Roman. 8.3.
in these words of Paul, God sending his own son in the similitude of sinful
flesh, etc: whom the old fathers called (...). They had a double name, Docitae,
or Docetae, and sprung indeed (as some suppose) from Simon Magus, who held,
that Christ came not in the flesh, but that he was Christ. They held as the
Marcionites did, that Christ suffered in a fantasy or ghost: See homil. 2.
following.
If these men's opinions were true, christ should not be in very deed Jesus, or
a Savior, as indeed one that had not bin born or had Nestorius, whose heresy
what it was is opened before.
For Nestorius interpreted these words, the word became flesh after this
manner, that is to say, the godhead of the Son of God did most plentifully
and fully power forth, the power and force thereof into that flesh which it
took. The absurdity of the former interpretation.
Which interpretation if it be true, Christ is not God, but divine, or as you
would say, god-like or heavenly, and though he be the most excellent amongst
saints and holy ones, yet he is not to be worshipped, neither to be accounted
as a Savior.

Whereas notwithstanding Paul attributes unto Christ, Coloss. 2.^.
not the fullness of the divinity, but the fullness of the deity or godhead,
and to be both GOD and man (which is a proper title to our savior Christ) is
far different from this, to be one that bears or carries God. So that
Nestorius makes Christ God, not by the union of the very hypostasis or person
of the word, but accounts him as most divine, only by the presence, coming,
and force, or by the effusion or spreding abroad of gifts: and beside that,
loosing, or destroying Christ's person, he makes him a mere or only man, he
places also the person in his flesh a manhood: whereas on the other side, the
flesh taken is sustained and vpholden, in, and by, the godhead taking it.
Eutyches heresy confuted.


Eutyches falling into the contrary error thought that by these words, Three
most gross errors flowing from Eutyches his heresy.
the word was made or became flesh, this was meant that the person or
hypostasis of the word was changed into flesh, and for the uniting of the
natures, he substituted or established the abolishing of the Godhead, that is
to say, darkness for light: in which Exodus 4.2.
and began to be a serpent, Aristotle.
even as Aristotle teaches, that by the depriving or taking away of one form,
another is brought in. But if drink called Mulsum, made of wine and honey
sodden together, is neither wine nor honey alone, but a certain matter
compounded or made of them both: and what can be imagined more wonderful and
monstrous than these errors? The right interpretation of some words profitable
to confute sundry errors.
But all these errors, are both most shortly and also most soundly confuted,
if the word of assuming or taking, be rightly expounded: that is, by the
comparing or conferring of other places of the Scripture. Wherefore declare at
the length will some say, The personal union what it is.
what is the hypostaticall or personal union in Christ? It is the taking of
man's nature, which is sustained or vpholden of the divine nature, that is to
say, such a taking or uniting, that there proceeds or comes out of that
uniting, but one subsistence or being only, in which subsistence, that divine
nature, that is to say, the person of the word bears swaie, or rules. I
repeat this again: The hypostaticall or personal union is that, from which
reboundeth or proceeds our hypostasies or person: for the more plain
manifesting and declaring whereof the fathers have used the similitude of the
body and the soul, Athanasius.
Athanasius, who was a most constant defender and stout maintainer of this
truth, being chiefly the author thereof. A similitude.
Wherefore as a certain soul, being joined to a certain body, makes one
certain person, as Peter, Paul, John. So that eternal word of the Father,
took unto it that flesh of the virgin, that is to say, made the same so
proper unto it self, that from hence comes and proceeds that person,
which is called Christ. It appears plainly unto us, out of the words of
Christ in the tenth chapter of the gospel according to John, John. 10.18.
that we must needs consider this mystery or sectet after this sort. Christ
there says, I have power to lay down my soul or life, and to take it again.
For necessary is it that Christ should so speak, either secretly in respect
of his body, The place of John 10. expounded: which cannot be understood
either of the
or in respect of his soul, or else in respect of his body and soul
together, or else distinctly and plainly in respect of his godhead. Christ
could not so say in respect of the body considered by it self, Body alone
because the body is not said to lay down a soul or to take it again,
because so excellent an action cannot be attributed to an instrument that which
is rather subject to the soul. or Soul alon^
But is it in respect of the soul it self considered by it self? No indeed:
for then Christ should rather have said: I have power to lay down my self a
soul, and to take up again my self a soul. Verily in the resurrection, the
soul is not taken up again, but the body: therefore these words cannot be
ascribed to Christ, either in respect of his body only, or in respect of his
soul only: or of them both together,
What then is it in respect of them both together? No, rather necessary is it
that we refer it to some third thing, which may be said to lay down, and
to take up his soul. Wherefore Christ so spoke according to his deity: and
when he says, but of the godhead.
that he has power to lay down his life, and to take it again, he does
again open that mystery or secret which we handle. For the very natures
indeed so joined together, are in such sort set out, that not two things,
but one alone is established, and that without confusion, yet so that the one
nature bears rule. And it is meet to be marked that Christ says: I have
power to lay down, not every soul, but mine own. Wherefore this cannot so
be taken, nor referred to this end, that God should be the lord of all being
things, but he shows, that that soul of his which he would lay down and take
again, was otherwise his soul, than other men's souls are theirs. How then is
it Christ's soul will some men say? Verily by personal union. The scripture
says that God dwells in us, John. 4.12.
and yet we believe and confess, that he dwells not in his saints, by his
union or uniting: 1. Corinthians. 6.19.
For our bodies are so the temples of the holy ghost, that yet they make not
one subsiste^ce or being with the holy ghost since that the sanctified party is
severally and by himself a certain thing, and so likewise the holy ghost, to
wit, god eternal. So a wicked spirit, and some one possessed with ye same
wicked spirit, are joined together, and yet the unclean spirit is not in man,
as the soul is in the body. For the wicked spirit remains by it self, a
certain thing much like as the ghest is in his inn: and again, the possessed
with the wicked spirit, is so become the inn or lodging place of the wicked
spirit, that yet the ghest is another from him. As for us we affirm, the
person of the word, or son of God so to dwell in that manhood that he has
taken unto him, that he has united himself thereto by a personal union: so
I say, that the nature taken or assumed, being sustained and vpheld in the
nature taking or assuming, makes yet notwithstanding but one person, which is
the eternal word of God. Hereupon it follows that there are not two sons
of God, much less two Christ's, one, the son of Marie, the other, the son of
God, Matthew. 1.21.23
but one Immanuel and savior only. And this is the very true description of
the personal union, as will yet much more plainly appear, if we compare with
this truth touching the personal union: Sundry sorts of errors.
the descriptions that are partly felt from the old heresies, and partly
anew devised by the fresh furbushing of the aforesaid heresies. First, there
are some that fear not openly to say, that the habitation or dwelling of God
in Christ, is not otherwise to be considered in Christ, or that he does no
otherwise dwell in him, than in other men, yea than in other creatures. Iacobus
Andreas assertion, and the same confuted.
Iacobus Andreas in those his Thesis or propositions, by which he blowed to the
field, or bade the battle, wrote the same even in so many words, as you would
say, to wit, that the habitation or dwelling of the son of God in Christ is
not otherwise to be considered than in all other creaturs whatsoever, as in
respect of his essential habitation or dwelling, for God is every where. If a
man demand what shall be the difference of the personal union: this shall be
their answer, that it consists herein, that into all other things the
godhead has powered forth some properties or qualities, but into Christ's
humanity or manhood he has powered all properties. A wonderful thing, that
after that these opinions have now a long while since bin tossed, and by the
solemn and most just judgments of Christ's church, condemned and confounded
by so many darts, as have come from heaven it self, against the authors and
fautors of these ungodly blasphemies, a marvelous thing, I say, that there
should now spring up some, as dare be bold, both by word and writing, to
maintain and defend the same, and that with so great reioicing and
commendation of most unskillful men: for who is he unless he be altogether
blind, that sees not, that if the word be no other wise present in christ,
tha^ in many things, (that is to say, beingly, presently, powerfully as in
schools they were wont to say) that then Christ's person is destroyed, His
heresy is declared before.
as Nestorius taught? And that if we grant an effusion or pouring forth of all
the proprieties of the godhead into the flesh assumed or taken, that then the
other part of the ungodly assertion of Eutyches, Concerning him and his
heresy, see before.
shall be erceted and set up? A wonderful wound indeed flowing from such diverse
matters, to wit, the seperating of the naturs on the one side, and the effusion
or pouring forth of the properties of the one nature into the other, on the
other side, and first in our memory and time most impudently fried, and most
unskillfully by our vbiquitaries defended.

But let us, I pray you, somewhat more narrowly look into the matter, that we
may see what it means. This I say; that if the personal union be to be
defined and determined by the effusion or pouring forth of all properties,
that then this, He overthrows the error by absurdities insuming upon it. The
first absurdity.
which of al things is most false and ungodly will follow thereupon, to wit,
that God is in some sort personally united unto all things created. Why so?
Because the effusio^ or pouring forth of all, and some properties alone, do
not differ genere, as they say, that is, in the general or common kind, but
according to more or less only: wherefore either Christ was not otherwise God
than any other thing, though perhaps he were somewhat more perfect than other
things, or else other things were divine and god-like, but Christ's flesh most
divine and god-like. The second absurdity.
Again, if the definition of the personal union were true, it would follow
thereupon, that the three persons were united, to that flesh that was assumed or
taken, for the essential propriety of the very godhead it self, are common
to the three persons in one and the self-same essence or being: therefore to be
infinite, almighty, knowing al things, present every where etc: (as they
themselves now speak) be not proprieties, either of the father or of the son,
or of the holy ghost, but only of that alone, and altogether singular godhead.
Whereupon it follows, that if we grant that definition of the personal union,
that then the 3 persons of the godhead were incarnat, They were so called,
because they affirmed that God the father suffered. Isiodor. Orig. libr. 8. The
third absurdity.
and took flesh upon them, and so we shall proceed further than the
patropassian heretics. Moreover, by this means the godhead it self should be
spoiled of his most essential proprieties, eue^ this I say which are most
proper thereto, or which do belong unto the same, after the fourth manner or
sort, as the logicians speak, that is to say, do belong unto the whole
Godhead alone unto the Godhead, and always unto the same: for verily, if they
be in deed communicated unto the nature of man that was assured or taken, then
I say they do now cease to be proper to the Godhead, unless we mind to make
these terms, proper and common, all one. But the Lord speaks otherwise in
the prophet saying: I will not give my glory unto another. Isaiah. 48.11. The
fourth absurdity.
What more? Him whom these men in the first part of their Nestorian opinion,
had made of him that was God and man together in one person, but one that
carried or bare God, these now in another part of their Eutychian opinion and
conceit, transform him I say and his flesh (having in deed all the properties
of the Godhead without exception powered into the same) into the Godhead it
self. But now, if there nothing happen to God, or there be no accident in him,
as indeed there is not, for whatsoever is in him, is substance and not
accidents, as they speak in schools, How were the properties (by which he is
distinguished from things created) indeed powered forth into the flesh assumed
and taken, but that also man's nature should be changed into a certain Godhead
that is made or created? He procures an objection.
But if these men will deny (as sometimes I see them by the power of truth it
self constreined to deny) that the monstrous presence every where (for whose
cause only (whatsoever they feign) they propound unto us that monster of
vbiquitie, to be esteemed and reverenced) does not cleave unto Christ's flesh
as to his proper subject, or that it is not accidents, but only as accidents,
then I say, who sees not what monstrous things these are, to ascribe unto the
flesh a real presence every where in it self, though not of it self, the
subject whereof should yet notwithstanding, not be the flesh it self, but the
Godhead, which Godhead for all that, should no otherwise be present to the
flesh, than to all other things whatsoever? And whereof will these men be
ashamed, who are so far off from being ashamed of these matters, that yet
they dare object this against us, that we exact points of divinity and
religion to be handled according to the rules of philosophy? The fifth
absurdity.
Certeinelie, if so be it that the personal union must be defined and
determined, not by the union of the very person of the word, with flesh
assumed or taken, into one and the self same subsistence or being, yet without
any real union, either of the natures themselves or of the essential
properties wherewith they are endued, but by the universal effusion or pouring
forth of powerful graces from the nature assuming or taking, into the nature
assumed or taken (which monstrous opinion fet from the filthy and stinking
puddles, both of Nestorius and Eutyches also, and twice sod Brentius,
Suindelinus, Illyrichus, and these other goodly fellows do propound and
deliver unto the churches of Christ) I say that whether they will yea or no,
this must needs follow upon it, that Christ is neither God nor man, much less
GOD and man together, Chimaera is a monster having three heads, one like a
lion, another like a got, and the third like a dragon.
but a certain Chimaera or monster made of most gross confusion and discord.
Yea, and what means this, that they themselves are of necessity constreined
to except some things, after that they have affirmed that all things are powered
forth. The sixth absurdity.
For these things verily to be without beginning to be of himself etc. Cannot
be attributed to a creature, but they may be personally united, and are in
deed personally united, because that must be true which Christ, himself
says: John. 8.58.
Before Abraham was, I am. And this is true, because that he that after so
many ages passed from the beginning of the world was made, or became the son
of Mary, John. 1.1.
even he I say, is that word which was in the beginning, not so much for his
full effusion or pouring forth of powerful graces, as for the bodily union
or uniting of the Godhead it himself in the person of the word: wherefore, if
we will believe these men, this son of the virgin Marie shall not be
eternal, because there was not powered into the flesh assumed or taken, that
same being without beginning, whereof he cannot be partaker, even as they
themselves confess, who are otherwise large sheders abroad, or rather euerters
and ouerthrowers of all properties. They being thus driven from hense, even as
it were out of some hold or fortress of their own, at the last they retire
hither, or have this starting hole, Another objection answered or rather error
confuted.
to say forsooth, that the personal union consists heerin, that the word
does nothing, but with the manhoood and by the manhood, as the soul does
nothing, but with the body or by the body. Peripatelians were subtle
philosophers of Aristotle's sect and opinion, who had their names of disputing
walking.
I will leave this to the Peripatelians to be reasons of, whether it be true,
that the soul joined to the body does nothing of it self, for there are not
diverse wanting, that do stiflie and stoutly deny the same. But I affirm,
that that definition of the personal union, cannot stand. I grant therefore,
that from the time the eternal word took flesh unto him, that it did not at
any time do any thing without the flesh, the reason is, because this union
is perpetual: and yet for all that, it does not heerevpon follow, that
whatsoever the word did, he did it by the flesh. Though it be granted, I say,
that the word did nothing being separated from the flesh, because that that
flesh which it once took it never laid down, yet it follows not, that
whatsoever the word did, it did it by the flesh, which thing may be showed,
by most assured and manifest examples. The first example.
Christ raised up himself by his own divine power, who also had said of
himself: John. 10.18.
I have power to lay down my soul or life, and to take it again. Did
therefore the Godhead, through the flesh accomplish and perform that work? I
suppose no man will say so. The second example. John. 1.48. Matthew. 9.4.
When Christ beheld Nathaniell absent, did he see him with his bodily eyes?
And when without the disclosing of any other man, he saw the thoughts of his
adversaries, did he this by any sharpness of man's mind or understanding? No
verily. Wherefore he saw all these things as he was God, and not with mind or
body, and yet he saw them not without man, because he being God is man also.
The third example. Matthew. 8.13. John. 9.6.7, etc.
When he healed the Centurians servant being absent, did he that as when he
healed that blind man being present, putting his hand to him, and making the
claie? No in deed. For he wrought this latter, by his hands moved through the
flesh, that is to say, using the instrument of flesh assumed or taken, whereas
he healed the other by the only power of his Godhead. And yet he was not free
from flesh, I confess it. He healed him therefore with the flesh, but not
through flesh. Wherefore in this fellow-working together of the Godhead, and
the nature assumed or taken, the personal union is not deposed or overthrown,
but established rather. Beside though I should grant the antecedent or first
proposition, He grants the adversaries that which they speak, and yet they
gain nothing by it.
to wit, that the word does nothing but with and by the manhood, yet that
would not follow thereupon that they imagine. For though the artificer or
handicrafts man do nothing but by his instrument or tool, An apt similitude.
yet for all that the artificer and his tool are not united into one
subsistence or being: this is my meaning, that that it does or works, is not
therefore united with that, by which he does or works, for the dooer, and
the instrument of doing are two several and distinct things. So the smith or
carpenter is not united with his hammer or mallet. John. 1.3. Hebr. 1.1.
The father created all things through the son, as the holy scripture
witnesses. Now because the father created all things through the son, shall
it thereupon follow, that the father and the son are personally united
together? No verily: For they are, and that in deed distinct persons, Wherefore
neither in the effusion or pouring out of powerful graces, nor in the
communicating of their powerful working together, can the personal union be
well described. Let that rather remain sure, that I have said, to wit, that
that union may rightly be called personal, Personal union, what it is.
by which it comes to pass, that one person of two natures (the natures and
properties of either nature remaining safe and sound) becomes one subsistence
or being: of which two natures one, that is to say, the nature assumed or
taken, has his being in the assuming or taking nature, because if either of
them did subsist or had it being of it self, they should be two persons.
Moreover, before we take in hand to handle the matter it self, we must also
declare, how from this personal union insueth that which the old writers and
fathers were wont to call communicating of the properties: for if both the
natures themselves and the properties thereof do remain safe and sound, then
there remains likewise unto either nature these proper attributes or things
ascribed unto them: and therefore it should seem, that it cannot be attributed
to one nature, which is proper and peculiar to the other. And yet the scripture
so speaks, as when it says that God suffered, Acts. 20.28.
yea and we our selves are taught so to speak, in the apostles symbol or
creed, when we say: I believe in Jesus Christ, the only son of God, who was
conceived, borne, suffered, cru^ified, buried, etc. Certain rules are to be
observed for the right understanding of the communicating of proprieties.
That we may well know and understand this matter, we must earne to distinguish
the things attribu^^ to either nature. If we will speak ^^^perlie and truly,
we say that things attributed to either of the natures, must most properly and
in deed be attributed to be same. The first rule.
And this is the first rule. Wherefore we affirm that Christ, as in respect of
his Godhead, is the eternal son of God, is infinite, is every where, is
eternal, is the creator of all things, cannot die, is invisible, etc. All
which things are truly and properly attributed t^ that nature of the son of
God which is v^ited to flesh. Now these things are proper to his humane nature
or manhood, that it had a beginning, that it was conceived by the Holy ghost,
that it suffered, and at the last rose again. Now from whence comes this
difference? Verily from this, that the natures remain safe, sound, and
unconfounded, least if in the personal union they were confounded, that which
were spoken of ones nature should be attributed to the other. And the second
rule is this. The second rule
Certain things are attributed to, or spoken of Christ, according to his
person and not as in respect of his natures, tha^ is to say, such things in
deed as resp^ct the person, and are attributed to his and person, which cannot
yet be spoken s^uerallie of either of his natures: as for example, if I say
Christ is the mediator: that word mediator, neither to the Godhe^d by it self
nor to the manhood by it self, or apart from the Godhead, but to that whole
person of Christ, for he is a mediator according to either nature: and ^hese
things attributed together to Christ, are personal, that is to say, respect
his whole person, which unless we confess we shall fall into the heresy of
Nestorius and his partakers. And yet in the mean while this and such like, are
so the works of the whole person, Leo. One sort of heretics had both these
names, because they held that Christ had but one will, and one nature, and not
two wills, or two natures answering to his two natures.
that notwithstanding either of the natures does distinctlie bring with it his
proper and peculiar work to this common deed of redemption, mediation, etc. as
Leo teaches in that his famous and worthy epistle, which also we must know
and believe, least we should fall into that other heresy of the Monoth^^its or
Monophysits. And yet the kno^ is not untied, nor the mat^er dispatched.
Therefore we are principalie to mark yet a certain other manner o^ speech
touching Christ, which as it is true in respect of the whole person, These
darcke terms are expounded afterward by the author himself.
den^minated either of the concrets: so it cann^t without great impiety be
attributed (...) either of the natures, considered by themselves, or in the
abstract: as for example, when we say, God (to wit, the word (...) son)
redeemed the church by his blo^d: so we do rightly believe and say, that God
suffered and died, Acts. 20.28.
which that vngod^ie man Nestorius denied. For unless God had been he that
suffered for us, his suf^ering could not have brought salvation unto us.
Wherefore we say that God was ^^rne, suffered, dead, and rose again. And
again on the other side we say, that the son of man was in heaven, when he
spa^e on the earth with Nicodemus. John. 3.13.
And ^his we affirm even by this rule following, to wit, The third rule.
that whatsoever words or terms, are proper to either of the natures, that is
to say, the Godhead or the manhood, they may be changed in the concret, but not
in the abstract. Abstract, and what he means thereby.
But some man will say, What is it that you call the abstract? We call the very
form it self, being by thought seuere^ from the matter, an abstract: as for
example, If I do in my mind comprehend, no some just man or other, but some
justice or righteousness of a man: which also has place in other
predications. Iustic^ therefore or righteousness shall be a c^rteine abstract,
that is to say, a thing c^^sidered by it self, and not in the subject, or
particular party wherein it is. Concret, and what he means thereby.
And ^he concret shall be the matter or man himself, as a just man, to wit, he
that is ^ndued with that justice or righteousness. S^ in Christ, we consider in
the abstract t^o natures, the manhood and the Godhea^, but in the concret we
comprehend him God and man. Therefore let Godhead and ^anhood be the abstracts,
and God and ^an the concrets. And then I say, that the things attributed to
the humanity nay be attributed to God, or spoken of ^im, though they cannot be
attributed to the Godhead, or spoken thereof: and on the other side I affirm,
that such things as be proper to the Godhead may be attributed to man, though
not to the manhood. Wherefore this proposition is true: This man is God, or
this: The eternal word of the father is man: but these are ungodly and
blasphemous: the Godhead is the manhood, or the manhood is the Godhead. So we
must say and believe God, that is to say, the son was borne of the virgin,
suffered, dead, etc. but not the Godhead: for he in deed that is God suffered,
but not his Godhead. 1. Pet. 3 18.
Therefore when Peter says that Christ suffered, he added in the flesh. So
Paul, Romans 1. Romans 1.4.
He was mightily declared to be the son of God according to the spirit. The
cause of this predication or speech in the abstract, is the very personal
union it self, to wit, because that that subsistence or being, or that person
Christ, is by the figure Synecdoche, That is (...) put for the whole.
so denominated of either of his natures. Wherefore, whether he be called man,
he is yet notwithstanding understood to be God, or whether he be called God, he
is like wise understood to be man. But when we speak of the natures
themselves, to wit, either the manhood or the Godhead, by these abstracted
names there is nothing else signified or meant but the several natures in and by
themselves. And least these manner of speeches might seem to any man dark and
strange, He preuenteth an objection.
as though christian religion were contained in certain hidden mysteries and
secrets far removed from common use and understanding, whereas rather on the
other side, the Holy ghost instructing the church, touching these most dark
and hidden matters, has kept a most gross (as you would say) and common mamer
of teaching. Theodoretus. Two similitudes to explain the point by.
Theodoret does rightly and truly tell us, that even the common people are
hardly accustomed to speak any otherwise: for if Peter speak, who would not
rather say that Peter speaks, than say that Peter's body or tongue speaks?
and yet notwithstanding, neither does Peter's mind, nor his foot nor any
other member speak, but his tongue or mouth.

But because these things have even personally grown up (as it were)
together, and are come into one subsistence or being, that is truly in the
concret attributed to, and spoken of the whole, which if it were uttered of the
parts of the whole considered severally, and by themselves, should be falsely
spoken. What more? By reason of this personal union, though now it be
dissolved through death, Peter shall be said to have died and sat at Rome, whose
soul yet notwithstanding, neither ^s dead, neither any where placed upon ^he
earth. So when I say, the eternal ^onne of God died, I consider and mean him
as he is whole Christ, although I denominate him after one of his natures, to
wit, his mortal or humane nature. So again I say: This man forgiueth sins,
and yet not as he is man of himself (for it belongs only to God to forgive
sins) but because he is God and man in one person together. Mark. 2.7.


And this is the manner of speaking which the ancient divines have called the
communicating of proprieties, Communicating of proprieties, and what it is.
which some do not rightly distinguish from making common, and other some
disputing whether it be real yea or no, have bewraied most gross ignorance.
And this may easily be decided and determined by the vnmoouable foundations
abouesaid, if we have not a contentious spirit, whereunto if we should not
yield, doubtless the old sophisters and natural philosophers, if they were
alive at this day, would laugh us to scorn. Religion allows no falsehood.
Divinity and christian religion admits no false matter or point: therefore
that trope or manner of spech touching the communicating of the proprieties, is
altogether true in the concret, that is in Christ's person, being weighed, as if
some whole thing should be considered jointly and together, neither was it
wont otherwise to be used in the church. But in the abstract, that is in the
appellatiue or common name, or name whereby either of the natures be called, it
can never be used without ungodliness, much less can it be taken for true,
that the proprieties of the Godhead may be spoken of the manhood, or the
proprieties of the manhood spoken of the Godhead. And these be the points,
which we being about to speak of the Lords supper, have thought needful to be
propounded and delivered, that therefore remaining behind, may be the better
understood, of which we will, by Gods grace, speak at large in the next
reading or lecture.

THE SECOND HOMILY, or Sermon, made the eight of April. 1574.
THis is the sum of the things that we spoke in the former Sermon, to wit,
The sum of the former Sermon, consisting of four particular points.
that 1 all the knowledge of our salvation, or taken, is sustained and vpheld,
or (as I may so say) made a person, with the nature assuming, that is to say,
the godhead: from Synodus Chalcedonensis.
are as the Synod of Chalcedon says, vndiuidedlie, vnseparablie, and
vnconfoundedlie coupled together in the personal union: necessary is it, that
either of these natures, should have their own proper things attributed unto
them, and therefore, not communicated unto others. Wherefore some things
attributed to the godhead, and somthings also attributed unto the manhood, were
so proper and peculiar to the Godhead, and the manhood, that those that were
attributed to the one, could not be spoken of the other without great impiety
and ungodliness. Notwithstanding, by reason of the personal union (excepting
always that which is attributed to the whole person, and belongs to both
natures, as when Christ is called the mediator, and such like) such things as
are proper to the godhead, and therefore as we have said can never be spoken
of the manhood) are yet notwithstanding attributed to Christ as man: and
again, such things as are proper to man, are spoken, and that rightly of
God, but never, or at no hand of the godhead. The reason is, because that the
subsistence or being is denominated even in the concret of one of the natures
only. So by the Son of GOD, we do many times understand, 1. Timoth. 3.16.
not only the godhead of the son by it self, but Christ manifested in the
flesh. And by the GOD of glory we mean GOD become or made man: and like
wise by son of man, we mean man assumed or taken of the eternal son of God.

Whereby it comes to pass, that by reason of that personal union, some
things in the concret, may be said of the whole person, which yet
notwithstanding in the abstracte, 1. Corinthians. 2.8.
do agree to one of the natures only. So Saint Paul affyrmeth, that the GOD
of glory was crucified, which proposition is not true touching whole Christ,
One and the selfsame proposition true and untrue in several senses.
that is to say, if we regard or consider Christ, as some whole matter,
consisting of some particulars: but not true, if we understand it of all or
every thing belonging to Christ, that is to say, if we severally and
distinctlye consider his several natures, because the name of the GOD of
glory, does in the abstract agree or belong, to the only godhead. Wherefore
this proposition is true in the sense as before, whereas otherwise it is a
wicked and an ungodly thing to say, that the godhead was crucified. Likewise
in the creed of the Apostles, Symbol. Apost.
we say, that we believe in Jesus Christ the only Son of God, conceived,
borne, suffered, etc: all which are truly and christianly spoken. And why so?
Because that by the name of the Son of God in the council, we mean not God,
the word, by himself alone, but GOD manifested in the flesh. So the Son of
man talking with Nicodemus on earth was in heaven: John. 3.13.
the reason is, because he that is man, is God also: and yet the manhood of
christ was at that time no where else, Acts 1.11.
but on earth, even as now also christ's flesh being taken up into Matthew. 28.20.
heaven, and therefore absent from us, that Son of man, is yet
notwithstanding present with us, because the same christ is that true GOD,
Isaiah 66.1. Acts 7.48.
whom neither heaven nor earth can contain. Wherefore, as these propositions
are false, the Godhead is the manhood, or the manhood is the godhead: so
these are true: This man is God, and GOD, the word, is man. Now then, if man
be truly said to be God, by reason of the personal union, it follows
therevppon, that things attributed to the manhood may rightly be attributed
to GOD: and on the other side, that things attributed to the Godhead may
rightly be attributed to, or spoken of christ, man. But let us now come to ye
other part of the knowledge that concerns our salvation, that is, to christ's
office. This office is declared in his name: Matthew. 1.21.
for he is Jesus, that is to say, a Savior, because God the father has
therefore given him unto us, that he might save us, to wit, from our sins.
Now he saves us, by justifying us, because eternal life, does of necessity
agree with justice or righteousness. Wherefore he gives us life, in giving us
righteousness, and that of his mere and only grace, through the power and
effectual working of his holy spirit: One and the selfsame power of God,
appears in man's creation and man's restitution, saving that this latter, in my
judgment, and before men (though not before God) seem to be the more
excellent and hard work.
for even that very selfsame power of God, which laid it self open in the
creation of man, must of necessity manifest it self also in restoring of man.

This is it that I mean: as God the father did freely through his son,
together with his almighty power, which is the holie-ghost, create man: so the
selfsame god, does by saving justify, and by justifying save man, through
his own sin fallen from grace, and yet made again, or anewe, as it were,
through his son, in the powerful working of the holy spirit. For the
holy ghost works in us that instrument which we call faith, by which only we
lay hold of christ after that we know him. Neither is this faith some simple or
bare accident, but a habit, as they call it in the schools, truly grafted in
us, not by nature, but by gods mere and free grace. But remember, I pray you,
that by laying hold of Christ, I understand the apprehension or taking hold
even of Christ himself. Two things principally to be considered in Christ.
For we must consider two things in Christ, that is to say, he himself, god
and man, and such things as be in him. A fit similitude.
For example (though it may be I confess, that the similitude shall not agree in
all points) if in a casket or box I set before a man, treasure, he that will
have the treasure hidden or shut up therein, must of necessity take the
casket or box it self: Coloss. 2.3.
even so there are in Christ, all those treasures of wisdom and
understanding: yea (and to speak all in few words) all those things, which
are necessarily required to our salvation. Wherefore we must of necessity
have him, that so we may obtain those things that are in him, and by the
means of them eternal life. But tell us, by what instrument we do take
hold of him, as it were, by a certain hand, that he may wholly become ours,
and we his? Verily by faith. Now the holie-ghost is he, who going about to
work in us, this excellent instrument of faith, uses for that purpose, the
preaching of the outward word, Roman. 10.17.
by which word he alone properlye woorketh inuisiblye in us.

But that we may the better understand this point, let us a little compare
this natural instrument of Faith, to wit, the outward word with that
supernatural instrument, that is, the spirit.

Light of nature may somewhat help us to obtain natural things, but it can
nothing further us in the understanding and believing of heavenly things.
The doctor or teacher by speaking, teaches his scholars that which he
speaks. For speech is the instrument and mean, whereby we lay open the
meaning of our minds one of us to an other, by understanding whereof, they to
whom we speak, become skillful in those things that we speak: even so it
pleases God to use his word written and preached, that so he might teach us
the knowledge of salvation, yet the way and order in both of these is
maruellously diverse, if not altogether contrary. For whereas our mind by a
certain engendered and natural power, is apt to conceive and understand
worldly things (yea, and though it be true, that some men are more apt to
learn than othersome, yet all men generally, are endued with faculty and
power, to understand those points, either by books, or the mouth of their
teacher) when we come to the true knowledge of God, and that his heavenly
secret touching our salvation, God must of necessity use a far other power, in
framing and disposing our minds, that so our ears being purged, and our hearts
also, we may in our understanding comprehend these matters, and having
comprehended them approve of them, yea consent unto them, and stay our selves
upon them, or else we shall never attain thereto. And this is that same
invisible working power of the holie-ghost, which graueth into our hearts that
which the mind perceives or understands: otherwise the pastors and techers
might speak to deaf people, as it does by too too common examples appear at
this day. Therefore the Apostle says, 1. Corinthians. 1.23.
that the gospel is an offense or stumbling block to the Jews, and that it
seems foolishness unto the Gentiles. And in another place, that it is to
some, 2. Corinthians. 2.16.
the savor of life unto life, and to other-some, the savor of death unto death.
But to whom is it the savor of life unto life? Even unto such as so perceive
and receive it, that they admit, and submit themselves thereto. And yet it can
not be understood and received, unless the holie-ghost do by his powerful
grace alter and change us. Wherefore to them then it must be the savor of death
unto death that do refuse it, and cast it far from them. Neither is God, or
the gospel it self, cause of this neglect or contempt, but the very corrupt
nature of man: 1. Corinthians. 2.14.
for the natural manne perceives not the things of the spirit of God.

But to come to the matter: that word of GOD that sounds into our ears, is
an instrument ordained and directed by the Holie-ghost to teach us, that so we
may understand such things as are needful to be understood for
salvation, and may by true faith apply unto our selves such things as we
understood, and have yielded unto. The word by it self.
And this speech of GOD talking so with us, is sometimes naked, as it were,
and simple, and sometimes again, is so decked and trimmed, as it were, with
other things, that even the matter it self, by reason of the rites and orders,
The word with the sacraments annexed thereto.
annected to the speech, seems after a sort, not to be spoken, but to be
done. Examples of the naked or bare speech, are these infinite promises of the
gospel: as when we hear this, GOD so loved the world that he gave his
only begotten Son, John. 3.16.
that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have eternal life.
So we read, and daily hear in the church, the writings of the Prophets and
Apostles, having exhortations, reprehensions, and comforts adjoined to the
same, according as good sheepheards, do their duty, publicly and privately.
And yet there are sometimes joined to this word of GOD some signs, with
certain rites and orders, that so the speech may not only beat orders, but
also the things that are looked upon may come to our sight. And these are
those things that the Latin writers call sacraments: August. cont. Faust.
Memictiae lib. 19 cap. 16. and habit. tom. 6. col. 349.
and therefore Augustine also called them visible words.

This verilye is certain, that even the most ancient Latin divines did
interpret that Greek word, Mystery, by the Latin word Sacrament, and that
not only in places where mention is made, of the rites and orders of the
Sacraments of the church, as of Baptism and the Lords supper, but generally
where the question is of such things as are of themselves close and secret,
and far removed from common use. Ephesians. 1.^.
So the calling of the Gentiles which the Apostle names a mystery, is of the
old Latin interpreter turned, 1. Timoth. 3.16.
sacrament. And our whole salvation, is the sacrament of godliness with him:
and the conjunction of Christ, and his church, and not the marriage of man and
wife, as commonly thorough ignorance men have supposed, is with him a
sacrament likewise, Ephesians. 5.32. Apocal. 17.7.
yea and in the revelation he mentions the sacrament of that unclean harlot,
and the beast that carried her.

To be short, nothing is more common amongst the Latin divines, or comes
more often in their writings, than this word, sacrament. And yet the Latin
church has in a more secret and narrow signification taken and understood
this term, Sacrament, how it is used amongst us.
sacrament, namely, for the signs and rites, which God has adjoined to his
promises, that so he might the more fully seal up in our hearts, the
salvation that he has revealed unto us. And yet no other certainetie, so far
as I know, or can remember is this word, mystery, in the Apostles writings,
used in that sense or signification.

Verily, the name or word, sacrament, it self is amongst the Latinists of
many significations: for which doubtfulnesse of the word, we that now come in
the last age of the world do sustain many and great smartes. The Apostle
calls circumcision, a sign and a state: Roman. 4 11.
and (to speak plainly, as the matter it self requires) though I do not
willingly depart from words in use, least one inconvenience and mischief
might be heaped upon an other, yet I had leiffer that the Latin authors and
writers, had still kept Paul's word.

But that we may at the length come to the purpose, What the lords supper is.
let that rite or order of the Lords supper be a sign given us from GOD,
whereby he will have testified and sealed up unto us, the communication or
partaking of the body and blood of Christ. But because every thing that is
used, in, and about this holy banquet, is not of one sort, manner, order, and
respect, we are therefore to mark, that even this word, sacrament, The word
Sacrament, in the narrow signification taken three ways.
and that in this more narrow signification, is of the old Latin divines
taken three manner of ways. For sometimes they understand by sacraments, the
very whole action, in which respect both baptism and the Lords supper it
self also, are called sacraments, that is to say, mystical actions or outward
rites, which do represent to our understanding some other certain thing.
Sometimes again not the whole action it self, but that which is used in that
action, is so August.
that the wicked do eat Christ, as in respect of the sacrament. And sometimes
it is used for the signs, joined with the very thing it self signified, as
when Irenaeus says, Irenaeus.
that the sacrament consists of two things, one heavenly, and the other
earthly: for he calls the heavenly thing the body and blood of christ, and
the earthly, the bread and the wine: and all that together he names, the
sacrament. And this much concerning the word it self, or the name sacrament.
Let us now at the length come to the matter.

Since now therefore, that every sacrament is a sign, we must needs put the
word Sacrament in the predicament of relation or relatiues, as the logicians
call them, that is, amongst such things as have mutual respects one of them
to an other. And since relation must needs be, amongst sundry things which
have mutual respect one of them to an other, we must therefore of necessity
confess, that in the sacraments there is a sign, and the thing signified.
Neither when I deliver these 2 parts, which indeed do meet, or whereof in truth
al sacraments do consist, do I shut out the word. August.
Let the word (says Augustine) come unto the element, and it shall become a
sacrament. I do not therefore exclude or shut out the word, which is, as it
were, the life and soul of either of the parts, and to which the sacraments
themselves, as we have said before, are adjoined as seals. And thus far
forth, even they agree with us, which otherwise do most of all dissent from
us. Wherefore let us now see, which be those signs, and which be those
things signified: for in this point we do not all agree. We call water the
sign in Baptism, and the thing signified we call Christ's blood, by the
washing whereof (we having obtained forgiveness of sins, and being mortified
in our flesh) we are saved.

But concerning baptism I will not now say any more. In the supper
certainly there are two signs, or rather, signs of two sorts. For some of
them are certain material and substantial signs: as for example, the bread
and wine, other-some are actions and sacramental rites, which are not for all
that vain or superfluous acts, but have there certain sacramental
consideratton and respect, from the Lords institution, of which point we
will speak hereafter. I say then that in the Lords supper, these are
outward, material, visible, and as you would say palpable signs, that God
has annected unto his word, even the bread and wine.

This the Papists deny, as who (after that they have confessed, that the
sacraments do consist, of a sign, and a thing signified) do yet
notwithstanding afterward take the bare accidents of bread and wine, as,
color, form, and such like, for the signs themselves: for they maintain,
that in the Lords supper there remains not, the substance of bread and wine,
but that that vanishes away, and that there comes in the place thereof, the
substance of the Lords body and blood. Therefore in their judgment, the
signs shall be the accidents. And which I beseech you? Forsooth whiteness,
roundnes, and redness, if they consecrate red wine, which accidents they do
by a new name call kind, show, or form. Augustine.
But as Augustine rightly teaches: Unless there were a certain analogy,
proportion, and agreement between the things signified, and the signs
themselves, they could not be counted sacraments. Now between accidents and
substances there is no agreement, therefore the sacraments, as they call them,
shall not be sacraments: for it behooves the signs so to agree with the things
signified, that they may represent to men's minds that which they signify. I
will speak somewhat more plainly. A similitude.
If admonishing some one, I would have him with his eyes to behold, and with
his mind to conceive a man, I will not set before him the image of a horse, or
of an ox, to look upon, because that outward shape or form of an horse, or
of an ox, cannot beget in his mind the conceit, portrature, or image of a man,
although all these things, that is to say, man, horse, ox, etc. are referred
to one general word or term, to wit, living creature: much less then shall
the shape of an herb, or form of an horse, bring to my mind and memory,
the form or shape of a man: and least of all others shall those accidents
which are void of all substance, as whiteness, redness, roundnesse, etc. call
to my remembrance things that in deed are, to wit, the body and blood of
Christ. In that papists, make the accidents of the elements the signs of the
sacraments, there follows three absurdities thereupon.
But it was the Lords purpose in his supper, to offer unto our minds and
thoughts the very food of our souls, that is to say, Christ's body delivered
to death for us, and his blood shed for the forgiveness of our sins, between
which

material things may be set before our eyes, yet all accidents do not belong
to, or agree with every matter: for many both white and round things may be
beheld, which shall not for all that represent a body: and who has told them
that the bread which Christ brake and gave unto his disciples, was white or
round, in such sort as they bake it and make it? Therefore the true signs of
Christ's body and blood, are the very bread, and the very wine, which thing
the apostle declares, 1. Corinthians. 10.16
saying: The bread which we break, is the communion or partaking of the body
of Christ: and the cup that we bless is the partaking of the blood of Christ.
And that same consubstantiation or transubstantiation, is a filthy forgerie
and devise of satan.

Now let us come to the thing signified: and first we will declare, Enemies to
truth are of two sorts, that is, ignorant and malicious.
what manner and kind of signification this is that we speak of. For this is
objected against us, partly by some that know not what is delivered and taught
in our churches, and partly by other some that do maliciously slander us,
that we say we set out to be beheld in the sacraments, as it were a vain
picture, or a certain dead image, that may stir up in us the remembrance of
Christ, when yet notwithstanding we are wont every where to beat upon this
point, that by the sacraments Christ is not signified unto us (as when we
behold Cesars image and picture we are wont to remember Caesar) and nothing
beside: for in the signs, having the word adioined unto them, we teach Christ
and all his benefits to be so represented to us and our minds, that he,
together with all his graces is given to us to be inioied of us, and in deed to
be participated, but yet after a spiritual manner, and by faith. Wherefore this
action is not vain, neither are the signs, and the very rites thereof naked
and empty matters, since that which is signified, is both most truly offered
unto us by God himself, and most effectually received of such as believe.
This kind of signification Bernard well declares, by the similitude of a ring
which the bridegroom delivers unto the betrothed bride, to the end that so
she may not only think upon the bridegroom delivering it, but that by this
pledge of promise he might after a sort deliver himself over unto her also.
And therefore Christ did not only say: Matthew. 26.2^.
This is my body, but also he added, Take ye, and eat ye. Mainteiners of the
truth charged to be defacers of the sacraments.
Ye see brethren what we think and hold touching these mysteries: also what
injury is offered us, when men say, that we do euacuat and disanull the
sacraments, and transform them into certain vain spectakles and shows of
Christ that is absent. Other men's malice must not hinder us from speaking truth.
Let us notwithstanding as plainly as possible we can declare, what that is
which is so in outward signs, set before our mind to be looked into, that yet
notwithstanding it is a faithful and believing soul truly exhibited and
offered, to be partaken by faith. And what is that I say? Truly the body and
blood of the Lord. But who teaches us this, or so instructs us? Even Gods
own son: for he says: This (that is to say, Matthew. 26.26.28.
This bread) is my body. And this (that is to say, This wine contained in this
cup) is my blood. By the way, I will put you in mind of one thing, Contention
about words though it be not always good, yet when it may clear the truth,
it may well be used.
least any man might be offended because I say not This is my blood, in the
masculine gender, but This is my blood, in the neuter gender, referring it
either to the wine, which is the neuter gender in Latin; or to the cup,
containing the wine, which in Greek is the neuter gender also: for though I
love not to strive about words, yet this point is well worthy the marking.
Certeinlie he that says: Hic est sanguis meus, in the masculine gender, that
is, This is my blood, does point to, or show forth nothing but his blood. But
it is certain, that as before Christ did not propound his body unto his
disciples without bread, so even in this other part when Christ said so, he
would not set his blood before his disciples without wine. Therefore this
Greek Pronoune (...) being of the neuter gender, must needs be referred to the
sign (that is to say (...), the cup, which is therefore expreslie put down in
Paul) concerning which, or of which, the blood it self may be spoken:
whereupon this arises, that the Greek Pronoune (...), this, cannot declare
any other matter or thing than this, that is to say, this thing or matter,
which I hold in my hands, to wit, the wine that is contained in this cup, which
indeed cannot be expressed by this word, Hic, a Pronoune of the masculine
gender, as the meanest Grammarians may well and easily perceive. Christ's
very body and blood is the matter o^ thing signified in the Lords supper.
But to return to the matter: By these things you may perceive, what we
understand by the name or word of the thing it self, or by the term truth,
sacramentallie sigifined, namely the body and blood of the Lord Jesus.

Wherefore first of all we dissent from In the matter of the supper we agree
not, either with the Anabaptists or sacramentaries.
who in sted of the matter of the sacrament signified, do put down I know
not what shadow or figurative thing, as though it were some warlike cognizance,
pledge, or watchword, by which christians might be discerned from such as be
no christians.

Next we dissent from them likewise, Or with such as understand it only,
concerning Christ's merits sundered from Christ himself.
who for the matter of the Sacrament, established Christ's force and power, as
also his merits, but yet severed from Christ himself. For Christ said not
this is the merit of my body, Luke. 22.19.20.
which is delivered for you, but This is my body, and this is my blood:
neither is it without cause definitiuelie before hand added, which is delivered
for you, and which is shed for you. So that it could not more plainly have
been said, that very Christ himself (whose body was given for us, and whose
blood was shed for us) is truly and verily given us in the supper, to be the
food of eternal life to us. And therefore the matter of that sacrament is in
deed that very body which he offered up for us on the cross, and that blood
which he shed for the forgiveness of our sins: so far off are we from
deeming or thinking of some figurative or typical body, or some allegorical
blood, as certain most fond men (who do not indeed well understand their own
words, mind, and opinion) are not ashamed to speak and write of us, that we
so hold. Now I come to the third point of this discourse: for first I have
spoken of the signs, and secondly of the things signified. Two sorts of
people that in the sacrament of the supper have erred in and about the right
conjunction of the signs, and the thing signified.
Now we are to see in the third place, what is the knitting or ioining together
of the signs, and the things signified, wherein for the most part consists
the whole determination of all this controversy touching the sacraments. The
papists have altered the ioining together of the signs, and the thing
signified, into a transmutation or change one of them into another: than which,
what can be more absurd? For certeinlie, if the bread and the wine be in deed
changed into the body and blood of Christ, as they affirm, then we cannot
choose but affirm also, that this is not to join the signs with the things
signified, but to change the signs into the things themselves, or else the
signs vanishing away or perishing, to put the things themselves in their
room. But let these men go, as who in deed deserve not any confutation, their
assertions be so absurd and blockish. There are others, at A gross absurdity
or two following consubstantiation.
if we will answer according to their opinion, we must say, that it is
truly and in deed in our hands, and in our mouth, and therefore certeinelie,
unless it presently vanish away, within this body of ours, with, in, or
under the very signs of the bread and the wine, being eaten and drunken. Now
we will show, and that by reasons not fet from humane philosophy (as our
adversaries untruly say we use such) but from the very word of God it self,
Two things to be handled: viz. the confutation of the adversaries, and the
maintenance of the truth.
that this consubstantiation (as we may truly call it) is no less absurd and
erroneous than transubstantiation, as also that that communion or partaking,
which out of the pure word of God we propound and teach in our churches, is a
most secret and divine matter. Wherefore our judgment is quite and clean
contrary to either of those opinions before rehearsed. To begin, we hold that
such things as are spoken of the sacraments, must be understood sacramentallie.
For what I pray you is or can be more upright than to have all things spoken,
rightly understood and perceived, as the nature of that matter will bear,
whereof there is question? A similitude or two, explaning the point he has in
hand.
Certeinelie such things as the lawiers speak touching the law, must be
understood even as they are used in that very science of the law: and we must
needs give the self same judgment of all things and arts whatsoever. Such
things therefore, as are taught and delivered touching the sacraments, must be
sacramentallie understood. What manner of conjunction then is the conjunction
or knitting together of the sign and the thing sacramentallie signified?
Verily it is sacramental. The signs therefore, and the things are joined
together by that relation or respect, which is between the signs and the
things signified: which yet once again, I do most plainly declare after
this manner.

When we hear some man speaking unto us in the tongue we understand, the words
that come to our ears and strike them, do very lively represent that unto
our minds for the expressing and signification whereof they were used. Another
similitude.
For example: as soon as we hear the word Rome, presently we think upon
that city. If a man name Caesar or the emperor, Caesar or the emperor
presenlie comes to our memory. The reason whereof verily is that, that is
well delivered and taught in schools: to wit, such things as are in the voice
or words are signs of the affections, that are in the soul or mind. There is
the self same consideration to be had of the sacraments: for the sacraments
are nothing else, but visible words, that is, representing, through our eyes
unto our minds, things signified, as words heard, do by our ears convey
understanding to our minds likewise. Therefore these visible sacraments of bread
and wine bring to pass, that when I see and receive that bread, and that wine
joined with the word of God, I do withal conceive in my mind, and understand,
that body that was given for me, and that blood that was shed for me, as
though I were led or carried even unto the thing it self being present. And
because I am commanded not only to look upon these signs with mine eyes,
but also to take them, Math. 26.26.27.
eat them, drink them, therefore does the faithful mind even lay hold of,
and apply unto himself those things so signefied, as they are delivered and
offered. Touching which point we will largely discourse in the fourth place,
to wit, when we shall come to handle this question, how both the signs and the
things signified are received of us: whereas now we only dispute or speak
touching the sacramental conjunction of the signs themselves, Two errors
maintained by the adversaries.
with the thing signified. Such as are not content with this sacramental
conjunction, fall into a double error, not only that they do in a The
substance of that we are to know or believe, touching the conjunction of the
signs with the things signified in the Lords supper.
even as when he was upon the earth, was no where else, but in that very place
where he was conversant, so now he is not any where else, but above all
heavens, into which he ascended: and that therefore he is not now together with
the signs offered to the body, but together with the signs truly delivered
and given to the believing soul, even as by the word we hear it, and by the
sign we see it. Now it remains that we do by some reasons fet from the word
of GOD well wey and consider whether they or we swerve from the truth.

The first reason. Romans 1.3. Romans 9.5. Galath. 4.4. Philip. 2.7. Hebr. 2.16.
John. 16.7.28. Matthew. 28.20. Acts. 1.9.
The holy scripture witnesses, that the son of God did personally take unto
himself a true and very body. The self same scripture does attribute unto
the flesh of our savior Christ assumed, and that both before and after the
glorification thereof, such things as do plainly prove the truth of a
natural body, as that he came, that he went away, that he was sometimes
present, and sometimes absent. These things then do of necessity follow the
truth of Christ's body, which if a man take from it, he must also needs take
away the truth of the manhood of Christ, and so come at the length to the
heresy of the Marcionits or Dokits. Marcionits or Dokits, they were called
Marcionits of one Marcion, whose principal error was this, that Christ did not
appear indeed, and suffer indeed, etc. upon the cross, but in fantasy or
ghostlike apparition.

Concerning Dokitiae see homil. 1. before going.

Tertullian wrote most learnedlie against this Marcion.


But these things are manifestly taken away, by their opinion, who say that
Christ's flesh is now also and that in deed and verily present, both into the
heavens, into which he ascended, and in the earth likewise, and that also in
all places, in which that bread and that wine is delivered or given to such as
come to receive it. I will say nothing of them that are not ashamed to affirm
that Christ's flesh even from the very first moment of the personal union,
was together and in deed present, both in the crib, and in the heaven, yea
every where present. To this first of all they answer: The adversaries
objection.
that Christ's body cannot without great wickedness, be made subject to the
law of nature, for that body that was taken into the unity of the person,
has received far other unmeasurable gifts and graces.

But here I beseech you wey well what we answer: The answer.
We confess that there is great regard to be had of that same grace and gift
of the personal union, by which we cannot but confess that the manhood of
our savior Christ was so highly exalted, that only the Deity or Godhead
excepted (according to which he is even greater than himself) it has atteined
and gotten a name, which is above all names, that is to say, Philip. 2.9.10.
that all things created are subjected unto the same, yet for all that, that
follows not heerevpon, which these men coldlie suppose, or fondly imagine:
for this is the question now between us, whether Christ's manhood do in deed
place it self every where, or in many places together at one time, to be
received with our hands and mouth, and not what it has obtained from another,
or in respect of the other nature, to which it is personally united: but
rather whether this propriety (which in deed is proper to the Godhead alone)
be in the manhood, to wit, to be every where, or in diverse places at one and
the self same season. School men fail many times in terms, but now and then
hit the matter.
And this is that matter which the schoolmen have by a barbarous word, if you
respect terms, but not by an unfit word, if men will wey the matter, called by
the name of habitual grace. Now this difference being already put down, which
skarslie any unless they be altogether most contentious, will deny, we say,
that such do in deed euacuat Christ, or make him of no force, as deny
Christ's flesh, Though Christ man, be not every where, yet Christ God and man
is every where.
as in respect of another, that is to say, not in it self, but according as it
is joined to another, to wit, so far forth, as it is personally united with
the person of the word, to be truly and in deed every where: much less will
we deny him to be present in that place, wheresoever in the world his supper
is administered. For why should we deny, that concerning christ's flesh, which
in a certain measure has place in all bodies: yea, even there where some one
whole thing, is become or made one, after an other sort, than by personal
union. A similitude.
A tree or a house is many times said to be in a river, whereas yet
notwithstanding the upper part, either of the one or of the other, appearing
above the water or river, and being considered in it self, is indeed in the
air, and not in the water: in like sort, I am said to sit in this seat or
chair, whereas yet notwithstanding, I sit, but in one part of my body only.
Likewise I am said to speak, whereas only the tongue, considered, in, and
by it self, speaks. The reason and truth of these speeches depends upon
this, that a tree, a house, a man, etc: is one selfsame whole thing,
compacted and made of his several parts. For otherwise that could not be
truly affirmed or said, of two things in deed separated and sundered one of
them from an other. Application of the similitude.
So a man may truly affirm whole christ to be every where, and therefore much
more with the bread in the supper, and yet no otherwise, but so far forth as
Christ is considered, as some one whole substance and being, and so also as
the proprieties of the natures be not by this means confounded. But the whole
of Christ, that is to say, every thing belonging to Christ, can not therefore
for all that, be said to be any where else, than to be conversant in one
place, at one and the selfsame time: for that can no more be spoken of
Christ's humanity in it self (unless we will with Eutyches and Brentius,
Eutyches. Brentius.
confound the proprieties of either nature) than this my hand can be said
to sit, or these my feet may be said to speak. If there be any that
understand not these things, I beseech them to learn to understand the same,
and to have more regard and consideration, both of themselves, and of others,
through whose sides, they would, if they could destroy the truth it self.

He turns that upon the adversaries which they objected against the truth.
To come to the point. They do not spotle the manhood of Christ, of that his
infinite majesty, who teach that flesh of his to be the flesh of the Son of
God, but they rather that transfourme and change him who is God and man in one
person, and make him but to bear or carry, God or the godhead: neither yet do
they spoil ye manhood of his majesty, or bring him back unto the state and
condition of other men, which according to the grace that they call habitual
(that is to say, cleaving to the very flesh of Christ, as, if it were to his
peculiar subject or matter whereunto it should stick) do acknowledge it to
be vnspeakablye more high and excellent than all other things whatsoever
without exception (excepting only the godhead of the word, according to which
he himself is greater than himself, as we said before) but they indeed bring
it to nothing, or into some image or sign in their own conceits at the
least, who, while they go about to attribute supernatural things unto him,
attributing yet notwithstanding unnatural things to him, or things against
nature, do of necessity destroy and overthrow, even man's nature it self: for
that cease to be humane, which having lost the essential proprieties
thereof, must needs cease to be ye which before it was. But we will encounter
with the^ by an other reason.

If this verily be to diminish Christ's glory, and to debase his majesty, to
affirm, that he can not indeed be at one time in many places, how much
more then must this be the debasing of him, to say, that he was mortal, yea,
that he did indeed die? And yet we see, that this is that, which the Apostle
alleges for the commendation of the most excellent love that the Son of GOD
carried toward us, Romans 5, 6, 7, 8, etc Philip. 2.8.
which was yet so much the more great and excellent, by how much he did the
more debase himself.

Now then, if the real taking of all infirmities upon himself (sin only
excepted) has taken nothing at al from his glory, Hebr, 4.15.
or impaired and lessened the same, how much less has this done it, that he
has for ever taken, together with very flesh, the very proprieties of flesh,
and that unchangeably, and without confounding? But they object further,
Another objection. The answer thereto.
that they mean not to abolish those proprieties. The^ they must needs
attribute contrary things, to one and the self-same subject, and that
altogether in one and the self-same respect, to wit, to be circumscribed and
tied to a place, which is the natural property of an isntrumental body, The
adversaries absurdity as well against reason as religion.
and yet notwithstanding, at one and the self-same time to be both in heaven,
and in innumerable places, or else, every where, if you will, in earth: and so
one and the selfsame flesh shall have a quantity set it, and also be
without quantity, that is to say, shall be both a body, and not a body. And
what is this else, I pray you, but to make every thing of any thing, as we
commonly say? but let us hear what they do yet further object. The third
objection.
They will have that time that went before the glorofieng of our savior Christ's
flesh, to be distinguished from that time, in which that his flesh was
received up into glory. We grant it: An answer thereto taken from a double
absurdity.
but withal we say, that if this real conjunction of the flesh with the
bread, do depend of the glorification of Christ's flesh, it The
transfiguration of Christ mentioned, Math. 17.2.3. etc fears not the
adversaries,
but (that I may so speak) even, as it were, hanging upon the cross. Against
this exception, they oppose and set the miracle of Christ's transfiguration.
But what agreement is there betwixt these two things? For of a truth, nothing
unnatural or against nature fell out in ye transfiguration, neither was there
any thing there done, that did destroy or overthrow the essential proprieties
of christ's flesh: even as righteous men shall not therefore or then cease to be
very men, when they shall shine as the sun, Daniel. 12.3.
or brightness of the firmament or stars. But to be every where, or in many
places at one time, is a property so contrary to al things created (as which
are indeed finite) that it belongs only unto the godhead alone, because that
alone is infinite. To conclude, we do in one word as it were, Glorification,
and wherein it stands.
answer thus. Glorification took not from Christ's body a corporal or bodily
nature (that is to say, quantity or circumscriptiblenes) but it abolished the
infirmity and weakness thereof, which weakness he for a time took upon him.
Now by the word infirmity or weakness, we mean not any essential
propriety in christ's flesh, but that only which sin brought into man's
nature, yet altogether without the spot or taint of sin, as it was in christ.
This is that I mean: where Christ's flesh is said to be infirm and weak,
before the glorification of it, that is not spoken in respect of the Godhead:
to the which he always has bin, is, and shall be inferior: but in
consideration of that great glory, into which afterward that his flesh was
exalted, yet so that there must always remain safe and sound (as I have said
heretofore) those proprieties, of which the very truth of the body it self
consists: amongst which, quantity, and therefore circumscriptiblenes
obtains so excellent and notable a place, Cyrillus.
that Cyrill fears not to affirm, that God himself could not possibly be
every where, if he were partaker of quantity. They affirm Christ's body to
be every where. He calls them so, because they set themselves against nature
and reason. John. 20.27.
Therefore these me^ I mean both Vbiquitaries and Antiphisitae, having openly
denied the quantity of Christ's flesh, must either get them to Eutyches his
tents, and take part with him: or if out of the words of Christ (who after his
resurrection, wills some to behold and feel him) they will prove, that he
has not put off the quantity of his flesh, then they must show us, that
Christ's flesh, according to the quantity thereof, can be at one time every
where, or in many places, which even the godhead it self, if it have
quantity, can not perform, as Cyrill openly and truly writes, whose
authority otherwise, these men do most especially abuse: for this real
presence of Christ in the sacrament of the altar: yea, they must prove, that
the Angels lied, when they said: Matthew. 28.6.
He is risen, he is not here. For whatsoever distinction they may use, if
we can show a place where Christ's flesh is not, then we are sure it can not
be every where: and if it can not be every where, then neither can the whole
flesh it self be at one time, and together in many places. Hence also it may
appear, Brentius and his followers.
how absurd and unreasonable Brentius his opinion is, and those that follow
him, Philip. 2.6, 7.
who attribute these words of the Apostle, The form of God, and the form of
a servant, to the only humanity or manhood of Christ in it self. For they
understand by the form of God, that their own forgerie and devise of all
majesty, and all presence, as they call it, with which, as they say, the
flesh of Christ was verily in it self endued from the very first moment of the
personal union, which it pleased him for a time not to make manifest: and this
is it they mean by the word, humbling and abasing. And the form of a servant
they call that state and condition, He confuteth Brentius, and such as
maintain him, as usurp the place of the Philippians, or rather falsely
interpreting it.
in which it pleased him to remain, so often as he would not use the form of
God. Very well said surely: if a man will attribute to one subject or matter,
two essential forms, what shall he else do, but confound one and two together,
and make them both one? And what is that else, but to be mad outright? Then it
remains, that by this word or term, form, these men understand, neither
the godhead it self, nor the manhood, but a diverse condition and state of this
his manhood, as which inwardly, and in it self, was beautified and adorned,
with all the powerful graces and effects of the godhead powered into the same,
and yet that he did not always manifest and disclose them.

But if this be true, Two absurdities or errors.
we must learn to define the personal union, not by the effusion to affirm,
that the manhood may by any means, without robbery be made equal to the
godhead? What shall become of that sentence so often repeated in the ancient
Fathers and old writers, to wit, that the Son as in respect of his flesh,
is less than the Father, and inferior unto him, yea, and therefore less than
himself, and inferior unto him self, because he is, as in respect of his
godhead coequall with his Father? Wherefore that interpretation is to be
refused as false, yea, as wholly and altogether savoring of the heresy of
Eutyches. An other objection of the adversaries.
They allege yet this also: The place (say they) is not of the substance of
a body: and that therefore the substance of the body is not abolished, though
place be taken away from it.

The answer.
Certainly it would grieve me to the heart, to behold the maintainers of
consubstantiation, to be so driven to their shifts, that by propounding such
absurd things, they should give themselves over to be scorned of the most
popish and gross maintainers of Transubstantiation (upon whose foundation, yet
notwithstanding they build up their own conceits:) saving that I see, even
those very defenders of Transubstantiation themselves (who have bin brought up
with the teats of that most filthy sow Sarbona) to be so thrust to the wall
in this point, The name of a college in Paris, where the popish divines are
maintained.
that they supposed, that with this dirt, the truth might be so dawbed over, He
very notably corrects himself.
that it should not lie open to every man's eye and sight. What wonderful
impudency and shamelesnes is this (bear with me brethren, and pardon me, O
ye hearers this my most just sorrow and grief) for men to deal so
sophistically and subtly in Gods church, which is the schoole-house of
truth? The word Body in authors referred to two predicaments, to wit
substance and quantity, but yet in diverse respects.
Any man endued with reason can hardly be ignorant of this, that this word
body is sometimes referred to substance, and sometimes to quantity. Therefore a
body is sometimes called, a corporal or bodily substance, consisting of
matter, form, and substance: and sometimes it is called that which consists
of three dimensions or mesurings, to wit, length, breadth, and depth. So in this
question sometimes we consider Christ's body, as that same material,
substantial, visible, and palpable thing, which Christ took unto him for our
sake: and after this sort verily quantity, as it is an accident, is not
part of that substance. And sometimes again, we use this word body, that
so, that which is defined, by that threefold quantity, may be the better
distinguished and known, The adversaries must either conclude against reason,
or else yield to the truth.
from that which is without quantity. And after this manner verily, these men
must either prove, that the definition does not declare the substance of
these things which are defined: or else they must with us confess, that a
body is nothing else, but that very three-folde quantity continue, as they
call it, that is to say, such a quantity, as whose parts are joined together
in a common term.

If this be once taken away, it cannot be denied, but that of necessity
christ's true and very body must perish, whether we consider it, as it is
glorified, or as it is set in weakness: yea, Christ himself shall be accused
of lieng, who proves the truth of his flesh even after his resurrection, by
those inseparable accidents, that is to say, his corporal or bodily quantity.

He passes to an other discourse touching the word Place.
Hitherto we have spoken of the body, now let us see what may be said
touching the place. What if out of Augustines plain and evident words we
should say: Take from bodies space of places, Augustine.
they shall be no where: and because they shall be no where, they shall not be
at all? What will they say to this? That is true in other bodies will they say,
but in Christ's body not so, or, it agrees not thereto. But I answer, that
it does most fitly agree to Christ's body, of the absence of which from the
earth, Augustine does most properly reason in that Epistle.

And truly, if it were true, that christ's body were in diverse respects
different from ours, then he could not be of the self same substance with us,
and like unto us in all things (sin only excepted. Hebr. 4.15. He explaneth
the question.
) I will add yet somewhat more, that the matter may appear more plain,
though by that which has been said, it be evident enough. When we affirm,
that a place can not be sundered or taken from a body, that is, from that
thing, which consists of three dimensions or measusurings before mentioned
(which thing the maintainers of consubstantiation do, when they flee to those
same starting holes of his omnipotency or almighty power, which hereafter
we will God willing discover) we mean not by this word place, The word
place considered after two sorts.
some peculiar space, which by and by may be altered and changed, as when
Christ departing from one place went to an other: for after this sort this or
that place is so evident to the body, that by most light and easy motion, one
being removed or taken away, another succedeth: but we call a place that same
condition or state, of a true and very isntrumental body whereby it necessarily
follows, that whersoeuer the thing it self is, it must be circumscribed in
that place, or tied thereto, neither can it, while it is there be in any other
place. This accident, though it be not the very substance of the body, as in
respect that ye body it self is a substance, yet verily as it is a quantity
it forms and frames the body, and it is an inseparable accident of the body,
as well as of the substance. So that there is no man (I suppose) but he
understands how vain and sophistical that exception is. But (say they)
Christ's body walked upon the waters: therefore they do not presently take away
the truth of Christ's body, An other objection with the answer thereto. Math.
14.25, etc.
that attribute unto it an extraordinary condition, or such a state as can not
be declared. And who (I pray you) denies this, or any part of it? The question
is not, whether Christ as in respect of his flesh, and that in the time of his
infirmitye and weakness also, could accomplish many things over and beside the
ordinary laws of man's nature. But this is the question, The state of the
question in controversy.
whether this doctrine concerning the real presence of Christ's very flesh in
many, or all places at once, can stand with the truth of Christ's flesh, whether
we consider it, after or before the glorification thereof.

Now we stoutly and safely deny that Christ's flesh at any time, can be in
many, or in all places at once, and we say, that it can not by any necessary
or fit consequence be gathered, either from this his walkyng upon the
waters, or in that he entered into the place where his disciples were, the
doors being shut, or in that he arose again, the stone of the Sepulcher or
Toombe, John. 20.19. Math. 28.2. Certain reasons alleged for proof of his
assertion.
not being removed or rolled away by man's hands. And of this we have
sundry reasons: for first these miracles seem rather to be done, in the
waters themselves, made hard and firm, not only under Christ's feet, but
under Peter's also, than in Christ's own body, the like whereof also is to be
said touching the wall and sepulcher, Matthew. 14.29.
the heap or weight and untrue, as by means whereof the truth of Christ's
flesh is utterly abolished. Now again, The second reason against
consubstantiation. See the first before, page 65.
even by this most weighty argument following, may this forgerie and devise be
confuted, namely because it plainly and wholly stands up against the
analogy and proportion of faith, so little need, or just cause have the
defendors thereof, to call us back to the power and force of faith. Acts.
1.11. Mark. 16.19.
The scripture witnesses in many places, that Christ's flesh ascended up
above the heavens, and that there also at this day it remains, we may not
therefore seek for it in earth: otherwise it should not be an ascending, but a
vanishing away for the time. Certeinlie, A general rule
no man can truly be said to come or go up thither, where he now was, or to go
away, descend, or be absent from the place where he remains. Look therefore
in how many places these things are spoken of Christ, according to his flesh,
and that without any figurative kind of speech by so many most strong and
invincible testimonies, there is confirmed unto us the true taking away of the
body of Christ from us, and also that real dotage of the presence of Christ's
flesh upon the earth, yt is to say, this opinion which the Dokits and
Marcionits maintain sufficiently confuted. Of these see before, page 70.
As for that that they urge against us, An objection answered.
saying: How absurd is that, that Christ's flesh is now in heaven and no where
else? It is easily answered, that we speak no otherwise than Peter, Acts.
3.21. Acts. 1.11.
yea than the angels themselves have spoken. And though they say further, that
by this means we shut up Christ, as it were in a prison, where as yet
notwithstanding the right hand of God (that is to say, his heavenly power and
authority) whereat he sits is every where. What for all this? Answer us
this, and tell us whether that being on the earth, and absent from heaven (for
he had not ascended thither where he was then present) or whether that being in
the virgins womb, or wrapped up in swaddling clothes, lieng in the crib, he was
shut up in prison? Yea since every body is contained in his own place, yea
and things without bodies, are yet notwithstanding included in the propriety
of their nature (for only the Godhead is infinite) what can follow else of
this their most absurd argument and reason, Absurdity in reason, by the
adversaries argument.
than that all things are full of prisons and prisoners? And though we should
say, that under ye terms of sitting at the right hand, Philip. 2.9.
there is meant the very self same thing which the apostle simply and
without trope says, that Christ (to wit as he is man) has received, that is
to say, a name above all names, yet it should be no less fond and absurd,
thereupon to gather and conclude the presence of Christ's flesh in every place,
A similitude.
that if we would affirm that the body of some king is as large and wide, as
the bounds of his kingdom are broad. But say they, Another objection answered.
Christ being present governs all things. We answer, that is true, as he is
God, and yet the person of Christ is not for all that rent in sunder or divided.
For even Christ man, being every where the Lord, is present also every where,
much more in the supper, In what respect Christ is present every where.
howbeit not as in respect of the manhood it self but as in regard of another,
that is to say, as he is one person, not in himself as in regard of his
manhood, but in the very nature of the Godhead it self, of which the
humanity was so assumed, that it is one subsistence or being together with it,
as a little while ago we declared. Therefore the man Christ is in deed present,
to wit, as he the self same is Christ God, and yet the manhood of Christ is
not now in any other place than in heaven. The third objection answered.
Ephesians. 4.10.
But it is yet further objected, that Christ went up into heaven to fulfill all
things. I grant it: whereupon also I gather, that he fulfilled not all things,
till he ascended, and that therefore the definition of the personal union
taken from habitual grace, as they call it (of which we have said some what
before) is false and fond. Yea, I gather this further, that if he did truly
and in deed ascend, that that his flesh was not in heaven before he ascended
thither, and that it cease to be on the earth, after that he ascended from
thense into heaven. But say they, he ascended to fulfill or fill all things:
The same objection urged, yet answered.
therefore he fills all things. We answer that he performed that, for which he
ascended, that is to say, he filled or fulfilled ye whole mystery of our
salvation, which the prophets foretold, and the full state whereof (as in
respect of that for the performance of which Christ came into the world) is
finished by Christ's ascension, as it had the beginning of it from his coming
into the earth. But if we had rather refer these words (which also we may do)
to the fruit that followed his ascension into heaven (by which, not as a
servant, but as a son he took upon him, and entered into the kingdom and
government) then we shall perceive, that he therefore ascended, John. 14.2^
that sending down the Holy ghost, he might bestow upon his church all
necessary gifts, for he ascended that he might even lade men with his graces,
Ephesians. 4.8.
and heap up benefits, blessings, and gifts upon them, which seeing the
apostle himself speaks even in so many words as it were, what man in his
right wit would believe them, that will transfer that to the very person of
Christ, which is spoken of the office of his kingdom, and the mighty and
effectual power thereof. The fourth objection answered. Luke. 24.31.
But they yet further say, he was taken out of their sight, or he vanished away
from it. I grant it, but if from hense they may gather, this their presence in
all places, or in many places, or that which they call majesty every where
(it is wonderful and pitiful to behold, what monstrous opinions in a very
short space have sprung up) why may not we affirm the same likewise touching
Philip? Acts. 8.39.40.
for he suddenly did so banish out of the Eunuchs eyes and sight, that he was
found afterward at Azolus. And what was wont sometimes to be tide the prophets
themselves, appears by the example of Elias his disciples. 2. Kings. 2 3. The
fifth objection. Acts. 7.35.36.
An other place they object Stephan saw Christ, therefore he was on the earth.
I deny that, for he being on earth, saw him set in heaven, as the holy
history declares. And to what purpose I pray you, should he see him in
heaven, if he be at his side, on the earth? So that this miracle is to be
considered, not in the very body of Christ, but in Stephans eyes. Neither did
that rite and ceremony of the church, used from all antiquity, whereby men
with a loud voice were admonished to have their hearts lifted upward, saying:
Lift up your hearts, The use of these words: Lift up your hearts, in the
celebration of the supper.
tend to any other end, but to cause men to mount up to heaven. For to what
purpose should that saying, Lift up, be used, if we had that in our mouths and
in our hands which we seek for? The sixth objection answered. 1. Corinthians. 15.8.
Acts. 9, 4.5. etc. August. in psalm. 54.
Again: Christ was seen of Paul as he went to Damascus. Augustine shall
answer this for us. He writing upon the fourth and fifth psalms, says: The
head that was in heaven, cried alowd for the body that was in the earth. Much
like unto this form, Acts. 22.17.
is that which they yet object, namely that Paul saw the Lord, when he praid
in the temple: therefore the Lord was in the very temple, we confess that he
saw him, but in a vision or trance. It was therefore a spiritual vision,
neither belongs it any whit at all to this present matter in hand: and yet
though we say it was a spiritual vision, we mean not that Paul saw any false
or forged thing. Hitherto also we must refer other words of the same apostle,
seeming ^o tend to the same end, for they may receive the same answer likewise.
The last shift of the adversaries fully answered.
They run at the last to ye same starting hole or shift (which I call by that
name, as in respect of them that do abuse it) of the almighty power of
Christ. And when we set against them this sure ground, that God cannot perform
somethings, then they throw out against us bitter outcries, as though that we
were manifestly and altogether blasphemous and evil men. For mine own part I
would require this one thing of them, The authors request to the adversaries,
standing upon two parts.
that they would with an upright mind suffer such as amongst us shall answer
them, and that they would not be carried so friuolouslie, yet weaklie (the Lord
knows) against such, as whose life (God be thanked for it) freeth them from
all suspicion of blasphemy. The first reason.
If every one deny the power of God that says there is something which God
cannot do, then they certeinelie were blasphemers, that said, God deceived,
God lied, and that he could not die. Yea but they will say, that in as much as
these things are not of any part of his power, but rather imbecilities and
wants, this is not to make GOD weak or feeble, but most mighty rather. And
this certeinelie is the same, that long ago amongst others, Theodoretus.
Theodoret did answer the Eutychian heretics, who defended this very self
same doctrine, by the very self same reason. Let us stay here then a while,
and as we say in the proverb, pitch our staff for a season. It is without all
controversy or doubt, that God, who at the first made all things of nothing,
is able utterly to turn all things up side down, yea even with his very
beck or breath to abolish and destroy them all: and yet for all that he cannot
effect or bring to pass this, that that which has been should not be,
Certain things that God cannot do.
or that some one thing should be and not be, at one and the self same time,
or that it should at one and the self same time, be such a thing, and not such
a thing. The reason is because of two contradictorie speeches, one of them must
of necessity be false: Numbers. 23.19.
but since he is God in deed, he cannot lie, and therefore he cannot either will
or do such things as are contradictorie contrary one of them to another.
Wherefore he shall convince GOD of lieng and himself of folly, woosoeuer he
be, that will cloak and cover Gods almighty power with this devise, by which
Christ's body is circumscriptible, and yet it shall in deed together be
present in many places at once (which properly belongs to that only
infinite nature) whereby also this is forged and framed, to wit, that the body
is finite and infinite, great and not great, yea a body and not a body. The
second reason.
And this I dare aduouch further: Whatsoever God would once have without
exception, to be unchangeable, that cannot be changed by him, much less can it
be abolished or done away: the reason is, because God cannot depart from
himself, or be contrary or unlike unto himself. And I make this without all
doubt or controversy, even that such is Christ's body, namely, that it has
always been, and must of necessity for ever be a very or true body, and
therefore also circumscriptible and tied to a place. The third reason.
Yea, this I say further, that God cannot be created by God, nor that a thing
created can be turned into God: for if there were many gods, he could not be
God, to who^ another created were equal, neither could that created god (so
called abusiuelie) be God, because that to be God, and to have a beginning of
time or in time, are merely co^tradictorie things or speeches. The conclusion
of this point.
Christ's flesh therefore could not become the Godhead, and therefore could it not
be endued with ye incommunicable proprieties of ye Godhead, that is to say,
with such proprieties belonging to the Godhead, as cannot be communicated to
any other, but ye Godhead alone, amongst which, this, to be infinite, and to be
wholly and at one time every where, is not reckoned in the last place. Is this
I pray you to deny Gods almighty power? or do we in this follow ye ungodliness
of ye blasphemous fellow Pliny? Plinius, and his errors.
for he denies that God is able to bestow immortality upon mortal people, or
to call back again such as are dead: which is not only falsely, but wickedly
spoken also. The self same party denies that God is able to kill himself,
or to bring to pass, Truth may be propounded by some, though they perhaps do
not well understand the cause thereof.
that he that has lived, and is now dead should not have lived then when he
lived, or that twice ten should not be twenty. And here in howsoever he fell
foully in the former, he has not missed the truth, but rightly denied these
things to be in God: only herein he did most beastly slip, The cause why
God cannot do some things, is not so much want of power in him, as because he
cannot or will not be found contrary to his nature.
that not knowing or believing the nature of God, he would have these things to
be arguments and proofs of Gods imbecilitie and weakness, whereas contrariwise,
we know and believe, that he cannot therefore do these things, because he
himself cannot perish, nor lie, nor be changed.

But lo we are now at the length come to them, who seem most equal and
upright above all other, who also avoiding all other forgeries and devises, do
stay themselves only upon these words of Christ's: This is my body, Such
answered as urge the bare words: This is my body.
and This cup is my blood: we must say they believe Christ's words though he
speak never so new and unaccustomed matters, yea though he speak things that
our flesh and senses cannot believe. We grant all this. But what if they seem
not agreeable to the truth, and the analogy or proportion of faith? Verily
they are to be believed indeed, seeing that the son of God is the truth it
self, and yet these things or points must be so expounded, Two rules meet to
be observed in expounding such places, as seem contrary to truth.
that they may altogether agree with the 1 rest of the places of holy
scripture, and the chief 2 grounds or heads of christian religion: for
whatsoever does dissent, though it be never so little from these rules, must of
necessity be false and unsound. Now we have heretofore at large declared and
proved, that such and so corrupt is that interpretation which establishes
either transubstantiation, or a real consubstantiation, of the signs and the
things signified. Two christian fruits arising by expounding the words of the
supper sacramentallie.
But on the other side if we grant a sacramental being of the thing signified
(which as it is true in other sacraments, so also in this mystery) then we
shall preserve 1 the truth of Christ's flesh, and uphold 2 the analogy and
proportion of faith. Wherefore this interpretation is to be admitted and
received, as true, and well agreeing with right and sound doctrine. An
objection answered.
But say they, there is no place here for a trope or figure: yea the very
plain word is simply to be observed. But who I beseech you has given you
this rule specially, since this is most manifest, yea and so usual also, that
when they speak of sacraments (which also are themselves figures) they speak
figuratiuelie. Neither think I that any man can skarslie bring forth or
allege an example of a contrary speech. You must therefore allege a cause, or
render a reason, why that which is of force in other sacraments should not
likewise be of strength and power in this sacrament, or speech touching the
same. But let us some what more nighlie look into the matter, and well wey all
and every of the words of institution. First I demand, what the thing is
pointed at, or painted out by this Pronoune demonstratiue, Hoc, that is, The
Pronounce Hoc, that is This, expounded.
This. The papists answer, that it is an identicall proposition, that is, The
popish opinion declared and confuted.
that one and the self same thing speaks of it self, and that therefore
nothing is showed forth, but even the very body it self: as if a man should
say: This thing is my body. But we say, that of necessity that must be
demonstrated and showed, which he having taken and broken, did deliver unto his
disciples, to wit, bread: which thing also the apostle has declared when he
said: The bread which we break. 1. Corinthians. 10.16
Is it not the communicating of the body of Christ? And the word (rup) added
in the other member or part of the institution of the supper, does plainly
prove to all men that are not utterly contentious, that this word (this) is
as much, as if Christ should say this bread. And here I confess there is no
trope at all, the reason is because it was needful for us to have the sign
properly and fitly declared, that we might not be deceived. But our
adversaries (among whom also a trope is almost as odious as an heresy) being
demanded, Vbiquitaries, or consubstantiators, and their opinions declared and
confuted.
What answer they? Verily that under this Pronoune Hoc, that is, This, there
is set out unto us, both ye bread and the body also, that is to say, both the
sign and the thing signified, Their opinion is contrary
being in very To scripture,
But (as erewhile I said) 1 Paul uses the only word bread, and certain it
To the nature of Christ's body.
Shall 2 we say, that he took and brake his own body? Certeinelie if they
will so affirm, this real conjunction To their own opinions.
shall 3 not depend upon the words of institution, seeing that even before that
Christ took it and brake it, it was not bread only, but his body also.
Wherefore they must of necessity confess, that these words: This is my body,
and these again: This bread is my body, mean and signify all one thing:
which not only all the ancient fathers do affirm, in innumerable places.
Luther. Brentius.
but Luther in many places, and Brentius also, both in his book called
Syntagma, and in his catechism likewise, Seluerieus. Eberus.
yea Seluericus and Eberus, do as it were in so many words testify also this
truth. If yet notwithstanding they will have even the body united to the
bread, to be showed out thereby. I answer they must of necessity then admit
the trope or figure Synecdoche, and that therefore the institution of Christ,
or the words of the institution, can not be understood without a trope or
figure. He proves the adversaries to fall into that which they dislike in
others.
And what man that is in his right wits shall they persuade, that the word
body can at one and the self same time be spoken of the bread and of the
body without an other Synedoche also. And this you see what they have gained,
who think it, and publish it in others to be a horrible heresy by a trope or
figure to understand ye words of the supper, whereas they themselves are
enforced and found out, to make a double trope or figure. Now let us come to
the word Est, The word Est, is expounded.
that is to say, Is. Seeing that whatsoever is, is not after one sort (for to
be, has place in all the predicaments) when these men from hense gather thus,
or do after this sort expound these words. or by changing were turned into a
substance of another sort, to wit, Vbiquitaries, in urging the ba^e letter, as
absurd as Papists at the least.
the substance of his body. Therefore these men alone do keep or urge, and that
most fondly, the bare word or letter. But these men of whom I now speak,
though in outward show and speech, they refuse all tropes and figures, in the
exposition of these words of the institution, do yet notwithstanding over and
besides the two tropes above mentioned, that is to say, The adversaries by
power of truth constrained to fall into three tropes in the exposition of a
few words though otherwise the name be odious to them.
the figure Synecdoche diversely used in deed bring in an other, and that same
very strange and wonderful: when they will have this speech: this bread is my
body, to signify and mean as much, as if Christ should have said: my body
is verily present, with, or in, or under this bread. Concerning which, this is
my mind, that whosoever he is that uses this last form or manner of
speaking does not show, what the body it self is, but rather declares where
the body is, and therefore uses the word (is) not in the predicament of
substance, but in the predicament of Site as they call it.

Now I come to speak of that word Body. The word Body handled.
The thing that about this matter is laid unto our charge, The adversaries
charge.
is this, that instead of the true body of Christ, delivered to death for us,
we substitute and place, I can not tell what typical or figurative, or as it
pleases them to call it, fantastical body, when we affirm that the body
is spoken of the bread, not that the bread is the very body it self, but
because it is as a sign and pledge of that true body of his, which was given
for us.

The answer thereto.
But is this to ascribe unto Christ, a fained body, as these men slander us? Or
is it not rather rightly to declare and show in what sense, that true and
only body may be said or spoken of the bread, to wit, not as it is bread,
but in as much as it is a sacrament of that his body? Therefore all these
interpretations following, which that stinking slanderer Illyricus tosseth too
and fro, Illyricus and his slanders.
as if they were contrary one of them to an other, that is to say: This bread
sacramentally signifies, or sacramentallye is Christ's body: or again: This
bread is the sacrament of Christ's body, do in deed and truth, and
altogether express but one and the selfsame judgment and matter.

Now that the word body is in many places used, by all the old right
believing writers, for the very sign of the body, All the ancient Fathers
use the word body, for the sign of the body.
our adversaries must of necessity whether they will or no, confess, since
that they fear not to affirm, that Christ's body is made, broken, consumed,
and why should it not be so likewise, when it is said, to enter into the
mouth? To be short, what strife and stubbornenesse is this of theirs? They dare
not deny the bread to be the sacrament of Christ's body: and why then will
they not allow of this interpretation? Here is the reason forsooth, because
they would have it called the Sacrament of the body present.

Then ye controversy shall not be, The state of the controversy or question,
is not about the interpretation of the words of institution, but about the
presence of Christ's body.
yet touching the interpretation and meaning of these words of the
institution, in which there is no mention at all, neither of presence nor
absence, but herein only shall they consist, whether that body (of which
that bread is said to be the Sacrament) be absent or present: which
controversy, I can not so much as suppose how these men should determine out
of these words This is my body.

The second part of the Lords supper, to wit, the institution of the cup, and
what is meant thereby.
Hitherto we have spoken of the first part of the Lords supper, to wit, the
bread: but now let us come to the other part, to wit, the cup. But tell us (I
pray you) what we must understand by the word cup? Verily, by their
confession, even that which is contained in the cup, that is to say, the
wine, and yet over and besides that, the blood of Christ, as they will needs
have it. The former of these I grant, to wit, that by the cup should be
meant, the wine contained in the cup: but the latter I deny, to wit, that that
wine should be in substance the very blood of Christ, and this I do deny
standing upon the reasons, which I have before spoken and alleged. But
howsoever it be, whether there be meant thereby this wine alone, or together
with the wine, even the blood it self: yet needs must these deadly enemies of
tropes and figures acknowledge one figure here, to wit, a Metonomia, of the
thing containing for the thing contained, yea, and that same very trope of the
same figure Synecdoche, (which we have spoken of before) whereby it comes to
pass, that the wine and the blood are said to be the blood.

Now then let them tell me how, See for the proof of this Genesis 17.9.
without a crope or figure, that shall be counted the covenant it self, by
means whereof, the covenant is established? And yet this further I would
gladly demand of them, if the bare word or letter being so precisely observed,
that real consubstantiation must of necessity ensue, how it can be that this
should not follow likewise, that the signs being not only distincted, but
in very deed and truth separated and sundered also the body it self should
not likewise in deed be separated and sundered from the blood?
Consubstantiation erroneous, and all that is objected for i^ most weak.
I many times thinking, and that earnestly of this one matter, to wit, why
diverse did so greatly urge this same rule Consubstantiation, even as if it were
the principal point of all our religion: of a truth, nothing could come into
my mind but that which was most easy to be confuted. As for ye that they say,
An objection.
that unless Christ's very body and his very blood be believed to be so present,
that it may be received with the hands and with the mouth, or else the bread
and the wine, shall be but empty and void signs, I say it is of no force. In
good sooth, suppose ye that ye speak the truth? Belike then all the
sacraments that the Fathers had, The answer ^^ken from an absurdity.
before that Christ's flesh was indeed created were void, and of no force.
Their Sacraments (says Augustine) were in signs diverse, but in matter equal.
But in what matter were they equal? Even in Christ, the only matter of the
sacraments: for that same spiritual word, that is, (as the selfsame writer
upon the 77. August. in psa. 77
psalm expounds it) signifieng some spiritual thing, was Christ; and they
did eat the same meat that we eat, 1. Corint. 10.2.3.
and did drink the same drink, to wit, Christ that was to be born, as we eat
and drink Christ already borne, who is a spiritual meat and drink. How untrue
therefore is it that the signs are of no force, except the thing signified,
being in deed also present be coupled and joined with the sign? 2 A second
reason, standing upon comparison of the element of baptism, with the elements
of the supper.
Yea shall we say, that the water of Baptism, is an idle sign? and yet I
never hard of any man that would say, that the blood of Christ was indeed
consubstantiated together with the wine. But against this they reply saying:
the reason or cause of that is, because the Lord said not, that that water was
his blood. Let us grant that, and yet in the mean while we have gained this,
that ye sacrament is not abolished, or made of no force, though the sign be
in one place, and the thing signified thereby be in an other, so that both of
them be truly offered and given. And this much, or hitherto have we spoken of
this third point, that is to say, of the sacramental conjunction or joining of
the sign with the thing signified.

Now the sum of this true and right believing judgment is this, to wit, The
sum of that which has bin said, touching the sacramental conjunction of the
sig^ and the thing signified.
that that is a sacramental conjunction, whereby it comes to pass, that
through gods ordinance, that which is signified by the signs used, though now
it be never so far from us (I mean Christ himself, as in respect of his
flesh) is yet notwithstanding, through the power of the holy ghost, but yet in
such a spiritual sort and manner, as we shall declare hereafter, as truly
and verily offered unto us, and given us, to be enjoyed of us as verily as the
signs themselves are looked upon with the eyes, touched with the hands and
received and perceived also with the mouth.

But let us now come at the length, The fourth or last part of this discourse.
to the fourth or last question and points, to wit, what manner of taking or
receiving there is, both of the signs themselves, and of the thing signified.
Concerning the taking or receiving of the signs, there is no controversy or
doubt made of it, A syllogism.
but that it is natural and outward, because it is manifestly and plainly
performed of all them that come unto it, by bodily instruments and means. The
mayor.
But as for the things signified, to wit, that very flesh of Christ, and that
very blood of his, they are so received and taken, even as they are present and
offered. The minor.
But they are present and offered also, to our mind and faith, because they are
now (as we have said) not on earth, The conclusion.
but in heaven: and therefore they can not be taken or received otherwise than
by our minds and faith. Augustine.
Augustine also speaking well and rightly touching this point, after this
manner: Why preporest thou thy mouth and belly? This food belongs not to
the belly, but to the mind: Believe and thou have eaten: Whereupon also this
likewise follows, that all that come to the Lords table (as the same
Augustine says) receue the body of the lord, Augustine.
that is to say, the sacrament of the Lords body, to wit, the bread used at
(...) may be one, even as thou and I are one

And in one word, as you would say to finish the matter: if only the members
of Christ are to be saved, then they must needs confess, that we are through
faith truly grafted into Christ, and that even before we come to the supper:
in so much as, no man can rightlye and orderlye come to the supper, which is
not now already, both in baptism, and in the word, That follows not, that
the adversaries fantasy.
become a member of Christ, and therefore is united with Christ him self.
And yet it does not heerevppon follow, that the institution of the Supper is
superfluous, by which we do not indeed at the first pushe, but yet
notwithstanding in process of time, do grow up more and more in Christ.
For him that we do already possess, must we yet still daily seek: and the
more in number or strength that the obiectes of our faith, so much the more
meet is, that that mean measure of faith that we have, being stirred up
in us, it should become so much the more effectual and powerful.

For else what do these men gather which we may not, even from the very first
institution and celebration of the Lords supper, as safly collect against the
repetition or often administration of the same? A reason of the assertion.
For certainly if we conclude, that the Lords supper is therefore superfluous,
because we receive nothing therein, but that which we received before, in the
word and baptism, then this also will follow therevppon, that it is
altogether unprofitable, to repair the second or third time to the Lords
supper, seeing that he that comes thither the second or sundry times,
receives nothing more than that very selfsame thing, which before he had
laid hold of and received, than when he came first thereto. The second
objection, with the answer thereto.
But they say, there is given to all that come thither, not bread alone, but
that bread which is the sacrament: otherwise Christ's words should be frustrate
saying: This is my body. I grant all this, and yet I deny the consequence.
Both things, that is, the sign, and the thing signified, As man stands of
two parts: so accordingly two things are offered in the supper.
is given or offered to all: therefore all receive both. This hangs not
together: for two things are offered, one to the body, the other to the mind:
the one is to be taken hold of by the mean of the body, either to life or to
death: the other is to be apprehended by faith, and yet but to life only. Is
it any marvel then that two things being to be received by several
instruments and means, though perhaps they be both offered in one action,
as they say, the one of them should be received, by every one that brings
the common instrument of the body: and the other apprehended but of them alone
that bring with them that same spiritual and only fit instrument to
apprehend Christ by? No verilye. And yet here again I pray you mark, how
great the strength of truth is.

Those that contend so stiffely, and that also without any profit to the church
about unworthy communicants (for to what end should we travail so much
about them? A distinction void of reason and religion.
) Do notwithstanding distinguish, between such unworthy persons as live not
christianlie enough, or otherwise are not sufficiently prepared for receiving
of the supper (yet so as they fear not to affirm, that even they also eat
Christ's flesh, though it be to their destruction unless they repent) and
such as are altogether the wicked and unbelievers, who receive nothing but the
bare signs.

But if that same real Consubstantiation which they fantasy be true, then
this will ensue thereupon, that not only all reasonable creatures without
exception, receuing the signs, but the very beasts (let there be reverence in
hearing this that I now say, A wary, but yet withal, a most necessary
caution.
and let not any manne take it, as though I spoke blasphemously) eating that
bread and drinking that wine, shall have received also the flesh and the blood
of Christ. An objection answered.
But they except further against this truth, that the unworthy are said to be
guilty of the Lords body and blood. We grant that too, Is it because they
did unworthily receive the body and blood? 1. Corinthians. 11.27
No in deed: But because they did eat unworthily of that bread, and drink
vnwoorthilye of that cup: 1. Cor. 11.28, 29.
or, because they discerned not the Lords body, for that same unworthy using
and receiving of the holy signs or pledges redoundeth unto the contempt of the
thing signified and offered, A fit similitude.
even as he may justly be accounted guilty of some crime: yea, of treason if
you will against the Emperoures Majesty, that in contempt or reprochfullye
does violate the Emperors picture or image. We see then, that the wicked are
become guiltye of the body and blood of Christ, not that they have received
them (unless a man will take the body for the sign of the body, which is
oftentimes used in the ancient Fathers) but because they have through their
unbelief rejected or refused them. For Christ him self can never be sundered
from that his quickening power, Christ and his graces are never sundered.
wherefore look of whom soever he is received (now indeed he is received
only of the believers) they must of necessitye be delivered from eternal
death, John. 5.24.
as he himself plainly bears witness.

Now whereas these men except against this truth, An objection shortly
answered.
that christ is delivered to some for judgment, and that through the very
fault of the hearers. We grant that also, but yet so, and in respect as Christ
is through their unbelief refused, and cast from them, and not received of
them by faith.

Lastly, whereas these men suppose, The last objection, with the answer thereto.
that Christ him self can not be truly partaken, unless he be indeed
apprehended both by the hands and mouth also, The last objection, with the
aunsweare thereto.
and that therefore we hold a communicating not of Christ himself, but of his
efficacy and power, let us a little consider this falshoode, and weigh this
slander. First therefore we must know, that when we remove a bodily eating,
that so we may establishe a spiritual and mystical eating: that both these
must be understood not of the thing it self which is communicated or
partaken, but of the manner of communicating or partaking. For neither did
Christ himself say: Luke 22.19.
This is the merit or benefit of my death: but this is that my body, which is
given for you: neither do we suppose, that Christ himself can be less
unskillfully separated from his efficacy, A similitude.
when the question is of Spiritual nourishement, than if a man would deny,
that we had need to eat bread it self, and drink wine it self, that so
afterward we might draw or fetch bodily nourishment from the same.

But we say and affirm, that this manner of communicating or partaking, is
not bodily, neither yet that it can be performed by bodily instruments, or
means, but altogether spiritual and mystical, as which is performed by faith
alone, which faith imbraceth that matter, Faith alone imbraceth the words and
sacraments and all the graces offered us therein.
that is offered unto us in the word and sacraments. But if they will deny
that this can be performed, because of such a great distance of places, let
them then cease at the last to accuse us of ungodliness, as though we would
either deny Gods almighty power, or give sentence touching this mystery, by
the rules of worldly philosophy. And yet we will not deny, but that this
objection may then have some place, If absurdities or errors be yielded unto,
then they will be infinite, and no measure of them.
if by communicating or partaking we understand a real applieng or mixture of
Christ's body with ours, whether it be of the whole with the whole, or of the
parts with the parts, that so the church might in deed be a body, as it were
souldered and glewed together of innumerable bodies of believers, being indeed
molten together as it were with Christ's body. But fie upon this monster, and
let us learn always to drive it far from us: for who perceives not that the
body arising or flowing from this fellowship or communicating and belonging
altogether to a spiritual life, is mystical? Wherefore we are truly, but yet
after a spiritual sort and mystically, become one with Christ himself
through faith, that so from him there may flow into us true life. A similitude.
And even as these our members being naturally joined with the soul, do
receive from it sense and moving: so should we after a spiritual and
vndeclarable manner (for great is the mystery of that spiritual marriage, that
is between Christ and his church, Ephesians. 5.32.
as the apostle largely and lowdlie declares) live in Christ, being led and
governed by his spirit, and he again manifest and declare his powerful
working in us. Now tell me, is this the abolishing of that partaking that we
have with Christ himself, or do we not rather make it a divine and heavenly
partaking? But if with these men we would make it a communicating with the
mouth, then this partaking or communicating should be no woonderful or
excellent matter. We cannot approve of a bodily communicating or partaking
with the mouth, because that were to spoil our faith, and rob God of his
almighty power and truth.
For what I pray you is more natural and usual, than if any thing that is in
deed present, be delivered us to eat, we take it in our hands, and swallow it
down through our mouth? But that we, though as now poor wretches we be placed
on the earth, and not else where, should notwithstanding, truly and in deed
become the very members of the flesh and blood of Christ himself, who now
according to his flesh remains in heaven, and no where else, and should fetch
from thence the very juice in deed of eternal life, notwithstanding that
wonderful great distance of place that is between him and us, this I say
passes all man's understanding, and is a most evident testimony both of Gods
truth, and also of his almighty power.

And let this suffice also for answer to these slanderers, who cry out, that
we transform this holy mystery into an imaginary ghost or conceit, in that
we do attribute all this wholly to our minds and faith: If the adversaries
conclusion be true, then there will ensue thereupon two gross errors.
for if they do truly conclude this against us, what remains then but that
we affirm likewise the baptism of christians to be a certain vain fantasy
or apparition, and their salvation also to be Two similitudes containing in
them arguments from the less to the more.
who die before they can come to be present at, or partakers of the Lords
supper? Now if natural understanding it self and apprehension be so powerful
and effectual, that we being helped by these faculties become skillful in so
many things, shall not faith that excellent gift of the Holy ghost, work
this in us, that we shall through faith truly and in deed apprehend and take
hold of that very thing, which God offers us, to be received by faith,
though it The conclusion of all.
But of these matters we have spoken thus far. My purpose was (brethren)
largely to discourse of these points, because of the slanders of certain
ilwillers, that so by this means, the true and sound doctrine of our churches,
being made known, none of them that repair to this church should refuse our
assemblies, specially the holy supper which we mind God willing, within few
days to administer, but rather that we should every one of us religiously
celebrate this holy banquet, earnestly entreating the Lord to restreine
troublesome spirits, to confirm right believers, A godly prayer.
and (to be short) to grant us all this grace, that being of one mind in him,
we may in this world lead an innocent and unblameable life, and at the last be
received into eternal life and blessedness, by our Lord Jesus Christ: to whom
with the Father, and the Holy ghost, be all praise, and glory for ever and
ever: So be it.

A SHORT SVMME OF sound doctrine, touching the matter of the Sacrament of the
Lords supper.
We have to consider in Christ our only Mediator, Four things to be
specially regarded in Christ,
especially four things, that is to say: 1 Christ's person. 2 His office. 3
The gift (...) graces which we receive from him. 4 Lastly, by what means we
are made partakers of those gifts.


1 Concerning Christ's person.
Christ consisting of two natures, is yet but one person.
WE teach and affirm, that Christ does consist of two natures, the one the
nature of God, the other the nature of man, making yet notwithstanding but one
person of both natures: and that so also as the proprieties both in the nature
of God, and also of man, remain safe and sound, and are rightly distinguished
one of them from another. Wherein the glorification of Christ's body stands.
And though we confess the man's nature of Christ to be glorified, and that in
the cheifest degree (...) one, and that no less truly and straightly than the
members are joined to a natural body, but yet in that manner, and after that
sort, which we will hereafter declare. Neither do they please, satisfy, or
content us, wherefore this our ioining with Christ unto that great mystery of
his incarnation: for this is a general communicating or partaking of his
nature with ours: but here we entreat of a particular or peculiar conjunction,
by which it comes to pass, Ephesians. 4.13.
that his church and congregation grows up together with him. And we affirm
this conjunction and ioining of us together, to be the welspring of all the
benefits which afterward are conveyed over from Christ unto us: Matthew. 3.17.
John. 17.11.
for seeing that the father is well pleased in him alone, it is meet that we be
truly made one with him, that in him also we may please the father. Hense
then insueth another sort of gifts and graces, that is to say, Christ and his
graces cannot be sundered.
such as when we have Christ given us, are the^ in and with him also bestowed
upon us. Two sorts of graces in Christ.
Of which there are likewise two special sorts: First, the imputation or
accou^ting righteousness of God, through the forgiveness

4 How Christ together with his gifts and graces may be received of us.
THat we receive Christ together with all his gifts and graces, What the Holy
ghost is.
this must be attributed, as we freely confess, to the free working of the
Holy spirit alone, which is the essential power of the father and the son:
1. Cor. 2.13.14.
for he alone makes us meet to understand these things which are of God, yea
and that in such sort, that we do not only confess all Gods promises
generally to be true, What faith is.
but also every one of us in our hearts do certeinelie persuade our selves
that these promises do belong unto us, Romans 8.15. Galath. 4.6.
and therefore may with boldness cry Abba, O father. This same most excellent
work of the Holy ghost we call faith, Ephesians. 2.8.
which is the free gift of GOD, allotted specially to the elect, and is as in
respect of us, the only fit and meet instrument to perceive Christ by, and to
receive all his graces. Therefore we teach with Paul, Romans 3.28.
that we are justified and saved by faith alone: we meaning thereby nothing
else but this, that by that only instrument of faith, we lay hold upon all
things necessary to salvation, to wit, Christ with all his gifts.
Furthermore, the Holy ghost, to the end that this faith may be begotten in us
by his secret power, as also for the fostering and strengthening thereof, after
that it is wrought, does use likewise outward means (because we consist of a
rude and gross nature) to wit, the word written and preached, The outward
means of faith.
which he by his power makes effectual in us, that so he may work in us
these things of which we have before spoken. The word considred two ways, to
wit, as it is preached without the sacraments, and as the sacraments are
annexed thereto.
And this word sometime is simple, and by it self or alone, as you would say,
not accompanied with other, of which sort is the daily preaching of the same
word. And sometimes again it has visible signs joined to it, together with
certain ceremonies: which signs the Greeks call mysteries, and the Latins
sacraments: for God verily regarding our weakness, went to assure us of that
his goodwill toward us, not by the ears only, but also by other senses, and
so more and more to establish and seal unto us our conjunction with Christ his
son. These things being put down, and these ground-works and fountions laid,
it shall be an easy matter to gather our mind touching the questions following,
which respect or concern the matter of the sacrament.

Q 1 Wherefore and to what purpose are sacraments ordained?

Sacraments ordained to three ends.
A First, that we might so much ye more

Q 2 From whense flows that force of the sacraments?

A Wholly and altogether from the working of the Holy ghust, The force of the
sacraments is from the Holy ghost only.
and not from the signs, otherwise than as by these outward objects, the
inward senses are moved. And the Holy ghost using those means and aids for
our infirmities sake, does make these motions effectual and powerful, in
what measure, and at what time soever it pleases him.

Q 3 Which is the formal cause of the sacraments?

A The ordinance of God contained in his word, The formal cause of the
sacraments.
and set out or declared by his minister, according to his commandment, and
not the bare pronunciation of those same words, nor any force lieng hid in the
words themselves.

Q 4 What is the power of this formal cause?

A That the signs not in their very nature or substance, The elements are
changed i^ the sacrament, but that is in respect of use only, and not of
substance.
but as in respect of their use only should be changed, and that so long as
the action whereunto they serve, is of force or in hand. For in the holy
mysteries we esteem not water, as water simply, or bread as bread alone, or
wine as wine only, but as certain signs, and true pledges of those things
which the Lord, though in another manner in deed (as we shall by and by
declare) yet notwithstanding most certeinlie and truly does give unto us,
that is to say, of Christ himself, with all his gifts and graces.

The matter of the sacraments is two fold.
Q 5 What is the matter of the sacraments?

The outward matter are the elements.
A The outward matter we count the signs themselves, to wit, water in
baptism, bread and wine in the Lords supper, together with the ceremonies
ordained by Christ, as his word testifies, which also themselves do truly
signify matters of great weight, and altogether heavenly. We have already
often times said, Christ and his graces are the inward matter.
that not that only is termed of us, the inward matter, or matter it self of
the sacrament, whatsoever is derived to us from Christ, but principally Christ
himself, with whom it is meet that we be made one, before we can draw or fetch
any thing from him. Baptism what it signifies.
And in deed in baptism there is set out unto us the true and very blood of
the Lord, as a lauer or founteine, with which blood being washed, we are more
and more ingrafted into Christ, and buried with him. The supper what it
signifies.
And in the supper, the body and blood of the same Christ is given to us, and
that in several signs, as our true meat, and true drink into life
everlasting. Christ offered in the word and in the sacraments, but yet in two
respects more lively and plainly in the sacraments.
There is then one inward matter of the word alone, or by it self, and the
sacraments also, annected thereto, that is to say, Christ himself, with all
his benefits, to the partaking whereof we are called. But notwithstanding some
difference there is, to wit, according to more and less, as they usually say
in schools. First, The first difference.
because that when the sacraments are joined to the simple word or word alone,
then it necessarily follows, that there is a more plentiful declaration of
Gods good will toward us, and look by how much there are more objects in
number, and they likewise more evident, by so much the more vehemently or
earnestly they do move and stir us up, or at leastwise ought so to do.
Secondly, The second difference.
because although the word alone propounded generally unto all, be
afterward by the power of faith, applied unto every particular faithful
person: yet this is not there so plainly and particularly expressed, as in
the sacraments in which Christ is verily offered particularly and severally
to every one: whereby it comes to pass that every particular believer is
after a certain manner put into the possession of Christ himself.

Q 6 How is the matter joined with the signs?

The signs and the things signified are joined sacramentallie.
A By a sacramental manner which seeing it is proper and peculiar to them
alone, must be declared by a proper definition, and such a one as is fit for
that purpose, we therefore define or determine, that the sacramental manner of
ioining the matter with the signs, Why it is called a spiritual conjunction.
is spiritual: by which epitheton or word, we conceive no imagined or feined
thing, but principally mean that it specially depends of the power of the
Holy ghost, as we have already said in the declaration of the formal cause.
Moreover, by that means we shut out all gross and natural manner of ioining:
A similitude.
for as we know that the signs are upon earth, and not else where, which thing
also no man can or will deny: so also we hold and conclude, that the matter it
self, that is to say, Christ himself, according to his flesh, is contained in
heaven, and not in any other place, as we gather out of the Scriptures, Luke
24.51. Acts 3.21. Roman. 8.34. Coloss. 3.1.
and all the Fathers of right faith and sound judgment. And yet we doubt not
but that the signs are joined with the matter, that is to say, in that
respect, or so far forth as God, does not only, as it were a far off show,
the signs of the body and blood of Christ: but beside the very signs, does
also truly give unto us Christ himself, to be enjoyed and possessed of us.
Whereby also it comes to pass, that in this respect above mentioned, these
things may be truly said to be joined together, although by spaces of places
they are separated far and wide asunder. Notwithstanding we hold, that this
conjunction is true and certain, The sacramental conjunction is true and sure.
in so much as, that therefore the name of the thing it self, that is, I say,
the body and blood is indeed figuratively, but yet very significantly and
plainly given to the very signs, to wit, unto the bread and the wine.
Secondly, to the end we may more fully declare this sacramental manner of
joining the matter with the sign, we add, that it is significatiue, not as
though God did only signify unto us in the Sacraments, What is called a
significatiue conjunction.
the body and blood of his Son, and also his Son himself (for no doubt but
that also he does truly give him unto us) but we do it to this end,
least any man should think the matter to be so coupled with the signs,
that Christ's flesh also should now be present in earth, though it were after
a certain invisible and incomprehensible manner. We say therefore, that
Christ's body and blood, is by so great a space absent from the signs, even
as the earth it self, Curiosity to be avoided, specially in things we are
not skilled in.
is distant from the most high Heavens, or from the seat of the blessed
(touching which we mind not at any time over curiously to dispute or
discourse) and into which we know and believe that Christ ascended, that so in
all our behalfes, and for us indeed, he might obtain and get that same
immortal inheritance. Notwithstanding we separat not the thing from the signs,
either as in respect of God, who truly offers both the one and the other,
Things must be so joined that neither they nor other must be confounded or
iumbled together.
or as in respect of the faithful, who truly and indeed receive both. But
we note the difference of place in the conjunction of the thing, and the
signs, that the truth of Christ's flesh, and of his ascension, may be
preserved safe and sound: neither yet do we for all that, by any means make
void the Lords supper it self.

Q 7 What is to be thought of these manner of speeches: The body of the Lord
is in, or with, or under the bread, or nigh unto the bread, and of all, or any
other that be of the like sort?

A As yet we fear to use these, or such like manner of speeches, because
they seem to take away the distaunce of places, Two causes why these kinds
of speeches are not to be allowed.
which we necessarily establishe and allow: or else they uphold the
vbiquitie of Christ's body, which we may A christian yielding, for peace
sake, but yet with good cautions and exceptions.
that these terms (which are under) for concordes sake may be admitted, but
not unless a plain and manifest interpretation be joined withal: to wit,
that these particles are so to be understood, not as though Christ's flesh
should be placed upon earth, but that we may know, that besides the signs
themselves which are upon the earth, Christ himself which is in heaven, is
truly given unto us, as the signs on earth do bear witness.

Q 8 What ought we to judge of this manner of saying, Christ is present in the
supper, corporally, reallie, substantiallie?

A For the selfsame cause before alleged, we do not use these forms of
speech neither: Hard speeches with some qualifications and interpretations may
be tolerated for a time.
notwithstanding it should seem, that they also might be tolerated or borne
withal, so that we add the interpretation following, to wit, that these
things do not pertain to that manner of conjunction, whereby the thing is
joined with the signs, but serve rather to express and declare the matter it
self, that is to say, that so we may understand, that by the action of the
supper, there is established and confirmed in us, not only the virtue and
power of Christ, but chiefly, our very growing up with christ himself, from
which we have affirmed the same to flow, This is the law of righteousness; to
have that done to our selves that we would do to others.
even as it were, from a fountain, because afterward we fetch from him,
both true life, and also all things necessary to salvation. Neither would I
judge it to be refused, that a like interpretation may again be joined to this
our manner of speaking, that Christ is spirituallie in the supper, least any
man should think that we separate Christ's power from the very flesh of
Christ, or imagine unto him a special body.

Q 9 What is to be judged of this manner of saying: That Christ is present in
the supper, and is distributed also, by an incomprehensible manner, or after a
sort, that can not be understood?

A We use this manner of speech, but yet in a far other sense and meaning than
some are woonte. A corrupt interpretation.
For (unless peradventure we be deceived) they seem to take this saying
after this sort, as though by a certain divine and heavenly power, by reason
also of the personal union of the flesh with the godhead Christ's flesh should
be really at one time and together, both in heaven and in earth. But, though we
neither deny the omnipotency of GOD: neither the true conjunction of the
thing, A true interpretation.
with the signs, and of the faithful with Christ himself, we do yet
notwithstanding, by reason of the truth of Christ's flesh, and his ascension
likewise plainly affirm that the body of Christ is now verily absent from the
world, Acts 3.21.
and shall remain absent until he come to judge the quick and the dead.
Nevertheless we confess, this mystery of god to be incomprehe^sible and beyond
our understanding: Faith joins things together that be as far asunder as
heaven and earth.
whereby it falls out, that that which is, and remains in heaven, and not
els-where, that so we may draw life and salvation from him, who is truly
offered unto us, and in deed communicated of us. For albeit we know, first,
that the Holie-ghost, that is to say, gods power does work this, The power of
the spirit, and of the force of faith.
and then that as in regard of our selves, all this is to be received of us,
by the only instrument or mean of faith: yet the power of the spirit, and
the force of faith, do exceed all our understanding: whereby it comes to
pass also, that even this whole action is very properly called, a mystery or
secret, as the Greeks used to term it.

Q 10 How is the matter or thing of the Sacrament communicated or partaken of
us?

A The matter of the Sacrament, that is to say, Christ himself, is received of
us, by a spiritual manner, through faith. And we call that a Spiritual manner
of receiving or communicating, Spiritual receiving what it is.
not only in which Christ his spirit is communicated with us, but also, that
which is not earthly or natural, but depends of the incomprehensible power
of the Holie-ghost, by which most straight bond indeed the members are more
and more joined with their head. For we exclude and shut out, all pouring
abroad and mingling of substaunces, and also all fitness of joining together
of natural parts, and yet can hold and main^^ine a true growing up of the
faithful with Christ, which can not be hindered by any distaunce of places:
for our faith cleaves unto the word of God, who indeed performs that which
he promises.

Q 11 In what sense are these speeches (To eat the Lords body, and to drink
his blood, and other such like) to be admitted?

A We say, Eating and drinking referred to Christ's body and blood must be
figuratiuelie understood.
that these manner of speeches do also belong to that communicating or
partaking, whereby we lay hold of Christ, even in the simple word, or in the
word it self alone: yea, we affirm, that they are very effectual and
significant, but so, that the words of eating and drinking, when they are
spoken of the taking of the body and blood of Christ, are no less figuratively
to be understood, than if a man should attribute to faith a mouth and teeth.
Two causes why the holie-ghost uses borrowed speeches. The first.
Now we allege two chief causes why the holy ghost speaks after that
manner: one cause is, that he may show, how strait our conjunction with christ
is, by the means of faith: for nothing more grows up and increases with us,
than meat and drink, without which no man ca^^^asse over his time, or spend
this life: ^he other cause (which also properly has place in the Sacraments)
is, The second.
that by this way and means it may be declared, how true the Lord is in
delivering the matter it self, which he promises by signs, as it were, by
certain pledges given: for thereby it comes to pass, that though the only
signs are taken with the hand, and received with the mouth, yet that also
which beside the signs, is truly offered, and by faith only spiritually
received, is said to be taken, eaten, drunken, etc: And for this cause we
acknowledge, Why we use not the fathers phrases in the ^upper.
that the holy Fathers have used many other forms of speaking, not unlike
these, which we notwithstanding will not at this day heedelesly use, but
suppose rather, that the same are to be mitigated by some profitable and fit
interpretations, and the rather, because of many errors spread abroad by
Satan, and many controversies also by this occasion stirred up in the church
of God.

Q 12 How are these words: This is my body, and this is my blood, to be
expounded?

A Even after this manner: This, The words of the institution expounded
particularly, and, as it were, one after an other.
that is to say, this bread and this wine, is, to wit, sacramentally for not
whatsoever is any thing, is by one only way a thing. Now the question is
here, concerning the Sacraments. And we plainly say sacramentally, because
the Lord did indeed offer, not bare bread^ and wine only, but the true signs
of his body and blood, neither only these signs, but besides them also, his
body and blood to be enjoyed and possessed of us, even into everlasting life,
which life everlasting also we draw from him being communicated unto us. Luke
22.19, 20.
My body and my blood, that is, not an imagined body or fained blood, but that
selfsame body which was given for us, and that self-same blood which was
shead for us, of both which we are indeed by faith made partakers, as the
signs do truly witness.

Q 13 What do the wicked or vnbelee^ers receive?

The institution of the supper depends upon Gods truth.
A We hold and teach, and that by an agreeing judgment and holy consent, that
the institution of the sacrament does hang upon the truth of God, and
therefore that in the very action of the Lords supper rightly administered, the
bread is always a true sign of the Lords body, and the wine a true sign of
the Lords blood, to whomsoever they be offered or given. A bad conclusion
justly reuerted and cast upon the adversaries themselves.
Now, whereas some would thereupon gather and infer, that al do receive the
whole sacrament, we can at no hand grant it, for this consequence or reason is
not of force. God does offer it to all, therefore al receive it. But rather on
the contrary side, we gather and reason thus: God does in the Sacrament offer
two things, and that indeed as verily and trullie the one, as the other, but
both are to be received by means and instruments altogether diverse and
different: that is to say, the outward signs are to be received bodily, and the
thing it self spiritually by faith. Therefore because every man brings his
mouth, The reason why some receive woorthilie, other some unworthily.
al receive the outward signs, some indeed worthily, and othersome
vnwoorthilie: but because the faithful and believers only bring the mouth of
faith, therefore the faith all only receive the matter it self, and therefore
also life everlasting. And the unbelievers eat and drink judgment to them
selves, because they discern not, that is to say, 1. Corinthians. 11.2^
despise and reject the Lords body offered them, neither have they any regard
thereof. Wherefore this their condemnation proceeds not, of the body and
blood of the Lord unworthily received (for seeing that they are not received
but by faith, they are never received unworthily, neither can they indeed be
otherwise than lively and quickening things) but of the body and blood of the
Lord, From whence the condemnation of the wicked flows, in that they do
unworthily eat at the Lords table.
therefore contemned and rejected, because in this action, neither the bread
should be duly considred as bread, but as a pledge of the lords body, nor the
wine regarded only as the wine, but as a sure pledge of the Lords blood.
Therefore hence it comes to pas, To receive without faith, i^ to receive
unworthily.
that whosoever he be that receives this bread and wine unworthily, that is
to say, without faith, does despise, not the bread, and the wine, but the body
and blood of the Lord in those pledges, and is therefore guilty of the body and
blood of the Lord, A reason why all receive not Christ in the supper.
which he received not, but which he had in consideration or due regard of for
Christ does not ^^icken or cause to live, al them to whom he is offered,
whether this be done in the word alone, or in the sacraments, but he does
indeed quicke^ al them of whom he is received, because he cannot be received
of any other but of the faithful only and as for those of whom he is despised,
he does judge them al, Two sayings of the ancient fathers very charitably
interpreted.
so far off is it, that he is of them received. Notwithstanding, for some of
the fathers sakes, and the reverence we carry but what the Lord of his own
goodness offers to every one.

The conclusion. The conclusion, consisting first of a wish, which has two
parts.

This is the sum of al those things, which are taught in our churches and
congregations, Secondly, of a promise, which also has two parts.
But if any thing in this doctrine delivered can be showed or proved, not to
be agreeable to Gods word, we are ready,

(...). The substance of the Lords supper, shortly and soundly set forth,
for the instruction and comfort of all true christian Readers.
TO clear, yea, to void all the controversies, that from time to time have
crept into the church of Christ, concerning the matter of the lords supper,
these three circumstances are meet especially to be considered.

1. Corinthians. 11.23
1 First, who ordained it, to wit, Jesus Christ our lord and savior, which
tends to two especial ends: first, to prove his eternal deity or godhead,
because it belongs to God alone, and none other, to institute and ordain
holy signs and Sacraments in his church, whereof also it should seem there
is very great and good reason, both in as much as the Church it self is, 1.
Timoth. 3.15.
the house of the living God, and his peculiar inheritance: and also because it
belongs to him alone, to give that virtue and strength unto elements of
common and unclean by sin, to become purified and holy through grace: secondly,
it seems to teach us, to have a more reverent regard to come to the sound
knowledge and religious use thereof, not only because he being God, and the
ordainer thereof, has all power in his own hands, to punish the profane
contemners and abusers of the same, but also because he, of whom we have
that that we have, not only as in consideration of our name, Christian, but
also as in respect of all other both spiritual and bodily graces, has
instituted the same for his own glory and our good.

2 Secondly, Matthew. 26.26.
we are to consider when it was instituted, to wit, before his death and
suffering, and that immediatelye after he had with his disciples eaten the
passover, by which we may see the Lord Jesus had as great ear for us, as for
the fathers, before his being and manifestation in the flesh: providing also
thereby, not only for our forgetfulness, that we might have the continual
remembrance of his death and passion before our eyes, 1. Corint. 11.26.
until his coming again, but for our instruction also, this being plain to
us, in that circumstance of time, that forasmuch as ye bread was broken in the
supper before his body was crucified on ye cross, that bread could not be
that same natural body, that was crucified on the cross, etc: as Papists
grossly imagine and maintain, the reason is, because these things that differ
in time, can not be said in all respects, yea, hardlye in any respect to
be the same.

3 Thirdly, wherefore it was ordained, to wit, to strengthen our faith in the
truth of Gods promises, by which we may see, that we are dull and ^owe of
heart to believe (whatsoever the Pelagians and the pride of our own minds
would persuade us to the contrary) GOD providing for the curing of this
disease in us, Luke 24 25.
not only his word preached, but visible signs and seals also by which
though the outward senses may be satisfied, the Lord yet notwithstanding
speaks to our souls and consciences, the Lord likewise instituting the
same, as effectual means to put us in remembrance, by reason of our
forgetfulness of Jesus Christ being absent, as also of his death and passion,
and of the fruits and profits we reap thereby. Now a remembrance of a
thing it could not be, if the thing it self were present. And all these
three points are proved out of 1. Corinthians. 11.23.24.

In the second place, the deep and due

1 First, which be the signs in the sacrament, to wit, the visible elements of
bread and wine, which have that strength and force in them, not of themselves,
and in their own nature, for then all bread and wine should have the like,
neither yet because they be used by men in the administration and participation
of the supper, for if that were true, many things then should have the like
power and effect: but in respect of the Lords institution, who in deed has
dedicated and appointed them to those holy uses, and who alone has power to
ordeine holy signs or sacraments, and to give them that effect and property,
as has been plainly declared before.

2 Secondly, what be the things signified thereby, to wit, the blessed body
of Christ crucified, and his precious blood, shed for the benefit and good of
all those, that by a lively and steadfast faith, do apprehend and take hold of
him, and all his merits: for no doubt but it was the Lords purpose, both in the
elements and the use of the same, to direct our faith to these things in him,
which in truth were in him, and which (such was his good pleasure toward us
miserable wretches) should be set out unto us in the sacrament, otherwise the
Lord Jesus should have dallied with us, and that in matters of no small
importance, from the which as we steadfastly believe, he was utterly free, so
the least thought of such a conceit and dotage, should not so much as once
enter into us.

3 Thirdly the analogy, proportion and agreement, which is between the
signs, and the things signified, the Lord no doubt choosing such elements as
might most aptly and fitly express the things signified and sealed by the
same: for otherwise, if we had had bare signs alone, without holy things
signified in and by the same, as our faith had no whit at all been provided
for, because it being spiritual and inward, is not, nor cannot be nourished
with outward and corporal things, so we might easily have been carried
away into idolatry or superstition at the least, whilst we directed our
imagination (for I dare not call it faith) to visible and external elements,
or doted in our fantasy and understanding upon creatures, which what hurt it
might have done, though we feel not by our own experience (God be thanked
therefore) yet we may behold and see the same in the lamentable and pitiful
spectacle of many blind and superstitious ones in the world.

Now the analogy and proportion between the signs and the things signified
in the Lords supper, may easily be reduced and brought into three especial
heads or points.

1 First, that as verily as that bread is broken before our bodily eyes in the
administration of the Lords supper, and the wine powered out, and diffused or
spread abroad in the sight of us all, specially whilst that many are made
partakers of the same, so verile do we or ought we by the eye of faith to
behold Christ wounded for our transgressions, Isaiah. 53.5.
and broken for our iniquities, as Isaiah says, and his blessed body
crucified, and his blood shed upon the cross for many, Matthew. 26.26, 27.28.
1. Cor. 11.24.25.26.
for the remission of sins, the one being no more certeinelie performed in
bodily action and presence of the people than the other, is truly and
faithfully accomplished in spirit and truth.

2 Secondly, that as bread has this property, through Gods blessing given it,
to feed and strengthen our natural bodies in this life? Psalm. 104.15.
so his body being represented effectually unto us by that bread, and
apprehended and applied unto our selves by faith, has the self same property
touching our souls, to strengthen and to nourish them spirituallie, Psalm.
104.15. Judge. 9.13.
even to eternal life. And even as the wine does comfort and make man's heart
glad, as appears by sundry scriptures: so our full joy and spiritual
comfort, is to be found in none other but in him alone. And (to join these two
together, of which we have spoken severally) this we must know and believe
further, that as our bodily diet is then full whole and perfect, as it were,
when it consists of these two things, to wit, bread and wine or drink: so we
are to know and believe, that the fullness and perfection of all spiritual
nourishment, is to be found in Christ alone, and no where else, whilst that he
is become, as well the drink as the meat of our soul, not only in this
double sign helping our infirmity, but also teaching us to seek the heavenly
refection and nourishment of our souls, fully and wholly in him, and no where
else, whereunto also he himself in some sort alludeth. Matthew. 11.28. John. 6 35.
John. 7.37.38.
and in other places of scripture.

3 Thirdly, that even as in our knowledge, the bread appointed for the Lords
supper, is made of many grains of corn, and the wine likewise it self of
sundry and several grapes, and yet all makes but one bread, and one wine: so
all the faithful should be instructed thereby, that how soever they be
several and distinct persons one of them from another, even as the several
members in man's body are, that yet they all compacted together, make but one
body in Christ, the only head thereof, Romans 12.4.5. 1. Cor. 10.16.17.
as the apostle plainly proves in sundry places of his epistles, by which
also they are admonished to refer all that they do to the glory of their head
and captain Christ, and to the mutual comfort and sustentation one of another.

Out of all that hitherto has been spoken or said, I would pray the godly
and well affected reader, diligently to observe and note these three things
following.

1 First, that though it be most true, that even by the ministry of the
Gospel preached, we have Christ with all his benefits offered unto us, and do
by faith wrought in our hearts, by the ministry of the same word, and working
of his spirit, take hold of him and all his graces, of which also S. Paul
speaks to the Galachians saying, Galath. 3.1.
that Christ was described in their sight, and crucified amongst them, that yet
all this notwithstanding, we have him more plainly and plentifully set
forth unto us in the use of the supper, whilst that we by faith feeding on
him, that is the bread of life which came down from heaven, John. 6.51.
are by that means become bone of his bones, Ephesians. 5.30.
and flesh of his flesh, and after a sort made one with him, John. 17.21.22.
even as the father and he are one: which I speak not to the debasing of the
word, as though the sacraments were more worthy and excellent, or to the
dividing of Christ, for as in respect of his substance, he is but one, both in
the word and the sacraments, but as in respect of us, and for our weakness
sake, we having more of our senses satisfied in and by the use of the elements
of the Lords supper, as for example, our sight, our taste, our feeling, yea and
our hearing also, whilst that in the delivery and partaking thereof, Christ's
death is preached unto us, than we have in the word which is directed only to
the ear or hearing.

2 Secondly, that this holy sacrament does not only direct our faith to
the death and passion of our savior Christ, which was performed for us and all
the faithful many hundred years agone, as the one, Hebr. 9.28. Hebr. 10.14.
and the only sacrifice for sin, never to be reiterated, because that
thereby he being the only high priest and eternal sacrificer, has
consecrated for ever all them that are sanctified: but also, yea cheeflie, and
especially, to the gracious fruits and effects that we receive thereby, as
the forgiveness of sins, our reconciliation to GOD, the death of iniquity
in us, the assured pledge of eternal life, and such like: all which are
lively set forth and preached unto us in the same, to the end that we may
by faith in a strong persuasion of Gods goodness toward us in Christ, be made
partakers thereof. For otherwise, if we had but Christ's death only, and
nothing else, it would be little auailable to us: for what would it have
profited us that he had died, if by his death he had not brought life and
immortality to light? 2. Tim. 1.10.
but for as much as his death, and the effects and fruits following the same,
and flowing from it, can not be sundered, we therefore steadfastly believe,
that the faithful are never partakers of the one alone, but that also they are
partakers of the other likewise.

3 Thirdly, that we must certeinelie know, and steadfastly believe that
though this holy sacrament do specially and cheeflie direct us to Christ,
his death, merits, obedience, and the fruits thereof, yet notwithstanding also,
it does sensibly and plainly instruct us in the special duties of that
sound and sincere love, which in Christ, and for Christ, we as the members of
that body, whereof he is the only head, Ephesians. 1.22. and 5.23.
ought unfeignedly to carry and accomplish one of us toward another, not
only as profitable and necessary for the parties to whom such duties are
performed, whilst in the days of their distress we relieve them by our
wealth, or comfort and council them by our wit, which are things that God has
given us even to the same end, but comfortable also to our selves, whilst by
that as by a bage or cognizance we are known both to others and our selves to
be Christ's disciples in deed, John. 13.35.
and have sealed up in our hearts the free pardon, and full forgiveness of all
our sins, Luke. 7.47. John. 3.14.
and an assured pledge also, that we are translated out of darkness into
light, without the which all we have in this life, and therefore the sacraments
also could tend but to our greater condemnation.

In the third place, for the clearing of

1 The first is, that of the sacramentaries, who hold and defend, that Christ
in his supper has left us nothing save the bare and naked signs of his death
and passion. But the truth is, that we are so far off from allowing this
conceit and opinion, whatsoever our adversaries babble and prate to the
contrary, that we fear not openly, and in the sun light to affirm, that
besides the signs themselves, yea and even together with the signs, we and
all true christians have the things themselves signified, not only truly
and effectually exhibited unto us, but given us also, and bestowed upon us,
because it is most certain, that our Savior Christ, John. 14.6.
who is the truth it self, and cannot lie, does in deed and assuredly
accomplish unto us, all the promises which he made us, and meant to seal unto
us, by the use of the signs in the sacrament, that so we might become
partakers even of his very substance, and grow up also with him into one life
and being. And though this cannot be comprehended by the eye of man's reason and
understanding, no more than many other things in our christian religion, yet
we cannot choose but know and confess that this is sensibly set forth unto
us in the use and participation of the supper, by several means and
instruments, some of them being outward, as the elements in the sacrament, and
some inward, as the spiritual grace represented thereby: for we are not
angels, but men, Eccle. 12.7.
consisting as the scripture teaches us, of body and soul: and therefore the
Lord, by the use of his word and sacraments, has provided for both parts, as
the word for our ears, Romans 10.17.
and our ears for hearing of the same, that so faith might be wrought in our
hearts, and the elements in the sacrament for our taste, sight, feeling, etc:
and yet our souls to be nourished and fed, not with any or all of these
outward things (for how ca^ outward and corruptible things nourish inward and
immortal substances?) but only with the spiritual graces, not only
offered, but given also unto us therein: and this likewise to be wrought in us
(though our savior be in heaven in respect of his body, Acts. 3.21.
Psalm. 39.12.
and we here as pilgrims and strangers on the earth) by the wonderful and
unsearchable working of his holy spirit in us, and by the means of a lively
and assured faith, both which being knit together, do easily join together
things that be as far asunder, in respect of distance of place, as one end
of the earth is from the other, and as far asunder, as heaven and earth
themselves are: or else how could we either believe the holy catholic church,
and feel the communion of saints, seeing it commonly falls out, that the
members of that holy fellowshippe are sundered one of them from another, in
respect of great distance of place? or be assured that Christ's righteousness
is become ours, seeing he is in the heaven, and we on the earth, if by faith
we did not take hold of the same, and apply it unto our selves. Besides, if
men should embrace this sacramentarie opinion, what were it but to euert, as
the truth of Christ's promises, so the certeinetie and assuredness of his
word, who in plain terms calls this holy sacrament his body? Wherefore be
it far from us to approve of any such dotage, as defaceth the truth of the
word, derogateth from Christ, and utterly destroieth our own faith, than
which what can be more horrible to hear, or fearful to think.

2 The second extremity is that of consubstantiation, some affirming that
there is delivered to the people, and they receive, together with the substance
of bread, the very substance of Christ's very natural body, so that there
is (as it were) an intermingling or mixture of both the substances, in the
action of the supper. But this opinion is justly to be disliked and reproved,
not only because of the absurdities which it has common, with the heresy of
transubstantiation (whereof we will speak in the next place) but also because
it is quite and clean contrary to common sense and reason, confounding and
iumbling together two several and distinct substances, and making the less,
to wit, the substance of the bread, to comprehend the greater, that is,
Christ's humane body, yea even his very Godhead, heaven and earth is not able
to contain. Besides it does utterly take away an essential property of
Christ's body, Isaiah. 66.1. Acts. 7.49.17.21.
for if Christ in respect of his humanity, be like unto us in all things,
sin only excepted, Hebr. 4.15.
and we know by the light of reason and understanding, that God has bestowed
upon us, yea by very experience, that our bodies are circumscriptible, and
tied to a place, it must needs follow, that Christ in respect of his manhood,
or Christ as he is man, is and must be tied to a place, and not be in every
place, as he must needs be, if these men's assertions be true, which is nothing
else in deed, but utterly to destroy Christ's body, which also I prove against
them thus: Whosoever takes away the essential property of any thing, takes
away also the very thing it self. This proposition is proved by this marime
in logike: If the definition of a thing, which cheeflie consists of the
essential property of the thing, be taken away, then the thing it self also
defined falls away? as for example: If reasonable living creature, which is
the definition of a man be taken away, what shall become of man? or where shall
he appear, which is the thing defined? whereof also there is good reason,
because the essential property is it that constituteth or makes the thing.
Hitherto the mayor proposition, as we say in schools, with the proofs thereof.
Now follows the minor or second proposition: But these men take away the
essential property of a thing, to wit, of a body which is to be
circumscriptible or tied to a place, which is in deed an essential property
of the body of man, and therefore of Christ's body as he is man, whilst
they will have him, as he is man, in sundry places at one time. If any man
will deny this, it may easily be proved both by their own writings in
sundry places, and also by the definition of a body, which is a quantity
that may be divided according to the threefold measuring received amongst men,
that is, length, breadth, and thickenesse, and likewise by the description of a
place, which is defined to be a nighnesse or touching of the thing containing
and the thing contained. The conclusion therefore is, that in taking away place
from the body of Christ (which they do, whilst they place it in every
place, whereas in the nature thereof, it can be but in one place at one time)
they do utterly destroy the body or humanity of Christ, or at the least
confound it so with the Godhead, as Eutyches did, that they make a confusion
(whereas in all truth and uprightness, there should remain a distinction of
the proprieties of either nature in his blessed person. But of this enough in
this place, because it is somewhat philosophical, and because also in the next
section we shall have occasion to deal with the like.

3 The third extremity, is that of transubstantiation, maintained altogether
by the Romish catholics, as they will be called, who hold that the bread and
wine (the substance thereof vanishing away, and nothing being left but the
accidents or qualities thereof, as in the bread, roundnesse, whiteness, etc:
and in the wine redness, moisture, etc:) are changed, and that by the power of
certain words spoken by the priest (as they name him) over the elements, they
are turned into the very natural body and blood of our savior. Concerning
this point and the branches thereof, I mind to speak, both more particularly,
and more fully, because it is one of the popish opinions, that greatly at
this present troubles the christian world, and namely our flourishing isle of
England, and also because in the days of persecution heretofore, both within
this land and elsewhere, it has been the common knife that the wicked have
used, to cut the throtes of the godly withal, and as it were the hatchet to
chop off their heads. It may be, that in this my poor travel some may be
converted, from falsehood to truth, and so be saved in the day of Christ: or, if
that gracious effect follow not in the adversaries, yet I hope the friends
and lovers of truth, shall by this means be somewhat stayed, that they be not
carried away with certain enticing and inchaunting words, in the mouths of
some seducing spirits, whom Antichrist Satan's eldest son has thrust into
the world, to pervert men from the truth and obedience of God.

1 First, for the name of Transubstantiation, I fear not to affirm, that it
is very new and never heard of, before the days of pope Innocent the third,
who was about the year of our Lord, 1205, much less was it confirmed as an
article of faith, before the Council of Laterane, which was kept and holden in
his days. And though we might by authority of good historiographers, make it
yet somewhat more new, namely, that it was not ratified as an article of
religion, till the Council kept at Constance, a city so named in Germany, in
the days of Pope John the 23, which was about the year of our Lord, Garan. in
sinu. Concilio Harding in confut. Apolog.
1415. Yet to gratify them, we will grant it, to be as old, as the council of
Lateran in Rome, held in the year 1215, tha^ the which also their own writers
will not prescribe further. But alas what get they hereby, namely, that this
their dotage and dream of transubstantiation, at the least, in the name of it,
has not so many gray hairs on the head, or years on the back of it, as
they would bear the world in hand it has, for, as by computation it may
appear, it is but 300 and do years old. Neither will that shift serve, that
they flee to here, to wit, that though the term were not till then, yet the
matter was before. A very likely thing forsooth, as though the fathers of the
Greek and Latin churches, so well skilled in those several languages, had not
bin able as well to have delivered the word as the matter. In points of greater
consequence than this by far, they had their peculiar and significant
words, as trinity, harmonously, hypostasis, and such like, and yet in this
they must fail forsooth, to the end, that the glory of new invention or
forgerie rather may be ascribed to some other. But to conclude ^his point: If
papists under a false cloak of ^oueltie, will not spare to reject, not only
old, but good and true things also, then much more may we, and that upon good
ground refuse this fantasy, not only because it is new, but also because it
is false, as shall (god willing) hereafter more fully appear.

2 Howbeit, that there is a change, no man of sound judgment, I think,
does, or will deny, but that is not in respect of the nature of the things
themselves: for the elements of bread and wine remain in their own proper and
peculiar substance, whereof not only al men may be sufficient witnesses, but
almost all the senses of every man, as sight, taste, feeling, etc: but this
mutation is made in regard of the use and end whereunto they are applied,
because that they are by the Lords own institution and appointment, separated
from the common use, yea, and as it were from common bread and wine, and
applied, not only to a holy use, whilst they are used in holy assemblies,
with sanctified and religious minds, but dedicated also to holy ends, that
is to say, to ratify and confirm our Faith in the truth of Gods promises,
and to be sure seals and pledges to our consciences, of holy things, to wit,
of christ's body and blood, and of the effects and fruits, that by his death and
passion we receive. But that this change should be wrought, by any words, as
they say, of consecration, I am so far off from allowing it as true, that I
am verily persuaded, that they speak they know not what, because it is not
yet resolved, not only amongst the doctors of their side, as Bessarian, Biel,
Bonauenture, Catharin, Durand, Scotus, and others, which be the words of
co^secratio^, or with which words Christ, and the priest by his example, makes
the bread Christ's body, but because a pope himself (who has the fulness of all
knowledge in his breast, and cannot err, if all be true that they affirm) I
mean Pope Innocent the third, Innocent. de sa^r. altar. myster. lib. 4. cap. 6.
a great favorer and furtherer of such fantasies, could not well tell how to
resolve it, as appears by his writings. Yea, in ascribing mutation and change
of things, to a form of words uttered by the mouth of a mortal man, they
blasphemoussy rob God of that glory which is due unto him alone: Psalm.
148.5.
For to him only it belongs to speak the word, and to have things made,
and give it to an other, to whom it at no hand appertains. And if words be so
strong in the one Sacrament, as to turn bread into Christ's body, and wine
into his blood, what reason is there, that the words of institution, uttered
by the same person, I mean the priest, with intent also to consecrat, it should
not alter the element of water in the other sacrament, to wit, of Baptism, and
be so strong and powerful, as to make the same, the very true and natural
blood of our Savior Christ? But let them say what they will. For mine own
part, I rest resolute in this, that this assertion, and their whole action in
consecration sauoureth very strongly of a magical incantation, and I am so
much the more confirmed in this, because the Papists rejoicing, as
inchaunters and sorcerers do, in their odd numbers, have added one word,
that is to say (enim) which is not in the Greek or Latin textes, Missali
Roman ex decreto council. Trident. restitutum, and Pij. quinti iussu editum, pa.
23. col. ^
to the words of institution, saying: Hoc est enim corpus meum, as may appear
in their misfall or mass book, and that not their old ones only, but in one
newly furbished, by the decree of the council of Trent, and published abroad
to behold the light, like an untimely birth, by the authority and
commandment of Pope Pius the fifth.

3 And as the novelty of this fained fantasy of transubstantiation, is a
brand good enough, to work the discredit thereof, even as though it had been
bored through the ear, or worn a paper for forgerie and deceit, so the gross
and palpable absurdities which follow the same opinion, are sufficient, and
strong enough of themselves, to make it out of credit with all persons, endued
with holy wisdom and right understanding, and to cause the^ to esteem of
it, not only as a thing false and eronious, but very ungodly and blasphemous
also. To reckon up all, or largely to discourse upon the particulars, neither
is it my purpose, neither is it almost possible, so fertile a soil, is this
point in falshoode, and yet I mind to touch some, and that in such sort
also, as the vanity and falshoode of this great corruption, may thereby
easily appear, to all such as will not be wilfully blinded, or stop their
eyes and ears, at the brightness and sound of truth. At the least, my hope and
persuasion is, that though I prevail not either with the malicious blind, or
simple ignorant, yet I shall confirm and strengthen my brethren, who together
with me, as in many other points of our christian religion, so in this, have
embraced the truth of God to our co^forts.

1 First, I say, that this assertion of Transubstantiation, or real presence
of Christ's natural body, does utterly overthrow and destroy the nature of
a sacrament, which, as all men know and confess, must ever consist of two
parts, to wit, of visible elements, and invisible graces: the truth whereof
appears not only by the general consent of all men, as before is alleged,
but also by the particular view of all the Sacraments mentioned in the old
or new testament. But this truth is not only defaced, and laid even with the
ground, but swalowed up also, and, as it were, brought to nothing, if so be it,
that the nature and substance of the elements, be either changed, or vanish
away, in this matter of the lords supper, as some affirm and hold, and the
things represented by ye same come in their place. The reason whereof is plain
and evident, to wit, that the one part of the Sacrament, namely, the visible
sign, is then and there absent. And therefore it must of necessity follow,
that not only the nature of a Sacrament is destroyed, but by consequent also
the Sacrament it self, because the nature of a thing being taken away, the
thing it self can not stand or continue, for the nature is it, whereof the
thing it self consists. Yea this also falls out upon it, that those men
that in the pride and vanity of their own hearts enlarge the number of
Sacraments, above them that christ has left unto his church, publishing to the
world, that there are seven, where indeed there are but two. In the true and
natural use of the word Sacrament, are found, not only to be clippers of
the Lords coin, but utter defacers of his holy ordinance, in taking from
the Church (whatsoever they pretend to the contrary) one of those that Christ
has left to the same, for the comfort thereof: being found likewise by this
means, not only presumptuous against Christ, but injurious also to the
people, in spoiling them of so great consolation. So fruitful in ungodliness
is the evil weed of corrupt doctrine. Indeed if the sign of the sacrament,
and the thing signified by the same, were things contrary, they might have
some show of reason, for this unmeasurable affection, but forasmuch as we all
know them to be, not things contrary, but diverse, no doubt, but they not only
may, but do very well stand together, the one of them being so far, from
destroying or defacing of an other, that they in a most loving consent agree
and concur together to the setting forth of Gods glory, and the spiritual
good and comfort of his children. Wherefore, I say, it cannot be avoided, but
that they do very ill, that do thus malapertlie disioyne and put in sunder
such things, as God has most wisely joined and glewed as it were fast
together.

2 Secondly, I affirm, that this doctrine is woonderfullie injurious unto the
glorified body of our Savior, not only whilst it fetches him from heaven
the place of all such blessedness, as can not be conceived, much less spoken
of, into the earth, the place of all unspeakable miseserie and wretchedness,
which yet is not all, this circumstaunce further aggravating the error of this
unjust assertion, that they make the blessed body of Christ, our Lord and god,
subject to the call of a mortal and miserable creature (the priest I mean, as
they name him) as though if he bade go, it should go, or if he commanded it to
come, it should come, etc: But also whilst it makes it, to be rent and torn
in pieces, not only with the teeth of good me^, a matter which our nature
abhors, both in respect of ye rawnes of it, and also in respect of the
substance of it, for we are not Anthropophagi, that is, eaters of man's flesh,
but even with the teeth of the wicked and ungodly also, which even for this
cause, if there were no more, is most untrue and false, because that then they
should live for ever, John 6.54.
in as much as all that eat his flesh and drink his blood, have this
promise, that they have eternal life. And yet these wicked men cease not
here, but proceed to further impiety, some of the chiefest among them
affirming (though in deed others are not so resolute in it, by which also we
may see, that there is not so much unity or consent amongst Popish divines
and doctors, as they pretend) that mice, rattes, dogs, hogs, and other
unreasonable creatures, falling upon consecrated hosts, and devouring the same
do undoubtedly eat the blessed body of our Savior. And if they stayed
here, their sin were somewhat less, but this is not all the mischief that
falls out in this behalf: for whereas in truth and christian religion, the
body of our Savior Christ is now immortal, and in immortal glory, as Gods
word, and the articles of our Belief agreeing with the same do plainelye
teach us, these men subject it to putrefaction, corruption, and worms, by
reason of the long reservation thereof, and at the last, to consuming in the
fire (a fact of most horrible cruelty, if it were Christ's flesh, but no
marvel though they deal so with him, when they handle his Saints as hardly
as that comes unto, which thing experience of all ages does sufficientlye
prove) because it may not otherwise be made away (as they themselves
confess) if it be once taken with hoarinesse, mouldines, or such like. If any
man doubt of the truth and certainty of these points objected against them,
let him but read their own works, and he shall see the matter
sufficiently cleared. Yea, I suppose, that the very adversaries themselves
will not grow so shameless, as to deny that which with a full mouth, and in
the open Sun light, has been published by the best of their side. And if
they would or should, yet we have the lives, and the leaves, the words and
the works, in sentence and sense, for manner and matter to charge them
wythall, and to throw this dung into their faces.

3 Thirdly, I say, that by consequent it does most cursedly confound (if not
utterly subvert and overthrow) the humanity of our Savior, with his
Godhead, whilst that which indeed and all truth, is proper and peculiar to
the eternal Deity only: for example, to be every where, which can not agree
to any but to GOD alone, as both reason and religion will sufficiently
persuade, if we will give ear unto the same, is yet notwythstanding, most
blasphemouslye attributed and ascribed to his manhood, which (as has been
already showed before) and shall more plainly, if GOD will, be proved
hereafter, is, and must of necessity, since the time of his most glorious
ascension into Heaven, and sitting at the right hand of the majesty of GOD
his Father, the very only seat and throne, as it were, of his bodily
residence, be circumscriptible and tied to a place. As for that which they are
wont usually to object, for the impeachement of this truth, and the
establishement of their own error, being taken from the glorification of our
Saviors body, is easily beaten back and aunsweared, as which indeed, if it
be well weighed, is not only untrue, as in respect of it self: because,
though glorification implie a most excellent and heavenly estate, does not
yet for all that destroy the essential properties of bodies glorified, but
most absurd and false also, as in regard of us. For if the glorification of
Christ's body, have removed or taken away that essential property, to
wit, that it should truly, and indeed, be tied unto a place, then the
like shall be performed, and the same effect follow, in all the glorified
bodies of the faithful after the resurrection, because our Savior has not
only glorified his own body for himself, he rising therein a mighty
conqueror over death and hell, and now triumphantly ruling and reigning in
the heavens in all majesty, but for our sakes also has achieved that great
honor, we having from him this assured promise in his word, Philip. 3.21.
that God shall change our base and vile bodies, that they may be fashioned
like unto his glorious body, according unto the mighty working, whereby he
is able to subdue all things unto himself. But to say, that our bodies
glorified after the rising again of the same in the general day of judgment
shall be every where, a rash and uncertain, yea, a beastly and blasphemous
assertion, because it ascribes that unto us, which is proper and peculiar
only to GOD: for unto him alone it pertains to fill, heaven, earth, and all
places, always, and at one time, as infinite places of Scripture do plainly
prove, therefore this opinion also, concerning Christ's glorified body,
being every where, or in infinite places at one time, must of necessity be
such likewise.

4 Fourthlie, it does directlye destroy, and, as it were, at one blow blotte
out, and deface, all those Articles of our most precious Faith, and Christian
religion, which do concern Christ's assured ascension into Heaven, his
maiesticall sitting at the right hand of the Father, and his glorious coming
again from thence, together with that infinite number of most plain places
of GODS holy word, that out of the writings of the Prophets and Apostles,
may be drawn for the proof of those most comfortable and necessary
points. To deal with every one of these by themselves shortly, and in few
words: I would feign know if our Savior Christ be here upon earth, in
respect of his bodilye power and presence, how he can justly, as in regard
of the same his body, be said to have ascended into Heaven? Or let them tell
us, if he remain with us in his flesh, how he can be truly said in his
manhood, to sit at the right hand of his Father in Heaven? Or how it can
be in religion or reason affirmed, that our Savior shall come from Heaven,
with great power and glory to judge the quick and the dead, seeing he is here
on earth already. The Scripture tells us for his ascension, Acts 1.9.
that in the sight and beholding of the blessed Apostles, yea whiles they
looked steadfastly toward heaven, he was taken up. Let them show so much for
his bodily abode upon earth, and prove it by such substantial witness, and
we are ready to yield. Besides, we know by the word, and therefore believe
it, that as he was seen go into heaven, Acts 1.10.
so shall he come again: but he was seen to ascend thither bodily, and
therefore so shall he return from thence again. I suppose they will not
say, that our Savior had two bodies, one that he took with him, an other
that he left here, for that were to make him altogether monstrous, and men
scrupulous, none knowing in whether of them he performed the work of their
redemption. And to say that that one blessed body of his was divided, is as
absurd and erroneous, because it can not be so, but that the whole body it
self must be impaired and mangled, at the least, if not destroyed and so the
work of salvation overthrown. To stand upon any naked interpretation
touching the right hand of God, will not serve their turn: for there being
nothing meant thereby in this article of our belief, but the great glory that
is in heaven prepared for the saints, and that most excellent blessedness that
belongs to them, whereof our savior Christ was in a most full measure made by
his ascension into heaven, as in respect of his humanity absolute partaker,
what could they gain* Do they imagine that it would heervpon ensue, that
Christ should be every where, and by consequent on earth? but they are
deceived: for why do they not as well consider the word sitting, which
implies local residence in a place? or do they not know and believe that
heaven it self is not every where, but local rather? or will they not see,
that without warrant of the word (yea contrary to the same, which in sundry
places opposes heaven and earth one of them against another) or sense of
humane judgment, they iumble and confound them together? Reason will lead us
to this, that none can be said to go up into the place where he is, or to come
down from it, when he remains there. And though we mind not to subject our
savior, specially as in respect of his eternal Godhead to humane sense, yet
by the same we may and ought to be led, not to destroy the essential
properties of his manhood. Now then, whether shall we believe this truth of
the Lord, or men's fantasies that go about to pervert our persuasions, and
deceive our understandings? Let men of the world deem what they lust, this is
the truth that God has sanctified unto us in his word, and I do steadfastly
believe it in my heart, and will through Gods goodness and strength always,
confess the same with my mouth, that from the very time of Christ's ascension
into Heaven, Acts. 3.2^.
The Heavens must contain his natural body until the time that all things
be restored, that is even to the worlds end.

5 Fiftlie, I say that this opinion does unjustly deprive us of all such
spiritual graces and comforts for our consciences, as God the father in his
son Christ, by sending the Holy ghost the third person in the deity, has
not only promised, but in good time will perform and bestow upon the whole
church generally and every sound particular member of the same: yea if we wey
it well we shall find, that it is the ruin and bane of the church it self,
both in the whole body of it, and in the several parts. Our savior himself
in most plain and express terms faith: John. 16.7.
I tell you the truth: it is expedient for you that I go away, for if I go not
away the comforter will not come unto you, but if I depart I will send him unto
you. He that knows any thing of truth, is well acquainted with this, that
generally all the word, but most especially the comfortable promises
contained in the same, be as it were, the life and soul of the church it
self. The verity and certeintie whereof, though it lie in Christ, 1. Cor. 1.20.
because in him al Gods promises are yea and amen, yet the particular
applications of the same, to our own hearts, must come from the powerful
working of the holy spirit. But how shall we come to the effectual feeling of
these, if the force of the spirit be not shed abroad into our hearts? or how
can the holy spirit be called the pledge of Gods promises, Ephesians. 1.13.
and the earnest penie of our adoption and salvation, if that promise of our
savior Christ be not accomplished? or how can we find comfort against the fear
of death? or peace in our consciences against the sight of sin, and judgment
due unto us for the same without this? Of a truth, the remembrance of our
dissolution, and departure hense (this being removed) shall be grievous, and
the horror of hell, the just punishment of our iniquity will be ready every
hour to ouerwhelme us. We need not stand long upon this point: either this
must be true, that we have the Holy ghost, in most abundant measure, by the
bodily absence of our savior Christ, given to the church, as before is said
and proved, and so a spiritual supply bestowed upon us for a bodiely want,
that being more excellent than this, because the apostle says, that
hensefoorth we know no man after the flesh, 2. Corinthians. 5.16.
yea though we had known Christ after the flesh, yet now henseforth know we
him no more: or else if Christ be here bodily present, the Holy ghost is not
yet come, nor the apostles endued with miraculous graces, nor the fullness of
the Gentiles gathered in, nor the comfort and peace of the church provided for:
all which are fearful to think upon, but much more horrible to feel, and in
deed are quite and clean contrary to the truth of the word: and if we had no
more but only the second chapter of the Acts of the apostles, it were
sufficient to overthrow the same.

6 Sixtlie, this assertion does not only closely, but openly accuse Christ
himself of manifest lieng and untruth, who as both the prophets and apostles
do bear witness, did no sin, Isaiah. 53.9. 1. Peter. 2.22.
neither was there any guile found in his mouth. He himself has plainly told
us: The poor ye have always with you, Mark. 14.7.
and when ye will ye may do them good, but me ye shall not have always. And
again elsewhere: John. 14.2.
I go to prepare a place for you. If this be not blasphemy, to do what we can
to taint him with falsehood, that is both truth it self, and the author of all
truth, I know not what is blasphemy. And yet this iniquity staieth not here,
for it depriueth us first of the comfort of the forgiveness of sins, because
if our savior have been tainted with any manner of, iniquity though never
so small, he cannot be a price and ransom for sin, because he that must
recommit sinners to God, must of necessity be free from transgression.
Secondly, it does (as it were) violently take and pull from us, the hope
that we have of the heavenly inheritance. For why has our savior Christ
sundred himself for a space from us, as in respect of his bodily presence,
not yet leaving us comfortless (for he has given us his spirit to supply (as
it were) his absence) but to the end that we might hereafter in time to come
most comfortablie enjoy him, both in body and soul for evermore? Does not
he himself say: John. 16.16.
Yet a little while and ye shall not see me: and again, a little while and ye
shall see me, for I go to my father? And in another place: Though I go to
prepare a place for you, John. 14, 3.
yet will I come again, and receive you unto my self, that where I am there
may ye be also. And yet all this notwithstanding, superstitious and
brainesicke people, dare with open mouth affirm, that we have him continually
with us here upon earth, and that not in respect of his spiritual power and
presence only, whereunto we our selves most gladly yield (as a very
principal comfort unto us, in the days of all our distresses) because in that
respect, as God eternal with his father, we believe that he fills all
places, both in heaven and in earth, and is said to be with the believers even
unto the end of the world, Matthew. ^3.20.
but as in respect of his corporal and bodily presence also, than the which
nothing undoubtedly can be more false and absurd, as has been sufficiently
showed already, and plainly proved before.

Now having waded thus far in the truth and certeinetie of the matter it
self, we might safely shut up and conclude this point, but that there
remain sundry of the adversaries objections to be answered: wherein I cannot
but let the godly reader understand, that I mind not to answer either all of
them, or many of them, because the most in truth be frivolous and vain, and
it would be over tedious to wade into such idle and unprofitable matter. Three
there are in deed, which because they seem to be of special strength and
ordinary use, I can not let pass. Two of them are taken from the words of the
text of holy scripture, and the third from the omnipotency and almighty
power of our savior Christ: which though they be common things in deed, and
such as might as easily be rejected as objected, because the controversy is
not touching the plain words of the text, and the almighty power of Christ,
as God (for be it far from us to be so absurd, as to draw things of such
euidency and excellency into question, but we strive rather, as for the true
sense and natural meaning of the words, so for the verity of Christ's
person, and the essential properties of either his distincted natures) yet we
cannot, but both for the strengthening of them that be weak and ignorant in
the same, as also for the discharge of our conscience before God and man, but
in a word or two, as it were, make a short, but withal a sound, sufficient, and
true answer I hope, to every one of these three severally, and by themselves.

1 The first place objected is these words of our savior, in the gospel after
John: Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, John. 6.13.
and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. Weerevnto I answer: first that
neither these words. neither the rest of the chapter, can in any probability
or show of reason, properly be understood of the Lords supper. And if we had
no more for it but this, yet were this sufficient, because at that time, the
supper it self was not instituted and ordained, but a long while after, as in
the evangelists writings does plainly appear: but must rather be referred
to our spiritual communicating or partaking with Christ, by the means of a
lively and steadfast faith, apprehending the word generally, and applieng
particularly unto our selves, all the gracious and sweet promises that the
Lord has made and offered unto us therein, which may plainly appear to be
most true, partly because he persisteth by a continual thread of speech (as
it were) in the metaphor of bread or meat, mentioned before verse. 26.27. using
also for that purpose, as every man may easily perceive, sundry borrowed
speeches, agreeing well to the circumstance of the matter wherein he was to
deal, which he would not, or needed not to have done, if he had mean so
groslie or carnally, as these men fantasy: and partly because he speaks so
often, not of eating only, but also of believing, as verse. 35.40. which can
not be properly attributed to any outward or material thing, such as the
body and flesh of Christ then was and is, but to inward and spiritual
matters, which as it may be gathered by sundry places of holy scripture, Romans
8.24.
the apostle affirming, that hope that is seen is no hope: for how can a man
hope for that which he sees? 2. Cor. 5.7.
and that we walk by faith, and not by sight, Hebr. 11.1.
yea and that faith it self is the ground of things which are hoped for, and
the evidence of things which are not seen: so also may it be proved even by
the very nature of faith, which being a spiritual and inward quality given
us of God, Philip. 1.29. John. 4.24.
who is nothing else but spirit and truth, and wrought in us by spiritual
means, as the word and sacraments outwardly, and the Holy ghost inwardly in
our hearts, must also of necessity be directed to spiritual and inward
things. But let us for reasoning sake grant that the place were to be
understood of the holy supper, yet does it not for all that establish any
gross and carnal eating of the natural flesh or body of our savior Christ,
because if that were so, then had not our savior sufficiently answered the
Capernatts or Jews of Capernaum, who vainelie dreaming and doting of such a
gross and carnal manducation or eating, John 6.52.
said: How can this man give us his flesh? meaning thereby that it was
altogether impossible and unnatural, both in respect of himself, and in
regard of them also, because it was seldom or never heard of except it were
amongst the Anthropophagi, that men did willingly give their flesh to be food
unto others, or that others did eat the same, but had rather yielded unto them
in that their conceit, which besides that it contains an error in religion
and nature, as before has been showed, is quite and clean contrary to the
purpose of Christ in that place, and closely accuses him, as though either in
ignorance he could not, or in an evil mind he would not have instructed them
in their blindness, all which are horrible to hear, blasphemous to speak,
and beastly to think. Besides, if that corrupt sense should be allowed, mark
what a Sea of absurdities would ensue thereupon. As first in what a miserable
estate should we leave the holy Fathers of the old couenaunts, who were
long before the time of Christ's taking our flesh upon him, and therefore
could not eat it, and so by consequent could not be saved. Matthew. 8.11.
And yet our savior in plain terms affirms, that they were in the kingdom
of heaven. And S. Paul also says, 1. Cor. 20.3.4.
that they did all eat the same spiritual meat that we do, and did all
drink the same spiritual drink that we do: which word spiritual would be
marked as directly opposite to gross, carnal, or bodily eating, plainly
also proouing that betwixt their sacraments and ours there was no difference at
all, as in respect of substance and effect, saving only that theirs were in
time before ours, even as they themselves also were, and instituted in other
outward elements than ours. Secondly in what a miserable case and condition
should we put poor infants, specially of the believers, if they should be
taken away by death before that coming to the years of discretion, they could
communicate or partake in that holy sacrament. One of these two gross
absurdities must needs follow thereupon, yea and be granted also, unless men
will be stifnecked in error, to wit, either that infants must have the holy
communion ministered unto them, which thing in deed Augustine did once
fantasticallie imagine, as appears by many places of his works,
notwithstanding all that papists say to clear him thereof. But S. Paul is
flatly against it, who will have none admitted thereto, 1. Corinthians. 11.28. 2. Corinthians. 13.
but such as can examine and try themselves, whether they be in the faith or
no, which infants cannot do, as all men may plainly perceive, not only
because they want reason, as in the practice thereof, but specially because
they be void of faith, which ordinarily and commonly is bestowed upon the
faithful, Romans 10.17.
by hearing the word preached, as the apostle says: or else that with out it,
they are all condemned already, which is very absurd and beastly, not only
because it tieth grace, yea the grace of salvation to the sacrament, by the
work wrought, than the which what can be more unreasonable? for so good and bad
having the outward sign, shall also have the thing it self, to wit, eternal
life, but also because it abolisheth, as Gods eternal election, whereby he
has chosen those that be his in Christ, to life everlasting, before the
foundations of the world were laid, so his gracious and continual covenant
made to us, that he will be a loving God and merciful father to us and to our
seed for ever, Genesis. 17.7.
by which covenant also we are assured even of his good will and favor toward
us in Christ. By all this we may see, that even for the avoiding of these
absurdities, and many such like, the place of the sixth of John can at no hand
he understood either of the sacrament or of the carnal eating of Christ's
body in the same, or of any such gross thing whatsoever, but of the
apprehension or laieng hold of him, together with the particular application
of him to our selves by the hand or instrument of faith, who even for that
purpose is propounded and set forth unto us, by the ministry of his word and
Gospel, or (if the adversaries will needs have it so) offered unto us in the
use of the supper, because that though the things be diverse, representing
him unto us, as the word and sacraments, yet there is in that respect but one
mean given us, to take hold of him by (even as he himself is but one Christ,
that in these sundry things is exhibited unto us) and that is that great grace
and gift of faith, which we must use in in the word and sacraments, as men do
in the apprehending of Christ's righteousness: which righteousness of his,
though it be not essentiallie dwelling in us, yet it is effectually made ours,
whilst we apprehend and lay hold of it by a sound and sure faith, applieng
the same also unto our own hearts: and even in like sort is Christ God and
man, together withal his merits, not only offered, but laid hold of in the
word and sacraments, yea and comfortablie felt likewise to the spiritual
sustentaion and nourishment of our souls, whereof also this is a good reason,
that of like things, there is always, and so should be continually a like
consideration.

The second place objected, is that sentence reported by the three evangelists,
This is my body: Matthew. 26.26. Mark. 14.22. Luke. 22.19. 1. Cor. 11.24.
which they urge in the letter after this sort. Has not Christ said it in
plain terms? and shall not I believe it, though that my carnal understanding
can not conceive the same? To all which I answer, first that the question is
not of the bare words or letter, for we as well as they confess the same, and
what man has there been that ever doubted thereof? yea what heretic ever was
there, that would not, or did not allege the letter of the text, for the
mainetenance and upholding of his heresy or error? but of the true sense and
right meaning thereof, which whether they or we have and gain, shall I hope
appear anon, to the upright reader. Secondly, we confess also, that we are
bound to believe all such things as are comprehended in gods word, yea though
our sensual reason cannot in deed comprehend the same: for be it far from
us, to labor to bring the incomprehe^sible truth of the eternal majesty
within the strait bounds and limits of man's understanding, no though he were
regenerated, and had received a great measure of the graces of Gods holy
spirit: and yet in such sort must we believe them all, and that to such ends
also, as the lord himself has appointed, at no hand stretching the^ further,
than the Lord would have us, for that is to be wise in our own eyes, and to
make our selves more sharp sighted than God, nor yet restreining them to
narrower purposes than the Lord has laid them out for, for that were, at the
least, great unfaithfulness, both toward the Lord himself, and men also,
neither yet failing in the allegation of them, either in the matter, manner, or
end, for if we do so, we do nothing else thereby, but heap up just
condemnation against our own souls, but reverently receiving them, and
faithfully alleging them in that just measure, weight, and proportion, that
the Lord himself has left them unto us, even as his only lawful and current
coin, which we can not clip, imbase, or impair any manner of way, without
high treason against his eternal majesty. Now concerning the words, and the
plainness of them, I say, that other words, both in the old and new
Testament, are as plain as they, which yet notwithstanding must be otherwise
interpreted, than the words themselves seem to import, or else, not only
absurdities in reason, but errors in religion will ensue thereupon. For example
in the book of Exodus, the paschal lamb, with the ceremonies belonging
thereto, is called, The Lords passover: Exodus 12.11.
whereas now we know, and no man can choose but confess, that it was not
the Lords passover in deed, but signified and set out the same rather. For
the Lords passover was his ouer-passing or passing by the Israelites houses,
marked with the blood of the Lamb, to the Egyptians, there to destroy the
first borne. So likewise in the new Testament, John 15.5.
Christ says of him self, I am the vine, than the which what can be more
plain? And yet we acknowledge with our mouths, and believe in our hearts,
that Christ was no natural vine, but rather that he calls himself so, in a
certain resemblaunce, because look what property the fruit of the vine has
in respect of our bodies, to wit, to comfort men, and to make them glad
hearts, the same has Christ and the fruits of his grace received by Faith,
in respect of our souls, namely, to replenishe our hearts with all
Spiritual joy and gladness, both of this life, and of the life to come. And
as the branches of the vine, have nothing of themselves, but all that they
have, they have it from the vine it self, so none whosoever they be can bring
forth fruit, but by abiding in him, and being made fruitful through his
grace. And even in like manner is the bread of the Lords Supper called his
body, because (as we have said before) look what proper and peculiar
office, the bread has or yields to our natural bodies, namely, to nourish
and strengthen the same, the like does Jesus Christ's body broken, taken hold
of by Faith, Spirituallie communicate unto our souls, namely, it feeds and
strengthens them, to the assured hope and feeling of eternal life. And this
manner of speech, attributing that to the sign which is proper and peculiar to
the thing signified, is very usual in the Scripture, as a man meanly
conversant in the same may plainly perceive: the cause whereof, is, the
straight analogy, proportion, and agreement, which is between ye sign, and the
thing signified, and not any other respect of consubstantiation,
transubstantiation, or any such like fantastical dotage. Besides all these
things, the very circumstaunces of time, place, person, and manner of doing,
do sufficiently set out the vanity and untruth of this gross
interpretation. For this Sacrament being instituted by Christ him self a
little before his death, in the presence o^ the Apostles (who had all their
senses satisfied, in the beholding, hearing, and feeling of the natural body
of our Savior Christ) in the visible elements of bread and wine, he himself
sitting at the tabl^ with them, and not only in their hearing speaking these
words, but also in their sight and presence actuallie breaking the bread, it
could not be that that bread offered unto them, as the pledge of his body,
should be his natural body or body of flesh: unless you will say, that
Christ had two bodies, one sitting at the Table, instituting the action of the
Supper, and administering the same in his own person, and an other borne in his
hands, and delivered unto the Apostles, than the which what can be, not only
more absurd and blasphemous, in respect of our Savior Christ himself, he
being by this means made a monster, and not become man, but also more
unprofitable or uncertain to us, as which might justly provoke us to dout
whether of his bodies were crucified for our transgressions? And thus as we
do, for good causes before specified, as you see reject this gross sense, so
for the instruction of the ignorant, and strengthening of the weak, we will in
a few lines put down the true meaning of these words. For the better
performaunce whereof I would have this to be noted in the first place, which
I am sure also no man of sound judgment can well deny, that all words and
sayings whatsoever, must be expounded, according to the subject, argument, or
matter whereof they entreat: and therefore these words also, speaking
particularly of the Lords supper, must of necessity be understood of the
Sacrament of the body and blood of our Savior Christ, exhibited unto us in
that supper. Otherwise we must say, that Christ spoke of one thing, and meant
an other, which as it might be injurious to our selves, we not knowing which
way to take Christ's words, so should it accuse him for want of plain
dealing, which dotage differs not much from blasphemy against his person.
Secondly, I would have this to be remembered, that seeing all, one and other,
both we, and our adversaries, confess these words to be spoken of the
Sacrament, we must not gather that the word body is otherwise attributed to
the bread than the nature and quality (as a man would say) of sacraments will
bear: for the^ if we should grant that, we might easily destroy and
overthrow all the sacraments, that either have been or are in the Church of God,
because in this behalf or respect there is a like proportion to be observed
in one, as in all, and if one be defaced in respect of a wrong sense, the rest
can hardly or not at all stand upright. For since the scripture speaking of
Sacraments, uses one ordinary and common kind of speech to them all, what
reason can there be showed, that the words in one sacrament being understood
so, the selfsame words should not have the selfsame sense and meaning in
other? Thirdly, that this is the nature of all sacraments, that the elements
and rites used in the same, be true and effectual, not signs only, but
testimonies and pledges also of those things, for the signifieng and
subiecting of which unto our senses, they were ordained, otherwise the nature
of a sacrament should be overthrown, which consists of an outward and
visible element, and of an inward and invisible grace, and we spoiled of our
faith, which is not, ne ought not to be occupied about those gross and
earthly matters, but upon spiritual and heavenly things only. And yet when I
use this word (sign) I would not be taken as though I meant, that they are
bare, vain, or unprofitable signs, such as painters commonly use to make, but
even thus far forth effectual, that it is no more true and certain, that we
see the same with our eyes, touch them with our hands receue them with our
mouths and eat them, than that it is also as true and certain, that the Lord
exhibiteth and offers unto us, yea, and gives us also, whatsoever they
represent unto us, that is, the very body and blood of our savior Christ and
the fruits and effects flowing from the same, to be the spiritual food of our
souls, to the full possession of eternal life. These rules being thus then
observed, I gather and put down this true and holy sense of these words:
This is my body, that is to say, that the bread which Christ took, blessed,
brake, and gave unto his disciples, appointing the same to be used, as the
element of this action, and to be continued in his Church, in such form and
sort as he did institute it, until his coming again, is sacramentally and
spiritually, being received and eaten by faith, a sure sign, and an
effectual pledge, that Christ's body is become the spiritual food of our
souls. And I use these words, sacramentally and spiritually, that thereby I
might meet with their gross slander, who, when they hear of a sign, and a
thing signified, say, that we do euacuate and make of no force the Lords
supper. No, we are so far off from holding any such conclusion, that we
know, believe, and confess, that the faithful and duly prepared
communicants, do besides the outward signs and elements truly receive by
the mean of faith, after a spiritual sort, that which is represented by the
outward elements, to wit, whole Christ, with all his gifts and graces. And yet
for the doing of this, we do not pull Christ's body out of heaven, or else
imagine either Transubstantiation, or any such like devise, but only think
upon and believe, the sacramental conjunction of the sign, and the thing
signified, for those things can not stand with the truth of Christ's
manhood, as has been before showed, neither indeed are they necessary to
salvation, because that to the end, we may be made partakers of christ, it is
not of necessity required, that his body should be really present upon
earth, but it rather behooves us, by the power of the Holy ghost, and through
faith, to mount up into heaven, and there to lay hold of him, that we may
sit with him in the heavenly places, which in this life can not be performed
in any other sort, than in a spiritual manner, and through faith, which faith
is begotten and confirmed in us by the holie-ghost, whereunto he uses as
instruments, the preaching of Gods word, and the administration and
participation of the Sacraments, by which all our senses, are even as it were,
provoked and pressed, wholly to possess Christ himself. So that you see I do
figuratively expound these words, and not grossly, whereunto I am drawn
also, partly by the very dealing of the Papists themselves, who do not,
either in the wine of the supper, the other part of this Sacrament, either in
Baptism, the other Sacrament of the church (which two alone God has given
unto it) acknowledge any such gross Transubstantiation (...) of in our
corruption, we hardly conceiving it now in our regeneration and new birth, so
could it not have bin performed in the godhead alone. Not that I mean, that
GOD was not able to have forgiven the sins of his people, and to have
released them from condemnation, and restored them to everlasting life, but
that GOD could not by suffering, because his essence and nature, is altogether
impassible, have suffered any thing for our redemption. Wherefore, for as much
as, the question between the Transubstantiators and us, is not now, of the
presence of Christ's deity in the Sacrament, but of the presence of his humane
body, we say, and flatly affirm it also, that if we should grant this, yet
could it no whit at all prejudice us, neither could they gain their cause
thereby, for unless they can prove Christ, as he is man, to be omnipotent, and
every where (which thing they shall never be able to do) they have said as
much, as if they had said nothing at all. But let us for reasoning sake grant
them this much, that Christ as he is man, were omnipotent, even as GOD the
Father, or he himself in respect of his Godhead is: Does it therefore
follow, that because he can do every thing, he therefore either will do
the same, or indeed does it? I suppose verilye, no. For besides that, in
Schools it is commonly said, a posse ad esse, the consequence or reason is
not good, which were sufficient aunsweare to this frivolous and vain
objection, man's reason in the blindness and corruption of it, being endued
with strength and force enough to aunsweare the same: besides this, I say, we
that are truly taught of GOD, both by his word and spirit, do know, that
though we believe, that the Lord can do whatsoever pleases him both in
heaven and in earth, which serves wonderfully to magnify his almighty power
in the exceeding excellency thereof, and greatly to strengthen our weak
faith, in the days of our calamities and distresses, yet notwythstanding we
firmly believe, that he will not only do nothing, but that he can not
do any thing in regard of us, contrary unto that will of his, that he has
revealed for us in his word. For even as a man of might on earth, having
given forth his speech of assurance in the word of a Prince or Christian,
though perhaps to one far inferior to himself, is yet notwythstanding
tied thereby, not as in respect of his power, for that remains as great
after as before, but as in regard of his credit, and the persons to whom he
has by his word after a sort, as it were bound himself: so is it with the
Lord to usward. And the reason of this is, not the abridgement or shortening of
his power, (for be it far from mortal men, to presume in any thing, though
never so little, to restrain the eternal power of the immortal God) but because
his will and power (I mean of the same, as they are revealed to us by his
word, and particularly by his promises made unto us therein concerning the
same) be in respect of us, so conjoined and knit together, that look
whatsoever he will do, that he can do, and look whatsoever he can do, that
he will do. Oh how unreasonable is this, that we will give earthly
Potentates leave, because of their high callings and excellent wisdom, that
we suppose to be in them now and then, to hedge in the bounds of their
power and authority, by their words at their own pleasure, and will not
grant or yield so much to the Almighty? Surely there is very great and
good reason to the contrary, for as for men, by reason of the blindness
and ignorauncie of their own hearts they can not well tell when it is good,
either to straiten or enlarge themselves, whereas GOD, by reason of the
fullness of goodness that is in him can not choose but do good, whether he
enlarge or abridge himself. But to make all this plain, by one or two
examples in stead of many, we are all persuaded, that God can not drown the
world any more, with the waters of an universal flood, because we know by
his word he will not, for the more certain and assured sealing up of the
same in our hearts, and not for any discredit unto him, or shortening of his
arm and power, he has not only given us his comfortable and sweet word
of promise, but has set his bow in the clouds, Genesis 9.12, 13, etc
to be a most effectual pledge of the same unto us. Again, we all do
know and believe, that though GOD, in respect both of himself, and his
almighty power, with whom all things, yea, the most hardest, are possible,
can if he would save all men, yet we fear not to say and affirm, that in
respect of us he can not save all men, because we know by his revealed
will in his word, that he will not save them all. For some, as well for the
manifestation of his justice and judgment against all ungodliness, must be
the vessels ordained for destruction, as well as others also for the
declaration of his mercy, in saving whom he will, vessels of salvation and
eternal life. And even the like may we conclude, touching this matter of the
Supper, namely, that though we were persuaded or should grant, against all
truth and reason, that Christ, as he is GOD might do what he would, or as
he is man, might be every where, yet because he has revealed the contrary
in his word, and namely, that he will have his body to be
circumscriptible and tied to a place, to wit, Heaven, yea, which is more, to a
certain place in heaven (for though Christ as in respect of his eternal
Godhead, fill Heaven and earth, and the heaven of heuens is not able to contain
him, yet in respect of his humane body, though it be glorified, he is and must
be contained in some part of the heavens) that therefore it can be no injury at
all to him, neither any debasing of his omnipotent power, to say that now he
cannot be bodily in the sacrament, much less bodily in so many sacraments,
as be celebrated and ministered in so sundry and infinite places at one time, no
more than it is to God the father, in saying that now he cannot drown the
world, or save the reprobat, as has been before declared.

Thus much I think sufficient and enough to all these objections, being
willing here to finish this present short treatise, saving that I have thought
good in this place to add (even as a challenge to the adverse party, and as
matter of necessary instruction, to such as either be simply ignorant (for as
for the malicious blind, it is almost impossible to reclame them) or do
already in some measure see the truth) these three points following.

1 First, that I am ready in all holy love largely to answer any thing that
christianlie shall be further objected concerning this question: I say
christianlie objected: for if any shall either curiously or captiouslie
propound any thing, I think it most convenient, rather to leave such in their
own folly for a season, till it shall please God, at some one time or other,
even extraordinarily as it were, to make them to see the same, if it shall so
please him, than to spend time, and to travel in fatisfieng of their vain
curiosities.

2 Secondly, that though this point of transubstantiation, brought in by
papists, be great and gross concerning the matter of the supper, yet that they
fail not alone herein, which might perhaps make their heresy less heinous,
but hold many more errors concerning that point, some of them as palpable, if
not more gross and blasphemous than this, and some of them less. To pursue
them all, and in a large sort, I mind not at this present, because it has
been already performed by men of great excellency, and the Lord may
hereafter give a more fit occasion, and yet I will rehearse and touch a few,
desiring the godly reader, with all holy wisdom, to consider both of them,
and the rest of that sort.

1 First, in that they make it a sacrifice propitiatory (as they call it) for
the quick and the dead: by which they do not one^ie scorn God, and deride
men, whilst they make men believe, that God will be plea^ed with such odd
devises, and that his justice shall be answered with the works ^f our own
invention, causing us also ^o think that sin is no heinous thing that can be
expiated and done away by ^he offering up a poor thin cake, as though that
spiritual and innumerable offenses might be taken away with bodi^ie exercises,
and that not of a holy and innocent man, but many times of one of the woorst
amongst the people: but utterly also euacuat by that means, and make of no
force the eternal preesthood and sacrifice of our savior Christ, which
consists specially in this, that he has once for all upon the altar of the
cross, offered up himself unto God the father, a full and sufficient
sacrifice for the sins of the people, as the apostle plainly proves in
many places of his Epistle to the Hebrews. But no marvel that they should
annihilat and deface Christ's offices, which destroy his natures, and by
consequent his whole person also (as these men do by confounding the
proprieties of either nature, as has been before declared) yea and overthrow
all their own religion: for if the sacrifice of the mass^ (as they call it)
will do away all sin what need we regard prayer to dead^ saints, auricular
confession, the popes supremacy, and a thousand more such abominations,
seeing that by setting a soul^ priest on work, they may have full forgiveness?
and why should we esteem pardons, indulgences, and such like trash and
trumperie? nay rather, why should they not live as they lust, not only as
epicures, but as brute beasts, seeing he may be assured for money, that that
which another performs for him, shall be auailable both to body and soul,
and that to eternal salvation: but fie upon all such beastly and blasphemous
dotages.

2 Secondly, there is but a little less leaven in that matter that they hold
of vncomitancie, by which they have not only spoiled the people of the use of
the cup, which both by Christ's own institution, and by his express
commandment, saying: Drink ye all of this, does in all truth and vprightnes
belong unto them, and by consequent also robbed them of the fruits and effects
of his blood, as the forgiveness of their sins, and their full reconcilement
to almighty God: but also accused our ^auior Christ of folly and rashness,
insti^uting more signs in the sacrament of his supper, than he needed. And all
this they ^aue done under this shadow, that because ^o body is without blood,
and they have before (presupposing that the bread is tur^ed into the body, as
in deed if men will ^resuppose, either impossible or untrue things, every
thing will follow of it) ea^en the body, therefore must it needs fol^ow, that
they have drunk also his blood. Tell us I pray you, why might not we as ^ell
say, respecting always the sacrament, that when men have drunk of the cup,
^hey have eaten his flesh? for if the par^aking of the one include the other,
or if ^hole Christ, as they say, be in every part ^f the visible elements, then
why do not ^en receiving the wine, as well receive ^e body as the blood? or
why may not we ^y, that eating is drinking, or drinking is ^ting? or why do
not they themselves ^minister it in the element of wine oue^e, as well as in
the bread alone? or why ^ay not we, even beating them with their own
assertions, of an unbloody sacrifice, and of the real presence of Christ's
natural body in the same, say and affirm that the body may be there without
the blood or the blood without the body? for if the sacrifice contain the
natural and fleshi^ body of our savior, and yet of it self it is unbloody,
we see no reason why we may not saflie conclude, that the body is ther^
without blood? But I know not whethe^ heerin I should blame the^ for their
beastliness, or reprove them for their pride that dare thus presumptuouslie
alter the Lords very ordinance and institution.

3 Thirdly their adoration is as corrup^ and filthy, whilst they cause men
t^^ commit gross and palpable idolatry, i^ falling down before a piece of
bread (what do I say? I know not whether I may call it by that name or no, for
it man be disputed of, whether their mass ca^^ be bread) and worshipping a
wafer cake the work of men's hands. And if it were a foul fault in the
Gentiles, to turn the glory of the incorruptible God, into the similitude of
the image of a co^ruptible man, Romans 1.23.
and of birds, and four footed beasts, and of creeping thing all which
notwithstanding had life in the^, and were in deed the creatures of GOD, what
must it be in the papists, who transform his wonderful majesty into a mustie
or whory cake, which though it be kept but a small while, is yet
notwithstanding subject to putrefaction and worms? But suppose it were
Christ's body, as they say it is, yet I affirm, that they may not adore
Christ's body alone, yea and that they cannot worship the same of it self,
without horrible idolatry, whereof also the reason is plain and evident,
namely because it is a creature, to which it is not lawful to give that honor
that is due unto the creator alone, because he being ielous over his own
glory, will not have it given to any other. For though it be true, that Christ
as he is god, is to be worshipped as his father: yea and Christ God and man in
one person is to be adored, yet we cannot without great sin, and grievous
offense against God and his word, worship the humanity or manhood of our savior
Christ only. And if they will say, as I my self have heard some of the^
ignorantly affirm, yt if Christ God and man may be worshipped, therefore
christ also as he is man may be worshipped: I answer, that besides, it is a
fallacy or deceit in reasoning, called in schools Fallacia diuisionis, it is
a flat contrary to the truth of christian religion, which teaches us, that
many things may be spoken of the person of our savior Christ, which can not
rightly or truly be said of either nature, and the reason is, because as the
unity of the person must be maineteined and vpheld, so must godly men have an
especial regard, that they confound not the several proprieties of either
nature. To make this plain by a point or two. A man may saflie say, that
Christ God and man in one person was crucified on the cross, and died for our
sins, whereof also this is the very true and sufficient reason, because in
his whole person he performed the work of our redemption, and not in either of
the natures alone, or by it self: but now if heerevpon a man should say and
conclude, therefore Christ God was crucified for our sins, besides that he
should utter an error or heresy in christian religion, he should speak
blasphemy against God, whose nature (as we have said heertofore) is altogether
impossible. Likewise a man may saflie say and affirm, that the virgin Marie
was the mother of our Savior Christ, as he is God and man in one person: the
reason is, because that even from the very moment of his blessed conception in
the womb of the virgin, the Godhead and the manhood, Romans. 9.5.
were inseperablie joined and knit together in that one person Jesus Christ,
who is God over all, to be blessed for ever and ever. But if hereupon a man
would infer, therefore she is or may be called the mother of God, besides
that he should speak against the grounds and principles of sound faith,
which teaches us, that as christ in respect of his manhood was without father,
so in respect of his godhead he was without mother, he should speak very proudly
of flesh and blood, and very basely of God, as though that the creature, were
in time before the creator, or God could not be without the help of pore and
weak women.

4 To deal with the reservation, circumgestation, or carieng it about, and
with many other odd toies of their own invention, and largely lay out the
inconveniences thereof, would require some proper and fit discourse for that
purpose, but I will reserve it til another time, making have now to handle that,
which shall be as the last, so in my judgment, not the least profitable part of
this treaty, and that is, how a man should draw near unto such reverent
mysteries, to gods glory, and his own good, and how he may best come, to
reap and receive fruit and comfort by the same, specially since it pleases
God, to offer to him such excellent graces thereby, wherein I mind not to deal
largely, because, as you see through all this discourse, I profess brevity
and shortness, and to deal fully and perfectly I can not, both by reason of
the excellency of the things to be handled, and also by mean of the maime,
that we find in our knowledge in this life, in which we know in part, 1. Corinthians 13.9.
and prophecy in part, as the Apostle says. And yet not to say somewhat,
since the Lord has made me to feel somewhat, were not only to deface the
graces that God in the riches of his mercy, has bestowed upon me poor and
miserable wretch yt I am, but to defraude my good brethren, and the people of
God, of some either profitable instruction, or sweet comfort, that the Lord
has been pleased to acquaint me withal: wherein setting Gods glory,
chiefly before mine eyes, and the good of his children, I will, trusting in
the multitude of his mercies assaye, to utter that little, that I my self in
some measure feel in this matter.

The things, that every man, is principally to deal in, concerning this
point, may, in my mind, be well reduced, into three short heads or titles.

Frst, because no man is to do a

Secondly, because in the action and execution

Thirdly, because there is no good thing we are to look what he is to do,
after the time of receiving, and this I will call action or practice.

Preparation which is the first, respects either God or man. Now that which
concerns God, is comprehended under sound knowledge, true faith, and
unfeigned repentance, as that which concerns man is comprised under sincere
love. And I call them sound, true, unfeigned, and sincere, and yet not perfect,
because perfection properly signifieng that, unto which nothing can be added,
can not be found in man, during this natural life of his. And this I speak,
partly to stop the mouths of such as dream of a perfection in this life, to
gross an error to be largelye confuted, because Gods word is most plain in
that behalf, and the manifold imperfections, of those that would seem most
perfect, do plentifully improve the same: and partly, as in a comfortable sort
to teach us, that our imperfections should not hinder us, from drawing nigh
thereto, (so that we do not foster and feed our selves in them) seeing that
otherwise the sacrament should stand us in no steed, if we were not imperfect,
because it is a holy help, and singular succor ordained by God him self,
against our natural infirmity and weakness.

1 By knowledge I understand not any human sciences, or worldly faculties,
or a mean insight into the grounds of christian religion, but an assured
understanding, as of the most material points of our faith, (for example, of
the unity of the godhead, of the Trinity in the persons, of the names,
nature, person and offices of our savior etc.) so specially of this point of
the Lords supper it self, (for be it far from us, to know others, and to
be ignorant in that whereof we are to be partakers) we keeping our selves
far off and free, from all erroneous opinions, either of Transubstantiation,
consubstantiation, or any such like, either besides or against the will of God,
revealed in his word: which as it must only be the direction of all our
actions, so must it always be the rule of our religion alone. And this sound
knowledge of the grounds and principles of christian religion, and that in
such sort as god has revealed the^ unto us in his word, must of necesity go
before al other things, both because it is as a man would say, the foundation
to the house, and the root to the tree, and also because if we know not the
good will and pleasure of our GOD, we can never either believe or do the same:
for even as in worldly matters, if men be set about the things, they have no
skill in, they know not where to begin, or how to proceed, or when to make
an end, so in spiritual things, they are much more blind and backwarde, for
in outward things of this life, men may somewhat be helped, by the light of
reason, and the liuelines of their own wit, but in the matters of God, the
more they rely or lean upon that, the further off they are from atteining the
truth, because the Apostle tells us, that the natural man perceives not
the things of the spirit of God, 1. Corinthians. 2.14.
for they are foolishnes unto him, neither can he know them because they are
spiritually discerned. Roman. 8.7.
And in another place: the wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God, for it
is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be.

2 By faith I mean, not only a general belief, of all the canonical books
of ye old and new testament, or a grounded knowledge alone, of the points and
principles of christian religion, and the truth thereof, for many wicked men
proceed so far, and the Apostle James tells us, James 2.19.
that the devils believe and tremble, but an assured persuasion, and particular
application, as of al these things whatsoever, that the Lord has revealed in
his word, so specially of his promises contained in the same, concerning
either this life, or the life to come (for though our faith do generally
respect the whole word, yet is it most specially directed to the promises that
god has made us in Christ, 2. Corinthians. 1.20.
in whom all the promises of God are, yea and amen) every particular person
being fully assured, and certainly persuaded of this, that as the Lord
has done and promised the same, to, and for others, so has he done and
promised it, particularly, to, and for himself. So that we may plainly
perceive, that this faith is necessary, to every one that shall communicate,
both because that otherwise they being on the earth, can not take hold of
Christ in heaven, and steadfastly apply him and all his merits to themselves,
that so he may become the spiritual food of their souls, norishing them in
the most certain hope of eternal salvation (for faith is it by which alone,
they may appropriate unto them selves particularly, Christ Jesus and all his
graces, to the assured feelyng of the free pardon and full forgiveness of all
their sins on the one side, and the imputation of Christ's righteousness on
the other side) and also that thereby, they may be fully certified in their
own consciences, that that which they do, either in the administration or
participation of that holy action, or Sacrament of the Lords body and blood,
is acceptable before GOD, and profitable to them selves, because without faith
it is impossible to please him, Hebrews. 11.6. Roman. 14.23.
and again: Whatsoever is not of faith, that self same is sin: which
properties indeed, or effects rather, if a man surely have, they shall make
his faith to differ, from all the vain imaginations and swimming conceits, of
devils and wicked men whatsoever.

3 By repentance I understand, a holy alteration and change of our minds
(for good reason is there, that where sin begins, from thence also should
proceed our conversion or turnyng to GOD) consisting of a sincere hatred of
all our former sins and iniquities whatsoever both general and particular,
and of a sound love, of all righteousness and well-dooing, both general and
particular: all which must in us proceed from the right reverence and loving
fear, of the majesty of almighty God in our hearts, which holy affection
does every day by little and little work in us, the forsaking of our
selves, and the subduing of the sinful lusts and affections of our own
flesh, to the end we may wholly resign and give over our selves, to be guided
and governed by the spirit of God, in the sincere service and worship of his
majesty, and in the Christian performaunce of the holy duties of charity
one of us toward an other, we our selves, not only standing up and
striving against our general iniquities, but also against our particular
sins, yea against these special transgressions, that most prevail in us
against the good will of our God: whereby no doubt God shall be greatly
glorified, whilst he makes his mighty power to appear, in strengthening
our wonderful weakness, against some particular wickedness, and we our
selves shall reap comfort, assuring our selves of this, that he that has
strengthened us against some one sin, will also assiste us against other, and
so make the good works that he has begun in us, Philip. 1.6.
perfect, even until the day of Christ. So that hereby we may see, that he
which feels himself truly and unfeignedly changed, in the affections of
his mind, for his former iniquities, not only loathing his sins, but even
himself for his sins sake, and carries with him this holy purpose, never,
through gods assistaunce to commit the same, or any such like against GOD or
men, may, not only be assured of his unfeigned repentance, and so by
consequent of the forgiveness of his sins, but also with boldness, and yet
notwythstanding with reverence in respect of GOD, and with humbleness of
mind, in respect of himself, may draw near to the partaking of those holy
mysteries.

4 By love, which is the thing that concerns men, I do not only
understand, the unfeigned pardoning and forgiving of others, that have any
manner of way trespassed against us, but also sound reconciliation after
offenses committed, one of us toward an other, yea I mean further by love,
which properly is an inward affection of the heart, the sincere and outward
testifieng of the same by words, deeds, countenaunces, and other means, as
the Lord shall give occasion, and our ability serve to express the same, and
that not unto our friends only, Matthew. 5.46, 47.
(for what great thing do we if we love them that love us? But generally to
all men, though unto some in greater measure, Galat. 6.10.
as to the household of faith, our wives, children, and parents, etc: and to
some in less measure, as to those that be yet without, and be somewhat
further off by nature and kindred, yea, and to our ennemies also, which is
somewhat more* against which, because we do wholly strive while we are in
the corruption of our nature, and be woonderfullye backward to the same,
even then when GOD has in some measure advanced our regeneration in us, there
lieng lurking within us the cinders of Hatred and Dis-like, ready to break
forth into a flame, as occasion and matter shall be ministered, we shall do
very well to gather as many reasons to induce us to the practice thereof, as
possibly we can, that so by them, as it were by strong cords, we may be
drawn and tied, as a man would say, to the execution of the same. First
therefore we have GOD in sundry places of his word, layeng that duty upon
us, Matthew. 5.44. Luke 6.27, 24.
To love them that hate us, to bless them that curse us, and to pray for them
that persecute us. Secondly, we have his own example concurring with his
commandment, he practicing the same to us, that he would have us to do to
others, namely, loving us, when we were and are his ennimies. Roman. 5.10.
Matthew. 5.45. 1. John 4.10.
Thirdlye, we have the example of our Savior Christ, clothed with one
nature accomplishing the same, praying also to the Father to forgive them, Luke
23.34.
that put him to death. And least any man should think, that that which
Christ did in this case, would not be performed in and by them, either by
reason of Christ's singular excellency, or the difficulty and impossibility
of the thing it self, the Lord has in the fourth place, for the ouercomming
of that temptation, set before us sundry of his servant, who being men
like unto us, in all respects, Acts 7.6^
have yet notwythstanding in the days of their flesh done the same, as we see
particularly in Stephan. Fiftlie, the very Sacrament it self, and the
elements in the same lead us thereto, 1. Corinthians. 10.17
For we that are many are one bread and one body, because we are all
partakers of one bread at the Lords boorde, even as that bread we eat of
there, is made of many grains, and yet makes but one loaf. Lastly, our
own good should carry us forward to this, because thereby we provide well
for our selves, that so we might feel the forgiveness of our sins before
GOD, our Savior telling us in plain words, Matthew. 6.14.
That if we do forgive men their trespasses, our heavenly Father will also
forgive us. And though it be true, that we can and do greatly aggrauate
other men's sins against us, as for example, he has taken away my good name,
he has spoiled me of my goods, he has killed my father, husband, children,
and a thousand such like: and what heinous offenses be these? Yet if GOD
would give us grace, vprightlie to look into our own sins, committed
either against other men, or Gods own majesty, we shall find, that we have
good cause offered, to be ready to remitte: For if men offend us, we do in as
great points offend others. And though that were not true, yet we cannot
deny, but that we do more highly displease Almighty GOD than men can, or
do displease us, and that not only in the notoriousnesse of our sins, but
even in a daily and continual course of iniquity, and in an infinite
multitude of transgressions also. What a fearful thing will this be in our
own hearts, that we would gladly have God merciful unto us, in forgiving
most grievous and innumerable transgressions, and we will not remitte small
offenses, and sins seldom times committed? By this we do nothing else but
cast away the sure seal and earnest penny, as it were, that our sins are
forgiven us before GOD, and refuse a certain pledge, that our prayers and all
other good things that come from us, are in Christ's obedience accepted in his
sight, yea, and most injuriously tread under our filthy feet, Gods word,
Gods example, Gods sacraments, and many other tokens of his grace, and lastly,
pull upon us a fearful vengeance from God, to be manifested in this life, and
in the life to come. And therefore I beseech all the godly, that have care of
their salvation, to look heedilie to this point.

Meditation, which is the second thing, due consideration of the same. And then
because we must not stay below on the earth, nor be busied in beholding of
earthly things only, but must by faith rise up to heaven as it were, there
to behold the abundant riches of Gods spiritual graces, offered and given to
the faithful, in, with, and by the outward elements, we are throghlie to wey
what great mercies the Lord sets before us, in that holy and spiritual
banquet, which though partly for the worthiness of the giver, and partly
also for the excellency of themselves, as also by the want and weakness of
our blind and dull understanding, they cannot be sufficiently conceived, much
less uttered, may yet in my mind be brought into these four points following,
as most material and principal.

1 God sets before our eyes in that holy action, first Christ's death and
passion, together with the benefits and effects which we reap thereby, and
namely the remission and full forgiveness of all our sins, together with
the imputation of Christ's righteousness unto us, and the assured possession
of eternal life: for we do no more verily behold the bread broken, and the
wine poured forth in our bodily sight and presence, than we do or ought by
the eye of our faith, to behold the body of Christ crucified, and his blood
shead upon the cross, for the forgiveness of our sins: neither are we
more fully or particularly put in possession of the bread and wine, when we
have eaten and druncke the same, than we are of Christ and all his merits,
then when by a lively and steadfast faith we lay hold of him, and the most
excellent graces, that in him are offered unto us, applieng them all
particularly to our own souls, which yet that they might be more effectually
pledged up in us, it pleased the Lord to appoint, not only that the bread
should be broken, and the wine poured forth, but that every one of us, should
severally by him self, and for him self, take it, eat it, and drink it,
etc: that so we might be in the more full and assured possession of him and
his graces.

2 Secondly, the Lord pledgeth out unto us thereby, that full and spiritual
nourishement, that through Christ we have, both in the outward and inward man,
even to the hope and fruition of eternal life: for even as verily, as that
bread and wine does seem to strengthen our out-ward manne: so even as
verily, yea more verilye by much, does Christ and is graces nourishe our
souls: yea I say more verily, because that though some part of the bread and
wine we receive, be turned into our healthful and profitable nourishment,
and is become as it were part of our substance, yet some of it also passes
through the panch into the privy, but Christ remains always a most holy
and sound nutriment unto our souls, no part of him vanishing away, but
having rather this effect in us, that he is not only turned into our
substance, as the bodily elements are in respect of our outward man, but
rather wholly turning us, as a man would say, into his most holy and blessed
substance, he being not only a plentiful, but a pleasant nourishment also,
bringing always with him that effect to our souls, that the outward elements
do to our bodies, namely giving them all spiritual strength, and inward
comfort, John. 15.5.
because without him, we have nothing, nor can do any thing.

3 Thirdly, by this means the Lord propounds unto us, the mystical union
that is betwixt Christ and his church, we and he making but one body of his
holy congregation, he being the head thereof, and we the particular members:
by which also, as we are instructed, in our holy duties toward him, we
attempting nothing that may tend to the prejudice, hurt, or grief of our
holy head, but endeavoring every thing that may be good and acceptable
before him, so we comfortablie conceive the great and continual care he has
for us, he performing more effectually by much, the duty of headship unto
his spiritual body the church, than a natural head, does, or can to a
natural body, namely, not only in devising for the good thereof, both in
general and in particular, but also in yeeldyng sense and moouyng unto the
whole body, and every several member thereof, yea, quickening the same, and
giving together with the understanding of heavenly care and conscience, yea,
some measure of strength and power to walk therein, Ephesians. 3.12.
so that He dwelling in our hearts by Faith, we are thereby not only become
members of his body, of his flesh, and of his blood, but also he makes us
zealous, prepared, and fruitful in every good work, both toward the Lord,
and one of us toward an other.

4 Fourthlie and lastly, the Lord delivers unto us in the use of his supper,
that holy unity and agreement, both outward and inward, of body and mind,
that is and ought to be known, felt and continued amongst all the members of
his church, whatsoever, or wheresoever they be. For even as the bread that we
are partakers of, is made of many grains, and yet makes but one loaf, as we
see, and as the wine that we drink at the Lords table, is made of many
grapes, and yet makes but one wine: so all the faithful people, not only of
one place and parish, but dispersed through out the whole earth
(notwithstanding that some through the riches of Gods mercies have atteined
more graces than other some) make in deed but one holy body of the church.
Neither does our being of several members one of us to another, any more
hinder our growth in this same spiritual fellowship, than the variety of
members in a natural body hinders the constituting and making of the whole
body it self, nay rather, as we may well perceive, it furthereth the same:
for as the whole cannot be said to be whole but in respect of all the parts
whereof it consists, no more can this whole or holy body of the church, and
every particular congregation throughout the world, concurring to the
establishing thereof: and yet so notwithstanding, that the name church may as
rightly be attributed to every several society of the faithful, as the
word earth to every part of the earth, or to speak of the elements of the
supper, the word bread, and the word wine, to every part of the bread and wine
used in the same.

The third and last thing, is that which practice commonly counted but a vain
conceit, so in spiritual understanding, that is much more true, because if a
man know never so much of Gods mercies, and meditate never so deeply in the
same, yet if that by the same he be not lead, as it were, by the hand, both
humbly to praise God for them, and heartily pray unto him, for the continuance
and increase of them, with grace to embrace them, and to use them well, it is
to himself and others as if it were nothing. Now this matter that we call
action consists:

1 First, in earnest prayer unto God, not only for a clear sight of the
graces offered, because we are blind to perceue them, but also for a lively and
continual feeling of the same, because we do easily choke and smother them
up, yea, for the plentiful fructifieng of the word of God, and his sacraments
in our hearts, because we our selves be barren and ill ground, and can
hardly bring forth good fruit, though we have have very much cost and labor
bestowed upon us. And this duty must be performed, not for the time present
alone, as whilst we are in the public exercises, or for the day of
communicating only, returning afterward as filthy swine to our former
wallow, or unclean dogs to our vomit again: for alas what will that avail
us, but to a more fearful judgment, and just condemnation, because we
continue in sin, and abuse the means of our sanctification and purging, but
even for the whole race and course of our lives, that as there is no day nor
hour of a day going over our heads, wherein we stand not in need of some
blessing from the Lord, so there should few times escape us, wherein we would
not do to God this duty, that we believe to be acceptable to him, because he
has commanded it, and so profitable unto our selves, because it reaches unto
every part and period, or state of our whole life.

2 Secondly, in humble thanksgiving, as for all the inestimable riches and
treasures of grace and goodness generally: which it pleases him in his
Church, and namely by the use of his word and sacraments, not only to offer,
but also to bestow upon his people, so specially for the death and obedience of
his Son, the blessing of all blessings, that is to say, the most excellent
blessing, the Lord bestowing thereby upon us all graces both bodily and
spirituallie: bodily, as the sanctification of all his creatures unto us,
which otherwise we continuing in our sins (as we must needs have done, if
Christ had not died for us) should have bin unclean unto us: and spiritual,
as the forgiveness of our sins, the imputation of Christ's righteousness
(which we must of necessity believe, because otherwise God may as
well-condemne us for want of righteousness, as for our notorious
transgressions) and many such other particulars before recited. And that we
may be the better provoked to this great duty of thankfulness, it shall be good
for us, not only to alot unto our selves sometime in every day, wherein we
will take a view so far forth as we can, of all the graces of God both
general and particular, bestowed upon our selves and others, but also deeply
to consider, first the person that gives the same, who is the Lord of heaven
and earth, merciful no doubt even unto thousands of generations, to them that
love him, and keep his commandments: secondly the excellency of the things
bestowed, which besides that they are bodily and spiritual, temporal and
eternal, arise to such a huge number, in the several sorts and great variety
of them that are not able to think of them, or any one of them, according to
their worthiness, much less to account or number them: and thirdly to
consider our selves receiving them, to whom the Lord freely and of his own
goodness, gives these great mercies, not only when we had not deserved the
least of them, but even then when every one of us, had deserved eternal death
and condemnation to be poured forth upon us and ours.

3 And lastly in care and conscience of a most holy and christian
conversation, that seeing we are in the holy Supper made partakers by faith
of Christ's death and resurrection, and that we fully persuade our selves by
the truth of the word, Roman. 4.25.
that he did not only die for our sins, and rise for our righteousness, but
also performed that excellent and great work to teach us, Roman. 6.1. Coloss.
3.1.
by his death to die to ungodliness, and by his resurrection to rise up to
that holiness, that may be acceptable before God, profitable to our brethren,
and comfortable to our selves, we having by that means, and to that end our
spiritual life and being from him, that therefore we should live soberlie,
righteouslie, Titus. 2.12.
and godly in this present evil world, and that in the sound affections of
our hearts before God, and in words and deeds before men, that when it shall
please him to finish the days of our wearisome pilgrimage, we steadfastly
looking for that blessed hope, and full-fruition of eternal life, may be
glorified with him in eternal blessedness: which thing the Lord grant us, even
for his crucified Christ's sake, to whom, with the Father, and the Holy ghost,
three persons and one eternal God, be given all honor praise, power and
glory, both of us and of all people, even now and at all times for ever and
ever: So be it.

(...).
TO THE READER.
AT the motion and request of sundry my dear friends in the Lord, I have
thought good to put down these two prayers following, not thereby minding,
either to tie any person to the use of these only (for they may according to
their several necessities, conceive some other of their own, or practice some
better form alredie set forth, by men of greater gifts or feeling) nor yet so
to busy their minds, and to occupy their heads, as that they should be
employed in these, when the public prayers and exercises of the church,
performed by the ministers, are in hand (for be it far from us, when the
minister (Gods mouth) speaks from the Lord to us, or when he as our mouth,
speaks to the Lord for us, to have either our hearts or our mouths occupied
about any other thing, than the reverend hearing and consenting unto, of such
things as he utters.) But that aiding the infirmity of our brethren, such
as have not the gift to conceive prayer, and shall think this fit for
themselves, might have a form to exercise themselves in, both before they
repair to the public exercises of the church, and also after the celebration
and partaking of these reverend mysteries shall be finished.

A PRAYER TO BE SAID BEFORE a man repair to the partaking of the Lords supper.
O Eternal God, and most merciful father, I thy poor and unworthy servant
do humbly beseech thee in Jesus Christ thy dear sons name, and for his sake,
graciously through his death and obedience, to pardon and forgive me all my
sins whatsoever, which at any time, by thought, word, or deed, I have,
through negligence, ignorance, or knowledge, committed against thy divine
majesty, or any other. And because both by reason of the curssed corruption
of mine own nature, and the infinite multitude of my sins also, I am slow and
dull of heart to believe, seal up in my soul I pray thee O Lord, this great
benefit of the free pardon and full forgiveness of all my sins, by the
assured testimony of thy blessed spirit, bearing record unto my spirit that I
am thy child, and by unfeigned parddoning and forgiving of others, which any
manner of way have offended against me. Yea make the death and resurrection of
thy son so powerful and effectual in me, that I may not only feel and
find in the same, the forgiveness of all my sins, both general and
particular, and the hope of eternal salvation, but also that I may be
instructed thereby, all the days of my life, more and more to die unto sin,
and daily more and more to live unto righteousness of life and holy
conversation. And forasmuch as through thy goodness, I have purposed this day
to communicate, in the use of thy blessed word and sacraments, I beseech thee
(good father) to pearse mine ears, to prepare my heart, yea and so to direct
all the parts and powers of my body and soul, that I may not only
reverently and profitablie hearken to thy voice, speaking unto me out of thy
word, laboring all the days of my life to conform my self to the knowledge,
faith, and obedience of the same, but also that I may assuredly be made
partaker of the fruits and effects of the death and passion of thy dear son,
which it pleases thee in that holy sacrament, to offer unto me. To this end
and purpose I beseech thee to grant, that I be not carried away in the
contemplation and consideration of the earthly and corruptible things, objected
therein to my senses, but that my faith may be set up and raised to the
spiritual beholding, assured feeling, and full fruition of these graces, which
it pleases thee by the same to offer unto me. Give me grace (good Lord) to
bring with me a steadfast faith in the truth of thy promises, that by it, as by
an eye, I may look upon, and by the same, as by a hand, I may apprehend Jesus
Christ thy son, sitting at thy right hand, to be my only and continual
iustifier, sanctifier and redeemer. Grant me grace also to bring with me, as an
earnest hatred of all my former evils whatsoever, so a sincere love of all
righteousness and well doing, that I by the power of thy spirit, crucifieng
the old man, with the lusts and concupiscences thereof, specially such as bear
the greatest sway in me, may be strengthened in the new man, daily to think,
speak, and do those things which may be acceptable and well pleasing in thy
godly presence. And I beseech thee further, to give me grace to bring with me,
sound and sincere love toward all men, yea even toward mine enemies, that I
may not only forget and forgive all the injuries and wrongs that they have
devised, said or done against me, but also pray earnestly unto thy majesty
for them, and purchase and procure

(...)
