QVESTIONS PROPOVNDED TO THE PROFESSORS OF THE CHVCH-ASSEMBLIES OF ENGLAND.
1.
WHither the Lord Jesus Christ, have by his last Testament, given unto and set
in his Church sufficient ordinary Offices, with their callings, works, and
maintenance for the administration of his holy things, and for the sufficient
ordinary instruction, guidance, and service of his Church to the end of the
world, or no?

2.
Whither the Offices of Pastors, Teachers: Elders, Deacons and helpers, be
those Offices appointed by Christ in his last Testament as is aforesaid: Or
whither the present Ecclesiastical Offices of Archbips. Lord Bips. Suffragans,
Chancellors, Commissaries, Officialls, Doctors, Proctors, Registe^s, Scribes,
or Clarckes, Advocates, Prelates, Pursevantes, Here are above 40. Offices
discovered and named not one of them found in the nevve Testament.
Paratours or Sumners, Deanes, Subdeanes, Archdeacons, Doctors of Divinity,
Bachellors of Divinity, Chapleines or Hous-priestes, Prebendaries, Cannons,
petty-cannons, Gospellers, pistelers, Chaunters, Vergiers, Singing-men,
Organ-plaiers, Queristers, or Singing-boyes, parsons, Vicares, Curates,
Stipendaries or Hired-preachers, Vagrant or mecenary Teachers, priests,
Halfe-priestes called Deacons, Churchwardens, Sidemen, Collectors, Clarckes,
Sextines, and the rest now had, in these Cathedral and parishionall
Assemblies, be these appointed by Christ in his last Testament, as is
aforesaid, or no?

3.
Whither the Callinges and entrance into these ecclesiastical Offices
aforesaid, their Administration also and maintenance, now had and retained in
England, be that manner of calling administration and maintenance which Christ
has appointed for the Offices of his Church above named, or no?

4.
Whither every true and Visible Church of Christ be not a company of people
called and separated out from the World by the Word of God, and joined
together in the Fellowship of the Gospel by voluntary profession of their
faith and obedience of Christ, the sure and right way to mortification and
sanctification. And whither the present Assemblies of this Land be such, or no?

5.
Whither the Sacraments (being seals of righteousness which is by faith) may
be delivered to any other then the Faithful and their Seed? Or in any other
ministry and manner then is appointed by Jesus Christ the Apostle and
High Priest of our profession. And whither they be not otherwise administered in
the Cathedral and Parishionall Assemblies of England at this day, or no?

6.
Whither all Churches and people without exception be bound in Religion only
to receive and submitt unto the ministry, worship, and order, which Christ as
Lord and King has given and appointed to his Church? Or whither in religion
any may receive and join unto such a ministry, worship, and order as is
devised by men or Angels for the service of God? And consequently whither they
which join to the present ecclesiastical ministry, worship, and order of
these Cathedral and parishionall Assemblies can be assured by the word of God,
that they join to the former appointed by Christ, and not to the latter
divised by others for the service of God.

To JESUS CHRIST the King of Kings, 1. Tim. 6: 15. and PRINCE of the Ringes of
the earth Revela. 1. 5, be praise and obedience of all Deuteronomy. 18. 19. Ies. 60.
12. and of every person for evermore Act. 3. 22. 13.

