DIVINE FANCIES: Digested into EPIGRAMMES, MEDITATIONS, AND OBSERVATIONS. BY
FRA: QVARLES.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for JOHN MARRIOT, and are to be sold at his Shop in
St. Dunstans Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1633.

TO THE ROYAL BVDDE OF MAJESTY, and Center of all our Hopes and Happiness,
CHARLES, Prince of Great BRITAIN, France and Ireland, SON and HEIR Apparent
to the High and Mighty CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great BRITAIN,
FRANCE, and IRELAND, etc.
Illustrious Infant:
GIve me leave to acknowledge my self thy Servant, ere thou know thy Self
my Prince: My Zeal burns me, and my desires are impatient: My breeding Muse
longs for green fruit, and cannot stay thy ripeness: Sweet Babe; The loyalty
of my Service makes bold to consecrate these early Leaves to thy sacred
Infancy, not knowing how to glorify themselves, more, then by the Patronage
of such Princely Innocence. Model of Sweetness, Let thy busy Fingers
entertain this slender Present, and let thy harmless Smiles crown it: When
thy Infancy has cracked the Shell, let thy Childhood taste the Kernel; In the
mean while, let thy little hands and Eyes peruse it: Lugge it in thy tender
Arms, and lay thy burden at thy Royal Parents feet; for whose sake, it may
gain some honor from their glorious Eyes. Heaven bless thy Youth with Grace,
and crown thy Age with Glory: Angels conduct thee from the Cradle, to the
Crown: Let the English Rose, and the French Lilly flourish in thy lovely
Cheek: And let their united Colors presage an everlasting League. Let the
eminent Qualities of both thy renowned Grandfathers meet in thy Princely
Heart; that thou may, in Peace, be honorable; and in War, victorious. And
let the great addition of thy Royal Parents Virtues make thee up a most
incomparable Prince, the firm Pillar of our happiness, and the future Object of
the Worlds wonder

Expected, and prayed for by Your Highnesses most Loyal and humble servant,
FRA: QVARLES.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable and truly virtuous Lady, MARY Countess of Dorset,
Governesse to that Royal Infant, CHARLES, Prince of Great BRITAIN, France,
and Ireland, the Mirror of unstained HONOR.
Most excellent LADY,
YOU are that Star, which stands over the place, where the Babe lies; By
whose directions light, I am come from the East, to present my Myrrh, and
Frankincense to the young Child: Let not our Royal JOSEPH, nor his Princely
MARY be affrayd; there are no Herod's here; We have all seen his Star in the
East, and have rejoiced: Our loyal hearts are full; for our eyes have seen
him, in whom our Posterity shall be blessed: To him, most honorable Lady, I
address my thoughts; To Him, I presume to consecrate these Lines; which, since
it has pleased our gracious Sovereign to appoint you the Governesse of his
Royal Infancy, I have made bold to present, first, to your noble hands; not
daring, in my very thoughts to disjoyne, whom his Sacred Majesty, in so great
Wisdom, has put together; or to consider severally, where his Highness has
made so in violable a Relation. Madam, May your Honors increase with your
hours, and let eternal Glory crown your U^rtues; that when this Age shall
sleep in Dust, our Children, yet unborne, may honor your glorious Memory,
under the happiness of his Government, whose Governesse you are; which shall
be daily the Subject of his Prayers, who is

The sworne-Servant of your Ladyships Perfections, FRA: QVARLES.

To the Readers.
REaders, I will not (like One that knows the strength of his own Muse) commit
Rape upon your Understandings, nor rail at your Ignorances, if our Wits jumpe
not: I have written at my own peril; understand you at your own pleasures: I
have nor so little Man in me, as to want my faults; nor so much Fool in me as
to think it; nor so little Modesty, as to swear it; nor so much Child in me
as to whine at Zoilus: My request is, That the faultles hand may cast the first
stone, So although I cannot avoid the common Lot of man, Error; I may escape
the punishment of the Common Man, Censure.

I here present thee with a Hive of Bees; laden, some with Wax, and some with
Honey: Fear not to approach; There are no Waspes; there are no Hornets, here:
if some wanton Be should chance to buzze about thine ears, stand thy Ground,
and hold thy hands: There Is none will sting thee, if thou strike not first: If
any do; she has Honey in her Bag, will cure thee too: In playner terms, I
present thee with a Book of Fancies; Among which, as I have none to boast of;
so (I hope) I shall have none to blush at. All cannot affect all: If some
please all; or all, some, it is more then I expect; I had once thought to have
melted the Title, and cast it into several Books, and have lodged
Observations, Meditations, and Epigrams by themselves; but new thoughts have
taken place: I have required no help of Herald, either to place, or to
proclaim them. Cards, well shuffled, are most fit for Gamesters: And
oftentimes, the pastime of Discovery adds pleasure to the Enioyment: The
Generous Faulkner had rather retrive his Partridge in the open Feilds, then
meet her in his coverd Dish. Only this: when you read a Meditation, let me
entreat thee to forget an Epigramme.

Farewell.
AD LECTORES VTRIVSque GENERIS.
Candide, si mala sint nostra inter carmina, parce;
Et bona si quae sint, Zoile, parco tibi.
To GOD.
GLorious and Great; whose power did divide
The Waves, and made them Walls on either side;
That did appear in Cloven-tongues of Fire;
Divide my thoughts: and with thy self, inspire
My soul; O cleave my Tongue, and make it scatter
Various Expressions in a various Matter;
That like the painful Be, I may derive
From sundry Flowers, to store my slender Hive:
Yet, may my Thoughts not so divided be,
But they may mix again, and fix in Thee.
DIVINE FANCIES, Digested into EPIGRAMMES, MEDITATIONS, AND OBSERVATIONS.
1.
On the Music of Organs.
OBserve this Organ: Mark but how it goes:
'T is not the hand of him alone that blows
The unseene Bellows; nor the Hand that plays
Upon th'apparent note-dividing Kayes,
That makes these wel-composed Airs appear
^^fore the high Tribunal of thine ear^:
They both concur: Each acts his several part:
The One gives it Breath; the other lends it Art.
Man is this Organ: To whose every action
Heaven gives a Breath (a Breath without coaction)
Without which Blast we cannot act at all;
Without which Breath, the Universe must fall
To the first Nothing it was made of: seeing
In Him we live, we move, we have our Being:
Thus filled with his Diviner breath, and backed
With his first power we touch the Kayes and act:
He blows the Bellows: As we thrive in skill,
Our Actions prove, like Music, Good or Ill.
2
On the contingencie of Actions.
I Saw him dead; I saw his Body fall
Before Deaths Dart; who^ tears must not recall:
Yet is he not so dead, but that his Day
Might have bin lengthened, had th'untrodden way
To life been found: He might have ^ose agin,
If something had, or something had not bin:
What mine sees past, Heavens eye foresaw to come
He saw, how that contingent Act should sum
The to^all of his Days: His knowing Eye
(As mine does see him dead) saw he should die
That very fatal hour; yet saw his death,
Not so so necessary, but his Breath
Might been enlarged unto a longer date,
Had he neglected This, or taken That:
All times to Heaven are now, both first and last;
He see^ things present, as we see them past.
3.
On the Sacraments.
THe Lo^ves of Bread were five; the Fishes two,
Whereof the Multitude was made partaker.
Who made the Fishes? God: But tell me, who
Gave being to the Loaves of Bread? the Baker:
Even so th^se Sacraments, which some call seven,
Five were ordained by Man, and two, by Heaven.
4.
On the Infancy of our Savior.
HAyle blessed Virgin, full of heavenly Grace,
Blessed above all that sprang from humane race;
Whose Heav'n-saluted Womb brought forth in One,
A blessed Savior, and a blessed Son:
O! what a ravishment 'thad been, to see
Thy little Savior perking on thy Knee!
To see him nuzzle in thy Virgin Breast!
His milk white body all unclad, undrest;
To see thy busy Fingers cloathe and wrappe
His spradling Limbs in thy indulgent Lap!
To see his desprate Eyes* with Childish grace,
Smiling upon his smiling Mothers face!
And, when his forward strength began to bloome,
To see him diddle up and down the Room!
O, who would think, so sweet a Babe as this,
Should ere be slain by a false-hearted kiss!
Had I a Ragge, if sure thy Body wore it,
Pardon sweet Babe, I think I should adore it,
Till then, O grant this Boon, (a boon far dearer)
The Weed not being, I may adore the Wearer.
5.
On Judas Iscariot.
WE rail at Judas, him that did betray
The Lord of life; yet do it day by day.
6.
On the life and death of Man.
THe World's a Theater; The Earth, a Stage
Placed in the midst; whereon both Prince and Page,
Both rich and poor; fool, wiseman; base, and high;
All act their Parts in Life's short Tragedy:
Our Life's a Tragedy: Those secret Rooms
Wherein we tire us, are our Mothers Wombes;
The Music ush'ring in the Play, is Mirth
To see a Manchild brought upon the Earth:
That fainting gasp of Breath which first we vent
Is a Dumb-Shew, presents the Argum^nt:
Our newborn Cries that newborn Griefs bewray,
Is the sad Prologue of the ensuing Play:
False hopes, true fears, vain joys, and fierce distracts
Are like the Music that divides the Acts:
Time holds the Glass, and when the hower's run,
Death strikes the Epilogue; and the Play is done.
7*
On the seven liberal Sciences of a Christian.
Grammar.
IT is an Art, that teaches not t'excell
In Writing, Speaking, as in Doing well.
Logic.
IT is an Art sometimes of Plotting treason
Against the Crown and Dignity of Reason.
Rhetoric.
IT is an Art, whereby he learnes t'encrease
His knowledge of the time, to Hold his Peace.
Arythmeticke.
IT is an Art, that makes him apt to raise
And number out Gods Blessings, and his Days.
Music.
IT is a potent Science, that infringes
Strong Prison doors, and heaves them from their hinges.
Astronomy.
IT is an Art of taking out the Lead
From hi^ dull Brows, and lifting ^p the Head.
Geometry.
IT is an Art, ins^ructs him how to have
The World in scorn; and measure out his Grave.
8.
Christ's four houses.
HIs first house was the blessed Virgins Womb;
The next, a Cratch; the third, a Cross* the fourth a Tomb.
9.
Of Light and Heat.
MArk but the Sunbeams, when they shine most bright,
They l^^d this lower world both heat and light:
They both are Children of the selfsame Mother,
Twins; not subsis^i^g one without the other;
They both conspire unto the Common good,
When, in their proper places, understood:
Is It not rebellion against Sense to say,
Light helps to quicken: Or, the Beams of day
May lend a Heat, and ye^ no Light at all?
It Is true, some obvious Shade may chance to fall
Upon the quickened Pl^nt, yet not so great,
To quench the (...) of the Heat:
The Heat cannot be parted from the Light,
Nor yet the Light from Heat; They neither might
Be mingled in the Act, nor found asunder:
Distinguish now fond man; or stay and wonder: Know then;
Their virtues differ though themselves agree;
Heat vivifies; Light gives man power to see
The thing so vivifyed: no Light, no Heat;
And where the heat's but small, the light's not great:
They are inseparable, and sworn Lovers,
Yet differing thus; That quickens; This discovers:
Within these lines a sacred Mystery lurkes:
The Heat resembles Faith: the Light; Good works.
10.
On Judas Iscariot.
SOme curse that traitor Judas life and lim*
God knows, some curse themselves, in cursing him.
11.
On the possession of the Swine.
WHen as our blessed Savior did un-devill
The Man possessed; the Spirits, in conclusion,
Entered the Swine (being active still in evil)
And drove them headlong to their own confusion.
Dru^kards, beware, and be advised then,
They Will find you as you are Swine* if not, as Men:
12.
On a Sun^Dyall.
THis Horizontall Dyall can bewray
To the sad Pilgrim, the hour of the Day:
But if the Sun appear not his Adviser,
His eye may look, yet he prove n^'er the wiser:
Alas, alas; there is nothing can appear,
But only Types, and shadowed Figures there:
This Dyall is the Scripture; and the Sun,
Gods holy Spirit; We, the ^ookers on:
Alas, that saceed Letter, which we read,
Without the Quickening of the Spirit's dead:
The knowledge of our Peace improves no better,
Then if our Eye had not beheld a Letter:
I, but this glorious Sun shines always bright:
I, but we often stand in our own light:
Use then the day, for when the day is gone,
There willl be darkness: there will be no Sun.
13.
On the three Christian Graces.
Faith.
IT is a Grace, that teaches to deprave not
The Goods we have; To have the goods we have not.
Hope.
IT is a Grace*, that keeps The Almighty blameless,
In long delay: And men (in begging) shameless.
Charity.
IT is a Grace, or Art to get a Living
By selling Land; and to grow rich, by giving.
14.
On a Feast.
THe Lord of Heaven and Earth has made a Feast,
And every Soul is an invited Guest:
The Word's the Food; the Levits are the Cooks;
The Fathers Writings are their Dyet-bookes;
But seldom used; for it is a fashion grown,
To recommend made Dishes of their own:
What they should boil, they bake; what r^st, they broyle;
Their lushious Sallats are too sweet with Oil:
In brief, it is now a days too great a fault,
To Have too much Pepper, and too little Salt.
15.
On Dives.
THat drop-requesting Dives did desire
His Brothers might have warning of that Fire,
Whose flames he felt: Could he, a Fiend, wish well
To Man? What, is there Charity in Hell?
Each Soul that is damned is a Brand of fire,
To make Hell so much hotter; And the nigher
In blood or love they be, that are tormented,
The more their pains and torments are augmented:
No wonder then, if Dives did desire,
His Brothers might have warning of that Fire*
16.
On outward show.
IVdge not that Field, because it is Stubble,
Nor Him that is poor, and full of trouble*
Though the one look bare; the the other thin;
Judge not; Their Treasure is within.
17.
On the reading of the Scriptures.
IN reading of the Sacred Writ; beware,
Thou climb no Style, when as a Gapp stands fair*
18.
On the life of Man.
Our Life's the Model of a Winters Day;
Our Soul's the Sun, whose faint and feeble Ray
Gives our Earth light; a light but weak, at strongest,
But low, at highest; very short, at longest:
The childish Tears, that from our eyes do pass,
Is like the Dew that pearls the morning grass:
When as our Sun is but an hour high,
We go to School, to learn; are whipped, and cry:
We truant up and down; we make a spoil
Of precious Time, and sport in our own Toil:
Our Bed's the quiet Grave; wherein we lay
Our weary Bodies, tired with the Day:
The early Trumpet, like the Morning Bell,
Calls to account; where they that have learnd well
Shall find Reward; And such as have mis-pent
Their Time, shall reap an earned punishment:
No wonder, then, to see the Sluggards eyes,
So loath to go to Bed; so loath to rise.
19.
On the Crowing of a Cock.
THe Crowing of a Cock does often foreshow
A change of Weather: Peter found it so:
The Cock no sooner crew, but by and by
He found a Change of weather in his eye:
T's an easy thing to say, and to swear too,
We Will dye for Christ; but it is as hard to do.
20.
On Mammon.
MAmmon's grown rich: Does Mammon boast of that?
The Stalled Ox, as well may boast, He Is fat.
21.
On Church-contemners*
THose Church-contemners, that can easily weigh
The profit of a Sermon with a Play;
Whose testy stomachs can digest, as well,
A profer'd Injury, as a Sermon-bell;
That say unwonted Prayers with the like wills,
As queazy Patients take their loathed Pills:
To what extremity would they be driven,
If God, in Judgment, should but give them Heaven.
22.
On Morus.
HE is no Flemming: For he cannot Swill:
No Roman; for his stomacke's fleshly still:
He cannot be a Jew; he was baptized:
Nor yet a Gentile; he was circumciz'd:
He is no True man; for he lies a trot:
Profane he is not; for he swears ye not:
What is he then? One Feast without a Bill
Shall make him all; or which of all ye will.
23.
On the Hypocrite.
NO man's condition is so base as his;
None more accursed than he: For Man esteems
Him hateful, 'cause he seems not what he is:
God hates him, 'cause he is not what he seems;
What grief is absent, or what mischief can
B^ added to the hate of God and Man?
24.
On a Pilgrim.
THe weary Pilgrim, often, does ask, and know*
How far he is come; how far he has to go^*
His way is tedious, and his hart's oppressed,
And his desire is to be at Rest:
Our life's a Wayfare; yet fond Man delays
T'enquier out the number of his Days;
He cares not, He, how slow his hours spend;
His Iourney's better then his Iournies end.
25.
On the Needle of a Sun-diall.
BEhold this needle; when the Arctick s^one
Has touched it, how it trembles up and down;
Hunts for the Pole; and cannot be possessed,
Of peace, until it find that point, that rest:
Such is the heart of Man; which, when it has
Attayn'd the virtue of a lively faith,
It finds no rest on earth, makes no abode,
In any Object, but his heaven, his God.
26.
On Afffiction.
WHen thou afflict'st me, Lord, if I repine,
I show my self to be mine own, not thine.
27.
On a Sun-dyall.
Go light a Candle: By that light, make trial,
How the night spends it self, by the Sun-dyall*
Go, search the Scripture; L^bour to increase
In the diviner knowledge of thy Peace
By thy own light, derived from thy mother:
Thou may as eas^ly do the one, as the other.
28.
On PETER.
When walking Peter was about to sinck
Into the sea, In what a case do you think,
H'ad bin; if he had trusted his complaint
To th'intercession of some helpful Saint:
Believe it; if Romes doctrine had bin sound,
And soundly followed, Peter had bin drowned.
29
On Merits.
FIe, Rome's abused: Can any be thought able
To merit heaven by works: It Is a mere fable:
If so; stout Rome had never bin so faint
To move her suit by a Collateral Saint.
30.
On Servio*
SErvio serves God* Servio has bare relation
(Not to Gods Glory) but his own salvation:
Servio serves God for life: Servio, it is well:
Servio may find the cooler place in Hell.
31.
A Soliloquie.
WHere shall I find my God! O where, O where
Shall I direct my steps, to find him there?
Shall I make search in swelling Baggs of Coin?
Ah no; For God and Mammon cannot join:
Do Beds of Down contain this heavenly stranger?
No no; He Is rather cradled in some Manger:
Dwells he in wisdom? Is he gone that rode?
No no; Man's wisedome's foolishnes with God:
Or has some new Plantation, yet unknown,
Made him their King, adorned him with their Crown?
No, no, the kingdoms of the earth think scorn
T'adorne his Brows with any Crown but Thorn.
Where shall I trace; or where shall I go wind him?
My Lord is gone; and O! I cannot find him:
I Will ransack the dark Dungeons: I Will enquire
Into the Furnace, after the sev'nth fire.
I Will seek in Daniels Den, and in Paul's prison;
I Will search his Grave* and see if he be risen:
I Will go to the house of mourning; and I Will call
At every Almes-abused Hospital:
I Will go and ask the widow, that is oppressed;
The heavy laden, that enquiers rest:
Il^ search the Corners of all broken hearts;
The wounded Conscience, and the soul that smarts;
The contrite spirit filled with filial fear;
I, there he is; and no where else, but there:
Spare not to scourge they pleasure, O my God,
So I may find thy pres^nce, with thy Rod.
32.
On Daniel in the Den.
FIerce Lions roaring for their prey? and then
Daniel thrown in? And Daniel yet remain
Alive? There was a Lion, in the Den,
Was Daniels friend, or Daniel had bin slain:
Among ten thousand Lions, I Would not fear,
Had I but only Daniels Lion there.
23.
On those that deserve it.
O When our Clergy, at the dreadful Day,
Shall make their Audit; when the Judge shall say
Give your accounts: What, have my Lambs bin fed?
Say, do they all stand sound? Is there none dead
By your defaults? come shepherds, bring them forth
That I may crown your labors in their worth:
O what an answer will be given by some!
We have bin silenced: Canons struck us dumb;
The Great ones would not let us feed thy flock,
Unless we pla^'d the fools, and wore a Frock:
We were forbid unles we would yield to sign
And cross their brows, they say, a mark of thine.
To say the truth, great Judge, they were not fed,
Lord, here they be; but, Lord, they be all dead.
Ah cruel Shepherds! Could your conscience serve
Not to be fools, and yet to let them sterve?
What if your Fiery spirits had bin bound
To Antic Habits; or your heads bin crowned
With Peacocks Plumes; had ye bin forced to feed
Your Saviors dear-bought Flock in a fools weed;
He that was scorned, reviled; endured the Curse
Of a base death, in your behalfs; nay worse,
Swallowed the cup of wrath charged up to the brim,
Durst ye not stoop to play the fools for him?
34.
Do this and live.
Do this and live? It Is true, Great God* then who
Can hope for life? for who has power to Do?
Art thou not able? Is thy Task too great?
Can thou desire help? Can thou entreat
Aid from a stronger Arm? Can thou conceive
Thy Helper strong enough? Can thou believe,
The sufferings of thy dying Lord can give
Thy drooping shoulders rest? Do this and live.
35.
On Joseph and his Mistress.
WHen as The Egyptian Lady did invite
Wel-favor'd Joseph to unchaste delight,
How well the motion and the place agreed!
A beastly Place, and it was a beastly Deed:
A place well seasoned for so foul a sin;
To^ sweet to serve so foul a Master in*
36.
On Scriptum est.
SOme words excel in virtue, and discover
A rare conclusion, thrice repeated over.
Our Savior thrice was tempted: thrice represt
Th'assaulting tempter with thrice SCRIPTVM EST.
If thou would keep thy soul secure from harm,
Tho^ know the words: It is a potent Charm.
37.
On the flourishing of the Gospel.
HOw do our Pastures flourish, and refresh
Our uberous Kine, so fair, so full of flesh!
How do our thriving Cattle feed our young
With plenteous Milk; and with their flesh the strong*
Heaven blessed our Charles, and he did our late James,
From Pharohs troubles, and from Pharohs Dreams.
38.
On Ioseph's Speech to his Brethren.
Go, ^etch your Brother (said The Egyptian Lord)
If you intend our Garniers shall afford
Your craving wants their so desired supplies;
If He come not, by Pharoes life, you are Spies:
Even as your Suits expect to find our Grace,
Bring him; or dare not to behold my face:
Some little food, to serve you on the way,
We here allow, but not to feed delay;
When you present your Brother to our Hand,
Ye shall have plenty, and possess the Land;
Away; and let your quick obedience give
The earnest of your Faiths; Do this and live:
If not; your wilful wants must want supply,
For ye are Spies, and ye shall surely dye:
Great God, The Egyptian Lord resembles Thee;
The Brother's Jesus; and the Suitors We.
39.
Of common Devotion.
Our God and Soldiers we alike adore
Even at the Brink of danger; not before:
After deliverance, both alike requited;
Our God's forgotten, and our Soldier's slighted.
40.
On the Day of Judgment.
O When shall that time come, when the loud Trump
Shall wake my sleeping Ashes from the Dump
Of their sad Vrne! That blessed Day, wherein
My glorified, my metamorphiz'd Skin
Shall circumplexe and terminate that fresh
And new refined substance of this flesh!
When my transparent Flesh, dischargd from groan^s,
And pains, shall hang upon new polisht Bones!
When as my Body shall re-entertaine
Her cleansed Soul, and never part again!
When as my Soul shall, by a new Indenture,
Possess her new-built house, come down and enter!
When as my Body and my Soul shall plight
Inviolable faith, and never fight
Nor wrangle more, ^or alcercat, agin,
About that strife-begetting question, Sin!
When Soul and Body shall receive their Doom
Of O ye Blessed of my Father, Come!
When Death shall be exiled, and damned to dwell
Within her proper and true Center, Hell!
Where that old Tempter shall be bound in Chains,
And overwhelmed with everlasting pains;
Whilst I shall sit, and, in full Glory, sing
Perpetual Anthems to my Judge, my King.
41.
On Death.
Why should we not, as well, desire Death,
As Sleep? No diffrence, but a little Breath:
It Is all but Rest; it is all but a Releasing
Our tired lims; Why then not alike pleasing?
Being burdened with the sorrows of the Day,
We wish for night; which, being come, we lay
Our Bodies down; yet when our very Breath
Is yrkesome to us, we are afraid of Death:
Our Sleep is often accompanied with ^rights,
Distracting Dreams and dangers of the nights;
When in the Sheets of Death, our Body's sure
From all such Evils, and we sleep secure:
What matter, Down, or Earth? what boots it whether?
Alas, Our Bodye's sensible of neither:
Things that are senseless feel nor pains nor ease;
Tell me; and why not Worms as well as Fleas?
In Sleep, we know not whether our closed eyes
Shall ever wake; from Death we are sure to rise:
I, but it is long first: O, is that our fears?
Dare we trust God for Nights? and not for Years?
42.
On the Body of Man.
Man's Body's like a House: His greater Bones,
Are the maine Timber; And the lesser Ones,
Are smaller Splints: His Ribs are Laths, daubd over,
Plastered with flesh and blood: his Mouth's the Door:
His Throat's the narrow Entry: And his Heart
Is the Great Chamber, full of curious Art:
His Midreife, is a large partition Wall,
'Twixt the Great Chamber, and the spacious Hall:
His Stomach is the Kitchen, where the Meat
Is often but half sod, for want of Heat:
His Spleen's a Vessel, Nature does allot
To take the skimme, that rises from the Pot:
His Lungs are like the Bellows that respire
In every office, quickening every Fire:
His Nose, the Chimney is, whereby are vented
Such Fumes, as with the Bellows are augmented:
His Bowels are the Sink, whose part's to dr^ine
All noisome filth, and keep the Kitchen clean:
His Eyes like Crystal Windows clear and bright
Lets in the Ob^ect, and lets out the sight:
And as the Timber is, or great or small,
Or strong or weak; it is apt to stand, or fall;
Yet is the likelyest Building sometimes known,
To fall by obvious Chances; overthrown,
Oft-times by Tempests, by the full mouthed Blasts
Of Heaven; Sometimes by Fire; Sometimes it wastes
Through unadvised neglect: Put case, the Stuff
Were ruin-proofe; by nature, strong enough,
To conquer Time and Age: Put case, it should
Never know an end, Alas, Our Leases would:
What have thou then, proud flesh and blood, to boast?
Thy Days are ev'll, at best,; but few, at most;
But sad, at merryest* and but weak, at strongest;
Unsure, at surest; and but short, at longest,
43.
On the young man in the Gospel.
HOw well our Savior and the landed Youth
Agreed a little while? And, to say truth,
Had he had will and power in his hand,
To keep the Law, but as he kept his Land;
No doubt, his soul had found the sweet fruition
Of his own choice desires without Petition:
But he must Sell and Follow; or else, not
Obtain his heaven: O now his heavens too hot:
He cannot stay; he has no business there:
He Will rather miss, then buy his heaven too dear:
When Broth's too hot for hasty hounds, how they
Will lick their scalded lips, and sneake away!
44.
On Man's goodness and Gods love.
GOd loves not Man, because that Man is good;
For Man is sinful, because Flesh and Blood:
We argue false: It rather may behove us,
To think us good, 'cause God thinks good to love us*
He that shall argue up from Man to God,
Takes but the pains to gather his own Rod:
Who from such Premis^es, shall drawe's Conclusion,
Makes but a Syllogism of his own confusion.
45.
On Man's Plea.
Man's Plea to Man, is, That he never more
Will beg, and that he never begged before:
Man's Plea to God, is, That he did obtain
A former Suit, and therefore sues again.
How good a God we serve; that when we sue,
Makes his old gifts the examples of his new!
46.
On Furio.
FVrio will not forgive; Furio beware:
Furio will curse himself in the Lords Prayer.
47.
On Martha and Mary.
MArtha, with joy, received her blessed Lord;
Her Lord she welcoms, feasts, and entertains:
Mary sa^e silent* hears, but speaks no word;
Martha takes all, and Mary takes no pains:
Mary's to hear* to feast him Martha's care is;
Now which is greater, Martha's love, or Mary's?
Martha is full of trouble, to prepare;
Martha respects his good beyond her own:
Mary sits still at ease, and takes no care;
Mary desires to please her self, alone:
The pleasure's Maryes; Martha's all the care is;
Now which is greater, Martha's love, or Maryes?
It Is true; Our blessed Lord was Martha's Guest;
Mary was his; and, in his feast, delighted:
Now which has greater reason to love best,
The bountiful Invitor, or th'invited?
Sure, both loved well; But Mary was the detter,
And therefore should, in reason, love the better*
Marye's was spiritual; Martha's love was carnal;
The One kissed his hand; The other, but the Glove:
As far as mortal is beneath eternal,
So far is Martha's less then Marye's love:
How blessed is he, Great God, whose heart remembers
Marye's to Thee; and Martha's to thy Members!
48.
On our Blessed Savior.
WE often read our blessed Savior wept;
But never laughed, and seldom that he slept:
Ah, sure his heavy eyes did wake, ^^d weep
For us that sin, so often, in Mirth, and Sleep.
49.
On Sins.
SI^^es, in respect of Man, all mortal be;
All venial, Jesus, in respect of Thee.
50.
On Man's behavior to God.
WE use our God, as Vs'rers do their bands;
We often bear him in our hearts, our hands*
His Paths are beaten, and his Ways are trod,
So long as he is a profitable God:
But when the Money's paid, the Profit's taken,
Our Bands are canceled, and our God's forsaken.
51.
On Man's Cruelty.
ANd da^'st thou venture still to live in Sin,
And crucify thy dying Lord agin?
Were not his Pangs sufficient? must he bleed
Yet more? O, must our sinful pleasures feed
Upon his Torments; and augment the Story
Of the sad passion of the Lord of Glory!
Is there no pity? Is there no remorse
In humane breasts? Is there a firm di^ors^
Betwixt all mercy, and the hearts of Men?
Parted for ever? never to meet again?
No mercy bides with us: '^is thou, alone,
Have it, sweet Jesu, for us, that have none
For Thee: Thou have ^ore-stal'd our Markets so,
That all is Above, and we have none Below:
Nay, blessed Lord, we have not wherewithal
To serve our shiftlesse selves, unless we call
To thee, that art our Savior, and have power
To give, and whom we Crucifye, each hour:
We Are cruel (Lord) to thee, and our selves too;
IESV forgive's; we know not what we do.
52.
Man's Progress.
THe Earth is that forbiden Tree that grows
In The midst of Paradise; Her Fruit that shows
So sweet, so fair, so pleasing to the eyes,
Is worldly pleasure in a fair disguize:
The Flesh suggests: The fruit is ^aire and good
Apt to make wise, and a delicious Food;
It has a secret virtue, wherewithal
To make you Gods; and not to dye at all.
Man ^asts, and ^empts the frailty of his Brother;
His Brother eats; One bits calls on another:
His guilty Conscience opes his eyes; He sees,
He sees his ^mpty nakedness* and flees;
He sti^ches slender Fig Leaves, and does frame
Poor Arguments t'^xcuse his Sin, his Shame:
But in the cooler evening of his Days,
The voice calls Adam: Adam's in a Maze:
His Consci^nce bids him run: The voice pursues;
Poor Ad^m trembles, ere he knows the news:
Adam must quit the Garden, lest he strive
To taste the saving Tree of life, and live;
Poor Man must go; But whether is he bound?
Even to the place from whence he came, the ^round.
53.
On the two great Floods.
TWo Floods I read of; Water, and of Wine;
The first was Noah's; Lot, the last was thine:
The first was the Effect* The last, the Cause
Of that foul Sin, against the sacred Laws
Of God and Nature, Incest: Noah found
An Arc to save him, but poor Lot was drowned;
Good N^ah found an Arc; but Let found none:
We Are safer in Gods hands then in our own:
The former flood of waters did extend
But some few days; this latter has no end;
They both destroyed, I know not which the worst:
The last is even as General, as the first:
The first being ceased; the world began to fill;
The last depopulates, and wastes it still:
Both Floods ore welm'd both Man and beast together;
The last is worst, if there be best of either:
The first are ceased: Heaven vowed it by a Sign;
When shall we se^ a Rainebow after Wine?
54.
On Fuca.
FVca* thou quo^'^t the Scriptures on thy side,
And maks^ Rebec^a patronize ^hy pride;
Thou say that she wore Earrings: Did she so?
Know this withal, She bore the Pitcher too:
Thou may, like her, we^re Earrings, if thy pride
Can stoop to what, Rebecca did beside.
55.
On Abraham's servant.
THis faithful Servant will not feed, u^till
He do his trust-reposing Masters will:
There Is many, now, that will not eat before
They speed their Masters work: They Will drink the more.
56.
On Alexander.
NO marvel, thou great Monarch, did complain
And weep, there were no other worlds to gain;
Thy griefs and thy complaints were not amiss;
H'as Grief enough, that finds no world but this.
57.
On rash Judgment.
IVdge not too fast: This Tree that does appear
So barren, may be fruitful the next year:
Have thou not patience to expect the hour?
I fear thy own are Crabs they be so ^ower:
Thy Judgment often may tread beside the Text;
A Saul to day, may prove a Paul, the next.
58.
On Jacobs purchase.
HOw poor was Jacobs motion, and how strang^
His offer! How unequal was the exchange!
A mess of Porrage for Inheritance?
Why could not hungry E^au strive t'enhaunce
His price a little? So much und^rfoot?
Well might he give him Bread and drink to boot:
An easy price! The case is even our own;
For toys we often sell our Heaven, our Crown.
59.
On Esau.
WHat have thou done? Nay what shall Esau do?
Lost both his Birthright, and his Blessing too!
What has poor Esau left, but empty tears,
And Plaints, that cannot reach the old man's ears?
What with thy Fathers Diet, and thine own,
Thy Birthright's aliend, and thy Blessing's gone:
How does one mischief overtake an other:
In both, how overtaken by a Brother?
Could thy imperious stomach but have stayed,
And if thy Fathers had not bin delayed,
Thou had not need have wept and pleaded so,
But kept thy Birthright, and thy Blessing too:
Had thy unprosp'rous, thy unlucky hand
Dispatched thy Venz'on, as it did thy Land,
Thy sorrows had not made so great a Heap,
That had not bin so dear; nor this, so cheap:
Had thine given place but to thy Fathers will,
Thad'st had thy Birthright; and thy Blessing still.
60.
On the absence of a blessing.
THe blessing gone, what does there now remain?
Esau's offended; Jacob must be slain:
The heart of man once emptyed of a Grace,
How soon the Devil jostles in the place!
61.
On the younger Brother.
I Know, the Elder and the Younger, too,
Are both alike to God; Nor one, nor other
Can plead their years, But yet we often do
Observe, the Blessing's on the younger Brother:
The Scripture notes it, but does spare to show
A reason; therefore, I despair to know.
62.
On Kain.
BEfore that Monster spilt his Brothers blood,
W'^re sure the fourth part of the world was good:
O, what a dearth of goodness did there grow,
When the Fourth part was murd'red at a blow!
63.
On the righteous Man.
PRomise is d^tt: And Det implies a payment:
How can the righteous, then dout food, and rayme^t?
63.
On Faith, Love, and Charity.
BY nature Faith is fiery, and it tends
Still upward: Love, by native course, descends:
But Charity, whose nature does confound
And mix the former two, moves ever round:
Lord, let thy Love descend, and then the Fire
Of sprightly Faith shall kindle, and aspire:
O, then, my circling Charity shall move
In proper motion, mixed of Faith and Love.
64.
On Jacobs Pillow.
THe Bed, was Earth: The raised Pillow, Stones,
Whereon poor Jacob rests his head, his Bones;
Heaven was his Canopy; The Shades of night
Were his drawn Curtains, to exclude the Light:
Poor State for Isacks heir! It seems to me,
His Cattle found as soft a Bed, as He:
Yet God appeared there, his Joy, his Crown;
God is not always seen in Beds of Down:
O, if that God shall please to make my Bed,
I care not where I rest my Bones, my Head;
With Thee, my wants can never prove extreme;
With Jacobs Pillow, give me Jacobs Dream.
65.
On Faith.
FAith does acknowledge Gifts, although we have not;
It keeps unseene those Sins, Confession hid not;
It makes us to enjoy the Goods we have not;
It counts as done, those pious deeds, we did not;
It works; endowes; it freely ^accepts; it hides:
What Grace is absent where true Faith abides?
66*
On Zacheus.
ME thinks, I see, with what a busy have,
Zacheus climbed the Tree: But, O, how fast
How full of speed, can thou imagine (when
Our Savior called) he powdered down again!
He never made trial if the boughs were sound,
Or rotten; nor how far 'twas to the ground:
There was no danger feared: At such a Call,
He Will venture nothing, that dare fear a fall:
Needs must he down, by such a Spirit driven*
Nor could he fall, unless he fell to Heaven:
Down came Zacheus, ravished from the Tree;
Bird that was shot, never dropped so quick as he.
67.
On the Thief and Slanderer.
THe Thief, and Sland'rer are almost the same;
The One steals my goods; the the other, my good name:
The One lives in scor^e; the other dies in shame.
68.
On Abram^ pleading for Sodom.
HOw loath was righteous Abraham to cease,
To beat the price of lustful S^doms peace!
Mark how his holy boldness intercepts
Gods Justice; Brings his Mercy down, by steps:
He dare not bid so few as Ten, at first;
Nor yet from Fifty righteous persons, durst
His Zeal, on sudden, make too great a fall,
Although he wished salvation to them all.
Great God: Thy dying Son has power to clear
A world of sins, that one shall no^ appear
Before thine angry eyes: What wonder then,
To see thee fall, from Fifty down to Ten!
69.
On Man's goodness.
THy hand, great God, created all things good;
But Man rebelled, and in defiance stood
Against his own Creation, and did stain,
Nay lost that goodness which the Beasts retain*
What ^ap has Man, poor Man, above the rest,
That has less goodness left him, then a Beast!
70.
On Zacheus.
SHort-legg'd Zacheu^* 'Twas the happiest Tree
That ever mortal climbed; I mean, to Thee:
Thy pains in going up, received the Crown
Of all thy labor, at thy coming down:
Thy Statures lowness gave thee fair occasion
To mount that Tree; that Tree, to find Salvation:
But was it the Tree, Zacheus? No, it was He,
Whose bleeding Body died upon the Tree.
71.
On the Roman, Turk, and Atheist.
THe Roman worships God upon the wall;
The Turk, a false God; The Atheist, none at all.
72.
On Babels Building.
GReat God, no sooner borne, but we begin
Babels accursed Foundation, by our Sin:
Our thoughts, our words, our deeds are ever yielding
The sad materials of our sinful Building:
Should not thy Grace prevent it, it would even
Rise, and rise up, until it reached to heaven:
Lord, ere our Building shall begin to show,
Confound our Language, and our Building too*
73.
On the Theife and the Liar.
THe Liar and the Thief have one Vocation;
Their difference is but only in their Fashion:
They both deceive; but diversely proceed;
The first deceives by Word; the last, by Deed.
74.
On the Egyptians Famine.
Mark but the course the pin'de Egyptians run:
When all their coin, when all their corn is done:
They come to Joseph, and their stomachs plead;
They change their beasts for corn, their flocks for bread,
Yet still they want: Observe what now they do;
They give their Lands, and yield their Bodies too:
Now they have Corn enough; and now, they shall
Have seed to sow their barren soil withal;
Provided that the fi^t of their increase
Be Pharoe's: Now their stomachs are at peace:
Thus when the Famine of the Word shall strike
Our hungry Souls; our Souls must do the like:
We first must part with, (as by their directions)
Our Flocks, our Beasts, our Bestiall Affections;
When they are gone, what then must Sinners do?
Give up their Lands, their Souls, and Bodies too:
O, then our hearts shall be refresht and fed,
We shall have seed to sow, and present Bread:
Allowing but the fifth of our increase,
We shall have plenty, and our souls have peace*
How art thou pleas^d, good God, that Man should live!
How slow art thou to take! how free to give!
75.
On Zacheus.
WEll climbed, Zacheus; 'Twas a step well given;
From hence toth Tree; and from the Tree to Heaven!
76.
On the Plough-man.
I Hear the whistling Plough-man, all day long,
Sweetning his labor with a cheerful song:
His Bed's a Pad of Straw; His diet, course;
In both, he fares not better then his Horse:
He seldom slakes his thirst, but from the Pumpe,
And yet his heart is blithe; his visage, plumpe*
His thoughts are nere acquainted with such things.
As Griefs or Fears; He only sweats, and sings:
When as the Landed Lord, that cannot dine
Without a Qualme, if not refresht with Wine;
That cannot judge that controverted case,
'Twixt meat and mouth, without the Bribe of Sauce*
That claims the service to the purest linen,
To pamper and to shroud his dainty skin in,
Groans out his days, in laboring to appease
The rage of either Buisnes, or Disease:
Alas, his silken Robes, his costly Diet
Can lend a little pleasure, but no Quiet:
The untold sums of his descended wealth
Can give his Body plenty, but not Health:
The one, in Pains, and want, possesses all;
The Other, in Plenty, finds no peace at all;
It Is strange! And yet the cause is easly known;
Tone's at Gods finding; the other, at his own.
77.
On a happy Kingdom.
THat Kingdom, and none other, happy is,
Where Moses, and his Aar^n meet, and kiss.
78.
On Gods appearance to Moses.
G^^ first appeard ^o Moses, in the Mire;
The next time he appeard, h^appeard in Fire;
The third time, he was known to Moses eye
Upon mount Sinai, clothed in Majesty.
Thrice God appears to Man: first, ^allowing in
His ^oule pollution, and base Mire of Sin;
And like to Pharoes daughter do'es bemone
Our helpless State, and draws us, for his own:
The next ^ime, he ^ppeares in Fire, whose bright
And gentle flames consume not, but give light;
It is the Fire of Grace; where man is bound
To d'off his Sh^^^s, because it is holy ground:
The last appearance shall be in that Mount,
Where every Soul shall render an Account
Of good or evil; where all things Transitory
Shall cease* and Grace be crowned with perfect Glory.
79.
On Gods Law.
Thy Sacred Law, O God,
Is like to MO^ES ^od^
If we (...) i^ i^ our hand,
It will do Wonders in the Land;
If we slight and throw it to the Ground;
'Twill (...)
A Wound that Flesh and Blood cannot endure,
Nor salve, until the Brazen Serpent cure:
I wish not, Lord, thou sholds^ ^ithold it;
Nor would I have it, and not hold it:
O ^each me the^^ my God*
To handle MOS^S Rod.
80.
On Pharo^^s b^icke.
Our God's not like to Pha^o^; to require
His (...) for Fi^e:
His workmen wanted Straw, and yet were lasht,
For not performance: We have Straw unthrasht,
Yet we are idl^, and we w^^ch, and kick
Against our Burdens, and return no Brick:
We spend our (...) the S^abl^,
And then we cry* Alas! W^ are not able;
Think not on Isra^ls sufferings, in that day,
When thy offended Justice shall repay
Our labo^^; Lord* when (...)
Think, (...) was a Tyrant; Thou* a ^od.
81.
On the insa^iablenesse of Man's heart.
THis Globe of earth has not the power to fill
The Heart of Man, but it desi^rs still:
By him that seeks, the Cause is easly found;
The Heart's Triangular; The Earth is Round;
He may be full; but, never to the brim
Be fill^d with Earth, till earth be filled with him.
82.
On Pharoe's ^ard-heartednes.
PLag^es after Plagues? And yet not Pharoh yield
T'enlarge poor Israel? Was thy heart so steeled,
Rebellious Tyrant, that it dare withstand
The often repeated Judgments of Heavens hand?
Could neither Mercies oil, nor Judgments thunder
Dissolve, nor break thy ^linty heart in sunder?
No, no, what Sun beams soften not, they harden;
Purposed Rebellions are asleep to Pardon.
83.
On the change of Pharoe's fortunes.
OBserve what peace great Pharo's kingdom found
while Joseph lived; what prospro^^ blessi^gs ^round
His happy days! Heavens plague-inf^icting hand
Was then a stranger to his peaceful Land:
Peace was ent^yl'd upon his Royal Thron^;
His Land had Plenty, when the World had none;
His full desiers over-flowd their Brim,
Favo^rs cam^ down unask^t, unsought by him:
His Scepter florish'd, from a God unknown^,
No need to tro^ble any of his own:
While Joseph lived, his Blessings had no end;
That God was his, whilst he was Joseph's Friend:
These temp'rall Blessings heaven does, often, share
Unto the wicked, at the Good-mans Prayer:
But Joseph dies: And Ios^phs Sons must fall
Beneath their Burdens, and be scourged withal;
Whilst Tyrant Pharoh's more severer hand
Keeps them laborious Prisoners in his Land:
God often permits his Children to be hurld
Into distress, to weane them from the world:
But Pharohs Blessings alter with his Brow;
The budding Scepter's turned a Serpent now:
His Land must groan; her plagues must still increase,
Till Jacobs Offspring shall find Jacobs peace;
Gods Children are the Apples of his Eye,
Whose touch is death, if being touched, they cry:
Now Tyrant Pharoh dares no longer choose,
Israel must go: Pharoh, repents, pursues;
Pharoh wants Brick; Pharoh, ere long, I fear,
Will find the purchase of his Brick too dear:
Moses holds forth his Rod: The Seas divide;
The Waves are turned to Walls on either side:
They pass secure; Pharoh pursues them still:
God leaves his Children to the brunt of Ill:
The Chariot- Wheels fly off, the Harness cracks;
One wants a Nail; the next, a Hammer lacks:
How Man is crossed and puzzel'd in that Plot,
Where Heaven denies success, and prospers not!
Moses holds forth his Rod: The Eastern wind
Calls back the Tides: The parted Waters joined,
And overwhelmd great Pharo and Pharoes Host;
None escaped to ^ell the news: All drowned, and lost:
Thus thrives Rebellion: Plagues, nor doing good,
Oft-times conclude their Ceremony in Blood:
Thus hardened hearts grow more and more obdure;
And Heaven cuts off, when Earth is most secure.
84.
On the first born^.
THe Fir^^ Borne of the Egyptians all were slain,
From him that holds the Scepter to the Swayne:
But all that are Firstborn in Israel, be
Accepted, Lord, and sancti^ied to Thee:
Thy looks are always turned upon the Prime
Of all our Actions, Words, our thoughts, our time;
Thy pleased Eye is fixed upon the First;
And from the Womb we are thine, or else accursed.
85.
On baptized Infants.
I Dare not judge those Judgments, ill advised,
That hold such Infants sa^'d, as dye, baptized.
What hinders Life? Original has bin
New was^t away; There Is yet, no Actual Sin:
Death is The Effect of Sin: The Cause being gone,
What ground is lef^ for Death to work upon?
I know not: But of Isreal's sons it is found,
Moses was saved; I read that none was drowned.
86.
On the grumbling Israelites.
NO sooner out, but grumble? Is the Brick
So soon forgotten? It Is a common trick:
Serve God in Plenty? Egypt can do thus*
No thanks to serve our God, when God serves us:
Some sullen Curres, when they perceive a Bone,
Will wagg their Tails and faune; But snarle, if none.
87.
On Man's Rebellion.
O, How perverse is Flesh and Blood! in whom
Rebellion blossoms from the very Womb!
What Heaven commands, how lame we are to do!
And things forbid how soon persuaded t^
We never read rebellio^s Israel did
Bow to strange Gods, till Israel was forbid.
88.
On Israel.
HAd Israel, in her want, been truly humbled,
Israel had prayed, and ground to heaven; not grumbled:
But Israel wanted food. Isr'els complaint
Could not be servent, Israel being faint:
Israel gets food: Now Israel is so full,
That her Devotion, and her Zeal is dull:
Lord when art thou in season? When Is the time,
To do thee service? When Is our Zeal in prime?
It Is always either not full ripe or wasting:
We can not serve our God nor Full nor Fasting.
89.
On the Sinners Refuge.
HE that shall shed, with a presumptuous hand,
The blood of Man; must, by thy just command
Be put to death: The Murderer must dye;
Thy Law denies him refuge where to fly:
Great God Our hands have slain a man; nay further,
They have commit^ed a presumptuous murder,
Upon a guiltles Man; Na^, what is worse,
They have betrayed our Brother to the Curse
Of a reproachful death* Nay, what exceeds,
It is our Lord, our dying Savior bleeds:
Nay more; It is thy Son; thy only Son;
All this have we, all this our hands have done:
On what dear Objects shall we turn our eye?
Look to the Law? O, by the Law, we dye:
Is there no Refuge, Lord? No place that shall
Secure our Souls from Death? A^, none at all?
What shall poor Mortals do? Thy Laws are j^st,
And most irrevocable: Shall we trust
Or fly to our own Merits, and ^e freed
By our good Works? I; there were help indeed!
Is there no City for a Soul to fly,
And save it self: Must we resolve to dye?
O Infinite! O (not to be expressed?)
Nay, not to be conceived by the breast
Of Men or Angels! O transcendent Love!
Incomprehensible! as far above
The reach of Man, as man's deserts are under
The sacred Benefit of so ^lest a Wonder!
That very Blood our sinful hands have shed,
Cries loud for Mercy, and those Wounds do plead
For those that made them: he that pleades, forgives;
And is both God and Man; both dead, and lives;
He, whom we murdered, is become our G^arden;
He Is Man, to suffer; and he is God to pardon:
Here Is our Protection; Here, our Refuge City,
Whose living springs run Piety and Pity:
Go then, my Soul, and pass the common Bounds
Of Passion, Go, and kneel before his Wounds;
Go touch them with thy lips: thou needst not fear;
They will not bleed afresh, though Thou be there:
But if they do, that very Blood, thou spilt,
Beleev't, will plead thy Pardon, not thy Guil^.
90.
On the deposing of Princes.
I Know not by what virtue Rome deposes
A Christian Prince: Did Aaron command Moses?
If sacred Scriptures mention such a thing,
Sure Rome has color to depose a King.
91.
On PETER'S Keys.
THe power of Peter does all power excel;
He opens Heaven; He shuts the Doors of Hell:
The Keys are his; In what a ^a^e were they,
Should Peters^ Successors mist^ke the K^y?
92.
On Offerings.
ARe all such Offerings, as are crushed, and bruised,
Forbid thy Altar? May they not be used?
And must all broken things be set apart?
No, Lord: Thou will accept a Broken Heart.
93
On Usurers.
OF all men, Vs'rers are not least accursed;
They robb the Spittle, pinch The Afflicted worst.
In others grief they are most delighted in;
Whilst Givers suffer for the Takers sin:
O how unjust a Trade of life is that,
Which makes the Lab'rers lean; and the idle, fat!
94.
On Repentance.
Can th^^ recover thy consumed Flesh,
From the well-feasted Worms? Or put on fresh?
Can thou redeem thy Ashes from the dead?
Or quit thy Carkas from her sheet of Lead?
Can thou awaken thy earth-closed eyes?
Unlock thy Marble Monument, and rise?
All this thou may perform, with as great ease,
As to Repent thee, mortal, when thou please:
It is thy Grave, not Bed that thou art in:
Thou Art not asleep, but thou art dead in Sin.
95.
On Wine and Water.
NAture and Grace, who ever tasted both,
Differ as much, as Wine and Water does:
This clenses, (if not grossly stayn'd with Sin)
The outward Man: but scowers not, within:
That cheares the heart, and makes the Courage bold,
Quickens and warmes dead spirits that are cold:
It fires the Blood, and makes the Soul divine:
O that my Water, Lord, were turned to Wine!
96.
On Balams Ass.
THe Ass, that for her slownesse, was ^orbid
To be employed in Gods service, did
Per^orme good service now, in being slow:
The Ass received stripes, but would not go:
She bau^kd the way, and Balam could not guide her:
The Ass had far more wisdom then the Rider:
The Message being bad, the Ass was loath
To be the Bearer: 'Twas a happy sloth;
'Twas well for Balam: Had his Ass but tryde
Another step, Balam had surely died:
Poor Ass! And was thy faithful service paid
With oft-repeated strokes? Had thou obayd,
Thy Lord had bought thy travel, with his blood:
Such is Man's payment, often, bad for Good:
The Ass begins to question with his Master,
Argues the case, pleads why he went no faster:
Nay, shows him Myst'ries, far beyond his reach*
Sure, Godwants Prophets, when dull Asses preach:
The Ass perceives the Angel, and falls down;
When Balam sees him not; or ^ees, unknown:
Nor is it a wonder: for Gods Spirit did pass
From blindfold Balam, into Balams Ass.
97.
On some raw Divines.
SOme raw Divines, no sooner are Espoused
To their first Wives, and in the Temple housed,
But straight the Peace is broke: They now begin
T'appoint the Field, to fight their Battles in:
Schoolmen must war with School men; text with text:
The first's the Chaldee's Paraphrase; the next
The Septuagints: Opinion thwarts Opinion;
The Papist holds the first; The last, the Arminian;
And then the Counsels must be called t'advice,
What this of Lateran says; what that of Nice:
And here the point must be anew disputed;
Arrius is false; and Bellarmine's confuted:
Thus with the sharp Artill'ry of their Wit,
They shoot at Random, careless where they hit:
The slightly studied Fathers must be prayed,
Although on small acquaintance, in to aid,
Whose glorious Varnish must impose a gloss
Upon their Paint, whose gold must gild their dross:
Now Martine Luther must be purged by them,
From all his Errors, like a School-boyes Theme;
Free-wil's disputed, Consubstantiation*
And the deep Ocean of Predestination,
Where, daring venture, often, too far into it,
They, Pharo like, are drowned both Horse and Foot:
Forgetting that the Sacred Law enioynes
New-married men to sit beneath their Vines,
And cheer their Wives: They must not venture out
To War, until the Year be run about.
98.
On Buying of the Bible.
It Is but a folly to rejoice, or boast,
How small a price, thy wel-bought Pen'worth cost:
Until thy death, thou shall not fully know
Whether thy Purchase be good cheap, or no;
And at that day, beleev't, it will appear,
If not extremely cheap, extremely dear.
99.
On the Buying of the New Testament.
REader, If thou will prove no more
Then what I term thee, even before
Thou ask the price, turn back thine eye;
If otherwise, unclaspe, and buy:
Know then, the Price of what thou buy'st,
Is the dear Blood of Jesus Christ;
Which Price is over-deare to none,
That dares protect it with his own:
If thou stand guilty of the price,
Even save thy purs-strings, and be wise:
Thy money will but, in conclusion,
Make purchase of thy own Confusion:
But if that guilt be done away,
Thou may as safely buy, as pay.
100.
To my BOOK.
MY Little Pinnace, strike thy Sails,
Let slip thy Anchor? The VVin^e fayles:
And Seamen often, in Calmes do fear
That foul, and boy ^^rous ^^ather's near;
If a (...) Storm should rise
And bl^^^er from Censorious Eyes,
Although the swelling VVa^es be rough,
And proud, thy (...) sa^e enough:
Rest, Rest a while, ^ill ^bbing Tides
Shall make thee stanch, and breme thy sides;
When Winds shall serve, hoyst up thy Sail,
And fly before a prosperous Gale*
That all the Coasters may resort,
And bid thee welcome to thy PORT.
The end of the first Book.
DIVINE FANCIES.
The second Book.
1.
To Almighty GOD.
LORD, Thou requir'st the first of all our Time,
The first of all our Actions, and the prime
Of all our Thoughts; And, Lord, good reason, we,
When Thou giv'st all, should give the First to Thee:
But O, we often rob thee of thy due,
Like Elies Children, whom thy vengeance slew:
We pinch thy Offering to enlarge our Fee;
We keep the Fat, and carve the Lean to thee:
We thrust our three-tooth'd Flesh-hook in thy Pot,
That only, what the Flesh-hook takes not,
We share to thee: Lord, we are still deceiving;
We take the Prime, and feed thee with our leaving:
Our Sluttish Bowls are cream'd with soil and filth,
Our Wheat is full of Chafe; of Tares, our Tilth:
Lord, what in Flesh and Blood can there be had,
That Is worth the having, when the best is bad,
Here Is nothing good, unless thou please to make it;
O, then, if ought be worth the taking, take it.
2.
On Gods Diet.
Dear Lord; when we approach thy sacred Fire,
To burn our Sacrifice, thou do require
The Heads of every Beast that dies; the Hearts;
Th'enclosed Fat^; and all the Inward parts:
Our Senses and our Memories must be,
All set apart and sanctified to Thee;
The strength of our Desires, the best perfections
Of our imperfect Wills, the choice Aflections
Of our refined hearts must all conjoyne
To seek thy Glory: They must all be thine:
I know thy Diet, Lord; Of all the rest,
Thou do affect the Head and Pur^nance, best.
3.
On Moses Birth and Death.
WE read; no sooner newborn Moses crept
Into this vale of Tears, but The Infant wept;
But, being warned of his Death, his Last,
We find it storied, that he sung as fast:
These several Passions found their reason, why;
He died to live, but he was borne to dye:
To whom this Transitory life shall bring
Just cause to weep; there, death gives cause to sing.
4.
On Ieptha's Vow.
VIctorious Ieptha, could thy Zeal allow
No other way, then by a rash-made Vow,
To Express thy Thanks? A Vow, whose undertaking
Was even a Sin more odious, then the making:
'Twas cruel Piety that taught thee how
To paddle in thy Da^ghters Blood: But thou,
Unlucky Virgin! was there none to ^e*
Betwixt thy Fathers mortal Brow* and Thee?
Why came thou forth, sweet Virgin? To what end
Made thou such needless have? Thou came, to lend
Thy filial Triumph to thy Fathers Wreath;
Thou thought to meet a Blessing, and not Death:
Rash Ieptha* may not thy repentance quit
That Vow, when Rashness was the Cause of it?
O can thou not dispense with that, wherein*
Thy strict Religion's a presumptuous Sin?
Is she unhappy, or thou cruel rather?
Unhappy Child* and too too cruel Father.
5.
On Jesus and Sampson.
AN Angel did to M^no^hs wife appear,
And brought the news her barren Womb should bear:
Did not another Angel, if not He,
Thrice blessed Virgin, bring the same to thee?
The Wife of M^no^h (nine months being run)
Her He^v'n-saluted womb brought forth a Son:
To thee, sweet Virgin, full of Grace and Heaven,
A Child was borne, to us a Son was given:
The name of hers was Sampson, borne to fight
For captived Israel, and a Nazarite:
Thine was a Naz'rite too, and bor^e to ease us
From Satan's bur^hens, and his name is Jesus:
S^^pson espons'd, and took in Marriage her
That was the child of an Idolater;
Our Jesus took a wife, that bowed the knee
And ^orshipt unknown^ (...); as well as she:
Assaulted Sa^pso^ me^, and had to do
With ^ fierce Lion; ^oyld, and (...) him too:
Our conquering Jesus purchased higher fame;
His arm encountered Death* and overcame*
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
But what! Is Sampson singular in this?
Did not our Jesus do the like to his?
Sampson propounds a Riddle, and does hide
The folded Mystery in his faithles Bride:
Our blessed Jesus propounds Riddles too,
Too hard for Man, his Bride unsought, t'undoe:
The Bride forsakes her Sampson; does betroth her
To a new Love, and falsely weds another:
And did not the adult'rous Jews forgo
Their first Love Jesus, and forsake him too?
Displeased Sampson had the choice to wed
The younger Sister in the Elders stead:
Displeased Jesus had espoused the Younger;
God send her fairer; and affections stronger:
Sampson sent Foxes on his fiery errant,
Among their corn, and made their crim^s his warrant:
Offended Jesus shows as able signs
Of wrath: His Foxes have destroyed their Vines:
Our Sampsons love to Delilah was such,
That for her sake poor Sampson suffered much:
Our Jesus had his Delilah: For her
His Soul became so great a s^ff^r^r.
Sampson was s^bject to their scorn and shame:
And was not Jesus even the very same?
Sampson's betrayed to the Philistians hands,
Was bound a while, but quickly brake his bands:
Jesus the first, and second day, could be
The Graves clos^ prisoner; but, the third was free:
In this they differed; Jesus dying Breath
Cried out for Life; but Sampsons called for Death:
Father forgive them; did our Jesus cry;
But Sampson, Let me be revenged and dye:
Since then, sweet Savior, it is thy Death must ease us,
We fly from Sampson, and appeal to Jesus.
6.
On Elyes double ^ensure.
When barren Hanna, prostrate on the Floor,
In heat of zeal and passion, did implore
Redress from Heaven, censorions Ely thought
She had been drunk, and checked her for her fault;
Rough was his Censure, and his Check, aus^ere;
Where mildness should be used, we are often severe.
But when his lustful Sons, that could abuse
The House of God, making her Porch their Stues,
Appeared before him, his indulgent tongue
Compounded rather then rebuked the wrong;
He dare not shoot, for fear he wound his Child;
Where we should be severe, we are often too mild:
Unequal Ely! was thy Sentence just,
To censure Zeal, and not to punish Lust?
Could thy parentall mildness but have past
The former by as easily, as the last,
Or had the last, by just proportion, bin
Rated but like the first supposed sin,
Perchance thy aged head had found increase
Of some few days, and gone to sleep, in peace:
Passions misplaced are dangerous: Let all
Remember Elies Faults, with Elies Fall.
7.
On the refining of Gold.
Have thou observed how the curious hand
Of the Refiner seeks to understand
The inadult'rate pureness of his Gold?
He waighs it first, and after does infold
In Lead; and then, commits it ^o the Fire;
And, as the Lead consumes, the Gold draws ^igher
To his perfection, without wast or loss
Of his pure substanc^, but his weight, his dross:
The Great Refiner of Man's baser Heart
Uses the like, nay shows the selfsame Art;
He weighs it, first, and finding it too full
Of Trash and Earth, he wraps it in some dull
And leaden cross, of Punishment, or Sin;
Then, tryes it in Afflictions Fire; wherein,
The Lead and Dross evaporate together,
And leaves the Heart refined, and quit of ^ither:
Thus though Man's Heart be lessened by the Cross,
And lighter; It Is but lighter by the Dross.
8.
On Dagon and the Arc.
WHat news with Dagon? Is thy Shrine so hot,
Thou can not keep it? Or has Dagon got
The falling sickness, that his Godship's found
On such a posture, prostrate on the Gro^nd?
Poor helpless God! But stay! Is Dagon grown
So weak ith'hamms: Nor stand, nor rise, alone?
A God, and cannot rise? It Is very odd!
He must have help, or lie: A proper God!
Well, Dagon must requier help of hands;
Up Dagon go^s the second time, and stands
As confident as though his place had bin
His own, in Fee: Down Dagon falls agin:
But Dagon's shrewdly martyred with the jumpe,
Lost hands and Head; and nothing left but stumpe:
Sure, all is not well with Dagon, now a late;
He Is either sick, or much forgot the State,
Belonging to so great a God: Has none
Offered some stinking Sacrifice, or blown
Some nauseous fume into his Sacred Nose,
And made his God-ship dizzy? Or who knows,
Perchance h'as taken Pett, and will resign
His sullen place, and quitt his empty Shrine:
No wonder, a false God should stoop, and lie
Upon the floor when as a true God's by:
It was unlikely Dagon should forbear
Respite of Homage, when the Arc was there:
If I would worship a false God at all,
It should be one that would not scorn to fall
Before his Betters: whose indiff'rent arm,
If it could do no good, could do no harm;
I Would rather choose to bend my idle knee,
Of all false gods, to such a God as He,
Whose spirit's not too quick: The fabulous Frogg
Found greater danger in the stork, then Logge:
And to conclude, I Would choose him, Dagon-like,
Not having Head, to plot; nor Hand, to strike.
9.
On Saul and David.
SVre, Saul as little lookd to be a King,
As I: and David dreamd of such a thing,
As much as he; when both alike did keep,
The one his Fathers Asses; the other, Sheep:
Saul must forsake his Whip: And David flings
His Crook aside; And they must both be Kings:
Saul had no sword; and David, then, no spear,
There was none Conquered, nor no Conqu'ror there;
There was no sweat; There was no blood, to shed;
The unsought Crown besought the wearers head;
There was no Stratagem; No Opposition;
No taking parts; No jealous Competition:
There needs no Art; There needs no sword to bring,
And place the Crown, where God appoints the King.
10.
On David and Goliath.
SAthan's the great Goliath, that so boasts
And threats our Israel, and defyes her Hosts:
Those smoother Stones courageous David took
From the soft bosom of the silver Brook,
Are Scriptum ests: The Sling, that gives them flight,
Is Faith; That makes them fly, and fly aright:
Lord, lend me David's Sling, and then I know,
I shall have David's strength and courage too;
Give me but skill to pick such Stones, as these,
And I will meet Goliath, when he please.
11.
On Saul's Witch.
WHen Saul received no answer down from heaven
How quickly was his jealous passion driven
A despr'ate Course! He needs must cure the Itch
Of his extreme desiers, by a Witch:
When we have lost our way to God, how level,
How easy to be found's the way toth' Devil.
12.
On the necessity of Gods presence.
When thou were present with thy strengthening Grace,
Saul prophesied, and fought:
But when, Great God, thou did withdraw thy face,
Murder was in his thought:
Thus, as thou giv'st, or take away thy hand,
We either fall, or stand.
13.
David's Epitaph on Jonathan.
HEre lies the fairest Flower, that stood*
In Isr'els Garden; now, in Blood;
Which, Death to make her Girland gay,
Has cropped, against her Triumph Day:
Here, here lies He, whose Actions penned
The perfect Copy of a Friend:
Whose milke-white Vellam did incur
No least suspicion of a Blurre:
Here lies the example of a Br^ther,
Not to be followed by another;
The fair indented Counter-part
Of David's Joy, of David's Heart:
Rest then; For ^ver, rest alone;
Thy Ashes can be touched by none,
Till Death has picked one such another:
Here lies a Flower, a Friend, a Brother.
14.
On Gods Word.
GOds sacred W^rd is like the Lamp of Day,
Which softens wax, but makes obdure the clay;
It either melts the Heart, or more obdures;
It never falls in vain; It wounds, or cures:
Lord, make my breast thy Hive, and then I know,
Thy Bees will bring in Wax and Honey too.
15.
On Man.
BY Nature, Lord, men worse then Nothing be;
And less then N^thing, if compared with Thee;
If less and worse then Nothing, tell me than,
Where is that S^mthing, thou so boasts, proud Man?
16.
On Ahaz^Diall
Man's Heart's like Ahaz Dial; If it flees
Not forward; it goes backward ten Degrees.
17.
On Lust.
Lust is an Ignis fatuus, that arises
From the base Earth, that plays her wanton prizes,
In solitary Hearts, and ever haunts
Dark places, whose deceitful flame inchaunts
The wandering steps of the diverted stranger,
Still tempting his mis-guided feet to danger:
She never leaves, till by her fair delusion,
She brings him headlong to his own confusion.
18.
On Thamar and Ammon.
SHe must be loved; Then courted; and what more?
Enjoyed; then hated; then expeld the door:
Ammon must be discov'red; must obtain
License to Feast; and then, be drunk; then slain:
O what Repose is had in sinful Breath,
Whose love, in hate; whose mirth co^cludes in death!
19.
On Love and Lust.
They Are wide, that take base Lust, for Loves halfe-brother,
Yielding two Fathers, but the self same Mother:
Lust is a Monster, that is conceived and bred
Of the abused Will; maintained, and fed
With sensual thoughts; Of nature rude, uncivil;
Of life, robustious; and whose Sire's the Devil:
But Love's the Child of th'uncorrupted Will,
Nourisht with Virtue, poys'ned with the swill
Of base respects; Of nature, sweet and mild;
In manners, gentle; easily known* whose Child;
For, by the likeness, every eye may gather,
That he is the Offspring of a heavenly Father:
This, suffers all things; That, can suffer nothing;
This, never ends; That, ever ends in loathing:
The One loves the Darkness most: The other, Light:
The last's the Child of Day; The first, of Night;
The one is meek; The other, full of Fire;
This never laggs; That ever apt to tire;
T'one's rash and furious; The Other mild and sage;
That dies with youth; whilst This survives with age;
The One's courageous; The Other full of Fears;
That seeks; The other baulks both eyes and ears:
In brief, to know them both aright, and miss not;
In all respects, the one is, what to'ther is not:
So far from Brothers, that they seem disioyn'd,
Not in Condition only, but in kind:
Admit a falsehood: that they had one Mother,
The best that L^st can claime's a Bastard Brother*
Great God, must thou be conscious of that Name,
Which jealous Mortals ^ount the height of shame?
And not thy Nuptial Bed alone defiled,
But to be charged with the base-borne Child?
And yet not moved? and yet not move thy Rod?
Have thou not cause to be a Jealous God?
Can thy just Iealousies, Great God, be grounded
On Man's disloyalty, not Man confounded?
20.
On a Tinder-Boxe.
MY Soul is like to Tinder, whereinto
The Devil strikes a Spark, at every blow;
My Heart's the Flint; The Steel Temptation is;
And his Suggestions hit, and never miss:
His Hand is sure; My Tinder apt to catch,
Soon sets on fire every profer'd Match.
21.
On ACHITOPHEL.
SAge were thy Counsels, and as well applied,
If thou had had but Loyalty on thy side:
I like thy last Design (above the rest)
When thou had set thy house in order, best;
In all Exploits, the Rule is not so ample,
Not half so beneficial as the Example:
The Almighty prosper Christian Crowns; and bless
All such like Counsels, with the like success:
Confound Achitophel: and, Lord, impart
His Head to us; and to our Foes, his Heart.
22.
On Sin.
Unhappy man! Whose every breath
Is Sin: Whose every Sin is death:
SIN, first Original; Then our actual Sin:
Our Sins that sally forth: Our Sins that lurk within,
Our wilful Sins; and worlds of Sins, by chance,
Our conscious Sins; our Sins of darker Ignorance,
Our o^t-repeated Sins: Sins ^never reckoned:
Against the first Table Sins: Sins done against the second,
Our pleading Sins; our Sins without a cause:
Our gospel- Sins; reb^llious Sins against thy laws:
Our Sins against our vows; fresh Sins agin:
Sin of infirmity; and high presumptious Sin:
Thus like our Lines, our Lives begin,
Continue, and conclude in Sin:
23*
On the Sun and stars.
Our dying Savior's like the setting Sun;
His Saints, on earth, are like the Stars of night:
Experience tells us, till the Sun be gone,
The stars appear not* and retain no light:
Till Sunset we descerne no Stars at all,
And Saints receive their Glory, in his fall:
24.
On Absolon and Sampson.
SAmpsons defect* and thy excess of hair,
Gave him his death, oth'ground; thee, thine in the air;
His thoughts were too deprest; thine sor'd too high;
As mortals live, so oftentimes, they die:
25.
On Gods favor.
GOds favour's like the Sun, whose beams appear
To all that dwell in the worlds Hemispheare,
Though not to all alike* To some they express
Themselves more radiant, and to others; less:
To some, they rise more early; and they fall
More late to others, giving day to all:
Some soyle's more gross, and breathing more impure
And earthy vapors forth, whose foggs obscure
The darkened Medium of the moister air;
Whilst other Soiles, more perfect, yield more rare
And purer Fumes; whereby, those Beams appear,
To some, less glorious; and to some, more clear:
It would be ever Day; Day, always bright,
Did not our interposed Earth make night:
The Sun shines always strenuous and fair,
But, ah* our sins, our Clouds benight the air:
Lord, drayne the Fenns of this my Boggy soul,
Whose grosser vapors make my day so foul;
Thy SON has strength enough to chase away
These rising Foggs, and make a glorious Day:
Rise, and shine always clear; but most of all,
Let me behold thy glory, in thy Fall;
That being set, poor I (my flesh being hurld
From this) may meet thee, in another world.
26.
On a spiritual Fever.
MY soul has had a Fever, a long while;
O, I can neither relish, nor digest,
My nimble Pulses beat; my veins do boil:
I cannot close mine eyes, I cannot rest:
O, for a Surgeon, now, to strike a Vain!
That, that would lay my Heat, and ease my Pain:
No, no, It is thy Blood, and not my own,
Thy Blood must cure me, Jesus, or else none.
27.
On David's ^hoise.
FAmine? the Sword? the Pestlence? which is least,
When all are great? which worst, when bad's the best?
It is a point of Mercy, yet, to give
A choice of death to such, as must not live:
But was the choice so hard? It seems to me,
There was a worse, and better of the three,
Though all extreme: Me thinks, the help of hands
Might swage the first; The bread of foreign lands
Might patch their lives, and make some slender shift
To save a while, with necessary thrift:
Me thinks, the second should be less extreme
Then that; Alas! poor Israel could not dream
Of too much peace, that had so often division
Among themselves, and foreign opposition:
Besides, their King was martial; his acts glorious;
His heart was valiant, and his hand victorious;
Me thinks a Conqueror; a Man oth' sword
Should nere be puzzeld a^ so poor a word:
In both, however, David, at the worst,
Might well presume he should not die the first*
But oh, the Plague's impartial, It respects
No quality of Person, Age, nor Sex:
The Royal brest's as open to her hand
As is the loosest Pesant in the land:
Famine? the Sword? the Pest'lence? David free,
To take his choice? and pick the worst of three?
He that gave David power to re^use,
Instructed David, in the Art to choose;
He knew no foreign Kingdom could afford
Supply, where God makes Dearth: He knew the Sword
Would want an arm; the arm would want her skill;
And skill, success, where heaven prepares to kill:
He knew* there was no trust, no safe recourse
To Martial man, or to his warlike horse;
But it is Thou, Great God* the only close
Of his best thoughts, and the secure repose
Of all his trust; He yields to kiss thy Rod;
Israel was thine, and thou art Isreal's God:
He kn^w thy gracious wont, thy wonted Grace;
He knew, thy Mercy took the upper place
Of all thy Attributes; 'Twas no adventure
To cast himself on Thee, the only Center
Of all his hopes; Thy David kn^w the danger
To fall to th'hands of man; or friend, or stranger:
Thus David's filial hopes, being anchored fast
On Gods known Mercy, wisely those the last:
If thou will give me David's heart: I Will voice,
Great God, with David; and make David's choice:
But stay; dear Lord, my tongue's too bold, too free,
To speak of choice, that merits all the Three.
28.
On Man's unequal division.
LOrd, it is a common course; we are apt and free
To take the Best, and share the worst to Thee:
We Fleet the Mornings for our own Design;
Perchance, the Flotten Afternoones are thine:
Thou giv'st us Silk; we offer Cammills hair.
Thy Blessings march in the Front; our thanks, in the Rear*
29.
On Beggars.
NO wonder that such swarms of Beggars lurk
In every street: It Is a worse trade to work
Then beg: Yet some, if they can make but shift
To live, will think it scorn to thrive by gift;
It Is a brave mind; but yet no wise fore^cast;
It is but Pride, and Pride will stoop at last;
We all are Beggars; should be so, at least;
Alas! we cannot work: The very best
Our hands can do, will not maintain to live;
We can but hold them up, whilst others give:
No shame for helples Man, to pray in aid;
Great Sol'mon scornd not to be free of the Trade;
He begged an Alms and blushed not; For the Boon
He got, was tr^ble fairer then his Crown:
No wonder that he thrived by begging, so;
He was both Beggar and a Chuser too:
O who would trust to Work, that may obtain
The Suit he beggs, without or sweat, or pain!
O what a privilege, Great God, have we,
That have the Honor, but to beg on thee!
Thou do not ^right us with the torturing Whips
Of Bedels; nor do answer our faint lips
With churlish language; Lord, thou do not praise
The stricter Statute of last Henry's days:
Thou do not dampe us with the empty voice
Of Nothing for ye: If our clamorous noise
Should chance t'importune, turn'st thy gracious eye
Upon our wants, and make a quick supply:
Thou do not brand us with th'opprobrious name
Of idle vagabonds: Thou know we are lame,
And cannot work; Thou do not, Pharo-like,
Deny us Straw, and yet requier Brick:
Thou can not hear us groan beneath our Task,
But freely giv'st, what we have Faith to ask:
The most, for which my large desire shall plead,
To serve the present's but a Loaf of Bread,
Or but a Token (even as Beggars use;)
That, of thy love, will fill my slender Cruse:
Lord, during life, I Will beg no greater Boon,
If at my Death, thou wilt give me but a Crown.
30.
On the two Children.
MY Flesh and Spirit, Lord, are like those pair
Of Infants, whose sad Mothers did repair
To Justice: The One is quick; the other dead:
The two promiscuous Parents that do plead
For the live Child, is Thee and Satan, Lord:
Both claim alike; Justice calls forth the Sword,
And seeing both, with equal tears, complain,
Proffers to cleave the Children both in twain*
And make them equal sharers in the same
That both do challenge, and what both disclaim:
Satan applaudes tho motion, and replyde;
Nor thine, nor mine, but let them both divide;
And give alike to both: But thou, dear Lord,
Dislik'st the Justice of th'unequall Sword:
Rather then share it dead, thou leave to strive,
And wilt not own't at all, if not alive:
The Sword's put up, and straight condemns the other
To be the false; calls Thee, the natural Mother:
Lord of my Soul: It is but Satan's wild,
To cheat thy bosom of thy living Child;
He Would have the Question by the Sword decided,
Knowing the Soul's but dead, if once divided:
My better part is thine, and thine alone;
Take thou the Flesh, and let him gnaw the Bone:
31.
On two Mysteries.
A Perfect Virgin, to bring forth a Son!
One, three entyre; and Three, entirely One!
Wonder of Wonders! How might all this come?
We must be deaf, when the holy Spirit's dumb;
Spare to enquire it: Thou shall never know,
Till Heaven dissolve, and the last Trump shall blow.
32.
A form of Prayer.
IF thou would learn, not knowing how, to pray,
Add but a Faith, and say as Beggars say;
Master, I Am poor, and blind, in great distress;
Hungry and ^ame, and cold, and comfortless:
O, succor him, that is graveld on the Shelf
Of pain, and want, and cannot help himself;
Cast down thine eye upon a wretch* and take
Some pity on me for sweet Jesus sake:
But hold! Take heed this Clause be not put in,
I never begged before, nor will agin:
Note this withal, That Beggars move their plaints
At all times Ore tenus, not by Saints.
33.
On Solomon and the Queen of Sheba.
IT spreds: The sweet perfume of Salomons Fame
Affects the Coasts; And his illustrious name
Cannot be hid: The unbeliev'd report
Must fly with Eagles wings to th'honourd Court
Of princely Sheba: Sheba must not rest,
Until her eye become th'invited Guest
Of Fames loud Trumpet; her impatience strives
With light-foot Time, while her Ambition drives
Her Chariot wheels, and gives an ayry passage
To'th'quick deliv'ry of her hearts Embassage:
True wisdom planted in the hearts of Kings,
Needs no more glory then the glory'it brings;
And, like the Sun, is viewd by her own light,
B'ing, by her own reflection, made more bright:
The emulous Queen's arrived; She Is gone toth' Court;
No eye-delighting Masque? no Princely Sport,
To entertain her? No, her ^ye, her ear
Is taken up, and scorns to see, to hear
Inferior things: Sh'allowes her ear, her eye
No less then Oracles, and Majesty:
How, empty pastimes do resolve and fly
To their true nothing, when true wisdome's by!
Th'arrived Queen has Audience; moves; disputes;
Wise Solomon attends; replies; confutes;
Sh' objects; he answers; She afresh propounds;
She proves; maintains it; he decides; confounds:
She smiles; she wonders, being overdaz'd
With his bright beams, stands silent; stands amazed:
How Scripture-like Apo^rypha's appear
To common Books! how poor, when Scripture's near!
The Queen is pleased, who, never yet did know
The blast of Fame, less prodigal, then now;
For now, the greatest part of what she knew
By Fame, is found the least of what is true;
We often find that Fame, in prime of youth,
Does add to Falsehood, and subtract from Truth:
The thankful Queen does, with a lib'rall hand,
Present him with the Riches of her Land:
Where Wisdom goes before we often find
That temp'rall Blessings seldom stay behind:
Lord, grant me wisdom; and I shall possess
Enough; have more, or have content with less.
33.
On REHOBOAM.
COuld dying Parents, at their peaceful death,
Make but a firm Assurance, or bequeath
Their living Virtues; Could they recommend
Their wisdom to their heyrs; Could hearts descend
Upon the bosom of succeeding Sons,
As well as Scepters do; as well as Th^^nes;
Sure Rehobeams Reign had found increase
Of Love and Honor, and had dyed in peace:
Kingdoms are transitory: Scepters go
From hand, to hand, and Crowns, from brow, to brow,
But Wis^dome marches on another guize:
They^^ two things; to be Worldly great, and wise;
It was the self same Scepter that came down
From Solomon to thee: The self same Crown,
That did encl^se his Princely brows, and thine;
The (...) same flesh and blood, the next o'th'Line;
The self same people were alive, to bless
The prosperous days; But not the same success:
Where rest the fault? what secret mischief can
Vn-same thy peace? 'Twas not the self same Man.
34.
On the Prophet slain by a Lion.
It Was not for malice; not for want of Food,
The obvious Lion shed this Prophets blood:
Where faithless man neglects the sacred Law
Of God; there, beasts abate their servile awe
To man: When Man dares take a dispensation,
By sin, to frustrate the end of Man's Creation,
The Beasts, Oft-times, by man's Example, do
Renounce the end of their Creation too:
The Prophet must abstain: He was forbid;
He must not eat: And yet the Prophet did:
Th'obedient Lion had command to shed
That Prophets Blood: and see, the Prophet's dead:
O, how corrupt's the nature of Man's Will,
That breaks those Laws which very Beasts fulfill!
35.
On Ahab.
HOw Ah^b longs! Ahab must be possessed
Of Naboths Vineyard, or can find no rest:
His tongue must second his unlawful eye:
Ahab must sue: and Naboth must deny:
Ahab grows sullen; he can eat no Bread;
His Body prostrates on his restless Bed:
Unlawful lust immoderate often brings
A loathing in the use of lawful things:
Ahabs defier must not be with-stood,
It must be purchased, though with Naboths Blood;
Witness must be suborned: Naboth must lie
Open to Law; must be condemned; and dye:
His goods must be confiscate to the Crown;
Now Ahab's pleased; The Vineyard's now his own*
Unlawful Pleasures, when they jostle further
Then ordinary bounds; often end in murder.
Me thinks, the Grapes that cluster from that Vine,
Should (being pressed) afford more blood then wine.
36.
On Rehoboam.
PEople have Balances; wherein to weigh
Their new-crown'd Princes; which can soon bewray
Their native worth: Some counterpoyse th'allow:
Unhappy Israel had not weights enough,
To weigh thy Fingers* Heads can never rest
In peace, when their poor members are oppressed:
Had thy unlucky Fingers weighed no more
Then thy light Judgment; had thy judeement bore
But half the burden of thy Fingers weight,
Thou had bin prosperous, both in Crown, and State:
The Lyon's known by's Paw; The people spends
Their Judgment of a Prince by's Fingers ends.
37.
On Leprous Naaman.
THe Leper, prompted with his loathsome grief,
Seeks to the King of Israel for relief:
But Naaman's vain desiers could not thrive;
Israel's no God; to hill, or make alive:
The Moral Man is of too mean a Stature,
To reach his hand above the head of Nature:
The willing Prophet undertakes the Cure;
The Leper must go wash, and be secure
From his Disease: He must go paddle straight,
In Iordan's water: It Is a fair Receipt:
And why in Jordan? Have our Syrian streams
Less power then Isr'els? sure the Prophet dreams:
How hard it is for Mortals to rely
On Faith! How apt is sense, to question, why?
The Cure perpl^xes more then the Disease;
Prophets prescribe no better means then these?
I lookd his Ceremonious hand should stroke
The place; I looked the Prophet should invoke:
Some men would feign he clean, if God would stay
Their times, or would but cure them their own way:
The techy Leper is displeased; he will hence:
The Jordan Prophet dallyes against sense:
His wiser servants urge their hasty Lord
To Iordan's streams: He washes; is restored*
How good a God have we, whose grace fulfils
Our choice desires oft-times against our wills!
The Leper's clens'd; And now he dos applaud
Not Isr'els streams alone, but Isr'els God:
The Prophet must have thanks, and Gold beside;
The thanks are taken, but the Gold's denied:
Who would not deal with Thee, that are not nice,
To sell such Pen'worths at so small a price!
Naaman, in lieu of his refused reward,
Vows the true God; provided, when his Lord
Shall serve ith house of Rimmon, if he bow
For fashion-sake, he may secure his Vow:
Some will not stick to lend their God a house,
Might they reserve one room for their own use:
Gehazi thinks the Cure too cheap; He soon
Oretakes the Lepers Chari^t, asks a Boon
In The Prophets name: But mark what did befall;
He got his Boon; but got his plague withal:
Unlawful gains are least what they appear,
And ill got Gold is a always bought too dear:
Lord, I did wash in Jordan, and was cured;
My Flesh, that false Gehazi, has procured
A sinful purchase, having overrun
The cleansed Naaman of my Soul: What Is done
By false Gehazi, let Gehazi bear;
Let Naamans Leprosy alone stick there;
O, cleanse them both, or if that may not be,
Lord, strike Gehazi; and keep Naaman free,
38.
On Chamber-Christians.
NO matter whether (some there be that say)
Or go to Church, or stay at home, if pray:
Smiths dainty Sermons have, in plenty, stored me
With better stuff, then P^lpets can afford me:
Tell me, why pray'st thou; Heaven commanded so:
Art not commanded to his Temples too?
Small store of manners! when thy Prince bids Come,
And feast at Court; to say, I Have ^^at at home.
39.
On the Widows Cruse.
LOrd, I Am in debt, and have not where withal
To pay: My score is great; my wealth but small;
My house is poorly furnished, and my Food
Is slender; I have nothing that is good:
Lord, if my wasted Fortunes prove no better,
My Debt is even as desperate as the Detter:
All the relief thy servant this long while,
Has had, is but a little Cruse of Oil;
There Is none will give of Alms: I neither get
Enough to satisfy my wants, nor debt:
Lord, if thee please to show the self same Art
Upon the slender vessel of my Heart,
The Prophet did, upon the Widows Cruse,
I shall have Oil to sell, have Oil to use;
So shall my Debt be paid, and I go free;
No Debt is desperate, in respect of Thee.
40.
On the swimming Axe.
THe borrowed Axe fell in: 'Twas lost; lamented;
The Prophet moov'd; the Workman discontented;
A Stick he ^ne down; and by the Prophets hand,
Thrown in; the Axe did float, and came aland:
And why a Stick? Had that the power to call
The massy ^ron up? Sure, none at all:
Moses must use his Rod; Moses I doubt it,
Had been but lame, but impotent without it;
Nor could that Rod have scourged Pharoes Land,
Had it been waved by an other hand:
God often works by means, and yet not so,
But that he can, as well without them, too.
God can save Man without the help of Man,
But will not; Wills not always that he can:
Something is left for us: we must not lie
In The ditch, and cry, And if we dye we dye:
We must not lie like Blocks, relying on
The workmans Axe; There Is something must be done:
The workmans Axe perchance had never bin
Recald again, if not the stick thrown in:
We must be doing, yet those Deeds, as our,
Have no more native virtue, nay, less power
To save us, then that stick had, to recall
The Axe from the deep bottom of his Fall:
I will be doing; but repose in Him;
Throw I in sticks: he will make my Iron swim.
41.
On Baals Priests.
IEhu's crowned King; Iehu the King must fall
To Ahabs Gods: Iehu must worship Baal:
The gods-divided people must go call
Baals sacred Priests: Iehu must worship Baal:
None must be left behind; They must come all;
Iehu must burn a Sacrifice to Baal:
The Priests come puffing in; both great and small
Must wait on Iehu that must worship Baal:
Baals house is filled and crowded to the wall
With people, that are come to worship Baal.
What must there now be done? what Offering shall
Perfume Baals nostrils? even the Priests of Baal:
Baals holy Temple's now become a Stall
Of Priestly flesh; of fleshly Priests for Baal;
How would our Gospel flourish, if that all
Princes, like Iehu, would but worship Baal!
42.
On the Tempter.
HOw dares thy Bandog, Lord, presume t'approach
Into thy sacred pre^ence? or incroach
Upon thy choice possessions, to devour
Thy sporting Lambs? To counterfeit thy po'wr,
And to usurp thy Kingdom, even as He
Were, Lord, at least, a Substitute to Thee?
Why do not rate him? why does he obtain
Such favor to have liberty of his Chain?
Have we not Enemies to counterbuffe,
Enough? Is not the Flesh, the World enough
To foil us? this abroad, and that at home;
But must that Satan, must that Bandog come
T'afflict the weak, and take the stronger side?
O, are there not enough, enough beside?
Is there not odds enough, when we have none
But mighty Foes; nay, Rebels of our own,
Beneath a false disguise of love and peace,
That still betray us? Are not these, all these
Sufficient, to encounter and o'rthrow,
Poor sinful Man; but must that Bandog too,
Assault us, Lord? We dare not cast our eyes
Our timorous eyes to Heaven, we dare not rise
From off our aching knees, to plead our case,
When he can commune with thee face to face;
Nay more, were it but possible to do,
Would draw thee, Lord, to his bold Faction too.
Lord, lend me but thy power to resist
What Foes thou sendst, and send what Foes thou list:
It is thy Battle: If thou please to warm
My blood, and find the strength, I Will find the Arm;
March thou in the Front, I Will follow in the Rear;
Come then ten thousand Bandogs, I Will not fear.
43.
On a Cipher.
Ciphers to Ciphers added, seem to come
(With those that know not Art) to a great sum:
But such as skill in Numeration, know,
That worlds of Ciphers, are but worlds of show:
We stand those Ciphers, ere since Adams fall;
We are but show: we are no sum at all:
Our bosome-pleasures, and delights, that do
Appear so glorious, are but Ciphers too:
High-prized honor, friends, This house; The the other,
Are but one Cipher added to another:
Reckon by rules of Art, and tell me, than,
How great is thy Estate, Ingenious Man?
Lord, be my Figure, Then it shall be known
That I am Something: Nothing, if alone:
I care not in what place, in what degree;
I do not weigh how small my Figure be:
But as I am, I have nor worth, nor vigure:
I am thy Cipher; O, be thou my Figure.
44.
On Haman and Mordecay.
THe King would fain take rest; But thought denies
To pay her nightly Tribute to his eyes:
The Persian Chronicle must be brought, to set
His eyes in quiet, till they are paid the debt:
He turns the leaves; The first he lights upon,
Is the true service Mordecay had done:
Heaven often works his ends, at such a season,
When Man has will to banish sense, and Reason:
His loyal service must be now recalled
To blessed remembrance: Haman must be called
To Council; questioned, but not know the thing
The King intends: He must advise the King,
What Ceremony must be used, what Cost,
What Honor, where the King shall honor most;
Observe but in the Progress of this Story,
How God turns Factor for his Servants glory:
Haman persuaded that such honor can
Fit none but him; never questions, Who Is the Man;
His more ambitious thoughts are now providing
A Horse of State, for his own Princely riding;
In brief; his Judgment is, That such a One,
Must lack no Honor, but the Royal Throne:
How apt is Man to flatter his own heart!
How fair a Debtor to his false desert!
The royal Horse is ready, all things fit,
That could be broached by a vainglorious wit:
Haman expects his answer; His Ambition
Spurrs on, wants nothing but his large Commission:
Haman must haste with all the speed he can,
And see it done: But Mordecay's the man*
God often crowns his Servants at their Cost,
That hate their persons, and disdain them most:
Lord, if thou please to make me but thine own,
I shall have Honor, spite of Honors frown.
45.
On Jobs Temptations.
GOd questions Satan: Boasts his Jobs desert,
In the perfection of a Simple Heart:
Jobs Faith was servent; Satan was as chill
To yield it; but must yield against his will;
Condemns it to be Servile, to be bought
With Gods own coin? Does Job ^erve God for naught?
It is a common trick, the Tempter uses,
The Faith he cannot conquer, he abuses.
Alas, that Faith requires not so much praise,
It Is a good Faith, as Faiths go now a days:
Is it not strengthened by thy indulgent hand,
That blessed his Labors, and inricht his Land?
Puff out the Fire: his Faith will quickly chill:
Satan puff thou; nay Satan puff thy will:
Nor Ebb nor Flood of small, or great estate,
Are certain Badges of Gods love or Hate:
What Is now to do? Poor Job must be bereaven
Of all his stronger Herds; Fire, sent from Heaven,
Must burn his fruitful Flocks, that none remain;
His houses fall; and all his Children slain;
And yet not ^^rse? Alas, poor Job adresses
His thoughts to heaven; he worships God and blesses*
The lively Faith that can retain her God,
May groan; but seldom rav^ beneath the Rod.
But what says Satan now? The hedge is broke,
That fenced my Servant Job: What further Cloak
For his uprightness has he? what pretense
For his continued Love and Innocence?
Has not thy malice had her own desire?
'Twas soundly puffed; thy Puffs have blown the ^ire:
Gods Trials are like Bellows: Sathan's Blower,
Blows out false Faiths, makes true ones blaze the more.
True Lord; His Raith is tough: But Snailes as well
Can thrive without, as live within their Shell:
To save a life who would not lose some skin?
Touch but his Horns; O how he will draw them in
Satan I give thy malice leave, be free
To peele the Bark, but spare to touch the Tree.
Fear not ye little flock: The greatest ill
Your Foes can does to scratch; They cannot kill.
What now is th'exployt? Afflicted Job does lie,
A very Hospital of misery:
I think, that all the Ulcers that have bin
In Egypt cu^'d, are broken out agin
In his distempered Flesh; yet Job is still
The very same, nor charged his God with ill:
A Faith that lodges in a double Breast,
May stand the touch; None but true Faiths the Test:
If these be Flames poor man must swelter in,
He needs a World a patience, not to sin.
46.
On bauling Curres.
I Feared the world and I were too acquainted;
I hope my fears are, like her Joys, but painted:
Had I not bin a Stranger, as I past,
Her bauling Curres had never barked so fast.
47.
On DAVID.
STands it with State, that Princely David, who
Did wear the Crown, should play the Harper too?
He plays and sings; His glory never disdaines
To dance, and to receive a Crown for's pains:
It Is no disparagement, it is no misprision
Of State, to play before the Great Musician.
48.
On ABRAHAM.
THe word is out: Poor Abr'am must be gone;
Must take his Isaak; take his only Son;
The Son of his Affection; him, from whom,
From whose blessed loins so many Kings must come:
Even him must Abr'am slay, Abr'am must rise,
And offer Isaac a burnt Sacrifice.
God scorns the Offals of our faint desires;
He gives the best, and he the best requires.
Abr'am forbeares to question; thinks not good
To reason, to advise with Flesh and Blood;
Begs not young Isaacks life, nor goes about
T'object the Law of Murder; makes no doubt:
He rises, rises early, leads his Son;
Hasts where this holy Slaughter must be done:
Where God bids Go, that very Breath's a warrant:
We must not linger there: Haste crowns the Arrant.
His Servants must no further: They must stay:
Private Devotion claims a private Way:
They must abide with the Ass, whilst th'aged Sire
In the one hand takes the knife: in the other, Fire:
The sacred Wood of Offering must be pil'd
On the young shoulders of th'obedient Child:
O here mine eye must spend a tear to see
Thee bear that Wood, great God, that, since, bore Thee:
Mistrustles Isaac seeing the wood, the fire,
The sacrificing Knife, begins t'enquire,
But where is the Sacred Lamb, that must be slain?
Resolved Abr'am (lest the flesh should gain
Too much of Nature) says not, Thou my Son
Art he: but, The Almighty will provide ^s one:
Where God commands, it is not enough to effect,
But we must baulk the occasion of neglect.
The faithful Abra'm now erects an Altar:
Orders the wood: what tongue can choose but falter,
To tell the rest? He lays his hands upon
His wondering Isaac, binds his only Son:
He lays him down, unsheath's his Priestly knife:
Vp-heaves his arm, to take his Isaacks life.
True faith is active: Covets to proceed
From thought to action; and from will to deed:
Before the strengthened stroke had time to fall,
A Sudden voice from Heaven cries hold: Recall
Thy threatening Arm, and sheath thy ^oly Knife,
Thy Faith has answered for thy Isaac's life;
Touch not the Child; thy Faith is thoroughly shown,
That has not spared thine own, thine only Son:
How easy is our God, and liberal, who
Counts it as don, what we have will to do!
49.
On Censorio.
CEnsorio takes in hand, by sharp reproof,
To mend his Brothers errror, and to snuff
His darkened Flame; and yet Censorio's crimes
Are rankt among the foulest of the Times:
Let none presume, Censorio, to control
Or top the dim light of another Soul,
If not more pure then him, that is controlled:
The Temple-Snuffers must be perfect Gold.
50.
On Mordecay and Haman.
TWo Steeds appointed were by Hamans hand;
The one at Grass; The other Steed did stand
In Persia's Mues: The former was providing
For Mordecay: the last for Hamans riding:
But since, in order, last things prove the worst,
Hamans ambition drove him to the First:
But see, proud Hamans prouder Steed did cast
His glorious rider, whilst the Jew sits fast:
What matter Haman? Fortu^^, though no Friend
Of thine, first brought thee to thy Iourneyes end.
51.
On three Fools.
THe Wise man says, It is a Wise man's part,
To keep his tongue close prisoner in his heart;
If he be then a Fool, whose thought denies,
There is a God, how desp'rately unwise,
How more then Fool is he, whose language shall
Proclaim in public, There Is no God at all!
What then are they, nay Fools, in what degree,
Whose Actions shall maintain't? Such fools are we.
52.
On miserable Man.
ADam, the highest pitch of perfect nature,
And lively image of his great Creator,
Declined his God; and, by one sinful Deed,
Destroyed himself, and ruined all his seed:
How wretched, then, how desp'rate's our Condition,
Whose every minute makes a repetition
Of greater sins, against both light of Nature,
And Grace, against Creation and Creator!
Alas! we claim not by descent, alone,
But add by hourly purchase of our own:
There is no breach of Loyalty, no sin
We are imperfect, and unpracticed in;
Shall not a world of Sins bring ruin, then,
To One; when one Sin slew a world of men?
53.
On Man's two enemies.
TWo potent Enemies attend on Man;
T'one's fat and plump; The other lean and wan;
The One faunes and smiles; The other weeps as fast;
The first Presumption is; Despair, the last:
That feeds upon the bounty of full Treasure;
Brings jolly news of Peace, and lasting pleasure:
This feeds on want, unapt to entertain
Gods Blessings: Finds them ever in the waine:
Their Maxims disagree; But their Conclusion
Is the self same: Both jump in Man's Confusion:
Lord, keep me from the first, or else, I shall
Sore up and melt my waxen wings, and fall:
Lord, keep the second from me; lest I, then,
Sink down so low, I never rise again:
Teach me to know my self, and what I am,
And my Presumption will be turned to shame:
Give me true Faith, to know thy dying Son,
What Ground has then Despair to work upon?
To Avoid my shipwreck upon either Shelfe,
O, teach me, Lord, to know my God; my self.
54.
On Queen ESTER.
ILlustrious Princess, had thy chance not been,
To be a Captive, thou had bin no Queen:
Such is the Fortune, our Misfortune brings;
Had we not first bin Slaves, w'ad never been Kings.
55.
On Slanders.
HAve sland'rous tongues bin busy to defame
The precious Ointment of my better name?
Or has censorious baseness gone about
With her rude blast to puff my Taper out?
They have: And let their full mouthd bellows puff:
It is their Breath that s^inks, and not my Snuff:
I, let them snarle and burst, that I may smile,
Do, let them jerk, and I will laugh the while:
They cannot s^rike beyond my patience; No,
I Will bear, and take it for an Honor too;
The height that my Ambition shall fly,
Is only to deserve their Calumny:
O, what a Judgment 'twere, if such as they
Should but allow my Actions, and betray
My'endangered ^ame, by their malign applause,
To good Opinion, That were a just Cause
Of Grief indeed! but to be made the Story
Of such base tongues, it is my Crown, my Glory:
I, let them spend their Dust against the wind,
And bark against the Moon, till they be blind,
And weary; Let their malice not forbear
To baule at Innocence, to wound and tear
An absent name, whilst their un^allowed tongues
Make me a glorious Martyr in their wrongs:
I beg no Favor: Nay, my hearts desire
Is still to be calcined by such a Fire:
That, in conclusion, all men may behold
A fair gilt Counter, from a Crown of Gold.
Great God, I care not this, how foul I seem
To Man; May I be fair in thy esteem:
It matters not how light I seem to be
To the base world, so I be weight to thee.
56.
On NABVCHADNEZZER.
WHat lucklesse Accident has bred such ods
Betwixt great Babels Monarch, and his Gods,
That they so often disturb him, and affright
His broken slumbers with the Dreams of night!
Alas, what has this Princely Dreamer done,
That he must quit the Glory of his Throne,
His Royal Scepter, his Imperial Crown?
Must be expeld his Honor, and come down
Below the meanest Slave, and, for a Season,
Be banished from the use, the Act of Reason?
Must be exiled from humane shape, and chew
The cudde, and must be moistened with the dew
Of heaven; nay, differ in no other thing
From the bruit beast, but that he was a King?
What ayle thy Gods, that they are turned so rough,
So full of rage? what, had they meat enough
To fill their golden Stomachs? Was thy knee
Bent often enough? what might the reason be?
Alas, poor harmless things! it was not they;
'Twas not their wills: I dare be bold to say,
They knew it not: It was not they that did it;
They had no power to act, or to forbid it:
Deserve thou not, Great King, the style of Beast,
To serve such Gods, whose Deities can digest
Their servants open wrongs? that could dispense
With what they'endure, without the least offense;
Illustrious Beast, methinks thy bettered state
Has no great reason to complain of Fate:
Thou art more near to him thou did adore,
By one degree, then ere thou were before:
^Tis some promotion; That there is less ods
'Betwixt thy Nature, and thy senseless Gods.
57.
On PARTIO.
Have thou forsaken all thy Sins, but One?
Believe it, Partio, Thou Have forsaken None.
58.
On Ignorance.
THe greatest Friend Religion has t'aduance
Her glory's unaffected Ignorance:
The burning Taper lends the fairest light,
And shines most glorious, in the shades of night.
59.
On a great Battle.
When my rebellious Flesh does disagree
With my resisting Spirit; me thinks, I see
Two mighty Princes draw into the Field,
Where one must win the Day; the other, yield:
They both prepare; Both strike up their Alarmes;
Both march; Both well appointed in their Arms;
They both advance their Banners: The One displayes
A bloody Cross: The other Colors blaze
A Globe terrestrial: Nature carries one,
And Grace the other: Each by's Ensigne's known:
They meet, encounter, blows exchange for blows:
Dart is returned for Dart: They grapple, Close:
Their Fortune's hurryed with unequal Sails,
Sometimes the Cross; sometimes, the Globe prevails.
We are that Field; And they that strive to win us,
Are God and Satan; Those, that war within us,
The Flesh, the Spirit: No parting of the Fray,
Till one shall win: the other, lose the Day:
My God, O weaken this rebellious Flesh,
That dares oppose: O, quicken and refresh
My dull and coward Spirit, that would yield,
And make proud Satan Master of the Field:
Dear Lord, the Field's thy own; thou thoughtst it good
To purchas't with my dying Saviors Blood:
It Is thine, Great God, by title, and by right;
Why should thou question, what is thy own, by fight?
Lord, keep possession thou, and let th'accurst
And base Usurper do his best, his worst.
60.
On the World.
THe World's an Inn; and I, her Guest,
I eat, I drink, I take my Rest:
My Hostess Nature, does deny me
Nothing, wherewith she can supply me:
Where, having stayed a while, I pay
Her lavish Bills, and go my way.
61.
On the Sabbath.
AWay my thoughts: Away my words, my deeds;
Away, what ever nourishes and feeds
My frail delights: Presume not to approach
Into my presence; dare not once t'encroach
Upon the hallowed Temple of my Soul;
Ye are not for this Day, you are all too foul:
Abide ye with the Ass, till I go yonder,
And cleave the Isaac of my heart in sunder:
I must go sacrifice: I must go pray,
I must perform my holy vows, to day:
Tempt not my tender frailty: I enjoyne
Your needful absence; you are no longer mine:
But if it may not be, that we must sever
Our yoakt affections, and not part for ever;
Yet give me leave, without offense, to borrow,
At least, this day, although we meet to morrow.
62.
On Prayer.
IN all our Prayers, the Almighty does regard
The Judgment of the Balance, not the Yeard:
He loves not Words, but Matter; It Is his pleasure
To buy his Wares by Weight, and not by Measure.
63.
On FIDO.
FIndst thou no comfort on this fickle Earth?
No Joy at all? No Object for thy Mirth?
Nothing but Sorrow? Nothing else, but toil?
What, do thy days show nothing, worth a smile?
Do worldly pleasures no contentment give?
Content thee, Fido, Thou Have not long to live.
64.
On CHARISSA.
WOldst thou, Charissa, wish thy fortunes better,
Then, by thy act, to make thy God thy Detter?
I Will teach thee how to do it: Relieve the poor,
And thou may safely set it on Gods Score:
65.
On RAYMOND SEBVND.
I Wonder, Raymond, thy illustrious Wit,
Strengthened with so much learning, could commit
So great a Folly, as to go about,
By Natures feeble light, to blazen out
Such Heav'n-bred Mist'ryes, which the hearts of Men
Cannot conceive, much less the darkened Pen
Express; such secrets, at whose depth, the Quire
Of blessed Angels tremble, and admire:
Could thy vainglory lend no easier task
To thy sublime Attempt, then to unmaske
The glorious Trinity, whose Tri-une face
Was never discovered by the eye of Grace,
Much less by the eye of Nature, being a story
Objected only to the Eye of Glory?
Put out thy light, bold Raymond, and be wise;
Silence thy tongue, and close thy'ambitious eyes:
Such heights as these, are Subjects far more fit
For holy Admiration, then for Wit.
66.
On Sins.
MY Sins are like the hayres upon my head,
And raise their Audit to as high a score;
In this they differ; These do daily shed,
But, ah, my sins grow daily more and more:
If, by my Hayres, thou number out my sins,
Heaven make me bald, before that day begins.
67.
On the Gospel.
Our Gospel thrives the more by foreign Iarres;
It overcomes in outward opposition:
But O, it suffers still, in Civil Wars,
And loses Honor by a home-division:
If thou assist, I care not, Lord, with whom
I war abroad, so I have peace at home.
68.
On the days of Man.
LOrd, if our days be few, why do we spend
And lavish them unto so evil an end?
Lord, if our days be evil, why do we wrong
Our selves, and Thee, to wish our Day so long?
Our days decrease; but, still, our evils renew;
Great God, we make them evil; Thou make them few.
69.
On Sins.
MY Sins are like the Sands upon the shore;
Which every Ebb lays open to the Eye:
In this they differ; These are covered ore
With every Flood; My sins still open lie:
If thou will make mine Eyes a Sea of tears,
O, they will hide the sins of all my years.
70.
On KAIN and DAVID.
THeir Sins were equal; Equal was their guilt:
They both committed Homicide; Both spilt
Their Brothers guiltles blood: Nay, of the twain,
The first occasion was less foul, in Kain:
'Twas likely Kains Murder was in heat
Of blood; There was no former grudge, no threate:
But David's was a Plott; He took the life
Of poor Vriah, to enjoy his Wife:
Was Justice equal? Was her Balance even?
Kain was punished: David was forgiven:
Both came to trial: But good David did
Confess that Sin, which cursed Kain hid:
Kain bewaild the punishment; wherein,
His Sin had plunged him: David wayles his Sin:
If I lament my sins; Thou will forbear
To punish, Lord; or give me strength, to bear.
71.
On PLAVSVS.
PLausus of late, has raised an Hospital,
Repay'rd a Church; Founded a College Hall:
Plausus has built a holy Temple; vowed it
To God: Erects a School, and has endowed it:
Plausus has given, through his abundant pity,
A Spittle to the blind, and lame of the City:
Plausus allows a Table for the poor
O'th ^Parish; besides those, he seeds at door:
Plausus relieves the Prisons; Mends the Ways;
Maintains a Lecture, on the Market days:
Plausus, in brief, for bounty bears the Bell;
Plausus has don much Good; but nothing, Well.
72.
On Sins.
MY Sins are like the Stars, within the skies;
In view, in number, even as bright, as great:
In this they differ: These do set and rise;
But ah, my Sins do rise, but never seit:
Shine Son of glory, and my sins are gone,
Like twinkling Stars, before the rising Sun.
73.
On change of Weathers.
ANd were it for thy profit, to obtain
All Sunshine? No vicissitude of Rain?
Think thou, that thy laborious Plough requires
Not Winter frosts, as well as Summer fires?
There must be both: Sometimes these hearts of ours
Must have the sweet, the seasonable Showers
Of Tears; Sometimes, the Frost of chill despair
Makes our desired sunshine seem more fair:
Weathers that most oppose to Flesh and Blood,
Are such as help to make our Harvest good:
We may not choose, great God; It is thy Task:
We know not what to have; nor how to ask.
74.
On PROSPER.
TAke heed, thou prosperous sinner, how thou liv'st
In Sin, and thriv'st;
Thou, that do flourish in thy heaps of gold,
And sums untold;
Thou, that had never reason to complain
Of Cross, or pain.
Whose unafflicted Conscience never found
Nor Check, nor Wound.
Believe it, Prosper, thy deceitful Lease
Allows thee neither wealth, nor Joy, nor Peace.
Thy golden heaps are nothing but the price
Of Paradise;
Thy Flattering pleasures, and thy ayrie ^oyes,
But painted Toys;
Thy peaceful Conscience is but like a Dog,
Tied in a Clogge;
Believe it, Prosper, thy deceitful Lease
Allows thee neither Wealth, nor Joy, nor Peace:
Thy heaps of Gold will stand thee in no steed,
At greatest need;
Thy E^pty Pleasures, will convert thy laughter,
To groans, hereafter.
Thy silent Conscience, when enlarged, will roar,
And rage the more:
Believe it, Prosper, thy deceitful Lease,
Affords thee neither Wealth, nor Joy, nor Peace.
75.
On the Sight of a Plague bill.
FIve thousand in a week, in one poor City?
Because it was thy Pleasure, it was no pity;
Why should thou pity us, Just God, when we
Could never find a time to pity thee?
Thou never strik'st without a reason why,
Nor often, then: We easily cast our eye
Upon the punishment, but blind toth' sin,
That far transcends the judgment it calls in:
O, if the weekly Bills of our Transgression
Could but appear, and make as deep impression
In our sad hearts, to make our hearts but know
As great a sorrow, as our Plague-bills do;
No doubt, no doubt but Heavens avenging hand
Would turn a Stranger to our prosperous Land
O, if that weekly Catalogue of Si^
Could, with our City Bills be brought but in;
And be compared we would think our Bills not high,
But rather wonder there are men, to dye.
76.
On Theaters.
SIx days were made for work; the seventh, for rest;
I read of none, that Heaven ordaind for Play;
How have our looser Theaters transgrest
The Decalogue, that make it every Day:
Me thinks that they should change their Trade for shame,
Or honour't with a more laborious name,
77.
On Players and Ballad mongers.
Our merry Ballads, and ^ascivious Plays
Are much alike: To common censure, both
Do stand or fall: The One sings; the other says;
And both are Frippries of another Froth:
In short; They Are Priest and Clark of Belials Altar;
The One makes the Sermon; The Other tunes the Psalter.
78.
On God and the King.
Our God and Prince (whom God for ever bless)
Are both, in Mercy, of a Constitution:
Both slow, till mere necessity shall press,
To put their penal Laws in Execution:
And mark, How in a like success they join;
At both we grumble; and at both, repine.
79.
On the life and death of Man.
THe life of Man is but th'imperfect Story
Of his Adventure, toward future Glory;
For death to finish: Who will stick to say,
A glorious Even foretells a glorious Day?
80.
On FOX.
THere was a time, (wo-worth that heavy time)
When rav'no^is Foxes did devour the prime,
And choice of all our Lambs: But Heaven did raise
A more ingenuous Fox, in after days,
Whose high immortal Pen redeemed their breath,
And made those Lambs revive, in spite of death:
To see, how mutual Saintly Favors be!
Thou gav'st them life, that now give life to thee.
81.
On the Book of Common Prays.
THe Book of Common Prayer excels the rest;
For Prayers that are most Common are the be^^.
82.
To MVNDANO.
WOldst thou Mundano, prove too great, too strong
For peevish Fortunes angry brow to wrong?
Renounce her power: Banish Fortune hence,
And trust thee to the hands of Providence;
The poorest heart that ever did importune
Heavens aid, is far above the frowns of Fortune.
83.
On Romes Sacrifices.
IT cannot be excused: It is a wrong
Proceeding from a too-too partial tongue,
To say, The profer'd service of false Ro^^
Had no good savor, and did never come
Toth' gates of Heaven; Eye, poor Rome's belyde;
For when our Troops of glorious Martyrs died,
In that warm age, who were their Priests? By whom
Was their blood shed? Was It not by holy Rome?
Such sweet Perfumes, I dare be bold to say,
Rome never burnt before, nor since that day:
A sweeter Incense, save his dying Son,
Heaven never accepted since this World begun.
84.
On a dead Man.
IT is a common use to entertain
The knowledge of a great man, by his Train:
How great's the dead-man then? There Is none that be
So backed with troops of Followers, as He.
85.
On corner Sinners.
SVch men are like to Owls; They take delight,
To make the night their day; their day, the night,
They hate the Sun, and love dark corners best;
But they shall houle, when day-birds are at rest.
86.
On the Kite.
Mark but the soaring Kite; and she will read
Brave rules for Diet; teach thee how to feed;
She flies aloft; She spreads her ayrie plumes
Above the reach, above the nau^ious ^umes
Of dangerous earth; She makes her self a stranger
T'inferiour things, and checks at every danger;
At length, she stoopes; and, with a brave disdain,
She strikes her prey, and mounts her up again;
By her example, learn to use the earth,
And thou shall find less mischief, and m^^^ mirth.
87.
On FORMIO.
FOrmio bewailes his Sins, with the same heart,
As Friends do Friends, when they are about to part,
Believe it, F^rmio will not entertain
A merry Thought, until they meet again.
88.
On bosom sins.
HOw loath is Flesh, to yield! the Spirit, to win
The glorious Conquest of a Bosom sin!
O, how th'ingenious Flesh will plead! abuse
The height of Wit, to argue, or excuse:
At length, it yields: O, give it leave to stay
A year, a month; a week; at least, a day;
And if not so, yet let my breaking heart
But hug it once or twice, before we part;
Let me but take my leave, my thoughts shall bind me
From the least touch; let me but look behind me:
Nay sin, Gehezi^like, will have a blow
At cleansed Naamans bounty, ere she go.
89.
On the Echo.
AN Eccho's nothing, but a forced rebound,
Or airy repercussion of a Sound,
Proceeding from some hollow place, well known
To have to Bulk, no Being of her own:
It is no Substance; nothing, but a Noise;
An empty sound; the picture of a voice:
Such is my Courtly Friend, At my request,
He Will breath his service from his hollow breast,
And Eccho-like for every word that is blown
Into his ears, returns me two, for one;
But when they come to th'Test, alas they are found
More light then Air, mere shadows of a Sound;
I Will trust my God; His bounty still af^ords
As many deeds, as my false Friends do words.
90
On a Water-Mill.
THe formal Christian's like a Water-mill:
Until the Floodgate's open, he lies still:
He cannot work at all; he cannot dream
Of going: till his wheels shall find the stream.
91.
On PAVL and APOLLOS.
It Is not, what this man, or what that man says,
Brings the least stone, toth'building of my faith;
My ear may ramble, but my Conscience follows
No man: I Am neither Paul's, nor yet Apollo's:
When Scripture gold lies by me, is it just
To take up my Salvation, upon Trust?
My Faith shall be confined to no man's Lists;
I Will only follow Paul, as Paul is Christ's.
92.
On MORVS.
IF a poor timorous Hare but cross the way,
Morus will keep his chamber all the day;
What Evil ^ortends it, Morus? It does show,
That Morus is not wise, for thinking so.
But Morus keeps his Chamber: There will be,
Morus, one Fool the lo^^e abroad by Thee.
93.
On some Faiths.
SOme Faiths are like those Mills, that cannot grind
Their C^rne, unles they work against the Wind:
94.
On the Temporizer.
HE seems to be a Man of War; His sail
Being filled and prosper'd with a foreright Gale,
Makes speedy way; and, with her Keele, divides
The sparkling furrows of the swelling Tides;
Or if the wind should slack, or ^^ase to blow,
Can make a shift to Tide it to and fro;
But if it prove a Storm, or the wind cro^^e,
His wavering Bottom soon begin^ to toss
Upon the troubled ^aves, without r^gard
Of either stear^, or yet the sea-mans ^ard;
His prouder Courage quails, and the rough weather
Transports his wandering keel, he knows not whither;
Till, after many a ruine-threatning knock,
He Is overwhelmd or splitt upon a Rock.
95.
On our sins.
IT is an Error even as foul, to call
Our sins too great for pardon, as too small.
96.
On the Hypocrite.
He Is like a Christmas Candle, whose good name
Crowns his fair actions with a glorious flame;
Burns clear and bright, and leaves no ground for doubt
To question, but he stincks at going out;
When Death puf^s out his Flame, the snuff will tell
If he were Wax or Tallow, by the smell.
97.
On Secret mungers.
HE, that at Secrets, shall compose his aim,
Is like the Fly that sports about the Flame;
He never leaves to buzze, until he brings
Himself to ruin; or at least, his wings:
And like a desperate Fly, though he has bin
Once schorcht, he will venture at the Flame agin.
98.
On a Fly.
THe Sun-delighting Fly repayres, at first
To the full Cup, only to quench her thirst;
But, oftentimes, she sports about the Brinke,
And sipps so long till she be drowned in drink:
When wanton leisure shall present thine eye
With lavish Cups, Remember but the Fly.
99.
On Scripture and Apocrypha.
When as the Scripture opens to mine eyes,
I see my Lord in's Bed: But when I meet
The Apocrypha at the end, me thinks it lies,
Like his well countnanc'd Page, at the Beds feet;
Who wears his Lords old Cloths, made less; and says
His own Inventions in his Masters Phrase.
100.
To my BOOK.
HEre comes a Critic; Close thy Page:
Thou art no Subject for this Age:
And censure, oftentimes, ye know,
Will strike the Dove, and spare the Crow:
But hold; Thy Guilt does not require
That thou should lurk, or yet retire;
Be open as the Eye of Noone:
And let Dogs bark against the Moon:
Thou have no Luster of thy own,
But what is derived from Heaven alone:
Fear not: Thy Heav'n-instructed Page,
Will either please, or teach the Age.
The end of the second Book.
DIVINE FANCIES.
The third Book.
1.
On old Wine and new.
OLd crazy Casks are not designd to hold
New-Wines; nor yet new Vessels, for the Old:
Old must, with Old; and new, with new, be filld:
Else will the vessels break, and Wine be spilld:
These empty Vessels are thy heart and mine;
The Law and Gospel represents the Wine:
The new's the Spirit, and the old's the Letter;
With reverence to the Text, The new's the better.
2.
On ZACHARIAS and the blessed Virgin.
HIs tongue required a Sign, which might afford
A cleerer Evidence, then the Angels word;
And had it too: Until those things shall come
To pass, his faithless lips are stricken dumb:
Our blessed Virgin, at her Salutation,
Seemd even as faithles, on the self same fashion
Her lips replied: And how can these things be?
Hard Justice! why he punished, and not she?
The Reason's easy to be riddeld out;
Hers was the voice of Wonder; His, of doubt.
3.
On a Picture.
SOme Pictures, with a fore-right eye, if seen,
Present unto the view some beauteous Queen;
But step aside, and it objects the shape;
On this side, of an Owl; on that, an Ape:
Look full upon the world, It proves the Story,
And beauteous Picture of the Almighties Glory;
But if thy change of posture lead thy sight
From the full view, to the left hand, or the right,
It offers to thine eye, but painted Toys,
Poor antic Pleasures, and deceitful Joys.
4.
On SERVIO.
SErvio's in Law: If Servio cannot pay
His Lawyers Fee, Servio may lose the day,
No wonder, formal Servio does trudge
So often to Church: He goes to Bribe his Judge.
5.
On PETER'S Cock.
THe Cock crow'd once, And Peter's careless ear
Could hear it, but his eye not spend a tear:
The Cock crow'd twice, Peter began to creep
To the Fire side, but Peter could not weep:
The Cock crow'd thrice: Our Savior turned about,
And looked on Peter; Now his tears burst out:
'Twas not the Cock, It was our Saviors Eye.
Till he shall give us tears, we cannot cry.
6.
On AMBIDEXTER.
GOd keep my Goods, my Name, they never fall
Into the Net of Ambidexters Laws;
But, for a Cause, he seldom prays at all;
But curses, evermore, without a Cause:
I Would rather have his Curses, all the day,
Then give his Conscience the least cause to pray.
7.
On Lazarus, the Damsel, and a sinner.
LAz'rus come forth? why could not Laz'rus plead,
I cannot come, great God, for I am dead:
Dam'sell arise? when Death had closd her eyes,
What power had the Damsel to arise?
Sinner repent? Can we as dead, in sin,
As Laz'rus, or the Damsel, live agin?
Admit we could; could we appoint the hour?
The Voice that calls, gives, and gives then the power.
8.
On Sin.
HOw, how am I deceived! I thought my bed
Had entertaind a fair, a beauteous Bride:
O, how were my believing thoughts misled
To a false Beauty, lying by my side!
Sweet were her Kisses, full of choice delight;
My Fancy found no difference in the night.
I thought they were true Joys, that thus had led
My darkened Soul, But they were false Alarmes;
I thought I Would had fair Rachel in my Bed,
But I had bleare eyed Leah in my arms:
How seeming sweet is Sin, when cloathd with Night;
But, when discovered, what a loathd delight.
9.
On Repentance.
It Is not, to Cry God mercy, or to sit
And droope; or to confess, that thou have faild;
It Is, to bewail the sins, thou did commit,
And not commit those sins, thou have bewaild:
He that bewailes, and not forsakes them too,
Confesses, rather, what he means to do.
10.
On Man.
MAn is a mooving Limbeck, to distill
Sweet smelling waters; where withal to fill
Gods empty B^ttle: Lord do thou inspire
Thy quickening spirit; Put in thy sacred Fire;
And then mine eyes shall never cease to drop,
Till they have brimd thy Bottle, to the Top:
I can do nothing, Lord, till thou inspire:
I Am a cold Limbeck, but expecting Fire.
11.
On the pouring out of our hearts.
It Is easy to pour in: But few, I doubt,
Attain that curious Art, of pouring out:
Some pour their hearts, like oil, that there resides
An unctions substance still, about the sides:
Others, like Wine; which, though the substance pass,
Does leave a kind of savor in the Glass;
Some pour their hearts like Milk, whose hiew distaines
Though neither Substance, nor the sent remains:
How shall we pour them, then; that smell, nor matter,
Nor color stay? Pour out your hearts like water.
12.
On Friends.
GOd shield me from those friends, I trust; and be
My firm defense from such, as trust not Thee.
13.
On the Hypocrite.
He Is like a Bul-rush; seems so smooth, that not
The eye of Cato can discry a knot:
Pill but the Bark, and strip his smoother skin,
And thou shall find him spungie, all within:
His brows are always ponderous as Lead,
He ever droopes, and hangs his velvet head:
He washes often; but, if thou enquire
Into his depth, his roots are fixed in mire.
14.
On SERVIO.
SErvio would thrive; and therefore, does obey
Gods Law, and shuts up Shop oth' Sabbath day:
Servio would prosper in his home affairs,
And therefore dares not miss his Dyet-Prayres.
Servio must put to Sea, and does implore;
Toth'end, that he might safely come ashore.
Servio's in Suit, and therefore must be tied
To morning prayre, until his Cause be tried:
Servio begins to loath a Single life,
And therefore prays for a high-portion'd Wife:
Servio would feign be thought religious too,
And therefore prays as the Religious do:
Servio still prays for Profit, or Applause;
Servio will seldom pray, without a Cause.
15.
On the Devils Masterpiece.
THis is the height the Devils Art can show,
To make man proud, because he is not so.
16.
On our Saviors Fishing.
WHen as our blessed Savior took in hand
To be a Fisher; Mark the rule he keeps;
He first puts off a little from the Land;
And, by degrees, he launchd into the Deepes:
By whose example, our Men-fishers hold
The self same course; They do the same, or should.
17.
On Man's greatest Enemy.
OF all those mortal enemies, that take part
Against my Peace, Lord, keep me from my Heart.
18.
On the Hypocrite.
He Is like a Reed, that always does reside,
Like a well planted Tree, by th'water side;
He bears no other fruit, but a vain brag
Of formal sanctity; A very Flagge:
He Is round, and full of substance, to the show;
But hollow hearted, if inquired into:
In peaceful seasons, when the weather's fair,
Stands firm; but shakes, with every blast of Air.
19.
On the holy Scriptures.
WHy did our blessed Savior please to break
His sacred thoughts in Parables; and speak
In dark Enigma's? Whosoere thou be
That findst them so, they were not spoke to Thee:
In what a case is he, that happs to run
Against a post, and cries, How dark's the Sun?
Or he, in Summer, that complains of Frost?
The Gospell's hid to none, but who are lost:
The Scripture is a Ford, wherein, it is said,
An Elephant shall swim; a Lamb may wade.
20.
On Man's heart.
NAture presents my heart in Ore;
Fair civil carriage gilds it over;
Which, when The Almighty shall behold
With a pleased eye, he brings to gold:
Thus changed, the Temple Balance weighs it;
If dross remain, the Touch bewrayes it;
Afflictions Furnace, then refines it:
Gods holy Spirit stamps and coins it:
No Coin so current; it will go
For the best Wares, that Heaven can show,
21.
On Drunkenness.
MOst Sins, at least, please Sense; but this is treason
Not only against the crown of Sense, but Reason.
22.
On a Kiss.
ERe since our blessed Savior was betrayed
With a Lip-Kisse, his Vicar is afraid:
From whence, perchance, this common use did grow
To kiss his the other End; I mean his Toe.
23.
On the Alchymist.
THe patient Alchymist, whose vain desire,
By Art, is to dissemble natures Fire,
Imployes his labor, to transmute the old,
And baser substance into perfect Gold:
He laughs at unbeleevers, scorns and flouts
Illiterate Counsel; neither cares, nor doubts:
Until, at length, by his ingenious Itch,
He Is brought most poor, in seeking to be rich:
Such is the Civillman; that by his even
And level actions hopes to merit Heaven;
He thinks, by help of Nature, to acquire,
At least to counterfeit the Sacred Fire
Of saving Grace, to purge and to refresh
His base desires, and change his stone, to flesh:
He spurns at Counsel; He derides and jerks
Those whining Spirits that renounce their works;
Till, too much trusting to their doing well,
In seeking Heaven, they find the flames of hell,
24.
On the ten Lepers.
TEn Lepers cleansed? And but one, of ten
Return the Clenser thanks? Ungrateful Men!
But Ten in the Hundred? 'That's a Gain that we
Receive or Sue, yet often deny it Thee.
25.
On the last Epigram.
HOw, how, am I deceived, that speak to thee
Of Interest, when the purchase was in Fee!
Thou made a clean Conveyance to the Ten,
And never expectd'st the Principal again:
Lord, we must reckon by another Rate:
They gave not one years Purchase for the Estate:
Lord, how we palter with thee! We pretend
A present Payment, till w'obtaine our End:
And then we crave, and crave a longer Day,
Then pay in Driblets; or else, never pay.
26.
On the Box of Ointment.
IT is no wonder, he, above the rest,
Whom thirty pieces tempted to betray
The Lord of Glory to his death, professed
The Box of Ointment was but cast away:
He that dare murder at so small a cost,
May easily think the charge in Burial, lost.
27.
On MARY and JVDAS.
MAry did kiss him: Judas kissed him too,
But both their aims were coverd in a mist;
Both kiss our Savior; but their kisses do
Differ as far as did the Parts they kissed:
There Is danger still, where double hearts do steal
The form of Love, or wear the cloak of Zeal.
28.
On our Savior and his Vicar.
ME thinks thy Vicar General bears the Keys,
And executes thy Place, with greater case.
And in one Iubile, enjoyes more mirth,
Then thou, my dying Lord, did from thy Birth,
Alas: Thou had not, wherewithal to fill
Thy craving stomach: He has Cates at will:
Thy empty Costers had not to defray
Thy Tribute charge: To him Kings Tribute pay;
Foxes have holes; Thou had not, whereupon
To rest thy wakefull head: He snorts in Down:
In short, Thy life was nothing but the Story
Of Poverty; and his, of Princely Glory:
When tempting Satan would have given thee all
The wealth and glory of the World, to fall
And worship him; at thy refusal, Lord,
Thy Vicar took the Tempter at his word;
So came thy wants so great; so great his store;
The Vicar so-so rich; the Lord, so poor.
29.
On the great Prelate.
Our Saviors Feet were kissed: The people do
The very same to thee, great Prelate, too;
O, who will seal but such another Kiss
Upon thy Lips, our Savior had on his!
30.
On Idolatry.
CAn common madness find a thing, that is more
Repugnant to the very Laws of Nature;
That the Creators Image should adore
The senseless Image of a sensual creature!
If such be Gods; if such our helpers be,
O, what are Men! How more then Beasts are we!
31.
On the Tables of Stone.
THat stony Table could receive the print
Of thy just Laws; Thy Laws were written in it:
It could be hewed, and letters grav'n thereon;
Sure, Lord, my Heart is harder then that Stone.
32.
On Man's three Enemies.
There Is three, that with their fiery Darts, do level
Against my Soul, the World, the Flesh, the Devil.
Lord, give me patience, if not strength; For there
Are Three to afflict me; I Am but One, to bear.
33.
On DINAH.
WHen Dinahs careless Eye was grown too lavish
To entertain, Sechem found time to ravish:
It is no less then silent invitation,
Although we scorn the Sin, to give the occasion:
Sure, Dinahs Resolution was too strong,
Or to admit, or not resist a Wrong,
And scorns to stoop to the Adult'rers arms;
We often burn, intending but to warme's:
She went but out to see, Perchance, to hear
What Lust could say: What harm to lend an ear?
Another Sin, sometimes, procures our shames:
It stains our Bodies; or, at least, our Names.
34.
On FIDO.
MArk, when the good man prospers with his Plot,
He Is still envied; despised, if prosper not;
The Wicked have no peace with God; And, then,
How can thou, Fido, look to have peace with men?
35.
On JACOB.
HOw Jacob's troop'd: Laban pursues with one
Great Troop; and Esau meets him with another.
Laban resolves to apprehend his Son:
Esau, to be revenged upon his Brother:
Me thinks I see how Jacob stands supplide,
Like Virtue with a Vice on either side:
Laban pursues him, to regaine his Gods:
Esau, t'avenge his Birthright and his Blessing:
What hope has Jacob now? 'Twixt both, it is ods,
There will be either Death or Dispossessing:
God takes delight to turn our helper, then,
When all our helps and hopes are past with men.
Laban encounters Jacob: He requires
His Gods: And Esau's near at hand, by this:
Laban's appeased; and quenched are Esaus Fyres;
The One leaves him; The Other meets him with a Kiss;
Jacob's in league with both: The Soul that shall
Have peace with God, has League and peace with all.
36.
On Drunkenness.
IT is a Thief; that, often, before his face,
Steals Man away, and lays a Beast in's place.
37.
On a Tenis-Court.
MAn is a Tenis-Court: His Flesh, the Wall:
The Gamesters God, and Satan. Th'heart's the Ball:
The higher and the lower Hazzards are
Too bold Presumption, and too base Despair:
The Rackets, which our restless Balls make fly,
Adversity, and sweet Prosperity:
The Angels keep the Court, and mark the place,
Where the Ball falls, and chaulk out every Chase:
The Line's a Civil life, we often cross,
Ore which, the Ball not flying, makes a Loss:
Detractors are like Standers-by, that bett
With Charitable men: Our Life's the Set;
Lord, In this Conflict, in these fierce Assaults,
Laborious Satan makes a world of Faults;
Forgive them Lord, although he never implore
For favor: They Will be set upon our score:
O, take the Ball, before it come toth'ground,
For this base Court has many a false Rebound:
Strike, and strike hard, but strike above the Line:
Strike where thou please, so as the Set be thine.
38.
On Abels Blood.
ABel was silent, but his Blood was strong,
Each drop of guiltles blood commands a tongue,
A tongue, that cries; It Is not a tongue, implores
For gentle Audience, It Is a tongue that rores
For hideous Vengeance: It Is a tongue that is bold
And full of Courage, and that cannot hold:
O, what a noise my Blessed Saviors Blood
Makes now in heaven! how strong it cries! how loud!
But not for Vengeance: From his side, has sprung
A world of drops; From every drop, a Tongue.
39
On the Memory.
DOes thy corrected Frailty still complain
Of thy disloyal Memory? do retain
Nothing that is Good? And is the better part
Of what thou hear'^, before it warm thy heart,
Snatched from thy false Remembrance? Is the most
Of what th'inspired Prophets tell thee, lost
In thy unhospitable ears? And not
To be recalled? Quite buried? Quite forgot?
Fear not: Thou have a Chanc'lour in thy Breast,
That keeps the Exchequer, and hoards up the least,
The poorest Sum: No, no, thou needst not fear,
There Is nothing will be lost that is taken there:
Think thou, that thou have lost that piece of Gold
That Is dropped into a fairer Heap, untold?
Or can thou judge that Fire, closed about
With raked up Embers, 'cause not scene, is out?
Gold, lost in greater sums, is still thine own;
And raked up Embers will, in time, be blown
To Flames: Beleeve't the Words thine ears have lost,
Thy heart will find, when thou shall need them most.
40.
On the Babel-Builders.
SVre, if those Babel-Builders had thought good
To raise their heav'n-high Tower before the flood,
The wiser sort of people might deride
Their Folly, and that Folly had salv'd their Pride;
Or had their Faiths but enterpriz'd that Plot,
Their hearts had finished what their hands could not;
'Twas not for love of Heaven: nor did they aim
So much to raise a Building; as a Name:
They that by Works shall seek to make intrusion
To Heaven, find nothing but their own Confusion.
41.
On ESAV and JACOB.
ESau goes forth; strives, with his own disquiet,
To purchase Ven'son for his fathers Diet:
Jacob abides at home; and, by his Mother,
Is taught the way, how to supplant his brother:
There Is some that hunt, like Esau, sweat and toil,
And seek their Blessing by their own Turmoyle;
Whilst others crave assistance, and bewray
Their wiser weakness, in a safer Way:
O, if the Church my Mother will instruct me;
Make savory Meat, and cloth me, and conduct me
Into my Fathers Arms, these hands shall never
Trust to the poorness of their own Endevor:
Bring I a Kid but of my Mothers dressing,
'Twill please my Father, and procure my Blessing.
42.
On several Sins.
Gross Sin.
IS like a Shower, which ere we can get in
Into our Conscience, wets us to the skin:
Sin of Infirmity.
IS like the falling of an April Shower;
It Is often Rain, and Sunshine, in an hour.
Sin of Custom.
IS a long Shower, beginning with the Light
Oft-times continuing till the Dead of Night.
Sin of Ignorance.
IT is a hideous Mist, that wetts amain,
Though it appear not in the form of Rain.
Crying Sin.
IT is a sudden Shower, that tears in sunder
The Cope of Heaven, and always comes with Thunder.
Sin of Delight.
IS like a fethered shower of Snow, not felt,
But soakes to the very skin, when ere it melt:
Sin of Presumption.
DOes like a Shower of Hayle, both wet and wound
With sudden Death: or strikes us to the Ground.
The Sin of Sins.
IT is a sulfurous Shower, such as fell
On Sodom, strikes, and strikes to the Pit of Hell.
43.
On these Showers.
GOod God! what Weather's here! These souls of our
Have still the luck to travel in a Shower:
Lord, we are cold and pitifully drencht;
Not a dry third; And all our Fyer's quenched:
Our very Blood is cold; Our trembling knees
Are mutual Andvils; Lord, we stand and freeze:
Alas we find small comfort from the Eye
Of Heaven; These showring clouds, our sins, do fly
Betwixt the Sun and us: We dry no more,
Then if the Sun had given his office o'r:
Nay Lord; if now and then those Beams do chance
To break upon's, and lend a feeble glaunce
Upon our reeking souls, ere we begin
To feel the warmth, we are dous'd and drencht agin:
In what a case are we! Our nightly damps
And daily storms, have filled our Souls with Cramps,
With wavering Palseyes, and our hoarser tongues
Can do thee service, nor in Prayers, nor Songs:
Our Zeales are Aguish; hot and cold: They be
Extremely hot toth' World, as cold to Thee;
Our Blood has got a Fever: Lord, it must
Be set on fire with every wanton Lust:
What worlds of mischiefs are there, that prevail not
Upon our fainting Souls? What is it we ayle not,
That Wet and Cold can bring? Yet have no power
To keep us in, but dable in the Shower:
Shine forth, bright Sun of glory; Be as feirce,
As these eclipsing Clouds are black; Disperse
And clear them with thy stronger beams, that thus
Dare interpose betwixt thy Glory' and us:
Reflect on my distempered Soul; Refine
This vap'rous Earth, this sinful Flesh of mine,
That, tho some Drops m^^^ fall, I may have power,
Sheltered by thee, t'avoyd the down right Shower;
O let my dabled Spirit still retire
To thee, and warm her by thy Sacred Fire;
That having ravill'd out some weary hours,
She may arrive where is neither Clouds nor Showers.
44.
On DIVES and LAZARUS.
DId ever Judge more equally proceed
To punish Sin? so right, in kind, and nature?
Poor Laz'rus was refused a Crum of Bread;
And Dives was denied a Drop of Water:
Children are oftentimes so like the Mother,
That men may easily know the one, by the other.
45.
On two Suitors.
THe Soul is like a Virgin; for whose love
Two jealous Suitors strive: Both daily move
For Nuptial favor; Both, with Lovers Art,
Plead for the Conquest of the Virgins heart:
The first, approaching, knocked, and knocked agin;
The Door being opened, at his entering in,
He blushd; and (as young bashful Lovers use)
Is more then half discouraged, ere he sues:
At length, that love, that taught him what to fear,
Gave resolution to present her ear
With what he hoped, and in a lovers fashion,
He often repeates the Story of his Passion:
He vows his Faith, and the sincere perfection,
Of undissembled, and entyre Affection;
He sues for equal mercy from her Eye;
And must have love, or else, for love, must dye:
His present means were short: He made profession
Of a fair Ioynture, though but small possession:
And in word, to make his passion good,
He offers to deserve her with his Blood:
The other boldly enters: with the strong
And sweet-lip'd Reth'ricke of a Courtly tongue,
Salutes her gentle ears: His lips discover
The amorous language of a wanton Lover:
He smiles and faunes, and now and then lets fly
Imperious glaunces from his sparkling Eye;
Bribes her more orient neck with pearl; with charms*
-Enclosing Bracelets decks her yvory Arms;
He boasts the extent of his Imperial Power,
And offers Wealth and Glory for a Dower:
Betwixt them both the Virgin stands perplexed;
The first Tale pleased her well, until the next
Was told: She liked the one, the other* Loath
To make a choice: She could affect them Both:
The one was Iocund, full of sprightly mirth:
The other, better borne; of nobler birth:
The second su'de in a compleater fashion;
I, but the first showed deeper wounds of Passion:
The first was sadly modest: And the last
More rudely pleasant: His fair looks did cast
More amorous flames; But yet the tothers eye
Did promise greater Nuptial Loyalty:
The last's more rich; yet Riches, but for life,
Make a poor Widow, of a happy Wife:
The first's Estate's but small, if not made good
By Death: Fair Ioyntures comfort Widow hood:
Who^ shall this Virgin (...) Her thoughts approve
The last, for present wealth, the first, for love:
Both may not be enjoyed: Her heart must smother
Her love to one, if she affect the other:
Ah, silly Virgin, Is the choice so hard
In two extremes? Can thy weak thoughts reward
Two so unequal, with a like Respect?
Know thou not which to slight, and which t'affect?
Submit to better judgment, and advise
With thy best Friend: O trust not thine own eyes:
This last, that seems so pleasant, so acute,
Is but a Slave, dressed in his Lords old Suite:
He brags of Glory, and of Princely Power,
When he is kicked and baffled every hour:
The Treasure that he boasts is not his own,
He basely stole it, and the Theft is known;
For which, he is arraigned, condemned to th'paines
Of death; His sentence is, to hang in Chains:
His plott's to bring thee in as deep as He;
Beleeve't; It is thy Blood he seeks, not Thee:
The Bribes he gave thee, are but stolen: Fond Girl,
Discard those Bracelets, and disclaim that Pearl:
The first, whose often repeated knocks did crave
Admittance, was the Lord to that base slave:
His Faith is loyal, and as firm his Vow:
To him, his life's not half so dear, as thou:
That wealth, that honor, that dissembled power,
That pleasant Pesant offered as a Dower,
Is that fair Lords: Nor peace, nor power ^or wealth
Can any challenge from him, but by stealth:
Match there, my Soul, and let thy sacred Vows
Plight holy Contracts with so sweet a Spouse:
His left hand's full of treasure; And his right;
Of peace, and honor, and unknown delight:
He Will give thee wealth; and in that wealth, content,
For present means; And (when thy Glass has spent
Her latest Sand, that Time untransitory
Thy days) a Jointure of Eternal Glory.
46.
On the old and new Garment.
NEw Garments being brought, who is it that would
Not scorn to live a Prisoner to the Old?
Yet though our bo^nteous Savior, at his cost,
Presents us new, we love the old ones most:
Alas, they pinch us! O, they sit too strait!
They are too combersome! too great a weight!
No, no; the old were too too light, too great;
So we have ease, we care not to be neat:
Like tired Jades, our better wills repair
To a foul Stable, then t'a Rod^ that is fair.
47.
On Man's cooperation.
WE are not Blocks: We must expect the Call;
And, being called, must move, and rise withal:
The Voice were needless, and as good be dumb,
As, with the Call, not give the power to come:
Deserves he food, that thinks it vain to gape?
Christ takes his Spouse by Contract, not by Rape.
48.
On the old and new Tables.
THe former Tables of the Law were broken,
And left no Monuments of themselves, no token,
No Sign that ever such things were: But mark,
The later were kept holy in the Arc:
Those Tables are our Hearts. Can we be bold
To look for new, and yet not break the old?
Or can the ruins of the old find place
In the Arc of Glory, not repayr'd by Grace?
Dismount, O blessed Moses, and renew
Those Tables thou have broken, or make new.
49.
On a Crucifixe.
WHy not the Picture of our dying Lord,
As of a Friend? Nor this, nor that is adored:
Does not the eternal Law command, that thou
Shall even as well forbear to make, as bow?
Not to so good an end? To Advance his passion?
The Gold being pure, what matter for the Fashion;
Take heed: The purest gold does often take
Some loss, some prejudice, for the fashions sake:
Not to a Civil end? To garnish Halls?
To deck our windows? To adorn our Walls?
Shewbread must not be common: And the Cruse
Of holy Oil admits no Civil use:
No, no; the beauty of his Picture lies
Within; It Is the object of our Faith, not Eyes.
50.
On praying to Saints.
NOt pray to Saints? Is not the Warrant ample,
If backed with Scripture? strengthened with example?
Did not that sweltring Dives make complaint
For water? was not Abraham a Saint?
Why should reformed Churches then forbid it?
It Is true: But tell me; what was He, that did it?
51.
On Confession.
EXperience tells, That Agues are about
To wear away, when as our Lips break out:
In Spiritual Fevers, there is the same expression
Of Health, when lips break forth into Confession:
But mark: These hopeful Symptoms never do
Confirm the Ague gone, but fair to go:
They do not always work, what they portend;
Confession profits not, unless we mend.
52.
On SOLOMON'S Rejoice.
YOung man Rejoice: What jolly mirth is here?
Let thy heart cheer thee: What delicious Cheer?
In thy young days; Thy Cates will relish sweeter.
Walk thy own ways: Thy Cares will pass the fleeter:
Please thine own heart: Carve where it likes thee best:
Delight thine eyes: And be a Joyful Guest:
But know withal, The Day will come, whereon
Thy Judge will doom thee for the deeds thou have done:
O what a Feast! O what a Reckning's here!
The Cates are sweet; The Shot's extremely dear:
Lord, I have been, and am a daily Guest
(Too often invited) at the Young man's Feast:
The Reckning's great; Although I cannot pay,
I can confess; Great God, before this Day,
I had been dragd to the redeemlesse Iayle,
Had thou not pleased t'accept my Saviors Bail;
Lord, he must bear't I doubt: For I can get
Nor Coin to pay, nor labor out the Debt:
I cannot dig, my Joints are stark and lame,
But I can beg, although I beg with shame;
I have no Grace in begging; can receive
The first repulse: I have no Faith, to crave:
If th'entertainments of the Feast be these;
Lord give me Famine; take the Feast that please:
53
On Bread.
TAke up that bit of Bread: And understand,
What it is thou hold in thy careless hand:
Observe it with thy thoughts, and it will read thee
An useful Lecture, even as well as feed thee;
We stir our Lands, or give directions how;
But God must send a season for the Plough:
We sow our Seed; But sow our seed in vain,
If Heaven deny the first, the later Rain;
Small proof in Showrs, if heavens pleased hand shall cease
To bless those showrs, nor crown the^ with increase.
The tender Blades appear, before thine eye,
But, uarefresht by heaven, as soon they die:
The infant Ears shoot forth, and now begin
To corn: But God must hold his Mildewes in:
The Harvest's come: But Clouds conspire together
Hands cannot work, til heaven shall clear the weather:
At length it is reaped: Between the Barn and Furrow
How many Offices poor Man runs through!
Now God has done his part: The rest we share
To Man: His providence takes now the care:
No; yet it is not ours: The use alone,
Not bare possession makes the thing our own:
Thy swelling Barnes have crowned thy full desire;
But heaven, when Mows should sweat, can make them
I, but the Sheaves are thrasht, and the heap lies
In thy full Garnier. He that sent the Flies fire;
To Pharees Court, can, with as great an ease,
Send thee more wastfull vermin if he please:
Perchance it is grounded, kneded: and what though?
Gods Curse is often tempered with the Dough;
Beleeve't the fruits of all thy toil, is mine,
Until they be enjoyed, as much as thine:
But now t'has fed thee: Is thy soul at rest?
Perchance, thy stomack's dainty to digest.
No, if heavens following favor do not last
From the first Furrow to the very Taste,
Thy labor's lost: The Bread of all thy travill,
Without that blessing, feeds no more then Gravill:
Now wastfull Man, thou may repose again
That Model of Gods Prov'dence and thy pain:
That bitt of Bread; And if thy Dog should fawn
Upon thy lap, let not so dear a Pawn
Of greater plenty be contemned and lost;
Remember how it came, and what it cost.
54.
On Faith and Reason.
TRue Faith and Reason, are the Souls two Eyes:
Faith evermore looks upward, and discryes
Objects remote; but Reason can discover
Things only near; sees nothing that is above her;
They are not Matches; Often disagree;
And sometimes both are closed, and neither see:
Faith viewes the Sun; and Reason, but the shade;
The One courts the Mistress; the other wooes the Maid:
That fees the Fire; This, only but the Flint;
The true-bred Christian always looks asquint.
55.
On Carnal Mirth.
Who seeks to quench by help of Carnal friends
Those fiery Errants that the conscience sends,
Redeemes his Peace, but with a further spoil;
Drinks in a Fever: quenches Fire with Oil.
Lord, if thou strike my Conscience; and that, Me:
I will expect, and trust no Friend, but Thee.
56.
On Prayer.
PRayre's like a Vapor fumed from earth; that flies
To the Gates of Heaven: It never rotts in the Skies:
If Faith and it be joined, it will obtain,
And melt into a first and later Rain;
If Faith forsake her, and they part in sunder,
It falls in Thunderbolts; at least, in Thunder.
57.
On ANNA.
What faithful Anna by her Tears had done
Deserved the double duty of a Son:
She was a double Parent; pleased to do
A double Office; bore, and got him too:
Thus Samuel was (It was less strange then rare)
Borne of her Body, gotten by her Prayer.
58.
On a Gift.
NO loss to give to thee; the gift is more
Our own, being given, great God; then 'twas before.
59.
On my self.
IF Righteous Ely was not vengeance-free,
How shall I escape! He was a Saint, to me:
Nay, Lord, how would my heart and comfort fail,
If I should weigh thy Mercies in our Scale!
60.
On Justification and Sanctification.
LOrd, thou have promised, in and for thy Christ,
To sanctify where ere thou Iustifi'st:
Lord, all my Evils are Iustifi'd in thee;
Lord, let those Evils be sanctified to me.
61.
On Man's Love.
WHen think we, Lord: on thee! and when we do,
How feeble are our thoughts, and sinful too!
How basely do our crooked Souls engage
Themselves to heaven? We make thy Glory, Page
To our Salvation: Man's more servile heart
Loves what he would have thee, Lord, not what thou art:
This is the very best of Man; wherein
We Are apt to think we merit more, then Sin.
But there is a baser Love: Our chief respects
Have mere relation to our own Defects,
Like Dogs we fawn upon our Masters Lapps,
With dirty feet, and only love for Scrapps.
But there is a baser yet: We love for fear,
Finding, like Kain, more then we can bear,
And, were it not for shame, our hearts would be
As warm to Satan, as, great God, to Thee:
But there is a baser yet: And baser none:
We love thee, to be loved of man alone:
We force a Zeal; usurp the name of Pure;
That we may sin more closely, more secure,
We love thee only to abuse thee, just
As Whores love Husbands, but to cloak their lust:
How art thou martyred in our lustful Fyres!
How made a Stale to catch our wild desires!
Lord, I will love as far as lies in me,
Thee for thy self, and all things else in Thee:
62.
On filial love and servile.
They Are not alike, although alike appear:
The One fears for love: The other loves for Fear.
63.
On Grapes.
IT is received, That seed of Grapes being sown,
Brings forth degenerate Clusters, or else none:
But Stocks being grafted prove a fruitful Vine,
Whose pleasing Berries yield a generous wine;
We are thy Vineyard, Lord; These Grapes of our,
By Nature, are degenerous and sower;
But if thou please to graft us, we shall bear
Delicious fruit; which being pressed, shall cheer
The hearts of Angels, and that blessed Trine
Of perfect glory with their sprightly Wine.
64.
On Joy and Grief.
LOrd, if my Griefs were not opposed with Joy,
They would destroy:
And if my Mirth were not allaid with Sadness,
It would be Madness:
While this, with that, or that, with this contends,
They Are both my Friends:
But when these happy Wars do chance to cease,
I have no peace:
The more my earthly Passions do contest,
The more my heavenly' Affections are at rest.
65.
On Doves and Serpents.
WE must have Doves and Serpents in our heart,
But how they must be marshalled there is the Art;
They must agree, and not be far asunder;
The Dove must hold the wily Serpent under:
Their natures teach what places they must keep,
The Dove can fly, the Serpent only creep.
66.
On Christ, and our selves.
I Wish a greater knowledge, then t'attaine
The knowledge of my self; A greater Gain
Then to augment my self; A greater Treasure
Then to enjoy my self; A greater Pleasure
Then to content my self: How slight, and vain
Is all selfe-Knowledge, Pleasure, Treasure, Gain;
Unless my better knowledge could retrive
My Christ; unless my better Gain could thrive
In Christ; unless my better Wealth grow rich
In Christ; unless my better Pleasure pitch
On Christ; Or else my Knowledge will proclaim
To my own heart how ignorant I am:
Or else my Gain, so ill improved, will shame;
My Trade, and show how much declined I am:
Or else my Treasure will but blurre my name
With Bankrupt, and divulge how poor I am;
Or else my Pleasures, that so much inflame
My thoughts, will blabb how full of fores I am:
Lord, keep me from my self; It Is best for me,
Never to own my self, if not in Thee.
67.
On Man.
AT our Creation, but the Word was said,
And we were made:
No sooner were, but our false hearts did swell
With Pride, and fell:
How slight is Man! At what an easy cost
He Is made and lost!
68.
On Death.
WE all are going to the self same Place,
We only differ in our Way, our Pase:
One treads the common Road of Age: Another
Travels, directed by the hand os's Brother:
Some cross the Waves, perchance the nearer way;
Some by the winged Shaft that flies by Day;
Some ride on Fevers* others beat the hoof,
With horses in their hands, and make a proof
Of their own strrngth; Others more fairly pase
On beds of Down; some ride a speedy race
On hot-mouthd Surfeits, emulous for the Cup:
Some hotly mounted fiercely gallop up.
On spurgal'd Broils, whose Frantic motions send
Their hasty spirits to their Iournies end:
Some ride upon the racking Steeds of Treasure;
Others false-gallop on the backs of Pleasure:
All journey forwards to the selfsame Place;
Some, the next way; and some, the faster pace:
All post an end; till beaten out of Breath,
They all arrive at the great gates of Death;
Lord, in this common Road, I do not care
What pase I travel, so my Way be fair.
69.
On the life of Man.
Our Life is nothing but a Winters Day;
Some only break their Fast, and so, away:
Others stay Dinner, and depart full fed;
The deepest Age but sups, and goes to bed:
He Is most in debt, that lingers out the Day;
Who dies betimes, has less; and less to pay.
70.
On Gods Image.
IT was a dainty piece! In every part,
Drawn to the life, and full of curious Art:
It was as like thee as a shadow could
Be like a substance; There was none but would
Have known thee by it: There needed then no name,
No golden Characters, that might proclaim
Whose Picture it was: the Art was so divine
That very Beasts did reverence, as thine:
But now, alas, it is blurred: the best that we
Or they can judge, is this, 'twas made for thee:
Alas'tis faded, soyl'd with hourly dust,
Sullyed, and shadowed with the smoke of Lust;
So swarthy as if that glorious face of thine
Were tawnyed underneath the torrid Line:
How is thy Picture altered! How ill used
By our neglects! How slubberd! How abused!
Her Cedar Frame's disioynted, warped and broke;
Her curious Tablet's tainted with the smoke:
The Objects both offensive, and the savor;
Retaining neither Beauty, nor thy Favor:
Lord, let not thy displeased eye forsake
Thy handy-worke; for the bad keepers sake:
Behold it still; and what thou see amiss,
Pass by: Think what it was; not what it is:
What though her beauty and her colors fade?
Remember; O, 'twas like thee when 'twas made.
There is a great Apelles that can lim
With thy own Pencell; we have sought to Him:
His skillful hand will wash off all the soil,
And cleanse thy Picture with his sacred Oil:
He Will mak't more fair then 'twas; at least, the same;
He Will mend the Tablet, and renew the Frame:
Till then; be pleased to let thy Picture be
Acknowledged thine: 'Twas made for none but Thee.
71.
On the Penny.
HE that endured the Tyranny of Heat;
The Morning-sorrowes, and the Midday-sweat;
The Evening-toyle, and burden of the Day,
Had but his promised Penny for his pay:
Others, that loyter'd all the Morning; stood
In The idle Market, whose unpracticed blood
Scarce felt the warmth of labor, nor could show
A blush of Action, had his Penny too.
What Wages can we merit, as our own?
Slaves that are bought with price, can challeng none,
But only Stripes: alas, if Servants could
Do more, then bid, they do but what they should*
When man endeavors, and where heaven engages
Himself by promise, they are Gifts, not Wages,
He must expect: We must not look t'obtaine
Because we Run; Nor do we run in vain:
Our Running shows the effect, produces none:
The Penny's given alike to every one,
That works in the Vin^yard: Equal price was shared
T'unequall works: Therefore no Reward:
Lord, set my hands a work: I will not serve
For Wages, lest thou give what I deserve.
72.
On a Christian.
THe Generous Christian must as well improve
In The quality of the Serpent, as the D^ve;
He must be Innocent; afraid, to do
A wrong; And crafty, to prevent it too:
They must be mixed, and tempered with true love;
An Ounce of Serpent, serves a Pound of Dove.
73.
On Gods bounty.
GOd freely gives; as freely we receive;
It is not, Do; but Ask, and thou shall have.
74.
On Sins.
MY Sins are like to Mountains, that arise
Above the Clouds, and threat the threatening skies;
Lord, give me Faith; and let that Faith be proved,
In leaving not a Mountain unremoov'd.
75.
On the life of Man.
A Thousand years, with God (the Scriptures say)
Are reckoned but a Day;
By which account; this measured Life of our
Exceeds not much an hour;
The half whereof Nature does claim and keep
As her own debt for sleep:
A full sixth part or what remains, we riot
In more then needful Diet:
Our Infancy, our Child hood, and the most
Of our green youth is lost:
The little that is left, we thus divide;
One part to cloathe our Pride;
An other Share we lavishly deboyse
To vain, or sinful joys;
If then, at most, the measured life of Man
Be counted but a Span,
Being half'd and quartered, and disquarter'd thus,
What, what remains for us?
Lord, if the Total of our days do come
To so-so poor a sum;
And if our shares so small, so nothing be,
Out of that Nothing, what remains to Thee?
76.
On the Childrens Bread.
THy strengthening Graces are the Childrens Bread,
Which maks thy thriving Children strong and able
Honor, and Riches are the Crummes that feed
The D^ggs that lurk beneath their Masters Table:
Lord, if thy gracious pleasure will allow
But Bread, I Am sure I shall have Crumbs enough:
77.
On Trust and care.
Our Trust in God, for Riches; neither must
Exclude our Care; nor Care exceed our Trust.
78.
On RVSCVS.
ILliterate Ruscus heard Pedantius preach;
Admired the Church man's learning, and commended
Such things alone, that were above his Reach;
But meanly slighted what he appprehended:
What hinders then to think that Ruscus has
At least the twilight of a Bastard Faith?
79.
On the receiving of the Lords Supper.
MEn take the Sacred Seals of their Salvation,
As some do Physic, not for health, but fashion:
The Day preceding, and the following Day,
There Is none so strict; none so reformed as they:
They curb the fury of their wanton Riot,
And call their Surfets to a stricter Diet:
The Time expired, the first Assault that haps,
Prevails, and strikes them to a worse Relaps;
Like Dogs to vomits they return agin,
As though they'ad past a Patent now to sin:
Let such Day-Christians, on the very top
Of all their mirth, remember Judas Sopp
80.
On Faith.
TH'oft shaken Tree grows faster at the root;
And faith's most firm, that is sometimes urged with Doubt.
81.
On the Story of Man?
THe word was spoke; And what was Nothing, must
Be made a Chaos of confused Dust:
The word was spoke: The Dust began to thicken
To a firm Clay: The Clay began to quicken:
The grosser substance of that Clay thought good
To turn to Flesh: The moyster turned to Blood:
Received Organs: and those Organs, Sense;
It was imbellisht with the Excellence
Of Reason: It became the Height of Nature,
Being stamped with The Image of the great Creator:
But, Lord, that glorious Image is defaced:
Her Beautye's blasted, and her Tablet's razed:
This Height of nature has committed Treason
Against it self: Declined both Sense and Reason;
Mere Flesh and Blood, containing but a Day
Of painted Pleasure, and but breathing Clay:
Whose Moisture, dried with his own sorrow, must
Resolve, and leave him to his former Dust;
Which Dust, the utter object of our loathing,
Small time consumes, and brings to his first Nothing:
Thus, from this Nothing, from this Dust, began
Thus Something, turned to Dust, to Nothing; Man.
82.
On ANANIAS.
THe Land was his: The land was his, alone;
'Twas sold, And now the Money was his own:
The power remained in the Possessors hand,
To keep his money, or have kept his Land:
But once devoted to the Churches good,
And then conceald, it cost his life, his blood:
If those that give, may not resume agin,
Without a Punishment, without a Sin,
What shall become of those, whose unjust power
Dispoyles the widdowed Temple of her Dower:
Who take her Profits, and in stead of giving
Increase to her revenues, make a living
Upon her Ruins, growing plump and full
Upon her Wants, being clothed in her Wool;
While she sustains th'extremes of cold and hunger,
To pamper up the fat Advousion-monger;
Who thrust their Flesh-hooks in their thristy Pot,
And only leave her what they value not:
The whilst her sacred Priests, that daily tread
Their slighted Corn, must beg their early Bread;
Or else, be forced to purchase easy shares
With the dear price of their ungranted Prayres:
Let such turn back their sacrilegious eyes,
And see how breathless Ananias lies:
Behold the Wages that his sin procures,
That was a Molehill, to these Alps of yours:
He took not from the Church: Did but conceal
Some part he gave; But your false fingers steal
Her maine Inheritance, her own Possession;
His was but bare deceit, yours bold Oppression:
O, if no less then the first death was due
To him, what death do you think's prepared for you?
So often as your pampered Eyes shall look
On your Estates, think on the Flying Book.
83.
On pious Uses.
THey that, in life, oppress, and then bequeath
Their Goods to pious uses at their death,
Are like those Drunkards, being laid to sleep,
That belch and vomit what they cannot keep:
To Gods and Man's acceptance, I presume
Their several Actions send the like perfume.
84.
On SOPHRONIA.
THe chaste Sophronia knows not how to escape
Th'inevitable danger of a Rape;
Cruel Sophronia draws her hasty knife
And would relieve her Chastity with life:
Doubtful Sophronia knows not what to do,
She cannot keep the one, and the other too:
Sophronia's in a strait; One eye is fixed
Of The seventh Commandment; the other, on the sixth;
To what Extremes is poor Sophronia driven!
Is not Sophronia left at Six and Seven?
85.
On the knowing Man.
He Is like a lusty Soil, whose Moisture feeds,
If not a world of Corn, a world of Weeds.
86.
On Romes Pardon.
IF Rome could pardon sins, as Romans hold,
And if such Pardons might be bought for Gold,
An easy Judgment might determine which
To choose: To be religious, or else Rich;
Nay Rome does pardon: Pardons may be sold;
We Will search no Scriptures, but the Mines, for Gold.
87.
On the World.
THe World, composed of heaven and earth,'s the story
Of Gods Eternal, and Man's Temp'rall Glory.
88.
On formal Devotion.
MEn do God Service with the same devotion,
As the soul Body takes his loathed Potion:
They stay and stay, then gulp it down in have,
Not for the pleasure, but to have it past:
Whose druggy Taste goes so against their mind;
That, often, the better part is left behind,
And what is taken,'s taken but in vain,
It either works not, or comes up again.
89
On heavenly Manna.
O What a world of heavenly Manna falls
Within the Circuit of our happy Walls!
With how great Joy would neighboring lands receive
The Fragments of those Fragments, that we leave!
Our furnished Markets flourish all the year:
We need no Ephaths, nor yet Omers here:
We take, unmeasured, from the bounteous heap;
Thanks never were so dear: not that, so cheap:
We never hoard, but toss from hand to hand,
As if that Famine had forsworn the Land;
Our satiate stomachs are so lavish fed,
That we even slight, and wanton with our Bread:
Ah Lord! I fear when careless children play
With their spoiled Bread, it is time to take away.
90.
On natural Sins.
TO murder Parents, or our selves, has bin,
Though falsely, counted an unnatural Sin:
By Nature, we are apt to fall into 't;
I rather think it unnatural not to do it:
If heaven should but forsake us, 'twere agin.
The very course of Nature, not to sin.
91.
On the Arc.
IF Floods of Tears should drown my world of Sin,
Alas, my floating Arc retains within,
A cursed Cham to store the World agin:
What then? so long as holy Sem vouchsafes
But to divide a Tent with bashful Iapheth.
92.
On SOPHRONIA.
SOphronia chooses rather to commit
Self Murder, then by violence, to submit
Her ventured honor to th'injurious trust
Of the eye sparkling Tyrants furious Lust:
What means Sophronia? Dare her conscience frame,
To act a Sin, but to prevent a Shame?
93.
On a fair Prospect.
Look up; And there, I see the fair abode
And glorious Mansion of my gracious God:
Look down; In every garnisht corner lies
Favors objected to my wondering eyes:
Look on my right hand; There, the sweet increase
Of Joys present me with a joyful Peace:
Look on my left hand; There, my Fathers Rod
Sublimes my knowledge, from my self, to God:
Look forward; There, I see the lively Story
Of Faiths improvement and of future Glory:
Look backward: There, my thankful eye is cast
On Sins remitted, and on Dangers past:
Look inwards; And mine eye is made partaker
Of the fair Image of my glorious Maker:
Look up; or down; About, above, or under;
Nothing but Objects of true Love and wonder.
94.
A Resolution.
IF thou have given me Wealth, great God, I crave
Content; and Grace to have the goods I have;
If otherwise; thy will be done: I crave not
So much, to have, as use the goods I have not:
Lord, make me Thine: And then I shall appear,
If not thy Almner, yet thy Beads-man, here.
95.
On the worlds Welcome.
EArths Entertainments are like those of Iael,
Her left hand brings me Milk; Her right, a nail.
96.
On our Meditation upon God.
When thy ambitious knowledge would attempt
So high a Task as God, she must exempt
All carnal sense; Thy Reason must release
Her power; Thy Fancy must be bound toth' peace;
Thy Spirits must be rapt; They must exile
Thy flesh, and keep a Sabbath for a while;
Thou must forget thy self, and take strong Bands
Of thy own Thoughts, and shake eternal hands
With thy rebellious Lusts; discard and clear
Thy heart of all Idea's; Then, with Fear,
And holy Reverence, thou must think of One,
As though he were not to be thought upon:
Conceive a Spiritual, a most perfect Being,
Pure, simple; At the selfsame instant, seeing
Things Present, Past, and Future; One, whose Might,
Whose Wisdom, Justice, Mercy, (in a height
Above Exceeding) is Himself, being Great
Without a Quantity, and most Complete
Without Degrees; Eternal without space
Of time: At all times Present, without Place:
Think thus: And when thy thoughts can sore no higher,
Stay there, Stand humbly silent, and admire.
97.
On Faith.
HE that wants Faith, and apprehends a Grief
Because he wants it, has a true Belief.
And he that grieves, because his griefe's so small,
H'as a true Grief, and the best Faith of all.
98.
On Man's Folly.
Idiots, and Sense-bound Lunaticks discern
'Twixt Salt and Sugar; very Babes will learn
To know a Counter from the current Coin;
Bruit Beasts, by' Instinct of Nature, will decline
Th'alluring Bait, and sense-beguiling Snare;
Though that seem never so sweet; this, never so fair:
Yet Man, heavens greatest Masterpiece will choose,
What Fools, and Madmen, Beasts, and Babes refuse:
Delights in dangerous Pleasures, and beneath
The name of Joys, pleases himself to death.
99.
On Glory.
THat Saint, in Heaven, whose Glory is the least,
Has even as perfect Glory, as the best:
There Is no Degrees; but in a finite Treasure:
No difference 'twixt Paul's glory and mine, but measure.
100.
On Reward.
WHen holy Scriptures mention the Rewarding
Of works, we read not, For, but still According.
The end of the third Book.
DIVINE FANCIES.
The fourth Book.
1.
A Good Morrow.
It Is day: Unfold thine Arms; Arise, and rouse
Thy leaden Spirits, and pay thy Mcrning Vows;
Send up thy Incense; Let her early smoke
Renew that League thy very dreams have broke;
Then may thou work or play; Nothing shall be
Displeasing to thy God, that pleases thee.
2.
A Goodnight.
CLose now thine eyes, and rest secure;
Thy Soul is safe enough; thy Body sure;
He that loves thee, he that keeps
And guards thee, never slumbers, never sleeps.
The smiling Conscience in a sleeping breast
Has only peace, has only rest:
The music and the mirth of Kings
Are all but very Discords, when she sings:
Then close thine Eyes and rest secure;
No Sleep so sweet as thine, no rest so sure.
3.
On a Printing House.
THe world's a Printing House: our words, our thoughts
Our deeds, are Characters of several sizes:
Each Soul is a Compos'ter; of whose saults
The Levits are Correctors: Heaven revises;
Death is the common Press; from whence, being drive^,
We Are gathered Sheet by Sheet, and bound for Heaven.
4.
A Dialogue between GABRIEL and MARY.
GABRIEL. Hail blessed Mary:

MA, What celestial tongue
Calls sinful Mary blessed?

GAB: It is I:

MA. Who art thou?

GA. I am Gabriel that belong
To the high Quire of Heaven:

MA. I faint, I dye.

GA. Fear not sweet Virgin; all the Earth shall be Son
Made debtors to thy Womb, and blessed in Thee.

MA. How Lord?

GA: Thy Virgin womb shall bear a
That shall redeem the world.

MA. My Lord, how can
Such wonders come to pass; such things be done
By a poor Virgin, never known by Man?

GA. The holy Ghost, at his appointed hour,
Shall make thee pregnant by his sacred power:

MA. Wonder of wonders!

GA. At whose height the Quire
Of heaven stand ravished, tremble, and admire.

MA. O may it be according to thy Word:

GA. Before that twice five Moons completed be
Thou shall be known the Mother of our Lord,
And thou shall dance thy Savior on thy knee.

MA. Both heaven and earth shall triumph; and the frame
Of hell shall tremble at Maria's name:

GA. All Ages past, and present, and to come,
Shall joy in Mary, and in Marye's womb.

5
On RHEMVS.
IF Heaven would please to purge thy Soul as well
As Rome thy purse, thou needst not fear a Hell.
6.
On the life of Man.
Man's day's a Song, composed by th'great Musition,
Full of harmonious Airs and dainty choice;
But spoyld with Discords, and too much Division;
Abused and lost for want of skill, and voice:
We miss our Rests, and we neglect our Graces;
Our life the Trebble, and our death the Base is:
7.
On MARY.
Four Marye's are eternized for their worth;
Our Savior found out three, our Charles, the fourth.
8.
On the Church.
LEt not thy blackness moove thee to despair,
Black Women are beloved of men that is fair:
What if thy hair, her flaxen brightness lack?
Thy face is comely, though thy Brow be black.
9.
On the two Essences.
GOds sacred Essence represents the bright
And glorious body of the greater light:
It Is perfect; has a Being of her own,
Giving to all, receiving light from none:
Man's Essence represents the borrowed light
And feeble luster of the Lamp of night:
Her Rays are faint, and her Reflection thin,
Distained with natural blemishes within;
Inconstant, various; having, of her own,
No light at all; or light, as good as none:
When too much earth shall interpose, and slipps
Betwixt these Lights, our souls are in the Eclips.
10.
On our Saviors Passion.
THe earth did tremble; and heavens closed eye
Was loath to see the Lord of Glory dye;
The Skies were clad in mourning, and the Spheres
Forgot their harmony; The Clouds dropped tears:
The Ambitious Dead arose to give him room;
And every Grave did gape to be his Tomb;
The Affrighted heavens sent down elegious Thunder;
The Worlds Foundation loosed, to lose their Founder;
The Impatient Temple rent her Veil in two,
To teach our hearts what our sad hearts should do:
Shall senseless things do this, and shall not I
Melt one poor drop to see my Savior dye?
Drill forth my Tears; and trickle one by one,
Till you have p^irc'd this heart of mine, this Stone.
11.
On PETER.
What luck had Peter! For he took a Fish
That stored his purse, as well as filled his dish;
Whose bounty did enrich, as well as feed him;
But they are better Fishers that succeed him:
He caught by chance: These catch the like by skill:
He caught but once: These catch them when they will:
They cast their Angles into better Seas;
Their bayts are only for such Fish as these:
Brave sport, and full of curious pleasure! Come,
There is no Fishing to the Sea -- of Rome.
12.
On HERODIAS.
I Will tell thee, Light-skirts, whosoever taught
Thy feet to dance, thy dancing had a Fault:
Thou Wilt find it dear, Herodias, if thou do
Compare thy pen'worth with the price it cost.
13.
On Faith and Hope.
HOw much the stronger, Hopes on life rely,
So much the weaker is my Faith, to dye.
14.
On Water and Wine.
THe happy difference and sweet change of life,
When a chaste Virgin turns a loyal Wife,
Our blessed Lord, in Cana did divine,
And turned cold Water into lusty Wine.
15.
On Age.
HOw fresh blood dotes! O how green Youth delires!
It most disdaines the thing it most desires.
16.
On a Fig Tree.
A Christian's like a Fig Tree, that does bear
Fruit, green, or ripe, or blossoms all the year:
No wonder then, our Savior cursed that Tree;
Figg-trees are always dead, where no Figgs be.
17.
On RHEMVS.
RHemus, upon a time I heard thee tell,
A Wall divides Purgatory' and Hell;
And that a gold-bought Mass will clear the offense
That brought us thither, and redeem us thence:
Ah Rhemus, what demented Soul would spare
To ruin Wife, or to dis-land an Heir,
Rather then feel such torments, you pretend,
That equal Hell in all but Time, and end:
Ah Rhemus, If the power of Gold be such,
How dare you be so bold to dye so rich!
18.
On JACOB.
Never boast thy Bargain, Jacob: For poor we
Have made a better contract far, then thee:
We envy not his Land thou did inherit;
Our Brother took our Flesh; gave us his Spirit.
19.
On SIMON MAGVS.
SImon, bring Gold enough; and I will tell thee,
Where thou shall buy what Peter would not s^l thee:
Repair to his Successors; They are free
And frolic Gamsters; not so strict as He:
Nay, if thy Gold be weak, they will not stand
To sell good Pen'worths at the second hand:
They Will sell good cheap, but they will not give to any;
No, Paternoster where there is no Penny:
No, if thy purse be like an empty Shell,
They will not give, what Peter would not sell.
20.
On the Bishop of Rome.
ADmit, great Prelat, that thou were that Rock
Whereon the Church was founded; coldst unlock
The gates of Heaven; and, with thy golden Key,
Make Hell thy Prisoner, and the Fiends obey,
Thy Papal dignity would far be greater,
If thou were Simon, but as well as Peter.
21.
On MILO.
DO; strive to enter Milo, though the Gate
Be narrow, and the rugged passage straight;
Lessen thy self, and fast thy carkas thin;
Take in thy Flesh, 'twill get thee easier in:
Look up to heaven, twill raise thy body'uprighter;
Give lib'rall alms, twill make thee tread the lighter:
Sweat forth thy base corruptions, and inherit
Thy promised Crown* half lost for want of spirit;
Let not thy destard, and dull thoughts disdain
Those works which cold despair mistakes, as vain;
Take heed; Let not thy queazy Soul repine
Against those Actions which are none of thine:
Heaven bids thee shine; what if thy Rays be dim,
Do thou thy best; leave the success to Him:
Follow thy Work; And when thy Soul shall be
Gathered from hence, thy Works shall follow thee.
22.
On Rome.
GOod Works abound in Rome: It Is well they do,
It Is the best string they challenge to their Bow:
But every He Is no Monck, that wears a Hood,
It Is well, if they are well done, as well as good:
When wandering Passengers have lost their way,
No sort of men that ride so fast as they.
23.
On three days and nights.
THou know our dying Savior did repose
On Friday; On the Sabbath, he arose;
Tell me, by what account can he be said
To lodge three days and nights among the dead?
He did for all the World: what wanted here,
Was full supplied in the other Hemisphere.
24.
On TOBITS Dog.
WHat luck had Tobits dog! what grace! what glory
Thus to be Kenel'd in The Eternal Story!
Until the Apocrypha and Scripture sever,
The memory of Tobits dog shall live for ever:
25.
On the Gospel.
When two Evangelists shall seem to vary
In one discourse, they are diverse, not contrary;
One Truth does guide them both; One spirit does
Direct them; doubt not, to believe them both.
26.
On SERVIO.
SErvio, It Is scarcely worth thy pains, to smother
Or to subdue one Sin, and hug another:
Believe it Servio, he that is in thrall
To one, is a potentiall Slave to all.
27.
On FORMIO.
FOrmio will keep the Sabbath, read and pray,
His lips are sealed from oaths upon that day;
Formio is clad in black, and will absent
His fleshly thoughts, this holy time of Lent.
Think thou that Formio's shaking hands with Sin?
No, it is but giving hands to meet agin.
28.
On JOHN and JESUS.
John was the Morning-starre that did fore-run
The long-wisht rising of our Glorious Sun:
The first word that John's preaching lips expressed
Was this, Repent: Our Saviors first, was, Blessed:
John makes th'incision; Jesus makes it sound;
Jesus nere cures, where John never made a wound.
29.
On dispossessing.
WE read, A broyled Fishes heart will scare
A frighted Devil from a troubled breast:
We read again, By Fasting, and by Prayre
The fierce Demoniack's only dispossessed:
What this affirms, that flatly does deny;
With reverence to the Text, The t'one's a Lie.
30.
On HERODIAS.
I Have a young Herodias lives within me,
That never leaves to dance, until she win me
To grant her Suit; will never cease to plead
Until I give her my John Baptists head:
O then my sorrow would be past her date,
And I, like H^rod, should repent too late.
31.
On MALFIDO.
Satan's Injections are like Weeds that fall
Into thy Garden, darted ore the Wall,
Whose loathsome smell unscent thy sweeter Flowers;
But grow not there, unles we make them ours:
They Will dye, neglected; If thou lend them room,
They Will stink; But easily thrown from whence they come:
Fear not, Malfido; those they be that spoil
Thy Flowers, that suck their substance from the soil.
32.
On Slanders.
WHen undeserved report distaines my name,
It shames not, but percha^ce prevents a Shame.
33.
On Law and Gospel.
THe Law is rough; The Gospel mild and calm;
That launc'd the Bile; and this powers in the Balm.
34.
On abosome Sin.
THat Sin that finds more credit then the rest,
That is thy Darling, leanes upon thy breast;
That, in the B^some of thy heart does lie;
That dips within thy dish, Says, Is it I?
That gives thee kisses? that is the Sin that slayes thee,
O that, O that is the Judas, that betrays thee.
35.
On the World.
THe World's a Book, writ by the eternal Art
Of the great Maker, printed in Man's heart;
It Is falsely printed, though divinely pend,
And all the Erratas will appear at the end.
36.
On my Soul.
MY weather-beaten Soul long time has bin
Becalmed, and tiding in the Sea of Sin;
But now afflictions Storm does drive and toss
Her battered Keele: The wind is loud and cross:
Fear fills her tatterd Sails, and doubts do drive her,
She knows not where; and of all hopes deprive her:
Thus, thus transported by the troubled Air
Amongst the swallowing Quicksands of despair,
If not prevented by a greater power,
She looks for wreck and ruin every hour;
O, that mine eyes could rain a Shower of Tears,
That, that would lay the Storm of all my Fears.
37.
On the Cuckoe.
THe idle Cuckoe, having made a Feast
On Sparrowes Eggs, lays down her own in the Nest;
The silly Bird she ownes it, hatches, feeds it;
Protects it from the weather, clocks and breeds it;
It neither wants repose nor yet repast,
And joys to see her Chicken thrive so fast:
But when this gaping Monster has found strength
To shift without a helper, she at length
Not caring for that tender care that bred her,
Forgets her parent, kills the Bird that fed her:
The Sin we foster in our bosom, thus
Ere we have left to feed it, feeds on us.
38.
On TOBIT.
WAs it not time to send his son to Rages,
For money, when his wife spun hard for wages?
Was It not high time for him to post away,
That for an Angel paid a Groat a day?
39.
On DAVID.
WHo ever sung so high, so rapt an (...)
As David prompted by heroic Clio?
But when thy more divine Urania sung,
What glorious Angel had so sweet a tongue?
But when Melpomene began to sing,
Each word's a Rapture, or some higher thing:
Sweet were thy triumphs; sweet those joys of thine;
O, but thy Tears were more then most Divine.
40.
On a Monument.
See thou that Mon'ment? Do thou see how Art
Does polish nature to adorn each part
Of that rare Work, whose glorious Fabric may
Commend her beauty to an after day?
Is It not a dainty Pe^ce? And apt to raise
A rare advantage to the Makers praise?
But know thou what this dainty Piece encloses?
Beneath this glorious Marble there reposes
A noisome putrid Carkas, half devoured
By crawling Caniballs, disguised, deflour'd
With loathed Corruption, whose consuming sent
Would poison thoughts, although it have no vent:
Even sucha Piece art thou, who ere thou be
That readst these Lines: This Monument is Thee:
Thy Body is a Fabric, wherein Nature
And Art conspire to heighten up a Creature
To sum Perfection, being a living Story
And rare Abridgement of his Makers Glory;
But full of loathsome Filth, and nasty mire
Of lust, uncurb'd Affections, base desire;
Curious without, but most corrupt within
A glorious Monument of inglorious Sin.
41.
On PLAVSVS.
PLausus has built a Church: And lest his Glory
Should dye, has boasted his vainglorious Story
Upon the painted Wall, and built to Fame
A large Memorial of his doubtful Name:
Plausus, it is bravely done; Thy Deeds make known
Thou either seekst Gods glory, or thy own.
42.
On CENSORIO.
THou blam'st the Age, condemns the days of crimes,
If thou would mend thy Faults, 'twould mend the Times.
43.
On fools of both kinds.
SOme scorn the Cross, whilst others fall before it:
Some sit and take the Bread, and some adore it:
Some are too bold, and others too too nice:
Fools act a Sin whilst they decline a Vice.
44.
On the name of JESUS.
IT is the common course of man to double
The name of Jesus in the times of Trouble:
The name of Lord is not a style to please us;
Iesu's no Lord with us; if Lord, no Jesus.
45.
On the Woman with the Issue.
HOw could thy Soul, fond Woman, be assured
Thy long disease could be so easily cured?
What? could thou think the touch of cloth was good
To dry the Fountain of thy flowing Blood?
Or was it because our blessed Savior wore it?
Or why? I read not, that thou did adore it:
He nere so much as ownd thee, Woman: Sure,
Thy Faith, and not his Garments wrought the Cure
46.
On our Redemption.
WE were created at a Word, a Breath;
Redeemed with no less then Blood and Death:
How much greater labor is it, than,
To wash a Sinner, then to make a Man!
47.
On Gods Arm.
It Was not, that he was weak; or thou so strong;
He died so soon, or that thou liv'st so long:
The headstrong Ox is haled to the slaughter,
When the poor worm crawls many a Summer after:
When Heavens victorious arm shall please to strike,
The Giant and the Pigmey are alike.
48.
On our blessed Savior.
O Thou that were the King of heaven and earth,
How poorly were thou attended at thy Birth!
A Manger was thy Cradle, And a Stable
Thy Privy Chamber, Marye's knees thy Table;
Thieves were thy Courtiers, and the Cross, thy Throne;
Thy Diet, Gall; A wreath of Thorns, thy Crown:
All this, the King of Glory endured, and more,
To make us Kings that were but Slaves before.
49.
On CORDVPLO.
Keep in thy Actions, and maintain the Fences
Of thy closed lips, Corduplo, and thy Senses;
Thou shall deceive both Man and Devil too,
And may be damned, and yet they never know;
The Devils power of knowledge never delves
Into our hearts, till we proclaim our selves.
50.
On Dreams.
Who dreams a Sin, and not his dreams forbid it
An entertainment, sins, as if he did it;
Which if thy slumbring Soul could not prevent,
Thou Art safe, if thou have dreamd thou did repent.
51.
On ADAM.
How soon, poor Adam, was thy Freedom lost!
Forfeit to death ere thou had time to boast;
Before thy Triumph, was thy Glory done,
Betwixt a rising and a Setting Sun:
How soon that ends, that should have ended never!
Thine eyes never slept, until they slept for ever:
52.
On Sins and Blessings.
WE write thy common Blessings, Lord, upon
A sliding stream; no sooner writ, but gone:
Thy more illustrious Favors we entrust
To the dry Sand, defaced with every Gust:
But, Lord, our Scrowle of Sins are written down
On during Marble, or some harder stone;
And our extreme mis-doings are thought good
To be inscribed, like Draco's Laws, in blood:
Lord, let us change our Tables, or our Story,
And we shall have more Comfort; Thou, more Glory.
53.
On CELIA.
CElia complains, her Heart cannot be well;
Nor will not, Celia, till it cease to swell;
It Is too-too proud with blood, perverse and stout;
It must be launc'd to let the humor out:
Alas no lance can pierce it; It is grown
More hard then Raunce, or the Adamantine stone.
Then Celia, like an Adamant, thou must
Make the incision with her own made dust.
54.
On PVSILLVS.
PVsillus can be jocund, never whines
When he is full, but still, in want, repines;
And, like a bad-nos'd ^ound, that hunts not true,
He Is at a Fault, if not the Game in view:
Be well advised Pusillus; Heaven may chance,
To pipe no more, if thou give ore to dance.
55.
On Belief.
THe Devils do believe; I know they do;
But their Belief does make them tremble too.
57.
On CRASTINIO.
PAst time is gone, the Future is to be;
Crastinio, say, which most belongs to thee?
The first, thou further go and further from;
And thou may dye before the last shall come:
The first, Crastinio's now grown out of date;
Perchance the last may come, but come too late:
The last's uncertain, and the first is gone,
The present then Crastinio's thine, or none.
58.
On an Hower-glasse.
Man's life is like an Hower-glasse, wherein
Each several sand that passes is a Sin:
And when the latest sand is spent and run,
Our Sins are finished, as our lives are done.
59.
On KAIN.
KAin, it is true: It was, and did appear
A Punishment too great for thee to bear:
If thou had had a Faith, and could have bin
As much oppressed and loaded with thy Sin,
Thy greater patience either might out-worne it,
Or found more able Shoulders to have borne it.
59
On TICIO.
TIcio stands gaping for the clouded Sun
To be informed how fast the hours run;
Ah, foolish Ticio, art thou sound in mind,
To lose by seeking, what thou seekst to find?
60.
On SORTIO.
SOrtio, that makst a Trade of gaming, know
Thou breakst two great command'ments at a throw:
The third thou break'st by thy abuse of Lot;
Thou breakst the Tenth, that bids thee Covet not:
Now tell me, Sortio, whether sins most high,
He that plays fair, or he that helps a Die?
61.
On RAYMOND SEBVND.
Honor to high-brain'd Raymond, And no less
To thy renowned Scholar, great Du Please:
Your high attempts object to our dull Sight
The God of Nature, by dull Natures Light:
But what has Raymond, and Du Plessis done?
They light but two bright Tapers to the Sun.
62.
To HENRY Earl of Holland.
It Is not the Sunshine of great Cesars Eye,
Nor our Opinion makes thy Honor fly
So fair a pitch; Nor need thy Glory claim
Assistance from thy Blood, to enrich thy Name:
But what it is that mounts thee up so high,
The World shall tell thee, Henry, and not I:
Blood gives no Virtue; nor Opinion, Glory;
And Princely Favors are but Transitory;
Heavens Act is mingled with great Cesars Eye:
Heaven gave thee wings, and Caesar bids thee fly.
63.
On Drunkards and Idolaters.
WHich is the greater Sin, and which the less?
Which finds the sharper? which the milder Rod?
To turn Gods glorious Image to a Beast,
Or turn the Image of a Beast to God?
Thrice happy is that soul, and more then thrice,
That buys no knowledge at so dear a price.
64.
On dying.
HE that would dye once well, must often try;
Practice does bring perfection how to dye:
The Law's our Tutor; and the World our School,
Wherein we are taught by' example, as by Rule:
The Rods Afliction, which being laid away,
The Gospel comes, and begs us leave to play.
65.
On Ravens and Lilies.
ARe not the Ravens, great God, sustaind by Thee?
And will thou cloth the Lilyes, and not me?
I Will nere distrust my God, for Cloth, and Bread,
Whilst Lilyes flourish, and the Ravens be fed.
66.
On degrees of Sin.
CVrses proportion to the Sins degree:
Adam had one; Eve, two; the Serpent, three.
67.
A last Will.
MY Life's my dying day; wherein I, still,
Am making, alter, and correct my Will:
My Soul I do bequeath to God; provided
Some smaller Legacies may be divided
Among my Friends: Item my Sins I give
To my dear Jesus, whether dye or live:
Item, I give the World, that did refresh
The tender frailty of my feeble Flesh,
My lesser Cares: I do bequeath moreover,
To my poor body, homespun cloth, to cover
And hide her shame, and Food for needful diet;
Some Sleep, but not immoderate, to quiet
Distempered Nature, and in her Vacation,
Some lawful Pleasures for her Recreation;
My Charity, to my poor helples brother,
I give; my Prayers to the true Church my Mother;
Whose watchful eyes I must desire, still,
To be the Overseers of my Will.
68.
On our JESUS.
He Is like a Rock, which when we strive to shun
We are in danger to be wreckt upon;
But when our wide-spred Arms seek Refuge there,
It will secure us from the harms we fear.
69.
To King CHARLES.
THe Common wealth is like an Instrument;
The diverse sorts of people represent
The strings, all differing in degrees, in places;
Some trebles, and some Means, and some are Bases:
The potent Rulers the Musicians are;
The music, sometimes peace, and sometimes war;
The Laws are like the Ruled Books that lie
Before their eyes, and which they practice by:
Play on great Charles; Heaven make thy strings as strong,
And true, as thou art skillful: Ravish long
The worlds wide ears, with thy diviner Airs,
That whosoever to thy Land repayres,
May thence return amazd, and tell the Story
Of Britains Triumph, in great Charles his Glory.
70.
A Riddle.
THe Goods we spend we keep; and what we save,
We lose, and only what we lose, we have.
71.
On GLORIOSO.
NEro vaunt Glorioso, that thou often reliev'st
The poor; Glorioso, it is not thine, thou giv'st:
Boast what is thy own; Thou art the poor man's Sive;
Thy wealth was given thee, with a Clause, to give;
Put case it were thy own thou gav'st; what then?
Thy own Applause has paid thy own again.
72.
On JVDAS:
TWo hundred pence! What Is that to thee? But say
That so much Ointment had been cast away;
The coin that paid for it, Judas, was not thine;
O Judas, that is the cause thou did repine.
73.
On IMPROPRIATOR.
LOrd, how he swells! as if he had, at least,
A Common wealth reposed in his breast:
A Commonwealth? ^Twas shrewdly guest, I tell ye;
He has a Leash of Churches in his Belly.
74.
On the same.
PRodigious Stomach! what a cruel deal
It can devour! whole Churches at a meal:
It Is very strange that Nature should deliver
So good ^ Stomach to so bad a Liver.
75.
On LVCRO.
LVcro, it is believed, thy Conscience, either
Is very wide, or made of stretching leather:
Me thinks thy Conscience rather seems too small;
So far from large, I fear thou have none at all.
76.
To GOD.
IF thou should strike a blow for every slipp
That mortals make, or spur for every tripp,
Within a moments space, here would be found
No place left free t'inflict an other wound:
Hackneys and spur-gall'd Iades would happier be,
And in condition, better far, then We.
77.
On Sleep and Death.
IT is received, that Sleep's the elder brother;
I see no reason for it* I think, the other:
Though Sleep does now usurp the upper hand,
I Am sure that death does sweep away the Land.
78.
To RHEMVS.
THy Conscience tells thee, that to make debate
Twixt Prince and People; to subvert a State;
To violate a Truce, to murder Kings
Are lawful; nay, are meritorious things:
Thou have a Freedom more then we, wherein
To do against thy Conscience, and not sin.
79.
On GLORIOSO.
HE that relieves his brother in distress,
And seeks no (...) Applause, does nothing less
Then lend to his Redeemer, laying down
A worthless (...), to take up a Crown:
But if vainglory prompt thy tongue to boast,
It is not lent, Glorioso; It Is but lost.
80.
To GOD.
I Wonder, Lord, thou should so much desire
Our younger days, when as the greene-wood fire
Of feeble Nature is but newly blown;
When every Roome's unfurnisht; and not one
Fit for the presence of so great a Guest;
None trimmed with Art; no, not so much as dressed
With common sense; when as th'unburnisht print
Of thy fair Image, taken from the Mint
But now, has not the least imbellishment
Of heavenly knowledge: Lord, what have thou meant,
To make such choice, to choose a time so ill,
When we have neither means, nor yet a will
To entertain? Would not our deeper Age,
Wherein the Toys of Childhood, and the rage,
The fire of lustful Youth shall be abated,
Wherein our riper Souls shall be estated
In richer Knowledge, and the strength of Reason;
O might not, might not this bin thought a season,
A time more aptly chosen of the twain,
For thee to come; and us, to entertain?
No; thou, great God, that art our wise Creator,
Were better read in our rebellious Nature:
Thou knewst the Bow of our corrupted will
Stood bent to mischief, would be drawn to ill
By every Arm; Thou knewst that every hour
Gave new increase to strength, and double power
To draw those sinful Shafts that shoot at heaven;
Thou knewst our easy Nature would be driven
By every Breath, and that our thoughts would fall
From bad to worse; from worse, to worst of all;
Thou know that growing Time would more unlevell
Our rugged Wills, and tookst the best of evil:
Lord, take it, and betimes; that, being possessed
Of that, thou may prescribe for all the rest.
81.
On PARTIO.
THou say thy will is good, and glory'st in it,
And yet forgetst thy Maker every minit:
Say Partio, was there ever Will allowed
When the Testators memory was not good?
82.
On an evil Conscience.
WHat hells of Horror, an evil Conscience brings.
What strange Chimera's! what prodigious things!
A pregnant womb of wonders! Every minit
We Sin; but least, when most we sin agin it.
83.
To MVNDANO.
NEre think, Mundaeno, that one Room will hold
Thy God, and all thy gold;
If ere they chance to meet within a heart,
They Will either fight, or part;
So long as Earth seems glorious in thine eyes,
Thy thoughts can never rise;
Beleeve't Mundano, by how much more near
Thou getst to Heaven, the less will earth appear.
84.
To my Friend.
Would thou be prosperous, tho the be^ded brow
Of Fortune threaten thee? He teach thee how:
Call home thy dearest wishes, and recall
Thy hopes; Expect the worst that can befall:
If come; thy heart will be the more secure,
The less amazed, and abler to endure:
If it come not, Expectance is no loss;
Perchance it arms thee for another Cross:
Thus wisely sheltred under this relief,
Thy Joy shall be the less; and less, thy Grief.
85.
To Malfido.
Cheer up Malfido, Lay thy thoughts more level;
Make sure of Grace, and never suspect thy Food:
He that is Good, can give a thing that is evil
No more, then thou, being evil, can wish a good:
He better knows to give, then thou, to beg;
Thou whin'st for Stones, and grumblest at an Egg:
O, let his better will suspend thy wish,
And thou shall find no Scorpion; if, no Fish.
86.
On CRVCIO.
THou still complainst that sorrows do attend thee,
And that their savours do so much annoy thee:
Mistake not; they are weapons, to defend thee;
They be not Engines, Crucio, to destroy thee;
Will thou mislike thy Cropps of swelling Corn,
Because they are trencht, and fenced about with thorn?
87.
To RHEMVS.
It Is true; we are but dust; but worms; nay men,
That are more base then either; And what then?
Shall worms, or dust, or men be well advised,
To go in person (where we have despised)
Before a God, a glorious God? I do;
Who bids thee Come, will bid thee Welcome too:
Rhemus, when called in person, you appear
By Proxy, tell me where is your manners, there?
It Is better to be wisely bold, then make
Thy self unmannerly, for manners sake:
Some ill-bred Clownes there be, that, being loath
To foul a Napkin, draw a filthy Cloth.
88.
To MACIO.
DRoope not beneath thy wants, as if forlorn,
Thou must be made a Jewel, to be worn
In Abrams bosom: Macio, he that comes
To Abrams bosom, finds his way, by Crumms.
89.
On Reproof.
It Is not enough to strive agin the Act,
Or not to do it; we must reprove the Fact
In others too; The Sin, being once made known
To us, if not reproved, becomes our own:
We must dissuade the Vice, we scorn to follow;
We must spit out, as well as never swallow.
90.
On CVRIO.
TWo Ears to let in Knowledge; Nature gave;
To entertain true Faith, one heart we have;
Why so? I Will tell thee Curio, in brief,
Our knowledge twice exceeds our half belief.
91.
On ZELVSTVS.
ZElustus thinks, his pains are worth his labor
If he love God, though he traduce his Neighbor:
His hot-mouth'd Zeal false-gallops on so fast
In the first Table't tyers in the last:
Art thou a faithful Steward of Gods store,
Zelustus, that spendst Six, and keepst but Four?
92.
On Philautos.
PHilauto's Charity is like a Mouse
That keeps at home, and never leaves the house,
Till it be fired: It stirs for no man's cause,
Unless to feed on Crumms of vain Applause:
Take heed, Philautos, lest thou heed too late;
The Mouse, in time, will eat up thy Estate.
93.
On Dubious.
DVbius, Thy ears are two, Thy tongue but one;
Hear God and Priest, Confess to God alone.
94.
To Sir Julius Caesar, Master of the Rol^es.
THe high Perfections, wherewith heaven does please
To crown our transitory days, are these;
Goods well possessed* and not possessing thee:
A faithful Friend; equal in love, degree:
Lands fruitful, and not conscious of a Curse:
A boastlesse hand, a Charitable purse:
A smiling Conscience, A contented Mind;
A sober knowledge, with true Wisdom, j^ynd:
A Breast, well tempered; Diet without Art,
Surfeit, or want; A wisely-simple Heart.
Pastimes ingenious, lawful, manly, sparing;
A Spirit not contentious rash, but daring:
A Body healthful, found, and fit for labor;
A House well ordered, and an equal Neighbor:
A prudent wife, and constant to the roof;
Sober, but yet not sad, and fair enough;
Sleep seasonable, moderate, and secure;
Actions heroicke, constant, blameless, pure,
A life, as long as fair; and when expired,
A glorious Death, unfeard, as undesir'd.
95.
On LVCRO.
LVcro, how poor thy Tyrant-wealth has made thee!
How miserable poor! It has betrayed thee
To thy own seeming self; And it is grown
As little, thine, or less then thou, thy own:
Alas, poor Lucro, how thy fruitful pawnes
Abuse thy Stomach, that so often yawnes.
For a good Morsel, whilst thy Saint does rome,
Like a D^coy, t'entice evil Angels home,
Whose more imperious presence must control
And fright the peace of thy perplexed Soul!
Lucro, be slave no longer to thy pelse;
Sub due thy Gold, and make thy self, thy self:
But if thy Saint be grown too strong for thee,
He tell thee Lucro; Turn thy Saint to me.
96.
On MENDAX.
FAire-spoken Mendax, on the least occasion,
Swears by his Faith, and by his own Salvation;
Is rash^brayne Mendax, well advised, then,
To pawn his Faith in God, for Faith with Men?
Sure, small's thy Wit or Credit, to be drawn
For Wares so poor, to leave so great a Pawn.
97.
On BLANDVS.
When ere I wish my Blandus a Good mor^ow
He is my Servant: If I come to borrow,
Or but salute my Blandus passing by,
I am your Servant, Blandus does reply:
If court my Blandus, I must understand,
He is my Servant, and does kiss my hand;
Discourse with Blandus, every Clause shall be
I am your Servant: If he drink to me
My Servant does it; I return his Love,
My Servant pledges: If my lips do move
A Suit, he is my Servant; Though I do
Abuse my Blandus, he is my Servant too:
How blessed am I, his service should be such
To me! He never told his God so much:
How much, dear Blandus, have thou bound me thine,
That art his Servant, not so much, as mine!
98.
On Rebellio.
THe stout Rebellio, scourged by his God,
Slights his Correction, and never ownes the Rod;
Take heed, Rebellio; Be not stout too long;
Neglected Stripes do often return more strong;
A stubborn Silence more ill nature shows,
Then Sobbs of Stomach, and deserves more blows.
99.
On God and Gold.
MY God and Gold cannot possess one heart:
My God and I; or Gold and I must part.
100.
To JAMES Archbishop of Armagh.
REnowned Prelate, I nor know nor care
What secret virtue's in Saint Patricks Chair;
If any; I dare boldly say, it is more
Since thou satst there, then ere it was before:
Go on, great Patriarck; If thy higher Story
(As sure it will) shall drown S. Patricks Glory:
Ierna will, (as now Ierna vaunts)
Be known, as well as called, The Isle of Saints.
101.
On a waking Conscience.
THere is a kind of Conscience some men keep,
Is like a Member that is benumbed with sleep;
Which, as it gathers Blood, and wakes again,
It shoots, and pricks, and feels as big as ten.
102.
On our Affections.
O How prepostrous our Affections burn!
We serve the world, love God, to serve our turn.
103.
On ZELVSTVS.
ZElustus wears his clothes, as he were clod
To frighten Crows, and not to serve his God;
As if the Symptoms of Regeneration
Were nothing but a Christian out of Fashion.
104.
On REBELLIO.
What? ever whining? Evermore alike,
Both when heaven strikes and when he leaves to strike?
Not stroke thy stomach down, when as thy God
Is friends with thee, and thrown aside the Rod?
Take heed, Rebellio, heaven do not replye
Upon thy Sobbs, and he that made thee cry
For thy own Good, reward not thy repining
With a new Rod, and scourge thee worse for whining.
105.
On ZELVSTVS.
NOt thy Geneva Ruff, nor steeple Hat
With flagging Eaves, or Cepresse out of date;
Thy nock-shorn Cloak, with a round narrow Cape;
Thy Russet hose crosse-garterd with a Tape;
Thy Antic Habit, of the old Translation,
Made for the purpose in despite of Fashion;
It Is none of these, Zelustus, that can bring
Thy zeal in credit; none of these can wring
The least applause from heaven: Heaven never meant
A Christians Conscience should be bound or bent
To shapes; Zelustus, we can scarce divide
An Affectation from a secret Pride.
106.
On CONSCIO.
ARt thou reviled, and slandred? and yet whine?
I fear thou art guilty: Is that heart of thine
So faint (if guiltles) that it cannot stoop
Beneath so poor a Burden, and not droope?
He that has fire at home may well refrain
To blow his singers, Conscio, or complain
The weather's cold abroad: Make sure within,
And let them censure, let them snarle agin:
Thou may appear, but not be this, the worse;
If Conscience bless thee, Do, let Shemei curse.
107
To GOD.
THy sacred will be done, great God,
To spend, or to suspend thy Rod:
If possible, my will's to miss it;
If otherwise, to stoop, and kiss it.
108.
On Devotion.
WE must not only be to God, but show
To Man; Paul's Cloak must be remembered too
109
On the Christian.
It Is not enough that the Kings Daughter should
Be fair within; She must be clad in Gold;
The curious Needle clothes her whiter skin;
She Is rich without, and glorious all within:
The true borne Christian, must, as well, be clod
With lives to men, as lined with hearts to God.
110.
On Mercy and lustice.
GOds Mercy and his Justice is the same;
It Is but the Object that divides the Name.
111
On AVLICVS.
BEfore that Aulicus was made a Lord,
He was my Friend; we might exchange a word,
As well as hearts; He could be never weary
Of my society; was jocund, merry;
Ingenious, and as jealous to offend;
He was enjoyd, He could enjoy his friend:
But now he swells, looks big, his Favors change,
A^ well as Fortunes: Now his eyes are strange:
His thoughts are Councels, curious webs of State;
And all his Actions must be wondered at;
His Speeches must be Laws, and every word
An Oracle, to be admired, adored:
Friendship must now be service: A new mold
Must have new Matter, melted from the old:
O Aulicus, 'twere well, if thou could do
The very same in spiritual honor too.
112.
To RHEMVS.
FAith must be joynd to works: Rhemus, I wonder,
What God has joynd, thou dare presume to sunder!
113.
On TORTVS.
It Is not the bearing of the Cross, or Cup
Of thy Affliction; Thou must take them up:
Nor is it the taking up, alone, will do;
Tortus, thou must take up, and follow too.
114.
On GRACCHVS.
GRacchus so often did repeat a Lie,
Past on, with Credit, from his very youth,
That now his Conscience has forborne to cry
Against it, and persuades him it is a Truth:
It Is well for Gracchus; He has gaind thereby;
He now may tell the same, and never lie.
115.
On PHARES.
THou say, it is a Supper, and is fit
To use the Posture of a Meal, to sit:
Can thy Discretion, Phares, or thy zeal
Give carnal Gestures to a spiritual Meal?
A heavenly Supper and a fleshly Heart?
Thy Posture has discovered what thou art.
116.
On the same.
You Will take it sitting: Pray; and no man know it:
You Will do, and yet you will not seem to do it:
You Will bow your Heart, although you bend no Knee:
It Is like your Self; You seem, not what you be.
117.
To my BOOK.
SO; Now, 't is time to waine thee from my breast;
Thy Teeth grow sharp, my Babe, It will be best
For both: Thy hasty Nurse is come to take thee
From my fond arms: never whimper; he will make thee
A dainty golden Coat: Let it suffice thee,
Thou art mine still: how ere; Thy Nurse will prize thee
For his own sake and thine: When thou art strong,
And fure of foot, he will let thee sport among
Thy fellow^children; He will let thee see
The World, which thou had never seen, with me:
Thou may do well; if Fortune strike thee luck,
And fair Opinion; Thou did never suck
But one good Friday, and thou may improve
As well in Merit, as in pop'ular love:
Thou have six Brethren (borne as well as thee
Of a free Muse) legitimate and free;
Pages to Caesar, and in Cesars Court,
Besides an Ishmael, that attends the Port
Of a great Lord, an Honorable Peer
Of this blessed Realm: If ere thou wander, there.
They Will bid thee welcome, at the times of leisure,
Perchance, and bring thee to the hand of Caesar:
Thou art but young, and tender, (for who knows
The paths of Fate?) perhaps, and one of those
Whom Clotho favors not; perchance, thy Twine
May be produced (for thou art half divine)
To after Ages, to the utmost date
Of Time; who knows? but we subscribe to Fate:
Perchance, thy Fortune's to be bought and sold;
Was not young Joseph served the like of old?
Thy Bondage may, like his, be made perchance,
A step to Honor, and a means to advance
Thy higher Fortunes, and prepare thy hand
To ease a dearth, if dearth should strike the Land:
But I transgress, my B^be: It Is time to part;
The Laws of Nature break the Rules of Art;
Once more farewell: Let Heavens high blessings shine
On my poork Babe, as my poor Babe has mine.
The end of the fourth and last Book.

