VERITAS.
CASTITAS.


PROPOSITIONS AND PRINCIPLES of Divinity, propounded and disputed in the
university of Geneua, by certain students of Divinity there, under M. THEOD.
BEZA, and M. ANTHONY FAIVS, professors of Divinity. WHEREIN IS CONtained a
Methodicall summarie, or Epitome of the common places of Divinity.

TRANSLATED OVT OF Latin into English, to the end that the causes, both of the
present dangers of that Church, and also of the troubles of those that are
hardly dealt with els-vvhere, may appear in the English tongue.

AT EDINBVRGH Printed by Robert Waldegraue, printer to the Kings Majesty. Anno
Dom. 1591.

Cum Priuilegio Regali.

TO THE RENOVMED AND NOBLE LORD, THE LORD NICHOLAS, EARL of Ostrorog, etc.
IT has been long since the complaint of very many, that those whom they
call the Schoolmen and Disputers, have given the studies of the holy
Scriptures, not only a great stroke, but even a deaths wound. And therefore
it will seem wonderful, it may be unto some, that the custom of disputing
touching divine matters, is retained in these Churches and Schools, which are
reformed acording to the pure word of God* For to dispute of every matter (will
some say) is blame-worthie, neither can it be lawful to call every thing into
question: but only such matters, as being doubtful and uncertain in their own
nature, may be argued one boath sides, according as the opinions and judgments
of men do vary and disagree: of which sort there are many things in
Philosophy, which do so move the minds of men with a kind of probability,
that it may be justly doubted, whether the things be as they seem or no. But
Divinity is grounded upon such a sure and certain foundation, that there is no
place left therein unto doubting and questioning. For he himself spoke, that
is not PYTHAGORAS, but IEHOVA by his Prophets and Apostles in his word written
by them, teaching therein, the only truth of those matters, which neither eye
has seen, ear has heard, nor ever enterd into the heart of man, and which
they whom God loves, and who love him again, do obtain of the merciful
Lord, not by reasoning, but by believing and leading an holy life. This reason
has so prevailed, that many godly and grave men, have either from their hearts
as being of this judgment, or for some other cause abstained, from this
course of disputing touching divine matters. For godliness say they, is to be
taught and learned according unto the plain and simple manner of Fishermen, and
not by the subtilties of ARISTOTLE: and that doubting of the ACADEMICKES (who
as AUGUSTINE says) hold that men are to be without all hope of finding the
truth, being an opinion, that makes men wavering and changeable, ready to
hold any thing, and to bear any face and countenance, is to be utterly
removed from the Church: whereunto you may add as the Apostle admonishes us,
that we take heed lest any man spoil us by philosophy: neither indeed can it be
denied, but that in the very first beginning of the Church there was a very
sore blow given unto religion, by those who being swollen up by the pride of
human reasonings, would rather submit Christ unto their judgments, then
themselves unto his majesty. So that TERTVLLIAN long since, justly named the
Philosophers to be the Patriarchs of haeresies. Now in the ages following,
that wound was not only not healed, but made greater and grieuouser, by those
who mingling the School Philosophy with Divinity, did make the Lady and
Mistres, to be at the commandment of the servant and handmaide. For the craft
of Satan was such, that whilst those, who (being otherwise good men) did
endeavor by the light of disputation, to clear the truth against errors, they
themselves falling into far greater darkness, drew others after them. For why
should we not so account of those questionarie masters as they call them?
Whereunto (if unto any other) that which AUGUSTINE allegoricallie spoke out of
the eight Psalm, concerning curious men may be most fitly applied. The most
earnest and obstinat study (says he,) of all curious men, who seek vain and
transitory things, is like unto the fish, that walk through the paths of
the Sea: the which paths, do as soon vanish away and decay, as the water
comes again together, after it has given place to any that pass or swim
thorough it. Thus far AUGUSTINE. For what is more curious and more intricate or
brier like, then so many (not so sound as subtle) questions, divisions,
distinctions and solutions of these men, who stand gnawing upon the bones of
arguments as TERTVLLIAN says. Verily that which is set down in the Fables
touching IXION, rauishing the cloud in stead of IVNO, whence the CENTAVRES
were begotten, who killed one another, may be very aptly applied unto these
men. For the bare shadow in steed of the solid truth, being taken hold upon
and apprehended by them, has altogether drunk up, and consumed the juice and
moisture of godliness, so that there remains nothing for them, but the dry and
wythered bark: and it has brought forth so many controversies and diversities
of opinions, which teach and learn nothing else, but brawles and parts taking,
that to recall so many minds and contrary judgments that deadly gore one
another unto concord and the right rule of reason, concord and reason it self
cannot suffice and be able. For as NAZIANZEN says, when as having once left
faith, we pretend the force and the ability of disputation, we do nothing else
thereby, but blot out the authority of the Spirit by questionings. By the
which vnsuccessiue and lamentable issue, we are earnestly admonished, to
betake our selves from their train, who use over narrowly and curiously to
sift matters, unto the assembly of those, that are godly and profitable
hearers.

But yet this was the falt of these men, who in divinity observed not that
rule. That nothing should be too much, which is exceeding profitable in civil
affairs. For it follows not, because they were over curious (which is not to
be commended) that therefore careful diligence should be disliked, or
sluggishnes and security thought praise worthy. But holy things as they are
to be dealt in with great judgment, so they are to be handled with greater
piety: for this latter is as it were the soul, the former being as the eye of
divinity. The orations of the Prophets, the sermons of Christ, the writings
of the Apostles, and especially the Epistles of PAVL, do contain most sharp
and grave disputations, which can in no wise be aptly discussed, but by the
use of reasoning. Our Savior Christ him self disputed with the Doctors,
Pharisees, Sadduces, etc. The same did PAVL with the Jews, with the
Philosophers, with the brethren. The Fathers also disputed: IRINEVS against the
GNOSTICKES, TERTVLLIAN against the MARCIONITES, ATHANASIVS against the
ARRIANES, NAZIANZEN, CYRIL, THEODORET, HILLARIE, AUGUSTINE, and many others,
almost against innumerable haeresies: but so as their disputations were not a
bare exercise, or a setting forth for a show of their wits for delights
sake: But all of them labored, that their reasonings and controversies, should
not be so much subtle in show, as profitable indeed.

And disputations says AUGUSTINE become then profitable, if nothing else be
considered in them, but the ways of the Lord which are mercy and truth: and
when al deceit, subtlety, selfe*loue, and desire of the victory is clean
removed, and when of the contrary side, the desire of the truth, the love and
reverence of Gods majesty, joined with modesty and singlenes is used therein:
So that whether we do lovingly confer with our brethren and friends, our
mutual reasonings of boath sides, ought to be as it were a Besome, to sweep
away all errors: or if the adversaries and Haeretickes be to be convinced,
(which PAVL requires of the Pastor,) were neither to seek contention by the
truth, nor victory by contention, but only the fear of God and the
edification of our neighbor. And it is a notable saying, which the same
NAZIANZEN has to this purpose: namely, that it is not any great matter to be
overcome with words or in reasoning: but it is a great and dangerous case to
lose the Lord: and certainly he has lost the Lord, as far as lies in him,
who does make old lies and falsehoods to become new sins and transgressions,
as it is in the auncint Proverbs among the Greeks. All christian doctors, then
are so to frame and fashion al their Scholars, that they timely season them
with the juice of these virtues in such sort, as when afterward they shall
come abroad from their private studies, unto any public calling, they may
perpetually retain the same. This point do we endeavor to perform according
unto our slender ability, as in all the parts of our callings, so also in the
exercise of disputation, according as we are bound by the laws of our
School: who in express terms do forbid, that neither curious nor
sophistical propositions, nor such as contain false doctrine in them be
propounded, and that all wrangling, curiosity, sacrilegious boldenes in
corrupting the word of God, evil contention, and obstinat headines be clean
banished from our disputations. According unto which pattern, all those that
will sincearly judge may perceive, that these Principles have been framed. Now
they are published according unto the example of other most famous Schools,
that it may appear by this pattern of wholesome words, boath what is taught
in our university, and after what manner the same is delivered, (the which
point also, is publicly made known, by many other the writings of our men:)
and withal it may be manifested, that we are far from the defense of all
false and erroneous doctrines, as far as our weak capacity is able to
understand the truth out of the word of God alone, expounded purelie, and
according to the analogy of faith: and that we may manifest, that as it
becomes honest temperat and sober men, we abhor from that stagelike
vnseemlines of malepert reuiling, and railing against those, that have bin
famous men, both for their godliness and learning, whose virtues being now as
dead Lions, these Hares of our time, or rather (that I may use that old word of
CATO) these woden Images do reprochefullie defame. And yet do their railinges
and scoffings light upon themselves. One of this number came out the last mart,
from among the HERDECANIE, who reckons us up among the ARRIANS, NESTORIANS,
and MAHVMETANS, of the which crimes, I hope that the Lord will never make us
guilty, so these Principles do show how false and shameful the same is
convinced to be: Now this fellow has put us in mind of that complaint of
JEROME against his vpbrayders, who did calumniously slander not only his
words, but also his very syllables: being men notwithstanding of that sottish
ignorance and sielines, that they were not able, no not to revile in their own
words, but were feign to borrowe the unbridled tongues of those enemies, that
had been long since buried in the dust. But this honest man shall have no worse
entreatie at our hands for this present time, but that which PLVTARCH says,
namely, that it is a servile thing to be bound to answer every vain fellow.
The Lord forgive him all his sins, and this great injury also, wherewith he
would have reproched us, as also we (because we are Christians) do forgive him
unfeignedly. Now unto this purpose of publishing these Propositions, is joined
another occasion, affoorded by many godly and reverend men, who having seen
here and there some Copies of these things, entreated both others, and also
my self, to send them some of them: and when as none of the Printed Coppies
were to be gotten, they caused them to be written out for their uses.
Amongst whom (right Honorable) I remember that your Lordship was one. For
when you were at Altorfe, and bare with great commendations, the office of the
honorable Lord governor in the Schole of that famous and honorable
Commonwealth of Norinberg, you desired by your Letters, that I would send unto
you those principles, which we had discussed and determined since your
departure: Which thing also (if you be remembered) I performed accordingly.
The same did JONAS MORAVNS, the most careful ouerseeer of your studies crave at
my hand, as many others also have done: unto whom, I think it was very
delitesome, to see that web finished, which we had only begun, when they were
here. Now as to your self, I thought that this work would be grateful and
acceptable unto you, as for many causes, so especially in that, by reading
these Principles, you may call to mind, the endeavors wherein you have been
employed in this study of the word. For besides that, you would not have your
self to be wanting in any duty of godliness while you were here, you were also
an example unto all others of industry and diligence in the Schools, not
only by hearing, but even by your godly and learned disputations. To the end
therefore, that we might satisfy your mind, and the request of others, the
Propositions that have been here disputed upon, for the space of some years
past, are now gathered and brought together into one body, and placed in
that orderly sort, that I think, they may not improperly be accounted a
Methodicall summarie of divinity: yet so, as a man may perceive, both by the
things them selves, and also by the form of speech, that these things were
handled in the Schools: which is spoken, least any man should require all
things to be here exactly done. But whatsoever this work be, the same (right
honorable) is offered and dedicated unto your Lordship, not only in mine own
name, but also, in the name of that worthy man, M. THEODORE BEZA, who took
the greatest pains in this work: to let you understand, that although, you
have been this long time absent, yet your memory is fresh among us, as also
the remembrance of that noble Lord, the Lord JOHN your brother, and of many
other the honorable gentlemen of the nobility of POLAND: of whom, not a few
lived here in times past, very Christianly and religiously: And this I do,
by reason of the excellent gifts, wherewith God has endued you, the which I
beseech and pray him, for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake to increase and multiply.
Fare you well, from Geneua the tenth of the Kalends of September. 1586.

Your Honors at commandment ANTHONY FAIVS.

TO ALL THOSE THAT WISH WELL UNTO THE LORD JESUS and his poor Church wandering
here upon earth: the Translator wishes the powerful assistance of Gods Spirit,
while they are here, and the speedy enjoying of their sure though deferred
hope.
AS the mercies and goodness of God (beloved in the Lord) toward his dear
Spouse and Church, has especially manifested it self in this last ruinous
age of the world: So has Satan in these very times, brought his whole
munition into the field, with full purpose and intent, one way or other, to
bring, either a ruinous fall, or a confused deformity, where the Lord intends
to build his sure grounded and well ordered house: And therefore all those, who
have given their names unto the profession of the Gospel, are to consider what
it is, that thereby they have taken in hand. For as it has bin true in all
ages: so shall it be verified in these our days, that all shall not walk with
the lamb for evermore, who for a time seemed to be of his train. And alas
we know, that he earnestly entreats over many to open unto him, who yet
shall not be partakers of the supper of the great King. Revel. 3.20.
For such is the deceitful wisdom of man's nature, and Satan's powerful
delusion, that even professors themselves, never want great and weighty
reasons, why they should deny Gods opressed truth here upon earth, that the
Lord may deny them in that day, when he shall come, not to suffer in his
members, but to judge as the most magnificent King, and shall come in that
glorious majesty, whereat heaven and earth will be astonished.

Now, because his judgment shall be, Luke 9.26.
(Go you cursed) upon as many as shall be found, not only the defacers of his
glory, but even the deniers of any point of his truth and word, as the holy
Ghost has forewarned us. Therefore, I thought it my duty unto his majesty
and his Church, to publish this book in the English tongue, that men and
Angels may bear testimony against the moderation and discreet wisdom of
this age in defending the truth, that the Lord has made known unto it, and
that by many witnesses, what that truth, and what that word of his is, which
he will have at all times, and in this age especially maintained by all men
with out exception, that mean to be partakers of his eternal favor. The
which truth, as it is largely contained in Gods most sacred written word, of
the old and new Testament, so is it briefly set down in this book, by the
whole consent of the godly learned in the Church of Geneua, and especially, by
that famous learned man, universally reverenced in Gods Church, M. THEODORE
BEZA. Out of this book also, shall appear, for what cause the Church of God
is at this day persecuted, wheresoever the same be hardly entreated. For this I
may boldly affirm, that there is no church or private man at this hour, in any
affliction for the maintenance of the truth, but the cause of his trouble is
contained and defended in this Treatise. So that although all the persecuted
Saints of God, now pilgrims upon earth, be not included within the walls and
narow dominions of Geneua, yet does this book manifestly prove, that as that
Church is barbarously assailed by the Duke of Sauoye within the bounds
thereof, so is this doctrine therein professed, hardly dealt with under their
government (though it may be they are ignorant of it) who would be loath to be
found at the siege of Geneua, or any wise to favor such godles cruelty. And
I would wish that this were made known unto them.

And herby also it will be manifested, that there is great cause why the estate
of that now distressed Church should be respected. For surely if there be any
love in men toward Christ Jesus, laboring and faynting as it were in his pore
members under the burden of great crosses and trials, they cannot shut up
their compassion toward him, craving their help in the person of that poor
Church. I beseech thee therefore good reader, in the mercies of God, not to
shut up thy compassion toward the same, and be assured, that the Lord Jesus
will for that thy kindness say unto thee, nay say of thee unto his Father, his
Angels and Church. Mat. 25.33.
I was poor, hungry, thristie, naked, sick, and besieged in Geneua, and
behold this man enriched me, fed me, clothed me, visited me, and defended me
as far as lay in him: wherefore come thou blessed of my Father, and possess
thy never ending reward. I know beloved that thou have many hindrances to do
this in this backsliding age, but know yet that Matthew says, Ver. 33.40.
that it is a king, who requires this at thy hands, and will be exceedingly
angry with thee to thy woe, if thou deniest his request as he will reward thee
most bountifully to thy comfort if thou grant the same. And in any case take
heed in this, as in all other points touching thy duty, of the wisdom of this
age, whose warines tends to noe other purpose, but warelie to starve and
forsake the Gospel. The shame, poverty and discontent of the Gospel, I tell
thee is a glorious ignomynie. All the crowns in the world are not worthy to
stand in the balance with the same. Thou art also to know, that the Gospel
is, whatsoever is according unto wholesome doctrine, as the Apostle teaches,
1. Tim. 1.11.
and therefore, if thou will stand unto the same, thou must wholly cleave unto
it, otherwise, the fierce anger of the God of truth, will be against thee for
shrincking from any part of his testimonies. And thou must know, that thou art
not to choose what to defend, but thou art bound to maintain according unto
thy calling, whatsoever thou see to be oppugned by any, be they friends or be
they enemies of the truth. And thou need not regard herein, whatsoever power
opposes it self against thee, for he whose truth thou maintainest is no
respecter of persons, but is terrible as the Prophet says, Psalm. 110.5.
even unto the kings of the earth, and thou shall find, that in thy defense,
defending his truth, he will break the great men in the day of his wrath,
except they submit themselves unto the scepter of his word. In conclusion, (for
necessity is laid upon me, that I cannot write what I had purposed) say with
the holy man EZRA Ez. 8.22.
unto thine own heart, and be assured thereof, that the hand of God is upon
all those that seek him in goodness, and therefore fear not, but his power and
his wrath is against all them that forsake him.

Briefly, that thou may profit by this book, I crave of thee to take
this pains in it, bestow an hour a day in the reading thereof, and in so
doing, after the first time, thou may well read it over once every month.
The which course if thou shall take, I dout not but in one year, thou shall so
benefit thy self, as there shall be no point of weight in religion; whereof
thou shall not be able to resolve thine own conscience; and also to edify
others according unto thy calling in very good measure. But in any case take
heed, that thy knowledge gotten by reading, rather increase, then diminish thy
care in the hearing of the word preached. And thus thou may exspect for the
blessing of the Lord, unto whom I betake thee, my self and all his, now and
ever, Amen.

GROUNDS AND PROPOSITIONS OF RELIGION, propounded and disputed in the
university of Geneua, by certain students of divinity there; and determined
by M. THEODOR BEZA, and M. ANTHONY FAIVS, professors of divinity.
FIRST CONCERNING GOD.
1 Seeing that the whole sum of all wisdom and felicity, does consist in
the true knoledge of God: it is most meet that all our endeavors should be
spent, in seeking to attain unto that knowledge, as far as we may be capable of
it.

2 Not that a full and a perfect knowledge of his Majesty, who is far greater,
then the capacity of men, and Angels can reach unto, may be any ways
comprehended within our understanding: but that we should bend all the powers
of our souls and bodies, to know that one God, who is the author and giver,
both of soul and body.

3 And although human reason, be able to afford us some proofs, whereby we
may be taught, that there is a God, and but only one: and whereby also his
attributes, may be in some sort, made known unto us. Yet notwithstanding,
those proofs are more sure and strong, yea, and altogether the most
undoubted, which for this purpose are fetched and drawn out of Gods word: that
is, out of the sacred writings of the holy Prophets and Apostles, contained in
the old and new Testament.

4 For howbeit, that the knowledge of God, which is derived from the
consideration of his works and power, has many notable uses: yet is it
nothing comparable, with that light, which is gotten from the holy Scriptures;
both because this knowledge revealed by the word, does wholly flow and proceed
from God him self: and also, in as much as, God in this his written word,
has manifested, how, and after what manner, he will be known, and worshipped
of men.

Now, whether there be a God or no, we are to be so far from making any
question thereof, that we are bound most firmly, with all our hearts, without
all wavering and doubting, to believe that point.

And therefore we avouch, that the rauing madness of all Atheists, who make a
question, whether there be a God or no, ought not so much to be confuted by
words and reason, as it ought to be clean rooted out of the society of men
by the Magistrate, and the stiff maintainers of it, taken from amongst men.

For though al men by nature, as it is now corrupt, be void of the true God:
nevertheless, there are certain motions and sparks of the knowledge of God,
imprinted in the mind of every man, which cannot altogether be put out: And as
these motions do testify, that man was borne to worship God: So unless, a
more full light be joined unto them, they leave man straying and groping in
the dark, and are smallie or nothing behoofull unto him.

Therefore, as the knowledge, which man has by nature, is not altogether of
no use unto salvation: so is it very far, from being of it self, sufficient
thereunto: It bereaueth them indeed of all excuse, who quench that small lighr
of nature, though never so corrupt, which is left in them.

5 True it is indeed, that he who goes beyond al bounds, can in no wise be
defined, and that that exceeding brightness of God, which no man can attain
unto, cannot be comprehended by our darkness, yet he may be, as it were,
shadowed out by this description, and so we may say, that God is he who has
his being in himself, whose nature is of himself, invisible without
beginning, without ending, infinite, incomprehensible, indivisible,
unchangeable, no bodily substance, but a being most pure, most simple, and
every way most perfect, wise, mighty, good, just, merciful, free, who has
created all things of nothing, etc.

And therefore, we do detest the multitude of Gods, acknoledged, among the
Gentiles, the grosnes of the Heretics so called, because they held God, to have
a body and members like a man.
Anthropomorphites, the fury of the Manichaeis, and all such like. And here it
is to be observed, that those things which are attributed unto God, by the
former Epithites and attributes, are not to betaken, as qualities inhaerent in
him: for we are to know, that there is nothing in God, which is not God
himself.

6 As where it is said, that God is just, good, merciful, etc. That is so to
be understood, as if he were said to be justice, goodness, and mercy it self.

And therefore, although that when we speak of God, we must not conceive of
him, as having any liknes or affinity with the nature of man, or of any
creature: yet such is the excellency of the Lord, and man's weakness, that when
we speak of his Majesty, we are enforced to use borrowed speeches from
creatures. And herein he is so far from disliking of us, that he himself,
descending, as it were, into our capacity, does every where thus speak of
himself,

Defended by SAMVEL AVIENVS of Berne.
THE SECOND SORT OF PRINCIPLES, CONCERNING THE HOLY AND UNSEARCHABLE TRINITY.
1 THat knowledge of God, which we attain unto, by his written word, does far
surpas all that, whatsoever it be, whereunto the light of nature, does or can
lead us.

2 For, that God is one in substance, and three in persons, is no where else to
be learned, save only out of the word. The truth of which Doctrine, it
sets down most clearlie and undoubtedly, but so as it leaves the reason
thereof, as a matter altogether unsearchable, and a mystery, not to be
sought out by humain arguments, but to be reverenced and embraced by faith
only.

3 These words, Trinity, Essence, or Substance, Person, and Coessentiall,
though they be not in express syllables (the word Heb. 1.3
Person only excepted) to be found in the Canonical Scriptures; yet
notwithstanding, they were not without just causes, brought into use, by the
godly ancient Fathers; neither are they to be rejected, as adding any thing
unto the word, but rather, to be still profitablie, and wholsomelie retained
in the Church.

4 By the word TRINITY, we understand the number of the persons, contained in
the divine essence, which is one only.

5 By the word essence, in this doctrine is meant, that which in deed is one, and
of al things most singular or single, wherein the several persons, being every
one of them, the whole and the same essence, do subsist, being distinguished in
their peculiar proprieties. These persons are, the Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost.

6 The Persons in the Deity, are the whole and the very same substance of the
Deity, distinguished the one from the other, by their peculiar or respective
incommunicable proprieties.

7 The proprieties whereby the persons are distinguished, are the diverse manner
of being, that they have in the Deity, whereby the substance of the Godhead,
is no wise divided assunder, nor the persons of the same essence separated, but
yet so distinguished, as the one of them cannot possibly be the other.

8 The divine Essence, the Deity or Godhead, and God, are essentiallie the one
and the same.

9 These persons, are said to be (...) or coessential, not because, they are
only of like essence and substance, as we see the particulars of the same kind
to be: but inasmuche as they are indeed, the one and the self same simple
essence: of which sort, nothing that is created can be.

And therefore, the persons of the Deity, cannot without blasphemy, be said
to be only cohaerent together in substance, or only of like substance.

10 Amongst these persons, distinguished indeed, by their respective
proprieties, although there be an order; yet is there not any degree, whence
either any inferioritie, inequality, or confusion may arise.

Therefore we conclude, that there are indeed, three persons in number, yet
but one Godhead, and one GOD in regard of substance.

11 The propriety of the person of the father, is to be unbegotten, and to
beget; The propriety of the son, is to be begotten of the father; The
propriety of the holy ghost, is to proceed, from the father and the son.

Wherefore in conclusion, we do from our hearts detest, all the blasphemies,
that both old and new heretics have maintained, contrary unto this doctrine.

Defended by JOHN CHEROPONTIVS of Neocome.
THE THIRD SORT OF PRINCIPLES, CONCERNING GOD THE FATHER, AND GOD THE SON.
SEEING, WE HAVE DEALT CONCERNING God, one in substance, and three in persons:
it follows now, that we speak in order, of every one of the persons.

1 THe word GOD, is sometimes taken particularly for the person of the Father,
because that the persons of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, are referred unto
the father as it were, unto a certain original of their being, whereas the
father receives his being of none, but does communicate it, both with him
self, and also with the other two persons.

2 God the Father, was always God, and always the Father, and therefore it
fell not as a property unto him, that being merely God at the first, he
should be afterward made God the Father: but as he is God from all
aeternitie, so he is the Father from all aeternitie.

3 God the Father after an unspeakable manner of generation begat his only
Son, by communicating his whole essence with him, the which manner of
begetting, is shadowed out by a kind of similitude, where the son is in the
holy scripture, named the Wisdom, the Power, the Coll, 1, 15
Image, the Heb. 13.
brightness, and the engraven form of his person.

4 And after this sort we are to conceive, (but not curiously to scan) the
similitudes, of the fountain and the stream that issues from it: of the
Sun and the Sunbeames of the light, that proceeds from light, of the water
and the vapors that arise out of it, of the tree and the branches, of the mind
and the speech, that is inwardly conceived, of the seed and the budde, and to
be brief, of al such similitudes, as the Fathers have brought, to manifest in
some measure, though not perfectly to lay open this mystery: Which they
accounted a matter to be reverenced and adored, and not curiously and
profanely to be sifted and waded into.

5 And although this divine manner of begetting, does neither cut into parts,
nor multiply the essence of the Deity, which Deity, is not a thing that only
may be conceived in thought, having no other being or existence, as are the
general kinds and sorts of things created, but is in deed a most single, and
a most pure infinite self-being: yet does it multiply the persons, but so, as
it does in no wise sever the one of them from the other.

6 The Father therefore is an other person in number then the Son, and in like
sort, the Son is another person, then the Father: And yet is the Deity neither
divided, nor multiplied, when the Son is said to be God of God. And even as in
substance he is the one and the self same with the Father, so is he in his
person so distinguished from the Father, that he is, and remains in him
still.

7 The Father and the Son then, are (...), that is, the one of the^ in the
other, or neither of them severed from the other by any distance of place: Yet
is the Son more properly said to be in the father, then the father in the
son, by reason of the dignity as it were, of the Fatherhood.

Hence also it is, that the Son personally distinguished from the Father, is in
many places of the Scripture called God.

8 Out of these things it apeareth, what we are to believe concerning the
person of the Son: to wit, that in regard of his substance absolutely
considered, he is that one only true God, unto whom do agree whatsoever
may be attributed to the divine substance considered in it self, but in
regard of the manner of his being, that is, in respect that he is the Son,
or as far as he is personally considered, then we are to believe, that he is
not of him self, but of the Father, yet coaeternall and coessentiall with the
Father.

9 We do condemn therefore the Tritheits, by whom, not only the persons
(which also we grant) are nombred, but even the substance of the Godhead,
(wherein also they place an inaequality) multiplied.

In like sort, we condemn the SABELLIANES, who holding a contrary error, do
not so much as number the persons, and in stead of the royal notions, whereby
the persons are distinguished the one from the other, do bring in only a
certain difference of their effects and names.

We do also condemn the ARRIANS, who rob the Son, of his essential Godhead.

And the EVNOMIANS, who have forged the inaequalitie of the persons.

Together with the followers of SAMOSATENVS, and SERVETVS: and all other
fanaticall spirits, who affirm the person of the Son, to have taken his
beginning with his humane nature, because (as they hold) before that time,
either the Word was not the Son, or was nothing else but a shape or a form
conceived in Gods mind, of the humane nature that should afterward be borne,
or was only predestinate and appointed to be, (but not being indeed) from all
aeternitie, or else because they will have the flesh of Christ to be taken out
of the substance of the Godhead, or (as some do now affirm) because all the
proprieties of the Deity, were poured into the humane nature, when the word
was incarnate: or to be brief, by what other dotage soever they go about to
obscure the coaeternall generation of the Son.

Defended by JOHN HENRY SCHINTYER of Tigurine.
THE FOVRTH SORT OF PRINCIPLES, CONCERNING THE HOLY GHOST.
HITHERTO CONCERNING, THE PERSONS of the Father, and the Son: it follows
now, that we speak of the holy Spirit.

1 Whereas the word SPIRIT, is diversely taken in the scriptures, we in this
doctrine, do understand by the holy spirit, the third person in Trinity.

2 The holy Spirit is that Essential, and working power, who is essentially
subsisting in the Father, and the Son, from whom (the whole Deity wherein also
they do subsist, being communicated unto him after an unspeakable manner) though
he proceeds, or (if we may so speak) is as it were breathed, yet is he not at
all separated in respect of this his proceeding, but is in regard of the manner
of his being, distinguished from the persons of the Father, and the Son.

And therefore he is not without cause reckoned, the third person in number,
seeing in consideration of his being, he is referred unto the Father, and the
son, yet not as unto two beginnings, but as unto one.

3 The Deity thus communicated, by issuing and proceeding, is not multiplied in
substance, seeing he is most simple and single: Whence it is that the holy
Ghost in regard of his person, is, and ever has bin coessentiall, and
coaeternall with the Father, and the son, and in regard of his substance, is
that one only true God in himself: Whereupon also, the name of God, is
sometimes personally attributed unto him.

The holy Ghost is therefore to be worshipped, by the one and the same faith
and invocation, that the Father and Son are.

4 And although the works of the Trinnitie, which they call outward, or
external, are inseparable, yet in the effecting of them, we are to observe a
distinction, not only of the persons, but also of the personal actions.

5 The proper, and the peculiar action of the holy Spirit, in all the works
of the Deity, be they natural and ordinary, or else extraordinary; was and is
to effect in his time and manner, those things which the father from all
aeternitie has decreed in his own wisdom, that is, in his Son, and the Son
has ordered and disposed to come to pass.

6 Yet is not the holy spirit any instrumental cause, affording his help as a
servant unto the Father or the Son, but working together with them, without
any inferioritie or inaequallitie.

7 But the power and working of the holy spirit, is especially seen, in the
planting and governing of the Church: In which particular respect, he is called
the holy spirit: even because, that he who is most holy, does stir up and
nourish, all the holy motions that are in the elect. For he it is, by whose
inspiration, all the holy prophets have spoken; it is he, that gives ears to
hear, and a heart to believe, who appoints Pastors, and does enable them with
necessary gifts, who stirs up the slothful, and being the true comforter
indeed, does comfort the afflicted soul: By whom those that are borne again
of him, do cry Abba father, he also formed the flesh of Christ in the womb of
the virgin, and did most abundantly anoint his humane nature: to conclude,
it is he by whose strength we stand until we overcome.

Wherefore, we do abhor and renounce the SABELLIANS who confound the persons
with the substance of the Godhead, the ARRIANS and the MACEDONIANS, who deny
the holy Ghost to be coessentiall with the Father and the Son; the GRECIANS
of later time, who affirm that he does only proceed from the father; and
those also, who by the holy Ghost, will have nothing else to be meant, save
certain motions and inspirations only; together with those, who deny that he
is to be invocated, by the one and the selfsame faith with the Father and the
Son: and to be brief; we detest all those, that any ways oppugn the Deity
of the holy Ghost, either in his substance or person.

Defended by JOHN JAMES COLER of Tygurine.
THE FIFTH SORT OF PRINCIPLES, CONCERNING THE ATTRIBVTES OF GOD IN GENERAL.
HITHERTO WE HAVE SPOKEN OF GOD, both as far as we are able to attain unto,
be the light of nature, and also, as he is laid before us in the holy
Scripturs, to be three in person, and one in substance: now it follows, that
we entreat of his attributes, whereby in a sort, we are taught, what manner of
God he is.

1 ALthough there be no composition in God, nor yet any accidental quality,
seeing he is a substance most single and every way one, yet to the end that
according unto our capacity we might understand what a God he is, he
himself in the scriptures is accustomed to attribute unto himself many
things, as qualities.

2 By attributes in this place then, we understand the essential proprieties
of the Deity, which are attributed unto him in the scriptures.

3 These things are so attributed unto him, that notwithstanding they place
nothing in him that is co^pou^d, or diverse from his substance, but look
whatsoever they point him out to be, the very same he is in his own most
simple substance.

4 For, both these proprieties, and also their actions do in very deed,
differ no whit from the substance of the Godhead: but only in some
consideration we are to hold them diverse both from the divine substance, and
also the on from the other.

5 Now these things are attributed unto the Deity, sometimes substa^tiuely, and
somtims adjectiuely as they speak, that we may thereby know him to be a being
that subsisteth indeed, and that he is such a one, not by participation and
imperfectlie, but of himself, and that most perfectly.

6 Of attributes we make two kinds: the one is, of them which are so proper
unto the Deity, that they can be in no sort communicated unto creatures,
neither have they any other respect unto creatures, save that by them, the
Deity is distinguished from creatures; of this kind are, aeternity, simplenes,
vnmeasurablenes, omnipotency.

7 The other kind is of those, who although simply, and as far as they are in
the Deity, they cannot be communicated; yet creatures may be partakers of
them, not properly, but by analogy, and a kind of agreement, and that not
essentially, but in regard of quality, and but in part neither: such ar
wisdom, goodness, and the rest of that kind.

Therefore OSIANDER erred grossly, who taught that the essential righteousness
of God, was communicated unto us, and at this day their error is intolerable,
who recalling back again the blasphemy of EVTYCHES, hold that all the
proprieties of the Deity, were powered by personal union, into the flesh,
which the Son of God took upon him.

8 For whatsoever is not the divine essence, thereunto the essential attributes
of the Deity cannot be communicated.

9 The actions furthermore, which we said to be also attributes of the Deity,
we divide both into those which they call remaining, because they do so
continue in the Deity that works, as they bring forth no work out of the
doer, of which sort are providence and predestination: and also into those
which may be termed passing, that is, those which leave some work out of the
doer, or do infer a suffering unto some thing, as are creation and
redemption.

10 As for the attributes, which have their names from the effects proceeding
from God upon the creatures, though they seem to have had their beginning in
time, as where God is called the Creator, redeemer, etc. yet we deny, that
either they put any change in God, or do agree unto him by way of accident.

Defended by JOHN CASTOL of Geneua.
THE SIXTH SORT OF PRINCIPLES CONCERNING THE OMNIPOTENCY OF GOD.
THE ATTRIBVTES OF GOD IN General have been dealt with: now some of them in
special are to be handled.

1 THe omnipotency of God, is that very immeasurable and infinite essence of
God, which is communicable unto no creature; always doing, never suffering;
and which cannot decist to be that which it is.

2 This being in deed but one, may yet in diverse considerations, be said to be
manifold.

3 For the omnipotency is one way considered, when we speak of it, as God
does always work in him self, and it is another way regarded, in respect that
God works out of him self, and can work innumerable things, if it pleases
him.

4 For we hold, that God is omnipotent, in as much as, besides that, he is
able to do whatsoever he will; he can both will and do innumerable things,
which he will never, either will or do.

We do therefore condemn them, who say, that God is for no other cause
omnipotent, but in as much, as he can without exception, work whatsoever can
be, either spoken or imagined. And we do dislike of them, who think, that
God is in that respect, only called omnipotent, because he can do only
whatsoever he will: For his power is in it self infinite, whereas his will is
as it were, bounded, within the very act of will.

5 Now we hold, that God cannot do any of these things, which either are
repugnant unto his personal proprieties, (as that the Father cannot be
begotten, neither the Son begotten) or are contrary unto his essence, as to
be finite; or which implie a contradiction, of which sort, it is to make, that
a body shall be truly natural, and yet, neither to have quantity, nor to be
contained in any place. Briefly we deny, that God can do any thing, which if
they were done, might show him to have defects and weakness in him, as to die,
to lie, to sin, etc.

6 And as by faith, we believe according unto the Scriptures, and the Creeds
appointed in the church, that God only is omnipotent, so we do profess and
publish the same with our mouth.

7 For it is no less repugnant unto his nature, that there should be many
omnipotents, then that there should be many Gods.

Whence it is, that Christian Religion, does not acknowledge in God distinct
into three persons, three omnipotents, but one omnipotent.

Now concerning the humane nature of Christ, although it be united unto the
divine, in the person of the Son, who is but one, yet as it is not therefore
made God, so is it not properly made omnipotent: but it retained even it own
infirmities, before it was glorified, wherein it might suffer and dye for us,
and now being glorified, although it be free from all infirmities and glorious;
yet is it not in it self made omnipotent.

Defended by WILLIAM MO^NES of Niuerse.
THE SEVENTH SORT OF PRINCIPLES CONCERNING THE KNOWLEDGE THAT IS IN GOD.
I Unto the treatise of Gods omnipotency, is to be joined the declaration of
the knowledge that is in him, being a doctrine very necessary; to the end,
that the true God may be severed from the false: and that from it we may take
counsel and consolation.

II Now, this science or knowledge is considered, both in it self simply,
when the question is what, and of what sort it is: and also in respect of the
things that it does know.

III By this knowledge, we mean an absolute, and a most clear knowledge in
God, both of himself, and of all things created: whereby he does not only
know, all things to be: but also the reason, why they are so. And this
knowledge is different, from all the sight that men and Angels have: not by
comparison, that it is greater, and theirs lesser: but altogether in the whole
nature of it. The which difference we discern by these notes.

1 That this knowledge is essential, and even the understanding essence of
God. 2 That it arises not from the outward senses, or from the notions that
the understanding does apprehend: by reasoning, by joining things together, and
by dividing, or yet from the report of any other: no, not from the knowledge of
principles, and causes that are of themselves formed in the understanding. 3
That it is neither any habit nor action, nor any thing different from that
very thing that does understand: that is, from the essence of God, seeing it
is most simple. 4 That it understands all things at once. 5 That it is most
certain. 6 That it is always the same.
IIII Now in respect of the things that it does know; we affirm, that God
does know al things by himself, and of himself: 1 Himself, properly and most
fully. 2 All things past, present, and to come; even those things that are
casual. 3 Yea, and such things as neither are, nor ever shall be. 4 Even evil
things. 5 Yea infinite. 6 And even all the motions of the will, and their
issues. 7 And not only by a general knowledge of general things, but even by
a most exact and perfect of every particular.


V This knowledge, which in respect of things to come, is called praescience,
or foreknowledge; is not the cause of the existence of things: although there
is nothing to come to pass, which God did not foreknow that it should come.

VI This knowledge either in whole, or in part, can no creature be capable off,

Defended by JOHN FLORIDVS of Angieu.
THE EIGHT SORT OF PRINCIPLES, CONCERNING THE WILL OF GOD.
1 THe discourse concerning Gods will, which is most of al to be sought into
for our salvation, follows that which is concerning his knowledge.

2 By the word WILL, in God, we understand, both the divine essence, which
does embrace and delight in that chief and sovereign good which it has in it
self, and also in respect of the things that God will have done; we mean
the very action of will.

3 And in this latter regard, it is also considered two manner of ways: either
as it is a decree certain, and known only unto God, which we may call (...),
His unchangeable purpose.
or else as far, as he is made known unto men, either by commanding, or
forbidding in the divine scriptures, and specially in his law, or otherwise
by permitting, and working in the creatures.

4 For although the essence of God, and therefore also his will be most simple;
yet we deny not the same to be manifold, both in respect of the things which,
and of the manner how it wills those things to be.

5 But look how that unchangeable decree of his, is such, as it cannot but
be done, will we, nill we; even so, that will of his, which the Moral law does
lay open, is not always fulfilled: for the reprobate do purposely repugne the
same, and the elect, by reason of the corruption of their nature, (which with
grief they acknowledge) cannot fully obey it.

6 Further, seeing there is nothing either greater or higher then God, we
account it unlawful, to seek any cause of his will, either out of him, or
above him, and so we hold his goodness to be the cause of all things, that
he will have done.

Whereupon we do justly condemn the old PELLAGIANS, and the half
PELLAGIANS of our age, to wit, the Papists; who babble, that God was moved to
decree what should be the end of reasonable creatures, by the foreknowledge he
had, either of their faith, or of their works.

7 Those things which God wills concerning himself, he cannot but will them:
but as for such things as he wills concerning others; them he wills
freely: yet so, as some of them do necessarily come to pass and work:
others, as it falls out, of their own accord.

And seeing it is the cause of all things, we believe, that both good and
evil, do come to pass at the appointment thereof, in such sort, as whereas
God is most good; so his will is most upright, and the rule of all justice, so
as it can not command any thing that is evil.

Now although in Christ God and man, there be a double will; his divine will is
yet so immutable, as it cannot will any new thing; but whatsoever it wills,
the same it willed from aeternitie; neither does it repent him of any thing
he has done, seeing he is God indeed, and from all aeternitie.

Defended by FRANCIS BYF^ETIVS of Langres.
THE NINTH SORT OF PRINCIPLES, CONCERNING THE GOODNESS, FAVOR, LOVE, AND MERCY
OF GOD.
THe goodness of God, we call that essential propriety of his, whereby he is
good in himself, and bountiful toward all his creatures.

2 God is so exceedingly good, that from him can proceed nothing but good.

Whence it is, that evil is directly repugnant unto his nature, much less,
can he be thought to be the author of evil.

3 And although a proof of Gods goodness, be powered upon every creature,
general and particular: yet he does not in the same measure, communicate the
same unto al of them.

4 Now, whereas this goodness turns unto the destruction of the wicked, the
fault is their own; and that because they do either not embrace the same, with
a sure confidence, or else do contemptuously refuse it.

5 The word Grace or Favor, which is taken in diverse sens, does in this place
signify the free favor of God, which is only peculiar unto the elect, which
does not only frame our will, being freed from corruption, to will and to do
that which is good, but also does continually uphold the same, which otherwise
would fall to decay of it self, unless that supplying grace, did make the
first grace to be of efficacy and force.

6 This grace is neither from nature, as the PELLAGIANES did falsely judge,
neither yet is it any habit infused in us: neither does it become ours by any
other means, then as far as we apprehend the same by true faith in Christ.

This ground being laid, we affirm, that grace and merits of work, can in
no wise stand together.

7 The love that is in God, is no passion arising of some good that it
aprehendeth, but it is the very simple essence of God, who is graciously
affected toward his creatures, and blesses them as he thinks good.

8 But the cause of that love of his, is not in the creatures, as though they
were such, as could allure God to love them, but it is rather in God, who of
himself is good, and powers goodness upon his creatures.

9 In like sort, God is called merciful; not because he is subject unto any
perturbation, but in as much as he repelleth misery from those whom he loves.

And although amongst men, mercy seems to be opposed unto judgment, as a
thing that can not stand with it, yet in God, these two do very well agree,
seeing mercy is not contrary unto judgment; but justice being as it were
subdued by mercy; does in respect of us, seem to give place unto mercy.

Defended by DOMINICVS BAYDIVS a flemming.
THE SECOND SORT OF PRINCIPLES CONCERNING GODS PROVIDENCE.
I GOds providence we make to be, that aeternal way and manner, whereby God
does conserve, govern and direct unto their certain ends, the things which
he has wonderfully created: So that the said providence incessantly working,
by a perpetual and an immutable disposition and administration of all things,
neither fainting, nor wearying, and being of it self immutable, does move
all things that have being.

II For God does so respect al creatures in general, as he does provide for
them al in special, even unto the meanest particular, which he cares for,
cherishes and governs, every where laying before us in them, his wisdom,
goodness, and power: So that all things, both in heaven and earth, are so
brought to pass at his appointment; as he always does apply his hand unto
them, until that which he has most wisely purposed, be most powerfully
finished.

III As he alone does ordain all things; so he alone does work all things;
though not always without second causes, which he so uses; as he does not
idly impose upon them the burden of effecting, that which he has once
decreed, (as many things are done in the names of Kings and Princes, and said
to be wrought at their commandment, which yet, because they are done by
other officers, they skant know, either how, or by what means they are
brought to pass) but does vncessauntlie, without any discontinuance, work and
bring to pass, by a determinate appointment, and unto their right ends; al
things, even the least matters: doing justly, even when he uses most evil
instruments; to be short, he continually works all in all things.

1 Wherefore, we do condemn all ungodly Epicures, who dream of a certain
idle and dainty GOD, that neither regards his own, nor yet other men's
affairs: who also think, that all things are turned and rolled by the blind
power of Fortune; and do account the aeternall punishments of the wicked, and
those blessed joys, afrer this miserable life, for no better, then toys and
fables. 2 We detest those Sacrilegious men also, who make a subalternall or
second providence, that is; do attribute unto the true God a general kind of
providence, whereas they ascribe unto Saints or false Gods, a more special:
whence it came, that blind gentilisme did fain certain lieftena^t Gods. 3 Those
also, who feign a linking together of causes, and that there is a fatal
destenie of things. 4 Those that affirm heavenly affairs, to be governed by
God; and earthly things to be disposed, by the virtue, influence, and
constellations of the Stars. 5 Those, who make Gods providence, to be only a
bare knowledge of things, for they divide between God and men, whereas they
will have men and their affairs to be guided by the power, but not by the
appointment of God.
IIII Now, though nothing ca^ be done, but by the decree of God, which can
never be deceived; yet second causes do work according unto their own nature:
and therefore, although the minds and the wills of al men, do bend themselfs
thither; wheresoever the Lord, as it were, the Ship-maister does move them;
yet is it our own fault, that we do evil, and so the cause and the matter of
our destruction is in our selves, so that the authors of wickedness, are
vnexcuseable.

V Gods providence therefore, being absent from nothing that is done, but
vprightlie governing, ruling, moving, and conuaying, whereto it lists, the
judgments, wills, endeavors, enterprises, and actions of all men, both good and
bad; and further sending upon us, by his most wise and just counsel, (though
we often cannot see it) whatsoever befalls us in this life, be they
prosperity or adversity, can by no means be frustrated, of the effects
which it has purposed.

Defended by JOHN CORNELIUS, of prouence in France.
THE ELEVENTH SORT OF PRINCIPLES CONCERNING GODS ETERNAL PREDESTINATION.
NOW THAT WE HAVE SPOKEN OF GODS Providence: it follows that we deal of
Praedestination.

1 FIrst in general, Praedestination is that aeternal and immouable decree of
GOD, whereby, as it pleased his Majesty; he has decreed all things, both
universally and particularly; and also does effect them by the causes created
in like sort, and appointed by him, as he thought good to the laying open of his
own glory.

2 Secondly, applying this decree in special unto mankind. We call
Praedestination, that aeternall decree (such as we have already spoken of:)
whereby, he has immutably purposed from all aeternity, by saving some in his
great mercy, and by damning others in his most just severity, to manifest
himself, what he is indeed by his effects; namely, that he is most merciful
and most just.

3 Among those second causes, as far as they concern mankind; whom properly
this discourse respects; we are to consider two, vz. the understanding, and
the will, as the spring of the actions of men.

4 It behooued God, being in time to execute the purpose of this aeternall
Praedestination, otherwise he should be the author of sin (which cannot
be) to create man good; that is, such, as both the judgment of his
understanding, could well and vprightlie see into the things laid before him,
and uprightly judge of them, and also the desire of his will should be just,
and every way even.

5 It behooved also, that this man should be endued with a free and a voluntary
power, to move himself, to the end, that this power should be a forcible and
a selfe-moouing beginning of the actions of man.

6 It behooued this man also to have ability, if he would, to fall from this
vprightnes and goodness, that a way might be opened, both unto the mercy, and
the justice of God.

7 It is so far then, that God bereaved our first Parents of the liberty of
human will, and the voluntary inclination to be carried both ways, that on
the other side he made no alteration in the same: Otherwise, as God was the
Author; so he might be accounted the destroyer thereof.

8 For the aeternall purpose of God, does impose no other necessity upon the
events, which he has determined, then such as he will have second causes, to
be moved according unto their own nature: whence it follows, that it does
not take away the contingencie or voluntarines of man's will, as shall be
discussed more fully, God willing, in the discourse concerning the nature of
man.

9 Those two therefore, who were the first of all mankind, although in regard of
that which was to come to pas, they fell not without the unchangeable
appointment of God; yet in respect of the cause inhaerent in them, and the
proper beginning of their actions, they fell contingentlie, not by constraint,
but willingly, and altogether by a voluntary inward motion; both in respect
of the understanding, who blinded, and of the will who depraved it self.

10 Therefore, we do retain these Scholasticall distinctions of necessity and
compulsion, of natural and voluntary, of absolute and conditional, of
enforced and ensuing necessity, as true and profitable.

11 This fall brought with it, that which was conuaied unto all men, as GOD had
threatened; to wit, the bondage of darkness in the whole mind, and of rebellion
against God, in the whole will of man.

12 And although, the liberty of making choice between good and evil; but not
between evil and evil, be now altogether lost, yet there remain still,
both in the understanding, and also in the will, though servant unto sin,
certain voluntary motions.

13 Out of this bondage, God, who is bound unto no man, does, when he thinks
good, call and enlighten those whom according unto his aeternall
fore-appointed election in Christ, it pleased him of his mere mercy, to
choose, and having bestowed faith upon them, and regenerated them, he freely
justifies them in the same Christ; meaning one day to lay open, in them being
glorified, the great glory of his great and unspeakable mercy.

14 We do condemn therefore all those, who appoint the foresight and
foreknowledge, either of faith or works, as a praeexistent or foregoing cause
of election, which was foreordained from aeternitie: neither do we teach, that
any man was elected; because he should either believe, or do well; but
contrariwise, that they therefore are endued with faith, who do believe; and
that they labor to do well, who are careful of good works; because that God
of his mere free goodness, did appoint them unto salvation; and therefore to
have faith in Christ, and the true fruits of faith.

15 The certainty of this Election, is not to be fetched from that aeternall
decree, known only unto God; nor yet from a general calling, but from the
gifts inhaerent in us, and the effects proper unto the elect; that is, from the
good motions of the understanding and the will, we must fetch the gift of true
regeneration, peculiar only unto the elect; and from Regeneration, we must
gather that unrepentant gift of imputed righteousness: From hence again, by our
effectual calling, we must arise to the full assurance of faith, and the
testimony of the Spirit of adoption in us, and from thence last of all; we are
by little and little, to climb higher and higher, unto the full assurance of
our free aeternall Praedestination in Christ, which is joined with continual
prayer, hearing of Gods word, and perseverance in well doing.

16 Now all those, whom it pleases the same GOD, who is debtor unto no man,
in justice to leave in their own corruption; either altogether not called, or
called; but without the opening of the heart, and worthelie to deliver up unto
Satan, and their own concupiscence; being such also, as wilfully and
willingly harden themselves; will he one day, according unto his aeternall
Praedestination, adjudge together with Satan unto aeternall punishments,
laying open in their just destruction, the glory of his great and most just
hatred against evil.

17 The manifesting of this decree of Reprobation, is to be left unto God,
unless it be apparent in any, that they have sinned against the holy Ghost,
as in times past, it was with IVLIAN the Apostata. The cause, why we are not
to determine of Rebrobation, from the effects of Satan and our corruption
(that sin against the holy Ghost only excepted) as we are to gather our
Election from the working of the holy Spirit in us, is this: Even because it
has pleased our merciful GOD, to show that some, yea of the greatest sinners,
at their very last gasp, were of the number of his elect, by bestowing
forgiveness of sins upon them by his extraordinary favor, as it fell out with
the thief that hung upon the Cross.

18 Those therefore, who hold on the way of destruction, are so to be told
of their duty, as leaving unto God the secrets of his judgments, we are not
to despair of any man's salvation. For it is a true consequence indeed to say;
I believe, as it appears by the effects: therefore I am elected and appointed
unto salvation: But it is no necessary consequent to say: I do not believe,
and I tread the path of destruction, therefore I am a reprobate, and appointed
to damnation. For he that believes not to day, may be endued with faith to
morrow. But thus rather we are to make a true conclusion. I do neither believe
the Gospel, nor labor to believe, but continue in the way of destruction.
Wherefore, except I betake me unto an other course, I shall perish. And
therefore I will enter unto an other way, which God lays before me. And these
are the cogitations, which all pastors are bound by duty with great care to lay
before their wandering sheep.

19 God therefore in appointing some of free-gift unto salvation, and others
unto just condemnation; is neither author of sin, nor respecter of persons:
but thereby shows himself to be the true God in deed.

Defended by RAPHAEL EGLINE of Tigurine.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING THE CREATION OF ALL THINGS, AND THEIR DIVISION. XII.
WE HAVE DONE WITH GODS PROVIdence and Praedestination: now we are to entreat
of the works of God, (whereby he does as it were make him self visible unto
us,) that is, concerning the creation of all things, and their distinction.

1 Creation is the external work of God, fore-known and decreed by him of his
unspeakable goodness from aeternitie: whereby, unto the glory of his Name, he
did create of nothing, all things that are without him: that is; all things
that have a substance different from his essence.

2 The alone sovereign cause therefore of the world, and all things that have
being therein, is God: who made all things, not after the manner of men, but
without all labor: and also without the work, help, and service of any
other, but by his word alone; that is, by his Son, through the power of the
holy Ghost. For the works of the Trinity, are inseperable.

3 Neither did he frame all those things of any fore-being stuff or matter,
but even of nothing; that is, from that which was not, by his word alone he
gave being, unto all things that are.

Those Philosophers therefore do err, who held, that the world was aeternall;
and those also who deemed it, to have been made and formed of moates by chance,
together with these who taught, this visible world to have been framed by some
other then by God. In which error was CERINTHVS, CARPOCRATES, the ARCHONTIANES,
and others, who attributed the work of the creation, only unto certain virtues
and powers.

4 The chief end of the creation is, that there should be some, who should
enjoy the loving kindness of God, in the true taste thereof, and glorify his
Majesty for ever.

To this end were Angels and men created. A secundary end of the creation is,
that all other creatures should together set forth the glory of God, and
serve to the use of man.

5 Now, although by the order of nature, from one, as far as it is one, there
can proceed but one: and that God of all other things, is most single and but
one: yet the infinite variety of things, proceeds from the same wisdom of
God, from whence their creation and government does depend. For he works not
according to the course of nature, but does whatsoever he will, above all
nature, most freely and voluntarily. Yet, in that inaequalitie of things,
there appears greatest aequalitie: yea, and the diversity of things, appear
to be but one, in respect that whatsoever he has created, are referred unto
that general kind of the being of things, which is but one.

6 The essential division of things, is from their matter and their form: in
which respect, some things are visible, as all simple and mixed bodies, either
without life and breath, or enjoying both: Some also are invisible; as Angels,
and the souls of men, whose effects are manifest; though both their Material
and Formal causes, as also other circumstances of the time and place, wherein
they were created, be obscure, and in some sort unknown unto us.

7 Now all these things, which God created, could not but be good, seeing he
himself is most good; for they were created of him exceedingly good, and most
pure without all corruption; having nothing in them, which did not declare the
omnipotency, and the exceeding goodness of the Creator. In this original
integrity, men and evil Angels, might have still continued, if they had
would; and men might have conuayed the same unto their posterity: In stead
whereof; God, for the sin of man, did curse the inferior Creatures, which he
had created for man's sake.

8 As concerning Evil: it is not any thing created or having being, but
only signifies the mere absence of the good, that ought to be present;
neither is it in the subjects as an accident, but as Privation opposite unto
good; rather expelling the same, then having being in it self.

9 And although it does mar that, which otherwise is good in it self; yet is
it by accident, the cause of good: That the degrees of things created may
appear, which have their state, according as they have the greater, or less
good in them. So unto the good of all things in general, Evil seemed to be
in some sort necessary. And so AUGUSTINE says; that God was the Author of
good, and the ordainer of evil.

10 Now, seeing that Evil is not any thing, that has being in nature: it
follows, that there can be no extreme sovereign Evil, save only as far as
evil is altogether departed from that, which is the chief, and the sovereign
good, which only is God alone, blessed and mighty above all.

We do therefore condemn, the MARCIONITES, the MANICHAEES and others; who
have taught, that there was two beginnings, the one contrary unto the other;
that is, two Gods, the one good, of whom the invisible, spiritual, and good
Creatures have had their beginning. The other evil; from whence all visible,
corporal, and corrupt things have issued: whereas indeed all things are good,
in regard of their being, and the evil that is in them, has proceeded from
the corruption and defect of their being.

Defended by JOHN HENRY SVVYTZER, of Tygurine.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING GOOD AND EVIL SPIRITS. XIII.
CONCERNING THE CREATION OF AL things in general, we have already spoken: now
it follows, that we deal of the things created in particular, and first of
spiritual substaunces, as being the Creatures, that draw nearest unto the
nature of God.

1 SPirits then are substances, created of nothing without bodies, and
invisible; yet finite in regard of the propriety of their nature; good indeed,
but so, as they were created by God, of a changeable goodness. Of this sort, are
those which we call Angels, and the souls of men.

2 All Angels were at the first created good, and endued with an understanding
of most surpassing excellency; and being of nature most simple next unto God;
they were al at once created in the beginning, and not to take increase by any
propagation.

3 The name of Angels, is attributed to those Spirits, to declare their office;
namely, that they are, as it were, the messengers and officers of God;
especially those of them, that continued in the truth: of whom we will speak
in the first place.

4 The names of those, do partly show the excellency of their nature, as
when they are called, SERAPHIM and CHERVBIM, and partly declare, the dignity
of their service whereunto they are sent; of which sort, are the names of
MICHAEL, GABRIEL, RAPHAEL, spoken of in the Scriptures.

The like names of Angels, mentioned in the books of CABALISTS and PAGANS, we
hold to be counterfeit.

5 And as for the disputation concerning their degrees, that of all other
things is most vain, and so is the question concerning the time of their
creation: seeing that the lord has not opened this mystery unto us.

6 Of these Angels, some thorough Gods grace, have continued in the truth,
that is, in that blessed and permanent state wherein they were created,
attending as diligent servants upon God, that they might be ready, to execute
his commandments, both for the furthering of the salvation of the Saints, and
also for the execution of the just judgments of God.

7 In the performing of these commandments, they have often times appeared
truly visible, and palpable, by taking upon them the shape of a man, or some
other form, being for a set time, clad with true bodies, to bring to pas bodily
actions: It being the will of God, that they should thus far frame themselves
unto the capacity of men. But whence they took these bodies, and whether they
fashioned them unto themselves, with all such like points as are laid up only
in the secret counsel of God; we hold it unlawful for us to search.

8 Now the rest of the Angels, the number whereof, are also exceedingly many,
wilfully and willingly changing themselves, and departing from the truth, he
being their guide and Captain, as it were, who is peculiarly named Satan,
(that is, the adversary of God) and the Devil, are by the just judgeme^t of
God, of those that were most good become most evil; but not bereaved of
understanding and judgment: Wherefore also they are called by a Greek name,
(...) or (...), that is, endued with knoweledge. And for this their sin, they
are justly adjudged by the Lord, unto aeternall torment, without any hope of
mercy.

9 And although, these wicked Angels, do with all their might, resist God; yet
are they wholly subject unto his government and power; the Lord using their
wickedness and malice; partly, to chastise his own, and partly, to execute his
judgementes against the enemies of his name; in such sort, as he turns their
wicked endeavors, and purposes, unto the clean contrary part, even unto the
salvation of his children, and to his own glory.

The Lord then in such sort, does use them, as instruments (though evil) that
are at his commandment, but so, as they can never be properly called the
servants of God, because their work is always evil; although he brings his
good work to pass by their means.

10 These, as also their Prince, who from the beginning was a murderer, as far
as in them lies, do desire the destruction of men both body and soul.

11 Their operations also are wonderful, when God gives them power to hurt:
In so much, that after a sort, they may seem to work miracles.

12 But if we call those miracles, which are done against all order of nature,
the Devils can work no such: no, nor yet any of the good Angels; Because,
this is only the proper power of God, which can in no wise be communicated
with any Creature. The miracles therefore, which seem to be wrought by Devils,
are either mere delusions, or else, wrought by the secret operation of nature,
(which is better known unto them, being evil Spirits, then to any men) and
therefore, they have but the show of miracles.

13 These evil Angels also, seem to foretell things to come: in which
respect, they have long since, bewitched men, and depraved the true worship of
God, as far as in them lay. But to speak properly; they cannot foretell any
thing to come, because, this also is the peculiar work of God only.

14 Now, how they are able to work in the hearts of men, and to stir up
their thoughts, that is; whether they always do the same, by the means of
some thing laid before man, or without any object, we think it to be a
curious question, and it may be such, as men cannot dissolve. But our part is,
that we be very careful to enarme our selves against these temptations, with
all our might, by continual prayers.

15 But we affirm out of the word of God, that the devils are dispersed
through all parts of the world, both above and beneath, doing all the evil
they can, even until, that Satan and his Angels, together with all cursed
reprobates be cast into hell, there to be tormented with eternal fire.

We do therefore condemn the MANICHAES, and the PRISCILLIANISTS, who defended
that the Devils were evil by nature, and created such at the first, by a
certain evil God: the SADVCES also, who together with that HERMES
TRESMEGISTVS utterly denied that there were any angels: And ORIGIN likewise,
who with PLATO affirmed, that those spiritual minds, as often as they
offended, were fallen and thrust into bodies: APELLES the heretic also, who
said, that the bodies which the Angels took upon them, were never created: and
LACTANTIVS FIRMIANVS, who dreamed that Angels were not presently at the
beginning of the world, appointed to guide and protect man: In sum, we
condemn all those, who either make them coaeternall with God, or attribute
unto them, the work of the Creation, as did SIMON MAGVS, CERINTHVS,
SATVRNINIVS, and CARPOCRATES.

Defended by JOHN JAMES COLER of Tigurine.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING MAN. XII.
1 Seeing that man is the most excellent of all the visible works of God: for
whose cause next unto Gods, all other things were created: we hold it a matter
belonging unto a Divine, to entreat of the nature of Man.

2 Man is neither the body, nor the soul, severally considered, but composed
of both, that is, of soul and body joined together by a most straight, and
most loving band.

3 The truth of Gods word does witness, that there was but one man created at
the first, who was to be the original of all other men. And so, all those
that proceeded from him, should be tied together by a common bond of blood. We
do then reject the opinion of such Philosophers, as have denied, one certain
man to have had his beginning first of all other.

4 The body of that first man, was formed by God of the dust of the earth:
that is, as we interpret it, of the four elements: that it should not be a
grave of the soul, as PLATO thought, but a most excellent and a most meet
instrument to perform the faculties of the mind.

5 Now in respect that this body was made of qualities repugnant one to the
other, it was mortal in the first creation of it, (for repugnancie or discord,
is the author of dissolution:) yet by the appointment of God, it was made
immortal, that it should be the habitation of the immortal soul: but after
the entrance of sin into the world, it returned unto the former necessity
of mortality.

The PELAGIANS therefore do err, in holding that the bodies of men, were
naturally subject unto death: and in attributing the cause of death, to be
only the discord of the contrary qualities.

Other points that belong unto the frame and beauty of man's body, we leave to
be discussed by natural Philosophers and physicians. As also many things that
they teach concerning the powers of the soul: because we think it meet that we
contain our selves within the bonds of divinity. And now we will speak of the
essence of the soul.

6 The essence of the soul can scarce be known: for it is not to be
perceived by the instrument of any the senses of our bodies: yet by the
faculties and operations of it, it does in a sort open it self unto us. And
therefore it is usually described and pointed out, after this plain manner.

7 The soul of man is an essence, created according unto the image of God,
infused into the body: that man consisting both of body and soul, should be
capable to know and glorify God.

8 The soul of man is properly and truly called a soul, for that faculty
which is in beasts and plants, is by reason of the scarcity of words so called
of the Latins. For seeing the same does not subsist of it self, and that it is
nothing else, but a power arysing out of the properties of the matter and form;
it scant retains the name of a being, much less deserves to be called a
soul.

9 The soul of man is of a spiritual and not of a bodily nature, subsisting
by it self: not unadvisedly made of moates, not a fire, or any other of the
four elements, or yet any thing compact of the elements, not any number,
not an harmony, not any faculty brought forth out of the matter: briefly, not
any part, cut as it were, out of the Deity: but wisely created of nothing
after a manner unknown unto us, by God who woorketh most freely.

10 Now although it has a beginning, yet does it remain immortal, not only
because of it own substance, it is uncompounded, and void of al contrarieties
and bodily accidents: but especially in as much as it is so created of God,
that of it self, it can live, exist, and continue for ever. And it does rather
afforde life unto the body, than derive it from the same. The which we do
believe, in as much as it is proved unto us by the most sure testimonies of the
holy scriptures, rather then because it is demonstrated by philosophical
reasons.

We condemn therefore, the MANICHAEES, GNOSTICKES, and PRISCILLIANISTS, who
have said that the soul was of a double nature, whereof the one was from a
good beginning, vz. a good God. The other from an evil. The SELEVCIANES,
HERMINIANES, PROCLIANES, who held that the soul was not made by God, but by
Angels. The LVCIFERIANES and TERTVLLIANISTS, who were of opinion, that it was a
bodily substance, and such as could fall off, or be shelled from the body,
and remove from one body to an other. The ARABIANES, and the NAZARITES who
thought it mortal: the ORIGENISTS, who judged that all souls should
aeternallye live in heaven, and the APOLLINARISTS, whose opinion was, that one
soul was begotten of another.

11 Neither is the soul of the same nature and sort, that the Angels are, as
ORIGIN thought: who made only an accidental and not a substantial difference
between Angels, and the souls of men. Now, that essential difference although
it cannot be easily known, is yet in some sort perceived by this adjunct, vz.
that Angels can not be ordinarily joined unto bodies, whereas the souls may.
Now the soul is also not only the first mouer of the body, but even the
very cheef and especial form of a man, whereby first of all and of it self,
A man is that which he is, and for whose cause, the body is so framed as it
is: to the end, that a most honorable lodging should be prepared for a most
honorable ghuest.

12 The souls of all men are not one as THEMISTIVS and the followers of
AVERROIS thought, but of every particular man, there is a particular soul,
which can (as naked and bare forms) consist and remain, when they are severed
from the body, as in deed they do for a time, when as they being out of the
body, do expect the aeternall and indissoluble conjunction, that they are to
have with the same.

13 And seeing that the form of every thing, does not only make up the whole,
but also every part thereof, and no part can effect the office thereof, except
the form be present, and seeing when the same departs, it cease from
doing: we do defend that common opinion out of AUGUSTINE, vz. that the soul
is wholly in the whole, and wholly in every part. Although there be this
diversity of the being of it in the whole and in the parts, as that it is
first and of it self in the whole, whereas it is in the parts, but after a
secondarie manner.

Defended by JOHN CASTOLL of Geneua.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING THE FACVLTIES OF THE SOVLE OF MAN. XV.
HAVING SET DOWN WHAT WE ARE to believe according unto the Scriptures,
concerning the essence of the soul of man: now we are to entreat of the
powers thereof.

1 GOD alone is a most simple, and a most mere being. And therefore, although
the essence of the soul be a spiritual and no bodily substance, yet it is
endued with faculties agreeable unto the nature of it, which, by their own
spiritual manner are inhaerent in the essence thereof, as in their subject.

We do not therefore allow the opinion of the PERIPATETICKS, who taught that
the faculties of the soul, does not differ from the essence of it in deed, but
after a sort.

2 And although the very essence and substance of the soul, does by the grace
of God, continue without all change and alteration: yet the powers thereof,
were created of a changeable nature.

3 Now as man was created in one of his parts like unto all other living
creatures, as well in regard of the substance of their bodies, as of their
natural life, (though in a far more excellent state.) So it behooved, that that
other part of his, should be endued with faculties meet for the preservation
of the natural life of his said body, namely; with the faculties of
nourishing, and the power of outward senses: whereof, whatsoever might be
farther spoken, we leave unto Physicians and natural Philosophers.

4 The other faculties are proper unto the soul of man, for the spiritual and
immortal excellency whereof, it is also (and not only for the very essence of
the soul) truly said to be created according to the image of God.

5 Yet in as much as the soul, in bringing forth the effects of these proper
qualities, does use the instrument of the body, whereunto it is personally
united: in this respect also, man (wholly considered but not in part) may be
truly held to be created after the image of God.

We do condemn therefore the dotage of the ANTHROPOMORPHITES, who placing the
image of God in the very body of man, did therefore dream, that God was a
bodily substance: as also the madness of OSIANDER, who referred the same unto
the incarnation of the world.

6 These faculties we hold to be two, the understanding, (which is also
called the mind) and the will, or as sometimes they are called in the holy
Scriptures, the spirit and the soul taken in a more narrow signification.

7 This Image considered, these two faculties is expressed of PAVL, by the
names of righteousness and true holiness, whereby he declares the agreement
which it had with the pattern, according unto which it was created: A
wonderful light being powered into the faculty of understanding, whereby it
was endued with a most clear knowledge (and such as was obscured by no
darkness,) of the true God, and his divine will: And an inward force being
ingraffed into the will, whereby it was able to stir up it self by holy
motions, without all show of resistance unto that end, for the which man was
created: the body, to be short, being framed in a most wonderful decent
sort, to yield obedience most redily, and without all wearisomnes unto the
soul when it moved the same.

8 Unto this agreeablenes of man with God, and to the agreement and proportion
that all the parts of man, had among them selves, was adjoined (as it were
another shining brightness of the divine Majesty) the dominion of all the
inferior creatures granted unto man: that by this means also, man might shine
here beneath, as a president of the majesty and glory of God.

9 To the execution of this government, there was given unto man, an exact
knowledge (not gotten by labor and use, but naturally ingraffed in him) both
of the natures of all things, that he was to govern: and also of the best way
to rule them. Whereunto of the contrary side, the good and right disposition and
inclination, which all the creatures, that were under man's government had to
obey man, was answerable: the which harmony and agreement of the whole world,
MOSES does express by the name of the goodness, that was in every creature.

Defended by JOHN FLORIDES of Augiers.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING FREE WILL. XVI.
THE FACVLTIES OF THE Understanding, and the will, are always accompanied with
that power, which is commonly called Free Will: whereof we will now speak.

1 FREE WILL, which the Graecians call (...) if the force of the word be
strictly considered, is given neither to man nor Angel, nor yet shall ever
be granted; but truly and absolutely does agree unto God alone, for he only
is (...).

2 Yet of this high and sovereign authority, there were certain lineaments
shadowed in Angels and men, at their first creation, when as both the one and
other were endued by the Lord with understanding and will, whereby they were
made capable of knowledge and understanding.

3 For man is not only stirred to desire by a natural and lively motion, but
even according unto advise or election, which cannot be, without either the
true, or the apparent knowledge of the thing it desires.

4 Such furthermore, was the state of the first man, before sin, that his
understanding and will, did altogether agree with the will of God, and were
wholly subject (which is the cheifest liberty) unto his commandment, without
all resistance or strife that the affections had against the mind.

5 At that time therefore, man was in deed the Lord of his own actions, that
is, endued with free will. Yet because he was mutable and changeable both
ways, he did so incline from good to evil, that as AUGUSTINE says, by
sinning he lost both him-self, and his liberty.

6 Not that he was turned unto a stock, and so bereaved of judgment and will.
For sin has not utterly abolished nature, although it has lamentably
polluted the same: but such a liberty remains, as can will nothing, but what
is evil, and that euillie, For whatsoever is done without faith, is sin.

7 Now in things that are subject unto us, as many actions both natural and
moral are: free choice is left unto man, that he can either will or not will,
as he has will either to speak or to hold his peace, to study or not study,
and such like.

8 But in supernatural things, as are to know God, to love him, and to obey
his will as we ought, we are altogether weak, and blind, or rather dead as
PAVLE speaks.

We do condemn therefore the PELLAGIANS, who say that the force of will
remains in us unblemished, and that sin may be avoided by the mere light
of nature. And the PAPISTS also, who hold, that it is but blemished only.

9 For we acknowledge as the Scripture teaches, that we are now, our nature
being corrupted, dead in sin, the children of wrath, and enemies unto God:
and we say, that we cannot by our own strength prepare any way for us to come
unto God, but that if we will come unto him, he must draw us.

10 It must needs be therefore, that he must first regenerate us, and make us
the sons of God, and new creatures. In which work, we are not co-workers
with God, but meerelie such as stand still while he works, that we may be
wrought upon, and reformed by him, even as we were at the first created by him,
without any help of ours.

11 Now after regeneration, we are by faith drawn from death unto life, and
to will is present with us, but so, as we are compassed about with many
hindrances, by reason of the stings of sin and the flesh in us, which are
not utterly done away: yet we begin to be co-workers with God, and we are
so wrought upon, as we also do work: And we shall then wholly obey him, and
stick unto him, even when our full restitution being wrought, we shall enjoy
that blessed and heavenly life.

12. The discourse concerning voluntary, changeable, and immutable things, we
thought meet to be severed from the quaestion of Free Will, and placed in the
doctrine of Gods providence.

Defended by FRANCES BVEFETIVS of Angiers.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING SIN. XVII.
1 THe estate whereunto, both ADAM and all his posterity did fall; is
contrary unto that integrity wherein he was created at the first.

2 For whereas the nature of man was then such, as he could have lived,
according unto the upright and aeternall law, (which is nothing else, but the
will of God:) Sin has brought him now to that pass, that he does of a set
purpose disobay the same.

3 Sin is not a bare want or privation of good, but a swaruing from the will
of God.

4 And we think, that it may be thus fitly defined: Namely, that it is,
whatsoever is against the law and will of God.

5 For the force of sin, does not depend upon the breach of some human
constitution; but upon the transgression of Gods will only.

And therefore, the definition of the Philosophers, is most imperfect, who
account sin to be that only, which is repugnant unto reason. For reason it
self, can do nothing else, but go astray until it be lightened by the light of
God. The Libertines also are to be condemned, who make that only to be sin,
which a man's own conscience thinks to be sinful.

6 The seat or subject of sin, is the very soul it self, that is, the
reason and the will. For the former of these, being ignorant of that which it
should know, or else ruling amiss, as well in commanding, as in forbidding,
has sin cleaving unto it. And the latter, either when it wills amiss,
that which it ought not to will, or when it wills not that which it ought to
be desirous of, sins: The body is only the instrument of the soul in
sinning.

7 Some of the causes of sin, are inward; as the will, (which before sin
came, was in ADAM only mutable; But after sin, as well in him as in his
posterity, was both mutable and corrupt.) Some outward, as the Devil, and
the diverse objects, that are laid before us.

8 But as concerning the Lord, he in no wise can be thought the Author of
sin, who is so far from turning men from himself, that he rather seeks
to convert all men unto himself, as unto the only true and perfect end: Yet
he is said to make them, to do that which is sinful, when he does not
restrain them from sinning, the which whole work, is only to be ascribed
unto his wisdom and justice.

We do condemn then the MANICHAEES, the VELENTINIANS, the SELEVTIANS, etc. who
affirmed, that sin proceeds from God.

9 The effect and wages of sin is death, and that aeternally; because it is
committed against him, who is aeternall and infinite.

That distinction of sin then into mortal and venial, is improper; save
only in the diverse respects of the elect and the reprobate. For unto the
elect, all sins are venial through Christ: But unto the reprobates, there
are no sins but they are mortal. And it is manifest, that the PELAGIANS do
err, when they say, that death is natural unto the body.

10 Yet for all this, we think not all sins to be equal, in that sense that
the Stoics did: But we acknowledge certain degrees in them, according unto
the diversity of their objects and circumstances; yet the original corruption
and guilt is alike aequall in all men: Seeing all men are alike, the sinful
sins of sinful ADAM.

Defended by STEPHEN BLOIVS of Augiers.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING THE DIVISION OF SIN. XVIII.
SEEING WE HAVE SPOKEN OF SIN in general: now we will deal with the same in
special.

1 THe principal sorts of sins are named two, vz. Original and Actual;
which notwithstanding, are rather issuing (then disagreeing) the one from the
other: for the one is as it were the cause and the root; the other as the fruit
and effect.

2 Original sin, is sometimes called absolutely sin: Otherwhile flesh;
old and first ADAM, the sin of nature, concupiscence, the lusts of the
flesh, the law of the members, the heart of man, etc.

3 And it may be thus fitly defined; namely, an infection derived from ADAM
unto all mankind.

4 The subject whereunto it cleaves, is not only the body, but even the
soul also. For whole man, every part of him is altogether corrupted, and the
powers and actions, as well the superior, as the inferior, both of body and
soul are polluted: whence it comes, that in the affection and will, all
things are depraved and perverted, and in the reason it self, there is nothing
but blindness, the ignorance and hatred of God.

5 Now, although the soul which is not taken from Ada^, but immediately
created by God, may seem to be void of this infectio^; and that it seems not
meet, that the sins of the Fathers should be punished in the Children: yet
seeing ADAM is considered, not only as some particular man; but as the
beginning, whence al mankind did issue, in whom also were all the gifts, that
were to be bestowed upon the whole offspring; he by his sin lost them, both
to himself, and unto all men, that proceed from him; who are now, in that only
respect that they are and do resemble the image of ADAM, hateful unto God.

We do condemn therefore, the PELLAGIANS, who held, that men were sinners,
not by birth, but only by immitation.

6 In all men, (Christ only excepted) there is the same original sin, and
it has spread it self alike upon all men: Neither are there any diverse
sorts of original sins.

The Papists then do err, who do except others besides Christ, from original
sin, as the virgin Mary.

7 There are two effects of original sin: the guilt or the offense, whereby
all men (even infants, which yet have committed no actual sin) are made
subject unto Gods wrath, and both deaths; and also the want and privation of
original righteousness, and the inclination unto all sorts of wickedness.

Therefore, the scripture teaches, that al me^ must be born again; even
infants and all, unto whom for this cause, we do rightly maintain against
the ANABAPTISTS, that the sign of Regeneration is to be administered: Although
we make no question; but that the relics of corruption does still remain,
and is not utterly taken away; after Baptism, whatsoever the Papists say to
the contrary.

8 Actual sin is, when the law of GOD is broken in deed: and that is two
manner of ways; either when as that which God commands is omitted, or that
which he forbids is committed. Whence those two sorts of sins, vz. omitted
and committed, sprang up in the Schools. The first whereof, arises, in that
we are unmeet to do well: The latter, in that we are prone unto every evil.

9 There are other distinctions of actual sin. For in respect of the object;
some are said to be done against God; others against men: And in regard of the
ends, some reach unto the soul only; others unto the body also.

Unto the first sort, of the latter division, do appertain all inordinate
motions, whatsoever they are; and even all the evil cogitations, even the
beginnings of them before they be fully framed, and though the will does not
assent unto them: and those in like sort, that the will (which especially
makes the form and gives being unto sin) does allow and strengthen: Unto
the latter member, are all those referred, which are brought unto action, by
the outward service of some part of the body.

The Papists therefore do err, in denying concupiscence, and those first
inordinate motions to be sins; most absurdlie affirming, that concupiscence
is given to man, to the end, that wrestling with it, he should be more and more
whetted on, to embrace virtue, and so should bind God so much the more unto
him, by his merit.

Defended by RAMOND PALOCANE of Bearne.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING THE RESTORING OF MANKIND. XIX.
WHERE FIRST THE PERSON OF CHRIST is to be spoken of.

1 GOd would not have the felicity of man to consist, in that first estate
wherein he was created (for then had his felicity been earthly, and in some
sort, subject unto change) but he placed it in a more firm and a more
excellent estate, whereby he might live a heavenly life, and such, as from the
which, he could in no wise fall.

2 Now, that man might be brought unto that perfect estate, he fell by his
own fault; yet not without the providence of GOD, and so was made subject unto
the death, both of his soul and body: to the end, that being delivered from
sin and death, he might pass unto a better life, and so might become a most
certain president of the justice and mercy of God.

3 Our restoring again, consists in that, that we should be freed from sin
and death, and also from all the effects of both, and should be preferred unto
the dignity of that righteousness and that immortal life, which is far more
excellent and permanent.

4 Our delivery from sin, is wrought by the abollishing of sin, which is
done two manner of ways. First, by taking away, both the guilt and punishment
thereof, by the mercy of God. Secondly, by the regeneration of a new life,
which is opposed unto the corruption of nature, and by the which,
Sanctification is so begone in this life, as it shall be fully perfected in
the next.

5 Our delivery from death is, when as we are assured, that God is not angry
with us; yea, and do hope, and also feel him so appeased toward us, that we
know our selves to be safe from the aeternall destruction of body and soul,
and from all other miseries.

6 These, and all other gifts which God bestows upon the elect, are given
unto us in Christ Jesus only. Now that we may be truly partakers of them,
there are two things to be considered: namely, his person, and his office.

7 The person of Jesus Christ, is the Son of God, who has personally united
unto himself, the human nature, which he took of the seed of DAVID: For he
who is God from all aeternitie, began to be man, when he was conceived by the
holy Ghost, and incarnate: that from the very moment of his conception, he
should continue for ever true God and true man.

8 Now although this work of the restitution, as well as of the Creation, does
agree unto the whole Trinity; yet the several persons are distinguished. For
the Father sent the Son, the holy Ghost did incarnate him, and the Son made
him self of no reputation.

We condemn therefore, the CERINTHIANS, EBEONITS PHOTIMIANS, SAMOSATENIANS,
ARTEMONIANS, and SERVETIANS, who affirmed Christ to be but a bare man: The
ARRIANS, EVNOMIANS, BONOSIANS, and ORIGENISTS, who held him to be a God that
was created, and that he was the Son, not by nature, but by grace and
adoption: The MARCIONITS, and the VALENTINIANS, who denied him to be true man:
The APOLLINARISTS, who denied him to be endued with a true soul, and would
have his divinity to serve instead thereof: To be short; we detest all those,
that do any ways, either directly, or indirectly, withstand the purity of the
foresaid doctrine.

Defended by WILLIAM MOGNES of Niue^se.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING THE PERSONAL UNION OF THE TWO NATVRES IN CHRIST. XX.
UNTO THE FVLL UNDERSTANDING of those things, which we have to believe
concerning the person of Christ* it serves to be needful, that we declare
how it is, that he consisting of two natures, is yet but one subsisting person.

1 THe second person of the Deity; namly, the word; did so neerelie unite and
appropriate unto himself the human nature, that these two whole natures, and
their proprieties united together, are but one subsisting person, Jesus
Christ, true God and man: Yet so, as the humain nature does subsist in the
divine. Wherefore this vnio^ is called an Hypostolicall, or a personal union.

2 In Christ therefore, there is not one Christ, and another Christ; that is,
Christ God and Christ man: seeing the person is only one, but yet there is
one thing, and another thing, that is, a divine and an human nature, seeing
the natures are diverse.

3 Now, although these two natures be inseparable; yet in very deed, they
remain distinct, both in themselves, and also in their essential proprieties,
and their actions: And therefore, the divine nature is severally, attributed
unto the Deity, and is human unto his humanity.

4 Wherefore, neither of the natures severally considered in it self, can be
said to be the other. For you cannot truly say, that the Deity of Christ, is
his humanity; or that his humanity is his Deity.

5 Neither can the essential proprieties of the one nature, be more attributed
unto the other severally considered, then the one nature can be said to be the
other. For this is no true assertion, to say, that the Deity was created, is
finite; and contained within a place: Nor yet this; The humanity is without
beginning, infinite, and immeasurable, or uncircumcised in a place; or that
it can be in many places at once, or every where, or yet any where indeed, any
otherways, then as in a place.

6 Yet as they are joined together, that is, in respect of the whole, wholly
considered; the word is truly said to be this man, and this man to be the
word; not that the one nature is transfused, or turned into the other; but
because, these two natures are one only subsisting person, which the
Schoolmen call the grace of union, or uniting grace.

7 In like manner, although the essential properties of the one nature, be not
transfused into the other; yet is the word said to be crucified and dead, not
in it self, but in the nature that was assumed. In like sort, this man is said
to be Eternal, Infinite, Immeasurable, and God himself; not in it self, but
in the assuming nature, or the nature that took flesh.

8 The manner of speaking, is called the communicating of properties, the which
in respect of Christ, wholly considered; is Real; or both in name and in deed:
but in consideration of the natures severally considered, it is verbal, or
only in name.

9 The Deity of Christ, borrows nothing of the humanity which it assumed:
Whereas on the other side, the humanity subsisting in the Deity, is perfected
by it.

10 Now the humanity of Christ, is fully endued with so great store of all
qualities most excellent, (those only excepted, which are so essential in
God, as they can be in no wise communicated with any creature; and by the
pouring whereof, the human nature should be swallowed up, and become the
Godhead) as in dignity and glory, he does far surmount all Creatures; as
being inferior unto the Deity only: The which fulness of gifts, the
Schoolmen call grace habitual, or fully possessed.

11 Now this exceeding virtue and power, was powered by degrees upon the flesh
that was assumed; not at the very moment of the uniting together of both
natures; In as much, as it behooued Christ to take upon him such flesh, as was
in deed subject to all our infirmities (sin excepted) until that he,
having fulfilled whatsoever was necessary unto our salvation, had obtained a
name above al names, the Godhead only excepted.

We do abhor then, both the NESTORIANS, who divide the person; and the
EVTYCHIANS, who either confou^d the natures, or mingle their essential
proprieties.

12 The glorifiyng of the humanity of Christ, which is meant in the Christian
belief, by ascending into Heaven, and sitting at the right hand of God, has
neither abolished the essence, nor the essential properties of a true body.

Defended by STEPHEN BLOIVS of Angiers.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING THE OFFICE OF CHRIST. XXI.
SEEING THAT WE HAVE DONE Already with the person of Christ, it follows now
that we deal with his office. For these two are to be considered in him.

1 Mankind by reason of sin whereunto it wilfully fell, was altogether
lost: in such sort as it could in no wise by it own strength escape aeternal
damnation.

2 But God, to the end that he might affoorde a most clear testimony of his
mercy, did appoint in his aeternal counsel, to deliver men from this misery
and calamitye. And to the end that this might be done without any impeachment
of his justice, he appointed a Mediator, who should perform all these things
that were required.

3 Therefore, seeing to avoid the curse of the law, the law it self must be
fulfilled by men, and this can by no means be performed by them: it behooued
the Mediator to effect this work, and not to ouerpasse the very least title of
Gods Law.

The opinion of the PAPISTS therefore is very wicked, in attributing any other
merit unto any man, save only the merit of Christ's alone obedience.

4 Furthermore, seeing it behooved God which is most just, to punish the
sins of men, that by this means his justice might be fulfilled: and men
could not undergo the weight of Gods anger, but they should be everlastingly
swallowed up thereby: It was the office of the Mediator, seeing he bare the
person of all men, to pay all their debts, and to suffer punishment for them
all.

They are again most wicked, who bring in any other Mediator of satisfaction
in the presence of God, save only this one.

5 And as Christ was under the law represented by Prophets, Kings and Priests:
so being exhibited in his time, he was anointed to be a King, Priest and
Prophet. In which three callings, his whole office is contained.

6 The Prophetical office of Christ is, to teach men the will of God, and
clearelie to lay open unto them his decree concerning the salvation of
mankind, and so to put an end unto al prophesies: that is, to fulfill all
those things that were fore-tolde of him.

It is execrable wickedness therefore, to burden the conscience of man, with new
commandments added unto the word, or to impose any law upon the conscience:
and much more to adjoine unto the Gospel, new supplies of salvation.

7 The Kingdom of Christ consists herein, namely, that al his enemies
being subdued under him, as Satan, sin and death; he only may bear rule
over his church, defend the same, and bestow all things needful thereupon.

8 This Kingdom is not like unto other Kingdoms that are earthly, but it is
spiritual.

And therefore the Jews are worthelie condemned, with all others, that think
this kingdom, to consist in a kind of outward pomp, majesty and
magnificence: And they are much more impudent then the Jews themselves, who
will have the tyranny of the Roman Praelate, to be a visible representation
of Christ's kingdom.

9 The office of Christ's Preist-hood was, by some acceptable Sacrifice to
pacify God being offended with us: And because no other Sacrifice, could be
found meet, and no other Priest worthy for this work: he who was without all
spot, became both the Sacrifice and the Priest, now also making intercession
for us in heaven.

Therefore the Papisticall Sacrifizing Priests, are most gross seducers, who
say, that in the Sacrifice of their Mass, they offer Christ really, both for
the quick and the dead.

Defended by BERNARD CASANOVA of Bearne
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING FAITH. XXII.
HAVING DECLARED THESE THINGS which appertain unto the person of Christ: it
remains that we speak by what means, Christ with all his benefits, is
applied unto us.

1 CHristian faith is that only hand, whereby we take hold, or apply unto
our selves, Christ being offered unto us, with all his benefits, that are
necessary unto our salvation.

2 This Faith, we do first of all distinguish, from that mere agreement of
the understanding, whereby it comes to pass, that we believe all these
things to be true which are contained in the holy Scriptures: the which
agreement or assent, we affirm that it may arise from the light of nature
also, and the arguments that may be compassed by humane reason, without any
peculier lightning of the holy Spirit, seeing the very unclean Spirits
themselves do believe this.

3 We also distinguish this Faith from the assent, whereby some have peculiarly
applied some peculiar promises made unto themselves, that were diverse from the
promises of aeternall life, who notwithstanding were never made pertakers
thereof.

4 The Faith therefore whereof we now speak, we do define to be that
assurance whereby, beyond the former assent, the godly are carried unto Christ,
and so particularly apply unto themselves the promise of salvation offered in
him.

We do condemn therefore all such sophistry as does confound these two sorts
of faith, and especially those who taking Faith for the obedience that is
yielded unto Gods commandments, do by that means mingle the one of them with
the other.

5 We affirm this Faith to be the mere gift of God, peculiar only to the
elect: and such a gift as in no wise ca^ be repented off, or called back, or
being the most sure and immovable remedy unto the salvation of all the elect.

We detest therefore all those, who imagine that Christ and his saving grace
may be received, by any merit, either praeparatorie, or foreseen. And
especially all these who dream, that Christ may be conuaied unto us, with the
hand or mouth of the body.

6 We deny also that this Faith can ever utterly be lost, although at some
times, even in the most holy men, it be a sleep, as the mind is in those
that are overcome with drink: and notwithstanding that some have, as it were,
a shadow thereof begun in them.

7 This faith does God creat, at what time, and in what measure it pleases
him, strengthening and increasing the same, by little and little, though never
perfecting it while we are here; yet granting so much of it in this life, as
is needful for the elect to obtain the victory: Now in the life to come, he
does fulfill in deed, that which we believed and hoped for, while we were
here on earth.

We do execrate and detest therefore, the CELESTINIANS, and the ANABAPTISTS,
who dream of a perfection of faith and righteousness in this life, and do
abollish the dailye growth of repentance, and our continual prayers, which
even unto our last gasp, we are to make for remission of sins.

Defended by BENJAMIN C^ESSONIVS of Burgundy.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING THE CAUSES AND EFFECTS OF FAITH. XXIII.
1 THe efficient cause of faith indeed, and to speak properly is one; to
wit, the mercy of God; that is, if the Father in the Son, by the holy
Ghost, that the same Coessentiall power of the Father and the Son, by the
which man at the first was created in the image of God should restore in us the
same being left.

2 The ordinary means whereby the same is wrought, (that is, whereby both the
understanding of man, is framed unto a saving knowledge of God in Christ, and a
particular receiving thereof; and also the will powerfullie disposed unto a
right order of the affections) is the preaching of Gods word, delivered unto
us be the Prophets and Apostles, and for that cause, (so far as it concerns
the elect) appointed to be in the Church.

3 But here two extremities are to be taken heed unto: the on of the
ENTHYSIASTES, who do not only distinguish but also separate the internal word
as they call it: that is, the work of the Spirit of God in our souls, from
the preaching of the written word: whence follows not any faith, but rather a
mere dotage. The other is of those, who after the manner of Sorcerers, do
transfer the efficacacie, which is the proper and incommunicable work of God
only, either unto the ministers which speak, or to the Sacramental elements:
whereas notwithstanding, they have no other effect, then to represent these
things to our understanding, which, according unto Gods ordinance they are
appointed to signify.

Whereas then the ministers are said to work together with God, it is so to be
taken, as they are used, but for the outward planting and watering: when as in
the mean time, the whole force which works in the understanding and the will,
does flow from God only.

4 Now that which we have spoken of the Ecclesiastical ministry, is so to be
taken, as in the mean time we are to know, that God as often as it pleases
him, is able in a moment by the inward operation of his Spirit, extraordinarily
to regenerate his elect.

5 But this extraordinary work of God, is neither to be expected for of us,
nor yet rashly to be admitted.

6 Now the most sure way to try it, whether it be truly from God, or no; is
this: namely, that whether it be by the ordinary hearing of the word: or,
(which has been always most seeldom) whether God works by extraordinary
inspiration; it must needs evermore teach the very same doctrine, which the
written word of the Prophets and the Apostles do teach.

7 There is not at all times the like majesty of the good order of this sacred
Ministry, because the Lord does as often, and as far as he thinks good,
revenge the negligencie and wickedness of the Sheep-heards, and the contempt of
the sheep in such sort: that sometimes it is darkened by spots of filthiness:
and otherwhiles for a time, it goes as it were, clean out of sight, as it
came to pass in the former ages.

8 Yet the Militant Church, either private or public from others, or by means
of private reading, has ever enjoyed, and ever shall enjoy the hearing of the
word, and the understanding of the truth that arises therefrom.

9 Now that true and lively faith, whereof we speak, is no less made
known, by the perpetual and necessary effects thereof, then is the life of
the body, by motion and sense.

10 But these effects do not give being unto faith, or inform the same, as
the Sophisters do most absurdlie dream, but they are the undoubted and sure
signs of it.

11 These effects are partly carried out of us unto Christ, with whom we are
united by faith, and partly they do beget some things within us.

12 The outward effects, in as much as they do peculiarly apply Christ and his
benefits, unto those that believe, are therefore the most excellent, and of
greatest account. And they are, both the full remission of all sins, as well
original as actual, by the blood of Christ; and also, the bestowing upon us,
of all righteousness fulfilled by him, together with the most full restoring and
repairing of our nature in the flesh of Christ: All which, are freely by faith
in Christ, imputed unto us, who take hold both of him and his gifts.

13 Another effect of our spiritual joining together with him by faith, is;
that he governs by his holy Spirit, both our understanding and will, being
sanctified and brought out of darkness unto that marvelous light; so as we begin
to think, to will, and to do, the things that are of God.

This self same Spirit, increasing faith in us, being now not under the
authority of the law and the flesh, but under the grace of effectual
Regeneration; does teach, comfort, raise, and confirm us in all our conflictes
against Satan: ^ill we obtain the crown, which is given of free gift,
though unto these only, that do lawfully strive and overcome.

Defended by HILARIVS FANTRAT an Englishman of Guernzie.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING MAN'S JUSTIFICATION IN THE SIGHT OF GOD. XXIIII.
1 THat we may have a sure foundation of aeternall life, and may worship God in
this life with a quiet conscience; the doctrine of man's justification in the
presence of God, is very necessary.

2 Justification therefore, is a free imputation of righteousness, made of God,
by and for Christ, to salvation unto every one that believes.

3 But in as much as God is exceedingly merciful, and exceedingly just, and
that his mercy does not abolish his justice, which remains vnviolated; it
behooued, that his justice should be fully satisfied, before such time as he
could pour forth his mercy upon mankind, and therefore that Christ should be
God and man.

4 For he who is only man, cannot be able to sustain the wrath of God; nor
on the other side, he who is only God, because, that God can be subject
unto no kind of suffering.

5 Therefore God the Father, being drawn in mercy, would have his only
begotten Son, at the appointed time, to become true man, without any
confusion or mingling of the natures, might reconcile men unto God.

6 The efficient cause therefore, of the righteousness imputed unto us, is the
mercy of God the Father, and his free love toward us: for he it is that
saves and justifies.

7 The material cause, is Christ crucified, and risen for us, where three
things come to be considered: the one whereof, consists in the punishments,
whereby he has most fully satisfied for all our sins: The other stands
in his obedience, and the fulfilling of the whole law, by him for us: the
third, is the most perfect repairing, and integrity of our nature in the
flesh, which Christ took upon him; whereby the filthiness of our nature is
covered, that it comes not into the sight of God.

8 The formal cause, is the very imputation of Christ's righteousness, by
means whereof, we are accounted to be freed from sin, just, holy, and
heirs of aeternall life.

9 The isntrumental is of two sorts, the one in respect of God that
justifies, which is Christ himself; the other in respect of us, that lay
hold upon imputation of righteousness; and the same is faith, embracing firmly
the promises of the grace of God in Christ.

10 The final likewise is two-folde; the one in respect of GOD, and that is,
that he might declare his righteousness unto men, by partaking the same with
them, and also the glory of his name, the which he makes more clear in the
vessels of mercy: the other in respect of us, that we may at the length,
enjoy indeed that life, which is laid up for us in the Heavens, which now we
possess by hope only.

11 The effect inhaerent in us, as in a subject, is that new quality, which
is called inhaerent righteousness, or regeneration, which in no wise does
absolve us in the presence of God; but is only a most sure witness of our
engraffing into Christ, and therefore, of our free absolution in him.

12 This righteousness, seeing it cannot be given unto any, save only unto
the elect by faith, has annexed unto it, the gift of perseverance; although by
their fault, it seems sometimes to be ceased.

13 Whence we gather, that they, who have been once endued by God with this
righteousness, can never fall away from his grace, and as for them that shall
never be partakers hereof, they shall perish for ever.

We do therefore condemn those, that gainsay this Doctrine.

I The LIBERTINES and the EPICVRES, who when they hear that man is not
justified by works, nor by his own righteousness, but by the righteousness of
another; namely, by the righteousness of Christ imputed by faith, casting off
all care of good works, have endeavored, and daily do labor, to bring a kind
of profane and godles security ^ into the Church. II The PAPISTS, who deny
that we are justified by Faith only, but do attribute part of our
justification unto works, and such works as are meritorious. III OSIANDER, who
held that man was justified by the essential righteousness of God.
Defended by WILLIAM QVARCINVS Tarbiensis.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING SANCTIFICATION. XXIIII.
SEEING THE EFFECT OF FAITH IS twofold, Justification and Sanctification: it
follows that having spoken of the former, we adioyn the latter unto it.

1 HEre first of al, we do especially distinguish, Sanctification, whereof we
are now to speak, from that most perfect integrity which in Christ is imputed
unto us, as the effect is to be severed from the cause, and the fruit from the
tree.

2 To express this whereof we now speak, there do occur many and diverse
names in the holy Scriptures, as are these especially in the new testament:
Sanctification, regeneration, newnes of life, Baptism taken passiuely,
Spirit, mortification of the old man, and the quickening of the new, with
other the like phrases, which would be too long to be here recited.

3 Sanctification in this place we describe to be an effect proceeding from the
holy Ghost, working in the minds of the faithful: whereby, by a little and a
little, even unto the end of this life, as the natural corruption is purged, so
the image of God is repaired in us, until, after death, it be perfitely
finished in the other world.

4 This gift (as also all others) which it bestows upon us, does the holy
Ghost wholly draw from Christ, in whom the Scripture gives us specially to
consider in his death, burial and resurrection, the subduing of that original
corruption of ours, which was imputed unto him: whence it comes to pass,
that we divide our whole sanctification into these three members;
mortification, burial of the old man, and the rising again of the new.

5 The mortification of the old man, we call the effect of that spiritual
and most powerful application of the death of Christ, whereby our corruption,
receaueth a deaths wound; so that it is no more so powerful, to stir up in
our minds, wicked motions, and such as are contrary unto Gods will.

6 The burying of the old man, is also an effect of the spiritual application
of Christ's burial, whereby, our old man, being already wounded by that
deadly stroke, dies by little and little, until at the length, after the
death of this body, it be brought to nothing: For as the burial of the body,
is a going forward of death; so also, the burying of the old man, is nothing
else, but a continuance, still proceeding further and further, of that
mortification which went before.

7 The raising again of the new man, is also an effect of the spiritual
aplication of the resurrection of Christ; whereby it comes to pass, that the
new man is raised up in us, that is, that the qualities of our mind (to wit,
our understanding and will) are renewed unto true holiness of life.

8 These being renewed by faith, powered into us, though all the time of our
being here; we do but in a sort understand, and will the things that are of
God: yet nevertheless, our works which belong unto Gods service, are
favorably accepted by his Majesty, as proceeding from Christ, living and
working in us by the holy Ghost.

9 In this respect then, we make this difference, between Philosophical and
Christian virtues, that the former proceeding from a mind, not yet
regenerated; are no other, then filthy and impure, in the presence of God;
whereas, the latter on the other side, do of favor please God, and are in
mercy crowned by him, because, he looks upon them as fruits of faith,
flowing from Christ, who is the Author of all our purity and holiness.

10 Out of these things which have been spoken, may be understood, not only
all the parts of our sanctification, but even the causes which concur for the
making up thereof, may be so easily gathered; as it may be well perceived,
that we put the holy Ghost for the efficient, faith for the isntrumental, the
force and efficacy of that essential holiness which is in Christ for the
material, the renewing of our whole mind, from impure, unto pure and upright
qualities for the formal; and the worship of God tending unto his honor and
the love of our neighbor, according unto the prescript rule of the first and
second Table, for the final cause thereof.

11 Whence it apeareth, that the Libertins who loath the practice of good
works, are not to be reckoned up amongst the number of true Christians;
seeing they neglect the chief end of a Christian life. It appears also, that
the PELAGYANS, and the half PELLAGIANS the PAPISTS, are to be detested,
because, the former of them do affirm, that we are sanctified by nature
only: the latter, partly by nature, and partly by grace.

Defended by FRANCES P^FAYRIVS of Bearne
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING THE JUSTIFICATION OF SINFVLL MAN IN THE PRESENCE OF GOD.
XXVI
1 IN as much as, our whole salvation consists in our justification before
GOD; it is needful, that we maintain the true doctrine thereof, against all the corruptions of the same; if so be that we will obtain salvation.

2 This justification then is, when God does attribute the sanctification of
his Son Jesus Christ, performed for mankind, unto those that believe in him.

3 For whereas God is exceedingly merciful, and excedinglie just; his mercy
indeed, did desire the redemption of man, but his justice demanded an
absolute, and every way a perfect satisfaction for the same.

4 To the end therefore, that the Lord might bestow his mercy upon us; it was
needful that his justice should be satisfied.

5 Now the most severe justice of God, could not be satisfied, either by him,
who should be only man; (because, no Creature, no not the Angels themselves,
can so sustain the weight of Gods anger, as they may be delivered therfrom;
much less deliver others:) or yet by him, who should be only God, because the
Deity cannot be subject unto any sufferings.

6 Therefore God the Father, moved by his unspeakable mercy, would have that
only Son of his, Coessentiall and Coaeternal with him (as he had promised
unto the Fathers, when Sin first entered into the world) at the time appointed,
to become true man, who, as being true God and true man, without any confusion
of the two natures, might reconcile men with God.

7 Of the justice of this Mediator, the which justice is laid against those
things, that make us guilty of Gods wrath, there are three parts. The one is,
the penalty sustained for the satisfaction of all our sins, which he
discharged to the very uttermost farthing. The other is, the absolute
fulfilling of the whole law of GOD, thereby covering our whole guiltines, both
that which we have by our original blemishe, or by sinning sin, and also by
the sins that are the most bitter fruits of that root. The third is, the
repairing of our human nature, in that most perfect humanity, which Christ
took upon him; whereby all our corruptions and stains are blotted out.

8 The righteousness of Christ profits us nothing, unless it be made ours.

9 Now it becomes ours, not by any infusion, either Essential, as OSIANDER
dreamed, or qualitatiue, as the jangling Sophisters do avouch; but by a
spiritual apprehension or applying of Christ, effected in our minds; after
the which, follows the free imputation of that threefold righteousness, which
is inhaerent in the man Christ only, as in the subject.

10 Of this spiritual and most effectual apprehension and application, the
only inward instrument, is true faith, which is that full assurance, whereby
every one that believes, does embrace particularly, the righteousness of
christ offered, as appertaining unto them.

11 This faith is in noe wise of our selves, but from the meare grace of God,
the holy Ghost mercifully creating the same in the understanding, and the
heart of the elect, that is, being the cause that after they have heard, and
understood the word of the Gospel, they do truly believe although not
perfectly: who also does afterward seal up and nourishe this gift in them:
as they do learn more and more, by the daily hearing and meditation of the
word of the said Gospel, and as the Sacraments annexed unto the word, do
most effectually witness unto them.

12 Now as the same Christ, does reconcile them unto his father, and purchase
unto them the title of the heavenly inheritance, who being freely made
partakers of that three-folde righteousness, do lay hold upon him by faith:
even so, does he sanctify them by his Spirit, abollishing the old man in
them by a little and a little, both kindling a new light in their
understanding, and also sturring up holy motions in their wills, to the end,
that strongly resisting with all their might, the relics of the old man; they
should beginn both to will, and to do that which is good.

13 That new quality then, called inhaerent righteousness, and regeneration
testified by good works, is a necessary effect of true faith: whence it is to
be gathered, that good works are by no means the causes, but only the
witnesses of that imputed justification, whereby alone trobled consciences are
at rest: for they are no otherwise to be considered, then as things, that
necessarily follow the believers, being already justified in Christ.

14 Therefore we are said to be justified by faith only, without any works;
not that true faith is at any time alone or destitute of good works; but in
as much as works, how good so ever they be, do not concur or avail to the
obtaining of the righteousness of Christ.

15 The square and only rule of these good works, according to the which they
are to be directed, and most diligently to be waied; is the will of God laid
open to us in the law.

16 Now although that they, who are after this manner reconciled unto God through
Christ aprehended by faith, do daily sin; and though also, that their good
works are not every way perfect, but defiled by sin, (whereof we have many
remnants still continuing in us after our renewing) yet those that do believe,
are to fear no condemnation, but may assuredly wait, and look for aeternall
life; whereof they shall be undoubtedly partakers.

These Doctrines therefore are to be detested.
1 That no man can be assured of his salvation. 2 That the natural remnants of
Free Will, being helped by preventing grace, do work together with (or
further) the first grace to believe, and to do good works 3 That Justification
before the tribunal seat of God, is to be attributted, if not wholly, yet in
part, unto good works, and that as being meritorious. 4 That the essential
righteousness of christ, that is, whereby Christ was God, is powered into us,
which was the phrenesie of OSIANDER. 5 That we cannot be justified by a
righteousness that is not inhaerent in our selves. 6 That our Justification in
the sight of God, is an effect of our Regeneration. 7 That it is false, that
we are justified by faith. 8 That Christ does purchase the dignity of merit
by our good works, which is a new-coyned falsehood of the Jesuits. 9 That the
law which God has left to us in the Scriptures, is not the only rule of good
works. 10 That the merrites of Christ only, are not sufficient for us unto
salvation. 11 Thar Christ, in regard of the guilt and the punishment, has
only satisfied for sins past; that is, for sins going before Baptism. 12
That in the sins, which follow baptism, the guilt is only remitted, and
not the punishment also. 13 That original sin is utterly taken away by
Baptism, and that, by the work wrought. 14 That the good works of the
faithful, are in no wise sinful. 15 That there may be some works of
Super-errogation.
Defended by BARTHOLMEVV RHODINGVS of Hafsia.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING GOOD WORKS. XXVII.
1 GOod works are as necessary for the sound and the undoubted discerning of
true sanctification in a regenerate man, (whereof we have spoken) as are good
fruits in a tree that bears, to show that it has bin rightly graffed.

2 We call good works, the effects of those actions only, which in the
regenerat by the working of the Spirit of God through faith, are squared
according unto the prescript rule of Gods law, that in them God might be
glorified, and our neighbors helped.

3 There are four things then to be especially observed in this definition;
the holy Ghost, as the efficient cause, Faith the isntrumental, the law of God
the formal, Gods glory and the edification of our neighbor, as the final.

4 Out of these former parts rightly understood, the whole doctrine of good
works is made clear; and with all the false doctrines, both of ancient and new
writers in this argument, are out of them easily confuted.

5 In the first place then, to speak of the efficient cause; we affirm, that
we are enabled to do good works, only by the grace and assistance of the
holy Ghost, renewing our hearts, when as it does incline our understanding, our
will, and all our members, which are turned from God, in such sort, as we do
obey the known will of God: for the works in us both to will and to do.

The PAPISTS then are deceived, who leaning upon their own strength, do brag
of their free will, and their natural abilities, as if it lay in them to
prevent or go before the first grace, by a kind of Praeparation: and as though
of themselves they could in a sort bring forth good works.

6 Secondly, as faith cannot be without good works, so good works can not be,
where there is no faith.

Whereupon we condemn their error, who boldly avouch that good works were,
or could be done by profane men, or such, as were not endued with faith, how
just and wise soever they were accounted: seeing whatsoever is done without
faith, is sin.

7 Although we profess that good works are no less necessarily conjoined
with faith, then light with the Sun, or heat with the fire: yet do we not say
that they are therefore respected of God, as though by them we deserved; either
to be justified before him, or to be made his Children.

8 And they are to be accounted to deal no less impudentlie then rashly and
ignorantly, who raise up the slander that we contemn and reject good works,
because we hold that men are justified by faith only.

9 Thridlie, seeing the Law of God is the cause which gives the form unto
good works, (that is, the name of true goodness) we avouch that none of those
things which have no other ground then the bare will or reason of man can be
reckened among good works.

10 In like manner, that a man may be said to do well it is not sufficient,
that what he does be found to be commanded in the Law of God: but this also is
required, that he assuredly know, that what he does be enjoined unto him by
the Lord, and that he do it with an intent to obey God therein: For whatsoever
is done with a doubtful conscience, is sin.

11 And although the good works of the regenerate be not perfect, because, we
cannot in this life, (no not though we be assisted by the holy Ghost) live
according unto the prescript of Gods law; but rather our good works are stained
with many blemishes: yet they do please God; not for any worthiness of theirs,
but partly because our defects are covered, by the holiness, merits and
intercession of christ, and partly because GOD, does of favor, approve and
crown them, not as they are in them selves, but as the effects of his Spirit
in us, and witnesses of our faith.

Whence we gather, that the DONATISTS, PELLAGIANS, PHARISEES, ANABAPTISTS,
MONKS, and the rest of that batch are to be condemned, who brag of a
perfection of life and obedience, and do securely rest themselves in their
own works, as though they were in every point answerable unto the law of God.

12 Lastly, although we have said, that the ends of good works, are the glory
of God, and the aedification of our neighbors; yet does it not therefore
follow, that ^ereby other ends of greatest moment be excluded; of which sort,
are the testimony of a good conscience, the sure token of true Religion or
Christian faith, the assurance of our aeternall election, the avoiding of the
punishment due unto evil works, and the undeserved obtaining of the good
works.

Wherefore we may justly accuse all Atheists, Antinomians quarrellers with the
law, as though it were repugnant unto it self; Hypocrites, Libertines, and
impenitent persons, as guilty of impiety; who either do despise good works as
being unprofitable, or condemn them as burdensome unto the conscience.

13 Neither is it to be concluded, in as much as in this matter, we make mention
of rewards, as the scripture does, that therefore, they are by merit due unto
good works: For whatsoever we do or can work, the same are we bound to
do; and although we had done all, yet must we confess our selves to be
unprofitable servants.

We do again here abhor, the MANICHAEES, PELLAGIANS, Pharisees and
Papists, who every hand while, thrusting upon us that prodigious dream of
their own, concerning the merits of good works do thereby obscure and
diminish the only merit of the satisfaction of Christ.

Defended by JOHN BRVNE of Bearne.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING THE LAW OF GOD. XXVIII.
SEEING WE HAVE ALREADY SPOKEN of good works: it now follows, that we deal
with the rule thereof, that is with the law of God.

1 THe law of God, is the manifestation and declaration of his will, published
by himself, whereby is described, both the true inward worship of God, and
also all the duties of man toward man.

2 This law is divided into three parts, Moral, Ceremonial, and politic
or judicial.

3 The Moral law is that, which prescribes the rule of Godly and upright
life, in the presence of God, the which rule is only the will of the
lawgiver alone, and it is divided into two Tables: The former whereof, is
concerning God: The latter is touching our neighbor; the former is
comprehended in four commandments most orderly set down; and the latter in
six: whence it arises, that the moral commandments are ten in number.

4 The Ceremonial law, was as it were, a certain picture or shape, (exhibited
unto the outward senses) of the inward worship of God: the which portion of
the law, part lie (as far as it was adjoined unto the Moral) testified unto
men, what in themselves they deserved: namely, aeternal death and damnation;
and partly (as far to wit, as it respected the Euangellicall promises of
Christ, that was to com) did shadow our full deliverance in Christ, from that
misery and calamity.

5 The Judicial or Political law, was the doctrine of those external
actions, whereby the civil Common-welth of the Jews was to be governed.

6 The Moral law may be also rightly called the law of nature; because that
God had ingraued the same at the first creation in the minds of men, in such
sort, as men should have been borne endued with the full knowledge thereof; if
sin had not for the most part darkened the same in them.

7 Now, because it was so grown out of use by reason of sin, as in a manner,
it seemed to be altogether blotted out: Therefore, the Lord thought good to
publish, renew, and give the same in writing unto his people, that they might
not have any excuse of their ignorance.

8 It was in this sort renewed, first of al, to the end that compelling men (by
the sight of the repugnancie, which is between that divine rule of justice, and
our own affections and behauior) to acknowledge the corruption that is in them;
and the fruit thereof, it might pronounce them worthy of aeternall damnation.

9 Next, that finding them guilty of condemnation, it might by accident draw
them to seek remedy els-where, namely, by the preaching of the Gospel.

10 Thirdly, that having gotten the elect regenerated by the holy Ghost, it
might be unto them a teacher of true holiness toward GOD, and charity
toward their neighbors.

The PELLAGIANS then erred most falselie, who thought, that the law was given
unto men, as though they (being enabled by nature to perform the same) only
stood in need to be put in mind of their duty by it: In which error, also
even at this day, the half PELAGIANS the Papists do in a sort continue.

11 Now whereas the law is said by PAVLE, to make sin more sinful, to
procure wrath to be the sting of sin and of death, it is to be understood,
that this is done, not by the fault of the law, but by our corruption, even as
the the Gospel is unto some, the savor of death unto death, not of it self,
but by accident.

12 The moral law, in consideration of the Saints, that is, of those that
believe, is abollished by the coming of Christ, as far as it had power to
condemn; and that because Christ was made a curse for them. But it retains
still a double use in the elect: namely, that it might with the fear of
punishment, keep under the old man, (the remnants whereof is as yet in them)
and instruct their new man in the ways of the Lord. Now in respect of the
impenitent, it retains, and will unto the worlds end retain, that first end,
which is to convince them and condemn them without all hope of mercy: And as
to the other two profitable uses, by their own fault it is in no whit
available unto them.

The Libertines therefore, the Antinimonians, and the rest that reject the moral
Law, are execrable and accursed.

13 The Ceremonial Law, is altogether abolished as touching the use of it,
seeing the body it self which was shadowed by those figures, is already come.

The doctrine of the Pharisees is to be condemned: and the Ebionits also, who
taught that the observation of the ceremonial Law, was to be joined with the
Gospel.

And their error is much more to be damned, who have the traditions of me^ in
the same account, that these Jews had the Ceremonies appointed by the Lord.

14 The Lord in steed of the whole outward worship of the law now abolished,
has appointed (in the assemblies of christian Churches) the administration of
two Sacraments, the which is to be celebrated in those rites, that are strictly
according unto that rule which he has set down: unto which rites it is
unlawful for any man, either to add, or to detract away.

15 The Politic or Judicial law is also abolished, because Christians are not
bound to rule their commonwelths after the same form, that the polity of the
Jews was governed, that general aequitie notwithstanding reserved always
unviolable, according unto the which, al humane laws are to be squared, which
is, that they be just and right,

We reject the^ therefore as fantastical men, who teach that Christians are
necessarily bound to use the politic laws of the Israelites, and none other.

Defended by PETER PERRON of Lausanna.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING THE PREFACE OF THE LAW, AND THE FIRST COMMANDMENT
THEREOF. XXIX.
SEEING WE HAVE ALREADY DONE with the Preface of the Law, and the division
thereof: it now remains that we deal severally with every precept of the
same: the which we will handle in that very order, that they are set down.
And first of all we will speak of the Preface, and of the first commandment of
the Law.

1 THe first words of the Law, are a Praeface, which does neither forbid nor
command any thing, that belongs any wise unto the ends of the things, that
are to be done.

2 The Lord before he would begin to set down the commandments, thought meet
to use a kind of proeme or entrance, both that he might thereby procure
authority, love and reverence unto his Law, and also prepare the hearers to be
attentive, easy to be instructed, and willing to give ear.

3 The hearers are made attentive, 1. by this word and exhortation [HEARE.] 2.
by the majesty of God who speaks, [I IEHOVA.]
Easy to be instructed 1. by the shortness of speech used unto them. 2. by the
order and distribution of the commandments.
Willing to give ear, by putting them in mind, 1. of the benefit of Adoption,
[THY GOD.] 2. of the late benefit of their delivery out of Egypt [WHICH
BROVGHT THEE OVT OF THE LAND OF EGYPT, AND OVT OF THE HOVS OF BONDAGE.]


4 Now the Lord did this (not, that he might allure men by a kind of
eloquence, as it is the custom of the most: (For the spirit of God deals
not with us by the persuasiue speeches of man's wisdom) but that he might
frame himself unto our capacity and disposition: and that he might stir up
the dullness of our flesh, by that means that might best do it, and be most
beseeming his majesty.

5 This Praeface does in general define unto us, who is the true God; wherein
God does specially direct his speech unto Israel in such sort, as in them he
speaks unto al nations, as having promised, that all nations shall be blessed
in the seed of Abraham.

6 There are three things to be diligently marked in every commandment of this
Law: first, the person of the Lawgiuer, then the person unto whom this Law is
given: thirdly, that which is either comanded or forbidden to be done,

7 The word IEHOVA, is to be referred unto that divine authority, which the
Lord by the right of his creation and providence has over all creatures. For
he is thence called IEHOVA, even because he is, and makes all things that
are to be, and to subsist: and withal, does administer life and sustenance
unto them.

8 In every one of these commandments, the whole is to be understood and
gathered out of the part, and from the outward act, we are to reason unto the
inward.

9 By the affirmative, we must always gather the negative: and contrariwise:
to teach us, that we are not only bidde^ to abstain from evil, but also to be
careful of doing good.

10 The true and the lawful inward service of God, is especially contained in
the first commandment, which is nothing else, but the worshipping of the true
God, according unto the prescript of his Law.

11 The end of the first commandment is, that God among his people will bear
rule over all, and wholly enjoy his authority. And to the end that this may
come to pass, he co^ma^deth al impiety, and al false opinions concerning God
to be far from us: and in like sort, he enjoineth him self to be worshipped and
adored of us, in the true practice of godliness.

12 Furthermore, although that the duties which we owe unto God be
innumerable, yet they may be not improperly referred unto four heads: The
first is the inward acknowledging, whereunto is joined as an addition, the
spiritual obedience of the conscience: the second is an assured trust: the
third is, invocation, or prayer. The fourth and last, is thanksgiving.

13 The inward acknowledging, we make to be a knowledge of the true God, joined
with the assent of the conscience, reverence, and submission.

14 Assured trust, is a secure resting upon him, arising from the knowledge of
his saving will.

15 Invocation, is the betaking of our mind unto the truth and promise of
God, as unto the only fortress of our salvation.

16 Thanksgiving, is the profession of a thankful mind, whereby the praise
of all the good things that we receive, is yealded unto God, as unto the giver
of them. Now, as God does not suffer any of all these things to be derived else
where: so he commands all of them to be wholly attributed unto himself.

17 To be brief, we are bound to content our selves with one God, and
therefore to put far from us all fained Gods: neither is the religious worship
of God to be rent in pieces, which he only claims to himself alone.

Defended by ANTONY RENNALD of Gascoine.
PRINCIPLES UPON THE SECOND COMMANDMENT OF GODS LAW. XXX.
1 EVen as the acknowledging and inward worshipping of on God, is especially
in the first commandment: so the second commandment does set down the outward
worship of the same God, from the contrary.

2 The end is, that all religious, worship, even that which is outward, is due
unto God only: and such a worship, as is agreeable unto his spiritual nature.

3 This commandment consists of three members: for God first of all
forbids the making of any image to represent his divine godhead. Secondly,
he forbids any worship to be yealded unto him, in any image. Thridlie, he
brings a twofolde reason of this commandment: the one, because he is the
only aeternall GOD, and therefore can be represented by no bodily shape or
form: the other, because he alone is able both to revenge most severely the
contemners of his name, and also infinitely to bless his true worshippers.

4 All those therefore, whosoever have at any time bin, not only the
worshippers of Images, as of holy things; but even the marks of them to that
purpose, are once for all condemned as superstitious in this commandment.

5 Foolish therefore is that opinion, which the Grecians have now these many
years maintained, who tolerating painted Images, do altogether refuse graven
Pictures, or any that are made of solid matter.

6 Ridiculous also is their ignorance, who make a difference between the
Greek word IDOL, and the Latin name Image.

7 Friuelous also is that three-folde distinction of religious worship,
Worship due unto God.
LATRIA, Service due unto Idols.
DVLIA, and And double service due to the Virgin Marie.
HYPORDVLIA, which has been lately in part invented, and in part depraved by
the Papists.

8 Neither is their evasion to be less condemned, who to the end, they may
excuse the sin of Idolatry, do affirm; that they worship not the Images, but
that, which is represented by them.

9 Yet we do not hold all Images to be forbidden in this commandment, but
such as are ordained for Religion sake; the religious use whereof, the word of
God does therefore condemn; because it is contumelious, both unto God and his
creatures.

10 And seeing, that the Temples or Churches of Christians, are ordained for
the use of Religion; it is unlawful to place Images in them, which the ancient
and purer churches wanted, for the space of four hundred years, whereas since
that time, standing Images, were at the length suffered to come in after
painted walls had been admitted, and together with the standing Images, that
horrible madness of Idolatry suffered to take place, which cannot as yet be
thrust out.

11 We grant then, that there is another manifold lawful use of Pictures: for
some of them were Typical, in the old Testament; yet not by man, but by Gods
appointment, and not to the end, that any wise they should be worshipped, but
that they might represent some divine thing, under the shape of that which was
visible unto the eye, as the brazen Serpent was the figure of Christ, and the
shape of the two Cherubins, that sat upon the holy Arc, resembled the Majesty
of God, attended upon by his Angels.

12 These examples do nothing avail them, who by this pretense do defend,
that Images may be tolerated in the Churches of Christians; For the figure of
the Serppe^t, was not placed in the Tabernacle, neither was it made to the end
it should be preserved; much less, that it should be any wise worshipped, and
it was afterward justly broken in pieces; and the Cherubins, together with the
Ark it self were so placed, as they were not be seen by those that came into
the Tabernacle.

13 There is also an Historical use of them, whereby profitable stories
drawn, either out of the Scriptures, or out of other writers, may be laid
before us: the which, notwithstanding, how dangerous they are to be set up in
the places appointed for the use of Religion, both the practice of the ancient
purer Churches, and also the admonitions of the writers of those times do
witness; and even experience does teach us.

14 No man also, of any sound judgment douteth, but that some paintings and
caruings may be used for ornaments sake, and even in the places appointed for
the exercises of Religion; so that they be such, as it may appear, that no
opinion of any religious worshipp, may any ways arise thereof: Of which sort,
there were not a few, in the workmanship of the Temple, and that among the
very holy vessels themselves.

15 They are also profitable, to come to the knowledge of the nature of many
things; as are the pictures of beasts, Trees, Cities, and Countries: and that
in such sort, as sometimes they are necessarily required in the deciding of
controversies in civil judgment.

16 The strength of God opposed unto the vanity of Idols, is mentioned I
Iehoua thy God, the strong God am jelous.
in this commandment, against those, who attribute unto them some abilitye
above the power of men, either to hurt or to help.

17 God indeed is subject unto no passions or affection: He notwithstanding
does here compare himself unto a jealous Husband, that to the end we may know,
that he will have us to be wholly consecrated unto himself; and that he can
in no wise abide, that any besides himself should be partakers of our love.

18 The Son indeed shall not bear the iniquity of the Father; but the same
soul that sins shall die: Notwithstanding sin is so odious in the sight
of God, that it is not a matter unbeseeming his justice, to deprive the seed of
the wicked of his grace, the light of the truth, and all means of salvation:
Yet can no man complain, seeing all men are guilty of the curse.

19 The Children of the wicked then, are deprived of the blessing of God,
because the Lord does take the occasion thereof from the sins of their wicked
Parents, whose ways the Children do tread, and whose proper sins therefore, do
deserve temporal and aeternall punishment.

20 God does love righteousness, in such sort, as he does bless, not only the
Fathers themselves, that are careful of righteousness, but even their posterity
also: and that, either by prospering their affairs, in respect of the things
of this life, or by rewarding them with aeternall life.

21 Yet is it an evil conclusion, which some do make, to gather merit from
the reward which God promises unto the obseruers of his law. For God does not
say here, that he will be faithful and just; but that he will be merciful
toward them.

22 It makes nothing against these things, that sometimes the Children of the
wicked, become careful of well-doing: and contrariwise, that the seed of the
Godly, do degenerate; because thet Lawgiver meant not here to set down an
inviolable rule which might degenerate from his Election.

23 Now, whereas God does assign four generations unto his wrath, and does
streatch his mercy unto a thousand; it is an argument, that of his own
nature, he is more bent to show mercy, then unto severity.

24 This threatening, and also this promise, does indeed appertain unto the
rest of the Commandments; but it was especially annexed unto this second,
that thereby we may know, how greatly God detesteth Idolatry amongst all
other sins.

Defended by JOHN VALLETONVS Albenatiensis Occitanus.
PRINCIPLES UPON THE THIRD COMMAVNDEMENT OF GODS LAW. XXXI.
1 THe end and the scoape of this third commandment, is to show what reverence
is due unto God in the conversation of man's society, the which we are bound
to refer unto the glory of God, as unto the chiefest end thereof.

2 Now this is set down by the contraries: for the contrary of that which is
forbidden, is here commanded.

3 And it seemed to be more meet, that this commandment should be uttered,
rather in the form of forbidding, then commanding: because that is not always
necessary to be done, which is here commanded in special: whereas that
which is here forbidden, is always unlawful.

4 The name of God here spoken of, is not to be restrained to some one certain
title or syllable; but it comprehends whatsoever may be spoken concerning
God, or does belong unto his knowledge and glory.

5 In sum therefore, we are commanded in this precept, (by setting down the
part for the whole) in all our walking in this life, to have the glory of God
before our eyes; and therefore, here is forbidden whatsoever, either directly
or indirectlie, either unwittingly or purposely redoundeth unto his dishonor.

6 To take the name of GOD, is to make mention of his name; the which thing,
the Lord forbidding to be done rashly, or for a matter of small value, or
irreverently, he does much more condemn, whatsoever is a greater offense then
rashness, or want of reverence.

7 All abuse therefore of Gods word, in the delusion of witcheries and
enchauntments, and such like sins, are especially condemned in this
commandment, as things most execrable.

8 Now the especial thing forbidden in this commandment, is every abuse of
an oath.

9 We make an oath, to be an invocation of God, both as a witness, and as a
revenger; wherein that it may be lawful, there are three things required; to
wit, truth, justice, and judgment.

10 Truth charge us, that whatsoever is affirmed or denied by an oath, it be
certainly and truly affirmed or denied; and briefly, whatsoever we promise,
be without all deceit, uprightly promised.

11 Justice commands, first that that be just which is promised; that is,
that it be agreeable unto the revealed will of God. Secondly, that the cause
of the oath be just.

12 Judgment requires, that an oath be demanded, and yielded with great
circumspection, and that a precise consideration be had, both of the matter
whereof the oath is taken, and also, of the person that swears.

13 A just cause of an oath is, either when the glory of God is called in
question, and so the greatness of the matter does crave it of us, or when our
own salvation, or our neighbors does require it, or when some outward matter
of great weight does drive us thereunto, or when the case stands, that by it
we may lawfully avoid some private or public damage: when the assurance of
some promises of great moment, or to be short: when the Magistrate does crave
a lawful oath at our hands in a just matter.

14 An oath taken, either to perform those things, which God, and the public
laws that are good does forbid, or to leave undone those things, which we owe
unto God and our neighbor, either by reason of our general or particular
calling, both private and public, is not to be fulfilled: Yet is not he to
be excused before GOD and his Church, which takes such an oath.

15 An oath yielded by them, that are not able to discern, whether they do
well or not, as by one that is mad or phranticke, by a child: or by those that
have no power to bind them selves; as by Pupilles and Wards, or those that
are at the government of their Parents or Masters, and generally by any,
that are not at their own hand and ordering, or an oath that is taken
concerning a matter that lies not in the power of him that swears, as
concerning other men's goods, or the keeping of perpetual chastity: all these
oaths (we say) do not bind a man, but are made void and anihilated by the
very law it self.

16 An oath that is rashly given, drawn by deceit, or extorted by force or
fear, binds the conscience: if the matter be only concerning some private
damage: it is the part of the Magistrate, notwithstanding, either to qualify
such bands, according unto equity and conueniency, or utterly to dissanull
them.

17 Simply to take an oath, is so far from being forbidden by the Lord (as
the Anabaptists do teach) that on the other side, to use it holilie and
lawfully, is both necessary and justly accounted a part of Gods woorshippe.

18 Every needless oath also, that is, such as is neither profitable nor
necessary, is forbidden in this Commandment.

19 That an oath may be lawful; there is required also, that the very form
of it be holy.

20 And seeing that in an oath, God is called, not simply a witness, but as a
witness of the conscience also, and a revenger of perjurie against the very
soul; it is a most great and heinous sin, to swear by the thing that is
created, much more, by false Gods.

21 It is lawefull notwithstanding, in the form of an oath, to make mention of
Creatures; yet so, as in no wise, the religion of an oath be referred unto
them. So MOSES and ESAIAS call Heaven and Earth to witness.

22 The penalty is not without great cause, adjoined unto this Commandment,
that it may be better known, of how great weight this Commandment is to be
accounted.

Defended by JOHN NISSOLIVS Semenensis Occitanus.
PIRNCIPLES CONCERNING VOWS. XXXII.
THE TREATISE OF VOWS IS TO BE ANnexed unto the discourse concerning an oath:
we are therefore in this place to entreat of them: and first of all, to see what
a vow is.

1 A Vow is a promise of things lawful, and possible, made unto God, with
advised deliberation, and to a godly end; whereby a man binds himself to the
performance of some thing.

2 For whereas every lawefull promise must proceed, not only from the will,
but also from the reason: it must needs be, that in vowing, not only the bare
motion of the mind is to be present, but even a sure deliberation, whereto a
purpose of binding a man's self does also concur. Now this assurance does not
els-where depend then upon a good conscience, grounded upon Gods word, by the
which, nothing can be lightly or rashly promised.

The Ethnicks therefore in times past did, and the Papists now a days do,
many ways offend in this point, who were, and are wont to make vows lightly,
and without any word of God: so also did IEPHTE. IVD. 11.

3 But we are to take heed, that we vow nothing that is unlawful; much
more, that we perform it not. For it is unlawful to promise, or to offer
any thing unto God, that displeases him: Next, we are to be careful, that
our vows be not of light, and jesting matters: thirdly, that they be not of
things that are impossible for us to perform.

4 The first sort of these vows, are such, as whereby men do bind themselves
to commit some wickedness; of which sort, was that vow, ACT. 23.12. And that of
the mother of MICHA, IVDE. 17. The second sort is of them, which, either do
take upon them, or deny the doing of something (that is indifferent in it own
nature) upon this or that day. The third is of them, who promise those things
that they are not able to perform, as they do, who vow perpetual Chastity,
which God uses not to grant unto all: but unto some only; and that often, but
for a time.

5 Now, seeing GOD only is he, unto whom, we owe our selves, and all that
we have; and that he is the only searcher of the heart, and has power to
take punishment, of those that break their vows; we justly conclude, that
our vows are to be made to him only. DEV. 23.21. PSALM. 56.12.

The Papists therefore do amiss, who vow at their pleasure unto Saints that are
dead.

6 Some part of the ceremonial law consisted in vows, whereby, men being
mindful of Gods blessings, did offer gifts and sacrifices unto him in token
of thanksgiving: therefore they were commanded in the old law, but the
necessity of vowing, together with other Ceremonies, were taken away at the
coming of Christ.

7 For in the new testament there is no commandment of vowing mentioned,
either in the Gospel, or in the writings of the Apostles: seeing the whole
duty of a Christian, is contained under the rule of faith and charity.

8 For the vow wherewith PAVLE bound himself, was done upon consideration of
the time, and other circumstances; the Apostle framing himself unto the Jews,
that he might win them unto Christ. Act. 21.

9 Yet vows are nor altogether unprofitable unto christians, that by such
exercises they may conform their wills unto well doing, and restrain
themselves from evil: so that the cautions above mentioned be observed: for
nothing is to be vowed, which makes not for the setting forward of Gods
glory, and the profit of our neighbor. And after this sort did JACOB, Genesis
28. and the Nazarites IVD. 6. make their vows.

10 And even as an oath made rashly, and concerning unlawful things, ought to
be anihilated: even so a vow that is either unlawful or impossible, ought to
be justly accounted of no force: And therefore that common saying is not
without good ground: In things that thou have sinfullie promised, break thy
promise: and this in like sort, In a godles vow change thy purpose.

11 For if in covenants that are between man and man those promises, do only
bind us wherewith the party with whom we covenant, will have us bound: it is
an absurd thing that we should be compelled to perform those things which God
requires not, but refuses to be done.

The Papists therefore are too obstinat in the defense of their Monastical
life, abusing thereunto many places of the Scripture. Impure also, and filthy
is that PIGHIVS and CAMPEGIVS, who teach, that is better for him who has vowed
chastity, to have a hundred Concubines one after another, then to marry one
lawefull wife; whereas the Apostle does persuade them that have not the gift of
continency, that it is better to have a lawful wife, then to burn.

The things that are to be vowed, are diverse: for the faithful in the old
time were wont to vow either men, 1. SAM. 1. or beasts, LEVIT. 21. or things
without life. 1. CHRON. 29.

Defended by CORNELIUS MARTYN, a low country man of Roxenburgh in Vltraject
PRINCIPLES UPON THE FOVRTH COMMANDMENT OF GODS LAW. XXXIII.
1 EVen as in the rest of the commandments of the first Table, there is set
down in what points the lawful worship of God does consist: so in the fourth
commandment, we are taught especially how the faithful should exercise
themselves therein.

2 This commandment was not then first of all established, wheh the Lord
delivered the Law at Mount Sinay, but even in the very creation of the world,
and that before the fall of man. For although man had never fallen, yet had he
stood in need of some order and policy of the outward worship of God: the
manner of which pollicye the Lord him self did then set down, thereby
condemning will worship even in the integrity of man.

3 The fall of man coming upon this, made the Lord in renewing this
commandment, which by little and little was decayed among men, to bring other
reasons thereof, which were partly altogether moral, and to continue unto the
end of the world, and partly ceremonial and temporary, serving only unto
the tutorship or Poedagogie of the Law, which PAVLE calls the rudiments of
the world: And these reasons were partly set down by MOSES in this
commandment, and partly in other places of the word.

4 Hence it comes to pass, seeing in this precept is contained not only the
inward, but also the outward solemn observation of Gods worship, that the
Prophets (by setting down a part for the whole) do co^prehe^d the whole worship
of God, under the observation of this commandment

5 It is no marvel then, that this commandment though in some things
Ceremonial, was yet by the Lord himself, placed amongst the number of these
that are moral and perpetual: because at that time when this was first
instituted, the inward perpetual worship of God, did altogether agree with the
outward and Ceremonial.

6 The word SABBATH being derived from SABBATH, which in the hebrew
signifies, to rest or to cease, does note unto us, rest and ceasing from our
works: and this name was at the first given unto the seventh day, because the
Lord having finished the work of the creation, did rest upon this day, and it
was afterward continued, because the Lord had forbidden his people to do any
servile work upon the same.

7 Now this commandment consists of four members: for first of all is set
down the sanctification of the Sabbath, which respects GOD the author
thereof, who has peculiarly appointed unto his holy use, one certain day
exempted from the order of the rest. Secondlye, the seventh day from the
beginning of the creation, is appointed unto this Sabbath: Thridly, the
Ceremonial rite of this Sabbath is set down to be the forbidding of every
servile work: in the fourth place is laid before us, the ground of this
sanctification of the seventh day.

8 The Ceremonial things of this commandment, are the appointing of the
seventh day, the rites of the Sacrifices ordained in the Law to be done upon
this day: and the resting from all servile works.

9 The moral things which are to be continued unto end of the world, are
the things which are shadowed out by those ceremonies. This seventh day
therefore, whereof there is neither evening nor morning mentioned, did signify
that other everlasting Sabbath, to wit: the perpetual rest of aeternall
life, begunn here; but to be perfected in the other world. Now the body of
these legal rites and ceremonies, was Christ. The rest from all outward labor
signified, that in the true worship of God, we are required to abolish the old
man, and therefore to cease from all the works that are meerelie ours, that
is, from all kind of sin, to the end that we may consecrate both our
souls and our bodies; to know and to glorify God.

10 Now whereas in other places, the reason why we should cease from bodily
labor is set down to be, the ease which both our household, and the beasts we
use in the necessary affairs of this life should have from their continual
toil, it commands mercy unto us, which men are bound to show in the
moderate and sparing use of the very brute beasts.

11 These Ceremonial things therefore being fulfilled at the coming of
Christ, are justly abrogated, but the things signified by those Ceremonies,
are justly commanded to be done of us.

12 We may therefore justly affirm, that the Apostles by the direction of the
holy Ghost, in stead of that seventh day observed under the Law, did
appoint that day which was the first in the creation of the former world: yet
not therefore, because it was the first in that work of the creation: but
because that Christ by his resurrection upon that day, did bring forth that
new and aeternall light of an other world: and therefore this day has been
named the LORDS DAY, even since the time of the Apostles.

13 The observation therefore of this Lords day, is not to be accounted as an
indifferent thing, but as an Apostolical tradition to be perpetually observed.

14 And that Christians do now cease from their daily labor upon that day,
it grew unto use by little and little, by the authority of Christian
Emperors: and yet is it not any Jewish observation, seeing that neither
every servile work is preciselie forbidden on that day, (whereas it is rather
lawful extraordinarily at sometimes to recall again the prohibition of those
works that are forbidden:) nor yet the said rest is now commanded unto
Christians figuratiuelie, as it was in times past unto the Jews, but to the
end that laying all other cares aside, we may so much the more freely and
earnestly bestow our selves in the hearing and meditation of the word.

15 And even as the observation of the seventh day amongst the Jews, was not
so to be taken, as though God had not been to be worshipped upon the other six
days: seeing that the continual sacrifices was every day offered both morning
and evening: Even so in like sort, the observation of the Lords day, does not
forbid sermons or prayers, to be on other days: but rather commands a
certain peculiar and a solemn profession of the external worship of God upon
that day in the publik congregation. The Lord herein deling most mercifully
with us, in that he grants us six days, to bestow our selves in a holy sort
in our worldly business: and requires no more to himself, but one of
seven. The reuollution of which seven days being fetched from the creation
of the world, does measure the length of all ages and times.

The Jews therefore are deceived, and also those, who together with EBION,
CERINTHVS and other superstitious obseruers of the Sabbath, do at this day
require that seventh day to be superstitiouslie observed amongst Christians:
and so by laying a yoke upon those that are delivered by Christ, do go about to
make christ unprofitable unto us.

16 And even as also, besides the observation of the Sabbath, which came about
every seventh day, there were other days appointed under the Law, to
celebrate some of the benefits of God, whereunto it was lawful to add some
others, so it were to the same purpose: and not to erect will worship, as were
those two days named, PVRIM, instituted under ESTHER, and also the feast of
the dedication of the Temple: even so also, there is nothing to the contrary,
but that both in particular churches, and also generally in the whole church,
some such days may be ordained, according as the necessity of occasions, and
times do require.

17 Yet two things are here necessarily to be taken heed unto: first, that
those days be very few, least that by such holy days, an entry be
opened to idleness and riot, the which abuses many of the ancient fathers do
complain to have come to pass in their time, at those meetings which were
celebrated at the sepulchers of the martyrs. The other, that no leaven of
superstition, much more of impiety, be intermingled with such observations: to
be short, those holy days (if need so require) must be so instituted, as all
possible heed be taken, that no such abuses do creep in: and especially, that
such holy days be consecrated unto none, save unto God.

The Papists therefore are to be condemned, who from the small beginning of
that impiety, which first sprang up, from the resort to the graves of the
Martyrs, are grown to that pass, that they have dedicated unto their
Saints, (as they call them) days, Temples, and inuocations, which are joined,
not only with unspeakable riot, but even with most open superstition and
horrible Idolatry.

18 Seeing then the case thus stands, and that this great wickedness is so
far grown, that it can not abide any moderate remedy: those godly
Magistrates and Pastors, have done religiously and wisely, who have, either
in part or wholly (as in some places) abrogated the observation of these
days; yet is not the peculier remembrance of some of the wonderful acts of
our Savior Christ to be therefore abolished.

Defended by JOHN WTERBOGAERT, a low country man of Vltraject
PRINCIPLES UPON THE FIFTH COMMANDMENT OF GODS LAW. XXXIIII.
1 Having already expounded the commandments of the first Table, which do
properly and peculiarly appertain unto the true and lawful worship of God:
it is meet that we lay open the commandments of the second, which do
contain our duty toward our neighbor, and first we will deal with the
first precept thereof.

2 This commandment therefore may be very aptly divided into two heads that
is, into the commandment it self, properly so called, and the promise.

3 In the commandment, are distinguished (by setting down one sort for the
whole) the diverse degrees of the callings appointed by God, to the behoof of
man's society: namlie, to the end that every man should walk with great care
in his own calling, never turning his eyes from the bounds thereof.

4 Therefore children (which is the first degree of man's society) are
commanded to honor their father and mother, which thing also nature it self
does teach. By this name are comprehended both these from whence we are come,
and also those that issue from us, together with our kinsfolk, both by father
and by mother, our allies, and our country it self: and in like sort, those
are here comprehended unto whom we are bound to perform any obedience,
either by reason of their high place and authority, as kings Magistrates,
Lords, Masters: or by reason of their age, as old men, or those unto whom we
are bound for some benefit, or by any other knot of duty.

3 The word (HONOR) contains three things, reverence, obedience, and
thankfulness.

6 Reverence is the acknowledgement and regard, which is yielded by the
inferiors, unto the superiors, not only in body, but also in mind. So the
son is bound to honor and reverence both his parents, the subject his
governor, the younger honor his elder in years, and to be short, one man to an
other.

7 Obedience is the execution of the comma^deme^t given by the superior,
performed cheerfully and reddily by the inferior, as far as lies in him:
therefore sons are bound willingly to submit themselves unto their parents,
and subjects unto their governors: and to obey their comma^dements with all
their might.

The Anabaptists then, do withstand both God and nature, who think, that there
ought to be no use of magistrates amongst christians, but that they are to be
abolished.

8 We are yet to take heed, that we yield not to our parents, Magistrates, or
yet to any man, more than is meet: that is, that we have them not in Gods
steed.

And therefore they do greeuouslie sin, who hold, that whatsoever pleases
the Prince, ought to have the force of a law.

9 Thankfulness does then, manifest it self, when as we do freely acknowledge,
that we owe a duty, unto al those of whom we have received any benefit, and
are ready to repay them again, and that in fuller measure if we be able.
Neither is it any thing against this point, that fathers do lay up for their
children, and not contrariwise: for it comes often to pass, that parents
do stand in need of the help and support of their children.

10 Even as honor is to be yielded unto superiors: so on the other side, those
that are above others in degree, ar bound to perform their duty toward their
inferiors.

11 Parents therefore must take the care of their children, but so as they do
not suffer them to have too much of their own will: that is, that they do not
love those whom they have begotten, either more, or otherwise the^ is meet. Of
which sort was the love of ELIE toward his sons, HOPHNIE and PHINEAS:
whereas it is their duty fatherly to chastise their offenses.

12 It is the duty also of Magistrates to regard the wealth of their subjects,
to appoint, and by wise counsel to enact and ordain those things, which
belong to their quiet and peaceable estate in this life. But as for those
things which appertain unto the salvation of our souls, and do belong to the
causes, precepts, and means to obtain the same, it belongs not unto
Magistrates to prescribe them: but it is an especial part of their duty, both
to see, according unto the authority granted unto them, that the true worship
of God be lawfully established according to his word, in the countries that
are under their government: and also to defend the same being once
established, against the violaters thereof, even by punishing them with death,
if the case so require.

13 In this commandment also, the flocks are bound to obey their Pastors, and
overseers; and also cheerefullie to honor them, and provide for their
maintenance: as they on the other side, are bound with great conscience and
care to feed their flocks committed unto them.

14 Yet can neither the subjects with a good conscience obey their Magistrates,
when they command them things that are manifestly impious and unjust, nor the
flocks yield obedience unto their false Pastors, who go astraie from the
will of God.

15 Yet it is not lawful for private men, to rise or oppose themselves
violently against the Magistrates, that deal tyranniouslie with them: but it
is their duty, when any such thing comes to pass, either to betake
themselves to prayers and patience, (which notwithstanding must not carry us
away from that which God requires of us,) or to fly unto them unto whom the
Law has given authority to bridle and to restrain such tyrants.

16 The particular actions of some, which seems to give leave to private men
to take armor against a tyrant, are not rashly to be drawn into example.

17 Briefly we affirm, that within this commandment our neighbor also is
comprehended: that is, every man (our enemies and all) unto whom we may do
good in the Lord: because the laws of nature it self, do bind man unto man.

18 Hitherto concerning the commandment. The promise adjoined unto the
observation thereof, is anexed unto it, first to the end that men might be more
and more stirred up to yield the said honor. Secondly, that it should be as
it were, an earnest-pennie of the divine covenant. Wherein also, mention is
made of that land, which the Lord had appointed, as it were, a pledge of his
covenant.

19 This promise belongs unto us, not as far as we consider the same, as it
was sometimes made unto the people of the Jews, concerning that holy land:
but in regard that wheresoever we be, the earth is the Lords, and in what
country soever we dwell, the same is granted unto us by the gift of God.

20 Now this promise is meruelouslie agreeable unto the commandment it self,
whereby the prolonging continuance of this life, is promised unto him that
honors those, that were the instruments of the life which he enjoys.

21 And even as a long and a prosperous life is promised unto obedient Sons;
so on the other side, all disobedient, unthankful, and obstinat Children, are
assured of the punishment of infamy, joined with diverse and great calamities
and torments.

22 Neither are we therefore to conclude, that this promise is vain, because
neither those are always long lived, who perform this duty, neither yet all the breakers of this commandment do die in their youth. For the Lord does
so dispose the blessings of this life, as he thinks expedient; and the sooner
he calls hence those that are obedient unto their Parents, by so much the
sooner he blesses them: now the long life of the rebellious, do so commend the
patience of God, as notwithstanding, it becomes a curse unto them.

Defended by JOHN GIGORDVS Baeterrensis Occitanus.
PRINCIPLES UPON THE SIXTH COMMAVNDEMENT OF GODS LAW. XXXV.
1 SEeing that life gives being unto mankind, and that the commandments
following, do appertain directly unto the preservation thereof; this
commandment is justly set down in the first place; the reason whereof is
three-foulde, merely and directly divine, natural, and politic.

2 Directly divine, because, that seeing God is the only Author and judge
of mankind: he sins most greeuouslie against the Majesty of God, whosoever
does errogate unto him self the authority, to take away life from man.

3 Natural, because, that seeing nature does desire nothing more then the
preservation of it self, he seems to bid battle unto all humanity:
whosoever goes about to destroy the very nature of man it self, as far as in
him lies

4 Politic, because the other sins of men against men, do but annoy the
society of man, whereas murder does utterly destroy and abollish the same.

5 The slaughter of man only is here forbidden.

The MANICHAES therefore doted, who thought that the use of those things ar
here prohibited, which we can not enjoy, except their lives be taken away from
them.

6 Yet it is rightly gathered, that all cruelty and sauadgenes in shedding the
blood, even of beasts is here forbidden.

7 He is not a manslaier, unto whom the Lord has given express authority
over the life of man, either ordinary, as unto Magistrates, or extraordinary,
as unto PHINIAS, SAMVEL, PETER, and generally unto all those, whose service it
pleases his Majesty to use, for the punishment of some men, so that it be
known unto them, that God has set them a work.

8 Yet extraordinary facts are not to be drawn unto examples.

9 Magistrates are so bound to revenge wilful murder, as they neither can, nor
ought to pardon their lives.

The Anabaptists therefore are intolerable, who take away that power from the
Magistrate: and they are also greatly to be reprehended, who contrary unto al
right and equity, would persuade men, that the superior Magistrates have
power to pardon wilful murder.

10 The Magistrate is bound to defend his people against all Domestical
enemies of the public peace, and also, to save them from the violence of
foreign foes, even by force of arms, if necessity compel him.

It is then a most gross error, and most pernicious unto mankind, to hold,
that all wars are unlawful unto Christians.

11 Seeing that the especial band of public peace, is the agreement in the
true worship of God, the Magistrate is also the maintainer of the first Table,
against those that are manifestly impious, against heretics that are condemned
of their own selves, and all such as are the violators of the public peace of
the Church.

12 This can be no buckler to the unjust persecutions, either of the Papists
or of any other against the Church, which are always likely most unjust,
both in respect of the matter it self, and also of their form of proceeding.

13 They are to be accounted wilful murderers, which have had a purpose of
killing, either long before, or upon some sudden passion of their mind. Yea,
and those also, who not purposing directly to murder, do yet in the heat of
their anger so hurt their neighbor, as death follows thereupon, neither can
drunkenness excuse murder.

14 Slaughter meerelie committed at unawares: namely, wherein it appears
that there was no purpose of hurt, is not contained within this Law: yet
notwithstanding this kind of fact requires some clearing, and a form of
discharge from the guiltiness of the fact: both that he who has done the
deed, may be safe from the kins-men and friends of him that is slain: and
also that men may every way learn to detest murder.

15 If it be not lawful for a man to slay his neighbor, much more is it
unlawful for him to kill himself.

16 Seeing the Law is spiritual that is, does not respect the outward fact
only, but also the very conscience this inhibition reaches farther before
God his tribunal, than before man's judgment seat. Therefore they only are
not guilty of the breach of this precept, who have in deed shed the blood of
their neighbor, or hurt his body, but even those that have but once thought of
the slaughter of their brother, though their will consented not thereto.

17 Yea, and the very affections themselves, that would carry us unto
slaughter, if they were not restrained, are accounted for no better then
murder in the presence of God, and of this sort, even by the testimony of our
Savior Christ himself, is anger any wise uttered, hard speeches, or the hatred
conceived against our neighbor.

Defended by JOSIAS DORTELLIVS Castridunensis.

PRINCIPLES UPON THE SEVENTH COMMANDMENT OF GODS LAW. XXXVI.
1 SEeing we have dealt in the sixth commandment, concerning the preservation
of man's life, which is the foundation of this commandment, and the rest that
follow: (for they who were not in this life, should need neither marriage,
nor riches, nor the estimation of their good name) and that next unto the care
of our life, nothing is more to be regarded then marriage; the commandment
concerning the same, is justly adjoined next unto the former.

2 The reason of this commandment, as of the former, is threefold, Divine,
Natural, and Politic or Civil.

3 Divine, because God, who himself is holy, (and that chastity is part of
holiness) will have us therefore to live chastely.

4 Natural, because that seeing the conjunction of male and Fe-male, is drawn
from the very fountain of nature: it behooves the same to be pure, holy,
and void of all uncleanness; and therefore, there was never any nation, who at
the least, by the testimony of their conscience, have not condemned wandering
and disordered copulation of men and women, and approve marriage.

5 Politic, because it is behoofull for the Commonwelth, that families should
be distinguished, and that bastards should not be taken in stead of true and
natural Children, and Citizens: to be short, that peace and concord should not
be broken; all which would be disordered, if men were suffered to pollute
themselves in wandering and disordered conjunction.

6 In this commandment, by setting down the part for the whole, is forbidden
all copulation of men and women out of marriage, and also al provocation of
lust. Of unlawful copulation, there are five sorts; Incest, Whordome,
Fornication, adultery, and copulation against nature.

7 Incest is the conjunction of kinsfolks or alies, which in the degree and
order of generation is forbidden both by the law of honesty, which is commonly
called public, and also by the law of God: Now with these degrees can no
mortal man dispense. Detestable therefore is the Pope, who claims unto him
self the power, to dispense at his pleasure with these degrees. Neither does
it any ways make for him that in the first ages, men married their own
sisters, whereunto they were enforced by necessity, when as yet, mankind was
not multiplied, and seeing it was the pleasure of God, that from one male, and
one female, al mankind should be derived, it was necessarily understood that
he did ordain the conjunction of Brethren and Sisters to be then lawful: But
this ocasion ceasing it is manifest, that he would not have that custom to be
accounted as a law.

8 Whoordome is the copulation of a man with a harlot, which the law of God
forbids by the same reason, that it does al other conjunction out of
marriage, for in all unlawful copulations, men sin against their own bodies,
and violate the temple of the holy Ghost.

Therefore of al other men they are most detestable, who think that to avoid the
greater danger, public stews may be allowed.

9 Fornication is committed, when an unmarried man medleth with a maid or a
widow out of marriage.

10 Adultery is when as the bed of marriage, (which ought to be of one man,
with one woman) is defiled either by the husband or by the wife.

Polygamie therefore, or the having of more wives then on, although it was a
long time tolerated amongst the ancient Fathers, yet was it never lawefull,
either by the testimony of the conscience, or in the presence of God: Neither
did God ever allow diuorcements, save only in the case of Adultery.

11 Now if any man shall adjoyne force unto any such unlawful copulation,
there is no doubt but he sins more grieuouslie.

12 Conjunction against nature is, when as either male with male, or female
with female, do in a brutish kind of fury, and such as nature it self
abhors, burn in lust on toward an other: Or when as they pollute
themselves with beasts, being a wickedness most abominable and not to be named.

13 This commandment does belong unto all, of what age, sex or state soever
they be.

14 God who is the only searcher of the heart, and does abhor all pollution in
what part soever of the soul or of the body it does appear, forbids unto
us, in this commandment, not only these outward sins, but also the
inward, and such as are preparations unto lust.

15 God therefore does here especially forbid the mind within to burn with
lust, and even that in our eyes, hands, or any other behauior, and jesture of
our body, there be nothing, that may savor of wantonness, and unshamefastness: to
be brief, all filthy speaking, and all wanton writings, and indecent pictures
are here forbidden by the Lord.

16 The Magistrate, seeing the breach of this commandment does most
grieuouslie anoy the society of man, is to punish the offenders herein,
according unto the greatness of their faults: neither can it be justly
doubted, but that incest, adultery, rauishing, and copulation against nature
do deserve death, even by the law of nations.

17 The Lord forbidding all uncleanness in this commandment, does on the
contrary command, that we lead all the parts of our lives, in Chastity
and shamefastnes.

18 And therefore they, who are not so far endued with the gift of
Chastity, but that they burn, are bound to marie, and husbands are to use the
remedy of marriage in all moderation and honesty.

The vow of Chastity therefore is to be condemned, both as being most
vnagreeable unto the law of God and nature, and also most rashly, neither
does it bind the conscience of any man.

Defended by JOHN R^E of Normandy.
PRINCIPLES UPON THE EIGHT COMMANDMENT OF GODS LAW. XXXVII.
1 IN the two former commandments, care was had of the preservation of man's
society, as far as it belonged unto the very persons themselves: In this
Comdement, God requires the maintenance of their goods; thereby having
regard, both unto every family, and also, unto the common utility.

2 The reason of this precept, as also of the sixth and seven is threefolde,
divine, natural and polliticke.

3 Divine, because that we must abstain from theft, seeing God does forbid us
to steal, for he that is the bestower of goods, is the disposer and preserver
of them.

4 Natural, because, as the Lawiers do speak; it is of the law of nature,
that some men do possess more, and some less, the which thing whosoever do
confound, they violate the law of nature.

5 Politic, because that unless, that theft were forbidden, not only peace
and quietness among men, should be broken; but also the whole society of men,
should be destroyed.

6 By theft, is comprehended in this commandment, by setting down the part
for the whole, all kind of injury that is offered unto the goods of our
neighbor, as the taking away of other men's goods, the unjust retaining of
them, either by fraud, or by open violence.

This commandment then does altogether withstand the confusion of goods,
which certain fantastical men, (and PLATO also in this point not divine) and
namlie, the Anabaptists of our time go about to establish among Christians.

7 All goods are, either sacred and divine, or human.

8 Sacrilege, is the stealth of those goods, which are called Divine: not
because God stands in need of them, but from the use and the end to the
which they are appointed: namely to the worship of God.

9 Humain goods are either our own in proper, or common by right of their use
and possession, or belonging unto other men. Other men's goods are in like sort,
as either public or private.

10 Peculatus or the robbing of the common Treasury, is the stealing of the
public goods, when as a man does take unto his own private use, the things that
are the whole Commonwealths: whereunto is annexed, the crime and accusation of
extortion or ill behavior in an office.

11 The definition of theft given by the Ciuilians, does properly belong unto
private matters, and it is rightly defined to be the fraudulent handling for
lucres sake of other men's goods, in the use or possession thereof, being a
sin forbidden to be committed by the law of nature: Now of this sin, some
sorts have proper names among the Latins, as Plagium, manstealing, and
Abigeatus, stealing of cattle: the rest they comprehend under the general
name of theft.

12 Theft is universally forbidden, both in respect of the substance of the
thing: and also in regard of the quantity, quality, and use of it.

He therefore is guilty of theft, not only which secretly conuaieth away other
men's goods, and fraudulently receaueth or possesses them: but also he which
puts old in steed of new, uses false weight and false measure; or he, who
upon a purpose to deceive, does not restore the owners goods at the time and at
the place appointed.

13 All of what age, sex, or state soever they be, are forbidden to steal in
this commandment.

14 The word Theft, does here also comprehend all the evil conueiances, whereby
we go about to make other men's goods to be our own. And all the ways which
covetousness, the root of all those evils, does teach us.

Usury, that is, the gain which a man either by covenant or without covenant,
does reap by the harm of his neighbor is here especially forbidden.

15 God the searcher of the heart does not only forbid outward theft, but also
all the inward desire whereby we gape after other men's goods.

16 Out of this negative commandment, the affirmative is to be understood,
whereby we are commanded to give every man his own, and freely and
willingly to bestow to the use of our neighbor, according unto our callings,
whatsoever gifts, either of the mind or of the body we have received of God.

Wherefore all Monks, beggars, stage players, and al other loyterers, who
either live in idleness, or gain their liuinges out of other men's goods by
unprofitable sciences: or by riot do spend their own substance, whereby, they
might honestly maintain them selves and others, are especially guilty of
the breach of this commandment.

17 The civil punishment of theft, may be arbitrarie, upon the diverse
considerations of circumstances, times, places, and persons, according to that
common saying of the Law: when wickedness does grow more riefe, the
punishment of it ought to grow more severe.

They are not therefore to be hard, who hold that it is in no wise lawful to
punish theft with death.

Defended by LAVRENCE BRVNE^IVS of Auinion.
PRINCIPLES UPON THE NINTH COMMANDMENT OF GODS LAW. XXXVIII.
1 HAving done with the exposition of the Eight commandment, order requires
that the ninth be explained, wherein the end and reason of the commandment is
diligently to be weighed, that it may be made clear and manifest, what is
commanded and what is forbidden.

2 The reason of the commandment is threefolde, divine, natural, and
polliticke.

3 Divine, because God who is true, will have us to love the truth, and to hate
falsehood.

4 Natural, because there is such a near consent and agreement between the
purpose of the mind, and the words of the mouth, that those wise men, who first
gave names unto things, did call them both in Greek, by the one and the self
same name, to wit, (...) thereby showing (...) in the one to be like unto the
spring, and in the other like unto the stream: that, like unto the spring
which is conceived in the mind, and therefore is called (...) inward, or
internal: the other like unto the stream which floweeth out of the mind
through the mouth, be means of the tongue, and it is named (...) or uttered
and pronounced

5 Now then even as it is agreeable unto nature, that the stream should be
like unto the fountain, whence it springs, and that it is against nature
that an impure stream should issue out of a clean and pure fountain, so it
is agreeable unto nature, that the outward speech should be answerable unto
the inward mind, and it is contrary thereunto, that the one of them should
disagree from the other.

6 Politic, because, that seeing the society of men, is very much annoyed
by a lying tongue and speech: this kind of injury ought altogether to be
rooted out, from all well ordered Commonwealths, that men may live in peace
and quietness.

7 The end of this commandment is, that in all things, at all times and
places, we follow after that which is true, plain, and upright; and that, not
only in the maintenance of the good name, credit, and estimation of others,
but in the augmenting thereof, as far as lies in us, and honesty will permit

8 Because furthermore, that this law does forbidd false witness, under the
which, by setting down a part for the whole is contained all kind of lying:
we think it meet in as much as the whole treatise following is concerning lies,
first to set down what a lie is.

9 A lie is that, whereby any thing with a purpose to deceue is expressed,
either in word or in deed, or by keeping secret the truth, which ought to be
spoken or otherwise. And it is committed two manner of ways, either in
doctrine, or otherwise in the government of our life.

10 A lie in doctrine is committed, either when in religion men depart from
the annalogie of faith: the which sort of lies, is of all other most
pernicious; within the compass whereof, all heresies are contained: Or when as
in the delivery of arts, some thing contrary unto truth, is Sophistically
intermingled with the true precepts thereof.

11 Now although, of those lies which are committed in the government of our
life, we see not every sort; yet the great ouglines of them, may be some
ways distinguished.

1 12 When as a man being carried only by the affection of lying, does utter an
untruth, having neither purpose to deceive, neither hope of gain, either for
him self, or for others. 2 13 When as a man does lie, either in word or in
deed for his credites sake; as all proud boasters, arrogant men, and
hypocrites use to do; and all those, who hunting after the common fame, are
not ashamed, with vncleane-mouths to power forth gorgeous and gay lies. 3 14
When as the pleasure of other men is only respected, and this sort of lie may
be called (...), or a sporting lie. 4 15 An officious lie, whereby, either
profit or commodity is sought for, without the endamaging of others, or the
truth which ought to be uttered is kept close, or the falsehood which ought
not, is uttered: For it is indeed, contrary unto the duty of a godly man, to
lie for any cause. 5 16 When some deceit is meant toward him, concerning
whom, or to whom a man speaks. 6 17 Hitherto are to be referred
backbiting, reproach, scoffing, and privy whispering: and to be short; all
those things, which either priuatlie or publicly, do oppugn, the integrity
of the good name, or goods of our neighbor, or do sow dissension. 7 18 When as
a man lies, either priuatlie or publickelie in judgment, to gain either for
himself, or for another, by the hinderance of his neighbor, as by false
accusation, false witness, the defense of an evil cause, or by pronouncing a
false sentence.
19 Hitherto concerning a lie, whereunto truth is opposed, the excellency
whereof, if it could be seen with the eyes, would wonderfully inflame men
with the love thereof, and draw them to seek it, and would bring lying into
envy and hatred, and make it loathsome unto all men.

20 Now Truth is a constant endeavor of the mind, whereby we are drawn to
embrace true speeches, to speak the truth, to avoid all disceitfull concealing
both in word and deed, and to love singlenes and vprightnes. Hitherto does
appertain the love of the truth, the plainnes and moderation of the tongue;
with many other virtues that are opposite unto lying.

21 But in as much as lying is a thing that cannot be comprehended: none of
these things which contain some truth either in word or deed, are to be
called lies, but are to be termed forms of speech, under the which, the truth
is contained: Of this kind are many Prophetical speeches and actions, and all
Tropes in like sort, as Metaphors, Metonimies or chaunges of the name, Ironies,
Allegories, Hyperboles or excessive speeches. And in like sort, all Proverbs,
Parables, Fables which carry no untruth with them; and therefore they are not
to be called Lies, but instruments of the truth.

Defended by JOHN HALBERGIVS a Flemming.
PRINCIPLES UPON THE TENTH COMMANDMENT OF GODS LAW. XXXIX.
1 Having done with the ninth Commandment, the tenth remains to be
discussed, wherein the Lord sets down a law, not only for the outward act
of the body, but even for the inward thought of the mind.

2 This commandment is set down in the last place, because the best method in
teaching, is, to proceed from the things that are known, unto the things that
are less known: Now these things which do consist in a determined will, and
before appointed deliberation or outward act, are better known then the inward
thoughts, which very few think to be sin, so they do not break out into
actions, and none (as PAVL testifies) can account them to be sinful, except
the assent be joined unto them, save only those who are instructed by this
commandment.

3 Now Concupiscence in this place, is not only, (as commonly they define it
in the Schools) a desire of an apparent good, but rather every motion of the
mind, even the very least that is not agreeable unto the will of God.

4 The reason of this Commandment is double, the former whereof; is drawn
from the nature of the Law giver; who being a Spirit most pure, has set down
a law like unto himself, that is, a spiritual, pearcing in this commandment,
unto the most inward closet of man's heart.

5 Unto this reason, is annexed another; whereby a difference is set down,
between the laws of God, and the constitutions of other Law-giuers, how wise
soever they be.

6 For by the Politic laws of men, are condemned those things only, which
are vnjustlie done or spoken, either against the Commonwealth, or against
private men. Some Philosophers indeed, reprehend the very evil affections, as
being of themselves faulty: but yet only so far as, the will consents
unto them.

7 But in this Commandment is condemned, the very least thought that does
swerve from the will of God, (and does not rese^ble that image, acording unto
which, the first man was created) although we assent not thereto; and
therefore, the foundation of this Commandment pearceth deeplier then any laws
of men, or any precepts of the Philosophers.

1 They are therefore deceived, who hold, that the concupiscence here
condemned, is only an infirmity, and not a sin, 2 They err much more
greeuouslie, who do not only, not condemn this sin after Baptism; but
also hold it to be a kind of matter left within us, to kindle and stir up
virtue, by opposing it self thereunto. 3 It is also manifest out of this
Commandment, that the fulfilling of the Law, is altogether impossible, even
unto the most holy men; and it is apparent, that all men in themselves are
here condemned.
8 Yet every desire and affection, are far from being condemned in this
Commandment, for those desires to do good, which are powered into the hearts of
the faithful, are especially commendable: Neither are the necessary, and the
natural effects, which God has engraven in the nature of man, both for the
desire of those things that are agreeable unto nature, and also for the
repelling of such things as are contrary thereunto, condemned by Gods word, so
that they be contained within the bounds of that mediocritie which the wisdom
of God has set down.

They do therefore greeuouslie offend, who bring in amongst men, the Stoiacall
immoouablenes of the affections, as though God would have men to be without
natural affections or senseless.

9 The rauing of frantic men, and the dreams of those that sleep, although
they be testimonies of the corruption of nature; yet are they not properly
contained within this commandment.

10 Yet all vile and filthy dreams, and all other that swerve from Gods law,
are sinful in their manner, and stand in need of the mercy of God;
especially, if they proceed from the evil cogitations, that we have had in
the day time.

11 This Commandment makes not the Decalogue to have any Tautologie, or
vain repetition in it, neither is it any wise superfluous.

12 This Commandment concerning concupiscence, is one, and not two.

The Papists therefore are gross seducers, and all others, who having blotted
the second commandment out of the first Table, and yet knowing that the number
of the Commandments by the authority of the Scripture must be ten, have, to
the end they might craftily cover their deceit, rent this Commandment into two.

13 All wicked concupiscence against the goods of our neighbor, is here
forbidden; by setting down a part for the whole, as it is usual in the other
Commandments.

14 This law does expreslie make mention of some of the goods of our
neighbor, as of his House, his Wife, his Servant, his Maid, his Ox and his
Ass: both that these few might be for an example of the rest, and also,
because that men do for the most part more earnestly and commonly covet these
things.

15 That which is here spoken unto men [Thou shall not covet thy neighbors
Wife,] is to be understood, as spoken and commanded unto women; namely, that
they should not covet the husband of another: for this Commandment does
appertain unto all, without any difference of sex or estate.

16 Out of the former things, the affirmative of this Commandment is easy to
be collected, which is; that whatsoever we conceive, meditate, or will, be
joined with the glory of God, and the good of our neighbor; the Lord herein
commanding us, that we should love him with all our hearr and understanding.

Defended by PETER CARPENTER a Low-countriman.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING REPENTANCE. XL.
1 SEeing the wickedness of man's nature is such, that not only no man can
perform the Law of God, but not so much as perfectly fulfill the least part
thereof; and therefore, no man in this corrupt flesh can live without sin; it
will not be amiss, now that we have done with the opening of the law, to
set down the treatise concerning Repentance: For even as by the diligent
reading over of a thing, the faults escaped in writing, are often corrected; so
the sins of our life are amended by repentance.

2 Repentance therefore, which the Hebrews call TSHVVAH from turning again,
and the Greeks (...) from the changing of the mind, may be thus aptly defined.

3 Repentance is the true conversion of our life unto God, proceeding from the
true and sound fear of GOD, whereby, the sinner leaving the folly of sin,
comes home again, and changes the former purpose of his mind into a better.

4 Two things are diligently to be noted in this definition; the one (where we
speak of the conversion unto God) that there is required a renewing, not only
in our works, but also in the very soul it self, which then does cast off
the old man, when as, it brings forth the fruits of works that are answerable
unto the renewing thereof.

Therefore, the preposterous endeavors of hypocrites are to be reprehended, who
externallie make a show of outward repentance, when as in the mean time,
they never go about to untie the bundles of iniquity, which they have within
them.

5 The other, in that we teach, that it ought to arise from the true fear of
God: For the soul of a sinner must be touched with the sense of Gods
judgment, before such time as it can be drawn to repentance; For such is the
obstinacy of our flesh, that unless it be bruised with threats, as with a
hammer, the slouthfullnes thereof will never be amended.

6 Now of Repentance there are two parts; Mortification of the old man, and
the quickening of the Spirit.

7 Mortification of the old man, is the abollishing of our natural
corruption, which is done by the Spirit of God, and is by little and little,
perfected by the same.

8 The quickening of the Spirit, or the gift of the new man, we define to be
that power, which by little and little, coming into the place of the
abollishing of our natural corruption, (as the day succeeds the driving away
of the darkness) makes that after we have known and allowed the will of God,
we begin to do and to will, that which is good.

The Papisticall division of Repentance, into contrition of the heart,
confession of the mouth, and satisfaction of the deed we allow, if it be
rightly expounded: but we refuse the same, as altogether false and ungodly in
that sense that they bring and understand it.

9 For they do understand nothing else by the contrition of the heart, then
that biting, wherehy, sin does gnawe the conscience, either when it stands
in the fear of the judgment, of GOD, or of man's, that hangs over it, or
when it suffers the punishment imposed by men.

10 But we call that a contrite heart, whereby the conscience is marueilouslie
grieved indeed, and that not with out the biting of sin, but properly by the
inspiration of the holy Ghost; not so much for fear of punishment, as because
a man has offended his GOD, and by reason of the hatred of sin; the which
heaviness, the Apostle, that he might distinguishe it from the other, which
begets desperation, calls sorrow or heaviness according unto God.

11 Again, most foul, and most contumelious against the grace of God, is that
other error of theirs, whereby, they make that biting of sin, which is
altogether deadly, unless it be healed by the grace of God, to be a part of
that punishment, which should be paid as a recompense for sin.

12 So also we acknowledge, that the Scripture does make mention of a double
confession: The one, which is done either unto God alone, and that either
privately by one man, or publicly by the whole Church: or that which is done
unto God and the Church, by those who have offended the Church by some public
scandal or offense: the other which is done unto our neighbor, being hurt
by some private injury.

13 Now, this latter confession have the Papists, contrary unto the whole law
of God, turned unto an auricular confession: setting down a law, whereby with
unspeakable tyranny they have bound miserable consciences to reckon up
their sins both all and some that they have committed, in the ear of the
sacrificing Priest.

14 The punishments also called (...) of the Grecians being ordained not for
every one, but for those only who sin with the public offense of the
church, and who have their cause made known before the Presbytery, not that
any satisfaction should thereby be made unto God, as though the penalty were
satisfied, but to the end that the pride of the sinner being beaten down, the
Church might have a sure testimony of his repentance (those punishments we
say) have the said Papists changed, with manifest impiety into certain
forms of penalties, that partly are full of superstition, and partly
altogether blasphemous: which also they teach to be such a satisfaction of
the penalty in the presence of God, as deserves remission of sins.

15 Unto this most foul delusion, they join an other twofolde error, to wit,
purgatory, and indulgences whereas indulgence was nothing else at the first, but
some mitigation of the severity of the Canons, whereby upon good grounds, some
favor was showed unto those that had offended, least they should have bin
swallowed up with over much heaviness.

We detest therefore that whole fable of purgatory, as being an execrable
impiety, and mere contrary unto our free reconciliation by Christ.

16 The law is properly the object of repentance, as the promises of the
Gospel are of faith.

Therefore to speak properly, Faith is the mother, and not a part of
repentance.

17 Yet if by repentance we will understand the whole change of man unto
better, we acknowledge, that faith is a principal part thereof, whereby a man
is changed from being an unbeliever, to be a believer.

18 Now we rightly gather by the former things, that repentance is a mere
gift of God, and that it is ridiculouslie said, to arise from our natural
free will; seeing by nature we are servants unto sin.

19 And seeing that the flesh does in some sort remain in us, two things do
follow thence; first, that continual Repentance is required of us, as long as
we are in this life: Secondly, that Repentance is acceptable unto God, not by
any merrite thereof, but only by his mere free mercy.

20 We condemn the Nouatians, who deny repentance unto them that are once
fallen.

21 And the Annabaptists, who dream, that they have attained unto a perfect
degree of righteousness in this life.

22 And that over great severity of the Cannons, who did exclude the Ministers
of the Church, after they had once made public repentance, from al hope of
being received again.

Defended by DANIEL DOOLEGIANVS a Low Country man.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING THE CONCEPTION OF JESUS CHRIST. XLI.
SEEING WE HAVE SVFFICIENTLY SPOken of the person and office of Christ, and also
of the Law, which brings us unto Christ: we think it meet now, particularly
to handle those things, out of the Creed of the Apostles, which Christ in the
performance of his office has done for us, beginning with his conception in
the womb of the Virgin.

1 BY Conception we understand, that which was made within the Virgin;
namely, that in deed, and essentially she should begin to bear in her womb,
that Son of God which was true God and true man.

2 Neither was that man formed, any space of time before the person of the word
was united unto him: but that Man began to be at the one and the very same
moment, that it was personally assumed by the aeternall word.

3 This humanity was, and shall continue for ever, a true and a perfect human
nature, in regard both of the body and soul, being then made, when as it was
conceived in the womb of the Virgin, and not before.

4 That aeternall person also of the word, or of the Son of God, Coessentiall
with the Father, is the true person of the Son of God.

5 In this conception, which was a beginning in time of that personal uniting;
the one nature did not simply assume the other, but the person of the Son,
took upon him the nature of man in that one particular man, and did prefer
it unto the dignity of the person of the Deity: Wherein, notwithstanding do
remain, both the very natures, and also their proprieties, whereby they are
that which they are, distinguished without any confusion or separation.

6 Whereas DAMASCEN then, does call the person of Christ wholly considered, a
compound person, because he is God and man, his words are warily to be taken:
For the parts concurring together, for the making of some third thing, which
of it self is not, (as the soul and the body in the making of a man) do of
them selves exist before the third thing made of them is existent. But in the
person of Christ, the Deity of the word, does not only sustain the
consideration of the one nature: but even of the whole person, attributing this
unto that man, that he does subsist in the very Son of God, and is not man
alone of him self: For otherwise there should be one person of the Son of God,
and another of the Son of man, neither whereof could of him self be the
Mediator.

7 The parts furthermore, that properly make up the whole, are compounded
together: But the Deity can admit no composition, seeing it is most perfect;
and therefore in this conception, it did prefer that man unto the dignity of
the divine person: but so as nothing was added thereby unto the word, but
rather, that that man did receive this personal dignity from the word,
whereby, it is come to pass, that (as we have said) he is exalted above the
Angels, the natures yet remaining.

8 Therefore Christ was rightly said by the Fathers to be greater then
himself, and lesser then himself.

9 Now this assumed body, was made out of the substance of the Virgin Marie,
according unto the promises made by the Prophets, in which respect, he the very
same, who is the Son Coeternall and Coessentiall with the Father, is truly
the Son of ADAM, out of the stock of ABRAHAM and DAVID, Coessentiall also
with his Mother.

10 This conception, the effect whereof, was the personal union of the word;
and that man, could not possibly be wrought by the power of any Creature.

11 Furthermore, Christ is said in the belief, according unto the Scriptures,
to be conceived of the holy Ghost, which is as the Angel GABRIEL does
expound, the power of the most high, and the third person in the Deity.

12 Yet cannot Christ be said therefore, to be the Son of the holy Ghost: for
in this conception, the holy Ghost, does not sustain the consideration of the
Father, who begat of his own substance, but of a cause forming the flesh out
of a matter taken els-where.

13 Yet is this Conception the work of the whole Trinity, but distinctlie
considered; for the Father does send his Son into this flesh, the Son is
conceived in this flesh, the holy Ghost does form this flesh out of the
substance of the Virgin.

14 Although that that Virgin, blessed above all women, was yet the daughter
of ADAM, and therefore infected of her self, with that universal contagion of
all mankind; whereof also undoubtedly she brought forth some fruits: Yet
notwithstanding, the flesh of Christ, was in no wise poluted with that
contagion; but as the Angel witnessed, he remained from the very moment of his
conception, a most pure consubsisting habitation of the eternal Son.

15 For the holy Ghost, when he took the substance the Virgin, did
altogether cleanse the said substance from all corruption, before such time as
he turned the same into the seed of man's flesh.

16 In this most pure flesh, was placed also a most holy, and a most pure
soul, that Christ alone should be that true holy one of the Lord, making holy
all his members for ever; of whom, the Leuiticall high Priest was only a Type.

17 We condemn therefore the Samosatenians, who will have Christ to be a bare
man.

The Arrians and Seruetians, who gainsay his Coessentiall and Coeternall
Deity.

The Marcionites and the Manichaees, who change the flesh of Christ into a bare
show.

The Schuengfeldians, who attribute unto Christ a heavenly body.

The Appollinarists, who affirm, that the WORD was in stead of a soul, unto
the flesh that was assumed.

The Nestorians, who divide the person.

The Eutychians, who both confound the natures, and mingle together their
Essential properties.

The Monophysits, who in stead of the unity of the person, did place the
unity of the natures.

The Vbiquitaries, who with EVTICHES do define the personal union, by a Real
effusion of the properties of the Deity into the human nature, and with
NESTORIVS, do define the same by the Cooperation of the natures, and with the
Monothelites, to be only a power proceeding as it were from God and man.

The Papists, who affirm the Virgin Marie to have been conceived without
original sin, (and in mainetaining Transubstantiation) do overthrow,
whatsoever they hold aright concerning the truth of the flesh of Christ, and
the personal union.

And their doctrine also, who placing here upon earth an essential
Consubstantiation under bread and wine, do strike upon the same rock of
confusion.

Defended by DAVID PIOTAEVS of Lions.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING THE NATIVITIE, CIRCVMCISION, AND BAPTISM OF CHRIST.
XLII.
IN THE FORMER PRINCIPLES WE HAVE done with the conception of Christ: now we
are briefly to deal with his Nativity.

1 EVen as these words of the Creed of the Apostles, (conceived by the holy
Ghost,) do set forth the purifiyng of the seed of the Virgin, to the end, that
the body of Christ might be purely formed thereof: So these words [Borne of
the Virgin Marie] do declare unto us, the bringing forth of Christ into the
world by the said virgin, and so his Nativity.

2 We say that Christ was borne, (when as the usual term of Childbearing,
common unto all other men being fulfilled) the Virgin brought forth Christ that
word of the Father, and the Son of DAVID.

3 For he which was conceived, was also borne; The Virgin Marie therefore is
justly called the mother of God; though she be not the mother of the Deity:
And we do justly condemn NESTORIVS, who made a vain distinction between
the mother of Christ, and the mother of God; as being things opposite the one
to the other.

4 Of the sure persuasion of this Nativity, we reap a double profit; the
one, that hence we learn, that the word (yet without the laying a side of his
divine nature, or any conversion or mixture of the same) having taken upon
him our flesh, our soul and our mind, that in all things, (sin excepted)
he might be made like unto his brethren; began to be God and man.

The Arrians therefore are to be condemned, who deny our Savior Christ to have
had an human soul; and the Appollinaristes, who deny him to have had an
human mind.

5 The other, that by this means we might be assured, that Christ according
unto the flesh, is from those Fathers, of whom Mary came, that is from ADAM,
ABRAHAM and DAVID, unto whom it was peculiarly promised, that the Messiah
should come of their seed.

6 He was also borne (as it must needs be) according unto the foretelling of
the Prophets, of a Virgin that was unknown of man, because otherwise he could
not be borne a pure man, and so he himself should have stood in need of a
Mediator.

The Jews therefore are to be condemned, who hold against the Christians,
that it was not needful, that the Messiah should be borne of a Virgin, but
that he should be the Son of some King or of some Prophet.

7 The virginity of Marie after her Childbearing, to wit, that as it is most
certain, that before her Childe-bearing, she was unknown of man; so also she
remained a Virgin after the same unto her dying day, is religiously believed:
yet there is nothing expreslie found concerning this point in the holy
Scriptures, neither does it belong anie-wise unto the mystery of our salvation.

8 In this place, we do not only refuse, but utterly detest, all filthy
questions, and such as are most vnagreeable unto so holy a birth.

9 Christ being an infant, and bound in his swaddling bands after the manner of
all other men that are borne, cried in his swathes, as also he did truly suck
milk: it behooved also, that his body and his human wisdom (though it made
greater growth in him then in other men) and his experience did grow as he did
increase in years; in so much as, God would not have the laws of nature to
be broken in these things.

10 Christ therefore, at that time had a Childs body, and afterward a man's,
finite, and having the isntrumental parts thereof, and therefore circumscribed
in a place, the which essential qualities of a true body, he neither did at
any time, nor ever will cast of.

They err therefore, who teach, that the body of Christ can be every where,
and yet his humanity remain still unviolated; neither does it follow thence,
that the natures are separated.

11 That body even unto his death, was subject unto human infirmities, and
so of it self subject unto corruption, though it never felt the corruption of
the Grave: but after his resurrection, he laid aside all those infirmities that
were brought upon man for sin, and even the natural life it self.

Whence MANES is convinced with MARCION, and those whom they call DOKITAE, who
teach, that Christ in deed never did, or could suffer any thing, and that he
did only bear men in hand that he suffered.

12 This Nativity was the beginning of the open humiliation of Christ,
whereby, he made himself of no reputation; namely, when taking upon him the
form of a Servant, he truly came into this world, even as his death and
burial was the last part of the same.

13 Furthermore, in that he was circumcised, and baptized, it was not done
therefore, because he in himself needed to be made clean by them, as though
before he were poluted; but that we should learn.

14 First, that the whole force, both of the circumcision of the Fathers did,
and of our Baptism does depend upon him, as being he, by whom the
Sacraments are truly made the signs of our reconciliation with God.

15 Secondly, that he was the Savior, and the Mediator, both of the Fathers
that were circumcised, and also of us that now are under Baptism.

16 Thirdly, that he came therefore into the world, not to break, but to
perform the law, and perfectly to fulfill it, even in the least points.

17 Fourthly, that he is the knot and the band of both the covenants, although
he abrogated the old by the new.

18 We then condemn their blasphemy, who thinking that Christ was born a bare
man, do teach that in his baptism, he was first of all made pertaker of the
holy Ghost, and therefore, that he is called God only in name.

Defended by DANIEL CHAMERIVS Occitanus.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING THE PASSION AND DEATH OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST. XLIII.
HAVING HANDLED THOSE THINGS which appertain unto the conception and
Nativity of Jesus Christ our Savior: we are to come unto his Passion.

1 AS soon as the WORD, that aeternall Son of God, taking upon him man's flesh,
was brought forth into this world, he began even then to perform the
mystery of our Salvation* Neither had it sufficiently profited us, that Christ
had only been borne, unless also, he had performed whatsoever was required
to be done, that we should be reconciled unto God.

2 The will of the Father consisted in these points: first, that in him, man's
nature being perfect and pure from all sin, should most holily, most
perfectly, and most fully fulfill all the righteousness of the law: Secondly,
that by the whole course of his life, he should take upon himself the
punishments due unto our sins, and pay the ransom of them by a full
satisfaction.

3 Therefore, whereas in our belief, we go presently from his Nativity to
the suffering of the Cross, thereby (setting down a part for the whole) is
comprehended what soever Christ suffered, even from the very moment of his
conception, unto the day that he was delivered into the hands of the Judge;
and that not without cause, seeing this was the last and especial act of the
suffering of Christ for us.

4 By his passion in like sort, we understand also al those sorts of injuries,
wherewith the Evangelists do write, that he was reproched, and his punishments
agrauated.

5 In these sufferings of Christ, we consider three things especially.

6 And first of al, both that fearful hatred of God, against every
transgression of the law, which could in no wise be appeased, but by a most
perfect satisfaction.

7 And also that unspeakable love of God toward man, who sent that only
begotten Son of his, that whosoever should believe in him, should not perish,
but have everlasting life.

8 Next, we are to consider the instruments which the Lord used to effect so
great a work; and they were most evil: namely, Satan, the Priests, IVDAS
and PILATE; (for who but such as were most wicked, could find in their
hearts, to accuse or condemn him that was most innocent) yet the LORD used
them in such sort, as by their means, he brought to pass that work, which of
all other the works of God, was the most holy and the most admirable; that is,
the redemption of his Elect: and as for the instruments, who sinned not by
compulsion, but wilfully, and against their own conscience, he allotted them
unto most just condemnation.

9 Thirdly, we consider the effects of that sacrifice; namely, the force of
that most perfect obedience of his, even unto the death of the Cross, whereby,
we are clad with such a righteousness, as the law of God requires; and also,
the most full satisfaction for all our sins, wrought by this oblation once
offered; whence does follow remission of sins freely, in respect of us.

Wherefore the Papists do err most foulie, who besides the only Passion of
Christ, go about to place their own merits, and the merits of Saints, as a
needful supply of the said Passion, or as though Christ was therefore borne,
that he might power into us the force to merit aeternall life of our selves.

10 Now, seeing Christ was true man, that is, consisting of a true soul, and
of a true body of a man; he had a body subject unto outward passions, and
therefore, he bare most grievous sufferinges in his body, to the end, that he
might truly deliver us, even in respect of our bodies.

11 Now, in respect of the soul, he was stricken through with most unspeakable
anguishes and torments: yea, he suffered in his soul, the most horrible and
fearful burden of Gods wrath, that he might deliver our souls from the
everlasting torments of Hell.

They therefore are to be condemned, who have affirmed, that Christ, either did
not suffer, as the Simonians or that he did not truly, but supposedly suffer,
as the Marcionites and the Manichaees did.

12 The Divinity notwithstanding, which was personally united unto the
humanity that was assumed, did not depart therefrom in the time of the
passion; but it so far with held it self in not showing the force thereof,
until that his soul did vnspeakablie apprehende and feel the wrath of God,
then the which nothing can be imagined more horrible; the burden whereof, he
had never been able to sustain, unless at the last, he had been strengthened
to gain the victory by the same Deity of the word.

13 Jesus Christ then, to speak properly, suffered in his body and in his
soul; yet notwithstanding, we may truly and Christianlie say, that the Lord
of glory was crucified, dead, etc. not that the Deity did suffer, (for the
Divinity is imparible) but that this body and this soul, is the proper body
and the proper soul of the WORD.

We do detest therefore, both the open Eutychians, who as they confound the
proprieties and the natures: so they hold, that the Deity did suffer; and also
the close and secret Eutychians, who are compelled in deed to confess, that
the Deity did not suffer, but yet do hold, that the communicating of the
proprieties of the Godhead and the Manhood, are real; even in respect of the
natures them selves, and therefore, that the WORD in respect of it self, did
suffer some thing.

14 That base estate of the WORD, whereby he made himself of no reputation,
not in himself, but in the flesh which was assumed, was especially seen, as
it were with the eyes in his Passion, wherein the aeternall Son of God as we
may say, forgetting himself, if I may so speak, did hasten of his own accord
unto such a punishment.

15 The condemnation of Christ under CAIPHAS and PONTIVS PILAT, which is a
matter of no small moment and consideration, went before the punishment which
he suffered: For when as we could not stand before the Tribunal seat of God,
Christ appeared before the seat of the high Priest PONTIVS PILATE; yet was he
by and by condemned to be hanged upon the Cross; the just for the unjust, that
he might set us free from the judgment of GOD the Father.

16 The kind of punishment whereunto he was judged, was the Cross; then the
which, there was nothing more ignominious, even by the law of God, to the end
we might know, that he was not only dead, but also made a curse for us.

17 Christ therefore, being the true and the only Priest, performing the work
of the Mediatour-shippe, as all the shadows of the law did prefigure him,
carrying about with him that Tabernacle of his body, entered once into the
holy place, where upon the Altar of the Cross, he once offered himself a
Sacrifice and a brunt offering unto his Father, by sheadding his most precious
blood; he I say, being the Priest, the Sacrifice, the very redemption,
ransom, and propitiation, and even all these things for ever.

We detest therefore with all our hearts that blasphemy, whereby the Papists
are not afraid to affirm, that Christ is as yet daily offered unto his
Father, reallie and in deed for the quick and dead, by the sacrificing Priest:
then the which blasphemy, nothing can be more execrable.

18 Now Christ by his death, has abollished both the first and the second
death unto his Elect. The first death, not that he has fully destroyed the
same, but that he has changed it in such sort, as it is no longer a
punishment of sin, or an entry unto the other death, but a passage unto
aeternall life.

19 The latter indeed, in respect that he being dead, did altogether put it
under his feet, and openly triumph over the same: wherefore also we are no
longer to fear it.

20 By the death of Christ, we understand the true separation of his soul
from his body: the which soul (as having it in his own hands) when he had
fulfilled al these things which were forespoken of the Prophets, concerning his
satisfaction for us, and having performed all the solemnities of the true
expiatorie sacrifice; he willingly calling again and again with a great
cry on his Father, gave up.

21 Yet was not the Divinity of Christ therefore separated in his death,
either from his body or from his soul; but it was always personally united
unto both, in such sort, as that band of the personal union was never broken.

Wherefore some have not taught aright, in giving out that Christ by his death,
ceased to be man.

22 Lastly, besides all the fruits which we draw (as has been showed)
from the passion, cross and death of Christ, this is not the least, that by
the benefit and power of them our old man suffers, is crucified, and quit
brought to nothing with him.

Defended by ANTONIE THYSIVS a low countriman.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING THE BVRIAL AND THE DESCENSION OF CHRIST INTO HELL.
XLIIII.
1 ALL these things that Christ suffered or did for our cause, are in the
second part of the Apostolical Creed, comprehended in the actions of his
humiliation or exaltation.

2 The actions of his humiliation, are either of his secret or of his open
humiliation: of his secret is his conception; all the rest even unto his
Resurrection are of his open humiliation.

3 We have hitherto dealt, concerning the act of his secret humiliation, and
also, concerning the four first heads of his open humbling, his Nativity,
Passion, crucifying, and death; the two latter above named do yet remain; viz.
his Burial and his Descension into Hell, the former whereof, belongs unto
his body, the latter unto his soul, as afterward we will speak.

4 The Burial of Christ is to be expounded, even as the words themselves do
sound, wherein are to be considered: First, the persons who buried Christ:
Secondly, the form and manner of his burial: Thirdly, the end: Fourthlie, the
effects: Fifthly, the place: Sixthly, the time he remained in the grave.

5 The persons who buried him, were JOSEPH of Aramathea, and NICODEMVS, who
having obtained the body of Christ of PILATE, did anoint the same with Balm,
and wrapped it in fine linen, and afterward buried it: In all which points,
we have a singular example of faith, and also of Gods providence, hereby making
a way to the resurrection of Christ.

6 The form of his burial, consists in his anointing, (the which in respect
of God, was a type of that lively smell flowing from the death of Christ) his
winding and laying in the grave, which were assured testimonies of his death.

And here we are not to conceal their notable delusion, who not only
superstitiouslie, but also ignorantly and foolishlie, do in Sauoy offer a
certain Linen to be worshipped, wherein Christ should be wrapped in the
grave, the which they also foolishly call a handkercherffe or napkin, wherein
the whole body of Christ is painted: whereas the Jews according to their
custom, do only bind the head in a Napkin.

7 The ends of this burial are manifold: For first of al Christ would
therefore be buried, that he might be declared to be truly dead. 2. That he
might pursue death, fliing as it were, unto her innermost den. 3. That he
might make our burial smell of the lively savor of his death, and so drive
away from us the horror of the grave. 4 That by this means, he might leave a
sure testimony of the resurection.

8 The effect of the Burial of Christ, is first of all this; that as dying, he
overcame death, and persued this victory of his, that he might deliver his
body from the effect of death, that is, from being turned unto dust: even so,
by the same power of his, he might bring the bodies of his members, unto
aeternall incorruption. The other is, that even as the burial of that body,
which was assumed into for us, a spiritual and an aeternall life, was a
certain continuance of death, so is it unto us a pledge of the spiritual
death of the old man, dying in us by little and little: in which respect we are
said in Baptism to be buried with him into his death.

9 Neither is the body of sin weakened in us at a moment, but by continual
progress does daily more and more languishe, until it be made altogether
without strength, which shall then be, when we shall perfectly rise again.

10 He is said to be buried in a Field, near unto the place where he was
crucified, and that in a new grave cut out of a rock, that it might be
clearlie manifest, that he was truly buried; and therefore, also that he
rose again, and not some other in his stead.

11 As concerning the sealing and watching of the grave, both came to pass by
the great providence of God; namely, that the most extreme enemies of Christ,
by whose seal and guard, the Sepulchers was made safe, might be compelled
against their wills, to confirm the Resurrection of Christ, that by and by
followed.

12 It was not necessary, that the time wherein he lay in the grave, should in
every point be answearable to the Type of JONAS; but we are to know, that
(Christ hasting as it were unto the victory) the Scripture is wont, by setting
down a part for the whole, to give the name of some whole thing to the
beginning and end thereof. So Christ being put in the grave, at the latter end
of that day, which went before the Sabbath, lay in the grave the whole Sabbath,
according to the custom of the Jews, which account a natural day, from
Evening to Evening, and rose again the beginning of the next, which was the
first day of the week.

13 Concerning this Article of the descension of Christ into Hell, it is
manifest, that there is no mention made of either, in the Nicene or in any
other of the ancient creeds, and RVFFINVS witnesses, that it was not read in
the Church of Rome.

14 No man therefore ought to wonder, if some question be made of the meaning
thereof.

15 That the Creed, which is called the Apostles, was written by the Apostles
themselves, before they departed from Jerusalem, every one of them bringing in
his several Article, it is a mere fabulous tale, as the very number of these
Articles do show.

16 Yet it is clear, that they were faithfully and truly gathered out of the
preaching of the Apostles, and acounted even from the most ancient time, as a
square and a rule of faith

17 Now their opinion is very probable, who do take these words, [he
descended into Hel] (if this Article was at the first in the common creed,
expressed in so many words) not for any distinct Article, but for a summary
comprehension of the last and lowest degree of Christ's humiliation, which
should be pointed out by the words of suffering, crucifiyng, death, and
burial; as this kind of speech is sometimes in the Scriptures Metaphorically
used, for the lowest estate of anguish and dejection: So that, [He suffered,
was dead, buried, and descended into Hell,] should be but one Article of faith.

18 But who can believe, that the Fathers of Nicene, and so many Synods that
afterward followed, and the very Church of Rome it self would have rashly
blotted out this Article, if it had bin written in so many words in the common
Creed.

19 Either of the two therefore must needs be necessary; namely, that either
this kind of speech, in that sense that we have spoken, though familiar unto
the Hebrews, was not yet received in all Churches, as being ambiguous and not
necessary; seeing it was sufficiently understood by the former, and so by a
little and a little, grew out of use: or that this Article also, was then
inserted into the common Creed, when as their opinion, which has been of
ancient time, had by degrees taken place, who thought that the soul of our
Savior Christ, being separated from his body, went into I know not what
place, where the Spirits of the believing Fathers should have their abode.

20 But this opinion, though it has bin of a long time received, by a common
and an old grown error, cannot be confirmed any wise by any testimony of
the Evangelical History, but is manifestly ouerthrown thereby, seeing it is
very apparent by the words of the Evangelists, that the Spirit of Christ,
being departed out of his body, was there received, into whose hands he
committed it when he gave up the Ghost, that is, into the place of aeternall
blessedness, whereof speaking unto the Thief, he said; [this day shall thou be
with me in Paradise.]

21 Now, that there was any place allotted unto the Spirits of the Fathers,
that departed before the incarnation of Christ, whence afterward, the Spirit
of Christ coming thither indeed, should bring them with him into heaven; it can
in no wise be confirmed by any colorable testimony of the Scriptures:
Neither would the Evangelists have omitted any such thing in the story of the
passion of Christ: But this opinion seems to arise, partly, in that many
are written to have risen, either by Christ, or with Christ: partly, out of the
PSALM 16.8. which PETER cites Act. 2.25. and out of two other places also of
1. PET. 3. wrongfullie interpreted.

22 Out of this error, arise two other that are more absurd, the one of those,
who being led by the misunderstanding of the words of PETER, thought that
the soul of Christ went indeed into Hell; to the end, that as in body he
had preached the Gospel upon earth, unto those that were living: so also he
should preach the said Gospel in his Spirit, unto the Spirits of those that
were dead, as though that after death, there were any place left for preaching
and repentance.

23 The other error is of those, who dreamed that the Spirit of Christ should
go unto the souls of the damned, that he might there also suffer in his
soul, the pains ordained in hell for the damned: as though that the soul of
Christ, whilst it was in his body, did not bear those punishments for our
sake; as both that horrible agony, which he sustained in the Garden, and
also, that fearful cry, [My God, my God, etc.] which upon the Cross made
Heaven and earth to tremble, do bear witness: or as though, that speech,
[It is finished,] wherein our whole hope consists were untrue.

24 But we (omitting the whole controversy, concerning the putting in, or the
blotting out of this Article) do simply understand, by the Descension of
Christ into hell, those things, which Christ being made a curse for us,
suffered in his soul for our sake, in those torments especially, which were
so grievous, as nothing could be, no not imagined more horrible.

25 By the word DESCENSION therefore, is not meant any remoouing from a higher
place to a lower, because that can properly agree neither unto the Deity,
which is every where, nor unto the body, which of it self lay dead in the
Grave, neither unto the soul, which being commended unto the Father, was
straight way in Paradise, after it was separated from the body.

26 Now the word HELL, which in the Scripture is diversely taken, signifies
neither the Grave, because that explanation should be superfluous and obscure;
neither yet the place of the damned, as it is clear out of the former
Principles.

27 Therefore this Descension of Christ into Hell, which had an end at his
death, went before the Article of his burial: but yet it is placed after the
same in the order of speech, even because it was thought meet, to set down in
one tenor of speech, whatsoever did belong to the humiliation of his body.

Defended by HILLARIE FANTRART an Englishman of Guernzy.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING THE RESVRRECTION OF JESUS CHRIST. XLV.
1 HItherto we have heard Christ's combat with death; wherein he might seem
to be overcome by death, because it so far prevailed against him, as it threw
his dead body into the grave.

2 Now we are to speak of Christ's victory over death: the beginning whereof,
was the preservation of his dead body in the grave, uncorrupted: and that
without the help of any art of the Apothicarie.

3 His full victory manifested it self in the resurrection of his body:
seeing that life is directlye opposite unto death.

4 Now, that only is said to rise again, which lay down, and therefore,
neither the Deity nor the soul of Christ rose again. Yet notwithstanding,
the resurrection after a sort does appertain unto the soul: namely, in that
respect that by the resurrection it was restored again unto the body, that
is, unto his proper instrument.

5 Here it is also gathered, that the same very body which was laid in the
grave, rose again.

6 The Resurrection did abolish none of the essential qualities of the body:
of which sort are, to have a quantity, and to be finite: whence follows,
that it is also enclosed within the compass of the members thereof; and is
contained in a place.

We do condemn therefore the Eutychians, who held that he had a body, that was
not bodily: and the Valentinians, who said that it was an aierie body: and
the Marcionites, who turned his true body unto a shadow, both before and after
the Resurrection.

7 By the same reason also does fall to the ground that invented forgerie, both
of Transubstantiation, and Consubstantiation, as being altogether repugnant
unto the truth of the body of Christ.

8 Christ was the first that rose having swallowed up mortality, and removed
at once all the infirmities of the natural life from him self: although that
after his resurrection he did truly eat and drink, that he might make us
fully assured, that he took upon him again a true body.

9 Christ (which is proper to him alone) rose again by the power of his own
Deity, and not by any borrowed strength, or by the force of any creature.

Therefore his Resurrection is a most true demonstration, that he was truly
God.

10 There was great cause why Christ should rise the third day, and not
before; least that if he had risen sooner, his death should have seemed to be
but fained, or if he had stayed longer in the grave, the faith of the elect
might have been hazarded.

11 The Resurrection of Christ was necessary to the accomplishing of our
salvation, because that as it behooued him to suffer the death due unto our
sins; so also it was needful that death should be overcome by him, that he
might bring us unto aeternall life, being delivered from mortality.

12 It was agreeable also unto the justice of God, that Christ should enjoy
aeternall glory, even by the condition of the legal covenant, which is, do
this, and live.

13 The Resurrection of Christ is a sure pillar of our resurrection, because
the church is as it were, the complement or filling up of Christ: and therefore
taking away that head of Christian religion, vain were the preaching of the
Gospel.

Therefore we detest from our hearts the Saducees and all Philosophers, that
have denied the resurrection of the flesh.

14 The doctrine of the Resurrection has been continually held in the church
of God: the which also though it do depend upon the omnipotency of God only,
may yet in some sort, by laying down some sure grounds and principles, be
probably gathered by human reason.

15 Our bodies shall not be two in number after the resurrection, but the very
same body that lay down in the grave shall rise again.

The opinion therefore which JOHN the Bishop of Jerusalem held concerning the
taking up of an other body is worthelie condemned.

16 The Resurrection of Christ does properly belong unto the elect: seeing the
wicked are to rise again not by the virtue of his resurrection, but by the
just judgment of GOD unto aeternall damnation, even by the force of that
penalty, which GOD added unto the commandment he gave to ADAM: The day that
thou shall eat, thou shall die the death, even the first and the second death.

17 It is no wonderful case, that Christ after his Resurrection did not
openly manifest himself unto all men: for as there is a time of mercy, so is
there a time of judgeme^t with God.

18 Christ proved his Resurrection unto his disciples, by all kind of
arguments: as, by the testimonies both of Angels, of weomen, and of men unto
whom he presented himself alive, even in the same body that was marked with
the scarres of the wounds: adding thereunto also the testimonies of the
Prophets.

19 Unto all these things he adjoined his conversation which he had with them
for the space of forty days, least either a shorter time should not suffice,
or if he had continued longer, he might seem to have risen to such a life, as
he lead here at the first.

20 Hitherto also belongs the manner of his appearing, which was in some
respect natural: that it might be manifest, that neither his resurrection nor
his glory did take from him his true humanity, whereby he is and shall be our
brother for ever: and yet notwithstanding supernatural that all might know
him, having laid down this natural life to be unto us, the first fruits of a
spiritual and an aeternall.

21 Now, seeing both this history of the Resurrection, and also testimonies of
the Prophets which fore-tolde the same, were published openly and in the
audience of as many as would hear, not only of the Jews, but of al other
people, and was also confirmed by all kind of miracles: it must needs be, that
neither the Jews, nor any other people can complain, that Christ after he
had risen again, did not offer himself to be seen of them.

22 And seeing that Christ came to save his elect wholly, both soul and body:
and that his resurrection is his true and full victory: it follows, that
that spiritual resurrection (whereby it comes to pass that our souls
being spiritually united unto Christ, the old man begins to die in us, and
being by little and little to be worn away, is buried, and the new man rises
again) does depend upon the resurrection of Christ; that even as Christ after
his resurrection, and not before (as far as he is our head) began to live that
aeternall life, after he had overcome all the infirmities of this natural
life, which (sin excepted) he had undergone for our sakes: so that quality
of an uncorrupted life being begun in our souls while we live here, and
proceeding farther, after the dissolation of this body, is at the length to
be fully perfected, when the restitution of our bodies shall be accomplished:
and so the elect shall live that aeternall life with Christ, the type of which
benefit is the Sacrament of Baptism unto us.

23 Now, even as the Spirit of Christ passed from the Cross into Paradise, at
the very same moment that it departed out of the body, and thence returned
into the body, that whole Christ in respect that he was man, might be
afterward glorified: so we do believe that their spirits who die in the Lord,
do straight way depart unto God, there to enjoy that measure of glory that is
appointed for the^: until that they being adjoined again unto the same
bodies (which will be the very same in substance truly corporal, though in a
far more excellent estate) shall live under Christ their head for evermore.

We do condemn therefore, both that fable of Purgatory fire, and also their
doctrine, who dream that the souls of the departed, are a sleep until the
last day of judgment.

Defended by BENJAMIN CRESSONIVS of Burgundy.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING CHRIST HIS ASCENSION INTO HEAVEN. XLVI.
SEEING THE ARTICLE OF CRISTS REsurrection has been already opened: it now
follows, that we deal with his ascension into heaven.

1 AS the Scripture does teach, that the death, resurrection, and burial of
Christ were true, and not fained; so, the same does testify, that his
Ascension into heaven, was not only visible, but also local.

2 For although, the word ASCENDING, is sometimes Figuratively spoken
concerning God; yet in this Article of the Faith, it is taken in his proper and
natural signification, in such sort, that by it is expressed a passage, from a
lower place unto a higher, which is pointed out by the name of Heaven.

3 Whereas in the Scripture, there is mention made of a three-folde Heaven; we
affirm, that the highest of all, is here to be understood: wherein, is the
seat and aeternall habitation of the souls of the faithful, and where also,
Christ is exalted above all Creatures.

4 And although, he be truly ascended into Heaven; yet does it not follow
thence, that he is no more present here with his Church for the government
thereof: seeing that the said Ascension, does only appertain unto that
nature which is finite, and contained in a place; that is, unto his humanity,
and not to his Divinity, which is every where alwais present, and can be
contained in no certain place, seeing it contains all things: For as
AUGUSTINE has spoken very notably, the body wherein Christ rose, must be in
one place, where as his truth is every where spread abroad.

5 Hence we gather, that he is not now upon earth, in respect of his Manhood;
seeing he has once ascended into that place, whence the Scripture does
testify that he will not depart, until the restitution of all things, and
in no other manner neither, then he did ascend.

6 Yet we say, that God and man did ascend, because that his human body was
taken up by the power of the Deity, which was unseparably joined with the
humain nature, and now remains there after a manner unknown unto us.

They are deceived therefore, who hold, that Christ according unto his human
nature, can be at the same time both in heaven and in earth. And those also,
who avouch that his flesh is every where, and all those in a word, who bereave
his body of the essential, and as DAMASCEN speaks of the Caracteristical
properties thereof; that is, such as are marks of a true body.

7 Now, where as Christ after his Ascension, was seen of PAVL and STEPHEN; that
vision was extraordinary, and a peculier revelation: So that from thence it
cannot be gathered, that Christ was not in that place whereunto he ascended.

8 This Ascension furthermore, was as it were, a certain triumph after the
victory gotten over the enemies of mankind which he overcame.

9 The end of this triumph is diverse and manifold: First of all, it testifies,
that the work of our Redemption was finished upon earth, the which he would
seal by this magnificall and royal triumph, which for this cause is called by
AUGUSTINE, a confirmation of the Catholicall faith. For by this means Christ
has gotten, unto the immortal and incorruptible life, not an earthly, but an
incorruptible and aeternall mansion.

10 Secondly, that there should be extant a most clear testimony of the
Divinity of Christ, by the which his humanity, was taken upon high, whence
also it appears, that he consists of two natures.

11 Thirdly, that having overcome death, he should enjoy that glory, which
was prepared and ordained for him before the foundation of the world was laid;
not according to his Deity, but according to his humanity, the glory whereof
appeared then, when a new ghuest as it were, entered into heaven; to wit, [the
man GOD,] the which thing, the Angels had never seen before.

12 And although the man Christ was glorified by his Resurrection, in such
sort, as there was nothing wanting unto him; yet this Ascension, was a more
certain ample possession of that glory.

13 Fourthly and lastly, that he might prepare a dwelling for us in Heaven: and
not only prepare it, but also allure us thither, that we might follow him by
an ardent desire and affection, while we are in this life, and here upon earth
seek those things that are above.

14 Now, even as Christ was borne for our cause, dead for our cause, etc. So
he ascended into Heaven for our cause.

15 The fruit and profit therefore, which arises to the faithful out of this
Ascension, is manifold. For first, we are thereby undoubtedly assured, that
we shall once, namely at the last day, ascend also into Heaven; For where the
head is, there the members also ought to be, and the Ascension of the members
shall be such, as the Ascension of the head was (save that he ascended by his
own power, where as we shall ascend, not by our own, but by his virtue:) For
our bodies ought to be fashioned like unto his glorious body, as the members
unto the head.

16 Secondly, after this Ascension, was the holy Ghost given unto the Apostles:
Next, were other gifts from heaven bestowed upon men, and the Church furnished
with things needful for the same.

17 Thirdlye, hereby a way is opened for us unto our heavenly country, from
whence we fell by the means of ADAM.

18 Fourthly and lastly, his Resurrection confirms our faith: For hereby we
are assured, that our souls separated from our bodies, even before the
Resurrection, shall pass to no other place, then where Christ is; that they
may live for ever in blessedness with him.

Defended by WILLIAM QVERCINVS Tarbiensis.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING THE SITTING AT THE RIGHT HAND OF THE FATHER ALMIGHTY.
XLVII.
1 SEeing whole Christ, that is, Christ personally considered, or in respect
that he is one subsisting person, is said to sit, and that the action of
sitting, can not in the proper signification thereof, agree unto the Deity in
it self: we must needs conclude; that sitting, properly taken, can in no wise
agree unto the Deity.

2 And although, it may be properly applied unto that other nature of Christ,
which is corporal; in that sense, that sitting is opposed unto the standing or
the moving of the body: yet we must not think, that that glorious body of
his, though it be truly circumscribed and contained in a place; does either
continually stand, sit, or move: For all these things are gross and curious
matters, neither are they so particulerly to be applied to the estate of that
life.

3 That which is added concerning the right hand of God, is much more to be
taken Figuratiuelie, as whereby those things are attributed unto God, which
are proper unto man; seeing that God, who is without a body, has neither
right side nor left, as being altogether immeasurable and infinite.

4 By this kind of speech therefore, being taken from the custom of Kings and
Princes, who are wont to make a show unto their subjects of those, whom they
will have to be in equal dignity with them, and by whom they exercise their
government, by placing them in a most honorable seat; that is, at their right
side, or at their left: by this kind of speech, I say is meant, that Christ
has received all power both in heaven and in earth, as he himself the best
interpreter of his own words does express, MAT. 28.18.

5 This power as far as he is God, Coeternal with his father; he received not
first, after the resurrection of his flesh, but enjoyed it from al aeternitie,
common with his Father, of whom he received his Sonne-hood from aeternitie.

6 Yet because, not in himself; distinctly considered as far as he is God, but
as far as he personally joined to himself the form of a servant, subject unto
all our infirmities (sin excepted) he seemed in some sort, unto the time of his
Ascension, to have cast of his own Majesty (which in the Scriptures is
expressed by the word of Descending:) therefore, he is also in the same
respect, said to be exalted unto the right hand of the Father; or restored (as
far as it appertains to the manifesting thereof) into the same Majesty,
which he had with the Father before all worlds.

7 There is another consideration of his humain nature, the which (having
truly, and not in show, most powerfully accomplished the office of his
infirmity) became Conqueror, ruler, and triumpher; and has gotten a
perpetual government over all creatures, both for the preservation of his, and
the perfecting by degrees the work of their salvation, and also, for the utter
overthrow of his enemies, and this is it that is meant by his sitting at the
right hand of the father.

8 And even as the hypostatical vnio^ is not therefore dissolved, because the
properties of the humanity ar distinctly attributed thereunto: even so his
glorification being distinctly considered in the said humanity, does not infer
that there should either be two christ's, or sitting at the right hand of God

9 Yet is not the humanitye by this means made equal with the word, either
in substance (which is the proper error of EVTYCHES) or in authority, as the
Vbiquitaries do now hold: because, that that government, whereby Christ as he
is man, has all things subject to himself, as well in heaven, in earth, as
under the earth, is limited within the compass of Creatures; excepting him
says the Apostle, who has made all things subject unto him; that is the
Father, with whom, as the WORD has the one and the same essence from
aeternitie: so has he the one and the same power fully in common with him, in
so much, that, the Fathers have said truly, that Christ in respect of this
government also, is both greater and lesser then himself.

10 False also and blasphemous, is that Vbiquitary and all present Majesty of
the essential humanity of Christ, which they seem to have sharply gathered
from this sitting at the right hand of the Father; for besides that, by this
means the truth of the flesh of Christ is manifestly abollished: It is a
foolish thing, to reason from the power of his flesh unto the essence thereof:
that is, to hold that the essence of his humanity, does reach as far as the
power thereof, where as the very faith of that Centurion, so much commended by
our Savior Christ, MATH. 8.10. does on the contrary side teach us, that it is
mere folly to enclose his power, within the bounds of his essential presence.

11 Now this kingdom and government, has Christ already perfectly obtained,
as having gotten a name above all names: but in his mystical body, that is, in
the church, it is but only in some sort begun, neither shall it be perfected
in the said body before that last day, (when as all the enemies of Christ's
glory, and our salvation being aeternally overthrown and cast down) God
shall be all in all, that is in his Saints; in whom now he is only but some
thing, whether we respect them being a live or dead.

12 That government of Christ therefore, does now consist in two things; that
is, partly in the subduing both of his own children, and also of all their
enemies; and partly in bringing his, by little and little to perfection by the
power of his Spirit, and the administration of that other part of his
aeternall Priesthood; that is, in the strengthening of them, by his
intercession with the Father, even until that he has together with all his
elect, celebrated an eternal triumph.

13 This intercession of his, consists especially in that efficacy of that
oblation of his, made once to his father; the force whereof is this, that the
Father looking upon all his elect in his Son, by whose blood he is
reconciled unto them, does embrace them evermore with a Fatherly affection:
partly, in that as all the prayers of the Saints, being as yet Pilgrims here
upon earth, are conceived in the name of Christ: so he presenting himself
unto his Father in heaven, as the only Mediator, does sanctify those
prayers, and make them acceptable unto God the Father.

14 Unto these things is to be adjoined that stay and defense which we have by
Christ, in that he having all creatures in his hand, does by what instrument
and means he thinks good, most powerfully preserve his Church, traueling as
yet here upon earth, against all the furious insurrections of all whosoever.

15 Touching this sitting at the right hand of GOD the Father, although in
respect of the title thereof, it belonged unto the humanity of Christ, from
the very first moment, of the personal uniting thereof with the Deity: yet
both in regard, that this humanity was to be thrown down unto the very
lowest degree, for the performance of the work of our reconciliation, and also
because this glorification of our head, was the crown due unto the obedience
he yielded for us unto the Father, even unto the death of the cross, therefore
it fell not unto him in deed and posession, before he had suffered, risen
again, and ascended above all heavens.

Hence it follows that this error also of the Vbiquitaries is intolerable:
namely, in that they hold that this real sitting at the right hand of the
father, began at the very first moment of the Lords incarnation: offending
herein two manner of ways. First, in the wrong interpretation of this
article: next in that they inuert the order of the articles of the belief,
which ought necessarily to be retained.

16 In as much as the place of this sitting is expreslie said to be in heaven,
and not upon earth, or any where else, and that Christ is not to depart from
heaven before the last day: and also that he is endued with a body, though
glorious, yet organical, and contained within the parts thereof. Therefore that
real presence of his upon earth, is showed to be false, against all
Transubstantiators and Consubstantiators, even by this sitting of his in
heaven, at the right hand of God.

Defended by FRANCIS PEFAVRIVS of Bearne.
PRINCIPLES UPON THAT ARTICLE OF THE BELIEF, WHEREIN IS SAID that Christ shall
come to judge the quick and the dead. XLVIII.
1 HAving done with the treatise of the incarnation of the mediator Jesus
Christ, and also of his life, death, resurrection, ascension, and exaltation
unto the right hand of the Father; which is the power that he has received
over all creatures, the which he does now so exercise, as he seems in his
members rather to strive and to be kept under, then to reign: and in regard of
his enemies, rather in some sort for the most part, to be vanquished, then to
overcome. It follows that unto the former we adjoine which things appertain
unto the full administration of this government.

2 Christian Faith therefore does teach, that Christ who strives with his
enemies, until the number of all those that were given him of the Father be
finished, and the time appointed for the executing of Gods wrath against
Satan, his Angels, and the world, be expired, shall come again from heaven and
execute his full power, both in the final delivery of all his children, and
in the utter overthrow of all his enemies.

3 The universal restitution of the world, which is earnestly desired of all
the creatures themselves in general, shall serve for the setting forward of
the salvation of the elect.

4 But it is curious and profane to enquire what manner of the restitution
that shall be, any farther then the word of God does reveal it.

5 Now that that judgment, whereunto all men, some to be wholly absolved,
others to be wholly condemned, shall be subject, is to be Universal and
everlasting, may be proved by arguments drawn from humane reason, and even
from that very principle, whereby the wicked go about to displace Gods
providence: namely, that God must needs be just, and therefore that it cannot
be, but it should aeternallie go well with the good, and evil with the bad.

6 But the undoubted proofs of this article, as also of all the rest, are to
be fetched from Gods word.

We do condemn therefore the Epicures, who deny Gods providence, as though
the casual (as they call it) succession and change of things were to continue
for ever. The Platonikes, who granting the world to have had a beginning, do
yet teach that it shall never have an end. The Aristotelians, who dream that
the world neither had a beginning, nor ever shall have an end. And all other
mockers, who think that there shall never be any judgment, because it is so
long differred as PETER sets down 2. PET. 3.3. Yet do we not ground our
selves in this point, upon the opinion of the Stoickes, who taught by natural
reason, that the world should be consumed with fire, but upon the authority
of the word.

7 This judgment in regard of the power and decree thereof, is jointlie of
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost: but the promulgating and execution
of the same, is committed to the Son, and that in his human nature: In the
which nature it pleases the Father mediatly to rule all creatures.

8 Christ therefore shall come from heaven in his true, visible and finite
body: yet clothed with that Divine glory and majesty, whereby he has
gotten a name above all names.

That dotage therefore of the Vbiquitaries, is most vain, who do oppose the
majesty of Christ's flesh, unto his local and organicall circumscription: and
do imagine a double real presence of his body, the one visible and finite,
which is of his dispensation: the other invisible and infinite, which they call
omni-majesticall, which cannot be grounded upon any place of the word.

9 Before the tribunal seat of this Judge shall all men without exception,
that ever were since the beginning of the world, stand to be judged.

10 All therefore that have been dead shall be joined again to their bodies,
and as for those that shall be found alive, they shall be changed in a moment,
to the end that some of them may enjoy that blessed and perpetual felicity
with Christ their head: others that they may be adjudged unto everlasting
torments, which Satan their head and his wicked Angels, and so Christ may
truly and perfectly reign for ever.

We condemn therefore the opinion of ORIGIN, and of the Chiliasts, who held
that all men should be saved after a thousand years.

11 This judgment shall Christ exercise, in respect of the elect, both
according to the law which he has fulfilled for them: and also according to
the Gospel which was given unto them, that they should embrace the same with a
true and a lively faith: and in regard of the wicked, according unto the law
only, which pursues every man with aeternall punishment: and therefore also
he shall crown the one of them, being acquired throw his mere favor, and
shall punish the other in just severity.

We refuse therefore, both those who attribute the reward of aeternall life,
unto the satisfactorie and meritorious works of men: and them also, who ascribe
the damnation of the wicked, unto a kind of absolute and sovereign power that
is in God, beyond the judgment of the law.

12 Christ shall then yield the kingdom unto his Father, that is, shall
absolutely perform in deed the office which he received of the Father: and
the Father on the other side, shall perform unto him, together with his, that
aeternall triumph promised unto him, when he has put all his enemies under
his feet.

13 The place and the time of this judgment, has God manifested unto none,
but would retain the knowledge thereof unto himself, both that he might contain
us watchful in our duties, lest that either we should be astonished with fear,
or abuse the deferring of his coming; and also, that he might exercise our
faith and patience: yet has he foretold us, MAT. 24. the signs that go
before his coming; so that none can be on the sudden overtaken thereby, save
only those, who wittingly and willingly remain unprovided.

They are therefore worthy to be reprehended in the Church, who presume to set
down the time thereof, by the aspects of the Stars, or upon some imaginary
suppositions or Prophesies.

14 Now the Lord according unto his secret wisdom, does defer that day,
partly, that the number of his elect may be finished; and partly, that the
wicked may be made more and more inexcusable.

15 That last universal judgment hinders not, but that the Lord may in the
mean time execute his particular judgments in this life, either upon his
elect for their salvation, or upon the reprobate for their undoing; neither
does it also hinder, but that he may after their departure gather the souls
of his elect, into that blessed life, and torment the spirit of the wicked in
the prisons that are known unto himself, even until the time that he
accomplisheth the full happiness of the one, and the utter confusion of the
other.

16 And even as he would have his last coming to be hidden from men, so also
he would have the time of their death for the very same cause to be unknown
unto them: unless, that he opens the same unto some, either by particular
revelation, or by probable conjectures.

Defended by JOHN VALETONVS Albenatiensis Occitanus.
PRINCIPLES UPON THE ARTICLE OF THE BELIEF CONCERNING THE FAITH IN THE HOLY
GHOST. XLIX.
1 WE do in this Article confess, that the holy Ghost as being the third
person in the Trinity, is to be adored and worshipped by the same faith and
invocation, whereby, in the former Articles we have confessed, that the Father
and the Son, being in order the first persons of the Trinity, ar distinctly
to be acknowledged and worshipped.

2 The holy Ghost in this place does signify, that essential power, who is
essentially subsisting in the Father and the Son, proceeding and distinguished
equally from them both, in regard of the manner of his being: but in respect of
his essence, absolutely considered, he is GOD, having that Deity which is not
derived by propagation from an other Godhead, but is one, most single, and of
himself.

3 Now, seeing the Father neither can be separated from his Co-aeternall and
Co-essentiall wisdom, neither co-essentiall power, who is the holy Ghost, can
be severed from that wisdom, but does depend of the Father, and of his
wisdom: there is no question to be made, but that he does proceed from the
Father and the Son, as from one cause.

4 Where the Son is said to be begotten of the Father, and the holy Ghost
affirmed, to proceed from the Father and the Son; it shows a difference
between the wisdom that remains in the Deity, and the power, that does
outwardly show it self by the effects.

5 That which both the Schoolmen, and also the ancientest Divines amongst
the Latins, have written concerning the holy Ghost, as being a kind of
essential love, knitting the Father; the Son together, has brought in to
religion, many intricate, strange, and dangerous questions.

6 Although the works of the Trinity, which they call outward or external,
are inseparable: yet in the effecting of them, there is a distinction to be
observed, not only of the persons, but also of the personal actions.

7 The proper operation of the holy Ghost, is to effect in deed in his time
and manner, those things which the father has determined to dispose by his
Son, that is his aeternall wisdom, and to execute by the power of them
both, that is, by the holy Ghost.

8 Yet are we not to think that the holy Ghost does work any thing with
the Father and the Son, as an isntrumental or a ministerial cause, but
without any inaequalitie, and immediately in respect of them both, works all
things together with them.

9 The power thereof did then show it self, when as the world was to be
created of nothing, and afterward in his providence, whereby he has unto this
day, and ever shall as long as the world stands, preserve the same, both by
ordinary and extraordinary means.

10 The effect thereof furthermore, is to work in the hearts of men, which is
done many ways: for some he makes apt and ready to practice moral virtues,
not by cha^ging, but by repressing their natural corruption: and others by his
especial power he does make meet to understand and bring to pass, great
matters, all which do properly serve for the conservation of man's society,
although that the effects of these guiftes are otherwhiles also behoofull unto
the Church.

11 Sometimes also he goes farther, in bestowing upon some the knowledge of
his heavenly truth, with other supernatural gifts, as of Prophecy and
healing: to be brief he does after a sort, sometimes enlighten not the
understanding only, but even the will of some, who yet are so in the Church,
as it will one day appear, that they were never true members thereof.

12 Now his saving power, does only manifest it self, both in the
congregation of his elect, and also in every particular member of his
mystical body: whence it comes to pass, that the Church alone is holy,
and the believers only, properly called Saints.

13 He does therefore in part bestow the very same gifts upon his elect,
whereof some of the reprobates are partakers: but adjoining thereunto the grace
of a good conscience, and of perseverance. So the holy Prophets and Apostles
in times past, have left unto us by the inspiration of the holy Ghost, the
scriptures, contained in the books of the old and new Testament. After this
manner also, many have been endued with the gift of woorking miracles, and
all faithful Pastors and Teachers, have been in all ages, bestowed upon the
Church, and endued with necessary gifts.

14 Now the gifts, whereby the holy Ghost does properly distinguish the
church from the world; are those unrepentant gifts which he bestows only
upon his elect: namely, the effectual enlightening of their mind, and the
gift of perseverance: the effect whereof is true faith, applying Christ with
all his benefits, unto the salvation of every one that believes severally:
whereunto is vnseparablie joined sanctification, whereby we are drawn
sincearlie to love God, and our neighbor.

15 That work which was the most excellent of al other: namely, both the
creation of the flesh of Christ in the womb of the Virgin, and also his most
perfect sanctification, whereby his humanity was anointed with all kind of
gifts, that were meet to perform the office of the Mediator, proceeded from
the same power.

We detest therefore all those, who deny that the holy Ghost is to be
worshipped by one and the self same faith and invocation with the Father and
the Son: and those, who hold that he proceeds only from the Father:
together with such as deny him to be coaeternall and coessentiall with the
Father, as the Macedonians and the Arrians: those, who distinguish him from the
Father only in name, and not in person, as the Sabellians: and those also who
affirm him to be but some created motion and power: to be brief, we detest al
those that do any wise withstand, either the true coessentiall and coaeternal
Deity of the holy Ghost, or his proceeding from the Father and the Son.

Defended by JOHN NISSOLIVS Semenensis Occitanus.
PRINCIPLES UPON THE ARTICLE, I BELIEVE THAT THERE IS A HOLY CATHOLIC CHVRCH.
L.
1 OMitting in this place, the question whether there be a Church or no, as an
unnecessary point; we will rather see what the Church is.

2 The word CHVRCH taken from the common custom of public affairs, where the
people being called by the voice of a crier, did meet together, began even
from the very time of the Apostles, (the name of Sinagogues being left unto
the Jewish conuentions,) to be applied unto their meetings, who embracing the
voice of the Gospel, were wont to have public assemblies for the use of
Religion.

3 Now the thing it self signified by this word, is drawn farther: that is, to
express the company of those, who being raised up from the fall of mankind
by the merciful voice of God, have, and will unto the end of the world,
consent together in the profession of his true worship.

4 Now, in as much as all those who have given their names to be of this
meeting, have not either done the same unfeignedly, or showed that constancy
that had been meet; by reason that Satan never cease to sow tares in the
field of the Lord: Hence it came to pass that men have been always enforced
to take the Church sometimes in a more general, sometimes in a more special
signification.

5 The Church therefore is generally called, the congregation of all those,
who profess true Religion, whether they do it unfeignedly and persevere
therein, or hypocriticallie and fall away from the same. In special, it is
taken for all those only, whom God of his infinite mercy having elected
before all worlds, does effectually call, when he thinks good, in such
sort, as they being endued with true faith, and perseuering unto the end, may
be justly accounted to be of Gods flock.

6 Hence sprung that distinction of the visible and invisible Church: of the
visible, which is so accounted by the notes of the outward profession, without
any difference between the faithful and the close hypocrites: of the
invisible, which is restrained unto those only, who truly and constantly
believe to the end, and therefore called invisible, because true faith can
assuredly be discerned by none, save by the Lord, and them in whom it is.

7 This invisible Church is only one, as there is but one God the Father, one
Christ the Mediator and head of his mystical body, one faith, one hope by
the holy Ghost, and one aeternall life: and it is therefore called Catholic;
that is, universal, both because it has been, is, and shall be always the
one and the same: and also, because GOD has always gathered them into one
body, out of all sorts of men and people, as it seems good unto his mercy;
whereas, before the coming of Christ, the Church was particularly called out
of the nation of the Jews only.

8 And although, God for many ages, had separated the Gentiles (whom the
Apostles therefore affirms to be without God, and strangers from the
covenant of grace) from the seed of ABRAHAM, yet was there almost no age,
wherein he called not some of the Gentiles, until that the particion-wall
being broken by the preaching of the Apostles, that promise made unto ABRAHAM
was accomplished: namely, that all the nations should be blessed in his seed:
because they were to become ABRAHAM'S seed by Christ.

9 The particular assemblies of this body, dispearsed throughout the world,
considered either generally or specially, as it is visible or invisible, are
as it were the members that make up one mystical body.

10 And this is that Catholic Church, whereof mention is made in the belief;
therefore called holy, because it is by the holy Ghost separated from the rest
of the world, and consecrated unto God.

11 This same Church is rightly divided into the Militant and Triumphant: By
the Militant, is understood the company of the true believing, yet remaining
upon the earth, and striving with Satan and the remnants of their flesh: By
the Triumphant, are meant those, whose blessed Spirits are already gathered
unto the Lord, even until both the one and the other, at that glorious coming
of Christ having received their glorious bodies, shall triumph with Christ
their head for evermore.

12 That holiness, whereby this Catholic Church, which is also invisible in that
sense that we have spoken, is severed from the world, if it be considered in
respect of the purity of the doctrine of the truth, is altogether without
spot or wrinckle: Or if it be considered, not as it is in it self, but
according unto the belief that is yielded unto this true and wholesome
doctrine: we hold again, that the force of that truth is so great, that it is
always declared and obeyed in the Church universally considered. Wherefore the
Apostle calls the Church taken in this sense, the pillar and ground of truth.

13 But if the Church be respected, not universally, but particularly; that
is, according as it has diverse assemblies here and there gathered together,
then indeed it may often come to pass, that some particular Churches may err,
yea, in some fundame^tal points, either in part or in whole, yet so, as the
elect do always return unto the way: neither can those particular spots,
that cleave unto it for a time, make the universal church to leese her natural
beauty.

14 We confess (to speak nothing here of the corruption of manners) that this
may come to pass, much more, if we severally consider the members of
particular Churches; for such is the weakness of man's judgment, even in the
dear Saints of God, that you cannot find any, so endued with the perfect
knowledge of the truth, but he does stagger in some things; especially, when
the Lord being provoked by the sins of men, does give efficacy and force
unto the spirit of error.

15 Although, that the Catholic Church can never fall away from the truth,
yet both the Prophets and Apostles, together with the holy story in general,
both before and after the coming of Christ, have foretold, and these very
times wherein we live do testify, that it has often come to pass, that the
greatest part of particular churches and men, falling away, yea, and striving
against the truth: the light of the Church seemed for a time, though not
utterly, yet in a manner to be clean extinguished.

16 The true marks therefore of the visible Church, can not be the multitude,
or personal succession, but the doctrine truly taught out of the written word
of God, and the lawful administration (that is, such as is agreeable unto Gods
ordinance) of the Sacraments, to wit, of Baptism and of the Lords Supper.

17 These two notes do depend upon the lawful form (that is, such as is
prescribed in Gods word) of the holy Ministry, constituted as it ought to
be: But in as much as the Church sometimes is brought to that pass, that not
only Wolves do supply the place of lawful Pastors; but also, the whole
form of the ordinary Ministry, is turned into a plain confusion; and that
sometimes, the external Ministry, being for a time altogether broken of, the
church is extraordinarily fed, as it were in the wilderness: therefore, is not
this mark simply and absolutely necessary, to point out the Church here upon
earth.

18 Now wheresoever the Doctrine of the Apostles is taught, there is no question
to be made, but that the church is there, though there be few that give ear
unto the same with fruit.

19 That therefore is a true Church, be it universal, or particular, which
hears the word of God contained in the writings of the Prophets and the
Apostles; in such sort, as it can add nothing thereunto, detract nothing
from the same, nor change any thing therein, either in respect of the
Doctrine it self, or in regard of those things that appertain unto the
foundation of the government of the Church: and as for the hard places that are
in the word, it interprets them, both by conference of the scriptures, and
also according to analogy of faith.

20 Now as touching those things which appertain unto outward order; the
Church in the fear of the Lord, may therein consider, what is most meet unto
time and place.

We do condemn therefore, those who dream, that every man, whatsoever he
profess, shall be saved by his own Religion, seeing out of the Catholic
Church there is no salvation.

And those who tie the Catholic Church unto one certain place.

Those who bring unto the Church, the Academicall ^ncertainty.

Those who require a form of perfection in the Militant Church.

Those who hold the personal succession absolutely, for an undoubted note of
the Church.

Those who have by little and little, transformed the Christian Presbyteries or
Eldership, that is, the government ordained by Christ the only King and
Monarch of his church, into the image of the beast, which was the old Roman
Empire; and that first, by bringing in the dignity of Bishops; next, by
apointing degrees amongst them; and last of all, by placing Antichrist at Rome,
under the title of the Ministerial head.

Those who do not measure the Church, according to the word of God, but the
word according to the bare name of the Church.

Defended by DAVID PIOTAEVS of Geneua.
PRINCIPLES UPON THE ARTICLE, I BELIEVE THAT THERE IS A COMMUNION OF SAINTS.
LI.
1 CHrist can be fruitful unto none, but by participation.

2 This participation is partly of Christ, and partly of of his benefits,
which do flow from the participation of him.

3 That therefore, whereof we are made partakers, is partly substantial, and
partly a quality.

4 The Substantial things, are both Christ himself God and man, and also all
those corporal things which are bestowed upon us, together with Christ, being
participated unto us. The qualities are all those gifts, both of the body and
the mind, which in him we receive in this life, and obtain in the life to come.

5 Now we are made partakers of the Deity of Christ, only in force and
operation, but of his humanity in very deed, as far as he is our brother.

6 Now this participation, by reason of the most strait ba^d, and the
unspeakable efficacy thereof (not that the one substance does touch the other)
is expressed by the names of union, engraffing, incorporation, and such like.

7 The same is for three causes called spiritual: first of all, because the
true and the sovereign cause thereof, is that power, and unspeakable force of
the holy Ghost, the which, notwithstanding the distaunce of place, does most
truly, and most effectually join the Saints, (though here as yet upon earth)
in a spiritual marriage with Christ, that they may be flesh of his flesh, and
bone of his bones; although according unto this flesh, they are not upon earth,
but in heaven.

8 Secondly, because again this conjunction with Christ himself, according to
the flesh is (in regard of us,) a work, not of the body, but of the mind,
which receives Christ by faith.

9 Thirdly, because the end and the scope of this mutual Communion is not to
the end, that a kind of monstrous body, should arise from the uniting of his
substance with ours, but that in this life, we should be governed by his
Spirit, and that in the life to come, we should live an aeternall and a
heavenly life with him.

10 Yet may this uniting, be called a corporal union in a sound meaning; so
that, all ambiguitie and newnes of words be avoided: namely, if that especial
thing, which in this mystery, (as before has bin said) we spiritually receive
by faith (and that is the very humanity of Christ) be considered: Next, if
respect be had to the external means, which the holy Ghost uses, to beget and
nourish faith in us; namely, both the outward word sounding in our ears, and
also, the Sacramental elements and rites, that affect the rest of our senses.

11 Out of this spiritual union, arises that mystical body, whereof Christ
is the head, both in respect of his pre-eminence over the same, and also,
because he does wholly give sense and motion thereunto. Now, all those that
believe and are sanctified, are called members under this head; in which sense
is the Church called by PETER, the City, and the spiritual temple of God,
built of lively stones; whose foundation and chief corner stone is Christ, who
sustaineth and bears up the whole building.

It is no less absurd therefore to suppose, that there is a kind of fastening,
and a cleaving of Christ's body within ours, or of ours within his; then it
were to say, that the bodies of the Saints do subsist one within another:
Seeing that the band of the Communion of Saints, is the very same that the
union is, which they have, both with themselves, and with Christ.

12 Some of those things, whereof we are made partakers in this mystery, are
altogether proper to the elect: namely, Christ himself, (of whom none can
be a member, except he be endued with true faith:) true faith, which is
inseparably joined with true hope; charity: and last of all, that aeternall
kingdom prepared from all aeternity, according to the free purpose of God unto
the elect only: Some also are after a sort, as the Lord thinks good, common
to the hypocrites and profane, by reason that they seem to be ingraffed into
Christ, as are the gifts of Prophecy, of tongues, and of healing, together
with many other notable gifts of the mind, and excellent benefits of this
life: the which, as by the elect they are consecrated to God, who is the giver
of them; so are they profaned by the wicked.

13 Again, these gifts (though not always in the same measure) are partly
common to all the Saints, as being necessary to the salvation of all (of
which sort are the participation of Christ himself, lively faith, steadfast
hope, love unfeigned, remission of sins, and sanctification by the holy
Ghost, with such like) and partlye, proper to every several believer; the
which, the same holy Spirit does distribute according to the diverse
consideration of the callings of men, unto whom, and in what measure he
thinks good.

14 Every one of the Saints severally considered, have their peculier gifts,
both in regard of the possession of Christ himself, and also of his benefits,
as it is expressed in the similitude of the talents. But in as much as there is
one GOD and Father of all, one Christ the Lord, one Spirit, whereof all the
Saints are endued, one faith, one hope of the same calling, one baptism, one
kingdom of heaven: and also, because whatsoever graces bestowed upon any, is
therefore given, that the use of them may be common unto them all, and so,
that they should be the one and the self same body of Christ: therefore all
the gifts bestowed upon any of the elect in particular, are common unto all
the Saints, in respect of the use, which is the communion of Saints in this
life.

15 Yea, and the use of these graces, (if it may be) ought to reach even unto
them that are without, as far as the glory of God, and the edification of
the Church does permit, both because often times, many of the elect lie hid
amongst them, and also, because we must be like our heavenly Father, who
makes his Sunn to rise upon the good and bad.

16 This Communion, begun here upon earth, shall then (after that those things
which belong unto the use of this life are abollished) be perfected in that
aeternall kingdom, when as faith being changed into a full knowledge, hope
into the enjoying of the things hoped for, and charity being made perfect,
God shall be all in all his Saints.

Now the Communion of Merits, either amongst the Saints living here
together, or between the Militant and the Triumphant church, is both most
false, and also blasphemous, as also, the very opinion of merrites, is a mere
forged untruth.

Defended by JOHN WTENBOGAERT a Low Country man of Vtrick.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING THE WORD OF GOD. LII.
1 WE have dealt in the former principles with the Church, and it has been
said that the notes of the true Church, were the Word of God, and the
Sacraments: now we will deal with these notes; and first of all with the
former of them.

2 The word of God (which is the first note) we call in this place, not
whatsoever GOD has spoken, but those things only, which the Prophets and
Apostles, inspired by Gods Spirit, have in times past as taught by word, so
committed to writing: and those things, which being comprehended in the books
of the old and new Testament, are as yet unto this day, after so many wars,
slaughters, and overthrows, extant in Gods Church: in which books God has
declared both what he will have us to know concerning him, and what is to be
done of us.

3 God only is to be acknowledged the author of these books, whence the
whole Scripture is said by PAVL to be given by the inspiration of God: and is
also called the word of God. And therefore it is unlawful to call into
question, or to refuse any thing that is contained therein: as also to bring
in any thing that is not written in the same.

Detestable therefore was that perverseness of the Marcionites, Manichaees, the
Valentinians, and of all such as refused either all, or some of the books of
the new Testament.

4 These writings by the singular providence of God have long since been
brought by the Church, into a certain order and Cannon, that they might be
discerned from counterfaite, yea, and all other books: and that they should
be a rule of faith and obedience, that should have credit of it self, and
hence they are called Cannonicall. Other books, whosoever have been the
authors of them, though they contain many wholesome and profitable things are
yet but accounted the writings of private men, neither have they their credit
of themselves, but as far as they agree with the former books, and no
otherwise.

They therefore both have, and at this day do most greuouslie offend, who take
away this difference, and affirm, that the books of the APOCRYPHA are to have
no less credit in the establishing of Religion, then the Cannonical
Scripture, of which number are the Tridentine conspiratours.

5 This Scripture we acknowledge to be cannonicall, and authentic, not so much
by the common consent of the Church, as by the testimony of the Spirit of
God, who teaches us, that they are to be embraced, as being most undoubtedly
true, and such as have proceeded from Gods own mouth.

6 Now, these holy books do wholly contain al those things, that are
needful for our salvation, in so much that it is altogether unlawful to
exspect for any supply of this doctrine: for the Scripture (as PAVLE does
expreslie teach) is able to make the man of God absolute.

Most grievous therefore is their error, who think that the lively and the
saving knowledge of God, is to be else where sought, then in the written word:
and do therefore thrust unto us, their unwritten falsehoods: out of the which
they will have necessary arguments to be drawn in the cause of faith and
religion.

7 The natural and proper interpretation of this holy Scripture, is to be
drawn from the analogy of faith, and the conference of places. For that which
is darcklie in one place, is in an other clearelie taught, that which here is
shortly, is elsewhere largely set down, and so the Word is the rule and the
interpretour of it self.

They are deceauers therefore, who say, that the right and authority of
expounding the word of God, is in their power, as though it were lawful for
them to interpret any place as they think good.

8 Neither are the expositions of ancient Doctors to be received as
undoubted, any farther then they agree with the truth: for PAVLE does command
us, that we give ear or consent unto none, whosoever he be, that teaches any
other doctrine.

We cannot allow therefore of their opinion, who will have the interpretation
of the fathers, (as they call the^) to have credit of themselves.

9 It is true indeed, that some places of the Scripture remain even unto this
day, so obscure and hard to be interpreted, as the very best and most
faithful interpretours have not agreed among themselves, upon their proper
meaning: but in these things, every man is to acknowledge his own ignorance,
sluggishnes, or some other fault: and the Scripture is so plentiful, that the
one and the self same place, can admit diverse interpretations, and yet all
agreeable with the doctrine of faith.

10 This notwithstanding is most certain, that the grounds and necessary
heads of Christian Religion, are so clearly set down by the Prophets and
Apostles, as (the Spirit of God woorking in the Saints) they are manifestly
perceived in the Church. And therefore we do not agree unto them, who think
the Scripture so obscure, as it needs to be made clear by some other light.
Now, this light they will have without exception to be drawn from that
pretended Catholic Church: that is, either from the fathers, from the Synods,
or from some long custom of time: as though the Scripture had not been
understood, before either the Fathers, or the Synodes were.

11 This Word of God is to be daily meditated upon, and all men of what
estate soever they be, ought most diligently to read the same: for no man is
to be bereaved of that means, whereby he is to be instructed in the
knowledge, and the sure way of his salvation.

We cannot therefore but condemn the Papists in this point also, who hold
it unlawful for laie-men (as they call them) to employ themselves in the
reading of the Word.

11 Now that the unlearned and unskillful may with fruit be conversant in the
reading hereof: it is needful that the Bible be translated into the mother
tongue of all Christian people. Therefore we do also condemn the said
Papists, who will not allow of such translations.

13 This same word of God, ought to be faithfully and sincearlie expounded unto
the people, by every Pastor: and out of the same are exhortations,
consolations and reprehensions to be drawn: whence also the gainsayer is to be
convinced and put to silence.

14 This word of GOD is said to have life in it: not that this life is placed
in the letters, syllables or words: (for they are to be counted witches and
enchanters, who attribute any divine power unto the letters and words
themselves) but because it is an instrument, whereby God does make known unto
us, that which he will have us to understand for our salvation.

15 To conclude, this is an absolute, perpetual and necessary note of the
Church: namely, that the purity of doctrine be maintained therein, and that the
pillar and ground of the truth be in the same.

Defended by JOHN GIGORDVS Baeterrenensis.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING TRADITIONS. LIII.
1 Having last of al disputed concerning the written Word of God, this present
Treatise is to be touching Traditions, which some call by the name of
unwritten word and doctrine.

2 Those which the Greek call (...) are commonly called Traditions amongst the
Latins: which they affirm not to be contained in writing, but to have been
conveyed by word of mouth, and as it were, from hand to hand delivered from one
to an other.

3 Now, there are two sorts of Traditions mentioned in the Scriptures, whereof
some are commendable, as proceeding from the Spirit of God, of which sort are
those which are mentioned to have been received from Christ and his Apostles:
others were invented by the wit of man, as those which Christ calls the
Traditions of the Fathers, and the commandments and doctrines of men.

4 The former of these were not at the first, as being in the infancy of the
church, committed to writing: but now, since that time, that they have been
put into the writings of the Apostles, they are not to be taken as unwritten,
but to have credit amongst all, as being the very written word of God.

5 Of these there are two sorts: for some do appertain unto the record of the
history, and the things that were done, as that which LVKE speaks cap. 1. 2.
of the things that were done by Christ: some do appertain unto doctrine, and
that in a twofold difference.

6 For some were concerning the Doctrine it self, as those things touching the
Lords Supper, which PAVL affirms to have delivered, as he received them of
the Lord: Some are concerning the rites and the good order of the Church; as
that touching the blood of things that were strangled, the covering of women's
heads, that men should not be covered in the time of prayer, and such like.

7 Those things, which are concerning the substance of doctrine, are to be
perpetually observed in the Church: but as for the things which apertain to
outward rites, they in consideration of diverse circumstances, as of time,
place, and person may be changed: yet so, as regard be always had (which
must be generally observed in all indifferent things) unto that which makes
most for the glory of God, and the aedification of the Church.

8 As touching other traditions which have risen from the bare will of man,
though they have never so glorious a show of antiquity, holiness and wisdom;
yet if they agree not with Gods word, they are to be accounted for no better
then will worship, and so they are to be utterly cast out, with all other
superstitions, that are either directly or indirectlie against Gods word. Of
this sort, are the observations of the difference of meat, garments, and days,
prayer for the dead, invocation of Saints departed, Mouckery, single life, and
a thousand such like; either foolish or impious toys, wherewith Christians are
now much more burdened, then the Jews were in times past with their
Ceremonies.

9 For in the worship of God, this has been, is, and shall be the only
rule: Whatsoever is without faith is sin; and that faith depends not upon the
inventions of men, but upon the hearing of Gods word; and that there can be no
obedience, where there is no commandment.

10 And seeing the mind of the Lord, is only known unto himself, it
belongs not unto man to set down, what is acceptable, or what is odious in
his sight, but unto God only; who has therefore taught us, how he will be
worshipped, and would not leave that point to our choice.

11 The word of God furthermore, is every way perfect, and thereunto nothing is
to be added or detracted; for it is able to make the man of God absolute.
Wherefore, we do constantly affirm, that we are bound only to cleave unto it,
rightly understood; and that we must not depart one jote from the same. The
understanding of it, is to be drawn from the analogy of faith, and the
conferences of other places of Scripture.

12 We hold, that it is lawful neither for counselors, nor Bishops, nor for
any man to impose laws upon the consciences of men, which only belongs
to the alone Bishop of our souls, and our Lawgiver Christ, or unto the
Apostles, having his commandment. For, although true Pastors and Doctors of
the Church, have been and are in the place of the Apostles, yet have not they
the same commission that the Apostles had. For the Apostles being immediately
inspired by the spirit of God, could not err, and we are bound in every
point to believe them. But as for Pastors and Teachers, they may (such is man's
weakness) oftentimes slipp, and therefore they are only to be followed, so
far as they follow Christ and his Apostles.

We condemn therefore the old Pharisees, and those which have followed them,
as the Jews, who have coined unto us their CABALA, and many other dotages of
their TALMVD: the Papists, and all other false Christians, who have polluted
the service of God, with their own dreams and inventions, and as it is
written, ISAY 29. MAT. 15. do worship God in vain, in teaching men's
traditions.

Defended by JOHN RVE of CADOMA in Normandy.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING COVNCELS AND FATHERS. LIIII.
1 WE have showed in the former treatise, what the authority of Traditions
can be: it follows that we entreat of those things which appertain unto
the confirmation of them: wherefore we will first of all deal with counsels,
next with Fathers.

2 Seeing all things in the Church of God, ought to be done orderly, and that
the Church is gathered out of all people and nations, the parts as it were of
the Catholic or universal church, were not without cause divided, which
parts, we call particular churches.

3 Whereas this division, was by little and little framed, according to the
example of the Provinces and Diocesses, or several jurisdictions of the
Roman Empire, as both the thing it self, and also, the very names do show:
it seemed indeed, to have been done upon some color of reason, but it had a
most ill issue: and we affirm, that this is it, that JOHN in the Revelation,
does mean by the image of the Beast.

4 For hence it came to pass the aequality of the Churches being taken away,
and the order of Priorship being under the color of avoiding schism
transformed into superiority, that in steed of the Apostolical and the truly
divine government of the church by the Eldership, the human order of
Bishops was by little and little brought in, and from thence presently
sprang, that horrible Antichristian tyranny: the chief head whereof, now for
these many years, has been that counterfeit Roman Bishop.

5 Yet of this order (as long as the Lord raised up those who did so use this
office of Bishop inve^ted by man, as they did maintain and set forward Gods
Church) there was some use, as whereby in some sort the puritye of Christian
doctrine has been maintained.

6 It was appointed, to the overthrow of the endeavors of Satan and his
ministers, not by man, but by God; both before the coming of Christ, and in
the time of the Apostles, that there should be held certain Assemblies of the
godly, both for the preservation and reformation of Religion; and also, for
the appeasing of controversies, risen in the Church; the which meetings, are
called in the story of the Christian Church, by the name of Synods and
Councels.

7 But when as these evils, did not always infect the whole body of the
Church, but did rather spring from particular members: It was not without
great cause, observed in the ancient Church, that certain Provincial
assemblies should be held at appointed times: wherein the controversies, if any
had risen in the province, were determined according to the word of God, and
the outward order of the Church so appointed as was thought expedient.

8 As often as the harm grew farther; there is no dout, but the godly and the
religious Pastors of churches, though dwelling in diverse Provinces, did yet
confer together without any ambition concerning the remedies thereof, as it
apeareth out of the stories of the Councels, and the writings of the ancient
Fathers, that were before the council of Nice: the aeternal God, very
mightily blessing their zeal, before ever the ambition of Bishops seas was
known in the Church.

9 But as Christian Religion, after that the Roman Empire submitted it self
unto Christ under CONSTANTINE the great, began greatly to florishe, (all
outward persecution being ended:) So Satan on the other side, began after a
marvelous sort, openly to set up the Mystery of iniquity, which before hand
secretly had taken some growth.

10 Hervpon, that authority of the Seas over their brethren and
fellowe-Ministers, was established in that first council of Nice, which
otherwise was a Christian assembly, and one of the most famous since that
time; the which authority, could be afterward restrained, by the force of no
Canons and decrees, but that it brake unto that horrible tyranny, which
wasted, and at this day does devour the whole Church.

11 There were notwithstanding (the Lord rightly using this evil, unto the
preservation of his Church) in these times Councels gathered, and ended unto
many good purposes, by the authority of godly Roman Emperors, against those
haeresies, which invaded the universal body of the Church, and they are
therefore called general councels, because the Emperors of Rome, did then
govern the most part of the world.

12 Now it is manifest that these councels were granted by the Emperors, upon
the entreatie and request of godly Bishops, whereas otherwise the haeretickes
and factious heads would not have yealded unto the Ecclesiastical censures
and judgments of the godly Pastors and Elders, had it not been for the
authority of the Emperors especially, seeing many Churches would receive
those that were cast out by their Pastors, as the whole ancient story does
testify.

13 It is also manifest that the Bishops themselves, (or such as was sent by
them to supply their rooms,) satte as the Judges in these councels and
meetings: for the Episcopal degree of superiority, which was even then a
great stain unto the Church of God, was even at that time crept thereinto.

14 Yet in these meetings, either the Roman Emperor himself, or some noble
men sent with commission by him in his stead, were present: but not as being
to judge, or to give the definitive sentence: but as being to moderate the
behauiours of the Bishops themselves which yet sometimes they could by no
means bring to pass (as yet appears in that sacrilegious synod of EPHESVS)
and otherwhiles though with great labor, they did in some sort effect.

15 In these Synods were heard and admitted, even laymen (as they call them,)
that no man should be condemned before his cause were heard. Now the whole
controversy concerning Christian Religion, was first of al and properly
defined out of the written word of God: Next, and in the second place were
brought, the ancient Christian Fathers; yet so, as of them selves they were
not believed, but received so far as they agreed to the word of God. To
conclude, the determination of the Synods, being sent unto the Christian
Emperors, were established by their vnviolable constitutions.

16 In these Synodes were determined, both the waightier controversies risen
among the Bishops themselves, together with their elections and depositions;
and also, the rules concerning the general government of the Church, which
the Greeks call Canons, were enacted.

17 Hence it appears, what place those Councels are to have, which are called
by the authority of the counterfeit Roman Bishop, and concluded by the
suffrages and voice of his own vassals, both to the establishing of his
tyranie, and also, to the overthrow of all godliness, and whatsoever good order
has been confirmed by the approved ancient Canons.

18 Now that the Romain Empire is severed into parts, and the government of
Christendom divided into diverse kingdoms and estates: If any man should
demand, what way we think meet, for the gathering of Synods, we answer after
this sort.

19 First, in those Churches, who have Christian Magistrates, care is to be had,
after the truth of Religion, and the right government of the Church be
established, that they have settled ordinary meetinges, according to the
convenient distribution, that they have made of their Churches, to the end,
that the controversies, either already risen, or being likely to arise, may
be appeased and prevented, and the progress of the Churches of every Province
may be looked unto; unto which work, the authority of the Christian
Magistrates is also to be used.

20 But where the Magistrates do not profess true religion, we see not to
what end, the appointing of Synodes, either ordinary or extraordinary, should
depend upon their authority. In such a case then, the Pastors are wisely to
foresee, that the Church of God be governed, notwithstanding all the
impediments of the adversaries.

21 Now, what hope there can be of a general Counsel amongst so many distinct
kingdoms and estates we see not; seeing that they, who do purposely withstand
the reformation of the Church, will never agree, that there shall be a
lawefull and free meeting. And seeing also, too many of those, whom the Lord
has in these times, enlightened with the brightness of his Gospel, are so
drawn into diverse factions, that there is left but small hope of
reconciliation, except that Princes, being kindled indeed, with the true
zeal of Christ's glory, would by their authority, restrain the madness of some
of the Bellowses and firebrandes, that Satan has raised in these our days:
so that the discourse concerning such a general Council may at this time seem
superfluous.

22 But if the question be in general, what the authority of the
determination of Councels ought to be, we answer briefly and plainly;
seeing we know fully, that those ancient general Synods, as both those four
most famous, gathered against the blasphemies of ARRIVS, MACEDONIVS, NESTORIVS,
and other such monsters; and also, many others held against the
Monothelites, and Monophysites, were lawefull and altogether agreeable unto
Gods word, in respect of the truth of Doctrine; that he which dissenteth
from these Synods in respect of Doctrine, may justly be said to swerve from
the very word of God, which is the rule of all lawful Synods.

23 We dare not affirm this, without exception of all prouincial synods,
because they are found marvelous contrary and repugnant one to another.
Therefore we do affirm, that the determinations of those Synods, concerning
Doctrine, is to be very carefully and religiously measured, according unto the
rule of Gods word, or the Doctrine of the Apostles, and the analogy of faith,
briefly comprehended in the Apostolical belief.

24 Now, as touching those general councels that were manifestly tyrannical,
as that first of EPHESVS, and the second of NICE, wherein the worshipping of
Images was established: and all others gathered against Gods truth, by the
counterfeit Bishops of Rome, together with all provincial assemblies like unto
them: we do not only not allow, but hold them accursed, according to the
commandment of PAVLE, seeing the true, much less the counterfeit Bishops, are
not in authority above the Angels, whom he commands to be held accursed, if
they teach any other Gospel.

25 Now in those things, which belong unto the good order of the Church, be
they established by ancient or latter Canons: This is first of all to be
observed, that the conscience is not simply tied by any such rules.

26 And this mean is also preciselie to be kept in all of them, vz. that those
things, which are either in their own nature supersticious, or so far abused
unto superstition, as it is more expedient, they should be abollished then
amended be at once clean taken away: that the Church be burdened with no
Ceremonies, that wicked Rites be rooted out of the same, and consideration be
had, what is agreeable unto every place and time.

1 They err therefore most dangerously, who hold that Councels both general
and particular cannot err, and will have the consciences of Christians to
depend upon them, both in doctrine, and also in traditions or Canons. 2 They
also do err, who resting only in their own private studies, do attribute
nothing unto the decrees of Councels. 3 As those also do err, who in
Ecclesiastical controversies, will afford no place unto Councels.
Concerning Fathers.
1 IT is certain, that as the Lord in times past raised up godly Priests,
leuits, and prophets, which might interpret his law against false teachers, and
apply the same unto their time: So in the Christian Church, after the labors
of the Apostles and the Evangelists, he endued with a certain greater
measure of his Spirit, those, whom he thought good; by whose writings,
posterities might be instructed, not that they should add or detract any thing
from the word of GOD, or change any syllable therein: But that they should be
the true interpretours of the same, and that there should be an use, both of
their sound disputations against heretics, and also of their holy and
learned, both exhortations and consolations: to ouer-passe here, that the
story of the ancient Church is to be known out of their writings.

2 But here men do diversely offend; for both they, are greatly to be
reproved, who do neglect so great gifts of God; and they on the other side,
do grievously offend, who receive the writings of the Fathers without
exception, for the rule of faith; and those also, who will have the government
of the church without respect of time, place, and person, to be framed
according to the prescription of the ancients: Neither are they to be heard,
who hold, that the Fathers are to be accounted, because they are ancient.

3 Therefore, there is this mean to be kept in the reading of them; namely,
in respect of Doctrine, be they old, or be they new, (for the old themselves
were sometimes new) al their sayings are without prejudice, to be diligently
examined, according to the rule of Gods written word, the which thing, they
themselves every where in their writings wish to be done: and as touching the
government and ceremonies of the Church received in their times, all
preposterous zeal is therein to be avoided; in such sort, as those things,
which the writings of the Apostles command to be perpetually observed in the
Church, are to be descerned from the matters that are indifferent, and were
added since their time. There is also great consideration to be had of
circumstances, which are always necessarily subject unto change.

Defended by JOHN HALSBERGIVS a Flemming.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING THE SACRAMENTS. LV.
WE HAVE IN THE FORMER PRINCIPLES dealt, both with the word being one of the
marks of the Church, and also with those things that depend thereupon: now we
are to handle the other mark thereof, vz. the Sacraments, and first in
general.

1 When as God of his infinite goodness, would not have his Church after the
fall of man, to remain in that miserable estate: he did not only in word
and promises declare his goodness thereunto, concerning the saving thereof by
Christ: but also added certain rites and ceremonies, whereby he might
confirm the same in the assurance of his divine goodness toward it.

2 These rites did the Grecians call Mysteries, because they signified secret
and hidden matters, which can be known unto none, save unto those only, that
are instructed, that is, unto the members of Gods Church. Now the Latins
called them Sacraments, either because the word (...) was so interpreted, by
the old translatour of the new Testament, or because these rites, are the
marks of the covenant between God and us, that he should be our God, and
we his people, and that by a Metaphore borrowed from the Sacraments, that is,
the solemn oaths, whereby soldiers bound themselves unto their Captains, and
the Captains again unto them.

3 Now, although neither the word MYSTERY, nor SACRAMEMT, be found in the
Scripture, in that sense whereof we now speak: yet those godly fathers have
added nothing unto the word, when as they used these terms for the
expressing of the said rites.

4 Now because the word Sacrament is by the Latin fathers, referred unto al
kind of signs, which are used to express holy things; it is to be
observed, that in this discourse, the same is particularly referred unto the
signs of the grace of God in Christ, and that, two manner of ways: for a
Sacrament does sometimes comprehend the external signs only, and sometimes
the things signified together with the signs, and a certain holy action also.

5 Sacraments taken in the former signification, we define to be certain
visible signs instituted by God unto the use of the Church, where by God does
seal in the hearts of the faithful, the promise of the grace of free salvation
by Christ, and so does more and more confirm their faith, and witness the
fellowship which the Saints have amongst themselves, under Christ their head.

6 In the latter sense we define them to be a certain holy action, enjoined by
God unto the Church: wherein, as GOD in a kind of agreeable proportion,
between the signs and the things signified, offers unto the senses of our
body, by the hand of the Minister, the things that appertain unto our
salvation in Christ: so does he give unto our souls the heavenly things
themselves, to the end that they should spirituallie by faith, be more and more
sealed in them.

7 By signs in this place, we understand not natural or miraculous, but
voluntary signs: because they are ordained by the will of God, to be signs
of his grace in Christ, which by nature they are not: neither are they signs
only, but partly remembraunces of things past, and partly seals of things
present, and also to come.

8 But now, we will consider in order of the causes of the Sacraments. The
efficient is GOD only, because that as it appertains to him alone to
promise grace; so does it also to add the seals thereof thereunto. Therefore
also, there are neither any other Sacraments to be received into the Church,
neither is the manner of the institution to be any wise violated.

Whosoever therefore do break out into that boldness, that either they dare
coin new Sacraments, or add any unto those that were appointed by the lord,
or detract any title from them, they are guilty of treason against the
Majesty of the highest.

9 The matter of the Sacraments are of two sorts, the one external and
corporal, which are perceived by the senses of the body: the other inward and
spiritual, offered unto the mind and the soul.

10 The form of the Sacraments, is the ordinance of God, comprehended in his
Word: for the Sacraments are that altogether (and nothing else) which GOD by
the word of his Divine institution, does testify that he will have them to
be: so that the word is as it were the soul of the Sacraments, in regard
that it testifies what the divine ordinance is.

They do therefore abolish the Sacraments, who either altogether omit this
word in the administration of them, or use the same in a strange tongue.

11 The chief end of them in respect of us, is the salvation of the faithful,
by sealing their conjunction with Christ. For God, not contented with the
general preaching of his promises, thinks it meet to seal, and to offer
them in special unto every particular believer, having a regard thereby to
their infirmity.

12 Other ends also they have, which are of great moment, as that by them we
should be put in remembrance of the benefits of Christ, that the Church should
be distinguished from other sects. For, as God will be discerned from Idols:
so he will have his people severed by these marks, from the Kingdom of the
Devil: that they should be bands of the mutual love of the faithful.
Briefly, that they should be a profession and a testification of the only
true Religion, and of our duty toward our God.

13 Now the instrument to use the Sacraments aright, is Faith: whence it
appears that the faithful only do receive them, as it is meet, whereas
all others do participate the outward signs only, and that to their
condemnation.

They err therefore, who hold that unbelievers do receive the thing signified,
that is Christ, together with the signs.

And they also do ouer-wickedlie abuse the Sacraments, who administer them to
things without life.

14 The change of the signs in the Sacraments, is not natural, but
respective by virtue of the commandment of GOD: for the signs are changed,
not in respect of their nature, but only in regard of their use: namely,
whereas the things which before were common, are by Gods commandment become
the signs of heavenly things: and this is the consecration of the Sacrament.

They err therefore, and destroy the whole nature of the Sacraments, who
teach, that the substance of the signs, are, (as it were) by a kind of
magical enchantment, either changed, or abolished.

15 The conjunction of the signs and the things signified, is also
respective, in regard of the ordinance of God, whereby invisible and
incorporall things, are in a kind of fit proportion, represented by corporal
and visible elements: in such sort, as God does give both, by the hand of the
Minister, and both are received in their lawful use.

They err therefore who hold that there is a real joining together, and
presence of the signs and the thing signified.

16 Unto this sacramental change, and the conjunction of the things with the
signs, there is no place left, but only in the administration of the
Sacrament.

They are therefore to be condemned, who do attribute some holiness unto the
signs: and as for those who worship them, them we utterly detest as open
Idolaters.

17 The Sacramental speeches and phrases, are either proper or figurative:
proper, as when that which appertains unto the sign, is attributed unto the
same: and that which is peculiar unto the thing signified, is distinctly
applied thereunto: and these do forbid us to attribute unto the signs any
more then is meet, namely, that we should not take them for the things
signified.

They are no less impious therefore, then the former, who worship the signs,
in the very Sacramental use.

18 These are figurative speeches, wherein we see the names and effects of the
things signified, attributed unto the signs, and contrariwise, the names or
the effects of the signs, applied unto the things signified: which is done to
express that most true, and most near sacramental conjunction of the signs
with the things, and that we should not attribute less unto them then were
meet.

They therefore do attribute less then is meet unto the Sacraments, who will
have them only to be signs of remembrance, thereby excluding the true
giving and receiving of the things signified.

Yet are they in a less error, who will have them to be signs only of our
outward profession.

19 Now, in as much as the Sacraments are supplies joined unto the word, it
comes to pass, that in some things they agree together, and differ in some
other. For both are instruments which the holy Ghost uses to make us
partakers of Christ and his benefits: yet so, as he may work without them
both in the hearts of the godly, when, and as often as he will: and that he
does not any wise give unto the signs, his own force and efficacy, by
virtue whereof the things signified are received.

They are blasphemous therefore, who will have grace either in whole, or in
part, to be bestowed by the Sacraments. And they are no less blasphemous, who
will have this to be done, by the work wrought.

20 The force of the Sacraments does in no wise depend upon the person of the
Minister, who delivers the^, but upon the ordinance of God only, so that
the same be observed: and that by a public person, either rightly called; or
at the least exercising a public function by a common error.

The Donatists therefore, and such like did err, who taught that the
Sacraments administered by evil Ministers, were of no force.

21 Even as the Gospel, who of it own nature is the word of life and
salvation, is yet turned by the wicked unto the savor of death: so the
Sacraments also, which are instituted by God unto the salvation of men, are
notwithstanding, received by the faithless and the unworthy communicants, unto
their condemnation and judgment: and yet do they not desist in respect of God,
to be true Sacraments still.

22 As the seed of the word preached, does not always bring forth fruit at
the same moment that it is sowed in the hearts of the faithful: so the fruit
of the receiving of the Sacraments does not presently show it self, in such
sort as the faithful have received the same: For that is only done at the
time appointed by God.

23 As the holy Ghost by means of the word, does beget and strengthen faith;
so does he stir up and confirm the same by the Sacraments. And therefore
regard is to be had, that they who are of the age of discretion, enjoy the
effectual preaching of the word, whereby faith may be wrought in them, before
they receive the Sacraments, that so they may worthelie participat them, which
cannot be without faith.

24 The word is necessary (save when it pleases God to work extraordinarily
in the hearts of his children) and sufficient unto their salvation that are of
age: but the Sacraments are not absolutely and preciselie necessary unto all.
For it is not the want of them, but their contempt that is damnable.

25 The word of promise is without respect to be offered, both unto the
believing, and to the unfaithful, and that generally. But the Sacraments are
only to be administered unto those that are taken for the known members of
the Church; and that, unto every one of them severally, whereby a particular
full assurance may be wrought in them.

26 The preaching of the word may be offered alone unto the Church, without the
Sacraments: but the Sacraments are never to be administered, without the
word preached. To conclude, seeing the word does affect but one of our
senses, whereas the Sacraments are object unto many of them, especially unto
the sight: therefore it is, that they are the more effectual means to
apprehend Christ, so that they be lawfully administered.

Defended by PETER CARPENTER a low countrieman.
PRINCIPLES TOUCHING THE AGREEMENT AND THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE SACRAMENTS OF
THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENT. LVI.
1 INasmuch as men can be joined together, (as AUGUSTINE says) in no Religion,
be it true, or be it false, except they be tied by some kind of visible
things and sacraments: hence it comes, that the Church either under the
old or under the new Testament, has never wanted the seals of the grace of
God, that is, the Sacraments.

2 Of these things seeing we have spoken generally in the former disputation;
we may now conuenie^tly see what agreement and what difference there was,
between the sacraments of both the couenaunts: that by this means it may be
declared, that the same faith was under both of them.

3 Unto this treatise we lay this most true ground, as a foundation: namely,
that the covenant of God with his Church was always one and the same, which
notwithstanding seemed to be diverse, in regard of the diverse circumstances of
the dispensation, whence did arise the name and the difference of the old and
the new Testament or covenant. Whereas therefore the things remained in the
same in regard of substance, the signs were changed, according unto the
circumstance of time. For the fathers (as the Apostle says 1. COR. 10.) did
eat of the same spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual drink, out of
the rock that followed them, the which rock was Christ.

4 But to the end that the whole matter may be the more manifest, we will more
particularly set down their agreement and difference: and first of all their
agreement, which consists in their efficient and final cause.

5 Their efficient cause, is one and the same, namely God, the author of the
Sacraments of both the couenaunts, who alone (as has been already set down)
has authority to appoint Sacraments, as he only is to promise grace.

6 The final also, is one and the same. For they respect the same end and
scope, and teach the very same things, to wit, Jesus Christ, and the
participation of all his benefits unto aeternall life.

7 The difference consists in the manner and measure of signifiyng or
applying Christ, and also in the outward matter, form and number.

8 For the Sacraments of the old Testament, did signify Christ to come, and
therefore at his coming they ceased, and ours came in their place.

Wherefore they were justly condemned by the Apostles, who taught that
Circumcision was to be joined unto Baptism, as being as yet necessary unto
salvation. And a few years after the Ebionites, who would retain the Jewish
ceremonies, together with the Christian Sacraments.

9 Now, the Sacraments of the new Testament, do show that Christ is already
come, and they are therefore established with new signs, that are to continue
unto the worlds end, whereas the other were only appointed for some certain
time.

10 The nerer furthermore, that Christ has manifested himself unto us, by so
much the more clearlie, do the Sacraments of the new Testament lay him
before us. For, things that are past are better known, then these that are to
come. And therefore AUGUSTINE has said well, that we have fewer Sacraments
then the Jews had, but yet clearer, and a great deal more significatiue, and
therefore of greater efficacy to confirm our faith, and to seal the promises
of God in our hearts.

11 The which saying of AUGUSTINE, is to be rightly understood. For we
think not (as the Schoolmen did) that they under the law, had the same grace
only shadowed unto them in the Sacraments, which is offered as present unto us
into ours: seeing the Apostle says, that they did eat the same spiritual
meat.

12 It appears that their outward matter and form, was diverse from the
Sacraments of the new Testament, by the very signs, rites, and manner of
administration.

13 That they differed in number it is out of controversy: for we, (according
unto the institution of Christ) do acknowledge only two, Baptism, and the
holy Supper: they had more, as Circumcision, the Paschall lamb, the Sacrifices
and oblations.

We do therefore condemn the Manichaees, who taught, that the things
signified under the old law were changed together with the signs.

Defended by DANIEL DOOLEGIANVS a low countryman.
PRINCIPLES TOUCHING THE NUMBER OF THE SACRAMENTS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. LVII.
WE HAVE DEALT TOUCHING SACRAments in general, and the difference of the
Sacraments of the old and new Testament: we will now, (omitting the old
which were abolished by the coming of Christ) deal with the new.

1 THe Sacraments of the new Testament, are those which Christ has instituted
in his Church, to continue until his second coming.

2 Of this sort there are only two, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord: by
the former we are received into, by the latter nourished and sustained in the
Church.

Confirmation, Repentance, extreme unction, order and marriage, (which the
Papists account among the Sacraments) are none in deed.

3 For the true definition of a Sacrament cannot agree unto them.

Now that definition which they bring, that a Sacrament is a visible sign of
an invisible thing, reaches a great deal toe far, and is not proper unto
this discourse.

4 Therefore, although the Fathers in the very purity of the ancient Church,
did use the word Sacrament in a very large signification: yet did they not
acknowledge any more Sacraments of grace, then these two, so far were they from
admitting the other five into the number of Sacraments.

5 For these do want in deed that form whereby the Sacraments are that which
they are: that is, the word of God, or the institution of Christ, (whose
office alone it is to ordain Sacraments) comprehended in his word.

6 And none of them do testify the union that the Saints have between
themselves, under Jesus Christ their head.

7 We do not deny but there were some use of them in the ancient and purer
Church, but we affirm it to be a far other, than that which is now in Popery.

8 The Papists make Confirmation to be the next Sacrament unto Baptism: and
they say, that it is that, whereby the children of Christians, that are come to
age, after they are anointed in the forehead with oil, and have received a
blow or a pat of the Bishop, do (forsooth) receive the holy Ghost, though
they make no confession at all of their Faith.

9 But the Fathers made that to be Confirmation, whereby those that were
baptized when they were infants, being after instructed in the Christian
Religion, were, by laiyng on of hands, and solemn prayers, after they had made
public confession of their faith, commended unto God and the church.

10 But it was not a Sacrament, for it wanted a proper visible sign, which is
one necessary part of the matter of a Sacrament.

11 True Repentance we admit in the Church, as being altogether necessary
unto the salvation of all believers that are come to age, although it has not
always satisfaction before the Church joined with it.

12 Now the Papists call that Repentance, when as a man being touched with a
perfect contrition for his sins, does confess them by making a full reckoning
of them in the ears of the sacrificing mass priest, by whom, after he has
received absolution, he is enjoined to make such a satisfaction, as receiving
force from the merits of Christ does satisfy Gods justice.

13 And seeing furthermore, it has no visible sign, it can not be a Sacrament.

14 They make extreme unction to be a fifth Sacrament whereby some person
being at the point of death, is by the sacrificing Mass Priest anointed with
oil, that the pains of Purgatory may be remitted unto him.

15 In the time of the Apostles, when as the guiftes of miracles remained, as
yet, those who were sick, were wont to call the Elders of the Church, by whom
they were anointed, and so did oftentimes recover their health.

16 But miracles being ceased, unction also has ceased, and therefore is no
Sacrament: for the Sacraments of the new Testament, are to continue unto the
coming of Christ.

17 Orders amongst the Papists, are rites and Ceremonies, partlye invented by
them, and partly fetched from the Fathers, whereby they consecrate their
Ecclesiastical Ministers.

18 It is out of controversy, that in the Church of God (who is the author of
order) all things ought to be done in order: yet cannot this order be any
wise a Sacrament of the Church, seeing it neither has any promise of grace
annexed unto it, nor does belong unto all the faithful.

19 Marriage, (being the seventh Sacrament of the Papists) is out of question,
the holy ordinance of God, appointed for the propagation and conservation of
mankind: yet do we not acknowledge it to be a Sacrament.

20 First, it has no promise of salvation, nor any corporal matter, which
might be a sign of the grace of salvation, ordained by God.

21 Secondly, it is not common unto all the elect: for it is not needful,
that all those who will be accounted of the visible Church, should be married:
yea, the Papisticall clergy do reject the same as a filthy and profane
thing.

22 Thridlie, it is not proper unto the Church of Christ under the new
Testament: for it was preciselie instituted at the very beginning of the
world, and it is common unto all men, even the very heathen, which could not
be, if it were a Sacrament.

Defended by DANIEL CRAMERIVS Occitanus.
PRINCIPLES TOUCHING BAPTISM BEING THE FIRST SACRAMENT OF THE NEW TESTAMENT.
LVIII.
HAVING IN THE FORMER PRINCIPLES set down the number of the true Sacraments of
the new Testament: we now come to handle the first of them, namely, Baptism:
where we will deal with the causes and effects thereof, referring other
things that belong unto this argument, unto the next disputation.

1 BAPTISM being a Sacrament of the new covenant, testifying that Christ is
come, came in the place of Circumcision, which under the old Testament, did
prefigure Christ to be manifested.

2 Both of them are the same in deed, yet differing in signs.

3 The same is to be said of all types both singular and extraordinary (of
which sort was the passage through the sea under the cloud) and also legal and
ordinary, of which sort were sprincklings and diverse washings, ordained under
the old Testament.

4 By Baptism, being one of the two Sacraments of the new Testament; we
understand in this treatise, that holy and mystical action which is proper
unto the Christian Church, and ordained for those ends whereof we will speak
anon.

5 The matter of Baptism, are the signs, and the things signified. The signs
are water, and the sacramental rites which are a dipping into the water, and a
taking out of the same again, whence washing does follow. The thing signified
is the blood of Christ, unto the remission of our sins,, and that spiritual
and divine force whereby we are regenerated, which regeneration, consists
partlye in the abolishing of the old man, which decaieth by little and little,
and partly in the creating of the new, which is to be perfected by degrees.

6 The formal cause of Baptism consists in the lawful use of the
institution: the especial part whereof, is the invocation of the name of the
Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, together with the rite either of
dipping into the water, or of the sprinckling of the same.

7 For it is not greatly material, whether the person that is to be baptized,
be wholly dipped under the water, or whether the water be only sprinkled
either upon his head, or his face.

Vain therefore, and void is that washing, where either Baptism is not done
into the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, or water is not
used.

8 Those vain questions that have risen from that false absolute necessity of
Baptism, as whether it be lawful to baptize with distilled water, with vrin
or stale, or with sand where natural water cannot be gotten; we reject, as
absurd and ridiculous: neither think we, that any contention ought to be made,
whether the water is to be once or thrice applied.

9 It is not lawful, no not for any Angel in heaven, to ordain any
Sacramental rites, seeing the signification of them does respect the promise
of grace. For it is in the power of GOD alone, both to promise what he
thinks good, and also to establishe his promises by what signs it pleases
him.

10 They did greatly offend therefore, who not contented with the simplicity
of the Lords institution, thought that they could adorn Baptism, by adding
curious rites thereunto: where as of the contrarieside, the Lord will have the
Sacraments of the new covenant, which are opposed unto the old, to be
therefore most few and simple, to the end, that we should so much the more
readily be drawn from these corporal and sensible things, to the
consideration of spiritual and heavenly matters.

I Those innumerable added trifles therefore, which have presently grown into
manifest superstition, (and whereof some were added by the Papists) as chrisme,
spittle, Tapers, we have justly abollished (though they be of antiquity) as
being will worship. II Now as touching Exorcisme, (if by that name be
understood, not the solemn covenant of Christianity, but the conjuring of
Satan, and Spirits:) we altogether refuse the same, as being rashly and
foolishly drawn from those that were possessed with Devils, to be applied unto
men that were in their right wits, and to the infants of Christians. III Yet
did not these spots, though filthy, and loathsome, and therefore to be
carefully abollished, anihilate Baptism, as long as the essential form
thereof remained.
11 The first that the Lord appointed to publishe this action was JOHN,
therefore called the Baptist; but the Author hereof is properly Christ, who
only has this authority in the house of his Father.

12 Now, the outward administration of this Sacrament, as also the simple
preaching of the word, he has committed unto Pastors lawfully called.

Their error therefore is very grievous, who commit this office unto private
men, and much more grievous, who give women leave to intermeddle in this
action, in the cause of necessity, as they call it.

13 ALTHOUGH, they are not to be accounted to have a lawful calling, who have
invaded the places of true Pastors, either by a common error, or by long
permission: yet are they to be DISTINGVISHED from mere private me^.

Therefore, Baptism administered by them, according to the form appointed by
Christ is to stand: Yet are not they to be excused, who, now that the holy
Ministry is in some sort reformed; do as far as in them lies, confirm
the false calling of these men, by giving their children to be Baptized of them.

14 To the end in the mean time, that all these things may be lawfully done,
they are to be so performed in the Church, as it may be understood what is
done, and therefore a certain form (together with meet and convenient
prayers) is to be used in the vulgar tongue, which may declare the original
use, and end of Baptism.

Therefore also, Baptism is profaned by them, who either administer the same
without any exposition, or deprave the administration thereof by some false
worship, or administer it in a strange and an unknown tongue: Although it
be true Baptism, as long, as that remains which is the chief thing therein;
namely, the sign, and the right invocation of the Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost; for Baptism does neither depend upon the faith, nor yet is
defiled by the sins of him that administreth it, but is grounded only upon
the ordinance of the Son of God.

15 The Analogy furthermore, of the signs and the things signified is
manifest: For the element of water, used for the washing of the outward
filthiness, does most fitly represent that blood, which was shead, for the
taking away of the sins of the world, and applied to purify us: Briefly,
that either dipping into, or sprinckling of the water, though it be but done
in a short space, does yet clearelie represent the first part of our
regeneration; that is, the sealing of our inward and spiritual ingraffing into
Christ his death and burial; whereby our old man, together with all our
sins, being by little and little brought to decay, is altogether buried.
Last of all, in that he who is baptized, whether he be dipped under the water,
or sprinkled with the same, does yet rise again: it lays open, as it were
before our eyes, the remission of our sins, and the rising again of our new
man.

16 The proper end of Baptism is, that by this solemn and holy action, we
might be known by the testimony of men and Angels, to be in the number of
the visible Church, and also that by means of this action, the adoption of the
elect, might to their full assurance, be more and more sealed by the holy
Ghost in their hearts.

17 The principal efficient cause hereof, is the holy Ghost; who in his good
time does inwardly perform, that which by the word of promise, accompanied
with outward signs, is declared unto the mind: Whence also may be gathered,
what are the effects of Baptism.

18 Now, the instrumental cause of the efficacy of baptism is the very same,
that makes the word alone to be powerful; namly, faith wrought by the holy
Ghost, through the hearing of the word in those that are of age.

I Their error therefore is intolerable, who dream, that there is any divine
power, either in the water, or in the rites of Baptism, seeing that whole
efficacy, is solie the work of the holy Ghost, which can be communicated
unto no creature. II Now, whereas in the Scriptures, and in the writing of the
Fathers, that is sometimes ascribed unto the outward Baptism, which is
properly belonging unto the inward, or that unto the sign, which appertains
unto the thing signified, or to the Minister which is proper unto the holy
Ghost alone: this comes to pass, not because that that thing which is the
only work of the power of God, can be any ways transferred to any other
thing: but that the truth of that, which is signified by the Sacrament, may in
regard of God who promises be known to be always present. III They are also
greatly deceived, who think, that Baptism was properly and chiefly ordained,
to the end that Christians might by that outward mark, be discerned from all
other people.
19 Now the signs themselves, have no other force, then of Sacramental
signification; that is, to call the thing signified, not only unto our
remembrance, but also offer the same unto us to be received by faith.

20 Seeing Regeneration, whereof Baptism is the pledge, is only begun in the
Saints, the jangling Sophisters do greeuouslie err, who think that original
sin, which is the corruption of nature, is altogether taken away by baptism,
and that by the work wrought; that is, by the very action of Baptism, and
that it is abollished from the very same moment that Baptism is received;
neither will they have that fire of concupiscence, which remains in those
that are baptized, to be accounted a sin.

Defended by ANTHONY THYSIVS a Low Country man.
THE SECOND PART OF THE PRINCIPLES, CONCERNING BAPTISM. LIX.
WE HAVE DISPVTED IN THE FORmer Principles touching the causes and effects of
Baptism: it follows, that we deal with those things, touching the same
argument, which we referred unto this Disputation.

1 THe subject of Baptism is he, who is baptized: And all those are to be
baptized, who in regard of likelihood, are contained within the covenant of God.

2 Now, the infants that are the progeny of believing Parents; and also those,
who being of full age, do offer themselves unto the church, by making
profession of their faith, and yielding their consent unto the Doctrine therein
prefessed, are to be accounted within the covenant.

3 We hold, that they who are of full age, are not to be received unto
baptism, before such time as they be instructed, and have yielded a confession
of their true faith, together with a protestation, that they will lead a better
life: Because for more assurance, the confession of the mouth is to be required
at their hands.

4 Touching infants, seeing our adoption does not depend upon our selves, or
upon any outward thing, but only upon the election of God, which began to be
manifested at our very conception, by virtue of that covenant, [I will be thy
God, and the God of thy seed,] and again, [I will be the God of those that
fear me unto a thousand generations:] And although, that infants be not endued
with actual faith, which is, by hearing: yet do we at this day, justly
baptize, (as in times past they were circumcised) the infants of the Saints,
because they are comprehended with in the covenant of aeternall life, by
means of the faith of their Parents.

5 It makes nothing against this point, that al, who are borne of faithful
Parents, are not elected: For if this reason might prevail, we would hardly
be drawn to admit those, that are of years: Seeing all that profess, are not
elected. It is not our part, to enquire into those secret mysteries of God:
but we may justly presuppose, that both all their children who profess
Christianity, and all those also, who being of full years, do make
profession of true faith, are elected unto aeternall life.

6 Whereas every man is said to be saved by his own faith, and not by another
man's; it is to be understood only of those that are of years: and we cannot
allow of the opinion, concerning the actual faith of infants. But leaving unto
God his secret judgments, we doubt not, but that the faithful Parents, do
according unto the condition of the covenant, apprehend the promise both to
themselves, and also to their children.

7 Now the Sacramental adding of the seal, does presuppose that, which is
sealed to be present indeed; namely, that the party baptized, is by
likelihoode comprehended within the covenant.

8 If no well ordered Church did ever admit, either Jews or Turks being of
years, or any other the professed enemies of Christ, until they had been
catechized, and made open profession of Christianity: much less, cann any
receive their children, but with the manifest profanation of Baptism.

9 Touching Papists, we are in some sort to think otherwise of them; in
as much as we may justly presuppose, that the Church does as yet remain
within the filthiness of Popery, (in respect of the elect, that are in their
time to be drawn out of that mire) because that the seal of christianity,
though defiled with many spots and stains, has continued among them, in the
substantial form thereof: as also the doctrine of Christianity, in respect
of the Trinity, and the person of Christ: And therefore we are of judgment,
that the children of Papists, may be received unto Baptism, if either one of
the Parents do require the same, or some man be present, that will promise their
right bringing up.

10 It is a great error, to tie salvation unto the outward Sacraments, as
though they were absolutely necessary thereunto; which the Papists
themselves, that are of any sound judgment do not altogether hold. And on
the other side, he that despises the mark of the covenant, is justly
guilty of aeternall death: And therefore it is not the want, but the contempt
of Baptism that is damnable; the which sin, (as also all other) may be done
away by true repentance.

11 Now he cannot be accounted a contemner of Baptism, who wanted opportunity
to receive the same lawfully.

And therefore, we do cast away these cases of necessity, and all the
corruptions brought into the Church upon this occasion, as being the inventions
of men.

12 The effects of Baptism administered, either unto infants, or unto those
that are of age, is not to be tied unto the very time of the administration
thereof. For the seed, both of the word, and also of the Sacraments, lies as
it were, buried in the earth, as long as it pleases God to defer his grace.

13 Now, seeing we are baptized for our whole life after, and that Christ
does never cast away those that were given him; it follows, that Baptism is
not to be itterated.

We do therefore condemn Rebaptization; neither can we in this point, allow
of CYPRIAN, and the Affricane Churches; and especially of that false and
dangerous opinion, which holds, that the remission of sins past, is only
sealed by Baptism: whence it came to pass, that some did very carelessly defer
Baptism unto their last end.

14 The Baptism of JOHN and of Christ, was one and the same, both in regard of
the signs, and also of the things signified.

15 The most meet place for Baptism to be administered, is that, where the
word is preached: and the most meet time is, the time of the preaching; even
for this cause, if their were no more, that public prayers, which are of
great force in this action, may be joined with the administration of the
Sacraments.

16 Yet may particular Churches appoint the time, and the place, as
circumstances shall require.

17 The use of witnesses, (called Godfathers) is neither absolutely
necessary, nor yet to be clean rejected: but such witnesses only are to be
chosen, as both know, and are also likely to perform what they promise,
concerning the holy bringing up of the infants.

Defended by JAMES ROVLAND a Low Country man.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING THE LORDS SVPPER. LX.
1 THe other perpetual Sacrament of the whole Christian Church, is the Supper
of the Lord, figured by diverse types under the old covenant.

2 For it was meet, the Mediator being now come, and the covenant being now
last renewed by him, that the old seals of the covenant should be changed
into such, as might agree to the time both of the ordaining of them, and also
of their last renewing, and so might even declare that the Mediator was come
both by water and by blood.

3 Now the Supper is that last Sacrament of the new Testament, or that
public action of the Christian church, wherein, as the bread being broken, is
given to be eaten, and the wine powered out, given to be drunk after the
corporal manner: so the body of Christ being delivered to death, and his
blood being shed to seal up those that are in league with God, is given unto
the faithful that can examine themselves, and are spirituallie received of them
by faith, for those ends; which we will presently set down.

4 The author both of the things delivered, and of the action is Christ
only, who (as far as this Testament is called the new) is the only testator:
but in respect that it has regard unto the covenant, that joineth others
therein, the author thereof is he, who is the author of the covenant. The
Church is the party unto whom the promise is made: and therefore the Church
is not to take upon it, the authority to confirm this covenant.

5 The matter of the Supper, are the signs, and the things signified. Under
the name of signs, are comprehended not only the substantial things
themselves, namlie the bread and the wine: but also the rites, and the whole
action as far as it is Sacramental; namely, the breaking of the bread, the
pouring out of the wine, the delyuering and receiving of both: whereunto is
joined the nourishment of the body, arising of the receiving of it.

6 Touching the bread, whether it should be leauened or unleavened; touching
the wine, whether it should be pure, or mixed with water: and if wine be
wanting, whether it be lawful to use some other drink: we think them
matters, about which, no great contentions are to be raised; so that (if
necessity so require) that which is the special thing, be retained, namely,
meat and drink, meet for nourishment, and answerable unto the proportion of
the signs and the things signified.

7 The administration of the signs, because they are present unto our outward
senses, has Christ committed unto the Ministers of the word, but yet so; as
the efficacy of the administration does not depend upon them, but upon Christ
only.

8 For this cause also, the things which we name signs are received by the
mouth of the body: and therefore also by the wicked, (although they account
them not for signs, but for common things) and that the receiving of them is
turned unto their greater damnation.

9 The things sealed, are the body and the blood of Christ, the offering and
receiving of both, and the spiritual nourishment arising therefrom: or rather
whole Christ God and man, with all his benefits, and the new covenant
confirmed by the death of the testator.

10 For although the receiving of the bread and the wine, does only signify
the communion of the body and the blood: yet because we are made one with
Christ, by means of his human nature, it does seal unto us the whole
benefit of salvation: because neither the manhood can be separated from the
word, nor the humanity subsist without the Deity, or his benefits without the
whole person; and therefore, the one are neither received nor delivered without
the other.

11 It is not without cause, that Christ has severally ordained the bread to
be the Sacrament of his body, and the wine of his blood: and commanded them to
be severally delivered in the Church. For the body and blood are not
sacramentally represented unto us in this action, as the whole humanity of
Christ, being glorified does now live: but in regard that they were offered
upon the cross for us, the blood being powered out of the body.

Vain therefore is that concomitaunce, (as they call it) or inseparable
conjunction of the body and the blood, under both kinds severally, whereas
the body is here laid before us and given to be considered by our faith, as
being without blood, and the blood as powered out of the body by death.

12 The things signified, because they are given unto our mind, and that to
establish and increase a spiritual life in us, are given by Christ himself,
and received through faith, by the power of the holy Ghost: whence it comes,
that they are proper and peculiar unto the faithful only.

13 Yet does it not follow, that the bread and the wine given unto the
unbelievers, are not Sacraments. For in respect of Christ, he gives unto
every man that wholly, which he promises in his word: vz. the signs unto
the bodies, and the things unto the souls that are endued with true faith:
whereupon it is no marvel, if the one of them alone be received by the
unworthy communicants as bringing only their body, and that polluted too,
unto the Lords Table, whereas they want the mouth of the mind, that is, faith.

14 The form consists in the apt and meet, that is, sacramental and
respective conjunction and analogy, or agreement of the outward sign, and
the inward mystery.

The Transubstantiation of the signs and the things signified, and the
essential consubstantiation of the things signified with the signs, are to
be rejected: for the former does abolishe one part of the Sacrament, to wit,
the signs, both of them are directly contrary, both unto the Articles of our
faith, concerning the truth of Christ's body, and also unto the use of the
Sacraments: whence follows that most horrible and detestable bread-worship.

15 The agreement of the signs and the things signified, is manifest: for as
bread and wine do nourish us in this life: even so, the body and blood of
Christ, purchase aeternall life unto us.

Both the bread and the wine therefore are to be delivered in the Supper,
both, to the end that the whole analogy may be kept, and also for the cause
alleged in the 11 principle.

16 This analogy does depend upon the divine ordination, institution or
blessing: by virtue whereof common things are drawn unto a holy use.

The signs therefore, have by the ordinance of God, no consideration at all of
a Sacrament, save only in the action of their lawful administration. Neither
are we to imagine of any force that should be engraffed in the signs
themselves, seeing they differ from common things in regard of a Sacramental
signification only, and that in the very use. That carrying about, an
adoration of the signs, is most horrible Idolatry.

17 As the whole force of the Supper, and the Sacramental forms of speech,
do arise from this analogy: so they are to be judged thereby.

These speeches therefore, [This is my body, the cup is the new Testament in my
blood,] are not to be expounded according to the words, but according to the
meaning; that is by a Sacramental Metonymie or change of the name, whereby
those things are said to be that, whereof only they are a sign.

18 The proper and principal ends of the Suppcr, are both the serious
remembrance (joined with thanksgiving) of the death of Christ, to his glory
and our profit: and also the nearer ingraffing of us into the body of Christ
by faith, being strengthened and increased, and our nearer uniting with God
the Father, by means of the Mediator, who dwells in us by his Spirit.

19 The less principal ends, are the mutual communion and love of the
faithful, being members of the same body, the outward witnessing of that
mutual consent, and the preservation of public meetings.

20 The effects of the Supper, do differ from the ends, but in respect only:
For seeing it is ordained by Christ unto these ends; it cannot be, but that
they should ensue upon the lawful use of the Supper: yet so, as the
isntrumental signification is attributed unto them, as their work: whereas
the whole efficacy is solie referred unto the holy Ghost.

21 The profit and efficacy of the Supper, is not to be tied unto the very
moment of the action of receiving, but does extend it self unto our whole
life: yet is not the action once celebrated, to be for this cause, ever after
neglected, seeing no man has such a perfection of faith in this life, as he
stands not in need of this support.

Defended by IANES ARMINIVS of Holland.
PRINCIPLES TOUCHING THE POPISH MASS. LXI.
WE HAVE SPOKEN IN THE FORMER Principles concerning the true use of the Supper
of the Lord: now we are to show in few words, how the said use has been
diversely depraved by Satan.

1 OF all the errors that have risen about the holy Supper of the Lord, that
invention of Transubstantiation, is the most ouglie, which was brought in and
confirmed, especially by LANFRANKE, about the year 1050.

2 For when as the words of Christ, instituting this Supper, ar to be
understood acording unto his mind who speaks them (which always ought to be
regarded in all acts, and especially in Testaments) so, that in this
Sacrament, the body and blood of Christ, are truly, but sacramentallie, and
by faith, giving credit without question unto his words received. The
Transubstantiators, contrary to all reason, and use of Sacraments, have so
obstinately stooke to the words, that many absurdities have risen thereof.

3 First of all, seeing all Sacraments do consist of signs and things
signified, they do take away the nature of the signs. For they teach that
after the Consecration (as they call it) the signs do not remain, but that
the thing it self only is presented unto us.

4 Secondly, the Sacramental participation being thus abolished, they make a
kind of imaginary receiving of the Lords body and blood: whereby (as they
hold) the body which is now in heaven, is reallie and corporally present in
infinite places, at the same time, and is received at once in whole and in
part, by many and by one: which thing, as it is most absurd: so does it
overthrow the articles of the Ascension, and sitting at the right hand of the
Father.

5 Thridlie, they have fained such a change, as makes that which is, not to
be; and that which is not, to be. For they do so spoil the bread and the wine
of their essence, as they desist to be bread and wine, and begin to be some
other thing: and they dream of accidences that are inhaerent in no subjectes,
against the first article of the belief, which teaches, that the Lord is the
Creator and preserver of the things which he made.

6 And here they do very foolishlie bring in the omnipotency of God: for
we are now to enquire, not what God can, but what he will do according to
his written word. Moreover it cannot be either that God can lie, or that
Christ can be contrary to himself: both which will necessarily come to pass,
if any thing be said to have been ordained by Christ, contrary to the
articles of our faith.

7 Hence have risen two most grievous errors: the former touching the
worshipping of the bread and the wine, the which in a very fearful
blasphemous sort, are thus commonly saluted by the Papists: ALL HAIL,
SAVIOVR OF THE WORLD, THE WORD OF THE FATHER, THE TRVE SACRIFICE, LIVELIE
FLESH, THE WHOLE DEITY, TRVE MAN, etc. The other touching the expiatorie and
propitiatory oblation for the sins of the quick and the dead, which the
Church of Rome does properly call the Mass, and wherein they place the sum
of all Christianity.

8 For the Mass is not that mingle mangle patched up as it were of the shreds
of diverse places gathered here and there out of the Scripture, and other
authors, which are the relics of the ancient Liturgy or common service
book of the Christians: but it is that ordinary propitiation and oblation
(called by them their unbloody Sacrifice) which is offered unto God the
Father, for the sins of the quick and the dead.

9 Now, they offend in this point, first, because they change the Sacrament
into a sacrifice: whereas Christ commanding us to receive, and not to offer,
ordained a Sacrament, and not a Sacrifice.

10 Next, in that they falsely teach; that in the Christian Church there
remains after the death of Christ, any expiatorie Sacrifice, besides the
very body of Christ, which is endued with a true human nature and soul.

11 Thridlie, in that they closely accuse that one and most perfect sacrifice
of Christ, of imperfection, by iterating the same every hand while. For
iteration is a note of imperfection, as the Apostle says Heb. 7.

12 Christ indeed commanded all the faithful to celebrate the memory of his
passion: but he gave no commandment unto any, that he should be sacrificed.
For there ought to be no mention of the NAME and office of a PRIEST or of an
ALTER at this day in the Church of Christ. For Christ is now the only, and
the chief Priest, who offered himself once, an only, and a most perfect
Sacrifice unto God, neither was there any other that could, can, or shall be
able to perform that work.

13 For the Sacrifices that ought now to have place among Christians, are
only of thanksgiving: that the faithful may give thanks unto God for all
his benefits, and offering their prayers unto him, may perpetually consecrate
themselves, wholly, a living and an acceptable sacrifice unto his majesty. An
expiatorie or propitiatory sacrifice there is or can be no other, but that
which Christ once made most perfectly, upon the Alter of the cross.

14 Yet we do not deny, but that the ancient writers did give the name of
Sacrifice unto the Lords Supper: but, as in this point, so in many other
things, in a very far streatched signification: and that partly to the
end, that (as they thought) they might set forth the dignity of this high
mystery, whereat the Angels do admire: and partly, that they might note out,
and retain the custom used amongst the ancient Christians. Who were wont in
their holy feasts of love, to bestow and offer guiftes and offerings of
diverse things, and even of meat and drink: which being collected together
into one, were so disposed of by the Pastors of the Churches, as first of all,
they were by prayers offered unto God: next, some portion of them was taken,
whereby the holy Supper was administered: lastly, that which was left, was
bestowed for the maintenance of the poor. Out of which rites, the
Masse-mongers do as yet retain the names of OFFERTORI, COLLECT, and
COMMUNION. And hence it is thought, that the name of the MASS was derived,
even from the custom that the faithful had to send those things unto the
public assemblies of the Church, which they would have bestowed upon holy
uses.

15 Now, it is no less fabulous, that the Popish Mass was celebrated by
JAMES, or any other of the Apostles; then it is most true, that the same was
coined, neither all at once, nor yet by one and the self same man, but was
soldered together, as now it is, by many Popes, after many years: and after
that it had been eiked out, with many patches which were added thereunto.

16 Unto the former errors, there are adjoined not a few others: as that it is
celebrated, not by the congregation of the faithful, but by one Masse-monger
alone: that the Sacrament is after the holy action RESERVED, as it were a
preservative against whatsoever inconvenience: that the names of dead Saints
are called upon, and their imaginary merits, intermingled in the Mass: that
the one of the signs is in a kind of impudent and altogether hellish
boldness, taken away from the lay people, as they call them: that the whole
action is done in a strange tongue: that the Mass Priest alone is privy unto
many things that are done therein: that they use the attire and gestures of
stage-plaiers, and many other things, brought forth by this plant, which the
heavenly Father has not planted, and therefore, shall one day be altogether
rooted out.

Therefore, we detest this imaginary and blasphemous sacrifice of the Mass,
which is contrary unto Gods word, and overthrows the force of Christ's
Passion, and brings in almost innumerable errors; and we pray with all our
hearts and souls, that the Lord would grant unto all his Churches, the pure
and sound use of his holy Supper.

Defended by THEOPHILUS HESPERIVS of Bearne.
PRINCIPLES TOUCHING CONSVBSTANTIATION. LXII.
WE HAVE ALREADY DISPVTED, concerning Transubstantiation: Consubstantiation
being the nearest error unto it, is now to be handled.

1 COnsubstantiation consists in this, that the body and blood of the Lord,
is said to be corporally, naturally, and really present; in, under, and with
the bread and the wine.

2 It has this common with Transubstantiation, that in both of them, the
words of the institution, are in a preposterous sort stiflie maintained,
without any regard unto the meaning: Although that in very deed, the words
are changed in both, by the fained interpretations whereby they are expounded:
whence many absurdities do follow.

3 First, in that both of them do take away the force and nature of a
Sacrament, which consists in this, that two things should be in them;
namely, earthly, elementarie, and signifiyng; then heavenly, invisible, and
signified: both which are severally considered, not as they are something
absolutely and simply existing of their own nature, but as there is a mutual
comparison and referrence between them, whereby the signs do represent the
things signified are represented.

4 Next, Transubstantiation makes that the thing is not that, which it is, and
that it is that, which it is not: but Consubstantiation makes that two things
indeed, are become one.

5 Thirdly, this doctrine does include contrarieties: for it affirms, that
the same body is received both naturally and supernaturallie; whereas the truth
does teach, that the signs are naturally, and the things signified
supernaturallie participated.

6 For the receiving of the mouth, and also the help of the other senses, are
here required by the institution of Christ, to the end, that that which is
natural and corporal, may perform his own office: the operation also of the
mind and faith is especially to be present; that what is spiritual, may be
received by spiritual instruments.

7 Yet we confess, that the body and blood of Christ is offered bodily,
that is, corporally in the holy Supper: But after the same manner, that PAVLE
says, that all the Godhead does dwell in him corporally; that is truly and
fully: the Lord performing without all doubt, that which he promised.

8 And although the body of Christ, be of it self a natural substance, and
contained within the dimensions or limits thereof; yet is it not materially,
but spiritually eaten of us. For the flesh would have profited us nothing, but
the Spirit and life: yet we may say in some sense, that the bread and the
wine, are the body and the blood: and that the body and the blood are
fed-vpon, namely, in a Sacramental manner.

9 This Doctrine also, is directly contrary unto that end of the institution,
whereby Christ commanded us, to celebrate his memory. For if he be present,
his memory cannot be called unto our remembrance, except we will speak very
improperly: seeing things past and not present, are called into memory.

10 Again, it does abolish the nature of Christ's body: For if the same be
thus receued by every one in particular, it must needs be, both present in
infinite places at once, and also be infinite of it self: The which point, is
contrary unto the Articles of our belief, whereby we believe, that he was
true man; that he was borne, suffered, dead, risen again, ascended up into
heaven.

11 Furthermore, if the receiving of Christ were corporal, the ancient Church
under the law, had not been partaker of his body, because the same was not as
yet borne: which point is contrary unto the Apostle, who says, that the
Fathers did receive the same spiritual meat, and the same spiritual drink.

12 Further, if Christ were corporally present, he should be eaten without
respect both of the badde, and the good, which is impossible. For to eat the
flesh of Christ, is to believe in Christ, to be joined with Christ, and to be
drawn from death unto life; which can by no means agree unto the wicked.

13 For they, as AUGUSTINE says, do only receive the bread of the Lord, but
not the bread which is the Lord: which bread, is also unto them, not a sign of
Christ's body, but merely bread: even as the Sacrifice of the wicked, are by
the Prophet HOSEAH, not called sacrifice, but only flesh. Yet does GOD justly
punish in them, the contempt of his grace offered.

14 Again, seeing the question in this point, is only touching the soul,
and the feeding thereof, to offer a corporal thing thereunto, is to be
ignorant of the nature of things, and to mingle heavenly and earthly things
together: seeing that eating of Christ's body with the mouth, (if it could be
possibly done) could not reach unto the soul, but only unto the body. And
as the blood of Christ, does not wash them that are corporally dipped
thereunto, (the which thing might have come to pass unto the very Jews, that
tormented him:) But those, who apprehend the force and efficacy thereof by
true faith: for they eat his body, and drink his blood, who spiritually (yet
not by imagination, but truly as has bin said) apprehend him as he is given
unto us of the Father.

15 Last of all, Consubstantiation cannot be established by the words of the
institution: For Christ did not say, Here is my body; that is, in, under, or
with the bread, but this is; that is, this bread is my body: And it were
absurd to say, that Christ, who reached the bread unto his Disciples, was
corporally in, under, and with that bread.

16 Now, the similitude of Iron being red hot, of an infant lying in his
swathes, of wine contained in the vessel, are so gross, that they need no
confutation: for these conjunctions are natural, whereby new qualities are
aplied unto bodies, and substances are joined unto substances: whereas al things
in the Supper ar supernatural, depe^ding upon the institution of Christ. Yea,
and that supernatural conjunction, whereby the Deity of Christ is personally
united unto his humanity, can have no place in this argument: nor yet that
miraculous conjunction, whereby, GOD taking upon him certain visible forms,
did manifest himself unto some; It follows then, that this compulation is
Sacramental; whereby the signs and the things signified wholly remaining, the
Sacraments are that truly, which they are said to be.

17 The rest of the proppes of Transubstantiation, being of the same strength
with the former, we reject, as making no account of them, together with
Consubstantiation it self, adjoining the saying of IRENAEVS, that they who
will not know the truth, are forced to allow of many falsehoods.

Defended by MOSES RICOTERIVS a Gascoigne.
PRINCIPLES TOUCHING THE INVOCATION OF GODS NAME. LXIII.
WE HAVE DONE WITH THE WORD and the Sacraments, being the two marks of the
Church, whereunto, seeing Prayer, or the invocation of Gods name is
inseparably joined: it is convenient, that in this place, we deal therewith.

1 THe invocation of God, is an ardent affection bent toward God, whereby we
do both crave and exspect of God, only for Christ his sake, spiritual and
corporal blessings, according unto his commandment and promises: and also
do give thanks unto him for blessings received.

2 The same is necessary unto all Christians, that are come to years: First,
because it is that especial worship of God, which the covenant of grace
does require of us: Next, because this is the means, whereby God will have his
elect to obtain and keep the grace of the holy Spirit, and all the rest of
his benefits: Briefly, it is a testimony of Gods covenant in our hearts. For
whosoever do call upon the name of God, they are endued with the Spirit of
the adoption of Children, and received into the covenant of God.

3 True invocation arises first, from the true feeling of our wants, and the
knowledge of the sufficiency of God, and upon the promise of being hard, which
is apprehended by faith.

4 Invocation is due only unto GOD the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost:
both because, he alone is the only Author of all good things; and also,
because that to be able to heare-and heal all that call upon him in all
places, belongs unto none, save only unto the omnipotent God.

5 Now, whereas no man is worthy to present himself in the presence of God;
the heavenly Father, to the end that he might drive away from us, all
shamefastnes and fear, has given us the only Mediator, in whom alone he
does look upon us, as being reconciled, and hears our prayers. Now the holy
Ghost is he, who gives us the true contrition of the heart, and true faith in
him upon whom we call; and does inwardly teach us, what we ought to pray: so
that we do call upon the Father, in the name of the Son by the holy Ghost.

6 Neither of the three persons of the Deity therefore, is to be omitted in true
prayer, though they be not always distinctlie named: but we may sometimes
call upon God simply, and sometimes direct our prayers unto the father,
sometimes unto the Son, and sometimes unto the holy Ghost.

7 By the intercession of Christ with the father, is meant, not any prayers
proceeding in some manner of gesture from him (now in heaven) on our behalf:
but the price of that redemption of his, whereupon, when the Father looks,
he hears his: and also this; namely, that when we call upon the Father in
his name, he in some sort does offer our prayers according unto the tender
care, whereby he is even now vnspeakablie affected toward his members; yet
after his own manner, which is altogether unsearchable unto us.

8 Seeing Christ does make intercession for us, and with us; in such sort as we
have spoken: we hold, that the prayers of the faithful are always acceptable
unto God, though he does neither alwais give unto us that which we rightly ask,
nor at the time wherein we ask.

9 And seeing our prayers are to be framed, according unto the rule of Gods
word; we may simply without exception, ask those things, which God has
simply and without exception promised unto us; as the increase of faith, the
strength of the Spirit against temptations, remission of sins, and such
like. All other things not specially expressed; as the delivery from this or
that danger, and such like; are to be desired with exception; namely, as far
as it be expedient for Gods glory, and according as (and also when) he
thinks meet, who only knows what is expedient to be granted unto us.

10 The father has delivered unto us, by his dear son, a most perfect
general form of prayer: yet are we not tied unto the very words thereof.

11 The chief end of true Prayer, is the glory of God, or some profit that
we hope to receive thereby.

12 It is meet, that a certain place and time be appointed, (if it may be
conveniently done) in every church for publik prayer; yet is it mere
superstition, to think, that prayers made in a certain place, or time, are of
themselves more effectual.

13 The dedications of Temples, and the rites used in this action, are the
relics, partly of Paganism, and partly of Iudaisme, and therefore to be
utterly abollished.

14 Private Prayers also, are carefully to be practiced, in the use whereof, it
is the part of every man to consider, what is expedient.

15 There are four sorts of Prayers, reckoned up by PAVLE, 1. TIM. 2.1.
supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks; under which four
sorts, he comprehends all other.

16 These four sorts may be thus discerned; Supplication is, when we desire
to be delivered from the evils, that hang over us: Prayer is, when we crave
a better success of our affairs; For as by Supplication, we entreat the
taking away of inconveniences; so by Prayer, we crave the supply of those
things that are good for us: Intercession is, when as one of us does entreat,
for the necessity of an other; being of charity moved thereunto: or when as
we complain unto God, of injuries done unto us: Briefly, by thanksgiving,
we praise God for the benefits that we have received, and show, that we are
beholding unto him, for all the benefits, both spiritual and corporal, that we
have obtained.

17 The fruits which we reap by Prayer, are diverse. 1. Our heart is inflamed,
with an earnest desire to seek, love, and worship God, when as we are
accustomed in all our necessities to fly unto him, as unto an holy anchor. 2.
No desire comes to our mind, whereof we are ashamed to make him a witness,
when as we pour out our whole heart before him. 3. We are framed to receive
his benefits with thanksgiving. 4. Having obtained that which we did crave,
we are more fervently carried to meditate of his loving kindness. 5. Lastly,
use and experience it self, does confirm unto our souls, his providence,
virtue, and goodness toward us.

18 Hence it appears, that Invocation, which is that true worship of God, is
altogether overthrown in Popery.

19 First of all, because the Papists do teach men to bring their own
merits, as that Pharisie did, although they are beholding unto God for them:
The which doctrine does damme up that especial spring of true Prayer, namely,
the sense of our want.

20 Next, that they either bring in fained promises, or invent merits that
have no promise.

21 Thirdly, in that they professedlie place doubting in stead of faith: as
though to be assured that GOD will hear us, were a security full of
Presumption.

22 Hereunto is to be adjoined, that both they conceive private and public
prayer, in a strange unknown tongue: (which is nothing else but a manifest
mocking of God,) and that they pray by number. Briefly, in that they teach,
(which is utterly wicked) that those prayers of theirs, do deserve remission
of sins, and other benefits.

23 To be short, herein they are most godless, in that they appoint Saints
departed, as substitute intercessours under Christ, not only rashly and in
vain, besides and contrary to the word of God, and therefore without faith;
but also unprofitably, seeing that cannot be held, but they must make the
Spirits of those that are dead, to be the searchers of hearts, and attribute
unto them, that which is proper unto GOD only: namely, that they may hear
those that call upon them every where.

24 This sin is augmented even by an other twofold impiety: the one, in
that they honor the Virgin MARIE, and the sign of the Cross, by a certain
peculier invocation: the other, in that they do yield unto Images both painted
and graven, the very same worship, whereby they would honor Christ, if he
were present.

25 Touching those degrees of their religious adoration by LATRIA, DVLIA, and
HYPERDVLIA, we affirm them to be altogether vain.

26 Vain also is that distinction, of the Mediator of redemption and
intercession.

Defended by JOHN CRVCIVS a Flemming.
PRINCIPLES UPON THE PRAEFACE OF THE LORDS PRAYER. LXIIII.
WE HAVE ABOVE IN THE LAST TENTH Principle made mention of a form of
invocation, or prayer: and therefore having already spoken of the rest of the
causes thereof, we now come to the interpretation of the said form, out of
the words of Christ. Math. 6. Luke, 11. which is therefore commonly called,
the Lords Prayer.

1 THis form teaches us most compendiouslie indeed, but yet most absolutely,
whatsoever we are to ask of God generally as it were, in certain common
places, and in that method wherein it is fit, that these things should be
craved of God: it does furthermore inform our minds by what affection we are
to conceive our Prayers, and in what hope we may expect the effect of the^,
being rightly conceived.

2 It is free for us, according unto our sundry griefs, to express in other
special forms, those things that make for the glory of God, and our
salvation, and to apply them unto diverse circumstances: but it is in no wise
lawful to pray any other Prayer, in regard of the matter. All the Prayers of
DAVID therefore, of the Prophets, and other faithful examined according unto
these rules, do agree with this perfect form.

3 The parts hereof are three. 1. The beginning or Praeface. 2. The petitions
themselves. 3. The conclusion.

1. The Preface, OUR FATHER WHICH ART IN HEAVEN.
4 FATHER.] This word does first of all teach us the foundation of our faith:
namely, the distinction of the persons, for the FATHER is one, the SON is an
other.

5 These petitions are directed unto the person of the Father, that thereby not
only the distinction, but also the order of the persons may be expressed: the
first whereof is the Father, the second, is the Son of the Father; and the
third is the holy Ghost, of the Father and the Son.

6 When as therefore we call upon the Son, our minds stay not in him, but
arise from him unto the Father, as we are led by the holy Ghost unto the
Father and the Son. Otherwais, as the persons unto whom the worship of
invocation is directed, are not separated, so is not the said worship to be
severally considered, but only distinctlie: seeing the same reverence is
aequallie due unto all the 3. persons, as to the one and the self-same God.

7 Moreover, this most sweet name of a FATHER does regard us also: seeing we
do not call upon the Father, as the Father of the Son only, but even as
upon our Father.

8 Again, this word does set down the other foundation of our trust: namely,
that he who is the Father of Christ, is also ours, though in a diverse respect.

9 For he is the Father of Christ, 1. by nature only, in respect that the
Son is Coessentiall with the Father. 2. In respect that his humanity being
conceived by the holy Ghost, does by personal union, subsist in that
aeternall Son of God.

10 But he is our Father in respect of Adoption, that is, in regard that he
does vouchsafe us, being spirituallie engraffed into Christ by Faith, to be
called children, as those whom (being elected in him) he justifies, and will
one day glorify.

11 Therefore, this word teaches us again, that belief in the Father
through the Son, must go before our Prayers: the which if it be not present,
prayers are not only not acceptable, but even sins in the presence of God.

12 We are also by this means taught, that if we will be heard, we are bound
to come in the presence of God, not only wihout any consideration of our
merits (which can be none at all) but contrariwise, that we conceive our
prayers, trusting in his only free Adoption and mercy in Christ Jesus.

13 Lastly, this word FATHER, does require that we pray unto God, with a true
sense of our sins past, and a firm purpose to amend our lives, otherwise our
prayers are in vain. For the impudency were not tolerable, to call him
Father, whom we are not sorry that we have offended, and whom ever after,
we meant not to fear and reverence.

OUR.

14 This does put us in mind of 2. things, (both being of great moment in true
Prayer) 1. of our Adoption, whereof we have spoken: whereby it comes to
pass, that he who has that only Son by nature, coaeternall with himself,
does account us his sons adopted in him: without whom there is no salvation,
nor any true confidence in calling upon God. 2. That true love is to be
joined with faith: that as the Father, who is but one, is yet in his Son, the
common Father of all the faithful: so we should think, that they cannot be
acknowledged for sons, who are not in love with their brethren: otherwise,
they should be accounted to be in the body, who sever themselves from the
members thereof, which cannot be.

15 This conjunction consists partly in the agreement of doctrine and
religion, partly in the affections. And therefore, before we can truly call
upon God, we must be members of the Catholic Church, and have a regard to
maintain peace, and concord one with another, in such sort, as all unkindness
and hatred being laid aside, we must pray from our hearts, even for our enemies.

16 But this conjunction cannot be perfect, while we live here. For all of us
know but in part; and often not in the same part; now in respect of mutual
living together; there is none; but in some things, he shows himself to be
a man: But as the imperfection of faith, does not hinder the effect thereof,
the same is to be said of our mutual agreement, both in Religion, and also in
affections: so that we be displeased with our selves for those our
imperfections, and be more and more desirous of a growth in our obedience.

17 Seeing this communion of faith, does not only comprehend the elect, that
are already endued with faith: and strive together with us in this life,
against sin; But even those that are to believe, and lying as yet uncalled,
known only unto God, our prayers also do belong unto them.

18 But as for those whose Spirits are already gathered with Christ, and whose
bodies are a sleep in the grave, our Prayers for them should be altogether
vain and unprofitable: as also for those whose souls are already condemned.

An addition.

That custom therefore, (though ancient) of reckoning up the names of the
Apostles, and certain martyrs in common prayers, though it may be thereby
excused, in that such prayers were mere thanks-giuings, does nevertheless want
a ground, (and therefore is to be abolished,) as the very issue of it has
proved: for it is certain that from hence did arise by little and little, both
invocation of the dead who were assuredly believed to be in heaven: and also
prayer for the departed, unto whom superstitious men, did according unto their
own fancy appoint Purgatory fire.

WHICH ART IN HEAVEN.

19 It is needful that unto the assurance of Gods fatherly goodwill toward
us, we adjoine his power and Majesty: both to let us know, that he is not
only willing, but also able to bestow upon us, whatsoever we crave of him by
true faith: and also, that the consideration of his majesty, may retain us in
that reverence, which is due thereunto.

20 We hold, that God as a most simple being, being in regard of his infinite
essence in every thing, and in all things at once, but not in or of their
substance, is without and beyond all things, wholly in himself, preserving and
governing all his creatures, and not mixed with any thing, contrary unto the
rauing dotage of the Manichaees.

21 He is then said to be IN HEAVEN, that thereby his supreme excellency,
power, and dominion above al things, may be declared: whereas by the name of
Heaven, we understand the highest place of this visible world, which is
conspicuous unto us, in regard of the unspeakable and most certain motion
thereof, wherewith the Lord has most excellently garnished the same.
Wherein, (as the Prophet DAVID says), God has engraven testimonies of his
unchangeable truth.

22 The same God is said to be above al those heavens, the Scripture also
declaring that the place of aeternal happiness, is appointed even above all the
celestial spheres, whereunto Christ being entered does receive the souls of
his children, according unto that saying; This day shall thou be with me in
Paradise: and that of the Apostle, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ. Whence also we believe that he will come, and where he will entertain
all his, when they have received their bodies again, being made incorruptible,
and will cause them to live there with him aeternallie.

23 Now, as that glory which we hope for, is at this day incomprehensible
unto us; so we are not curiously, that is, without Gods word, to make
inquiry of these blessed mansions: but devoutly to reverence that which the
Scripture teaches us to hope and to believe touching them, until the time,
that indeed we shall see, hear, and receive, those things which eye has not
seen, ear has not heard, nor ever entered into the heart of man.

Defended by JAMES HABEERVTERVS of Bearne.
PRINCIPLES TOUCHING THE PETITIONS OF THE LORDS PRAYER IN GENERAL; AND
PARTICVLARLIE OF THE FIRST OF THEM. LXV.
HAVING HANDLED THE PRAEFACE which was the first part of the Lords Prayer, the
second is now to be opened, which contains the petitions, or the substance
of the Prayer it self.

1 CHRIST framed these petitions, according unto the present nature and state
of man, (vz. in respect that we are in the want of all things, and sinners in
this world, which wholly lies in wickedness, (as it is said JOHN 15.19.)
and not unto the first condition, wherein ADAM was created pure and upright
before his fall.

2 For there had been no need of these petitions, if the first man had
continued in that original purity, and excellent integrity, wherein God had
created him: neither had this world been subject unto vanity for the sin of
man, whereby it now comes to pass, that the glory of God is hidden as it
were, under many clouds.

3 Neither shall we need, when we are fully restored in heaven, to say,
[Hallowed be thy name, Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done, etc.] For then God
shall be al in all, 1. COR. 15.28. but there shall be Thanksgiving and
Confession, such as is set down, REVEL. 4. ver. 8. Holy holy Lord God
omnipotent, etc. It remains then as we have said even now, that these
petitions do appertain unto the present time and state of men.

4 And seeing they may be considered in a diverse respect: namely, in that
the three former of them, do directly regard the glory of God, and the three
latter do properly concern us, they may be fitly comprehended in a division
of two members.

5 Although then, there is nothing appertaining unto Gods glory, whence some
profit does not redound unto the godly: and though also, we ca^ rightly crave
none of those things which belong unto our salvation, but we must desire them
for the glory of God: yet it behooves us in these things, to be affected in a
diverse sort: namely, that in the one, we have a respect only to the glory
of God, not regarding our own behoof: and that in the other, we so respect
our own estate, that we be also especially mindful of Gods glory, which we
are bound to promote.

6 These petitions moreover, which belong unto Gods glory, are justly placed
in the first rank. For Christ says Mat. 6.33.
Seek first the kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, and all these
things shall be given unto you. And this order is observed also in the
commandementes: for the first place is yielded unto those which properly
appertain unto the worship of God, whereas those which concern the
maintenance of love between man and man, do follow in the second rank.

7 Among the former petitions, it is not without cause that HALLOWED BE THY
NAME is the first. For although the end of them be, that Gods glory may shine
every where, as it ought: yet the order of teaching does require that that
should be accounted the first petition, which declares the first degree of his
glory: whereunto the second is adjoined, which shows the means to augment
the same, and the third next unto that, which declares the way to the
accomplishing and finishing thereof.

8 Touching the first, we place not the name of Jesus in the very notes of the
letters, or in the vocal pronouncing of the word. For the former were Jewish,
as the latter is Popish, where the name of Jesus is not uttered, without the
yielding of some superstitious reverence thereunto, and the kissing of the
letters themselves.

9 But by the name of GOD, we understand God himself, or the Majesty,
justice, mercy, goodness, truth, power, and holiness of God, and the rest of the
attributes whereby he has made himself known in the world.

10 In this Petition therefore, we entreat, that the glory of God, may
according to the majesty thereof, be acknowledged and celebrated amongst men
here upon earth. Briefly, that the honor and worship due unto God, may be
yielded unto him in this world: on the other-side we wish, that all those
things may be removed, overthrown, and clean taken away, which do profane,
diminish, or obscure the said glory of God, either in himself, in his works,
or in his word and doctrine: So that this Petition is answerable unto the
commandment: [Thou shall not take the name of God in vain.] For here is
commanded that which is there forbidden.

11 This Petition is so strictly enjoined unto us, that we cannot omit the
same without heinous wickedness. For what is more unworthy, then that either
our ingratitude and blindness should obscure, or boldness and furious
presumption, as far as lies in it, blot out the same?

12 But although all the wicked, with their sacrilegious lust should fly a
sunder for spite; yet shall the holiness of Gods name shine and glister. For
thus the prophet cries out; [As thy name o God, so does thy praise extend unto
all the ends of the earth;] for whersoeuer the Lord makes himself known, it
cannot be, but his virtue, power, goodness, wisdom, justice, mercy, and truth
should manifest themselves, whereby we might be drawn unto the admiration of
his majesty, and stirred up to set forth his praises.

13 But, in as much as GOD is so unworthily robbed of his holiness upon earth, we are bidden, if we have not power to maintain the same; yet at the least, to
undertake the care thereof in our prayers, as it is meet we should, although of
it self, it can neither increase nor be diminished.

14 Whosoever therefore do obscure the holiness of God, or suffer the same to
be obscured, as far as in them lies, they sin against this petition, and
are most heavily guilty of Gods judgment.

Defended by LAZARUS ROBERTUS of Roan.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING THE SECOND PETITION OF THE LORDS PRAYER. LXVI.
HAVING EXPOVNDED THE FIRST PEtition, which declares the first step of Gods
glory: we are now to address our selves, to the opening of the second,
which sets down the means to augment the same.

1 THis Petition, THY KINGDOM COME, being put in the second place by Christ,
is justly set before the third: For as to bear rule, is in nature before the
execution thereof; so is it meet, that the Lord would first establish his
kingdom among us, and then make us obedient thereunto.

2 For the will of God cannot be performed, but by that power, which he does
exercise in his said kingdom.

3 Now as touching the exposition of the Petition, the Lord is said to reign,
when as men having denied themselves, do wholly submit them unto him.

4 The principal scope then of this Petition is, that the Lord will consume
and abollish all the lusts which fight in our members against his will: and that
he would frame and fashion us, and all our faculties unto the obedience of his
will.

5 Now whereas al men, from the highest to the lowest, are blind by nature,
and understand not what the will of GOD is; and seeing it is the office of a
King, to appoint laws for his subjects; we crave also, that God would manifest
his will unto the world, and would plant the ministry of his word, (which it
pleases him to use as a Scepter, for the granting of the things that are
contained in this Petition) throughout all the parts of the world, that by
means thereof, he may gather together, those whom he has elected from all
aeternitie; and on the other side may overthrow them, who as far as they can,
do hinder this work.

6 So, we affirm, that it is the right of God, alone to rule, this kingdom
by his own laws; that is, by the law and the Gospel, whereunto no man can
add or detract any thing, without high treason against the supreme Majesty of
God.

The Pope then, and all his followers, who have presumed to impose laws upon
the consciences, are condemned in this Petition.

7 We desire furthermore, that he would send faithful servants, to declare
this word purely and sincerely, and that he would drive away all false
Teachers, and Prophets, who go about by their own inventions, to draw others
away from the will of God.

8 But in as much as that word, barely expounded by man, would rather turn
unto our damnation, then salvation, (for our judgment is mere contrary unto
Gods will, and our will does turn away, even from the known will of God:) we
desire that the Lord would vouchsafe to engraffe the same in our minds, by the
force and efficacy of the holy Ghost, that the true light may shine in them.

9 And seeing we can by no means fully obtain these things in this world, as
being compelled to carry about with us, the relics of sin, even unto our
dying day: we do therefore desire that that day may come, wherein Satan,
sin, and death being subdued, the Lord shall be all in all: whence it may be
easily gathered, how senssesse they are, that fly this day as a fearful
thing.

10 Out of all these things, we may readily collect, that a spiritual, and not
an earthly kingdom is here spoken of, as also our Lord Jesus does witness,
John. 18.36.
because it is exercised both by GOD who is a Spirit, and also upon the
conscience.

11 The necessity of this Petition does first appear, in that Satan seeks
nothing else, but to erect the kingdom of darkness and confusion, (which is mere
contrary unto this) amongst men: For the which cause, he is called the Prince
and God of this world.

12 Here unto is adjoined, our natural infection, together with our corrupt
judgment and perverse will, who prefer lies before the truth, sin before
righteousness, earthly before spiritual, most evil before good, and unjust
before right things; and in some, who cannot be subject unto the law of God.

13 But although, the Devil and wicked men do run mad, yet the Lord does
and will exercise his government, as well upon them as upon the elect: (For
who can be exempted from his authority, who has created all things?) yet in
a diverse manner. For he imbraceth the one with his eternal favor, whereas he
consumes the other in his fearful wrath.

14 And if God be properly said to bear rule, when as men do willingly submit
themselves unto him: he sins most grievously, who under the pretense that
GOD does already rule both the godly and the wicked, does not desire, that the
government which GOD exercises in his Church, may be daily increased and
enlarged.

Defended by FREDERICK BILLETIVS a Low Country man.
PRINCIPLES TOUCHING THE THIRD PETITION OF THE LORDS PRAYER. LXVII.
HAVING OPENED TWO OF THE PETItions of the Lords Prayer, which do immediately
respect the glory of God: we do now come unto the exposition of the third.

1 THis Petition [THY VVIL BE DONE IN EARTH AS IT IS IN HEAVEN] is the third in
order of those whereof we have spoken, because that no man does obey the will
of God, being made known and commanded, save only those, who acknowledge God
for their king.

2 The sum or scope of this Petition is, that the will of God may be
performed upon earth by men, who know the same, and love it from their hearts,
as it is done by the blessed Angels in heaven.

3 The aequitie of it, is understood by the praeface: For God is said to be
in Heaven, which signifies power and authority, and to be our Father, both in
regard of the first creation of al men, and also, of the redemption of the
regenerate; whence it follows, that we being his servants and sons, are
bound to know and willingly to practice the will of our Lord and Father.

4 This Petition is necessary, because our flesh being bond-slaue unto sin
and Satan, is contrary hereunto: Now the more impediments that do hinder us
to perform the will of God, the more earnest ought we to be in seeking
strength to practice the same. It is also necessary, to the end, that we
perish not; but may be made Citizens of the kingdom of God; which cannot be,
unless we obey his will; not that the obedience of the same does make us
freemen of his kingdom, but in as much as it declares, that we have been made
the Citizens thereof.

5 The parts of this Petition, as being a perfect similitude or two; that which
is opened, and that which does open. The former contains our prayer for the
execution of Gods will: the latter sets down a similitude, which shows,
how we desire the same to be performed here upon earth.

6 Let us therefore, diligently examine every word of the Petition: First the
word (...) offers it self, which according unto the accustomed manner of
speaking amongst Christians, is expressed by the word WILL, though that will
be of a more large signification then (...) is.

7 Now the word WILL, does not signify the faculty or action of willing,
which in God differs nothing from his essence, but it points out those
things which GOD wills, by a Metynomie of the adjunct put for the subject.

8 The things which God wills, are of two sorts: For some of them, are of
that nature, that they are good of themselves, by the goodness which God has
put into the^: others of them are good by accident, or for the end that God
has appointed, who can bring forth good out of evil, and light out of
darkness.

9 Again, some of those things that God wills, has he made known unto us;
others has he reserved to himself: whence some of the ancients, and also of
the Schoolmen made the will of God to be in part, voluntatem beneplaciti, that
is his free, unbounded or secret will, and in part to be voluntatem signi:
that is, his signified, written, or revealed will. The Grecians call the former
of these, (...) and (...): the latter, (...) and (...), For knowledge, for
apointment, will, good pleasure.
which contain the charges, commandments, and doctrine revealed unto men
concerning the will of God, either general touching all, or particularly
aplied unto the calling of every one, which are briefly comprehended under the
name of the Law and the Gospel.

10 Now we are to deal in this place, with that which is called the signified
will, because that only is perfect obedience, which is yielded by those that
have knowledge, and are willing to obey, and which is concerning those things
which are good of themselves, and in the regard of those that do perform them.

11 Whereas THY VVIL (and not another or every man's) is added, it takes away
men's traditions, and whatsoever is contrary or besides the will of God.

12 The word [BE DONE] that is, be fulfilled, does teach us, that we are to
obey Gods will, with the whole affection of our soul, with all our mind and
thoughts.

13 Whereas it is set down passiuelie [BE DONE] it seems, that it may be
gathered thereby, that man before the first grace, is only considered
passiuelie, as being to be wrought upon, but not working; so that, even to
will what is right, is given of God: Next we gather, that after the first
grace, the continuance of willing that which is good, and the perfection
thereof, is in the hand of GOD only; even thence that we are commanded to
crave, that Gods will may be done; whereas we do not crave those things that
are in our own power.

14 BE DONE IN EARTH AS IT IS IN HEAVEN] the word HEAVEN and EARTH, are to be
understood Metonymically, that which does contain being put for that which is
contained.

15 The will of God upon earth, is in deed performed only by men: unless a
man will refer the word OBEYING, Metaphorically unto other creatures: yet not
by all men, but by them only who are regenerated: Although, as AUGUSTINE
says, the will of God is done concerning (but not by) the rest.

16 Now, because human frailty, (which by Gods decree, does always cleave
unto man in this life) can bear no more; it comes to pass, that the will of
God, is but begun to be performed by the regenerate here upon earth; and that
only in affection and in faith: (this also being the will of God, that besides
the love which we are commanded to yield unto God and our neighbor, we should
also believe in Christ.) But when God shall be al in all, we shall then
perfectly and fully obey his will.

17 Neither is there any more then this, meant by the note of the similitude
[AS] which does not point out an aequall quality, but a likeness, and an
agreement therein: not that the regenerate should upon earth perform the will
of GOD in as great measure, but in the like affection and operation, that the
Angels do execute the same in heaven.

18 Now [IN HEAVEN,] al those that remain therein, as the souls that are in
bliss, and the Angels do obey the will of God.

19 Yea, and the Son also, in respect that the Mediator Christ, does as yet
the will of his Father in Heaven, when as he does make intercession for us, and
brings to pass, whatsoever does belong unto the edification of the Church.

20 The souls also that are in bliss, do in heaven celebrate the praises of
God, and do desire after their manner, both the deliverance of their brethren,
that are here militant upon earth, and also the punishment of the enemies.

21 Now those blessed ministering Spirits, do perform the will of God diverse
ways; as by singing that song, Holy, holy, etc. by procuring the salvation
of the elect, and punishing the wicked, as it pleases GOD to use their service.

22 Now all these Spirits do execute Gods will.

I Most willingly, because they obey him without murmuring. II Most readily and
surely, because they make no delays, but presently betake themselves unto
that which they are commanded to do. III Most faithfully, because they both
hear, and also perform in deed their whole charge, and not a part only; and
being once sent, they never cease, until they be called back again.
23 We desire therefore of God, that he would give us both the will and the
power to obey, and that we may be seruice-able and obedient unto his majesty,
according unto the same Spirit, manner, affection, readiness, and cherfulnes of
the will, that the Angels in heaven do obey him: And we do also crave the
taking away of all those things which either directly set themselves against
his will, or do any wise withstand the same.

Defended by JOSIAS [sonne unto IOSIAS] SIMLERVS of Tigurine
PRINCIPLES TOUCHING THE FOVRTH PETITION OF THE LORDS PRAYER. LXVIII.
THE THIRD PETITION OF THE LORDS Prayer has been opened in the last
Principles, concerning the will of God: so that the first part of the Prayer
being expounded, we come now to the second.

1 AFter that Christ had taught in the three former petitions, such things as
do immediately respect the glory of God: he now adjoyneth those, which (though
they are to be referred unto Gods glory) do yet especially concern us and
our profit.

2 Now, as man consists of two parts: so these things are of two sorts,
corporal and spiritual.

3 This first petition of the second part the^ is touching corporal, the other
two, are concerning spiritual blessings.

4 Now, whereas mention is made first of corporal benefits, the reason thereof
may seem to be, in that corporal things, and the profit that arise of them,
are better known unto us. And therefore, the Lord (to the end he might relieve
the slownesse and infirmity of our nature) does lift us from common things,
unto these that are less known unto us, from easy unto hard, from earthly
unto heavenly matters.

5 The sum of this first petition is, that the Lord would bestow upon us
things necessary for this life: to wit food and raiment especially: next,
those things which are helps of the outward necessities of this life; that is,
such things as make for our peaceable being, as far, and as long, as the Lord
thinks expedient for us.

6 The necessity, or rather the aequitie of this petition is manifold: First
it teaches us, that we ought wholly to depend upon Gods Providence, by whom
we are nourished, maintained and preserved. Secondly, that we acknowledge him
the giver of all good things both spiritual and temporal. Thirdly, that we
may with quiet minds expect those things at his hands, which otherwise would
hold us in a miserable care and perplexity.

7 For our merciful Father does not disdain to receive our bodies into his
protection and custody, that by these small things, he may exercise our
faith, when as we look for all things at his hands, even the least crumb of
bread, and drop of water, that we put into our mouths.

I. The Marcionites and Manichaees therefore are out of their wits, who have
endeavored to defend that God has no care of these our bodies, as though the
same were unbeseeming his Majesty: and that our flesh or our bodies, were the
work not of God, but of an evil beginning, that is, of the Devil, and
therefore that it became not the good God to sustain them, seeing they are
evil. II. They are madd also who think, that all things are disposed by the
tossing of Fortune. And the Epicures also, together with those who houlde that
God has no care or respect unto the things that are done under the or be of
the Moon. III Witches and Sorcerers in like sort are here condemned, and all
those, who either openly, or by any secreat trade, seek their maintenance in
this life of the Devil, and not of God.
8 But now we come to examine the words of the petitions: the word [BREAD] is
taken in this place, neither simply, nor Metaphoricallie, for the bread of the
Supper or Thanksgiving, of alms, of tribulation, of Doctrine, as some of the
ancients have expounded it: but it is taken by setting down a part for the
whole, for all those things which are required for the sustentation of this
life.

9 Now, whereas Christ has expressed this Petition by the name of BREAD
(being the moderatest kind of sustenance that men use,) and not flesh, or of
dainty fair: he does thereby commend unto us, the care of thriftines and so
brietie; and teach us that we ought to be content with small and mean things.

10 For although we may use meat, not for necessities cause only, seeing the
Lord does most liberally grant us many things besides those that are
necessary for the maintenance of this life: yet are we to take heed, least
abusing the sweetness of these things, and forgetting that heavenly bread,
we give our selves unto pleasure, according unto the saying of PAVLE, Romans
13.14.
Take no thought for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof.

11 Where he adjoyneth [OVR] he teaches us, that we ought to abstain from
other men's goods; and that we are, in a sinceare conscience, to use the things
which God of his mercy bestows upon us.

12 Now the bread is made ours, by his free-gift, because neither our
endeavors, labor, or hands, as is said LEVIT. 26.20, can profit us any
thing, except the blessing of God be joined with them: yea, and the abundance
of bread it self, would not be any whit available unto us, except it were
from above turned unto our nourishement.

13 The very rich men themselves then, with whom God has dealt so
bountifully, are bound here to crave daily bread. For, it is God who does
not only give and take away good things, but also blesses that which we
have received, and gives force of nourishment, otherwise bread having lost the
staff thereof, would be but as a stone unto us.

14 Now although that these things which we have received of God, are ours; and
that we may use them with a good conscience: yet it is not meet that they
should be ours in such sort, as they be only turned unto our own use: but
we must always remember, that we are but stewards of Gods blessings, and bound
to yield an account before his Tribunal seat, how we have bestowed them.

15 The word (...) does not signify a supersubstantiall bread, as some have
thought: but such as is sufficient for the daily sustentation of our body.

16 For the children of God are so carried above this life, that they may yet
necessarily crave earthly things, for the maintenance of their vocation in
this life: especially seeing the fatherly kindness and favor of God, does
appear even in meat and drink, and that godliness has the promises, not
only of the life to come, but even of this.

By this word DAILY is condemned their folly, who have used an immoderat
kind of abstinence, and hurtful unto the health of their bodies, and became
at the length to live so austerelie, that they dreamed the same to be a kind
of Angelical perfection.

17 The word (...) GIVE, or (...) as LVKE has it, does teach us that God is
the author, even of corporal blessings, and that food and raiment, and
whatsoever do make that we eat our bread in quietness, do come from his
mere liberality.

They are to be rejected therefore, who do attribute any thing unto the
merits of men, (which are none at all) in obtaining of corporal things.

18 Now, whereas we desire these things to be given us of God, which he has
commanded us to get with the labor of our hands, and the sweat of our brows,
this is done for two causes especially. First, because our industry and
diligence, do avail us nothing, for the obtaining of things needful, except
the blessing of God be joined unto them. Next, in that we are not properly
nourished by the power of meat and drink, but only that the Lord uses them
as instruments.

19 The word [THIS DAY] teaches, that we ought to bridle our immoderat desire
of transitory things, whereunto we are carried away beyond measure.

20 It teaches also, that we are continually to depend upon the goodness of
God, and that we are not to pine our selves with over much caring, how we shall
have things necessary for many years.

21 Yet are they not here condemned, who lay up for the time to come, that
which they have gotten by lawful means; so that it be done to a good end, and
that they repose not their confidence therein.

Defended by JOHN TAFFINVS of Tornay.
PRINCIPLES TOUCHING THE FIFTH PETITION OF THE LORDS PRAYER. LXIX.
1. SEeing, we have in the former Principles made the second part of the Lords
Prayer to be two-folde, so that the things contained therein, were showed to be
either corporal or spiritual: It follows, that having already dealt with
the corporal, we now come to the handling of the spiritual things.

2 Now, all the spiritual things which belong unto our salvation, and which
Christ teaches us to seek at Gods hands, are referred unto true repentance;
the which as it has two parts; so the same is contained in two Petitions.

3 True repentance consists first, in that we bewail our sins, and by
faith desire them to be done away: next, that we be careful not to commit those
things again. The former of these is contained in this fifth, the latter in the
next, which is the last Petition.

4 The necessity of this Petition, is no less then the aequitie of it: For
seeing all men, by reason of their sins, are so hateful in the sight of God,
that they can have no hope of aeternall life, except the Lord pardon the^ their
offenses: surely, there is none but may see, what great necessity there is of
this Petition: whosoever therefore desires to be saved, he is to know, that
this petition is very needful for him

5 The reason of the aequitie of it is the same, for there is nothing more
aequall, then that we should daily crave the remission and pardon of our sins,
at the hands of our merciful God, whom we continually offend.

I We cannot therefore but condemn the Pelagians, who thought that this
Petition was to be used for modesties cause: the which modesty is nothing
else, but blasphemous impudency. II We detest also, the madness of the
Catherists, Coelestinians, Anabaptists, and all such monsters, who dreaming
themselves to be perfect and free from all spot of sin, do deny, that they
have any need of this Petition. III And the Nouatians, who leave no hope of
remission, unto them that have fallen into any sin, after that they have once
received Baptism.
6 This Petition, that we may come unto the particular opening of it, has two
parts: In the former whereof we are taught, what we ought to crave, namely the
free remission of all our sins whatsoever they be, by and for, Jesus Christ
our Lord.

7 There are four things then contained in this Petition. 1. a confession of
our sins, who have made us guilty of aeternall death. 2. The great patience
and clemency of God toward us is commended, who does not only bear with
us, who daily offend him, but also does pardon every one of us, so many sins.
3. Out of the proper signification of the word (...) FORGIVE, we gather that
the remission of our sins is a free gift. 4. The word (...) DEBT, which the
Syrians call CHIBAH, does teach us, that all our sins, (which are here
figuratiuelie and according to the propriety of the Syrian tongue, called DEBTS,
are wholly forgiven us.

The Papists therefore, are mad with their merits, and distinctions between
the punishment and the offense, between mortal and venial sins, as they
define them; though we do not deny some sins to be greater then others; and
who fly unto their satisfactions, as believing that their sins are not wholly
done away by Christ only.

8 Vs] Christ would have us to use this word, to the end we might learn, not
only to be careful of our own salvation, but also of our brethrens: and this
is true love, which is so much commended unto us.

9 In the other part of this Petition, we are taught what our duty is.

10 Namely, that following the example of our most merciful Father, we should
truly forgive all trespasses unto those that have offended us, which is one of
the special effects of true love.

11 Now this second part is added, that we may rightly crave the remission of
our sins, and so may come unto prayer with true faith and repentance; the
mark whereof, is love toward our neigbour.

12 Neither are we bound, only to forgive those that have offended us: but
even to love them no less then our selves.

13 The word AS, does not paint out the cause, degree, or aequalitie of the
forgiving, proceeding from us, with the remission which we crave at Gods hand:
but it sets down the resemblaunce thereof after a sort, and our willingness
thereunto.

14 This word then is added as a sign, whereby we might be confirmed, that
God has so certainly forgiven us our sins, as we are assured, that we have
forgiven our neighbors, and that we are void of all hatred, envy, and revenge.

15 Now we forgive our neighbors their sins, as far as they concern us, and
not in regard that they have offended God, whom he especially offends,
whosoever he be, that trespasseth against his neighbor.

16 Whosoever then, desires his sins to be forgiven him, and has not
forgiven his neighbor; or having forgiven him in words, does intend to be yet
revenged: he does again desire, that God would not remit him his sins, but to
take punishment of them.

17 Yet is it lawful for a Christian, to seek redress by the Magistrate, of
the injury that is done unto him, both that thereby, the society of men may
be preserved, and that lewd men be not encouraged to abuse the patience of the
good; but yet so, as all desire of private revenge, and al offense be avoided.

Wrongfully therefore, did IVLIAN the Apostata gather out of this doctrine,
that Christians did take away the authority of the Magistrate, and the use of
laws.

Defended by SAMVEL BOYSSYNVS Occitanus.
PRINCIPLES TOUCHING THE SIXTH PETITION OF THE LORDS PRAYER. LXX.
HAVING DONE WITH THE FIVE FIRST Petitions of the Lords Prayer: the sixth and
the last is now to be opened.

1 THis last Petition, is rightly placed after all the rest; and especially
next after the first. For first, seeing we do here also crave of our God,
those things which make for our salvation: order requires, that after we have
in the former Petition, begged the remission of our sins, we should here
desire the strength of the Spirit, whereby, we might be daily enabled to
stand against all temptations.

2 For although our sins are forgiven us, yet are we never so cleared of
them, but the relics of the flesh do still remain in us, whereby our
adversary does drive us unto diverse sins. Wherefore we desire, that the
Lord would not suffer us to be overcome by the Devil, and the lusts of our
flesh, which do continually war against us.

3 Now because we wrestle not with flesh and blood, that is, with those
enemies, which we are able to against and by our own strength: but against the
powers of the Air, that is, against Satan himself, who does continually as
a roaring Lion lie in wait for us, and provoke us to sin: this Petition is
altogether necessary for us, that thereby we may obtain spiritual armor
at Gods hands.

4 This request consists of two parts; the Petition it self and the
declaration thereof: The Petition is, LEAD US NOT INTO TEMPTATION.] the
declaration of it is, [BVT DELIVER US FROM EVIL.]

5 In these words, [LEAD US NOT, etc.] is showed, that neither the Devil
himself, nor any other adversary can do ought against us, but by the Lords
permisision, and as far as he will permit them.

6 By the word LEAD, as also by many other that are found in the Scripture,
(as to harden, to deliver up into a reprobate sense, etc.) is not meant a bare
permission of God only (as some think,) but a permission joined with the
decree and ordinance of God, who does use the work of Satan, and the
concupiscence of men, either for the punishing of sin with sin, or for the
chastiseme^t of his children.

7 Now the Lord is said to lead those into temptation, whom in his just
judgment, he gives over unto satan, or their own wills.

8 Neither are we for this cause to think, that God is the Author of sin:
for what so ever he wills, the same does he will justly and holilie, and
his action even in that temptation whereunto men do yield, is altogether
without sin, whereas the action of Satan, and those that obey him, is both
unjust and altogether sinful.

It is without cause therefore, that some do gather out of this doctrine, that
we make God to be the author of sin.

9 Neither are we taught simply to pray, that we be not tempted at all, but
that we be not lead into temptation. For it profits us to be sometimes
tempted, but we pray, that we be not overcome of the temptation, and so offend
God.

10 The word TEMPTATION, or to TEMPT, is of a double signification: for
sometimes it signifies to sift or to try, and sometimes to lead unto evil.
God therefore is said one way to tempt, and Satan another. Satan, that he
may destroy, condemn, and overthrow; but God to the end that by trying his, he
may see what strength is in them not because God knows not what is man; but
partly to teach his children to know themselves, and partly that he may
manifest the hypocrites.

11 Now there are diverse and almost infinite sorts of temptations: for some of
them are raised within us only by our own concupiscence, which afterward are
augmented by Satan: others are administered unto our concupiscence by the
wonderful delusions of Satan: Again, we are sometimes provoked unto
wickedness from the right hand, that is, by flatteries, and the false
resemblaunce of right and profit; otherwhiles from the left, that is, by
threats and terrors.

12 And from all these do we desire, that our God would deliver us, by
enabling us with his strength: that so dwelling under his protection and
defense, we may firmlie stand against all the assaults of Satan.

13 So the word DELIVER, does admonish us of our weakness, and ignorance.
For, if we were able by our own strength to withstand temptations, we
should not stand in need to crave strength and aid else where: This our
deliverance from sin then, is not in our selves, neither does it depend upon
our selves, but only upon the strength, grace, and mercy of God.

Here are confuted both the mere Pelagians, who dream that Satan and our
corruption, may be overcome by our own strength: and also the half Pelagians
the Papists, who imagine a concurring together of nature and of grace: and
those also who teach, that the grace of regeneration once begun, is sufficient
for us, to gain the victory.

14 For we are borne the servants of sin, and the grace of regeneration
being begun, stands in need of the support of new graces, to confirm the
same and to make it effectual.

15 Yet are not we therefore turned into stocks, that in gaining the victory
over Satan, we should be used as dead instruments only, seeing both to will
and to do, is given unto us.

16 It is not greatly material, whether by the word [EVILL] in this place,
we understand the Devil or sin dwelling in us.

17 To conclude, we desire in this petition, that we be not overwhelmed by any
temptation; but contrariwise, that leaning upon the power of God, working
within us, sin and Satan being overcome, we may all our days, live in true
holiness.

Defended by MATTHEW ROBERTUS of Lorraine.
PRINCIPLES UPON THE CONCLUSION OF THE LORDS PRAYER. LXXI.
1 Having hitherto expounded the Petitions of the Lords Prayer: it now
remains, that we open the shutting up of them, contained in these words,
[FOR THINE IS THE KINGDOM, THE POWER AND THE GLORY FOR EVER.]

2 There are two things especially contained in this conclusion: first, the
confirmation of our faith, that is, of the assurance which we have, that we
shall be heard of God who both will, and can give us what we ask.

3 Next is set down the end, whereunto we ought to refer all the things,
that we crave in this Prayer: namlie, to his praise and glory.

4 And this is the most sure foundation of our prayers, when as we know that
they are to be directed unto GOD, unto whom all power, glory, and dominion
does appertain.

5 For if our prayers were to be commended unto the Lord, in our own
worthiness (which is none at all) there is no mortal man that durst (without
singular temeritie) so much as open his lips, much less, present his prayers
before his majesty.

6 But now, though we be most miserable, and bare of all things, yet can we
not be destitute of sufficient trust and confidence in prayer, seeing our
Fathers kingdom, power and glory, cannot be taken away from him.

7 By the word [KINGDOME] is meant, the right and authority to bear rule:
this confession then does attribute unto God, the most sovereign and free
rule over all creatures, whereby he governs every where, and over all.

8 The POWER which is me^cioned in the second place, does point out the
ability and power to execute this government: which power is so sovereign and
so mighty, that nothing is able to resist the same. So that God is able to
give us all things, seeing he has this power in his hand; which is also
joined with exceeding mercy and bountifulness.

9 Thirdly and lastly, by the word GLORY is declared the praise and honor
of God, whereunto we are to refer all our thoughts and deeds, as to their
last and final end.

10 The word AMEN signifies as much, as that which we ask is sure and
certainly ratified: neither is it adjoined as a portion of the prayer, but to
the end that it may both declare the sinceare desire and affection, whereby we
wish to be heard in Prayer, and also may testify the staiednes of our faith.

11 Seeing to give thanks then, we ought to consider these three things, which
this short sentence of Christ does contain. First, that we remember those
peculiar benefits which we have received at Gods hand: as DAVID being
delivered from the danger of war says: [Thou have delivered me Lord from
death, and from the enemy, etc.

12 Next, that we ascribe whatsoever we have obtained to have proceeded from
the mere liberality of God, and not to any worthiness or merits of our
own.

13 Briefly, that thereby we may be more and more confirmed in faith, and may
be raised up to the hope of receiving other, yea and greater benefits from his
majesty. For our God is not weary in doing us good.

14 Under this form which is every way most perfect we hold that there is
contained, whatsoever we ought to seek at Gods hand, so that it is to be
accounted for the rule of all our prayers.

Wherefore it is not well done of the Latin Churches in that they have omitted
this clause and end of the Lords Prayer, though sometimes they use the same
elsewhere.

Defended by MATTHEW SCARRO of Geneus.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING THE SACRED MINISTRY OF THE CHVRCH, WHERE THE DOCTRINE
OF the Law and the Gospel are compared together. LXXII.
1 WE have done with the true marks of the true Church: that is, with the
truth of Gods word, Sacraments and Prayer: now because that all things are to
be orderly done in the Church; it is meet that we set down, how these things
ought to be administered.

2 We hold that as the truth of all the sinceare doctrine that does appertain
unto aeternall life; so also the true manner of the government of the Church,
was given from above by the holy Ghost: both unto the Fathers before the Law,
and to MOSES in the wilderness, and also unto the Apostles. And to be short,
that this truth touching doctrine and government, was most faithfully and most
fully set down both by MOSES and also by the Apostles.

3 And although from the beginning unto the end of the world, there was, is,
and shall be but one doctrine of salvation, yet was there not always one and
the same form of the dispensation thereof.

4 For it pleased GOD at sundry times and in diverse manners to make the said
doctrine known unto the world: according unto the which dispensation, it was
also needful to frame the form of the ministry thereof.

5 The principal and chief end therefore of the holy Ministry in respect of
salvation, was always one: namely, the laying open of Gods goodness, touching
the salvation of men, by means of the free covenant made in Christ only: who
both before, and under the rudiments of the Law was shadowed, and manifested in
deed in the fullness of time.

6 Yet of this holy ministry both before and under the law, there were three
general parts; namely, to teach, to sacrifice, to bless, as might be showed
by many testimonies of the scripture: under the name of sacrifice, we
understand, all sorts of rites, as under the name of blessing, we contain
public prayers.

7 Of the holy doctrine there have been two kinds. namely, the law,
denouncing judgment and death; and the Gospel offering life, freely given
unto the repentant.

8 Yet is it not properly the law, but the transgression thereof that does
kill.

9 The Legal ceremonies were certain appurtenances both of the law and the
Gospel, wherein as in a glass, were to be seen, though in a contrary regard,
both the curse of the law, and also the blessing of the Gospel.

11 The ministry of Moses, notwithstanding, compared with the ministry of the
Gospel, is for three causes called the ministry of death. The one, because
that the law written, was given by Moses, whereby death was more manifestly
laid before the eyes of sinners, then ever before.

12 The other, because Moses did labor much more in setting down the Law,
then in opening the promises of the Gospel; that men might learn by the
terrors thereof, to frame the^-selues unto the receiving of perfecter things,
that were to be manifested at the time appointed, and not place the hope of
salvation in these rites. Thirdly, because the Law indeed does point out the
disease that brings death, but does not heal it; yea rather increase the
same through our falt, in that it requires of us, the execution of the
Commandments, and gives us not ability to perform them.

12 But in the Gospel (the picture whereof in a sort, was that external
worship of the Law) God gives by his holy spirit, the ability to perform
the promise of the same, that is, the power to repent and believe. And
therefore the preaching of the Gospel, is called the spirit ingraffed in our
hearts, but the Law is termed the dead letter, that is, a dead writing
engraven in Tables of Stone.

13 Wherefore the Ministry, not only of the old, but also of the new
Testament, was ordained not by men; but by the Lord, who both instructed, and
also called both the Patriarchs, and also Moses and Aaron to exercise the
same, and afterward declared to Moses the rule and the form thereof, as he
would have it executed among his people: whereunto it was not lawefull to add,
or to detract any thing.

14 And because the Lord fore-sawe the negligence and the wickedness of the
Priests, he did therefore ordain in the ancient Church both before and under
the law, not only an ordinary (which under the law, was especially assigned
unto the Tribe of Leuy) but also an extraordinary that is a Prophetical
ministry: unto whom the Priests and Kings themselves were to yield obedience,
and whose office was to teach the whole people, partly by a more exquisite
exposition of the law, and partly by terrifiyng the disobedient by fearful
Reuelationes of Gods judgments, and comforting the godly by most loving
promises.

15 Their ministry was extraordinary, for although there were certain
colleges of Prophets, when and as often as it pleased God, yet were they not
appointed by man, neither did they lean upon any ordinary calling: Briefly,
God did enspire with his Spirit whom it pleased him, respecting therein,
neither sex nor calling.

16 Both these Ministeries, did the Lord promise unto his people by MOSES, and
withal showed, how false Prophets whom the people were to take heed of,
might be discerned from the true, whom they were to hear.

17 The Lord ordained this Ministry of men, not that he was compelled thereto
by any necessity, but that thereby he regarded man's infirmity.

18 Yet he never used it, in such sort, as he would give his own glory
thereunto, that is, the authority to perform those things, which the divine
power alone brings to pass: but he effects external things only by his
Ministry, performing those things by his own inward power alone, which were
declared unto the senses of the hearers, by the outward ministry of men.

19 Therefore he performs what he thinkeh good inwardly in the
understanding, and will of man, when and as often as it pleases him, even
without the external ministry: but he who ever neglects the ordinary
ministry, or by unbelief does severe the inward force from the outward
administration; that man tempts God and shows himself unworthy of his
grace. But as for those that any wise ascribe the proper work of God, unto the
ministry of men, they are to be accounted mere superstitious, and even
plain Idolators.

Defended by ARON CAPEL an Englishman of London.
PRINCIPLES TOUCHING THE MINISTERS OF THE WORD UNDER THE GOSPEL. LXXIII.
1 BEcause God, by means of his Ministers, from the beginning of the world unto
this day, has with the word of life sustained man being fallen: the order both
of time and doctrine requires, that seeing we have in the former Principles,
spoken of the Ministry which God ordained in his Church, both before and
after the law: We now deal with that Ministry, which Christ after the
abolishing of the law, appointed in these last times, to be in the Christian
Church.

2 And to the end that the sum and the truth of the whole matter may be more
clearly set down: we affirm first of all, that there are three sorts of
Ecclesiastical functions to be gathered out of the holy Scriptures. For some
do attend upon the preaching of the word; of which sort, were Apostles,
prophets, Evangelists, and at this day Pastors and Teachers: Others have the
oversight of the gathering and right distribution of the Church goods. The
third sort, do watch over the manners of men in preventing offenses, and
preserving the right government of the Church.

3 Christ therefore, as the Son and the sovereign Lord and governor of his
Fathers house; did not only perfectly set down the doctrine of the covenant,
but also declared, by what callings he would have his Fathers house, that is,
the Church to be governed.

4 And therefore he himself, as PAVLE says, gave for the work of the
Ministry, and the knitting together of the Saints, some Apostles, some
Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers.

5 Neither is it to be inferred, either that all these callings were ordained
to be perpetually in the Church: or yet on the other side, that all of them
were to continue, but only for a time.

6 Now all these names, as also the name of Elders and Deacons, are sometimes
in a general signification, attributed unto al those who have the ministry of
the word committed unto them: and sometimes they do declare dictinct and
peculiar functions, in which sense we take them in the treatise following.

7 Of these five, the three first were temporary, having also every one of
them a distinct Ministry, and they were peculiarly called Apostles,
Evangelists, and Prophets, as being appointed for the planting of the Church
throughout the world, by the publishing of the new covenant. The other two
callinges were perpetually to remain unto the last coming of Christ.

8 The chief and most excellent of all these, were the twelve Apostles, (unto
whose number, PAVLE was afterward called) as it were the ambassadors of God,
who were elected and admitted neither of men, neither by men, but of Christ
immediately, that all of them being of equal authority amongst themselves,
should become the Maister-workman of the building, whereabout they were to be
employed, being strictly tied unto no certain congregation.

9 They therefore, as they were lead by the inspiration of the holy Ghost, or
by some peculiar commandment of God, traueling through many countries,
preached the grace of Christ every where unto all men, the which, they both
confirmed with miracles, and sealed by the administration of the Sacraments.
They also committed the churches which they had planted, to be governed by
their Pastors and Doctors, as time and place would permit: this office being
faithfully performed by them, and they being called out of this life, the
Apostolical calling also ceased.

10 Hence it appears, how vain and detestable in all godly ears, is that
voice of the Romish Prelate, who is not afraid to profess himself an
Apostle, by virtue of his tyrannical succession, and is not ashamed under the
feigned pretense of PETER'S Primacie, to call himself, chief or Prince of the
Apostles, (amongst whom there was none either greater or lesser then other)
and even the head of the whole Church.

11 It is out of controversy, that all those were called Prophets, who by the
inspiration of Gods Spirit, forsawe and foretold things to come: whose calling
before the coming of Christ, was (when the Priests grew negligent) to direct
the faith of the Saints unto the promised salvation, and also both to raise up
the godly, and to beat down the disobedient, by their divine revelations. So
also at the beginning of the preaching of the Gospel, they were called
Prophets, who were endued with a peculiar gift of revelation or divine wisdom,
wherewith God would at that time adorn his Church: of this sort was AGABVS, and
the four daughters of PHILIP the Evangelist, mentioned in the Acts of the
Apostles, and others undoubtedly not a few.

12 Sometimes notwithstanding the word PROPHET and Prophesying in the
Scriptures, are taken in a manifold sense, and signify all those in general
who execute the function of the Pastor. For in this sense the Apostle says, He
that prophesies aedifieth the Church, exhorts, comfort, reproves the
contrary doctrine.

13 Under the name EVANGELISTS are understood those whom the Apostles used as
their companions and fellow laborers, because they themselves were not
sufficiently able to perform every work in all the Churches, of this sort
was TIMOTHY and TITUS, SILVANVS and others.

14 Now their office was to perform the work begun or otherwise committed
unto them by the Apostles, as it is manifest especially out of the Epistles of
PAVLE to TIMOTHY, and TITUS: whose calling was also temporary. Those four in
like sort are called Evangelists in a more strict signification, whose service
the Lord used for the writing of the story of the Gospel, and describing the
beginning of the Christian Church.

15 There remain two callings belonging to the Ministry of the word: to wit,
Pastors and Doctors; who are distinguished from the former, in a threefold
respect: first in that they are not immediately, but have been ever since the
time of the Apostles, ordained by the ministry of men according unto that
form whereof we shall speak. Secondly, in that they are tied unto a certain
congregation: lastly, because the Lord has ordained both these functions to
be perpetual in the Church.

16 The proper and the peculiar function of the Doctor, is to teach the
doctrine of true Religion, by the faithful interpreting of the Scriptures, to
defend the same against the gainsayers, and to govern the Ecclesiastical
schools.

17 Now the Ministry of Pastors, as of the Priest in times past, consists
in three points: First not only in the simple laying open of the prophetical
and appostolicall doctrine which we said to be the office of the Doctors, but
also both in the private and public aplication thereof by sinceare and diligent
teaching, reproouing, correcting, and instructing: Next in the administration
of the Sacraments, which are come in place of the legal rites; briefly, in
conceauing public prayers, which is not the lest part of the Ecclesiastical
ministry.

18 The administration of the word also is committed unto the Elders
peculiarly so called, (whom Paul does especially express by the name of
gouerners) but not simply to that end, for the which it is committed unto the
Pastors and doctors. For they do not administer the word either publicly
unto the whole congregation, or priuatlie unto some: but have authority to
administer the ecclesiastical censures together with the Pastors, by
reproving, rebuking and binding, if necessity so require, those, who by due
trial are found to walk inordinatly in the Church, being such as cannot be
otherwise amended; which is don not that sinners should perish, but
contrariwise that being humbled at least by shame, they may return into the
right way.

19 These together with the Pastors (though distinguished by their function as
we said) are some times called by a general and common name of Bishops,
overseers rulers; and that in respect of the flock, which they are to rule and
govern.

20 DEACONS peculiarly so called, are those, who have the charge both of the
receiving and also of the orderly distribution of the alms, and the
administration of the rest of the Church-goods: and the applying of them to the
necessity of the poor, and other holy uses: amongst which number in times
past were reckoned the company of widows, being appointed especially for
the manifold necessities of the poor.

21 Now, it is unlawful for any man to intermeddle with these holy
functions, except he be rightly called: and a lawful calling is that, whereby
(according to the order instituted by Christ) any man, of whose life and
doctrine there has been a diligent and a precise examination had, is by the
Church whereunto he is appointed, (the name of God being in all singleness
and sincerity called upon) chosen, as it were, by the voice of the holy
Ghost, speaking in the mouth of the Church.

22 In these kinds of elections, whether they be done at once in the same
tenor, time and place, (which use being at the first in a holy sort practiced
in the Church, was afterward made dangerous by covetousness and ambition) or
in diverse actions, times and places: it is meet, as it has been the continual
practice of all well ordered churches, that first the Pastors, Doctors and
Elders, should have the chief dealing, as being those who both have the
oversight of the flock, and are likely to be of sounder judgment in
discerning the doctrine. Next unto them, the chief and especial men, both in
godliness and authority as the Magistrate (if he be a Christian) are to have
place. Lastly, the consent of the people is to be had, in such sort as no man
is to be admitted unto any Ecclesiastical function, but by the knowledge and
consent of the whole Church.

23 Election being lawfully finished, published, and ratified, imposition of
hands or ordination, that is, the placing of a man, as it were, in the
possession of the holy ministry, is to be done of Pastors, in name of the
whole Eldership.

24 The Lord has ordained these callings to continue in his church, to the end
of the world: neither indeed has the church, or ever shall altogether want the
ministry of the word, seeing faith is by hearing. Yet we see (the sins of
men enforcing the Lord thereunto, and his just judgment which begins at his
own house, requiring the same) that it has often come to pass, as it was
expreslie foretold by the Spirit of God, that the public ministry was for
the most part, not in the hands of careful Sheepheards, but of the most
forlorn spoilers and wasters of the Church, Antichrist him self also, sitting
in the very Temple of God.

25 Now, when this has come to pass, the Lord, in mercy toward his Church,
has been accustomed, either extraordinarily (as he did to the Prophets in
times past) without any consideration of that election whereof we have now
spoken, or ordinarily out of their number who lurked amongst those robbers, to
endue with his Spirit and wonderful power, whom he thought good to choose for
the building up of his decayed house: whose vocation appears by their fruits:
that is, both by the truth of their doctrine drawn out of the pure word of God,
and also by the example of their true Christian life.

26 So it comes to pass, that the vocation of these men, which at the first
was extraordinary, is (after that the right order is restored by them) become
lawful and ordinary: and they are far unlike unto them, who neglecting the
right order that is in force, are drawn either by ambition, covetousness, or
some other affection to invade the functions of the ministry: of whom the
Lord says, [They ran, but I sent them not.]

Defended by ABRAHAM HENRY a Normane.
PRINCIPLES TOUCHING THE FALSE MINISTRY OF THE GOSPEL. LXXIIII.
1 Having set down the true and lawful Ministry of the Gospel, which the
Son of God ordained, and by his Spirit divided into their several functions:
It now remains, that we adjoyne the false ministry of the same, to the
end, that contraries being laid one against an other, may be better
manifested.

2 In the true Ministry of the Gospel, there are three things which
distinguish the same from the false. The one that the authority of the callings
proceed from the Son of God, as being ordained either immediately by
himself, or mediatlie by his Apostles. The other is, that the calling be
lawful; that is, such a calling as is squared according to the prescript laws
of the doctrine and Discipline of the Apostles. The third is, the prescript
administration of the holy callings. Now all these things, we aduouch to have
been, by a little and a little utterly overthrown by the Papisticall tyranny,
which with the Apostle we may justly call, the mystery of iniquity.

3 And first we affirm, that the callings of the Popish Clergy, which they
express by that proud title of Hierarchy, are in part altogether false; that
is, such as have at the first been invented by man, and afterward, became
merely devilish and in part counterfeit: that is, such, as only retained the
names of true callings, which they abollished in deed.

4 These functions following, we hold to be altogether false, and destitute of
all true foundation; namely, the Primacy of the Bishop of Rome over al
Churches: the Cardinalship, Patriarkship, Archiepiscopalship, and briefly, that
whole Episcopal degree of Lord-Bishops, over their fellowe-Elders.

5 As to the usurped power of the Bishop of Rome over others: yea, and over al
Churches; the same by two manifest reasons amongst the rest is convinced, not
to be Apostolical, and therefore to have no warrant in Gods word. The one,
because the Apostles were of equal authority and power amongst themselves, as
it appears by the commandment of Christ who sent them, and also by the
record of the things which were done by them. The other, because that the
Apostolical function, being appointed for the laying of the foundation of the
christian Catholic church; now, that the same is laid, and the Apostles called
into heaven, is ceased here upon earth, in respect of their personal
ministry; and in respect of the building upon the foundation which they
laid, the doctrine delivered by them, preserved from above, and which is to
continue to the worlds end, is so sufficient, that there is no need of any
successor of the Apostolical authority, either from the planting of new
Churches, or for the restoring of those that are already planted.

6 Cardinals, as it appears out of the story of FABIAN and SILVESTER, though
corrupt stories, were at the first no other then the seaue^ Deaco^s of the
church of Rome, having their names from seven quarters of the city, (which
also they called cardines) wheru^to they were allotted, and therefore called
cardinals, is as it were quarters: and thus does their borrowed cou^tefeit
style yet testify. He furthermore seems in the writings of Gregory, to be
named a Cardinal, who is called a Pastor or Curat: neither is any mention of
those that are now, in the subscriptio^ of the ancient Councils, in so much
that they are, and ought to be justly accounted the most ougly brood of
Satan, begotten by him in these latter times, for the defense of that strumpet.

7 As touching the distinctions of Bishops into Patriarks, Primates,
Metropolitans, and Archbishops, (al these being the same at the first) that
whole work was ^s institution, and not Gods ordinance, as even IEROM himself
testifies in express words.

8 Now all these at the first were names of order and distinction, and not of
any superiority or power, when any Ecclesiastical controversy did arise, or
any Pastors were to be chosen, both Synods might be orderly gathered together,
and Synodall decrees put in execution; and also, that elections might be done
by the advice of the neighbor churches, and ratified in a comely manner,
without confusion.

9 This distinction of Churches, belonging unto order, and not unto any
pre-eminence of degree, allowed by custom, and confirmed by the Fathers in the
council of Nice, is not of it self to be reprehended: but yet the miserable
issue of it, manifested at the length, that (in two respects) there was not
that wise regard by this means had of the Churches, which had been needful.

10 First, in that this Prioritie and Primacie, was tied unto certain rites,
whereas the regard should chiefly have been had in this point, unto the
fitnes of the persons, and not unto the power and populousnes of Cities; for
experience it self does teach us, that vices invading the very Pastors
themselves, do grow no where more rife, then in great Cities; and in this
point, this one thing is very wonderful, that the Fathers in that
distribution followed the type of the Roman Empire; notwithstanding, that the
holy Ghost by JOHN, speaks of the image of the beast.

11 The other, in that they made one man ouer-seer over more elderships or
churches then had bin needful, and that for term of life, (unless some great
matter had fallen out, although at that time, he easily suffered himself to
be displaced:) whence the way was opened first, for those Bishops to opresse
their fellow-laborers; Next unto mutual contention amongst themselves, then to
the tyrannical government of a few; and last, unto that Antichristian
tyranny it self.

12 Whence it appears of what great moment it was, that the government of
the Church ordained by the Apostles, and under the which, the Churches
flourished even in persecution, (being a government consisting of an
Aristocratie, most diuinelie mixed with the holy Democratie of the Church,
under that only Monarch, ruling by his own laws,) should have been
retained, rather then new degrees and forms of government should have been
invented, and especially according unto the pattern of the Roman Empire:
wherein they did no other thing, then the Israelites in times past, who not
contenting themselves with the Aristocratie ordained by the Lord, would be
governed by kings, after the manner of the nations round about them.

13 Yet the Fathers foreseeing this inconvenience, labored to prevent the same
by many decrees, both of particular and general Synods, least that this order
by any pretense, should be turned into honor and lordly dominion. But what
compelled them to ordain that, whereunto they were necessarily enforced to
provide a remedy?

14 And alas, this remedy was used in vain, as most woeful experience did
presently testify. From whence I pray you did it proceed, but from this
authority attributed unto certain Cities and places: that first scismes,
next, the defense of heresies did arise, and presently the change of the
Ecclesiastical Aristocraty (the head whereof is Christ alone) into the horrible
tyrannical government of a few? when as at the first, the four Patriarks
exercised jurisdiction over their fellow-brethren, the Metropolitans or
Archbishops, whereunto the Patriarch of Constantinople being added to make up
the fifth, and usurping (the Patriarchs of Jerusalem, Antioch, and Alexandria,
being thereby thrust down lower:) the next place unto the Roman Patriarch
by reason of the dignity of new Rome: he in the East, and the Romish Patriarch
in the West, invaded the very throan of Christ Jesus.

15 Now as touching the other functions; the only names whereof, have
remained amongst the false Romish clergy to blind the world withal, it shall
appear in the 3. head of this contrariety or Antithesis, how they are depraved.

16 The Lord in his word, has opened one only way, whereby men are to enter
into the sacred functions of the Ministry, and that is free election, made by
those who have interest therein, together with the trial of doctrine and life;
as also it is decreed by infinite numbers of the purer canons of Councels and
Synods.

17 The right of this election, in regard of the choice of their universal
tyrant, or rather in the execution of their open and most manifest Symony, have
the College of Cardinals at Rome usurped unto themselves. And this tyrant
also, does claim unto himself most impudently the authority to make most
shameful merchandise (unto any that will give most) of Ecclesiastical
benefices, as they call them, or to bestow them any ways at his pleasure,
raising and exacting very often the price of them as he thinks good, without
regard of any canon old or new; and besides that, Bishops and a few others
within their Provinces, are beholding unto him for the right of collation, as
they call it, or bestowing of benefices, he has very often couenanted
(concerning the naming of those that should possess the^) upon what condition
he thought good, even with Kings and Princes.

18 Now, the treatise concerning the third head, that is, concerning the
administration of Ecclesiastical functions in that false Apostaticall Church
of Rome: we will refer unto the next disputation.

Defended by SAMVEL CEVALLER of Geneua.
PRINCIPLES TOUCHING THE HOLY FVNCTIONS OF THE CHVRCH, THAT ARE DEPRAVED, AND
RETAINED ONLY IN name in the Romish counterfayt Church. LXXV.
1 FIrst of all, this shameful error has taken root in that Romish
false-Church; namely, that they count the holy functions of the Church
amongst Sacraments: upon the number of which functions also, they the^ selves
cannot agree.

2 This which falsely they call the Sacrament of Order, some do divide into the
highest and the lowest orders: others more arrogantlie, unto the ruling and
governing, or into the ministering and serving degree; not altogether without
reason (because some of them are under the authority and subjection of others)
yet by a vain and frivolous distinction seeing they have taken away (as shall
be showed) the things themselves, and do only retain the names, that thereby
they may cloak themselves under the cou^terfeit show of antiquity

3 This ruling order, they attribute unto their Bishops, (whereof also they
make diverse degrees) and their Elders, unto whom also they do assign their
rulers, called their Arch-elders, the rest they contain under the name of the
serving order.

4 Others do make the Ecclesiastical Lordships and jurisdictions to be above
the orders themselves: and so they make the highest orders to be Priests,
Deacons, and Subdeacons: the rest which are of the inferior order, they name
Ostiaries, or doore-keepers, Readers, Exorcists, and Acolythes, or such as in
times past attended upon the Ministers: of these we will speak severally,
laying down this foundation, that none of these functions are found in the
Romish fals-Church, but only in name.

Concerning Bishops.
5 Now, as touching Bishops; seeing that by the ordinance of God a Bishop,
Pastor, and Elder (we speak now of those Elders that labor in the word) are
the one and the same in respect of their function: whereas in the Romish
counterfeit Church, to be a Bishop, and to be an Elder, are altogether diverse
things: so that there are many Bishops there, which neither are, nor never
were Elders, (whom they call Priests) and on the other side, there are many
and almost infinite Elders, which neither are, nor ever shall be Bishops: it
follows that amongst them, there are no Bishops of Gods ordinance.

6 Seeing that none by Gods word is called a Bishop in respect of his fellow
brethren, (which are al aequall among themselves) but in regard of his own
flock which he ouerseeth, as the rest of them do theirs; amongst whom he
which seems to be most meet to moderate the whole number of the brethren,
is chosen to be over them, not in regard of any degree or pre-eminence, but
only for orders sake: Man's wisdom, (as we have spoken in the Principles
last going before) brought this order, which was only an order of place
amongst them which were aequall, into superiority and pre-eminence; which
pre-eminence notwithstanding was tied within the bounds of certain laws least
it should grow into plain tyranny.

7 But this humain Bishopric in the Romish cou^terfeit Church, not only
untying, but breaking a sunder, and casting clean away all these bonds, grew
into manifold tyranny.

8 Now, how far this false and counterfeit Bishopric differs both from
that which was ordained by God, and also from the other of man's invention,
which by steps was co^uaied into the Church, these things following do show.

I In that some are promoted unto this dignity, by a fained kind of election,
with the chapters of Cannons, as they call them, have wholly wrested unto
themselves: Others treading and despising all Cannons and order, do come by
the same, through most shameful and abominable briberie. II In that, as the
soldiers in times past, divided the garments of Christ being crucified; so do
these false Bishops with their chapters, openly without all shame, divide the
goods of the poor amongst themselves. III In that, contrary unto the manifest
and so often repeated prohibition of Christ, having cast from them the
dispensation of Gods mysteries, they have so far entangled themselves with
Civil government and affairs, that some of them have usurped all kind of
temporal government, fraudulently obtaining the same, either by deceiving
Commonwealths and Cities, or by seducing, as the Pharisees did under color of
Religion the unwary and uncircumspect heirs to bequeath unto them their
possessions, which neither the one could give, nor the other lawfully receive:
Other of them, do bear rule over Princes, and even over Kings themselves.
IIII And what should hinder them to do this, who stick not to bear rule over
the very souls and consciences of men, and to abrogate the very express law
of God, as often as they think good. V To be short in that, if it pleases
them for fashions sake, to perform any thing that seems to have any
affinity with the office of a Bishop, that must consist not in the
dispensation of Gods word, but partly in their disguised and masking Bishoplie
apparel, and crossing with the sign of the Cross, partly in the defending
of their superstitious and cursed Idolatry, as in anointing, in using that
ridiculous ceremony of confirmation as they call it; in the consecration of
Temples and Altars, in the wicked ordination of their sacrifices: Briefly, it
consists in the godless rites of their Idolatrous worship. VI. And this
forsooth is that true and undoubted Apostolical succession, whereby the true
Catholic Church may be discerned in deed from the false.
Touching Elders.
9 By the ordinance of God, which was carefully observed in the Church, as
long as the same was rightly governed: there were chosen others also, called
according to the custom of the Hebrews by the common name of ELDERS: whom
PAVLE does also call Governors, who being men of approved godliness, were
joined unto the number of Bishops, Pastors, or Elders, (for these three are all
one) by whose common direction and authority, sinners were admonished, or
brought under the Ecclesiastical censures: and by whom the mere
Ecclesiastical causes which had risen, were decided: and the civil
contentions also (as it is likely, before there were any Christian
Magistrate) were, according to the Apostolical doctrine, brotherly and
friendly taken up, without any debating of the matter, as it is usual in
civil courts.

10 This then was the Christian Presbytery, or Eldershippe: But in the Romish
false-Church, they came in the place of the Elders that ought to have attended
upon the word; whose especial and principal calling, is not to declare that
Sacrifice of Christ; nor as PAVLE commands to teach, to rebuke, improve and
exhort the people out of the Scriptures of God: but wholly to overthrow the
very foundation of Christianity, by that horrible and blasphemous Sacrifice,
whereby they bear the world in hand that they in very deed do offer Christ
himself unto his Father for the quick and the dead, to mock God and men, by
their singings, which are either ridiculous, or patched together out of Gods
word, miserably torn in pieces, or else full of horrible impiety, being also
sung in mockery of the Church, in a strange, and (for the most part) a
barbarous tongue: to burn incense unto Idols, to administer Baptism, (which
they pollute a thousand ways) in a strange tongue also, and that for money, to
change the holy Supper of the Lord into most detestable Idolatry: Briefly,
not to feed the poor people, but to flea them, and pill them most
unnaturally, by exacting a continual tribute both of the living and of the
dead. This (I say) is the charge, and this is the calling, both of their
Curates, and of the rest whom they call beneficed men; and also of their
maisterlesse hounds, who living by their daily wages, do, (as hungry Dogs)
smell out the kitchen of these fat mastiffes, and hire out themselves to supply
their rooms.

11 Now as to the other Elders, whom we said to be especially called
Gouerners, they have utterly abolished even their names, and have placed in
their steed the Official, (as they call him) being the Bishops Vicegerent,
the Promoter, as they call him, and briefly the Procurators of that which they
name their Ecclesiastical Court, wherein Civil causes (for the most part) are
handled, and that with greater brablement and stir, than in any civil court
beside: and wherein the cause of matrimony is decided, not by Gods law, but
according unto their rotten Canons: briefly, where all the laws of God and
men, are most impudentlie put to sale.

And therefore there is no holy Eldership or Presbytery, and no Elder in the
false Romish Church, save only in name.

Concerning Deacons.
12 It is clear and out of controversy, unto all those that are conversant in
the reading of the word, and in the story of the purer Church, that the
Deacons, by the ordinance of the Apostles, had the charge of the Church-goods,
wherein they were also subject unto the oversight of the Pastors. But in the
false Romish Church, wherein they have adjoined subdeacons unto their Deacons,
what is it I pray you to be a Deacon? Forsooth, to be discerned from the Priest
saying Mass, by a coat without sleeves, to stand answering the Priest at his
right, or at his left hand, (if the Mass be to be chanted or sung, otherwise
Deacons have nothing to do there:) when he secretly muttereth some things to
himself, to chaunt the Epistle, as they call it, and to read a piece of the
Gospel: to reach the Cup or Chalice unto the Priest, being to make merry
therewith alone: briefly, to carry about the basen, wherein they do receive
the money that is offered by the poor miserable sheep, to be divided only
amongst the wolves themselves. And who I pray you do exercise this Ministry?
even they, who though they be sacrificing Masse-priestes themselves, do yet
for the names sake, play the part of a Deacon and Subdeacon in this Comedy.
But what is become in the mean time of the goods of the Church, belonging unto
the poor? Surely this whole pray (excepting Hospitals, which Cities and
Towns are bound to maintain upon their own charges) being shared and torn
in pieces amongst the wolves themselves, is publicly, without all shame,
bestowed upon the maintenance of dogs and horses, of whoores and baudes, upon
dycing and carding, and all kind of luxuriousness, unless it be that
covetousness does devour up some portion of it, or that it be spent upon the
maintenance of Civil dissentions amongst themselves, or upon the persecuting of
the godly.

There is therefore, no office of the Deacon according to Gods ordinance, in
the false counterfeit Church of of Rome; no Deacon, but only in name, unless
we had rather call al these forlorn wretches, by the name of Deacons than of
sacrilegious persons, as they are in deed.

13 As to the inferior orders (as they call them) they are not so much to be
counted Ecclesiastical functions, (whereof we have already spoken,) as
certain exercises, whereby the young me^ (excepting only the Exorcists) that
were consecrated unto the church were, in times past, made meet, (a proof being
had of their godliness and religion) to the execution of the ministerial
functions, whereof we have spoken.

14 The office of the Ostiaries or doore-keepers, was to atte^d upon the
Church-dore, least that any Catechist, or any who making their repentance,
stood in the Church Porch; should rashly intrude themselves unto the holy
assembly or Supper. Now, the Readers office was, standing at the desk to read
some part of the word unto the people, while they stayed for the Sermon. The
Acolythes did attend upon the Pastors, and upon the Bishop, not only for
honors sake, but also for the performance of diverse other services if it were
needful: and even to the end, that the Pastors should do nothing, (as near
as could be) without witnesses: briefly, that by this their daily attendance
and hearing, the young men might be made meet for the holy functions. As
touching Exorcists, the Christian Church used them (as long as the gift of
miracles continued) to the healing of those that were possessed and distracted,
or at least wise, for the commending of them to God, by certain peculiar
prayers. But seeing the gift of miracles, is now ceased, to what purpose
should we have Exorcists?

15 Now, because it was ordained by the ancient Cannons, that no man should be
rashly admitted unto the ecclesiastical functions, who had not first approved
his godliness and diligence unto the Church, in these small offices, therefore
do our good Romanists, of that false and apostaticall Romish Church, before
they admit any unto the highest orders (as they call them) which are most
disordered, ordain with most foolish and ridiculous ceremonies their Clarks
having paid their fees, even in the one and the self same week, to be
Dore-keepers, Readers, Acolythes, and Exorcists: and within a short while
after, they presently (if they pay for it) will admit them unto their higher
orders. Now in their churches, they have neither ostiary nor reader; and as for
Acolythes, they do not so much as know them by name. Touching exorcism, it is
partly ridiculously performed in Baptism, by all Curates or Priests that are
their substitutes, as though that all the children of the christians were borne
possessed with Devils: and partly used in a wondrous juggling and deceitful
sort, by some, who are endued (forsooth) with a peculiar kind of power over
evil Spirits, (as in times past, when as the gifts of miracles was in force:)
and that sometimes, as it has been seen, when they have suborned those, who
feigned them selves possessed with Devils: though also they have sometimes
performed it in deed, by reason that the Devil did not refuse to depart out of
the bodies of men, as overcome by signing of the Cross, or sprinckling of
holy water, and invocation of the dead, that thereby deceiving many a
miserable soul, he might confirm them in their superstitious worship.

Wherefore in Popery, there is neither Ostiarie, Reader, Acolyth, or Exorcist,
save in mockery and in name only.

16 Wherefore also, there is in that Babylon, no holy order or Ministry in
deed, no lawful calling, and therefore no true Apostolical succession, but a
mere usurpation of the holy Ministry: Whence it is necessarily gathered,
that seeing the sacred Ministry is a true and an essential mark of the true
and Catholic Church, that there has been, and that as yet, in some sort
there does remain a true Church held captive in Babylon, which the Lord some
few years since, began to bring out of the said captivity: and it
necessarily follows, that the said Babylon neither was at any time, nor ever
shall be the Church of God.

Defended by DANIEL CHAMPHORANVS of Piedmont.
PRINCIPLES TOUCHING THE POWER AND AVTHORITY OF THE CHVRCH. LXXVI.
HAVING DONE WITH THE Ecclesiastical functions: it remains, that we now
show what, and how great the power and authority thereof is to be accounted.

1 But before we come unto the particular handling hereof, there are two things
especially to be considered: the one, that this whole power is spiritual, that
is, directly belonging unto the conscience; and therefore, that is severed
from the power and authority of the Magistrate, by the substauntiall form and
proper end thereof: The other, that it is not a sovereign authority, neither
consisting in their will unto whom it is committed, but only an
Administratorie poweer, contained within certain bounds and laws prescribed
by GOD, the only Lord and Lawe-giuer of his Church, upon whom alone also,
and not upon men, the force and efficacy therereof does depend.

That whole Lordly power therefore, which both the Bishop of Rome, and the
rest of the false Bishops have attributed unto them selves, together with the
temporal Government also, which they have wreasted, and (which is more
intolerable,) the rule which they have usurped over the consciences of men, is
not a power ordained by God: but a tyranny invented by Satan and his
instruments, for the disturbing of man's society, and the overthrow of the
true power of the Church.

2 This true power of the Church, is partly ordained against Satan, and the
rest of the enemies of our salvation: namely, sin, the world, and death,
which are subject unto him; and it does partly belong unto that order and
degree, which the Lord has appointed for the government of his own house,
that is, his Church here upon earth.

3 The former of these two, is common to the whole Church, whereby it comes
to pass, that the same, leaning upon the power of GOD, does prevail against
the gates of Hell: and it is also bestowed (although not in the same measure,
but as it pleases the holy Ghost to give it) upon every particular member
of the Church: whereby it comes to pass, that the holy Ghost in them does
tread Satan under feet, resist the flesh, bear rule over sin: yea, and at
the length, utterly destroy and overcome death.

4 Near unto this, is that other extraordinary and particular force, whereby
the Lord endued his, when and whom he thought good, with the power of casting
out Devils in the name of the Lord, and with other gifts of woorking miracles.

5 The other, Ecclesiastical power, which concerns the order appointed for
the Government of the Church, is defined to be that power, which is given
unto them that are in the function of the Ministry, over those whose
salvation they are, in respect of their calling, to promote; of this sort, are
Pastors and Elders called also Governors, of whom we have spoken in the
former sort of Principles.

6 This whole power consists in three points; namely, in teaching, in
appointing of laws, and in censuring.

7 The right and authority of teaching, not what they think good, but that
only which the Lord has written by the Prophets and Apostles, and in the
public administration of those Sacraments, which, and in those rites wherein,
he commanded them to be administered, does belong only unto those Pastors
that are rightly called, as long as the ordinary vocation does remain.

8 Now this authority, every faithful Pastor is bound to practice: not
only universally amongst his flock, but even toward every particular
sheep thereof, by instructing, comforting, and correcting them, according as
their necessity requires: as the Lord in EZECHIELL, and the Apostle himself,
by his own example does teach us. Act. 20.

9 The strength and efficacy of this power is showed, in that it is
Metaphorically expressed by the names of Keys, of shutting and opening: and
properly uttered by remission and retaining of sins, and it is also of that
great moment, that that is said to be loosed and remitted: and on the
other-side, to be shut and retained in Heaven, which is opened and remitted,
and in like sort shut and retained in earth.

10 Yet is not that by this means transferred to men, which is only proper
unto God, and to our savior Christ Jesus, unto whom alone all judgment is
committed: but hereby is meant, that that is ratified with GOD, which is
rightly done in his name by his Pastor, that is chosen thereunto, or rather that
God is the author of that which he does by his Ministers, declaring remission
of sins, unto those that believe the Gospel, and condemnation unto the
unbelievers, according unto that saying: [Hee that hears you, hears me: he
that despises you, despises me, he that believes shall be saved; he that
believes not, is already condemned.]

The Romish Prelate therefore, and his false Clergy, who do falsely bear
the world in hand, that the keys and power of opening and shutting of heaven
is committed unto them, do abuse their Ministry, and according unto the
saying of Christ, (let them alone) they are blind leaders of the blind.

11 The other part of this Ecclesiastical government, being committed to
Pastors and Elders, which we said to consist in appointing of laws, is so to
be understood, not as though it were lawful in Christian Religion, to impose
laws upon the consciences, as it is in the Civil policy, to ordain and to
abrogate civil laws and constitutions; the which point, the Apostle expreslie
testifies, not to be permitted unto the very Angels. For we have but one
lawgiver, namely, the only Son, being the alone interpretour of his Fathers
will, and the head of the Church, who has most fully opened the whole counsel
of our salvation, together with the whole worship due unto him, and has
both by his own mouth, and also by the Apostles, both by preaching and by
writing, most perfectly set down the government of his own house, even unto
the end of the world, whereunto nothing is to be added or detracted, and
wherein it is unlawful to change one tittle.

12 That matter therefore, remaining whole and sound in those points, which God
has commanded concerning his worship, and the duties of a Christian life: it
follows, that the Church has power to enact laws, only touching those
things which belong unto comelines and order, and appertain unto the mutual
agreement of the faithful, in the outward worship of God; in consideration of
which matters, seeing by reason of the diverse and sometimes repugnant
circumstances, (the Church being now gathered out of all nations,) they cannot
be the one and the same at all times and places: It follows, that it is free
and lawful, either to ordain or to abrogate them, as it shall appear, that
the necessity or commodity of the Church does require the same.

13 But here some things are especially to be very carefully taken heed
unto: First, that the conscience be not ensnared hereby, as though these laws
were any part of Gods worship. For the Lord does condemn all will worship,
as being himself the only Lawgiver of the conscience.

14 Secondly, that unprofitable, curious, and ridiculous rites, be not
appointed in stead of grave, comely, and profitable order.

15 Thirdly, that the true and pure worship of God, be not hindered, much less
oppressed by the multitude of such laws.

16 Fourthly, that especial care be had, that these things by a false pretense
of Religion, grow not into superstition: much more, that they degenerate not
into impiety: and if this come to pass, that they be either presently
amended, or rather utterly abollished.

17 Now that men have long since greatly offended in these matters, experience
alas, and the lamentable deformity of the church, does make it true and
manifest; whereas the true use both of the word, and also of the Sacraments,
has been not only depraved, but even turned into open Idolatry.

All the will worship then, that has been brought, either into the West by
that Romish Prelat, and his false Bishops, or into the East Churches, by the
Patriarchs of Greece: we do at once condemn.

And we affirm, that those Christian Magistrates have done well, who by the
procurement and advise, of the true servants of God, have cut off out of their
Dominions, many unprofitable ceremonies, (and altogether abollished the ungodly
and superstitious rites) how ancient so ever they were.

We do on the contrary side avouch, that they have smally regarded the good of
the Churches within their dominions, who either have retained the relics of
such ceremonies, or have chosen in a kind of preposterous judgment, rather to
correct them, then at once to abolish them.

18 Briefly, the ordinary and lawful power, to ordain and abrogate these laws,
does neither depend only upon the will and good liking of the Pastor alone,
nor yet upon the judgment of some Presbitery only; but there is also
required, that hereunto be adjoined the consent and authority of the
Christian Magistrate, together with the approbation and allowance of the
flock: who are not indeed, rashly to dissent from the judgment of their
Pastors and Elders, being grounded upon just reasons, which are agreeable unto
Gods word, that all things may be orderly done in the house of God.

19 Now although these laws are not imposed upon the conscience, yet being
once established, no man can with a good conscience violate them, both by
reason of offense, and also of the contumacie that should arise thereof.

We do therefore condemn, all the open tyranny of the Papists, even in this
point also.

Now, touching the third part of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, which we said to
consist in the lawful and judicial chastising of offenders: we will deal
God-willing, with that point in the Principles following.

Defended by IOHANES GEORGIUS VLRICVS of Tigurine.
PRINCIPLES TOUCHING THE CENSVRES OF THE CHVRCH, AND PARTICVLARLY TOUCHING
EXcommunication. LXXVII.
WE HAVE DISPVTED IN THE FORmer Principles, touching the power of the Church
in making Laws: it remains, that we now set down the third part thereof,
which consists in Judicial censuring.

1 THe Church of God in this life, is subject unto sundry Domestical
offenses; the which, though they cannot be utterly taken away, before that
last day; yet are they to be carefully foreseen, that as near as may be,
they do not arise; and when they do arise, that they may be purged by the
holy Ministry.

2 Of this purgeing, there has been always an order, and a practice
appointed in the Church by the commandment of God, whereby, not only the
Church in general, has bin severed from those who are manifestly profane, as
in times past before the law, the sons of God were separated from the sons
of men; but also those, who behaved themselves amiss in the bosom of the
Church, were separated from the sincere worshippers of the true God; in which
sense, the ancients thought rightly, that CAIN was said to be expelled from
the face of the Lord.

3 This order, as also all other the parts of Ecclesiastical government, was
more distinctlie and manifestly ordained by God under the law, where were
ordained diverse rites, both of inward and outward pollutions, and also of the
manner of their cleansing and purifiyng; which rites were prescribed unto the
Eldership of the Synagogue.

4 This order being appointed by the Lord, although the rules of the Synagogue
did most impudentlie and wickedly abuse the same, even against Christ and his
Apostles: yet did Christ teach, as MATHEVVE witnesses, that this same was to
be appointed in the christian church retaining even the very name of Elders to
this purpose, the which thing the Apostles performed, and observed very
diligently, as it appears by the express testimonies and examples of their
writings.

5 This also is manifest, out of the whole Ecclesiastical story, that the
Christian Church even unto this day, never wanted this order; although that the
Elders properly and peculiarly so called, (of whom we have spoken at large in
the former Principles,) were by a little and a little abollished by the tyranie
of the false Bishops; in the place whereof, came those most profane Courts of
their Officials, as they call them, and that abominable government of the
Antichristian kingdom.

6 What, and how great that Babilonicall confusion is, it may appear no way
better, then by the comparing of it with the true ordinance of God. Now this
true ordinance consists of two parts especially: First, that the
administration of it, should be committed unto those only whereunto the word
of God does allot the same: next, that they unto whom this care is committed,
do holilie and sincerely exercise this power.

7 That this spiritual jurisdiction is committed unto the Pastors and the
Elders (peculiarly so called) being rightly chosen, we have fully showed
in the former principles.

That whole authority then, which the Bishops, under Popery and the Roman
Antichrist himself, together with the instruments of his tyranny do usurp,
is altogether tyrannous. Neither ought the power of exercising this
Ecclesiastical censure either of the greater or lesser Excommunication, (as
they call them) to be in the hand of some one particular Pastor or Elder alone.

They are also deceived, who on the contrary side do hold that this
jurisdiction ought to be exercised by the whole assembly of the Church, the
which they gather upon the wrong exposition of the places, MATH. 18.17. 1. COR.
5.4.

8 This censure is rightly administered, when as those are called, who ought to
be called, and both parties being pacientlie heard together with convenient
witnesses, if the case so require, the whole controversy is decided in the
fear of God, without prejudice or declining unto either part, as the Apostle
teaches.

9 We affirm that those who are to be called, ought to be discerned partly by
the consideration and weight of the matter which is propounded, and partly by
the quality of their persons.

10 Those that are altogether without (such as are at this day the Jews,
Turks, etc.) are not to be called before the Church, as the Apostle does
expreslie teach.

11 The same is to be held touching Shismatickes, and Haeretickes; which by
their manifest departure, have made as it were, an other body of the Church,
or have been borne in those sects, having never joined themselves unto the
true Church: of which sort are the Anabaptists, newe-Arrians, Libertines, and
the rest of such sectaries, which are to be altogether accounted for those
which are without: but are yet either by Synods, private disputations, and
conferences, or by any other means, if they show themselves tractable, to be
called into the right way, their haeresies being condemned by just and lawful
proceeding according to Gods word.

12 But we are to think otherwise of private persons, who continue as yet
within the bosom of the Church, and have made no manifest departure unto any
such sectaries: for they are carefully to be called, to be admonished,
reproved, and if they be obstinat, and such as are condemned of their own
conscience, to be delivered unto Satan, as it is manifest out of the writings,
and by the examples of the Apostles.

Excommunication therefore, of Grasshoppers or Locusts, of Mise, Snakes, and
Flies, and all other such trifles, used by the Papists, are not only
frivolous, foolish and ridiculous, but joined with the manifest and most
shameful abuse of the Ecclesiastical authority.

13 As touching those that have priuatlie sinned, and have not given public
offense, our Savior Christ does teach most plainly MATH. 18. how they are
to be dealt with. Now public offenders are either to be presently
reprehended, if the occasion so require, even to their faces as PAVLE practiced
toward PETER, 1. TIMOTH. 5.20. or to be reproved in the public assembly of
the Eldership, as the very same Apostle teaches us.

14 That a difference is to be made between outrageous crimes, and lighter
offenses; it is out of controversy.

15 Unbridled contumacie, is almost the most heinous sin against the Church:
whether it be that he who is called, refuses to appear, or that being
lawfully admonished and convicted, he deny to confess his fault as it
deserves.

16 After the lawful trial of the cause, both the whole fact together with
the circumstances, are carefully to be considered: and also great regard is
to be had of the sinner himself: briefly, all things are to be referred
unto this end: namely, that regard be had both to the conscience of the
sinner, and also to the aedification of the Church, in preventing offenses.

17 For the end of these Censures, is of two sorts: the one, that a timely and
a convenient remedy may be applied to the sinner, who is neither to be left
in his sin, nor swallowed up with heaviness. The other end is, both that
the Church may be purged from offenses, and infected by no contagion: and also
that every man may be instructed and taught by the example of others.

18 There is also a difference to be made, between those who do confess
their faults, and those who do profess their repentance, least that a
fained confession be rashly believed: or that whilst some one is borne with
by untimely le^itie, a sufficient care should not be had for the public
aedification of the Church, as the example showed by the Lord himself upon
MARIE, MOSES sister does declare. Touching which point, a perpetual rule,
neither can nor ought to be set down, by reason of the variety and
diversity of the circumstances.

Wherefore, (with reverence of the Fathers be it spoken) we do not allow of
the too great severity of many of the ancient Cannons, in appointing the
space of repentance, from the which necessity compelled them to depart by
bringing in their indulgences.

19 The sorts of these Ecclesiastical Censures, are Admonition, Suspension
from the Supper of the Lord, (which they call the lesser Excommunication)
public Excommunication, unto the time that repentance be testified: as it is
manifest that the Hebrews also had a three-folde Excommunication. Yet as
touching perpetual ANATHEMA, or Excommunication to death: the Fathers of the
soundest judgment justly disliked the same.

20 We are to abstain from the company of those that are publicly
excommunicated, to the end (as the Apostle witnesses) that they may be
ashamed: yet so, as we are to perform toward them, all those things which
appertain to admonish them of their duty, and to call them to the right way.

21 This Excommunication is altogether a spiritual chastisment, and does
directly belong unto the amendment of the conscience.

Wherefore they are overthrown both by the word of God, and by the testimonies
of the whole Ecclesiastical story, who do attribute the authority of the
Eldership, in binding and loosing, unto the Magistrate, though Christian: much
more they who leave no place, unto those Ecclesiastical judgments, where
there is a Christian Magistrate; seeing on the contrary side, they can be no
where more practiced, than under his wings, when as his authority, (who is the
maintainer and defender of this whole divine ordinance) is used against the
disobedient: neither was there any other course taken in the ancient Church,
even under the most religious Emperors.

They do also greeuouslie err, who (as it is usual amongst the Papists)
draw mere Civil causes unto this Ecclesiastical Court. For Christ did not
only distinguish, but also most manifestly sever the office of the
Magistrate, from the ecclesiastical functions: although he has commanded all
those, who execute the Ecclesiastical functions, as well as all the rest of the
subjects, to submit them selves unto the power of the Magistrates, in those
things which are properly belonging to his office. And again, he will have
Kings and Emperors themselves, to be subject unto the authority of the
Ecclesiastical Ministry, and to the commandment of his word. Now, of this
divine order, we do acknowledge that the Magistrates are ordained the
maintainers and defenders.

22 The contract of Marriage, seeing in part it is manifest and properly
divine, namely, in the consideration of the very bond and covenant of the
marriage: and in part meerelie Civil, as far as it belongs unto the common
soeietie of men: and in that diverse civil conditions belonging to the things of
this life, are adjoined thereunto: wherefore Matrimonial controversies, are in
some sort to be referred unto the determination of the Eldership, as shall be
spoken more fully (God willing) in the proper place thereof.

23 They who have authority to bind the sinner, the cause being lawfully
tried; have also authority to loose and to restore him to the Church, when he
has approved his repentance.

24 This confession, that is, this profession of repentance whether it be done
before the Eldership, or publicly in the congregation of the Church, is to go
before his absolution and reconciliation with the church; in such sort, as the
neglecting hereof is to be taken for undoubted contumacie.

They are therefore deceived, who think that those who are bound in the
Consistory of the Eldership, are to be left unto their own judgment and
trial.

And they offend no less, who as they have abolished the Eldership, so also
have they commanded this confession, (which is only proper unto those that
are tied by the judgment of the Eldership) as a law, common to al Christians,
and have turned it unto auricular confession, which is to be done either unto
the Mass Priest, or unto the Confessor as they commonly call him.

25 Seeing this confession (though most acceptable unto God,) is not therefore
ordained, that it should be a satisfaction for sin in the presence of God,
but only that the Church may be assured of the repentance and restoring of
the sinner, it is only thus far necessary, as he who has not performed
the same before his death, (the fault not being his) is yet justly accounted
as absolved, if he has repented in his heart.

Detestable therefore is their opinion, who will have the punishment which they
call Satisfactorie, and the Canons termed (...) to be meritorious and
satisfactory in the presence of God; and under that pretense, have (for the
most part) made that purgatory fire of theirs, and brought into the Church,
their Indulgences which they sell for money, being so many blasphemies against
that one oblation of the Son of God.

26 The Eldership does properly neither bind nor loose, for this is the
proper right of Christ alone: but it does only apply the word of God, after
the lawful trial of the cause, unto the sinner; either for his retaining or
releasing upon earth: and it pronounces upon earth, in the name of God and of
Jesus Christ, that either contumacie had bound, or repentance had loosed the
conscience of the sinner before the Lord in heaven: neither is it to be doubted
but that which is thus done upon earth, is ratified in heaven

Frivolous therefore is that objection of some, who to the end they might
abolish the authority of the Eldership, do pretend that men arrogate unto
themselves the authority of God and Christ, in retaining or remitting sins.

Hence also it follows, that those Ecclesiastical censures are of no force,
which are exercised by those who were not appointed by God to be judges in that
cause, and wherein, either the lawful trial of the cause has not gone
before, or the sentence has exceeded those bounds within the which, God will
have the authority of the Eldership to be contained; much more are their
censures of no effect, who under the false pretense of Gods name, do judge
contrary unto his word.

27 This manner of confession either before the Eldership or Presbytery, is so
far from procuring any discredit with men, unto the offender; that
contrariwise it restores the sinner who does repent, unto that dignity and
excellency amongst Christians, whereunto they are promoted who are made the
sons of God.

Defended by BARNARD MORLANVS of Bearne.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING THE MAGISTRACY. LXXVIII.
WE HAVE HITHERTO SPOKEN CONcerning that government, which is properly
spiritual and meerelie Ecclesiastic: it follows that we now deal with
that which is directly Civil.

1 Seeing Ecclesiastical discipline, does according to the word of God alone
take order with offenses; and that there are many stubborn and obstinat
persons to be found, who cannot be drawn unto the way, by any admonitions or
censures of the Church, either in regard of piety, or yet of common quietness:
an other remedy was to be provided, whereby this untamed and brutish unruliness
of men, might be healed.

2 This remedy is in their hands, unto whom a kind of supreme power has
ever since the beginning of the world, been ascribed: and in whose power the
sovereign government has been always in making of those laws, whereby the
civil society of men should be maintained.

3 It is manifest by the common consent of men, (who have rightly judged that
good laws and their maintainers and defenders, have been the work of Gods
Providence) that this Civil power was not iustituted by men, for the hurt of
man; but ordained by God for the preservation of mankind, in such sort, as the
Lord does vouchsafe Magistrates to be called ELOHIM, that is, Gods.

4 Of these forms of governments, there are reckoned up three sorts
especially: a Monarchy, which is the government of one above the rest: an
Aristocracie, where many of the nobility and best sort have the government in
their hands: and a Democratie, where the same consists in the power of the
whole people.

The Anabaptists therefore are to be detested, who despise al government, and
speak evil of the superior powers under the pretense of a kind of imaginary
perfection, which stands not in need of the government of any man. Their
cavil is also frivolous, whereby they go about to prove, that we can have no
use of the Magistracy, because we acknowledge Jesus Christ for our Lord and
King, by whose spirit we are led: whereas the inward power which the Lord
exercises by the virtue of his Spirit in the consciences of his children,
does not only exclude that outward dominion which belongs unto the
Magistrate as unto Gods Liuetenaunt, but does establish the same.

5 We affirm that the duty of the Magistrate does extend it self unto both
the Tables of Gods law, or as the Apostle says, that it is their duty to
provide that their subjects may not only live peaceably, but also
religiously, But in a diverse respect and manner.

6 For in respect of the first Table, it is unlawful for the Magistrates to
invent any laws touching Religion: but their duty is to see that the worship
of God, be understood and practiced by their subjects; as it is fully set down
in the sacred books of both the Testaments, which have been written by the
Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists.

7 The Magistrates also are bound (if necessity so require) to compel such as
are in the Ecclesiastical function, unto the godly and careful performance of
their duty: and they are much more bound to punish blasphemers, and such as
either broach haeresies, make a departure from the Church by schisms, or
briefly do any wise endeavor to overthrow the truth of the Gospel: together
with those, who will not suffer themselves to be called into the right way, by
the Censures of the Church.

8 And if any controversy do arise concerning the truth of doctrine, unto
the appeasing whereof, an extraordinary meeting of the Pastors and the Doctors
of the Church seems needful: It is the duty of the Magistrate to call a
Synod, to gather the Ministers together thereunto, and to see that the whole
controversy be decided according to the holy Scriptures: and being decided,
that it be extinguished and utterly put out.

The Pope therefore does thrust his sickle unto other men's corn, who does
licentiously arrogate unto himself, this power of summoning Councels at his
own pleasure, which was in times past justly exercised by the godly
Emperors and Kings.

9 Now, touching the second Table; the Magistrates are to see, that by their
just laws, they be the protectours and defenders of public innocence,
modesty and tranquillity, that they maintain the good from the injuries of
the evil men, and uphold by their help and power such as are oppressed:
briefly that they have a regard of the common goods of all their subjects.

10 This cannot be performed by them, except they be endued with power and
might: wherefore they are to be armed with the sword, to the end that they
suffer not those sins to remain unpunished; which God, and the behoof of the
Commonwealth require to be punished.

11 Hence also we understand, that when necessity so compels them, and
when they cannot otherwise defend the Dominions committed unto their
government, they may lawfully proclaim war, both that they may thereby
keep under the seditious practices of the unbridled Domestical disturbers of
the common peace and quietness, and deliver their Dominions from the invasions,
or any other the attempts of their foreign enemies.

12 For the upholding of this burden, they may lawefullie require tributes and
subsidies of the people, whom they govern: The annual revenues furthermore,
whereby the Magistrates do maintain the honor, and magnificence of their
daily port and train (being things in some sort joined with the dignity of
the Government, which they bear) are to be paid unto them.

13 It is their duty also, to publish the laws and edicts which seem
necessary for the right government of the civil policy, according to the
circumstances of time, place, and persons.

14 No unchangeable rule of these laws, by reason of the variety of
circumstances can be set down, save only this one; namely, that they be
leaueled and directed unto Gods glory, and to the good of the subjects.

We do therefore condemn those customs, laws, and constitutions, which
decline from this aeternall rule of the honor of God, and love toward our
neighbor, and do permit, either theft, stews, or any such monstrous
disorders, and we accounte them for such constitutions, as unto whom no
obedience is to be yielded.

15 Yet we hold it not in any case lawful, for private men to rise against their
Magistrates, though never so great tyrants, for that is a far different thing,
from refusing to yield obedience unto impious or unjust laws.

16 It becomes Christians, least of all other men to be contentious; yet
notwithstanding they are not forbidden, when other means will not prevail:
either to crave their aid, or to defend their right before the Magistrates,
though the very enemies of true religion, as far as they may do the same
without giving of offense; so that it be done also with an upright conscience,
and a mind void of al guile, revenge and evil affection.

They are deceived therefore, who think it unlawful, that Christians to seek
and maintain their right by civil Pleas, and to crave the help of the
Magistrate.

17 All men, of what age, nation, sex, or condition so ever they be, are bound
without exception, to be subjects unto this ordinance of man; not only for
fear of punishment, which the law does inflict, but even for conscience sake,
as the Apostle says, who commands us to make prayer for all Magistrates
without exception.

Rebellious and seditious therefore, is the Papisticall Clergy, who under the
color of certain counterfeit immunities, has presumed to with-drawe the
neck from the yoke of the Magistrate.

18 Yet is it the duty of the superior powers, (of which sort, are the
seven electors in the Romain Empire, and the states of kingdoms in all
monarchies,) to restrain all furious tyrants; which thing if they do not
perform, they shall yield an account of their treachery in the presence of
God.

19 As often as the Magistrate commands any thing, that is repugnant either
to the worship which we owe unto God, or to the love which we owe unto our
neighbor, we cannot yield obedience thereunto with a safe conscience. For as
often as the commandment of God and men are directly opposed one against
another, this rule is to be perpetually observed, that it is better to obey
GOD then men: but yet so, as no man is to pass the bounds of his calling, as
is set down in the fifteenth Principle of this head.

Defended by JOHN IOBERTVS of poictiers.
PRINCIPLES TOUCHING THE REMISSION OF SINS, AND THE SIN AGAINST THE HOLY
GHOST. LXXIX.
1 THe Article concerning the Church is already inentreated of: it follows
now, that we deal with those benefits which our heavenly Father does
bestow upon his children, partly in this life, and partly in the life to come;
which are remission of sins, resurrection of the body, and life everlasting.

2 The Article touching the remission of sins, being already spoken of,
(when as we dealt with the justification of man by Christ, and opened the first
Petition of the Lords Prayer:) we will now briefly touch the same, and then come
to that irremissible or unpardonable sin, which is called the sin against the
holy Ghost.

3 Sin in general, we define to be a transgression or swaruing from the
law, repugnant unto Gods will, brought into the world by our first Parents
through the instigation of Satan, the fruit whereof is by the just curse of
God, the misery of the life present, and death aeternall.

4 Now remission of sins, is the free, and the most full pardon of all our
sins, obtained by Christ, apprehended by faith, in the place of which sins,
succeeds the imputation of the righteousness of the said Christ.

5 The fountain of the remission of our sins is, the aeternall and constant
love of God toward his Church. Eternal, because he loved us from aeternity;
for if he had begun to love us, he should have been subject unto change:
constant, because with God is no shadow of change.

6 Hence it appears, that remission of sins being once bestowed, can never
be dissanulled: For it must needs be, that the counsel of God touching the
salvation of his, should be stable and firm.

7 The cause whereby, and for the which, we obtain remission of sins is, the
love of God toward man in Christ, who draws us from condemnation,
delivers us from the power of darkness, and makes us meet to obtain the
inheritance of the Saints in light.

8 The isntrumental cause is faith, wrought in us by the hearing of the word
Preached, and confirmed by the use of the Sacraments: whereby we now do not
only know, that Christ is our Savior, but also do apply him and all his
riches, which are indeffinitely offered unto the church, as ours, and every
one of us in particular are assured of our Election.

9 The faith therefore of the remission of our sins, is a most full and sure
persuasion, whereby, every faithful man does assuredly believe, that God
the Father, has pardoned him all his sins, for the only sacrifice of Christ,
and in their steed, does impute unto him the righteousness of Christ.

It appears out of the former things, that the opinion concerning the
remission of the fault, but not of the punishment, is altogether most
detestable: from whence the doctrine, touching meritorious satisfaction in the
presence of God, touching indulgences, Purgatory, and prayer for the dead have
arisen.

10 Seeing God, who is offended with sin, is just: it follows, that
whosoever does not that which the Law commands: and whosoever does that
which the Law requires not, makes himself subject unto the burden of Gods
wrath: whence it appears, that the very least transgression of the Law
deserves death, if ye consider the nature of sin. Yet no sin is so
heinous, but it is pardonable in Christ, that one sin excepted, which is
altogether incurable and irremissable, whereof we are now to speak, seeing we
have already dealt with remissible sins.

11 This incurable sin, is called sin unto death, blasphemy against the
holy Ghost; not simply in respect that the holy Ghost is the third person in
the Trinity, but in regard that it is he only, who enlightneth the minds
of men, and opens the way of salvation.

12 The sin against the holy Ghost, is the voluntary denial of Christ
being truly known, the falling away from the Gospel, being sealed in the
heart of man by the holy Ghost enlightening the same, arising from the hatred
of the truth, joined with a sauadge and more then barbarous tyranny against
the same, and the Sophistical opugning therefore, and also, with the contempt
of the sacrifice of Christ, which is the alone propitiation for sin.

13 This seems to be the manifest description of this horrible sin; the
cause thereof, is the mind and will of man opugning the known truth, by a
Sathanicall kind of pride and cruelty.

14 This sin would the Lord therefore have justly to be unpardonable,
because that they, who do after this sort throw themselves hedlong, do tread
under foot the blood of Christ, whom they have truly known; without whom
there is no salvation, and do stop up the way unto the gift of repentance.

15 PAVLE therefore did not sin against the holy Ghost, who persecuted
Christ and his members whom he knew not. 1. TIM. 1.

16 Although this sin be voluntary, yet it follows not, that every sin
which is voluntary, and committed against the conscience is irremissible.

17 But contrariwise, although these sins are horrible, whether they be
committed of infirmity or of malice, yet are they forgiven unto those that
repent, as they were unto DAVID, PETER and others.

18 The counsel of God concerning the salvation of the elect cannot be
dissanulled, and therefore the elect cannot be guilty of this sin.

19 Neither do all the reprobate necessary fall unto this sin, seeing
original sin is sufficient to condemn them.

20 This sin is placed in the heart of man, and therefore, seeing God is the
searcher of the heart, diligent heed is to be taken, least that being carried
away with a preposterous zeal, we rashly pass sentence against any in
judgeing them to be guilty of this sin.

21 Yet are they to be seriously admonished, who continue to show themselves
disobedient unto the admonitions and judgments of God, least that being at the
length hardened by the Lords just judgment, they run headlong unto this
downe-fall.

Defended by JOHN HALBERIVS CORTRACENVS.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING THE RESVRRECTION OF THE FLESH. LXXX.
1 THe rest of the Articles of our faith, being hitherto sufficiently handled;
two of them remain yet to be discussed, namely, the resurrection of the
flesh, and life everlasting.

2 Although the Son of God, by taking upon him our nature, by dying and
rising again, has performed the parts of our salvation: Although also he does
bestow that quickening Spirit of his, upon all those that truly believe the
Gospel: It remains as yet, notwithstanding, that what has been performed in
him who is our head, be also performed in us being his members.

3 Hence must the faithful learn, both day and night to meditate upon the
mark, and shutting up of their happiness, and to be continually desirous of
the same, in such sort; as although they be tossed in this world by diverse
and dangerous storms of temptation, raised up against them by the Devil, the
World, and the Flesh, they may yet continue firm and immooue-able in faith,
and in the hope of the living GOD, and of the Lord Jesus Christ.

4 Even as death entered into the world, by the sin of the first ADAM, whence
the necessity of death did arise: Even so we affirm, that death is
abollished in the saints, and changed unto aeternall life, by the virtue of
the latter ADAM, that is Christ; to the end, that as Christ did first of all
rise again unto that aeternall life: So all the elect may rise by him unto the
same.

5 Now death is by a natural generation, conuaied unto all the posterity of
the first ADAM, whereas aeternall life is by spiritual ingraffing into the
second ADAM, derived unto his members.

6 In this respect, is the name of ADAM attributed unto Christ; namely, that as
ADAM was the stock of mankind, breathing out poison according unto the
deadly nature: So Christ is made by grace the root of all the Saints, pouring
the juice of eternal life into his members.

We do therefore condemn the Philosophers, who drew the cause of death, not
from sin, but from this Aixome in natural Philosophy, vz. whatsoever is
compounded, is subject unto dissolution. Much more do we detest the
PELAGIANS, who teach, that sin and therefore death did arise, not from the
deprauation of nature in ADAM, but from the voluntary imitation thereof: the
which error, PAVLE does overthrow, as by many Arguments, so by this most
clearelie, in that Infants themselves also are subject unto death.

7 Although that all sins, which are the cause of death, are truly remitted
unto the believers; yet notwithstanding are they no less subject unto death,
then the very wicked themselves, and that for two causes: First, because that
the root of sin, (which is called original sin) is not utterly
abollished in them in this life, but is brought to an end by death. For then
does the strife between the flesh and the Spirit cease. Secondly, because
that unless they did shake of this life, they could never be partaker of that
other life which they hope for.

8 And therefore we hold, that the faithful are deprived of this life, rather
by the mercy of God, calling them unto that aeternall kingdom, then because
that death is the reward of sin.

9 And on the other side, that the unfaithful do not rise by virtue of the
resurrection of Christ, which is always unto salvation and is bestowed upon
his members, but by the force of that curse of God: whenever thou shall eat
of the fruit hereof, thou shall die the death.

10 For seeing this degree does comprehend both the deaths, but especially the
second, which is eternal; it must needs be, that the unfaithful also shall
rise again; whereas otherwise, their bodies except they should be joined
again with their souls, should escape eternal pains, which is meant by the
second death.

11 The whole person of every man wholly considered, but not in part, is said
to rise again. For as the body only is said to lie down, so the same alone (to
speak properly) shall rise again. Whereas the soul (seeing by death it has
suffered no detriment in the essence thereof) can be said to rise again but
metaphorically, as when it is brought by the Spirit of Christ, from the
servitude of sin wherein it was dead, and wherein it could not so much as
think (much less will or do) the things that are of God, into that holy
liberty, which is the way unto eternal life.

We do therefore condemn them, who dream that the souls separated from their
bodies are a sleep, and that they shall arise together with the bodies: And
we do also detest the opinion of HYMENEVS and PHILETVS, who did not
distinguishe the spiritual from the corporal resurrection.

12 The Scripture declares by manifest testimonies, that the souls of the
faithful who die in the Lord, are received of christ into that eternal
paradise, situated above all heavens, whereunto Christ did ascend, and that they
are there conversant with Christ, being partakers in their measure of
blessedness and felicity: whereas on the other side, the word of GOD, and the
consideration of things that are contrary, do show, that the souls of the
wicked are thrust into hell, and there tormented in their manner.

13 The same bodies that lay down shall rise, but not in the same qualities, as
the very same body of Christ which was crucified and buried did arise, but not
having those qualities wherewith it was endued when it was crucified, dead and
buried. Yet this is the difference, in that the body of Christ felt no
corruption, and therefore did overcome the power and effect of death, even in
the very house of death: But our bodies are delivered from corruption, which
seemed to have been able utterly, to have abolished them.

We do therefore condemn those, who dream that the souls having lost their
former bodies, by corruption, shall assume other bodies in their steed.

14 This change shall be done at a moment in those whom Christ shall find
alive at his second coming.

15 The Axiom of the Philosophers that the generation of one thing, is the
corruption of an other; has no place in this matter: and the similitude of
PAVLE drawn from the seed sown in the ground, is not to be drawn any
farther, than unto the change of the quality.

16 We affirm that the one and the self same man in number shall arise, both
in respect of his body, which is his matter; and also in respect of his form,
that is, of his soul, which shall quicken the one and the self same body,
although by the retaking again of the form, the person might in a nice sort
seem to be an other in number, than it was before.

17 By reason of this change of the qualities, and not because the very bodily
quantity and circumscription, are taken away (for they are perpetual
circumstances or adjuncts of a body) PAVLE does affirm that the natural body
is changed into a spiritual.

Great therefore is their error, and meerelie contrary unto the Resurrection of
the bodies, who teach that the bodies are essentiallie changed by Resurrection,
into a spiritual nature. For by this means death should so abolish the nature
of the body, as the Resurrection cold not restore the same, and the analogy
also between Christ's Resurrection and the resurrection of his members should
be destroyed.

18 By this means furthermore, the threatening of the punishments of that
aeternal fire and pain, should be altogether Allegorical: yea, and after the
resurrection, both the godly and the wicked should become some third spirit
compact or braied together, as it were, of the natural spirit, and the body
accidentally transformed into the nature, either of the same, or of a diverse
spirit.

19 But they do very greeuouslie err, who imagine that the body of Christ
after his glorification, which ensued upon his Resurrection, became not only
of a spiritual nature, (which though it were granted not to be circumscribed
in regard of quantity, yet they must needs yield, that the same is bounded
within the propriety of the nature of it) but also of a divine; seeing the
Deity alone is every where, by a propriety altogether uncommunicable unto
any thing else. Neither has the Resurrection abolished the true bodily
human nature of Christ, but the infirmities of his natural body being laid
aside, God has endued the same humane nature, with most excellent
supernatural gifts.

20 The qualities of the bodies being glorified, cannot be known unto us
while we are in this life, neither are we curiously to enquire of them: Yet
may it be gathered by the words of Christ, comparing the Saints unto the
brightness of the Sun, and affirming them to be aequall with the Angels, by
the story of the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ: and also out of the
first to the CORINTH. and both the Epistles of PAVLE to the THESSALONIANS, that
besides their incorruption, they shall be also bright or shining, and of a
more refined and quick substance, than now they are.

21 Of the contrary side, it may in some sort be gathered, how horrible and
fearful the state shall be of those men, who are to be adjudged unto the
second death, which is the everlasting curse of God. Seeing their souls shall
therefore never be separated from their bodies, even because that their
unspeakable torments may be aeternall.

Defended by ABEL BARRERIVS a Gascoigne.
PRINCIPLES CONCERNING ETERNAL LIFE. LXXXI.
1 THe Article concerning the Resurrection of the flesh, being handled at large
in the former principles; we are now at the length come to the exposition of
that which is touching Aeternall life.

2 This Article is therefore set last in the belief, because it is the end and
shutting up of all those things, which are there propounded unto us to be
believed.

3 We make life in this place, to be that power and faculty, whereby the soul
does not only move it self, but does also give motion and sense unto the
body: and this latter effect thereof in this life, does PAVL call (...) that is,
natural, as being applied unto the use of this present life: of which sort
also, was the life of ADAM before his fall, although it was neither subject
unto mortality, neither unto those things which tend unto death, as he was
after his fall. But the soul being again joined to the body, shall both move
it self by a far more excellent power, and shall also quicken the body in a
far diverse sort from that natural life, which shall be done away, namely, by
a spiritual life and aequall unto the Angels: as also the very body shall
rise again, endued with far more excellent qualities, whereupon it was called of
PAVLE a spiritual body, not in regard of the substance, but of the qualities
thereof.

4 To live therefore the etetnall life, is to be in that state wherein the
elect, being after the blessed resurrection, most fully joined with Christ
their head, shall know God in heaven, together with the Angels, after a manner
altogether unknown unto us at this day, enjoy his prescence, and glorify him
eternally.

We do therefore justly condemn the error of the CHILIASTES.

5 By the word ETERNAL in this place, we understand that which has a
beginning, but never shall have an end.

6 Touching curious and difficult questions, as concerning the sight of God,
which we are to have in the life to come, and such like, we think meet to
omit them, because it is sufficient for us to know, that God has prepared
for us, those things which neither eye has seen, ear has heard, nor enterd
into the heart of man.

7 The Author of that life is God, who freely bestows the same upon those,
whom of his mere mercy he has chosen in Christ before the foundation of the
world, from whom as from the head, this blessed immortallitie does flow in a
most full sort into his members that are joined unto him.

8 For the foundation both of our resurrection unto life, and also of that
eternal life is that resurrection and glory of Christ our head, because he is
the first fruits of the rising from the dead of those for whom he prayed,
that they should be there where he is.

9 That life therefore is not without respect generally bestowed upon all men,
but only upon the elect, as being those who only are found in Christ
according unto that saying of PAVL, ROMANS 11. The elect have obtained it, the
rest are hardened, and according unto that voice of Christ: Come yea blessed of
my Father.

10 This blessed immortallitie shall be common in deed unto all the elect, but
not in the same measure as it may be probably gathered by the consideration of
the contrary punishment of the wicked.

11 The especial end for the which eternal life is bestowed upon us is this,
namly that acknowledging the immeasurable and infinite mercy of God, we may
attribute unto him eternal praises as it is meet.

12 We shall at the time when God has appointed, be put in full posession of
that life, at which time the number of those that are to be saved being
fulfilled, Jesus Christ shall be seen of us, who look for him to our
salvation, to come as a redemer from Heaven.

13 Seeing the Lord has put this day in his own power, to be inquisitiue when
the same shall be, is a point of extreme madness.

We do therefore condemn those both old and new writers, who breaking into
the secrets of God, do think that they can set down, when that day shall be,
whereas the knowledge hereof is not given, no not to the Angels themselves.

14 It is our duty therefore rather to be watchful, least being drowned with
the delights of the world, and the flesh; and as it were overwhelmed in a
dead sleep, that last day do come upon us (being unprepared) at unawares.

15 Now although the full perfection of that life, which we hope for, be
referred unto the very last day, yet notwithstanding, it takes certain
beginnings in our minds even while we are here, when as the holy Ghost does
by the preaching of the word, dispell the darcknes of our mind, and indue the
same with the true knowledge of God, whence afterward does proceed a willing
mind to obey his commandments, and that hope which cannot deceive them that
believe.

16 Unto this eternal life, which shall bring unspeakable felicity unto the
elect, death eternal is oposed, which shall bring unto the wicked that
destruction, which never shall have an end.

17 Even as that most happy felicity, cannot now be comprehended of us: so
also that misery of the damned is altogether incomprehensible.

18 This most horrible state is called the second death, not because that,
either the soul is thereby separated from the body, or that the soul or the
body of the damned do suffer death, but because, that as by the first death,
the body and the soul of the wicked is dissolved, the one of them hastening unto
putrefaction, the other going to have a taste of the eternal pains; even so by
this second punishment both the soul and the body are not only wholly excluded
for ever from Gods favor, but also adjudged unto his most fearful and never
ending curse.

19 For the like cause is this death called eternal fire, because that fire is
a most sharp and vehement punishment: but we are not here curiously, to
dispute touching the pains of Hell, lest that we thereby run into poetical
fables.

20 Yet do these very fables teach us, that the doctrine concerning the
eternal punishment, which the wicked are to under go even after this life,
did always sound in the world.

The Epicures therefore, and such as deny the immortallitie of the soul, are
confuted not only by the word of God, but also by common sense.

21 That these punishments are eternal, whereunto eternal life is oposed, it
is manifest by the expresse^ lord of God, and also by the infinite nature of
Gods majesty who is offended.

The Church therefore justly condemned the Origenists, who dreamed that the
wicked and the Devils themselves, having fulfilled those punishments, should
at the length be delivered.

22 Yet does our Savior Christ manifestly witness, MAT. 10.13. that the state
of the damned in respect of the measure of their punishments shall not be alike.

Defended by JAMES TREMVLAEVS of Geneua.
FINIS.
THE TABLE AND ORDER OF THE PRINCIPLES CONTAINED in this Treatise.
1 PRinciples concerning God. page 1. 2 Of the holy and unsearchable Trinity.
3. 3 Of God the Father and the Son. 5. 4 Of the holy Ghost. 9. 5 Of the
attributes of God in general. 10. 6 Of the omnipotency of God. 12 7 Of the
knowledge that is in God. 13. 8 Of the will of God. 15. 9 Of the goodness,
grace, love, and mercy of God. 16. 10 Of Gods providence. 17. 11 Of Gods
eternal Praedestination. 19 12 Of the creation of all things, and their
division. 23. 13 Of good and evil Angels. 26. 14 Of man. 30. 15 Of the
faculties of the soul of man. 33. 16 Of Free Will. 35. 17 Of Sin. 37. 18 Of
the division of Sin. 39. 19 Of the restoring of mankind. 41 20 Of the
personal union of the two natures in Christ. 43. 21 Of the office of Christ.
25. 22 Of Faith. 47. 23 Of the causes and effects of faith. 49. 24 Of man's
justification in the sight of God. 52. 25 Of Sanctification. 54. 26 Of the
justification of sinful man in the sight of God. 56. 27 Of good works. 60. 28
Of the Law of God. 63. 29 Upon the preface of Gods Law, and the first
Commandment. 66. 30 Upon the second Commandment. 68 31 Upon the third
Commandment. 72. 32 Concerning vows, 75. 33 Upon the fourth Commandment. 78.
34 Upon the fifth Commandment. 82. 35 Upon the sixth Commandment. 86. 36 Upon
the seventh commandment. 89 37 Upon the eight Commandment. 92. 38 Upon the
ninth Commandment. 94. 39 Upon the tenth Commandment. 97. 40 Concerning
Repentance. 100. 41 Of the conception of Jesus Christ. 104 42 Of the nativity,
circumcision, and baptism of Christ. 108. 43 Of the Passion and death of our
Lord Jesus. 111. 44 Of his burial, and descention into hell 115. 45 Of his
Resurrection. 121. 46 Of his ascension into heaven. 125 47 Of his sitting at
the right hand of the Father. 128. 48 Of his coming again to judge the quick
and the dead. 131. 49 Of faith in the holy Ghost. 136. 50 Upon the Article, I
believe that there is an holy Catholic Church. 139. 51 Upon the Article, I
believe that there is a Communion of Saints, 144. 52 Of the word of God. 147.
53 Of Traditions, 151. 54 Of Councels and Fathers. 153 55 of the Sacraments.
160. 56 Of the agreement and difference between the Sacraments of the old and
new testament. 167. 57 Of the numbers of the Sacraments of the new Testament.
169. 58 of Baptism being the first Sacrament of the new Testament. 172. 59 The
second sort of principles concerning Baptism. 177. 60 Of the Lords Supper.
180. 61 of the popish mass. 185. 62 of Consubstantiation. 189. 63 Of prayer,
or the invocation of Gods name. 193 64 Upon the preface of the Lords prayer.
197. 65 Touching the Petitions of the Lords prayer in general, and
particularly touching the first of them. 202. 66 Of the second petition. 208.
67 of the third petition. 208. 68 Of the fourth petition. 212. 69 of the fifth
petition. 216 70 of the sixth petition. 219 71 Upon the conclusion of the Lords
prayer. 222. 72 of the sacred ministry of the Church where the doctrine of
the Law and the Gospel are compared together. 274 73 of the ministers of Gods
word under the Gospel. 281. 74 of the false ministry of the Gospel 233 75
of the Ecclesiastical functions that are depraved and retained only in name,
in the counterfeit Romish church 238 76 of the power and authority of the
Church. 242. 77 of Ecclesiastical censures and excommunication. 251. 78 of the
magistracy. 258. 79 of remission of sins, and the sin against the holy
Ghost. 263. 80 of the resurrection of the flesh 266. 81 of Eternal life. 272.
FINIS.
Bear good Reader with the false pointing in some places of the book, correct
the number of the Principles according unto the Table, and mend these faults
with thy Pen.

Page 10. lin. 5. by for be, Pa, 16. lin. 33. beget for begotten, Page 19. lin.
33. which, for of, Page 20. lin. 31. Read. The Lord then, was so far from
bereauing etc. Page 34. lin. 2. add growing, lin. 23. ad in Pa. 35. ad
subject unto none, and the supreme governor of himself. Pa. 43. lin. 23.
seems, for serves, Page 44. lin. 34. This, for the. Pa. 48. lin. 29. as, for
for. Pa. 49. lin. 25. lost, for left. Pa. 52. lin. 24. add that he page 62.
lin. 21. add revvard of. and 24. ad or. Pa. 72. lin. 5. derogate, for
degenerate. Pa. 79. lin. 35. signifiing, for signified. Pa. 83. lin. 25. dele
honor, and 26. ad honor, Pa. 93. lin. 9. dele as. Page 103. lin. 6. read (...)
Page 114. lin. 3. Read, and although he was at the first pronounced innocent
by Pilate etc. Pa. 117. lin. 5. Read, for us into. etc. Page 129. lin. 30. Read
two sittinges, Pa. 132. lin. 20. Read, those things which. Page 148. lin 7.
old for nevve Pa. 153. lin. 3. councelles, for counselors, Page 154. line 13
Read, or primacie, Page 168. line 38. in for into, Page 207. line 16. sum for
some, Page 209. line 1. are for or, Page 209. line 18. fifth for first, Page
221. line 5. in, Page 223. line 29. Being for Seeing, Pa. 227. line 17. either
for ever, Page 232. line 28. by the, for of Page 135. line 1. for for from,
line 19. this for thus, and 23. that when etc. 37. cities for rites, Page 246.
line 3. it is etc. Page 251. line vlt. rulers for rules, Page 259. line 2.
better for more, Page 262. for, for that,


