A REIOYNDER UNTO WILLIAM MALONE'S REPLY TO THE FIRST ARTICLE.

Wherein The Founders of unwritten Traditions are confounded, out of the sure
foundation of Scripture, and the true Tradition of the Church.

By ROGER PUTTOCKE, Minister of Gods word at Novan.

ACT. 24. 14. After the way which they call heresy, so worship I the God of my
Fathers, believing all things which were written.

Theop. Alexand. in 2. Paschal. Diabolici spiritus est extra Scripturarum
sacrarum authoritatum divinum aliquid putare.

Printed at Dublin by the Company of Stationers, Anno Domini 1632.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS LORD VICE-COVNT VVENTVVORTH, LORD DEPVTIE
GENERAL of the Kingdom of IRELAND, LORD PRESIDENT of his MAJESTY'S Council
established in the North parts of England, and one of the Lords of his
MAJESTY'S most Honorable Privy Council.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
THE Pope affecting a terrestrial Monarchy, to be exalted above all that is
called God, and aspiring to a celestial Hierarchy, as God to sit in the Temple
of God; had never effected the former, 2. These. 2. ^.
if the Pope had not eaten up the Emperor: and might for ever have despaired
of the latter, if that Church had not overtopt the Scriptures. Omnium
Bibliothecas unus mihi videtur 12. Tabularum libellus, and authoritatis
pondere, and utilitatis ubertate supera^^ Tul de Orat. l. 1.
I am of opinion, says the Orator, that the little book of the twelve Tables
far surpasses all Libraries whatsoever; both for authority, and for
perfection. If the two Testaments had, as they ought to have been thus
accounted of, that Church had never Is. 14. 14.
ascended above the heights of the clouds, to be like the most High in her
authority: and if that Church had not mounted up so high above her own
Sphere, unwritten Traditions had never gained the credit to be compared for
authority with the written word: and if unwritten Traditions, the pillar of
Popery, had not been set up, Popery had long ere this fallen to the ground.

The Persian Magi found out a law, that The Kings of Persia might do what they
list; and by this general law they concluded, Herodot^. in Tha^^a.
That the Persian Monarch might marry his Sister. Soule-cheating Jesuits have
likewise found an unwritten law, that whatsoever the Church does, it must not
be questioned; and by this general law, they conclude, that a man may eat his
God, and kill his King: by this they prohibit the Scriptures, and the Cup in
the Sacrament: by this they condemn marriage in some: in a word by this
unwritten law, they make new laws, which shall bring a man to greater
perfection then the Scripture can. This is that Trojane horse, out of whose
belly there arise these and many more cursed doctrines. This is that sandy
foundation of the tower of Babell.

This little, which I bring into the Lords storehouse, may serve as a mattocke
to dig up this foundation; or as an engine to batter down this tower. And
though it be but little, yet a little mite may well be cast into the Lords
treasury. Among the Heathens (as Pliny writes) he that had not frankincense
to offer, might offer milk; and he that wanted milk, might offer salt. And
in holy Writ, Levit. 1^. ^.
he that had not a Lamb, might offer turtles, and he that had not turtles,
might offer two young pigeons, Whatsoever it is, it is the first fruits in this
kind of my labors, and the Prodromus of this Kingdom which comes to Your
Honor for protection, as the sparrow sledde for shelter to Aelian. l. 13. c 31.
Ze^ocrates bosom.

It comes not as an informer, for Your L^^ is Act. 26. 3.
expert in all customs and questions which are among us. Nor as a confirmer;
for no Bariesus, or Jesuit of them all, is able to turn away Sergius Paulus,
a prudent Act. 13. 8.
Deputy from the faith. But as an humble suppliant,

1. Craving pardon of this bold presumption. And yet in this I was directed by
a Pindarus.
famous Poet, (...), to begin with a glorious Preface. If then, for the
beautifying of the frontispice of this Work, I have been too bold to praefixe
the name of so great a Viceroy, blame not me, but my director. Neither in
this have I been so bold as this blind Bayard, or proud Jesuit, who durst
presume to dedicate his Reply unto his sacred Majesty, in which he assigns
no other lot to any page 490.
Protestant whatsoever, but the very pit of hell.

2. Some respect and acceptance of the Work. As for the Workman, if any
glimpse of Your favorable aspect and countenance shall at any time shine upon
him, it is more then he can deserve. The acceptance of the Work is the full
satisfaction of the Workman; or in the words of Seneca, Seneca de benefic l.
2. c. 12.
Si grate hoc, non beneficium, sed officium meum accipias, ejus pensionem
solvisti. This acceptance and approbation of it may prove profitable unto
others, howsoever it be unto me, who by Your example, (though the subject
deserve it not) may be drawn to do the same.

And yet the subject of this little, is great, and deserves no little respect
and regard. If it were a needelesse Act. 18. 15.
question of words, or of names, Gallio the Deputy would not regard it: but it
is the greatest Question, the ground of all Questions, the foundation of
Popery, not one branch, but the root of the Roman superstition, the
Master-veyne which feeds all the rest, the Goliath of Gath, with whom if we
1. Sam. 17. ^.
be able to fight, and to kill him, they confess they will be our servants
for ever. And in this behold a sandy foundation, a rotten root, a vein
bleeding, and a Goliath vanquished.

All these are nothing to those two Allectives, Your personal indowment, and
Your Honorable employment, which like two attractive Load stones, have drawn
it to Your Honorable protection.

God has honored you with grace; this grace being wrought in you by the holy
Scriptures, the word of grace, he may have hope of your gracious acceptance,
that labors to vindicate the Scriptures from that disgrace, which graceless
Tradition mongers bring upon them.

His Majesty has graced you with honor to be under him, and over us the
defender of the faith. That faith which you are to defend by the sword, that
faith I defend by my pen, namely the faith which was once delivered to the
Saints, and is contained in the holy Scriptures. Stapleton would have had the
Duke of Parma, D. Staplet. Epist dedic^t. before his work of lustification.
to cut all knots with Alexanders sword, rather then to appease contention with
the harp of Apollo. S. Augustine would have both the sword and the harp
joined together, and gives his reason, August Epist, 8.
Siterrerentur and non docerentur, improba dominatio videretur: si docerentur
et non terrerentur, vetustate consuetudinis obdurarentur. There is no cause to
complain of an evil government, for there has bin more teaching the^ terror:
but we have cause to pray, that terror may expel that hard and evil custom,
which by teaching will not be removed. The Lord, who has exalted you above the
many worthies of Israel, grant that Act. 24. 2^
many worthy things may be done for this Nation by your providence. In all
things God guide You by his Counsel, and after all, receive you into glory.

Your Honors in all Christian duty, and humble observance, to be commanded.
ROGER PUTTOCKE.

TO THE READER.
THere is a sort of men, by foundation Friars, by appellation Jesuits, who are
the last, but proudest Order of the Roman Clergy. One of these, swelling like
a to ad with a great conceit of a little learning, in an evil hour for
himsefe challenged (as thou know) an Elisha, a valiant horseman of Israel
to combat with him about sundry points of faith. In this duel this Challenger
being wounded went over Seas for healing unto his Master-Iesuites. And having
his wounds bound up, he returns without fear or wit to assault the most
learned Primate with a new Reply. In which he promises much, but performs
little; and defends the Roman Capitol, as it was of old defended, by gagling
like a goose in babbling eloquence, and by barking like a dog in slanders and
reproaches.

To write of these points after the most learned Primate is all one as to write
the Iliads after Homer. And none are so well able to defend his Answer as
himself; but as S. Hierome thought it not fit to answer Helvidius, so the
most judicious, concurring with him in judgment, thought it not fit for him to
answer this Reply. Qui^ loquacitatem facundiam esse purabat. Quia omnibus
maledicere solebat. Et ne respondendo dignus fie^et qui vinceretur Hiero^.
cont. Helvid. c. 3.
1. Because babbling is his best eloquence. 2. Because railing is his best
argument. 3. Because he should not be thought worthy of encounter by his
answer. And indeed why should the most rev^rend and learned Primate of this
whole Kingdom (a most skillfull General in ordering and fighting the Battles
of the Lord) enter again into the field in his own person to fight a duel
with a p^^ie Jesuit? Our common Soldiers are able to sight with the best
Captains, and our Captains with the best Generals of the Roman faction;
witness our Abbot conquering their Bishop, and many of our Bishops their
greatest Cardinals. It was too great an honor for this Jesuit that he had
such an Answerer.

Quem si non vicit, magnis tamen excidit ausis.

There are others who are picked out to do this service, among whom I confess
my self the meanest and unfittest to fight against this Roman Bullwarke: yet
seeing it is fallen unto me, not by my choice, but by ^^^, trusting to God (for
whose word, and by whose word I fight) and to the fastness of the cause I have
set upon it.

Happily some curious Spectators, seeing the manner of my fight, may say; I
have a good cause, but do not defend it well: be has a bad cause, but
defends it craftily. I confess that in this fight I have used no Fencer-like
flourishes: and at sometimes such words have dropped from my pen, as if it had
been dipped in vinegar. If any man blame me for those two things, my defense is
this. For the 1. I had rather fight with the words of wisdom, then with the
wisdom of words. For the 2. His own thundering of scornful and disgraceful
speeches against so grave and so gracious a Prelat, has turned my wine into
vinegar. Had he replied in a calm manner, he should have been answered in the
same; but seeing his Reply is a railing and slanderous accusation of his
Answerer, rather then a sound and solid confutation of the Answer, I thought
it not amiss to currie him in his kind; and I hope no man will blame me for
calling a spade a spade.

As for crafty defending of the cause, I deny the fact; let him be Master of
the craft. Pura religio nescit imposturas, Truth needs not lying pretenses,
nor cunning devices; I leave them to this juggling Jesuit, whose crafty
dealing is discovered in many particulars. In his carping at the true stating
of this Question, and in not stating of it at all, of set purpose that he might
wander from the question. In not answering many of the testimonies which were
produced against him. I pass by his absurd distinction of mediate and
immediate sufficiency or perfection, where with he answers most of the
testimonies of the Fathers. I need not here to discover his false quotations,
his corrupt translations, his impertinent allegations, his vain tautologies
and reiterations of the same testimonies, some times ten times over, his scraps
gathered from Bellarmines table, and his treasure stolen out of Coccius his
thesaurus, his manifest contradictions, and his manifold digressions into other
points, his division of this Part into nine Section^, five of which ((...), ^.
3. 4. 8. 9.) have the title of a Reply to the Answer: but not one word to the
Answer, secundum allegata and probata. All this thou shall find discovered.

I have used none of these: if my Adversary can discover any such dealing, let
him not spare me. I have followed his wandering method, to the intent thou may
see all his testimonies to be answered: and what is not answered being formerly
answered, the margent (to avoid needless repetition) directs thee to that
former place: and for the easier finding of it, I have made divisions of every
Section. My Adversaryes words thou may know by these two [ ] enclosures. With
thy will to read the Lord give thee an understanding he art to believe those
things which were written, that thou John 20. 31.
might believe, and in believing have eternal life.

A REIOYNDER TO FRIAR MALONE touching Traditions.
SECT. I. The Jesuit shrinketh from the Question.
IF Scripture be the Judge, Heretics cannot stand out in Judgment, says De
solis scripturis quaestiones suas sistant, and stare non possunt. Tertul. de
resurrect. carnis c. 3.
Tertullian. The Romanists find it to be true, that the Bible will be the ruin
of Babell: to prevent the downfall of it, Pighius in the name of the Roman
Church gives this advice. Ad Traditiones potius quam ad Scripturas provocandum
est, etc. Cujus doctrinae si memo^es fuissemus, meliore sane loco essent res
nostrae: sed dum osten^andi ingenil, and eruditionis gratia, cum Luthero in
certamen descenditur scripturarum, excitatum est hoc, quod, proh dolor, videmus
incendium, Pigh. Eccles. Hiera^. l. 1. c. 4.
We must rathen fly to Traditions then to Scripture. And again, Had we
remembered this doctrine, it had been better with us: but while we have sought
with Luther by the Scriptures, that we might show our wit and learning; this
combustion, which we greive to see, is stirred up. By this we may see why
they fly from Scripture, even as the dog flies from the whip wherewith he is
beaten. The Scripture is no friend of theirs; and therefore they will not be
friends with it: but speak evil of it, as of an inky Gospel, a leaden rule,
a nose of wane, a dumb Judge, and an imperfict Law. And they have invented
this Doctrine of unwritten Traditions as a Sanctuary to slye unto; which they
call, Salutis and castrum and propugnaculum. Lindan. de optim. gener. in
terpret.
The tower and fort of salvation. Andrad. orthodox, explicat. l. 2.
The maine pillar of Religion. [ page 169.
And upon it, says the Lesuite (in this his hotch-potch) does podge the whole
frame of all differences, and controversies in Religion, which now adays are
disputed betwixt Protestants, and Catholics.] Seeing then this is his
Masterpiece, in which he fights Tanquam pro focis and aris, let him show his
skill and reading. [Hee gives good testimony of his vain skill and reading.]
(If I may use his own words) who has read no more then his A. Andradius. B.
Bellarmine. C. Coccius.
A. B. C. And such a fibolist by whole sale I never read: yet this impudent
Jesuit compares him, (whose learning his learned Adversaryes do acknowledge)
unto [ page 151.
Esopes Iacdaw, trimmed with the gay feathers of other birds, but now remaining
in his doublet and hose.] Whenas he fluttereth in others feathers, having of
his own not so much as one feather, or a fig-leafe to cover his nakedness:
but only a robe of lies, of raylings, of malice, and of impudency. Quem
veritate non potest vincere, lacerat convitij^, Ambros. in Psalm. 118
In truth he cannot overcome him: yet by raylings he would wound him. It is
no marvel that he should slander and belie him, that stands for the
perfection of Gods written word; seeing he slandereth and belyeth the written
word it self with imperfection. A whipp is fitter for a fool then an answer
for his follye. An non justius os loquens talia fustibus tunderetur, quam
rationibus refelleretur Bernard. epist 190.
A cudgel is more fit to stop, then reasons are to confute, a mouth that
speaks such things. I might refuse to answer his foolish Reply, as Ierem.
^8. 11.
Jeremy did to Hannaniah: but then the Philistims will vaunt, that none dare
meet with their Goliath; and therefore I, (who am but the least in the Camp of
Israel) will grapple with him: and by GODS assistance leave him grovelling on
the ground.

2. Sir Wiseakers in his haulting simile, taxes the page 115.
most reverend Primate, for [frameing of the Question.] A witless cavil. Is
it not the part of an Answerer to lay down the state of the Question, that the
truth may be the better discovered? If the Jesuit had stated the Question
better, or if he had showed wherein, his Answerer had framed the Question
amiss, he had not spoken nonsense: but to do neither the one nor the other,
this [Declareth how idly his Answer will be shaped.] It is his policy (Dolosus
versatur in generalibus) to dispute at rando^, and not to state the Question at
all, lest the truth should be discovered. Vanitas potest plus clamare quam
veritas. August, de Civit. Dei. l. 5 c 27.
Vanity, says S. Augustine, may outcry the truth. So does the Jesuit crying
out of vanity, and of gross vanity in the most reverend Primate: when he
himself most vainly triumphs as Victor. [That unwritten Traditions are
embraced by the Catholic Church as the undoubted Word of God] this is one of
his vain flourishes; this is no better then petitio principij, a vain begging
of the Question.

3. He can do little that cannot belie his Adversary. This the Jesuit has
done; first persuading the Reader to believe, that the Answerer engaged
himself to tell, [When unwritten Traditions first began.] The most reverend
Primate has showed their page 40.
Original: although he shows, that it is a page 2. and 3.
vain, and a foolish demand. Tell us when those Jewish Traditions, which the
Scripture condemns, began; and who was the Author of them? and then we
will do the same for Popish Traditions: This is as true as the next, that the
[Answerer has not produced so much as one only Authority out of the Fathers
against unwritten Traditions.] Not one only, why? Is it because he has
produced many more then one? And those so direct, so clear, so evident against
them, as that the Jesuit could not invent any false gloss to obscure them. In
answering many testimonies of the Fathers he has made use of that Counsel
which the Divines of Doway gave. Commodum ijs sensum affingamus, dum oppo^untur
nobis in disputationibus. Index Enpurg. Bolg.
Let us invent some commodious sense for the Fathers, when as they are objected
against us in disputations. But many others he has answered only with a noli
me tangere, dealing with them, as Antony the unskilful Orator did with
troublesome points, Mar Tul. l 2. de Orat.
passing them over in silence. It will not be unseasonable here to give a taste
of them: Can there be a more direct testimony then that of S. Basil? Basil.
page 11. and l.
Every word and action ought to be confirmed by the testimony of holy
Scripture. And again, page 38. ctm.
Neither reject, nor add any thing thereunto, for it whatsoever is not of
faith be sin, as the Apostle says, and faith is by hearing; and hearing by
the word of God: then whatsoever is without the holy Scripture, being not of
faith, must needs be sin. Gregory Nyssen says, Greg. Nyss. page 39. ct o.
Forasmuch as this is upholden with no testimony of Scripture, as false we
will reject it. Unto these I might add that of S. Benedict. Benedict. page 42.
n.
The Abbot ought to teach nothing that is without the precept of the Lord. That
of S. Anthony, Anthon. page 43. 0.
The Scriptures are sufficient for Doctrine. And that of S. Basil, Basil. page
43. p.
It is necessary that every one should learn out of the holy Scriptures that
which is for his use: both for his full settlement in godliness, and that he
may not be accustomed unto humane Traditions. These are direct testimonies,
and unto those the Jesuit answers nothing but mumme. never expect truth from
a Jesuit in defending of his Religion; for as it is compounded of lies, so it
is maintained by lying.

[What Traditions do you admit?] Reply.


4. If he had eyes to see, he might see, that All Traditions are not
promiscuously struck at by our Religion. We cavil not at the use of the word
Tradition: we find it both in Scripture, and in the Fathers. And the general
sense of Traditio with the Latins, of (...) with the Greek, of Cabbala, or
Masoreth with the Hebrews, is the same: namely, a Delivery, or any thing
delivered. as well by ^. Th^^. ^. 15.
Epistle, as by word of mouth. The word Tradition is taken as well for the
manner of delivery, which is Traditio activa, as for the matter delivered,
which is Traditio passiva. And therefore lest the Jesuit (who is well skilled
in the practice of equivocation) should equivocate with the word Tradition, and
so prove Quid pro Quo, the manner of deliverie for the matter delivered, the
Answer shows him: That we admit modum tradendi, the Answer.
manner of delivery. We willingly acknowledge, that the word of God, which by
some of the Apostles was set down in writing, was both by themselves and
others of their fellow laborers, delivered by word of mouth: and that the
Church in succeeding ages was bound not only to preserve those sacred writings
committed to her trust, but also to deliver unto her children viva voce the
form of wholesome words contained therein. Here he might have seen, that we
admit modum trad^ndi, the manner of delivery both by the Apostles, and by the
Church.

1. We believe the preaching of the Apostles to be the undoubted word of God,
as well as their writing: so that it is Ridiculum est quod nemini est dubium
probare. Mare. Tul pro Quint.
a ridiculous thing in the Jesuit to prove that which no man doubts. He
alleges the Fathers, as Iren. page 118
Irenaeus, Euscb. page 120.
Eusebius, and many more, to prove that the [Apostles preached before they
wrote; and that their preaching is to be believed, and was effectual to save
soul^s, as well as their writing.] In this he shrinketh from the Question; which
is not, whether the Apostles preached before they wrote, and whether their
preaching is to be believed? but th^^ he should frame the Question. whether the
Apostles in their preaching delivered such points of faith, or doctrines of
salvation, as are not contained in the Scriptures? 2. As the preaching of the
Apostles is called a Tradition: so is their delivery of the Scriptures, and of
diverse doctrines contained in them, called a Tradition* being delivered unto
the Church by writing. Traditum est nobis quod sit unus Deus and una spes, and
una sides etc. August. de baptism. l. 5. c. ^6.
It is dell vered unto us, says S. August in that there is one God, one hope,
one faith, etc. As this kind of Tradition comes not within the compass of
this controversy: so these Fathers Irenaeus page 125.
Ir^naus, Eusebius. page 109. 120
Eusebius, and sundry others, are impertinently produced by the Jesuits, who
ascribe the word Tradition unto Scripture, and unto written Doctrines. In this
the Jesuit shrinketh again from the Question, which is not, whether the
Scripture may be called a Tra^^tion? but whether all things necessary for our
salvation be written in this Tradition?

Unto these two I may add a third kind of active Tradition, and that is, the
delivery by action or conversation, which I may call a Practical Tradition. S.
Chrysostom expounding these words. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6.
Withdraw your selves from every brother that walks disorderly, and not after
the Tradition which he received of no. gives this sense of them. (...)*
Chrysostom. in 2. These. c. 3.
He means the Tradition which is according unto works. This kind of
Tradition belongs not to our purpose; and to little purpose does the Jesuit
bring in Iuseb. page 162.
Eusebius, who calls the practice of the Apostles, a Tradition. In this
again the Jesuit shrinketh from the Question, which is not, whether the
practice of the Apostles may be called a Tradition? but whether in their
practice of Piety they observed any holy duties, necessary for our salvation,
which are not contained in the Scriptures either expressly, or by consequence.
We likewise admit the active Tradition of the Church; as

1. Her preserving and delivery of the written word unto her children in
succeeding ages: not as the means whereby the Scripture is made canonical; yet
as one good means, though not as the only means, whereby a man may be
persuaded that it is canonical. And the granting of this is a sufficient
answer to a deal of confused stuff alleged by the Jesuit in his 4. Section.

2. Her delivery viva voce of the form of wholesome words, and of such
Doctrines, as are either expressly contained in the Scriptures, or by sound
inference may be deduced from them. S. Basil. de Fide.
Basil was sparing to use such words as are not contained in Scripture: but the
Pontifical Romanists spare not to bring in such doctrines as are not contained
in it. For words we say with Hilarie, words Nomen nih^^ habeterimini^, quod non
perturbat sensum religionis. Hilar. de Synod. cont. Arian.
are not to be blamed, which disturb not the sense of Religion. All things are
not delivered (...), verbatim in the Scriptures. I read not the words,
Essence, Persons, Unbegotten, Coessentiall: yet we do lawfully use them. All
Doctrines are not formally laid down in them: the Apostles Creed is not
totidem verbis written in them: yet they contain grounds and principles, by
which all doctrines may be tried, and from which all divine conclusions may be
drawn. And those conclusions which by sound inference are gathered out of the
Scriptures, by the opinion of Greg Nazian. l. 5. de Theolog.
Gregory Nazian:, are all one with the Scripture. And to this Stapleton.
relect. fidei, controv. 5. q. 5. ar. 1
Stapleton consents. By this kind of Tradition we are taught many points of
says, as these Fathers prove, which the Jesuit alleges abundantly, and
impertinently. By Athanas. page 140.
Athanasius, and Epiph: page 145.
Epiphanius, That the Father is unbegotten. By Athanas. page 140.
Athanasius and August. page 155.
Augustine, That the Son is consubstantiall with the Father. By Basil. page 150.
Basil, and Aug. page 119
Augustine, That the holy Ghost is to be adored. By Origin. page 126.
Origin, and August. page 118. 119. and 126
Augustine, That Children must be baptized. By Augustine, That the baptized by
Heretics must not be rebaptised. He alone is alleged for this point: but yet
for want of company he is so Augustine. page 116. 116. 146. 148. Ide^^ page 118.
and 147 Idem page 119. and 148. page 11^.
often brought in still singing the same song: that the music must needs be
tedious to the hearer, and the quotations troublesome to the reader. The
Jesuit again shrinketh from the state of the Question, in alleging these
Fathers as Patrons of a Tradition which we defend. The Question is not, whether
the preaching of the Church be a Tradition, or whether in delivery of Doctrines
to her hearers she may use such words as are not written, and deliver such
Doctrines as are by sound inference deduced from the Scriptures* but the
Question is, whether the Church may deliver such doctrines unto her hearers, as
are neither expressly contained in the Scriptures, nor by sound inference
deduced from them? [All this, says the Jesuit, is no more, but that you admit
the written word: but our Question is of the unwritten word,] Is not he a silly
Logician, that cannot distinguish between modum tradendi, and doctrinam
traditam? These five ways, The Apostles preaching: Their writing, and their
pious practice: The Churches delivery of the written volume: and her preaching
out of the same, concern only the manner of delivery. And if by admitting
these, we admit no more but the written word, what then becomes of your
unwritten word? It must needs be a question de non ente.

2ly, The most reverend Primate shows him, what passive Answer.
Traditions we admit. We speak of doctrine delivered as the word of God, that
is, of points of religion revealed to the Prophets, and Apostles, for the
perpetual information of Gods people. Not of rites, and ceremonies, and other
ordinances, which are left to the disposition of the Church, and consequently
be not of divine, but of positive, and humane right. The Question is not of
rituall, but of doctrinall Traditions: not of points of history, or
genealogies, but of more weighty matters, in observing of which a man's life and
death consists: not of indifferent actions, but of moral, such as have vice
or virtue, good or evil in them. These ceremonies of the Church are called
Traditions in the vulgar Latin Translation of that text, mu^^bit Traditiones,
Act. 6. 14.
He shall change the Traditions. All these are at the disposition of the
Church, by that golden rule, or Canon of Canons: 1. Cor. 14. 40.
Let all things be done decently, and by order. These we admit.

1. As mutable, not as everlasting: that belongs to the Rev. 14. 6.
Gospel.

2. As indifferent, not as necessary: God only is such a Iam 4. 12.
Lawgiver.

3. As particular customs, of force only in some places, like the law of Gabal
kind: not as general to bind all. Vna in his salube^rima regula tenenda est,
ut quae non sunt contra fidem, neque contra bonos mores, and habent aliquid ad
exhortationem melioris vitae, ubicunque institui videmus, vel instituta
cognoscimus, non solum non improbemus, sed etiam laudando and imitando
secte^^^^. August. epist. 119.
In these things, says S. Augustine, one wholesome rule is to be observed;
those things which are not contrary to faith, nor to a godly life, and have any
encitement to a better life, wheresoever we see them appointed, or know them
to be appointed, let us not only not disallow them, but by our commendation,
and imitation of them allow them. We read of the Jews, that they had their
Synagogues, and their pulpits. The primitive Church had, and our Church has
diverse ceremonies, and ordinances, and yet the Scripture does not directly
contain them. Do we hereby make the Scripture imperfect? I may as well say,
that man is imperfect that wants gay clothes: for these are not of the
substance of religion, but are outward accidents for the comelines of the
Church. The Jesuit here yields unto this, That the ceremonies and ordinances
of the Church page 116.
are grounded only upon positive and humane right. But forgetting himself he
says, [ page 135.
This distinction of rituall and doctrinall Traditions serves to no purpose.]
but by his leave we can make very good use of it.

1. It serves for the true stateing of the Question, which is only about
doctrinall Traditions.

2. It evidently declares, that the Jesuit stateth the question most falsely
of rituall Traditions, saying, [ page 169.
Those articles which are reserved unto sole Tradition, are rituall points.]
And yet he inserteth doctrinall points into his Catalogue of unwritten
Traditions, as that page 126.
The Father is unbegotten, the Sons consubstantialitie with the Father: the
baptism of children, etc. Is not this a manifest contradictio^?

3. It shows that he shrinketh from the question, in alleging a number of
Fathers, who only speak of rituall Traditions, as of holy days, fasting-dayes,
and the like: as August. page 118. and 147.
Augustine, Epiphan. page 1^0.
Epiphanius, Chrysostom. p 1^0.
Cbrysostome, Theophilact. page 120.
Theophilact, Tertul. page 137.
Tertullian, Basil. page 1^^.
Basil, Chrysostom and
Chrysologus, Leo page 149
Leo, and many others. And yet he that speaks nothing to the purpose, takes
upon him to teach the Answerer to [Speak to the purpose: whether the Apostles
preached no more then they laid down in writing? And whether tradendi modus,
the manner of delivery of such things without writing, made them to be of less
authority then that which they committed to writing.] 5. All this is nothing to
the purpose. If by no more he means no more words, he may be begged for a fool
for asking such a question. He is told that some of the apostl^s wrote, and
that al preached. We have but 8 writers of the new Testament, Reply p. 115.
and there were at the least 80. Preachers of it. This Jesuit has a trick to
preach printed sermons, in which he will preach no more words then are written:
but it was not so with the Apostles: their Sermons were large Epistles, and
their Epistles are contracted Sermons. If he mean no more rituall points, this
is nothing to the purpose: he frames the Question falsely concerning those. It
is as little to the purpose if hoe mean no more doctrines: for they might be
written formerly by the Prophets, although they were not written by the
Apostles. And we defend the perfection of the whole Canon of Scripture, and not
of any part thereof. Yet for his instruction we tell him; all that was
necessary for the Church to know was inspired: all that was preached was
written. 1. Epist. Ioh. c. 1. verse 1. 3. 4.
Those things which the Apostles saw and heard, they declared, and those things
they wrote. Quod quidem praeconiaverunt, po^^^a per Dei voluntatem in
scripturis nobi^ ^^adiderunt, Iren. l. 3. c. 1.
What they first preached, the same afterward by the will of God they
delivered unto us in the Scriptures, says Irenaus.

And if they be not, what Authority can they have? We give a due respect unto
any thing which the Apostles have delivered either viva voce, or by writing:
but for Popish Traditions we respect them not, because they were never
delivered by the Apostles. They are of a later invention: they are the
commandments of men condemned by the Scriptures. And is not this ad rem? Is
not this to speak to the purpose? He may sooner cough up his heart then prove
the contrary. And though some things were delivered by the Apostles without
writing, yet their authority may be less then the authority of the things they
committed to writing; not because writing gives authority; but because the
authority may arise from the matter delivered, and from the intention of the
deliverer.

1. From the matter delivered. unwritten rituall Traditions may be of the same
authority with written rituall Traditions, which are mutable, and changeable:
but no man of understanding will say; that they are of the same authority with
written doctrinall Traditions, which are immutable, and unchangeable.

2. From the intention of the deliverer. Those things which the Apostles
intended should be universal, and perpetual, were written by them: but those
things which they intended should be transient, and particular, for the most
part they were delivered by word of mouth: so that their intention was to
deliver such things as befitting those tim^s and places, and not by them to
make an addition to the written word, as it were defective: nor to make them of
equal authority with the written word. In leagues between Prince and Prince,
and in covenants between man and man, the Articles are committed unto writing.
God has entered into a covenant with man, and has made choice to deliver it by
writing: and therefore we give supreme authority to the written word, above all
things unwritten whatsoever. Yet those things which by sound inference are
deduced from the Scriptures, have the same authority with the Scriptures.

[But first you have no means to know which is a sound inference.] Reply page
116


6. Sir I tell you, that you are a liar, and I will prove it by a sound
inference. It was of old accounted an argument sound both in matter and form:
Thom. Wal^ing. Histor. Rich^^. 2^.
If a Friar, then a liar. This Argument is as sound; If a Jesuit then a liar.
The inference is sound, because Psalm. 116. 11.
All men are liars. This is a surer inference then the Popes supremacy, or the
corporal presence: the first depending upon many false suppositions; and the
second upon many doubtful intentions. Such I confess, is the depth of
Scripture, that the wit of man is not able to sound it, and to find out all
the sound inferences that may be deduced from it. Such is the depth of
Scripture, says S. Augustine, Tanta est Christianarum literarum profunditas,
ut i^ eis quotid se proficerem, sieas solas ab in: cunte aeta^e usque ad
decrepitam senectu^em co^are^ addiscere. August. Ep. 3^
that still I may learn more out of it, although I should studio nothing but
it all the days of my life. But to say, that we have no means to know which
is a sound inference out of it; is to deny that we have Wit, or any spiritual
understanding. This is a most witless cavil, and it seems that the Jesuit
has no more brains then a bird-boult.

[2. We have the express warrant of the Scripture approving Reply.
unwritten Traditions] And so the Scripture condemns unwritten Traditions,
and I believe when we come to examine your Traditions, we shall find them more
like those which are condemned, then those which are commended by the Scripture.

3. We are able to prove all such Traditions as the Catholic Reply.
Church holds for Apostolical to be doctrines deduced by sound inference
from the Scripture. And so are we: but what is that to Popish Traditions, which
were never held by the Catholic Church, are not Apostolical; and are no
doctrines deduced by sound inference from the Scripture? We have long desired
to see the catalogue of unwritten Traditions: we press you and defye you to
set it out. This puny Jesuit knows not what is an unwritten Tradition. What
a babbling wittall is this? He undertaketh to prove, All unwritten Traditions to
be doctrines deduced by sound inference from the Scripture. If he do not prove
this, he is a liar in grain. If he do prove this, then he over-throweth
unwritten Traditions: for doctrines deduced by sound inference from Scripture
are not unwritten Traditions: but even all one with the Scripture it self. I
marvel not at the dunsary of this Ignoramus, in calling doctrines deduced by
sound inference from Scripture, unwritten Traditions: seeing in page 145.
an other place he calls the Scripture it self, an unwritten Tradition. Sr.
Ignaro, learn to speak English, before you write again in divinity. But let
us here his sound inference. [Because the Scripture commands us to obey the
Church.] A sound inference to defend Jewish Traditions, as well as Popish,
because the Church among them was to be obeyed. Such an inference may pass for
current among your Proselytes, who must believe whatsoever you prate or
prattle. This is a sound of an inference, but no sound inference.

1. Because the Romish Priests, and Prelates, who require this audience and
obedience, are not a true Church, but upstart Imposters, Tradition-mongers,
such the Scripture commands us not to obey.

2. Though they were a true Church, yet they are not the Catholic Church, of
which Mr Dullman speaks.

3. Because the Traditions which you defend, cross both the verity and
perfection of the sacred Scripture. And therefore they are no doctrines deduced
by sound inference from the Scripture; for which cause we set our selves
against them. [Then you set your self against no body, Reply.
but combat with your own shadow, frameing a fantastical Adversary: for such
Traditions as we defend, are far from crossing the verity, or perfection of
the Scripture.

7. The first article of Ignatius Loiola his lame confession is this: Credo
Scripturam esse doctrinam imperfectam, mutilam, et mancam* Hospin: de orig.
Jesuit.
I believe that the Scripture is an imperfect, lame, and maimed doctrine. not
all that a Christian is bound to believe, but only Maxima pars co^tinetur in
Scripturis. Andrad. orthodox. Explicat. a^.
The greatest part is contained in the Scriptures, says Andradius. Multo pars
maxima Euangelij pervenit ad nos traditione^ perexigua est literis mandata.
Hosius confess. Petrocov^^. 9* de Traditionibus.
The far greater part of the Gospel we have by Tradition: very little is
committed unto writing: thus writes Hosius the Cardinal. How often has this
Sir Oblivious denied the perfecti^ of Scripture, even in points of greatest
moment? page 126.
That it cannot be proved by Scripture, that the Father is unbegotten, and that
the Son is consubstantiall with the Father; and that page 118.
The holy Ghost is to be worshipped. He likewise affirms, page 132.
That all the Council of God, which the Minister is to deliver, is not written.
And page 165.
That the Scripture has sufficiency to declare some, but not all the Articles
of faith. And if this defect must be supplied by unwritten traditions, do not
those cross the perfection of scripture? Pull your considering-cap closer to
your cockscombe, and think better upon it. This discovers his shrinking at
the first encounter: and that (by his own confession) he is good man no body,
but a shadow, but a very fantastical Adversary. For such Traditions are
defended by him, as cross both the verity and perfection of the sacred
Scriptures.

1. The verity: The denial of the cup to the Laity, crosses this institution,
Math. 26. 27.
Drink ye all of this. The Council of Constance took away this Council.
Constan. Sess. 13.
non obstante mandato: although Christ, the Apostles, and the Primitive Church
used it. Of this nature is the Popes deposing of Kings, and his Dispensations
contrary to Gods Law.

2. The perfection of Scripture is crossed, by adding of many books (which
were never inspired by God) unto the Canon of Scripture: and of many articles
of faith unto the faith at once delivered by the Apostles. Of this nature is
Pius Quartus his new Creed, and many points of Religion with you, which are
prater legem, and so cross the perfection of Scripture: although they are not
contra legem, and so cross the verity of it. These Lawmakers, are worse then
Law-breakers: for men actually break Gods Laws, because of their weakness,
and the hardness of Gods Laws to do them: but these men make new laws as if
Gods Laws were but foolish, and they wiser then God to know what is meet.

[But they cross not the perfection or truth of Scripture, because Reply page
116.
they help us to find out the true sense in the obscure and controverted
letter.

^. This is neither true, nor to the purpose. It is nothing to the purpose;
because the Question is not, whether unwritten Traditions be a good help to
expound Scripture, but whether they are to be accounted as Scripture, and as
part of Gods Law? It is not true.

1. Because the Scripture is not an obscure and controverted letter in
doctrinall things. (...). Chrysostom. hom. 3. in 2 Thessalonians.
All those things, which are necessary, are manifest in them, says S.
Chrysostom. In eis quae aperte in Scriptura posita sunt, inveniuntur illa
omnia qu^ ad fidem, etc. August. de doctrina Christi* l. 2. c. 9^
And in those things which are laid down plainly in Scripture, all those
things, says S. Augustine, are found, which appertain to faith, and direction
of life.

2. Although the Scripture were obscure; yet Popish Traditions cannot help to
find out the true sense: unless we should say: Exodus 20. l.
Thou shall not worship an image. The sense is, Thou shall worship images.
Math. ^^. ^^.
Drink ye all of this: That is, All shall not drink of it. Heb. 13. 4.
Mari^ge is honorable among all: It is not honorable among all. These are
your cursed glosses which corrupt the text, and cross the sense and meaning
intended by the Holy Ghost.

3. Although the Scripture were obscure; and your Traditions did help to find
out the sense: yet they do cross the perfection of Scripture; because they
are accounted not only helps for the interpretations of Gods written Law, but
even additions to the written Law. Interpretation is for things obscure:
addition is for things imperfect. What then will you call your Traditions,
additions to the Scripture; or, helps for the interpretation of it? If they be
additions, then they cross the perfection of it: for that which is perfect,
needs no addition. If they be helps for the interpretation only, then you
shrink from the Question, from the matter delivered as the word of God, to the
manner of deliverie, or of expounding the same. Howsoever the Jesuits argument
is most false [That which helps to expound Scripture, cannot cross the
perfection of the same.] Why goodman noddie, Do not all the Arts, Tongues,
Fathers, Commentaries help to expound Scripture? And yet whosoever shall say,
that all these are the word of God, he denies the perfection of the Bible. We
use commentaries upon Aristotle's text: but he that brings the commentary
into the text, thereby to supply the defects of it, denies the perfection of
the text. Do not you deal so with the Scripture? making unwritten Traditions
a part of Gods word, that so you may supply the defects of the written word;
making every idle interpretation as page 124. Reply.
authentical as S. John's Gospel? Do you not hereby cross the perfection of
the written word? [So S. Basil tells us, that Basil de Spirit. sanct. c* pro
If unwritten Traditions be neglected, the Gospel will incur no small
detriment.]

So we tell you, that if Arts, Tongues, Fathers, Councels, Commentaries, and
the like helps be neglected, the Gospel will incur no small detriment. We
yield to the pen man of that Book, (although it was not Basil, but a
counterfeit,) that if all unwritten Traditions be neglected, if the testimony,
lyturgie, and doxologies (of which the author specially speaks) if the
customs* constitutions, orders, and ceremonies of the Church (handmaides of
the Gospel, and excellent in their use) be slighted of all: and every man left
to himself to do as he list in the manner of Gods service, doubtless the
Gospel will incur no small detriment; and if nothing be received into the
Church, but what is totidem verbis written in the Scriptures, I wonder what
kind of Church we should have? Popish Traditions are of another nature; they
cross the truth and the perfection of Scripture: if we admit such, the Gospel
will incur no small detriment: And though the Author of that Book would
have Tradition respected; yet he would not have them accounted Gospel: for in
the words alleged he distinguishes them from the Gospel. You make no
difference between unwritten Traditions and the Gospel; you give them the
same Sect. 3.
nature and quality; the same *credit, and authority with the Gospel. If we
reject such Traditions, the Gospel will incur no detriment.

[And S. Augustine says, Sect. 4.
Then do we hold the truth of Scripture, when we do that, that pleases the
Universal Church.] Where S. Augustine says so, we may go seek; Reply page
116
for the Jesuit cites not the place: but I think the place is this:
Augustine. contra Crescon. l. 1. c. 33. In this thing we do hold the truth of
the Scripture, when we do that which now pleases the Universal Church. The
thing is the point of rebaptization, in which the Church held the truth of
Scripture, and determined this point by the authority of Scripture, and not of
unwritten Traditions: so that S. Augustine might truly affirm this: He
speaks not of unwritten Traditions; they are a thing not pleasing to the
universal Church: and therefore no man can hold the truth of Scripture, nor
please the universal Church, if he hold with unwritten Traditions.

9. And now good man Wiseakers, wherein does the most reverend Primate shrink?
Wherein has he stated the Question amiss? Does not he directly oppose Popish
Traditions, which cross either the verity or the perfection of Scripture?
Confess this, or else deny this article of unwritten Traditions. All your
exceptions prove frivolous and ridiculous. You are like an unskilful Pilot
that makes shipwreck before he can get out of the haven. You deal with your
Adversary, as Pericles did in his disputations with Thucidides, Plutarch. in
vita Pericl.
boasting that he gave the foil, when he received the foil. And as in this
Section we find that which Josephus found in Joseph. l. 1. cont. Apion.
Apions writings, an heap of untruths: So I doubt not but that we shall find
the like dealing in your next Section; wherein we are to examine

SECT. II. Whether Christ and his Apostles delivered unto the Church many
things which are not written.
1. Aristot^l. de reprehens. sophist.
ARistotle compares sophistical disputers unto weak persons, who stuff up
themselves to seem greater: The Jesuit is such a one, he stuffeth up his
three ensuing Sections with a deal of bombaste, that so his Replye may seem
greater. They bear the title of a Reply to the Answer, and yet the Answerer
does not once speak in them. I might therefore pass them over as
impertinently written: but I will be content to run the wildgoose chase, and to
pursue this gagler by his hissing, who thus begins to keake.

[Christ commanded that the Math. 23. 3.
Scribes and Pharisees Reply page 117.
should be obeyed in their doctrine for the authority of Moses chair, much
more will he have his Church to be obeyed in her holy Laws.]

In the same Chapter Christ says, Verse. 19.
The altar sanctifyeth the gift. Yet it does not sanctify every gift, as dogs
flesh, or swines flesh: but only such gifts as are fit for the Altar. Children
must obey their Col. 3. 20.
Parents in all things: Yet not in unlawful things: so must the Chair and the
Church be obeyed in all holy Laws. We must obey them that sit in Moses
chair; but who sit therein? Qui ea, quae in lege habentur, docent. Theoph^l in
Mat. 23.
They that teach those things which the Law teaches them, says Theophilact.
Perinde est ac si dicat, omnia quae lex and Moses vobis dixe^int, Scribis and
Pharisaeis recitan^b^s. Maldo^^^. in Mat. 23.
It is all one, says Maldonate, as if he should say, obey all things which
Moses and the Law do teach, being recited by the Scribes, and Pharisees. And
S. Augustine says, Sua vero si vellent docere, nolite audire. Aug. tract. 46.
in Ioh.
If they will teach things of their own, hear them not. Prove then your
Traditions to be taught in the Law; and that they are not of your own, but
from God; and we will obey them. You stretch this obedience, as shooemakers
do their leather, until it crack. The caveat which Christ gave unto his
Disciples: Matthew. 16. 12
Take heed of the leaven of the doctrine of the Pharisees, is entered in sacred
writ for our instruction. You err in Traditions as much as ever did the
Pharisees. Moses Chair is fallen: the Popes is a falling, as you paint;
Lernaus in introduct. in ar^^^ Jesuit.
The Pope in his Chair ready to fall, and the Jesuits bearing it up with
their shoulders.

You have lost not only the power of binding, and unbinding: but likewise your
discretion with it: for no man of discretion would say, as you do, [That the
Church can bind and unbinde at her discretion.] To prove this he alleges the
text, [ Luke 21. 15.
Christ bestowed upon his Church os and sapientiam, a mouth to utter, and
wisdom to declare all his will and counsel, in so much that whatsoever she
says, must not be doubted.] This seems to be a gift peculiar to the
Apostles, (to whom Christ gave wisdom without study or labor, not only to
stop the mouths of their Adversaries; but also to pen Laws for his
Church) rather then an inheritance conveyed by succession unto the Church: her
wisdom is not to make new Laws, but to keep the Laws which GOD has made:
not to be wise above that 1. Cor. 4. 6.
which is written. But to be 2. Tim. 3. 15.
made wise by the Scripture. Suppose it were a promise made to the Church for
ever; yet it is no such warrant for her infallible truth: but that her doctrine
may be inquired into, and examined by the Scriptures. (...) etc Chrysostom. hom.
13. in 2. Cor.
It is an absurd thing, says S. Chrysostom, not to believe others in
receiving of money, but to reckon it after them: and yet in greater things to
receive other men's doctrines, and not to try them. Are your words more
authentical then S. Paul's? Si ipse tali^ ac tantus Apostolus authoritatem
dictorum suorum sufficere non posse credit, nisi doceat in Lege and Prophetis
script^ esse quae dicit; quanto magi^ nos minimi hoc observa^e debemus. Origen^
in Romans c. 3.
If he, such and so great an Apostle, did not think his words to have
authority enough, unless he could teach, that those things which he said,
were written in the Law and the Prophets: how much more ought we, who are the
least, to observe the same course, says Origin.

And what if the doctrine taught, cannot be prooved by the Scripture, must it
be obeyed? I read the contrary in Cyrill, (...) etc. Cyrill. Hieros. Catech.
4^ de Spi^* Sanct.
Believe not me, unless I can bring a demonstration out of the Scripture. In
S. Augustine, Nec ipsis Catholicis Episcopi^ cons^ntiendum est, sicuti forte
falluntur, ut contra ^anonica^ Dei scripturas aliquid sentiant Aug. de unitat.
Eccles. c. 10.
Believe not the Catholic Bishops themselves, who may sometimes be
deceived, teaching things contrary to the holy Scriptures of GOD. And in the
imperfect work upon Matthew, Nec ipsis Ecclesi^s credendum est, nisi ea dicant
quae convenientia sunt Scriptura. Author imperfect. Oper. in Matthew: hom. 49.
Believe not the Churches themselves, unless they teach these things which do
agree witb the Scriptures. So that a Bishop, Bishops, or the Churches must not
be believed, unless they can prove their doctrine by the Scripture. But if
the Church say it, then the Jesuit will swear it. [Because it is the Lords
decree. Luke 10. 16.
He that hears you hears me, and he that despises you despises me.]
Take heed you be not forsworn: for Gerson tells you, that this is spoken of
the Gerson de vita spirituali. lect 2
Apostles, And Driedo adds his reason, Ecclesia primitiva propter collegium
Apostolorum, majoris erat gratiae, majorisque authoritatis, quam Ecclesia quae
nunc est. Driedo de Eccles. dogm. l. 4. c. 4.
Because the Primitive Church by reason of the college of the Apostles had more
grace, and more authority, then the Church which now is: but be it spoken of
the Church that now is; as long as the Church hears Christ, and delivers
nothing but his embassage, hearing her, we hear Christ: but if once she speak
of her own head, and go beyond, beside, or contrary to her commission; if we
hear her, we hear not Christ. Did the Jews hear Christ, when they heard
Judas with his Quid dabitis? If our teachers become Arians, Nestorians, or
Pelagians, must we hear them? No; If it be Paul himself, more; If it be an
Gal. 1. 8.
Angel from heaven shall teach other doctrine (then is contained in the
Scriptures) let him be accursed.

[Hee is rather to be accursed, and accounted as an Reply page 117
Matt. 18. 17.
Insidell, who wilfully refuses to hearken to the Church.] In that Text our
Savior speaks not of matters of faith, but of fact; as of the means of
ending strife between party and party. And as it is in inferior Courts, they
may hear and judge some things, as Batteryes, Blood-sheddes, and the like: but
may not judge of Felony, Treason, and the like. So it is with the Church, she
may hear and determine in matters of fact, as to compose strife; and he that
will not in such a case hearken unto her, let him be no better then an
Infidel: but if she take too much upon her, as that God must say whatsoever
she says: that all her words are Gospel, page 124.
as sure as S. John's Gospel: and if she dare add unwritten Traditions to Gods
written Law, (the point of greatest consequence, and the chiefest Article of
the Roman faith) she extends her authority beyond her power, and in such a
case none but wittalls will listen unto her. [But the Church is 1. Tim. 3. 5.
it is verse 15.
the foundation Reply page 117.
and pillar of truth.] To speak properly, (...) Chrysostom. in 1^ Tim. hom. 11.
Truth is the foundation and pillar of the Church, as S. Chrysostom says. And
the Replyer, often a liar, now tells truth. [This title does properly belong
unto God himself.] Then it is improperly given unto the Church, but the
question is, in what respect: whether in regard of her nature, or of her duty?
In regard of her nature, says the Jesuit. [Because she is endued from above
with the Spirit of truth, which never fails to teach her all truth.] I may
safely grant this, and yet deny unwritten verities, because they are not truth,
but very lies, never received from the spirit of truth, nor taught by the
Church unto her followers. This title is given unto the Church, rather in
regard of her duty; for as the Magistrate is said to be Romans 13. 3.
A terror not to the good, but to the evil. Not because he is always so, but
because he ought to be so: so this title is given to the Church, not in regard
of her infallible nature, which never fails: but in regard of her office, and
duty; which is to upholde the truth, and to preserve the truth, in which she
may sometimes fail. The Apostle calls the Church of Ephesus, (where he left
1. Tim. 1. 36
Timothy, and where Timothy was resident when S. Paul wrote unto him) the
ground and pillar of truth: yet that which S. Paul Act. 20. 19:
feared, is come unto it; it is not now the pillar of truth; but is fallen from
the truth: So is the Church of Rome fallen from the truth into many errors, of
which this doctrine of unwritten Traditions is not the least.

2. Thus much I have well considered; and the more I consider, I see the more
dunsery, and the less divinity. In his ensuing observations he labors to
tread down the authority of Scripture; even as in his precedent observations
he labored to make the authority of the Church to mount up unto heaven. The
first is this, [Christ never Reply p. 117.
wrete any his doctrine himself.] As he spoke by the mouth of all his Prophets
and Apostles, so he wrote by their hands. S. Paul's Epistle written by Romans 16.
22.
Tertius unto the Romans, is accounted part of Paul's writings, as well as the
Epistle to Philemon which was written with Verse. 19.
his own hands: so the Scripture may be said to be written by Christ, being
written by the Apostles, and Prophets, who were his hands. S. Augustine will
teach him to speak. Nequaquam dicendum est, quod Christus non scripserit,
quandoquidem memora ejus id operata sunt quod dictante capite cognoverunt.
quicquid enim ille de dictis and sactis suis nos le gere voluit hoc scribendum
illis, tanquam suis manibus imperavit. Aug. de consens. Evang. l. 1. c. ult.
Say not by any means, that Christ has not written, because his hands wrote
that, which the head did dictate unto them: and whatso^ver he would have us to
read touching his words or works, that he commanded them to write as it were
with his own hands. Haee ille docte and eleganter etc. Tanto magis dicen dum
est Christum scripsesse per Iuangelicrum Scriptores ut per manus suas; quanto
illi ne verbum unum aut iot^ unum de suo spiritu Evangelio addiderunt. Sa^mer.
Proleg 26. Tom. 1.
These things, says Salmeron, S. Augustine spoke learnedly, and eloquently.
And he adds this reason. By so much the rather we must say that Christ
himself wrote by the writers of the Gospel as by his own hands; in as much
as they added not one word it self, nor the least letter of their own to the
Gospel. Gregory de Valentia says, Plan^ instar calami cum usurpatur a
Scriptore, quo and illud Davidis spectat: lingua mea calamus scribae velociter
scribentis, nec enim alium hoc loco scribam significat, praeter ipsum Deum.
Greg. de Val. Annal. fid. l. 8. c. 5.
They wrote even as the pen which the writer uses, unto which David alludeth
Psalm. 45. 2. my tongue is the pen of a ready writer, he means here no other
writer but God. Neither is it any thing material, whether we say Christ wrote
it himself, or the Apostles wrote it, as long as we are sure, they had Christ's
commandment for the writing of it: But this the Jesuit denies. [Wee do not
read, that ever he gave commandment to his Disciples to commit any part
thereof unto writing.] S. John was eleven times Revel. c. 1. 11. 19. c. 2. 1.
8. 1^, c. 3. 1. 7. 14. c 14. 13, c. 19. 9. c. 21. 5.
commanded to write. Is the Revelation of Jesus Christ no part of his doctrine?
Aug. de co^sen. Euan* l. 1. c. ult.
They were commanded to write, says S. Augustine. Iren. l. 3. c. 1.
They wrote the Scriptures by the will of God, says Irenaus. Christus voluit
scribi Euangelium. T^eoph. praefat. in Mat.
Christ would have them to write the Gospel, says Theophylast. And is not his
will a sufficient command? Inspiration, ( 2. Tim. 3. 16. 2 Pet. 1. 21.
whereby they wrote the Scriptures) is an internal command. [Hee sent them to
preach his faith, and to teach all nations.] Does this exclude writing? May not
a man preach and teach by writing? The Apostles did Rom 16 26.
preach and they did 2 Thessalonians 2. 15. 2. Tim. 3. 17
teach by their Epistles. Clemens Alexandrinus Reply page 117
in this spoke truly: (...). Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 1.
Preaching is truly an Angel^call Scie^c^ in some sort, and very profitable
both ways, whether it ^^ by the hand or by the tongue. Tertullian tells us
how the Apostles preached: Tum viva, quod aiunt, voce, tum per Epistolas
postea. Tertul de praescrip. c. 21*
As Well by word of mouth, as they say as afterward by Epistles. So that
preaching and teaching may be diverse ways; by writing, as the Apostles preach
by their Epistles: by practice, as Christ preached in his actions, which are
all for our instruction: and not only by word of mouth.

[Wee have a commandment to hear his holy word, and faith comes by hearing,
but none can show (I trow) where we are obliged to read, or where any
commandment is given to propound the word of God to be read.]

3. It seems the Jesuit is more skillful in Machiavel then in the Bible: for
if he had ever read it over, and remembered Reply page 119
what he read, he would never avouch this so confidently, when as he may read:
Hab. 2. 2.
He that runs may read it. Ioh 5. 39.
Search the Scriptures. Luc. 10. 26.
How read thou? Romans 15. 4.
Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our learning. 2.
Cor. ^. 13
We write no other things unto you, then what you read. Col. 3. 16
Let the word of God dw^ll plentifully in you. Upon which place S. Chrysostom
observes this: (...). Chry in Col. c. 3 ho. 9.
Harken as many as are, and are married, and have children, h^w he commands
them specially to know the Scriptures. Timothy himself is commanded to read,
and to 1. Tim. 4. 13.
Attend upon reading. Neither does hearing of the word exclude reading of the
same; seeing it may be heard by reading, as well as by preaching. Revel. 1 3.
Blessed are they that read, and they that hear. Luc. 16. 29.
Moses and the Prophets must be heard. They are dead: but yet when their
writings are read, then they are heard.

[Certaine it is, that the Primitive Church did abound in Reply page 118
faith, and godliness, for many years, before the writings of the new
Testament were perfected, even by the means of unwritten doctrine.]

4. This is as certain as all the rest. It was not many years before the New
Testament was perfected: before it was perfected, the Church had those Books
of it which were first penned: before any were penned, the Church had the Old
Testament, which Christ commanded should be Ioh. 5. 39.
searched. And the Bereans were commended for Act. 17. 11.
searching into it. The Primitive Church did not continue in faith and
godliness by the means of unwritten doctrine: for the doctrine taught by the
Apostles, was first written in the Romans 16. 26.
Old Testament, and after in the New: although it may be said to be unwritten
in regard of the manner of delivery of it by the Apostles at the first viva
voce. Howsoever the Primitive Church did, yet the Church in succeeding ages
stood in need of a written word. Children at first are taught many things
without books, yet afterward they stand in need of books for their better
learning. The Primitive Church might do well enough without Scripture during
the life of the Apostles, (whose preaching was as infallible as their writing)
yet the Church in succeeding ages could not do so well without Scripture,
because no man living since the Apostles, had, has, or ever shall have, the
same gifts, power and authority to deliver points of faith, (whose words shall
be Gospel) as the Apostles had. And because writing is the best means to
preserve doctrine delivered by word of mouth. Respect^ nostri commodius and
utilius per Scripturam corle^^em doctrinam a corruptione, oblivione, and
interitu conservari, quam absque Scriptu^^. Gretzer. de sens. Bellar^ l. 4. ^ 4.
The heavenly doctrine, says Gretzer, in respect of us is better preserved
from corruption, oblivion, and decay, by writing, then without writing. S.
Chrysostom teaches us this. 1. That the singular gifts which the Apostles
had, might well serve for these times instead of Scripture. 2. That the
aftertimes stood in need of Scripture. And then he concludes, Extremae esse
omnino dementiae, post. quam co redacti sumus, ut Scriptis indigeamus, ^e
secundo quidem hoc remedio ad salntem nostram uti; item magni esse criminis per
illud auxilium nolle proficere, sed quasi fru^^^a ac vane posita scripta
despicere. chrysostom. hom. 1. in Mat.
It is the extremity of madness, now that we stand in need of Scripture, not
to use this excellent help for our salvation; and that it is the greatest
fault that can be not to profit by that help, but to despise it as written in
vain, and to no purpose. This fit of frenzy has intoxicated the Jesuits
brain: he has accounted the Scripture needless and written in vain.
Possevine has written a whole Chapter Possev. Bibliothec. select l. 2 c. 16.
De necessitate Scripturarum. S. Jude thought it needful, Jude verse. 3
To write to the Saints. Luke 1. 3.
It seemed good to S. Luke, to write his Gospel to prevent false rumors. And
S. Paul thought it Philip. 3. 1.
The surest way for the Philippians to write unto them. If it were needful,
good, and the surest way then; it is now more needful to have the written
word of the Apostles to prevent your false Traditions fathered upon them.

[And Iren. l. 2. c. ^.
Irenaeus does witness, that in his days, many nations lived Christianly
without the use of the written word, only by the guide of Apostolical
Traditions.]

Sir I must tell you, that if you go on to allege the Fathers as you
begin, you will gain little credit by it. In your first testimony you cite
a counterfeite. In your second you omit the place. In your third, Reply.
(which is this) you mistake the l. 2. c. 3. for l. 3. c. 4.
place. I subscribe to what Irenaeus says. And I believe that by Apostolical
Tradition (that is, the preaching of the word) many nations were converted to
the faith of Christ: not by unwritten doctrines, but by delivering written
doctrines in an unwritten manner. Irenaeus shows, Iren. l. 3. c. 1.
First that the Apostles preached the Gospel, and that afterward they
delivered the same unto us in writing. The same things the Pastors of the
Church (who might have the written word, although the persons taught had it
not) delivered unto the People. Irenaeus shows what those things were, which
were Iren. l. 3. c. 4.
written in their hearts without ink or letters. They did believe In unum Deum
sabricatorem coeli and terrae, and omnium quae in eis sunt, per Christ^^^ Iesum
Dei filium etc. Iren. ibid.
In one God, maker of heaven and of earth, and of all things in them, by Jesus
Christ the Son of God, etc. These were the Traditions which they believed:
and if any would have taught them otherwise, they Iren. ibid.
would have stopped their ears, as Irenaeus shows, and have fled from them,
as they would from you, and from your unwritten Traditions.

[ Iren. l. 3. c. 4.
Irenaus demands; How should we d^e if the Apostles had written nothing at
all' must we not then follow the rule Reply page 118.
of Tradition delivered unto them, to whom the Apostles committed the charge of
the Churches?]

5. We reject not this kind of Tradition which is the succession of true
doctrine in the Church. And what shall we do, seeing the Apostles have
written? Is it not our duty to follow the rule of Tradition delivered in their
writings, and not only to take that course now that the Apostles have written,
which Irenaeus prescribes, if the Apostles had not written?

[What if the Scripture should be consumed, so that not one Reply.
Coppie thereof should be extant? which is possible. And what if a man had lost
the true sense and mea^ing of the Scripture, how shall he find it out? must he
not, as Irenaeus says, Follow the order of Tradition delivered by the Apostles
unto those unto whom they committed the Churches?]

The 1. hypothesis is absurd, and impossible. The Sun may as well be pulled
out of the heavens, and the skies fall, as the Scripture perish. Staplet. co^t.
Whi^ak. de authorit Script. l. ^. c. 1. s. ^.
If it should, GOD himself must fail in his providence, says Stapleton. The
2. hypothesis is possible, A man may l^se the true meaning of the Scripture:
and the order of Tradition delivered by the Apostles is one but not the only
means to find it out: and how shall a man find out this order of Tradition
in the original of it better then by the Scripture it self? So that when all
is done, the Scripture is the best interpreter of it self. Legitima and sine
periculo est expositio scripturae secundum ipsas scripturas. Iren. l. 4. c 63.
The exposition of Scripture according to the Scriptures themselves is the most
surest, says Irenaeus. The Apostles have written: their writings are
preserved: the true meaning of them is well known. Yet we reject not this
means, but do follow the order of Tradition delivered by the Apostles, as
long as we follow their writings: for both by preaching and by writing they
taught the same. Popish Traditions are not of this order, they were never
taught by the Apostles, nor by them to whom the Apostles committed the care of
the Churches: but only of old by Heretics, and of late by an Anti christian
faction.

[Moreover S. Augustine teaches us, that there be many Reply page 118
points of faith, for which we have no written word. Aug. epist. 128
In those things, of which the holy Scripture says nothing, what course are
we to hold? that which is used by the Church throughout all the world is to
be observed, says S. Augustine, and it would be insolent madness to dispute
against the same.]

6. The Jesuit mistaketh both the Epist. 128, for. 118.
place, and the point. S. Augustine speaks not of points of faith at all; but
only of some rituall points, or customs then in use, as of the use of holy
days, of receiving the Eucharist, fasting, and the like. These come not within
the compass of this controversy. And as it is madness to dispute against
these things, so it is little better in him then madness to dispute about these
things; and to call these things points of faith.

[For Aug. de bap. cont. Donatist. l. 4. c. 24.
whatsoever the Church universal does hold, if it Reply.
be not found or dained by some Council, but has been always in use; it is
most justly believed to be a Tradition of none other, but of the very Apostles
themselves.]

S. Augustine treats in this place of the Baptism of Children, and calls
it, Traditum apostolica autheritate: A thing delivered by Apostolical
authority, or an Apostolical Tradition. And are not written doctrines
delivered by Apostolical authority? S. Augustine did not account Baptism of
Children to be an unwritten Tradition, as appears by the arguments, taken out
of the Scriptures, which he uses: we need not go farther then this Chapter
to find one. Si quisquam hac in re authoritatem quaerat, divinam etc veraciter
conjicere possumus, quid valeat in parvulis baptismi Sacramentum, ex
circumcisione carnis, quam prior populus accepit. Augus. ibidem.
If any man, says he, desire divine authority in this point, we may truly
conjecture, how powerful in Children the Sacrament of Baptism is, by the
circumcision of the flesh which the Jews received. And this is accounted by
Bellarm. l. 1. de Baptism. c. 1
Bellarmine, a strong argument to confirm this point.

In the next testimony S. Augustine writing of the custom, or practice of not
rebaptising those that have been baptized by Heretics (so that they have
been baptized in the name of the Trinity) says. Quam consue^^dinem credo ex
Apostolic^ Traditione venientem Aug de baptism: cont. Donat. l. 2. c. 7.
Which custom I believe came from Apostolical Tradition.

[ Aug. ibid
Even as many other things are not found in the writings of the Apostles, nor
in the Councels of following ages, yet because they are held by the whole
Church, they are believed to have been delivered and commended by the said
Apostles.] It is a weak argument drawn from custom to Articles of faith,
from practice to the doctrine of the Sacraments. We read nothing for point of
practice, whether those that have been baptized by Heretics, have been
rebaptized, or no: Yet the doctrine in this point is sufficiently taught in
Scripture. We believe it Propter folidissima and manifest^ssr^^ scripturarum
fundament^ et testimonia. Ti^^^a^. defens. Triden. ad articul de Charactere.
because of the most solid Reply.
and most manifest testimonies of the Scripture, as one of your own has said.
^^^videar humanis argumentis id agere etc. ex ^vangelio profero certa
docum^^^^a. Aug. l. 1. de Bapt. ^ont. Donat. c. ^.
Least I should seem to deal in this only by humane arguments, says S.
Augustine, I will bring most sure arguments out of the Gospel. And in the
words following he brings in this Text. Luc. 9. 50.
Forbid him not, for he that is not against us, is with us. By which he
overthrows the maine argument of the adverse parties, who held, That the
things of Christ could not be had out of the Church. And in his answer to this
question; whether it were better to baptize, or not to baptize such, he has
these words: Recurrens ad illam stateram dominicam, ubi non ex humano sensu,
sed authoritate divina return momenta pensantur, invenio de ^^raque te Domini
sententiam: Aug. l. 2. de bapt. cont. Donat. c. 14.
Looking to the divine measure (that is, the Scripture) whereby things are
measured by divine authority, and not by humane opinion, I find the judgment
of the Lord concerning both. And he concludes this question with these words,
Perspectis Scripturarum testimonijs, potest etiam dici, quod veritas
declaravit, hoc sequimur. Aug. l. 4. de bapt. cont. Donat. c 7.
Having searched the testimonies of the Scriptures, I may say, we follow that
which the truth declares. Thus it appears by the judgment of S. Augustine,
that the point of doctrine is written, although for point of practice we read
nothing in the writings of the Apostles.

7. That the holy Ghost is to be adored; and that the Father is unbegotten, and
unborne, I believe those as the Articles of my faith: but I will never believe
him that says [ Aug. cont. Maximinum. l. 3. c. 3.
S. Augustine held them to be unwritten articles.] These words, The holy Ghost
is to be adored, The Father is unbegotten; I confess are not written verbatim,
yet there are other words written, which do import the same, and are
equivalent unto them. And may we not understand some words which we read not,
out of those words which we read, says S. Augustine. In verbis Scripturarum
non est Evangeliu^, sed in sensu. Hicro^^m. in Galat. c. 1.
The words are not the Gospel, but the sense of Scripture is the Gospel,
says S. Hierome. So I Reply page 119
may say, the form of words is not the article of faith, but the thing
signified by those words; else the Church believed not these two articles,
until this form of words was Quasi non ex ijs quae legimus, aliqua etiam quae
non legimus, intelligamus. Aug. ibidem.
used: The holy Ghost is to be adored, The Father is unborne. As for the
article of faith signified by these words, The holy Ghost is to be adored; S.
Augustine prooveth it out of the Scriptures, in which it is written in an other
form of words. Glorificate ergo Deum in corpore vestro. ubi delucide ostend it
Deum esse spiritum sanctum, glorificandum scilicet in corpore nostro. Aug.
cont. Maxim. l. 3. c. ^1.
Glorify therefore God in your body, this evidently declares that the holy
Ghost is God, and that he must be glorified in our bodies, says S. Augustine.
And again, Glorifieate Deum, and portate in corpore vestro. Quem Deum nisi
Spiritum sanctum, cujus corpora nostra dixerit esse templum. Aug. epist. 66.
Glorify God in your body. whom does he mean but the holy Ghost, whose temple
he calls our bodies? And concerning the words Coessentiall, Unbegotten, and
the like, he says. Etiasi vocabula ista ibi non inveniuntur, fieri potest, ut
illud inveniamus, cui haec vocabula recte adhibita indicentur. Aug. epist. 174.
Although those words are not found in Scripture, yet we may find that which
is intended by those words. This then was the opinion of S. Augustine, that the
doctrine signified by those words, was written in other words, although those
words themselves were not written. And as S. Augustine answers Pascentius the
Arian: so I may answer the Jesuit: Quid contentiosius est, qua^ ubi de re
constat certare de nomine. Aug. ibidem.
What is more contentious, then to strive about words, when the thing meant by
them is manifest?

8. It is not An other point of faith, which S. Augustine handles in the next
testimony, but the point of rebaptization. [ Aug. de unit. Eccles. c. 19.
This neither of us both can find written expressly, and evidently in the
Scripture.] And this is not spoken concerning the doctrine, but concerning the
practice in this point, as appears by S. Augustines answer to the Heretics
demand. Cum in scripturis non inveniamus aliquos ad Ecclesiam iam transisle ab
Heretic^, and sicut ego dico, aut sicu^ tu dicis esse succeptos. Aug. ibidem.
Seeing now we find not any in the Scriptures to have for saken the
Heretics, and come home to the Church, and to have been received either as I
say, or as you say. This point of fact may well be distinguished from the point
of faith; and the doctrine may be written, though Reply.
the practice is not written. Howsoever we grant it, that the practice is not
written; neither is the doctrine written expressly and evidently, That the
baptized by Heretics, shall not be rebaptised: Yet S. Augustine from most
certain principles, and by most evident consequences out of the holy Scripture,
concludes the doctrine of this point. The pra^tise of the Church herein being
according unto the truth of Scripture, S. Augustin^ might very well oppose the
practice of the Church against the Heretic, and tell him [ Aug. ^bidem.
Thou must believe the Church, which if thou refuse to do, thou do not
oppose thy self against me, or against man, but Reply.
even against our Savior himself, to thy everlasting damnation.]

The baptism of Children, of which S. Augustine writes in the next testimony,
is no unwritten doctrine, but a point established likewise both by the
authority of the Scriptures, and of the Church; and S. Augustine did well to
declare the authority of the Scriptures, and of the Church in this point,
saying [ Aug. sermon. 14. de verb. Apost.
Such force has the authority Reply.
of the Church, and the fixed rule of truth, (that is, the Scripture) against
this bulwark, against this impregnable wall who so advances himself, he
shall be broken, and burst in pieces.] As this is most truly affirmed by S.
Augustine, so it is as impertinently alleged by the Jesuit. Reply.


[Is it not recorded in the Acts of the Apostles, that Act. 1. 3
Christ after his passion showed himself alive to his Apostles, being seen of
them forty days, and spoke to them of the things appertaining to the Kingdom
of God? Can any man tell where those things are written, which our Savior spoke
al those forty days?]

9. All is not at all in the Text: neither is it true, that our Savior spoke
All those forty days. The Text tells us of what he spoke, namely of the
Kingdom of God. And have not Act. 28. 23.
Moses, and the Prophets written of this? Do not the Gospels, and the Epistles
treat of this? It was of the Kingdom of God; therefore it was not of Popish
Traditions: Popish Traditions are of meats; but the Kingdom of God is not of
Romans 14. 17.
meats. It is profitable to know all that our Savior spoke, because he never
spoke in vain: but it is necessary for us to know all. It is less necessary
to know where the things are written, which Reply page 119.
he spoke at such, and such a time: it is enough to know; that there is Cyrill.
l. 12. ^^ Ioh c. 68. Aug tract. 19. in Ioh.
Enough written of all Christ's words and works for our salvation.

[And our Lord before his passion told his Disciples, that Ioh. 16. 1^.
He had many things to say unto them, which then they could not comprehend, but
should learn them after of the Holy Ghost, yet none of them ever wrote what
those many things were.] S. Augustine tells us, that Omnes in^^plentistimi
haeretici and act as sigmentorum. suorum colorare, occasion ejus sententis.
Adhuc ^^lta habe^ etc. Aug. tract. 97 in Ioh.
All foolish Heretics use to color their bold fictions with this saying: I
have yet many things to say unto you. Thus S. Augustine puts both the Fool
and the Heretic upon the Jesuit. Lenseus l. 3. de verbo Dei non script. c. 1.
Lenseus (whose eyes were as good as the Jesuits) professes that he can see
nothing in this Text for unwritten Traditions. But we deal with a Jesuit, who
can see further into a millstone then an other, and makes himself wiser then
the Apostles, understanding what those things were, which the Apostles could
not comprehend. I may better conclude this of him, that he never wrote this
Reply himself, because he could not do it, until he went over seas for
help; then he can conclude of the Apostles, that they wrote not all things,
because they were not able to understand all things, until they went to
Jerusalem to receive the promise of the holy Ghost. It is more then he is able
to prove, that the things, which Christ and the holy Ghost taught the
Apostles, were not the same. Ioh. 15. 15.
Christ taught them all things which he heard of his Father. But at the first
they were not so ripe of Ioh. 20. 9.
understanding, nor so tenacious of Ioh. 2. 22.
memory, as they were afterward. The holy Ghost therefore first opened their
understandings, not teaching them any new things, but Iansen. in Ioh. c. 16.
by a new way more fully opening their understanding, says Iansenius. They
were not taught Aquin in Ioh c. 16.
Altiora, sed altiord mode, says Aquinas. And afterward brought Ioh 14. 26.
Those things to their memories, which Christ first taught them. So that we
say with Cyrill: (...). Cyril. Catech 16.
Christ did not teach one thing, and the holy Ghost an other thing, but the
very same things. And the 1 Ioh. 1. 3. 4.
same things they might write afterward, although they did not comprehend them
at the first.

[And Eusebius relates of S. Polycarpe, Eusebius. l 5. c. 20.
That he made known some words spoken by our Savior, which are not recorded
Reply page 119
in Scripture.]

10. This is a silly shift to argue a verbis ad res, from words to Doctrines.
We dispute of Doctrines, but the Jesuit first flies unto Things; (as in the
title of this Section appears.) From things again he flies unto words: He
says, Eusebius says, that For Eusebius relates Irenaeus his words.
Irenaeus says, that Polycarpe said, That Christ spoke some words not recorded
in the Scripture. This is a verbal argument; this is to shrink quite from the
question. Is any man so mad as to say, that all the words are recorded in
Scripture, which our Savior spoke? Or will any wise man infer, that all the
doctrines which he taught, are not written; because all the words, which he
spoke, are not recorded? Let him be recorded for an ass that argues so. This
Irenaeus says of Polycarpus (...). Eusebius, ibidem.
Polycarpus spoke all things consonant with the Scripture. Any truth is not
dissonant from the Scriptures, as that Malone is a Jesuit; but this is not
consonant with the Scriptures: only those things are called (...), which are
the same, or are spoken of the same things: as Thucydides, and Diodorus Siculus
are said (...), to be consonant, because both have written the same of the
same, namely of the Peloponnesian war. The things then which Polycarpus
spoke, being consonant with the Scriptures, could not be any unwritten
Traditions, which are plainly dissonant to the Scriptures; and either cross
the truth, or the perfection of them. The occasion why Irenaeus alleged the
words of Polycarpus was, because both he and Florinus the heretic (against
whom he disputed) had heard the doctrine which Polycarpus delivered, which was
consonant with the Scriptures: and not because the heresy, which Florinus held
(that God created evil natures) could not be co^vinced by Scripture. [ Just.
Martyr, Apolog. 2^.
Justin Martyr likewise lays down many unwritten Reply page 109.
Traditions delivered by our Savior unto his Disciples, when he appeared unto
them upon the day of his resurrection.] These things, says he, Christ
delivered unto his Disciples. And he shows what those things were. That the
Christians must meet together to sanctify the Lords day. This is a point
delivered unto us in the Act. ^0. 7. 1. Cor. 16. ^.
Scripture. That the ministry of the word must go before the administration
of the Sacrament. This is likewise taught us in the Act. 2. 42.
Scriptures. That the Communion must be given unto none, unless that they have
been baptized. The same has sufficient warrant in the 1. Cor. 12. 13.
Scriptures. All the rest, of which he writes, are either doctrinall points
written, or ^i^uall points unwritten, which belong not to this present
Controversy.

[But what say you to the Apostles, S. John, and S. Paul? S. Reply page 120
John would not commit all ^. epist. verse 1^.
To paper and ink. And S. Paul gave unwritten commandments to the
Corinthians, 1. Cor. 11. 2.
praising them because they kept such precepts as he delivered unto them. And
again, verse, 23.
I received of the Lord that which I delivered unto you. And again, * The rest
will I set in order when I come.]

11. What a Sr John is this to commit such an Argument unto paper and ink?
There must be unwritten Traditions, because S. John would not commit all to
paper and ink. Who ever held that all written doctrines were contained in the
2d. Epistle of S. John? I hope there were more Apostles then S. John: and
Apostles that wrote more then S. John. It were a ridiculous thing in me if I
should argue thus; No Jesuit ever had any will to handle the Question of
Freewill, because this Jesuit had no will unto it. What then may we think of
this William Summers for his wise argument concerning S. John. S. Paul handles
two things in that Chapter; Prayer, and the Eucharist. And unto those, some
things are accidental, as time, place, gesture, vesture, as to pray with faces
covered, or uncovered: and some things are essential, as the matter, and form
of those duties. The first of these belong not to this Controversy, and
therefore the Jesuit shrinketh from the Question, in alledgeing these Fathers,
Epiph. haeres. 61.
Epiphanius, Basil: de Sp. Sanct. l. 1. c. 29.
Basil, Chrysostom in cor. 11.
Chrysostom, and Theoph. in 1 Cor. 11.
Theophilact, who treat not of doctrinall, and essential things: but of
things rituall, and accidental. Epiphanius first writes of those things,
which the Church holds as points of faith, and concerning these we have
spoken; says he. Then he proceeds on to reckon up sundry ecclesiastical
rites, or Institutions, as Monks, Exorcists, fasting days, holy days, and the
like; concerning which he says Epiph. ibid.
. All these cannot be taken out of the Scripture. Basils drift in that Book
(if he be the Author of it) is to defend a form of words, or of Syllables
used by the Church, as whether it were better to say, Glory be to the Father,
and to the Son, with the Holy Ghost; or Glory be to the Father, and to the
Son, in the Holy Ghost. His whole disputation is about the Syllable cum; and
that this form of words may be admitted he proves, because many other things,
as forms of words, and rituall Traditions, are admitted, although they be not
written. Theophylact says, It is manifest that the Apostles have not delivered
all things in writing. And Chrysostom says, They delivered many things
without writing. But withal he shows what those things were. (...).
Chrysostom. ibidem.
Of other things of no great moment, Salmeron calls them, minutiora,
diminitive things; these are his words. Non enim dignum erat, ut minutiora
haec, quae cultum divinum exornant, and quae tempor^^ progressu erant vel
augenda, vel minuenda, vel mutanda i^ melius, in Sacris literis, ponerentur.
Salmeron. disput. 3. in. 2. These. ^.
It was not meet, that these diminitive things, which are ornaments for divine
worship, and in time were either to be increased, or diminished, or altered to
the better, should be laid down in writing. The word (...), which the Apostle
Verse, 34.
uses, imports the same, being commonly used (as here, so in other 1. Cor.
16. ^^ 1. Tit. 5.
places) when Ecclesiastical orders are spoken of, and not in relation unto
divine doctrines. The essential things, which appertain unto these two divine
dut^es, they may be written, [Although this be S. Paul's first Epistle to the
Corinthians.] either by other Penmen of Scripture; (as diverse Sermons of the
Apostles are penned by S. Luke) or by himself, in other of his Epistles; or
else in the same in which he writes that which he Verse, 23.
delivered, even all the essential things belonging unto the Sacrament of the
Supper of the Lord. Reply page 1^^


[Eusebius relates of Egesippus, that Eusebius. l, 4. c. ^
he wrote five books of such unwritten Traditions, as the Apostles lest unto
the Church.]

12. These are the words of Eusebius. (...), etc. Eusebius. ibidem.
In five b^okes he wrote an infallible deliverie of the Apostles preaching. The
books are not extant to see what they contain: but they seem to be a divine
history, rather historical then dogmatical, by Eusebius his citing the^
always in point of Eusebius l. 2. c. 22 l. 3. c. 12
history; and by this testimony which S. Hierome gives of them. Hegesippus who
lived near to the Apostles times, knitting together all the stories of the
Acts of the Church Hegesippus vicinus Apostolorum tempo rum, omnes a passione
Domini, usque ad suam aetatem, Ecclesiasticorum actuum texens historias,
multaque ad utilitatem legentium pertinentia, hinc inde congregam, quinque
libros composuit, Hieron in Catalog.
from the passion of our Lord, until his own days, and gathering together in
one many things profitable to be read, he composed five books of them.
Eusebius says not, that they contained unwritten Traditions; there is neither
the word Traditions, nor unwritten in his words: but an Infallible Tradition,
(or deliverie) of the Apostles preaching. And if an infallible deliverie of the
Apostles preaching must needs be of unwritten Traditions, then the Acts of the
Apostles (penned by S. Luke) is of unwritten Traditions, because it is an
infallible delivery of the Apostles preaching. A strong lie it is, that
unwritten Traditions are strongly confirmed by Eusebius, either in that, or in
the next testimony alleged by the Jesuit. [S. Ignatius was accustomed Eusebius.
l. 3 c. 30
to exhort all men to adhere unto apostolical Traditions, the which Reply page
120
says Eusebius, this Father affirmed, that formore assurance, he had left them
in w^iting.] This testimony is most grossly corrupted by the Jesuit. Eusebius
relates it in these words. Ignatius exhorted to hold fast (...) Eusebius, ibidem.
The Tradition of the Apostles, which for more assurance he thought fit to be
practiced, (or expressed in practice) even as he testified by writing. Here
is no mention of Traditions, but only of the Tradition of the Apostles; and
the doctrine delivered in Scripture is their Tradition. Here is not a word of
writing unwritten Traditions, as if Ignatius had written a book of them,
(which is a dream of this Ignatian brat) but that Ignatius testified by
writing, that he thought it necessary, that the Tradition of the Apostles
(that is, their doctrine) should be expressed in practice. So the word (...) is
taken for expressing by action, not by writing. As Ignatius did, so do we
exhort men by word of mouth to hold fast the Tradition, or the doctrine of the
Apostles; and likewise by writing testify the same unto them, that for more
assurance they express the same in life, and conversation. Thus have we run
one course of the wildegoose chase, following this Gaggler thorough the
Scriptures, and the Fathers; and find this for truth, that Christ, and his
Apostles, taught no unwritten Traditions. If they did so, what is this to the
purpose? unless the Jesuit can prove, that the unwritten Traditions of the
Roman Church are the same which Christ and his Apostles delivered. They
pretend that they are so: so they do in their miracles, which are but
coozening, and juggling tricks of Leiger de maine: so they do in their
relics, which are but grand impostures, as the Angel Gabriels feathers, our
Ladies smock, S. Peter's chain, and the like: these I believe are as true
relics from them, as their Traditions are the same which Christ and his
Apostles taught. And as they are, so is their authority, which is the subject
of his next Section; wherein we are to examine

SECT. III. Whether unwritten Traditions are of equal authority with the
written word.
1. NOne but a Non ens would say, that a Non ens can be of equal authority
with the written word, when as Bellarmine confesses, that Bellarm. de ^er^o
Dei l. 4. c. ^.
All Traditions are not of equal authority among themselves: but without any
distinction whatsoever, this Jesuit would have them all to be of the same
authority among themselves, and of the same authority with the written word;
and the truth is, they are no more worthy to be compared with the written word,
then Ier. 13. 28.
chafe with wheat, then dross with Is. 1. ^2.
silver. The Jesuit has already granted this, page 116.
That the rites and ordinances of the Church are grounded only upon humane
right, and now he contradicts the same, that they are of divine right, even
equal with the written word; and for this opinion he Reply p. 120.
boasts of [Plaine Scripture, and the uniforme consent of ancient Fathers.]

It is no new thing to hear the enemies of the truth clayming the Scripture
and the Fathers to be theirs; after the same manner the Heretics boasted,
that (...). Eusebius. l. 5. hist. c. 27.
The Fathers, and the Apostles held, and taught the same things which they
said. First let us hear his plain Scripture. [ ^. These. ^. 15.
Therefore brethren stand fast, and hold the Traditions which you have been
taught, whether by word, or by our Epistle.] This Text is no less then ten
times alleged by him, and once for all I return this Answer to it. Those
Traditions are Reply page 121.
written, and not unwritten Doctrines. S. Paul declares his continual
practice, Act. 26. 22.
He witnessed both to small and great (and therefore to the Thessalonians)
none other things then those, which Moses and the Prophets did say. His
doctrine delivered at Thessalonica was taken Act. 17. 2.
out of the Scriptures. And suppose it was not written in the Old Testament,
yet it might be written in the New, by himself, or by some other of the
Apostles. What he taught the Philippians by word of mouth, the Philip. 3. 1.
same things he wrote afterward unto them in his Epistle. And unto the
Thessalonians he wrote those things, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 5.
which he first told them: and 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10.
which he first commanded them. The word (...), used by the Apostle, signifies
as well both, as whether; and it is not only disjunctive, but very 1. Cor. ^1^
1^ c. 15. 11. Coloss. 1. 20* Romans 14. 8.
often conjunctive. By which the meaning of the Apostle is declared to be this:
Hold fast the Traditions, (or the doctrines) which have been taught you both
by word of mouth, and by Epistle. The matter taught was the same, although the
manner of teaching was different, both by word of mouth, and by Epistle. S.
Ambrose expounds it thus, In Traditione Evangelij, standum ac perseverandum
monet. Ambros. in 2 Thessalonians.
He admonishes them to stand and to persevere in the Tradition of the Gospel.
And Gretzer, your Great Sire, defending Bellarmine, defends this
interpretation, that it might be the same doctrine which S. Paul delivered by
word of mouth, and by Epistle, and gives this instance for it: Sicut eadem
fides quae confirmata olim fuit per Circumcisionem and Pascha, quae nu^c
co^firmatur per Baptismum and Coenam. Gretz. defens. Bellarm. l. 4. c. 5
Even as it was the same faith, which was formerly confirmed by Circumcision
and the Passover, which is now confirmed by Baptism, and the Lords Supper. It
is most manifest by the precedent words, that the Apostle speaks of such
Traditions, as help to keep out 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3.
The man of sin, the son of perdition. It cannot then be that he should
speak of unwritten Traditions, because Popish Traditions are the only key to
let him in.

2. To prove the uniforme consent of the Fathers, he first alleges S.
Chrysostom. [ Chrysostom. in ^ Thessalonians.
By this saying of S. Paul, it is manifest, says S. Chrysostom, that the
Apostles did not Reply page 121.
deliver all things by their Epistle, but that they delivered many things
without writing, which are as worthy to be believed as those things which they
left written.] We yield unto this, that the Apostles have not delivered all
things by writing. And I will grant more unto the Jesuit, that the Apostles
have not delivered all things by Epistle, or by word of mouth, which are, and
may be observed in the Church, as all the rites and ceremonies of it, and those
are the things, of which S. Chrysostom speaks, of things indifferent.
Concerning necessary things, writing upon the same Chapter, these are his
words. (...). Chrysostom. hom. 3 in 2. These. ^.
All things are clear and true, which are in the holy Scriptures, all
necessary things are manifest. But that those things which are not necessary,
and are delivered without writing, should be as worthy of faith, as those
things which are written; this is one of his many hyperbolicall speeches; it is
rather a flourish of his Rhetoric, then a truth in Divinity.

[S. Basil says, Basil. de Spirit Sanct. c. 29.
I hold it to be an Apostolical doctrine, that Reply.
we adhere unto unwritten Traditions, in proof whereof he alleges
Scripture.]

The Author is suspected, but I pass by that for the present. I hold with the
Author, that it is fit to yield unto such unwritten Traditions as he writes
of; and those are only rituall, and not doctrinall. Unto these we do yield,
not as unto the word of God, which is of divine power, and abides for ever;
but as to the Laws of men, which are of humane right, and mutable according
unto time and place. And in proof of the lawful use of those, we often cite
Scripture, as that Author does.

In the next place he alleges That of Epiphan. is answered Sect. 2d. Divis.
10. lit. ^
S. Hierome. [ Hieron. Dial. cont. Lucifer. c. 4^
Although, says he, there were no authority of Scripture at all for this, yet
the consent of all the world herein would bear the force of a precept. For
many other things, which are observed in the Reply page 1^1
Churches by Tradition, have obtained the authority of the written Law.]

If S. Hierome himself had said this, yet we might appeal from him, as S.
Augustine did, who being pressed by him with humane authority, said, Ad ips^^
(...). Aug. Epist. 19.
I fly to Paul himself. How much more may we justly do the same, when these
are not the words of S. Hierome himself, but of the Lucifirian Heretics,
against whom he disputed by way of dialogue, Is this the uniforme consent of
the Fathers? Is not this to shake hands with Heretics? This is no fair
dealing; either you are wilfully ignorant, or you grossly corrupt S. Hierome.
You took it at the second hand, or wanted sleep when you read the place. But
will you hear S. Hierome himself speaking like himself, concerning a
certain Tradition which had no warrant in the Scripture. Hoc, quia ex
Scripturis non habet authoritatem, eadem facilitate contemnitur, qua probatur.
Hieron, in Math c. 23.
This is as easily rejected, as affirmed, because it has no authority out of
the Scriptures. And if one Tradition may be rejected because of this reason
only; It has no authority out of the Scriptures: then by the same reason all
your Traditions may be rejected, unless you can bring authority for them out
of the written word. So far was S. Hierome from believing unwritten
Traditions to be of equal authority with the written word, that he accounted
that to have no authority which wanted the authority of the written word. And
in an other place he beats down unto the ground all unwritten Traditions by
these words: Alia, quae absque authoritate and testimonijs scripturarum, quasi
Traditione Apostolica sponte reperiunt, atque confingunt, percutit gladius Dei.
Hieron. in Hag. c. 1.
Many other things, which of their own accord they invent and find out, as if
it were by Apostolical Tradition, without any testimony, or authority of the
written word, all those things the sword of Gods mouth strikes thorough. And a
little after he shows what such things are, sit days of fasting,
night-watchings, bodily labors, sleeping on the ground, and the like, these
are things of great esteem among our adversaries, grounded upon Tradition,
without any warrant of Scripture, and such things are stricken thorough by the
sword of God.

In the last place Dionysius is brought in affirming [ Dionys. Areopag. Eccles.
Hier. cap. 1.
That Reply page 121
the apostles delivered the most high and divine mysteries, partly by their
written, and partly by their unwritten institutions.]

The Author is suspected, and not without just cause. The Severian Heretics
were the first that objected them in a disputation betwixt the^ and the
Catholics in the year 532 The Catholics made this Answer: Illa testimonia
quae vos Dionysij Areopagitae dicitis, unde potestis ostendere vera esse, sicut
suspicamini^ si enim ejus erant, non potuissent latere beatum Cyrillum: nec
Cyrillum solum, sed si Athanasius procerto scisset ejus fuisse, illa allegaret
contra Arianos in Cone^lio Nicaeno in ista quaestione de consubstantiali
Trinitate Si autem nullus ex antiquis recorda^us est ea, unde nunc potestis
ostendere, quia illius sunt? Baronius Anno 532. S. 39
Those testimonies of Dionysius the Areopagite, which you say are his, how can
you show them to be his, as you think? For if they had been his, blessed
Cyrill could not be ignorant of them: and not only Cyrill, but Athanasius
would have alleged them against the Arians in the Council of Nice, in the
Question of the consubstantiall Trinity, if he had certainly known that they
were his. And if none of the Ancient made mention of them, how can you now show
them to be his? This I have taken out of Baronius. Bellarmine confesses,
Bellarm. de confirmat. l. 2. c. 7.
many doubt of this book. Erasmus, and Cajetan (writing upon the 17. Chapter
of the Acts of the Apostles) deny it to be his, Eusebius and Hierome (who were
very careful to find out all the writings of the Ancient) write not a word of
it. It ill became that Author to call Cap. 1.
Timothy his son. He handles the order of the Angels, and of the heavenly
Powers, a thing which S. Paul could 2 Cor. 12. 4.
not utter. Irenaeus gives this censure on such as write of such things, Nihil
^anum dicunt* delirant; dicant, nobis, quae sit invisibilium naturn, enarrent
nume^m A^g^lorum, and ordinem Archangelorum, demonstrent Thronorum Sa^^men^a,
and doceant diversita^es Dominationum Principaruum, atque virtutum. Iren. l. 2.
c. 54.
It is not sound which they say, they are no better then mad, can they tell
us the nature of invisible things, can they setforth the number of the Angels,
and of the Archangels, can they demonstrate the mysteries of the Thrones, and
teach the diversities of the Dominations, Principalities, and Powers? He
writes of Temples, Altars, Quires, Monks, and the like; such things were not
in Dionysius his days. Our Adversaries reject many things in this book; and
we reject this testimony as false, which the Jesuit calls his irrefragable
confirmation.

3. And now not being able to prove any thing for the authority of unwritten
Traditions out of the Fathers, he would persuade the Reader, [That his more
learned Adversaries (then himself he means) as Reinolds, Whitaker, Fulke,
and Kemnitius have censured some, and have acknowledged Reply page 121.
others of the Fathers to be great Patrons of Traditions, as Basil, Epiphanius,
Chrysostom, Dionysius, Ignatius, Clement, Origin, etc.] It would be tedious to
examine all those apart, and to show their opinions concerning Traditions in
this place; only for the present take this general answer.

1. For censuring of the Fathers, some of them have deserved it, in holding
false and frivolous Traditions, so that our writers have justly censured
Epiphanius for his foolish delighting in uncertain genealogies; Origin for his
fiction, that Origin in Man. tract. 35.
Christ had diverse aspects, often changeing his visage, which made the Jews
desire of Judas a sign to know thereby which was he. And concerning Iustine
Martyr, Irenaeus, Epiphanius, and others, Bellarmin says, Non video quomodo ab
errore possumus defender^. Bellarm. de Beatit. sanct. l. 1. c. ^.
I see not how they can be defended from error. S. Augustine teaches us, that
Liceat aliquid in ^orum s^riptis reji^er^ August. epist. 111.
it is lawful to reject some things in the writings of the Fathers. The giving
of the Eucharist unto children, and the deferring of the Baptism of Children
until Easter, is censured and rejected on both sides; and yet these, and many
such things were defended by some of the Fathers.

2. We confess, that the Fathers are Patrons of Traditions, of such Traditions
as we allowed in the Sect. 1. Di^is. 4.
stateing of the Question, and not of Popish Traditions; for all our Writers
have disputed by the testimonies of the Fathers against unwritten doctrinall
Traditions, learned Whitaker shall answer for himself, and for all the rest;
Con^edimus defensas esse Traditiones a Patrib^^; sed ^^ modo ^uod dictumest: at
quod ai^. Patres non oppugnare, illud fal^um est. Wh^^ake^ controvers. 1. de
verbo Del non sc^^pto, q. 6. c. 1^.
We confess that the Fathers defended Traditions, but they were such
Traditions, as we defend: But whereas you say, that the Fathers did not oppugn
Traditions, it is false. What now may we think of the Jesuit, who falsely
charge both the Fathers, and our Writers? He verifieth the saying, The Monk
of all men, and the Jesuit above all Monks, is most impudent. This babbling
prater, or prating babbler may brag that [He has the consistory of
Antiquity,] and that we are [The babbling upstarts.] We cannot tame his tongue
from railing; for as he observes out of S. Hilary, Hilar. de Tri^i^ l, 3.
Desperation brings always with it self an unbridled boldness; and
professed impiety le^peth beyond the bounds of all shame. This is true of him,
although S. Hilary has no such words in that book. He deserves the whetstone
for his impudent lying, and the cucking-stoole for his shameless scoulding.

And for his excusing of the most reverend Primate to those of his own side,
and to the outlandish Doctors, he has more need to excuse himself.

1. To those of his own side, who stand for the perfection, sufficiency, and
prerogative of the sacred Scripture. Scriptura sufficleuter continet doctrinam
necessaria^^ viatori-Scotus in prolog. in 1. sentent. ^. ^.
The Scripture, says Scotus, sufficiently contains the doctrine necessary
for him that is in his travel. Sacra Scripture est regula fidei, cui nec
addere, nec subtrahere licet. Aquin, (...) ar. 9.
The holy Scripture, says Aquinas, is the rule of faith, to which we must not
add, and from which we must not substract. Loquitur Deus in Scripturis, and it
a copiose quod non oportet Deum iterum loqui nobis aliquod necessarium, (...)
habeantur. A^ton. part. ^ 3. ti^. 1^. c. 3.
God speaks in the Scripture, says Antoninus, and speaks so copiously,
that he need not speak again unto us any thing that is necessary, seeing all
such things are in the Scriptures. Thus God has made the Ioh. 1. 5.
light t^ shine in darkness. And how can the Jesuit reconcile himself unto
these men, who denies that which they affirm?

2. To all the outlandish Doctors, who prefers himself, and all his
Countrymen, before all other writers of what Country soever. [That they are
partakers of that benign and blessed influence, which it pleases the heavens
to distill into the Irish disposition.] This is good Divinity, The heavens
distill this influence of grace. The outlandish Doctors are beholding unto him
for his good opinion of them, in that Ireland, or the Irish disposition is made
partaker of this influence before all other Countries, and Countrymen
whatsoever. This is to make all other places and persons like ^. Sam. 1 21.
The mountains of Gilboa, upon which there falls neither dew, nor rain: And
only Ireland to be like the Reply page 112. 1^3.
hill of Psalm. 133. ^.
Hermon, the dew whereof waters other hills. And how shall we excuse him in
these things?

1 Be pleased to remember, that he left his native soil, and wen^ over seas to
write this book, by means whereof he le^t his wits behind him; and deprived
himself of this blessed influence; if he had remained at home, he might
perhaps have received some of this benign influence which it pleases the
heavens to distill upon his native Climate.

2. That those of his own side speak of the susticiency of Scripture in
things necessary, in doctrines of salvation: but he denies the sufficiency of
Scripture in rituall points, which are the Traditions which he defends; this
will appear in the examining of his next Section, which is

SECT. IIII. Of the nature, and quality of unwritten Traditions.
1. THe subject of this, and of the former Section, is the same; and therefore
I will answer the Jesuit, as S. Augustine did Julian upon the like occasion,
Replicas quae superiore disputatione consumpta ^unt. August. cont. Julian. l.
4. c. 18
Thou replyest those things which are already confuted. We Sect. 2. D. 1.
have answered the argument drawn from the infallibility and authority of the
Church; and yet here again the Jesuit renews it. [The Catholic. Church
cannot err, and therefore whatsoever she delivers Reply p. 1^4.
as a point of faith, or an interpretation of any obscure passage of Scripture,
we must believe it as fire, as that S. John's Gospel is Scripture.] Sir, you
reckon without your Hoaste, for the Catholic Church never taught unwritten
Traditions. And according to your own sayings, and tenants, unwritten
Traditions were of no authority for the first 300. years; for if it be the
Catholic Church that must give authority to an unwritten Tradition, and if
the judgment of the Catholic Church could not then be heard but in a
general Council: and if there were no general Council until about 300.
years after Christ; what nature, or quality, what credit, or authority had
unwritten Traditions until that time? Traditions likewise which are
particular, not observed by the Catholic Church, but only in some Churches,
(which by your doctrine are parcels of the unwritten word^) must needs want
their authority, because they are not delivered by the judgment of the
Catholic Church. Neither is any Church on earth so infallible, as that it
cannot err in delivery of a Tradition, or exposition of an obscure passage of
Scripture. The Church, which he means, has erred in many foolish, and
ridiculous expositions. What shall we think of that exposition, (which is so
famous among the Franciscans) upon this text? Revel. 7. 2. From the East, that
is, Ab ortu solis, id est, decivita^ate Assissij in Orient posita: asce^dit
Angelus, id est, Franciscus, puritate and sanctitate Angelis consi^oilis: cum
signo Dei vivi, id est, cum stigmatibus Jesus Christi. conformit: Francis: l. 1.
from the city Assissium which is in the East: the Angel ascended, that is,
Francis like unto the Angels in purity, and sanctity: with the Seal of the
living God, that is, with the wounds of Jesus Christ. Is this exposition as
true as S. John's Gospel? Besides the testimony of the Church, I have diverse
arguments to persuade me that S. John's Gospel is canonical, the testimony of
the Church is but one argument, and such an one, as may sometime deceive a man;
and therefore though the exposition be true, yet how can I be as sure that it
is true, as I am that S. John's Gospel is canonical? I like better of that
saying of Marsilius; Dict a Christi, five Dei, non vera sunt causaliter, ^o
quod ^i^dem testificatur Ecclesia Catholica vero testimonio: sed testimonium
Ecclesiae causaliter verum est, dum dicit dicta christi vera, propte^ ve^tatem
dictorum christi. Marsil. Desensor: pacis part. 2. cap. 19.
The words of Christ, or of God, are not therefore made true, because the
Catholics Church by a true testimony gives her testimony unto them: but the
testimony of the Church is therefore true, when she speaks the true words of
Christ, because of the truth of Christ's words.

[And as S. Augustine said, August. cont. epist fundament c. 5.
That he beleevea the Gospel Reply page 114.
by the authority of the Church, so are we to believe the Traditions, which the
Church propounds unto us as the word of God.]

2. I wish our Adversary to consider two things, which make the meaning of S.
Augustine most evident.

1. That S. Augustine speaks of the primitive Church, Augustinus ibidem
Ecclesiam sumit pro^ primitiv^ congregatione fidelium, qui Christum viderunt,
audieru^t, and sui testes sueru^t. Gerson de vita spirit. lect. 2d^.
S. Augustine, says Gerson, in that place takes the Church for the primitive
congregation of the faithful, who did see, hear, and were witn^sses of
Christ. What is this to the now Roman Church? Have you the same power, and
authority, which that Church had? Your own Driedo tells you no. Ecclesia
primitiva propter collegium Apostolorum, majoris erat gratiae, majorisque
authoritatis, quam Ecclesia quaenunc est Driedo de dogma l. ^. c. 4.
The primitive church, by reason of the college of the apostles, was of
greater grace, and of greater authority, then the Church which now is. If the
Jesuit speak of the Traditions delivered by that Church, we refuse them not;
let him prove this, or that, to be a Tradition delivered by the Apostles, and
we will believe it: but if he speak of the now Roman Church, his argument is
of no force; and as S. Augustine believed not the Gospel by the authority of
that Church, so we will not believe the Traditions taught by her.

2. That this was the occasion, why he alleged the authority of the Church. S.
Augustine had been for nine years a Manichee, and now having to deal with
the Manichees to convert them, he propounds unto them the authority of the
Church to move them, even as in the time of his heresy it moved him. This he
speaks of the time past, I had not believed the Gospel, if the authority of
the Church had not moved me. But afterward being converted, and made a Bishop,
he makes a better confession, saying; I am credere coeperam nullo modo te
fuisse tributurum tam excellen. tem illi scripturae per omnes jam terras
authoritatem, nisi per ipsam tibi credi, and per ipsam te quaeri volu^sses Aug.
confess l. ^. c. 5.
Now I began to believe, that thou would not have given so excellent
authority unto the Scripture it self ^ver the whole world but that by it thou
would be believed, and by it thou would be sought.

This is all that can be gathered out of S. Augustine, that the Church is a
good motive to persuade men to believe the word of God: and not, that it is
such a Doctor that can give such laws, as shall be equal with the word of God.
S. Augustine confesses that he had an other motive to persuade him to believe,
besides the authority of the Church; Se Carthagine motum esse disputatione
cujusdam Elpidij, cui Manich^i imbe^illa responsione restiterint. August.
confess. l. 5. c 11.
Being at Carthage he was moved to believe by the disputation of one Elpidius,
whose arguments the Manichees were not able to answer. But every mover is not
a Lawgiver. 1. Pet. 3. 1.
The honest conversation of the wife may move the husband to believe; must he
therefore believe whatsoever she shall say? I may as well infer thus; the
testimony of the Jews moves us to believe the old Testament, therefore we
must believe their Cabbala, their Masoreth, and all their unwritten Traditions.
We are willing to Math. 22. 21.
give unto Caesar the things which are Cesars, and unto God the things which are
Gods; and therefore we give unto the Church the ministry to allure us, and to
move us, to believe the word of God: and to the Scripture the dignity, and
authority, to be the only word of God.

[If the Church were bound not only to preserve the sacred Reply page, 124
writings, but also to deliver the form of wholesome doctrine contained in
them: why should she not be likewise bound to preserve the sacred Traditions,
and to deliver the form of wholesome doctrine in them contained? And why
should not we receive them upon her credit?]

3. If unwritten Traditions had been committed to her trust, there is no doubt
but that she ought to preserve them, and to deliver them as she received them;
to keep nothing back, but to deliver the whole counsel of God, and to teach
the form of wholesome doctrine, whether written, or unwritten: but unwritten
Traditions are no wholesome doctrine, they are part of that poisonous potion,
that bewitching doctrine, which is in the golden cup of that glorious Religion
for outward show, of the Scarlet colored beast of Rome. And though it were
true, that the Church received unwritten Traditions, and that she is bound to
teach them; yet how can I be assured that this, or that, is a true Tradition,
as sure as I am of any written article of my faith? That Christ dyed, I believe
because the Scripture says it: that this is a Tradition, you believe it,
because a Father, the Fathers, or the Church says it. Can a man believe that
testimony which may be false, as sure as he beleiveth that, cui non potest
subesse falsum? No humane testimony can beget that (...), or full assurance,
which a divine Testimony does. (...) etc. Clemons Alex. Strom. 1. 7.
We regard not an humane testimony, let us confirm the question by the Word
of GOD, which is the surest demonstration, yea the only demonstration, says
Clemens of Alexandria. It is 2. Pet. 1. 19.
more sure then the testimony of men, and of Angels.

[Epiphanius lays down these for the limits and bounds Reply page 125
of our faith, Epiph h^res. 55.
Apostolical Traditions, and the holy Scriptures, and the succession of
doctrine, by which Gods truth is fortified on every side, that no man should be
deceived with fabulous novelties.]

4. None of the Ancient were more deceived with fabulous Novelties, then
Epiphanius, especially in Genealogies; into which, it is probable, he was
misledde thorough his overmuch love of historical Traditions. He takes upon
him to tell who was Heracles and Astaroth.
Melchizedecks Father and Mother; and who were the wives of Sanue. Asura.
Bartheno^.
Cain, Seth, and Noah. These were some of his fabulous Novelties grounded upon
Tradition, without any authority of Scripture; for which he deserves to be
censured. We are willing rather to cover, then to discover the nakedness of
this Father, and therefore favorably interpret his words, that The Traditions
of the Apostles, that is, their preaching; and The succession of true doctrine,
both which are the same with the Scriptures, are the limits of the Church, and
the bounds of our faith. This is consonant with the doctrine of other Fathers.
^criptura est murns adamantinus circum vallen^ ^eclefiam. Chrysoft. l. 4. de
Sacerdot.
The Scripture, says Chrysostom, is an adamantine wall environing the Church.
The Church, says Hierome, Ecclesia non egressa est de fi^^bus suis, id est, de
Scripturis sanctis Hiero^. l: ^. c. ^. in Mich.
is not gone out of her bounds, that is, out of the holy Scriptures.

[Irenaeus tells us first, that Iren l. 3. c. 2.
Heretics cannot possibly be convinced by only Scripture.]

5. I tell you, that you belie this Father, this is all that he says; When
Heretics are convinced by the Scriptures, Reply.
they begin to accuse the Scriptures. Heresy has always an obstinacy
joined with it; this obstinacy, and not the insufficiency of Scripture, made
the Heretics not submit unto it. S. Steven convinced the Jews by the
Scriptures; and so did S. Paul the Athenians; yet malice made the Jews to Act.
7. 34.
Gnash with their teeth at the one, and obstinacy caused the Athenians to Act.
17. 18.
rail upon the other. The Scripture is sufficient to convince the whole
rabblement of Jesuits, although they do (as those Heretics did) accuse it
of insufficiency, when as they are convicted by it. If the Scripture be not
sufficient to convince Heretics, because they rail upon it; by the same
reason they cannot be convinced by Tradition, for Irenaeus shows that they
did Iren ibidem.
likewise oppose Tradition. And that they would neither yield to Tradition, nor
to Scripture. Irenaus had a better opinion of Scripture, then the Romanists
have, he spent three Books in his arguments taken from Scripture against the
Heretics, and not three Chapters in his arguments taken from Tradition;
Erasmus therefore well observes it: Solis Scripturarum praesidiis pug^asse
I^en^um adversus catervam H^reticorum. Eras^^. in Epist. ad Triden. Epist.
Iren. prae^^^^.
That Irenaent fought against the root of Heretics only with the strength
of Scripture. [Afterwards reckoning up the Bishops of Rome, from S. Peter to
Elentherius, who sat in his time, thereby to show that there was in the
Church a continual, and orderly succession of Bishops, by whom divine and
Apostolical Traditions were truly preserved.] There was, does not prove
that there is. Reply.
Rome was once Romans 1. 8.
famous for her faith: but now her obstinacy, and apostasy (whereof she was
Romans 11. 21.
forewarned) is manifest, and apparent. I grant, that from the days of S.
Peter, until the time of Eleutherius, or Iranaeus, the Church of Rome
preserved Traditions: But not such Traditions as are now observed in that
Church: that Church then was as ignorant of these late inventions, as this now
Church is wide from those Traditions. [In his second Chapter he has these
golden Reply.
words. (they are in his fourth Chapter.) Seeing that these demonstrations are
so great, we must not seek for that truth amongst others, which we may easily
find out in the Church.]

By others he means the Valentinians, the Marcionists, and those Heretics,
against whom he disputes, amongst these we must not seek for the truth: Where
then? In the Church. Must we not therefore seek it in the Scriptures? This is
to extract dross out of Irenaeus his gold. Is the Church without Scripture?
And if we find truth in the Church, can we not therefore find it in the
Scripture?

[ Iren ibidem.
Seeing that the Apostles have laid up fully in her, as in a Reply.
rich storehouse, all whatsoever belongs to the truth.] The preaching, and
writings of the Apostles, which are the same for substance of doctrine, are the
endless treasure laid up in the Church, as in a rich storehouse. These are [
Iren. ibidem.
The things of the Church, which we must love; this is the Tradition of truth,
which we must lay hold of.] Namely of the truth preached by the Apostles,
delivered unto the Church in the Scripture, and preserved in the Church; this
kind of Tradition Irenaeus commenmendeth; by this kind of Tradition he
condemned the Heretics; and this kind of Tradition is not of unwritten, but
of written doctrines, even of such doctrines as were co^tradicted by those
Heretics, who erred in points of written doctrines. [ Iren ibidem.
What if there were a controversy in some small point it self, must we not
make recourse unto those most ancient Churches, and receive from them what we
hold to be certain and undoubted?] Not only in small, but even in the
greatest Controversies we collect the testimonies of antiquity, we enquire
what the Primitive Church has taught, even as we do in this great
Controversy of unwritten Traditions; and we find that the Primitive Church
taught as we teach; and therefore we hold it as certain, and undoubted, that
unwritten Traditions are to be rejected.

But the last words of Irenaeus, [ This is answered Sect. ^. D. ^.
What if the Apostles had not left us the Scriptures ^^written, should we not
then be obliged to follow the rule of Tradition, delivered by them unto those
with whom they, left the Churches in charge?] These, says the Jesuit, put us
in mind, (of that I dare say, which never came into Irenaeus his mind) [That
the Apostles delivered some things only to certain persons, which they would
not have laid open unto all by writing.] This is to corrupt Irenaus, to
sophisticate his golden words, and to turn them into dross; there is nothing
in Irenaeus sounding like unto this: but I see, as the fool thinks, so the
bell tincketh. If the Apostles had not written, then there had been unwritten
doctrines; and now seeing the Apostles have written, must there needs be still
unwritten doctrines? Irenaeus never knew other doctrine delivered by the rule
of Tradition, then is contained in the Scriptures.

[So Paul to Timothy. ^. Tim. 2. 1.
Thou therefore my son, be Reply p. 1^5.
strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus, and the things that thou have
heard of me by many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who
shall be able to teach others also. Here the Apostle delivered some mysteries
unto Timothy, willing him to open them, not to all by writing, but to choice
men, who might teach them by word of mouth unto others.]

6. To the same purpose did the Heretics of old allege this text, and were
condemned by the Church for it, as Tertullian Tertul. de praescript. c. 25.
bears witness. Timothy heard Paul's doctrine, both by his preaching, and by
his writing. The many witnesses of his doctrine were Act. 26. 11.
Moses, and the Prophets, as he testifies of himself, and sundry Anselm.
Bruno. Aquinas;
Interpreters so expound this place. The same doctrine he would have Timothy to
teach unto faithful men, not because they were such mysteries as were unfit to
be opened unto all by writing, but because they were not fit, being holy
things, to be opened by all by speaking, as by the ignorant, and profane
persons; unto such says the Lord, Psalm. 50. 1^.
What have thou to do to take my word in thy mouth, seeing thou ha^est to be
reformed? Paul before having showed, that there is required in a Teacher, both
ability to teach, and 1. Tim. c. 3.
faithfulness in teaching; and now Timothy himself being an Over-seer of Gods
Church; he therefore exhorts him to make choice of such men as were fit for
the Ministry, who were to be teachers of others; and unto these to teach the
same doctrine, which he taught him, that so they might be faithful teachers of
others.

[It cannot then le denied, but that many commandments, Reply p. 125.
and holy mysteries are preserved in this storehouse of the Church without
writing.]

7. Here the Jesuit equivocateth in the words commandments, and mysteries, as
appears by the instances, which he alleges; of which, some are points of
faith, as that the Father is unbegotten: The Son is consubstantiall with the
Father, etc. which are taught us sufficiently by the Scripture, although they
be not written verbatim in the Scripture. Some are not points of faith, as The
Lenten Fast: The celebrating of Easter day upon a Sunday, etc. And such
commandments may be preserved in the Church without writing. And first he
begins with the point of rebaptization.

[Such is the rebaptizing of those that have been baptized Reply page 126
by Heretics, as witnesses S. Augustine. August. cont. Crescen. l. 1. c. 33.
Although no example hereof is brought out of holy Scriptures, yet do we
follow the truth of the same holy Scriptures in this point, whilst we do
that, which now pleases the whole Church, which the authority of Scriptures
does commend.]

8. The doctrine of rebaptizing is a point, which the authority of Scripture
does commend. Many texts of Scripture are alleged for the proof of this point
in an Index in some of your own Index Bibl. Sixth. Ephesians. 4. 5 Heb. 6. 6 10.
16. Gen 17. 14 1. Cor 10. 2.
Bibles. S. Augustine deemed this point rather to be an obscure Question, then
a point of faith. Quaestionis hujus ob^curitas, prioribus Ecelesiae temporibus
ante schisma Donati, magnos viros, and magn^ charitate praeditos, Patres,
Episcopos inter se compulit, salva pa^^, discep^^re. Aug. l. 1. de Bapt con.
Donat. c. 7,
The obscurity of this Question, in the former times of the Church, even before
the Schism of Donatus, caused great men, and men abundant in charity, even
Fathers, and Bishops, to differ among themselves, the bond of peace not being
broken, says S. Augustine. Howsoever we distinguish between the precept and
the practice, between the doctrine and example of the doctrine. It is evident,
that S. Augustine speaks of the practice or example, Although no example
hereof is brought out of holy Scripture, etc. And though we find not the
example of this doctrine, whether those have been rebaptized, who were first
baptized by the Heretics: (as we read not, whether those that have been
baptized by murderers, and adulterers, have been baptized again, or no) yet
the precept, or doctrine may be, and is sufficiently declared in many places of
Scripture by sound inference, although it be not expressly written, Those that
have been baptized by Heretics, shall not be baptized again.

The next testimony concerns the same point; [ Aug. (...). de Bapt. cont
Donat, c. 1^.
The Apostles commanded nothing hereof, yet the Reply.
custom, which was herein opposed against Cyprian, is to be believed to
proceed from their Tradition: even as many things be which the Church
handles, and are therefore well believed to be commanded of the Apostles,
although they be not written.] And unto it we return the same answer; that
the Apostles commanded nothing hereof in express words; and that the
Scripture does not afford one example of this point: but it does not follow,
therefore it is an unwritten doctrine. Cyprian was one of the Fathers, and
Bishops of the Church, who held, that they were to be rebaptized. S.
Augustine dissented from his opinion, and yet both consented to have this
Question determined by the Scriptures. Vnde est haec Traditio etc. Cyprian,
Epist. 74. ad Pomp.
Whence is this Tradition? says Cyprian; Is it from the divine authority of
the Gospel, or from the commandment, and Epistles of the Apostles? Bellarm.
l. 4. de verbo Dei c. 8.
Bellarmine confesses, that here Cyprian speaks of the Scripture; and so
does S. Augustine commending Cyprian, Quod autem n^^ admonet ut ad fon^^m
recurramus, id optimum est. Aug; l. 5. de Bapt. cont. Donat. c. 16.
Because he would have recourse in this unto the fountain, etc. for that is
the best course. And by this authority drawn out of the fountain, Ephesians. 4. 5^
There is one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, he confuteth his opinion. And not
only by one, but Adjunctis Scriptura^m testimonijs ostendimus. Aug. l. 6. c. 1.
We prove it by testimonies of Scripture heaped together, says S. Augustine.
And in the Chapter alleged by the Jesuit, thus he writes. Contra mandatum
est, quod veni^ntes ab Haereticis, si jam ab illis Baptismum Christi
acceperint; bapti^antur; quia Scripturarum sanctarum testimonijs non solum
ostenditur, sed plane ostenditur, mul^os Pseudo-Christianos, quamvis non
habeant ^andem charitatem cum sanctis, sine qua nihil prosunt, quaecunque
sancta habere potuerint, Baptismum tamen ^om^u^^^ habere cum ^ancti^. Aug. l.
5. c. ^3.
It is contrary to the commandment, that those should be rebaptized, which
return from the Heretics, if they have the Baptism of Christ; because it is
not only proved, but plainly proved by the testimonies of holy Scripture,
that many false Christians may have the same baptism with them, although they
have not the same charity with the Saints, without which, the holy things
which they have, cannot profit them. By this clause, If they have the baptism
of Christ, he excludes the Baptism of those Heretics, which did not baptize
in the name of the Trinity: but of the rest thus he disputes. The Baptism of
CHRIST is not to be reiterated: but the Baptism of Heretics is the Baptism
of CHRIST. The Assumption he prooveth by this medium; By the testimonies of
Scripture it is plainly prooved, that they have the same Baptism with the
Saints. Thus S. Augustine determines this point by the Scriptures.

[Such is the Fast of Lent.] Reply.


9. Fasting is a Christian duty, needful for our salvation: such is not the
Fast of Lent. The On Mat. 1.
Rhemists do account it to be a written doctrine, grounded upon Scriture.
Hosius the Cardinal reckons it among Hosius in confess: Petrocovien: c. 4.
de caeremonijs.
the Traditions of the Church. The Jesuit is of opinion, that it is a
Tradition of the Apostles, and for this he cites S. Hierome, saying; [ Hieron
epist. ad Marcel.
We fast one Lent by Apostolical Tradition.] This he calls Apostolical,
not because it came from the Apostles, but because it had gained some space of
time for the observing of it in the Church; for S. Augustine ascribes the
invention of it Aug. epist. 119.
unto the Church. And though it were an unwritten Tradition coming from the
Apostles, yet S. Hierome did not think it to be a doctrinall Tradition; for
Doctrine Ecclesiae, quae est domus Dei, in librorum repe ritur plenitudine
divinorum. Hierom. in Epist: 155. ad Paulam Vrbicam.
The doctrine of the Church, which is the house of God, is found in the
fulness of the divine books. says S. Hierome. It must needs be then a
rituall Tradition; and such are impertinent to this Question.

[Such also is the commemoration and prayer for the dead Reply page 126.
in the sacrifice of the Mass, witness S. Chrysostom, Chrysostom hom. 3. in
Phi-
It was not in vain ordained by the Apostles, that in the celebration of the
venerable mysteries, a remembrance should be made of the deceased. They knew
well that great comfort and profit did from hence arise unto the dead.]

10. The private conceit of every Doctor is not the public tenent of the
Church; especially in this point of prayer for the dead, in which as most of
the Fathers differed among themselves, so S. Chrysostom dissented from the
most of them. It was his opinion, That wicked livers; that such as were not,
and would not be baptized, might be prayed for: that such as were in hell,
might receive some benefit by the prayers of the living. Concerning such,
writing upon the same Chapter, he says: (...), etc Chrysostom in Philip. Hom. 3.
Let us weep for such, let us succor them according to our power, let us
find out some help for them, little indeed, but yet such as may relieve
them. How and after what manner? By praying for them. Ch^ysostome deserves to
be censured for this, for Gregory in his Morals says, Greg. Moral. in Job l.
34. c. 16
We may as well pray for the Devil, and his Angels, as for such; and it is the
general tenent of the Roman Doctors, that only those are helped by the
prayers of the living, who dye in the state of grace, and being dead, go into
Purgatory, and not unto Hell. For thy full satisfaction in this point, read
the Article of prayer for the dead, which is most learnedly handled by the most
reverend Primate, unto which I will add this, we distinguish the point it
self of praying for the dead, from the practice of praying for them at any set
time, and namely at the time of celebrating the divine Mysteries: this is but a
custom, or Epiphan. in fine Panarij.
ordinance of the Church by the judgment of Epiphanius; of this S. Chrysostom
speaks, and such things are as impertinently objected by the Jesuit, as this
is falsely affirmed by S. Chrysostom.

[Such also is the custom of baptizing Infants before they do actually
believe, for S. Augustine says, Reply page 126
Aug. de Genes. ad lit. l. 10. c. 23.
The custom of the Church in baptizing of Infants, were not at all to be
believed, unless it were an Apostolical Tradition. And Origin says, Orig. in
Romans c. 6.
The Church received from the Apostles this Tradition, to confer baptism
even unto children.]

11. None but an Anabaptist would hold this opinion, that the baptism of
Children is not warranted by Scripture. If he had learned the Catechism of
Trent, or if he had read Bellarmines first Book, and eight Chapter de
Baptismo, he would not have inserted this into his catalogue of unwritten
Traditions. That which he produces out of S. Augustine overthrows all that,
which he with so much toil in this, and in the former Section, has labored
for to build, for if This, or that is not to be believed, unless it be an
Apostolical Tradition, how then can Ecclesiastical Traditions be believed? or
how can they be of the same credit and authority with the written word? We
distinguish between the doctrine, and the practice in the Sacrament of
Baptism; and likewise between doctrines expressly written in the Scriptures,
and by sound inference deduced from them. S. Augustine proves the doctrine by
diverse texts of holy Scripture; by this, August. de peceat: merit: l. 1. c. 27.
He that has the Son has life. By that, Idem. de verbis Apostol: Sermon. 8.
He shall save his people from their sins. And by the Idem de Bapt. cont.
Donat. l. 4. c. 24.
Circumcision of Infants. As for the custom or practice (whereof S. Augustine
speaks) we read not of any Children baptized; neither do we read that any
Apostles, that any old men, or widows, or virgins were baptized: but yet the
general precept, and practice, of baptising the Species under which these
Individualls are contained, is a sufficient warrant for their baptism. And
this custom is to be believed Nec omnino ^redenda est, nisi Apostolica osse
Traditio. (esses for esse is crept into the text in S. Augustine.)
to be an Apostolical Tradition; that is, a practice according to the written
word, which is the Tradition of the Apostles. In the same sense Origin calls
it a Tradition received from the Apostles. He proves it by this text, Origin.
Hom. 14. in Luc.
Unless a man be borne again of water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God. Stupleton teaches the same, that we teach,
concerning this, and sundry other points of faith, that, Principia in Scripture
aperte posita, quae plurimorum alio^um articulorum ^unt ^ontes, and seminaria:
ut de duabns ^atu^s and una persona in Christo, de necessitate baptizandi
parvul^^ etc. and de a^is multis dogmatihus non aperte Scriptis, ^de tamen
firmiter deductis. Stapleton. Relect Princip. fidei. Cont^: 5. quaest^ 5. ar. 1.
There are Principles plainly laid down in Scripture, which are the grounds
of many other articles: as of two natures and one person in Christ, and of the
necessity of the baptism of Children etc: and of many other doctrines not
expressly written, and yet firmly drawn from Scripture.

[Such a^e many other points, as that of the consubstantialitie Reply page 126
of the Son with the Father: The proceeding of the Holy Ghost from the
Father, and the Son, as from one beginning: That the Father is unbegotten.]

12. These three points, which concern the glorious Trinity, Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, we believe them to be articles of our faith, and to be written,
though not formally, yet virtually in the Scriptures; and it may be, that the
spirit of contention moves the Jesuit to strive about the form of words, and
not about the form of doctrine contained in those words, unbegotten,
consubstantiall etc: S. Augustine, disputing about the same words, says; Quid
enim contentiosiue, quam ubi d^re constat, certare de nomine. August: ad
Pascent: Arian: Epist: 174.
What is contention, if this be not, to strive about words, when we agree about
the thing? The words themselves are not the points of faith, the Church
believed the same points of faith before the same words were used: but the
doctrines contained in those words are the points of faith. And if he will say
the doctrines are not written, because the words are not written; he may as well
say, the Trinity of Persons, and the Unity of Essence are unwritten doctrines,
because the words Trinity, and Unity are not written. It is the doctrine of
Devils, first to teach that these things are not written, that so men may doubt
of them, and after deny them. What a gappe is here laid open to let in
Paganism, Atheism, Iudaisme, and sundry sorts of heresies? Let him then
recant his error, least he be burnt for an Heretic. Bellarmine make^h a
better confession, saying, Retinentur a nobisilla nomina, Essentia, Homousios,
Hypostasis, Persona, etc: quia etsi in Scripturis non ^abentur, ^amen habentu^
little semina, and ^quivalentia. Bellann. de Christo. l. 2. c. 2
We retain these words, Essence, Consubstantiall, Hypostasis, Person etc:
because we find words which are aquivalent unto them in Scripture, although
the Scripture does not contain these same words. That of the Consubstantiality
of the Son with the Father, is proved out of the Scriptures by Tertullian in
a Tertul. ad^. Prax^am.
treatise written for that purpose. (...) Theodor: Dialog: ^.
For this we will produce demonstrations out of the holy Scripture, says
Theodor. ^ disputing against Arius concerning this point. Quomo ^o dicis in
Scripturis Ho^ousion non inveni^i, quasi aliud ^it Homousion, quam quod dicit.
Ego de Patre exivi et Ego and Pater unum sumus? Ambros^ de fide cont. Arian^ c.
5.
How do thou say, says Ambrose, the word Consubstantiall is not found in
the Scriptures, as if Consubstantiall were any thing but this. I came forth
from the Father. And I and the Father are one? Adver^us impietatem
Haereticorum, Pa^res novum nomen condiderunt Homousion: sed non rem novam tali
nomine signaverunt. Hoc enim vocatur Homousion; quod est. Ego and Pater unum
sumus. unius videlicet, ejusdenque substantiae August. tract: 97. in Ioh:
To cross the impiety of the Heretics, the Fathers invented a new word
Consubstantiall: but that new word signified no new thing. For Consubstantiall
and this is all one. I and the Father are one. to wit one in substance. says
S. Augustine. And he urges the Arians to consider this. August. Epist. 174.
If any where in Scripture they can find two called one, who are not one in
substance. And again he provokes them to try this point, not by any August
cont. Maximin l. 3. c 14.
Council, but by Scripture. And Bellarmine tells us he had good reason to
do so. Quia in illis qu^^ionibus exstabant in Scripturis claris^ima
testimonia. Bellarm: de verbo Dei. l. 4. c 11.
Because in that question the Scripture afforded most evident testimonies.

That the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son, S. Augustine in
sundry places proves it by the Scriptures. Cum per Scripturarum Sacraru^
testimonia docuissem, de urro^, procedere Spiritum Sanctum. August. de Trinit
l. 15. c. 27.
Seeing that I have taught, says he, that the Holy Ghost proceeds from them
both. And again, Spiritum Sanctum esse Patris, and Fili^, and a Patre and
Filio mitti, atque procede^e ab ut^oque sanctae Scripturae testimonijs clatius
demonstremus. Aug Tract: 99. in Ioh.
That the Holy Ghost is of the Father, and of the Son, and is sent forth from
the Father, and the Son, and that he proceeds from them both, let us
demonstrate it more clearly by the testimonies of holy Scripture. And this
point Bellarmine prooveth by Bellarma de christ. l. ^. c. ^^.
Scripture. And that the Holy Ghost proceeds from them both as from one
beginning, this is not expressly written, yet by undeniable consequence it is
gathered out of Scripture. Petrus Damianus uses this argument. Cum Filius
dicit, Ego and Pater unum sumus Quomodo potest Spiritus Sanctus ab eo, quod
unum est, and procedere, and non procedere? Pet: Damian: l. 3. Epist. 1.
Seeing the Son says, I and the Father are one. How can the Holy Ghost
proceed from that, which is one, and likewise not proceed? Melch: Canus
locorum l. ^. c. 2.
Melchi^r Canus reckons this among those things, which (without loss of
Salvation) may be left doubtful, and a man may be ignorant of. And it is the
last Article of Faith revealed to the Church, yet not by unwritten Tradition,
but by firm consequence out of the written word.

That the Father is unbegotten is likewise a written doctrine; for though the
word unbegotten is not written, yet the doctrine taught us by that word is
written: and we dispute not of words: but of doctrines.

[That the mother of God remained a perpetual Virgin.] Reply page ^^6


13. We say with S. Augustine, August. de nature: and great: c. 36.
We are not willing to move any question about the mother of God, for the
honor we bear unto her Son. But seeing we must declare what we think;
we think her to be a blessed Virgin, because the Scripture does not teach the
contrary; and because we are commanded to hold those things, which are of
Phil: 4. 8.
good report. If it be an unwritten Tradition, then S. Ambrose was mistaken,
who alleged this text to prove it. Ezekiel. 44. 2. Ambros. epist. 81.
This gate shall be shut, and shall not be opened, and no man shall enter by it,
because the Lord God of Israel has entered by it. And so are many of our
Adversaries, who defend, that she vowed perpetual virginity by these words.
Luc. 1. 34.
How shall this be, seeing I know not man?

[That Sunday ought to be kept holy.] Reply.


14. This is a doctrine warranted by the Scripture; S. Augustine thinks, that
it was tipisied August. epist. 1 9. ad ^an^a^: ^. 13.
by the ^ight day appointed for Circumcision, and that it was taught by Christ's
resurrection upon that day. We find in Scripture, that it is called Revel. 1.
10.
The Lords day. and upon this Rib^^ observes (that I may oppose one Jesuit to
another) that which this Jesuit cannot see. Videmus hic etiam tempore
Apostolorum Sabbathi solemnitatem mutatam esse in die^ Dominicum. Riber. in
Apoc. c. 1.
We see even here, that in the times of the Apostles the Sabbath was changed
into the Lords day. We find that day ordained by S. Paul for 1. Cor. 16. 1.
holy duties; so Chrysostom, Ambrose, Remigius, Primasius, and many others
expound that place. And we find the observance of it Act. ^0. 7.
by the Apostles themselves, in preaching of the word, and administering of the
Sacrament upon that day.

[That Easter day be celebrated always upon Sunday.] Reply page 126.


15. It is a decent order in the Church to observe the feast of Easter, and
there is no day fitter then Sunday for it: but we deny the observing of it,
upon Sunday, upon another day, or upon any day, to be a point of faith. It is
only a custom, or ordinance of the Church, and therefore comes not within
the compass of this Question. Controversia de die Paschatis diu ^eterum
Ecclesias exercuit. Socrat. l. 5. c. 22.
This Question about Easter day, says Socrates, troubled the Churches a long
while. The Churches of Asia (unto which S. John wrote) pleaded his Tradition
for the 14. day. other Churches observed Sunday, alleging the Tradition of
Peter, and Paul: at the last it was determined in the Council of Nice, that it
should be kept upon Sunday, not as if it were a point of faith, but because it
was a decent order. (...) etc: It is a comely order, says Constantine in his
letters written to the Bishops that were absent, which the Churches of the
West, North, and South do observe. And Epiphanius says of the Audians,
Epiphan. in Anacephal.
They are of the same faith in all things with the Catholic Church. And yet
they kept the Passover as did the Jews.

[And truly they that deny this to be sound Doctrine, cannot Reply.
possibly have any sure ground for their Faith: For how can they prove that
they have any word of God at all, but only by the Tradition and authority of
holy Church? how will they know which books of Scripture be canonical, which
not etc? How shall those Heretics be disproved, who denied the Canticles etc;
the four Gospells etc? How shall those five Gospels attributed unto Thady,
Thomas, Barnabe, Bartholomew, and Andrew be disproved etc: but by the authority
of the Church? Why then does he condemn such Traditions?]

16. Such Traditions we condemn not; In the stateing of this Question it does
appear that we allow modum tradendi, the manner of delivery of the volume of
Gods written word by the authority or testimony of the Church: and all this
concerns the manner of deliverie. In this the Jesuit not only belyeth our
Doctrine, but also shrinketh from the Question: he should prove that unwritten
Traditions are the word of God, but he goes about to prove, that by an
unwritten Tradition (namely by the authority, and testimony of the Church) a
man may know, that there is a word of God, and which books are the word of
God, and which are not. All Questions are not to be disputed of, says Aristot.
l. 1. Topic. c. 9.
Aristotle. Of all things this is most sure, and ought to be believed, that the
Scripture is the word of God. As he that Heb^: 11. 6.
Will come to God, must first believe that God is: so he that will come to the
knowledge of Gods word, must first believe that there is a word of God, and
that the Scripture is this word. To doubt of this, is to deny a most sure
principle: and to dispute of this, is to take away the very ground of this
Question. If this Question were given, Whether Heaven covers all things; if
the opponent should argue thus; It does not cover it self: therefore it does
not cover all things. We would judge him a silly Sophister. The trifling
Jesuit disputes after the same manner; The Scripture does not discover all
points of faith, because it does not discover it self to be the word of God.
But this point is excepted by the Question it self; for when the Scripture
says, 1. Cor. 15. 27.
That all things are put down under him, it is manifest that he is excepted,
which did put down all things under him. So when we say, that the Scripture
declares all points of faith, it is manifest that this is excepted, it needs
not declare it self to be the Scripture, or the word of God. As the first good
is to beloved for it self, so the first truth is to be believed for it self,
says Aquinas in Prolog. in sent.
Aquinas. The Scriptures are accounted among those things which are (...), to
be believed for themselves: yea they are (...), most worthy of belief, being
like Principles in an Art, which, oportet discentem credere, the Learner must
believe, as Basil. in Psalm. 115.
Bafill says. So that in this disputation this must be datum, a thing granted,
and taken pro concesso, that the Scripture is the word of God. August:
Confess^l. 6. c. 5.
Hear them not, says S. Augustine, who demand, How do you know the
Scripture to be the word of God? for that is a thing to be believed. Yet we
will be content to answer this foolish demand, and to show by what means we
know which books are canonical, and which are counterfeit.

We know the Scriptures to be the word of God by those arguments which we find
in them. They need not testify for themselves, but it is to be presupposed as
a pracognitum that they are the word of God: yet they bear witness for
themselves. The Scripture is a witness to it self, says Testis est ipsa
Scriptura. Bellarm: de verb: Dei. ^. 1 c. 2.
Bellarmine. Humana dicta argumentis and testibus cge^^. D^i au^em sermo ipse
sibi testis est. Salvian. de gubernat^ Dei.
Humane sayings, says Salvian, need arguments, and witnesses: but the word of
God is a witness to it self. Scotus in prolog. in l. 1. sent. q. ^.
Scotus proves it by eight arguments taken out of the Scripture it self, the
which I will briefly repeat. By the Majesty of the Speaker: by the titles of
the Books: by the power of the doctrine in the conscience: by the simplicity,
and purity of the style: by the truth of the predictions: by the agreement in
all things, though written by sundry persons, in sundry places, and at sundry
times: by the perfection of it: and by the testimony which our Savior gives
unto the Luc. 24. 27.
old Testament, 2. Pet. ^. 16.
S. Peter to the Epistles of S. Paul, and S. Paul to the whole 2. Tim. 3. 17.
Scripture. By all these it is more then probable and credible, that the
Scripture is the word of God. These are sufficient arguments to beget an
acquired faith in any man, if the 2. Cor. 4. 4.
God of this world has not blinded his eyes, so that he cannot Psalm. 119. 1^.
see the wonderful things contained in the Law. The natural man is blind,
and 1. Cor. 2. 14.
perceives not the things of God, by his active understanding: neither can he
conceive them by his passive understanding, although they be most evidently
revealed: and therefore God works in his own an infused faith, and opens
their eyes that they may see and believe this truth. There is In Scripturis est
Sol justitiae. August. in Psalm. 80.
in the Scriptures the Sun of righteousness, as S. Augustine says; a blind
man cannot see this Sun no more then a blind man can see the Sun in the
Heavens: as therefore the eye of the body must be light, that it may see the
Sun, so must the eye of the soul be spiritually illuminated, that it may see
this Sun of righteousness.

This is wrought outwardly by the word, which Psalm. 19. 8.
gives light unto the eyes: and inwardly by the spirit, which 1. Cor. 2. 11.
only knows the things of God, and works this by Origin. de Principijs l.
4. c. 1.
working upon the spirit and the understanding, as Ovigen says. And when the
heart is purified, that a man does the will of GOD, then he shall Ioh. 7. 17.
know whether the doctrine be of GOD, or no. And as a friend knows the
voice of his friend, so the spouse of CHRIST, and the sheep of CHRIST know his
Cant. ^. ^. Ioh. 10. 4.
voice. These are the means by which we know the Scriptures to be the Word of
GOD: by which we know what books are canonical, and which are counterfeit.

And for the manifestation of this truth, we do likewise allow the testimony
of the Church, these cautions remembered.

1. The testimony of the Church is one, but not the only means. He that
knows the Sun to be the Sun only because he is told so: and he that
knows his horse to be his horse only because the hostler tells him so, is
as wise a man as he that knows not the Scripture to be the Scripture, but
only because holy Church tells him so. I will demand one thing of this
Jesuit; if a man deny the Scripture, will he not convince him by the authority
of the Church, which testifies for the Scripture? And if he deny the testimony
of the Church, will he not convince him by the authority of the Scripture,
which testifies for the Church? Thus is he forced to dance in a circle, and
in the end to bring all conclusions to be proved by the Scripture. We rather
hold, that the Scripture is the only means to know the Church by: then that
the Church is the only means whereby to know the Scripture. So says the
Author of the imperfect Work upon Matthew. Ante^ multis modis ^stendeba^ur
quae esset ec^lesia Christ, and quae gentilitas: nun^ autem nullo modo cognos
citu^ volentibus cog^oscere quae sit ecclesia Christ^, nisi tantummodo per
Scripturas. Hom. 49.
In former times there were many ways whereby to know which was the Church of
Christ, and which was Gentilisme: but now if a man would know which is the
Church of Christ, the Scripture is the only means whereby to know it. And S.
Augustine shows us where we must seek for the Church. In pr^scripto legis,
in Pro phetarum praedictis in Psalm. morum ^antibu^, in ipsius pastoris vocibus,
in Evargelistarum praedicationibus and laboribus, hoc est, in omnibus canonicis
sanctorum librorum authorita^ibus. Aug. de unitat. Eccles c. 16
In the prescript of the Law, in the predictions of the Prophets, in the
Psalms, in the words of the Pastor himself, in the Sermons and labors of
the Apostles; that is, in the canonical authority of the holy Bible.

2. The authority of the Church is a means to declare which is the canonical
Scripture, but not to make the Scripture canonical; as he that declares
Ignatius to be canonized for a Saint, does not thereby canonize him: it is a
good argument not a priori, but a posteriori, as when the Goldsmiths declares
the Gold to be good. But the Romanists speak most disgracefully of the
Scripture. Scripturas valere quantum fabulae Aesopi, si destituantur
authoritate Ecclesiae. He^man. apud Breut. in Prolegom.
That the Scriptures are no better then Aesopes fables, if they want the
authority of the Church. And without the authority of the Church Se non plus
fidei adhibiturum quam Tito Livio. Gul. Bailius Catech. contr. tract. 1. q 12;
They will believe them no more then Titus Livie.

Thus I have made good my promise, and have run the wild goose chase after
this Gagler in these three Sections, who at last (seeing his fault, that all
this while he has answered nothing that has been objected) confesses [That
it is time for him to examine the Scripture which is produced against unwritten
Traditions.] In reexamining of what he has examined, it shall be made manifest,
that

SECT. V. The Jesuit uses most silly shifts in answering the Scripture which
is produced against unwritten Traditions.
THe three observations gathered by the Jesuit in the beginning of this
Section, are already answered; and therefore I need not actum agere: yet I
will be content to give them a touching answer.

[First the Traditions which we maintain Reply p. 127.
cannot be said to be precepts or commandments of men, but of God himself,
forasmuch as they proceed immediately from Christ and his Apostles.]

1. Are your Ecclesiastical Traditions immediately from Christ, and his
Apostles? Your solemn baptizing of Bells: Your Friday fast, and the like, can
you prove their original to be immediately from Christ, and his Apostles?

[Secondly, that the like our Traditions are not any Reply page 128.
way contrary or repugnant to the truth of holy Scripture.]

2. There is neither sense nor truth in this observation. The lik^ our
Traditions are not, is none sense: not contrary to the truth of holy Scripture,
is contrary to the truth. That it is a greater sin for a Priest to be married
to a wife, then to live in fornication with many whores: that it is worse for a
Layman not to make his auricular confession once in the year, then to live in
sin all the year: that it is a greater sin to eat flesh in Lent, then to
be drunken in the Lent: and to break a Saints day, then the Lords day: these
Traditions are contrary, and repugnant to the truth of the holy Scriptures.
Chrysosto^e and Hierome answered Sect. 3. Di^is. ^. Rep^y page 128.


[Thirdly, that our Traditions do not any way derogate from the fulness or
perfection of the written Word.]

3. Traditions are additions to the written word: if they be so, then they
derogate some way from the perfection of it: for that that is perfect needs
no addition. And this addition of unwritten do^trines to the written Word, not
only crosses the truth of the Scripture in the general command, which
forbids ^evel. ^^. ^^. ^euter 12 3^.
Addition, and Substraction: but likewise derogateth from the perfection of it;
for if the Scripture be a covenant, then Gal ^. 15.
No man must add unto it. Chrysostom. hom. 12 in Philip.
If it be a Canon, it admits neither addition nor substraction: if it
should, it cease to be a Canon, says Ch^ysostome.

[They rather bring unto us the whole complement of Reply page 1^8.
Scripture, as this example foll^wing will most plainly declare. His Maj^stie
sends over into th^s Kingdom our of his trusty Counselors wi^h his Royal
Letters unto his Subjects, where in he pr^scrib^t^ unto them not only express
Laws himself, but also commands them to fulfill whatsoever shall be
enjoy^ed them by his said Counselor, to whom he has imparted his whole will
and pleasure. Can it be said, I pray you, that the subjects of Ireland, by
obeying unto such things as are commanded by the said Ambassador, do
derogate any thing unto the fullness and perfection of His Majesty's Letter?]

This his royal argument, like Golia^^ sword, shall undo himself. Be it to;
The Scriptures are the royal lette^s, or the grand commission: and the Church
is the trusty fr^^n^, the Ambassador, or Commissioner. Now I demand

1. Is not the authority of the Commissioner, or of the Ambassador, from his
commission, or his letters; and not the authority of the commission, or letters
from the commissioner or Ambassador? So (if this similitude hold) the
authority or credit of the Church is from the Scriptures; and not the
authority or credit of the Scriptures from ^he Church.

2. May not an Ambassador (as many have) go beyond his commission, and
deliver things contrary to the trust committed to him, and so become an
Impostor? So the Church of Rome is gone beyond her commission, and has
delivered these things, which are contrary to the written word; and in this she
is a grand Impostor.

Similitudes are a weak foundation to uphold this pillar of Traditions, (upon
which the weight of all other controversies does depend) especially such a
similitude as this, which wants feet to uphold it self.

1. Kings of themselves know not all things which are fit for their subjects,
neither can they foresee what passages will happen between their
Commissioners and their people, and therefore they are forced to leave many
things to the discretion of their Ambassadors: but it is not so with the King
of Kings, he has revealed all things necessary for his people to the penmen
of Scripture, and they according to that revelation have written all things.
Aristot. de Rhetor. l. 1. c. 1
The best Laws, says Aristotle, determine all things themselves, and leave
very little to the discretion of the Judges. The Law of God is the best, and
the most perfect Law; how then can there be so many, and so great things left
to the discretion of the Church?

2. The Laws of Kingdoms are subject to mutation, and addition, so that his
Majesty may send over Commissioners for this purpose, but the Law of God is an
Revel. 14. 6.
eternal Gospel; the faith of the Church was Jude verse. 3.
at once delivered unto the Saints in the holy Scriptures, as it is here
confessed by the Jesuit. [In these letters, it is true, he has expressed his
Laws and Commandments himself, yet forasmuch as all things are not so
manifestly therein described, that our feeble understanding may attain unto
the knowledge of his heavenly will by the same alone, he himself commands
us to be ruled by his Church.] Can any Protestant say more? God himself has
expressed his Laws and Commandments in the Scripture. And again, All things
are therein described, though not so manifestly. This, I confess, does not
derogate from the perfection of Scripture: but it over-throweth the Jesuit,
and his cause, because all things are therein described: and there is only
required the interpretation of things obscure (which no Protestant denies)
because all things are not therein so manifestly described.

4. The truth has convinced the Jesuit, yet malice has set his wits a
raveing, and his tongue a railing on his Adversary, of [most gross vanity, of
great madness, of ostentation, and of not touching the point at all.] But who
can with patience endure to hear this animal bray thus: It seems he is
touched to the quick, and that makes him kick as if he were mad: if he be
not, it is because his own conscience is past feeling; and yet he takes upon
him to be the Judge of an other man's conscience. He that cites Scripture more
for show, then to purpose, taxes his Answerer [For alleging so little
Scriptur^^^ (...), Reply page 119.
and to so little purpose: for bringing in his proofs, out of Scripture so
scan^ly, who sometimes is puffed up with no thing but Scripture.] The Roman
Tradition mongers have l^arned the trick of the Jewish Cabbalists, to call
those of the adverse part, Scripturians, or men puffed up with Scripture. Call
them as you will, I had rather be filled with Scripture, then with the
puft-paste of Traditions, or the puftcrust of humane inventions. Neither is the
most reverend Primate to be blamed for alleging in this point but a few texts
of Scripture, because brevity was the thing which he intended in the beginning
of this Work. If he alleged but one text to the purpose, Chrysostom pleads
1 Chryso^^^ hom. ^6. ad ^^pul. A^ ^othe^.
his excuset^ What have I to do with multitudes? I had rather have one
p^^^ious (...) th^^ many half (...). And I think a judicious Reader will like
better of his little to great purpose, then of the Jesuits great deal to
little purpose.

[But it is to little purpose; for first that text of Matthew. 15. (In vain do
they worship me, teaching for Doctrines Reply page 119.
the commandments of men) is far from proving any thing against us, seeing
that by it only such humane Tradit^ous are reproved, a^ are repugnant to the
Law of God.]

5. Jewish Traditions were not more repugnant to the Law of GOD, then Popish
are; ye^ even to every commandment. That title given to the Pope, (...)
D^^^^oster Papa. The Lord (...) God the Pope, is repugnant to the 1. That
Images are to be worshipped, i^ repugnant to the 2. That unwritten Traditions
do supply the def^ct of the written word, is adi^^^on our to it, and repugnant
to the 3. That a, Saints day is more duly to be observed then the Lords (...),
i^ repugnant to the 4. That a man may give his goods unto the Church, and let
his parents starve, ^^ repugnant to they. That ^n some ^ases the subject may
kill his King, is repugnant to the 6. That the Stews may be permitted, and
Priests allowed their Concubines, is repugnant to the 7. That religious persons
may en^ise and steal such children from their parents as will be fit for their
turn, is repugnant to the 8. The doctrine of Aequivocation is repugnant to the
9. And that lust without consent is no sin, is repugnant to the last. Can
these be repugnant to the Scriptures, and be Traditions deduced by sound
inference from the Scriptures? This the Jesuit affirms of them: his reason
is, [The Scripture commands us to obey the Church? and Reply page 130.
the holy Ghost teaches the Church all truth: and Christ is present with his
Church unto the worlds and: and he that hears the Church, hears God: and
the Scripture comm^ndeth Traditions, and commands us to hold fast what the
Apostles have delivered with^^^ writing. And the Church in all ages has taught
unwritten Traditions etc.] This is (...), his ^^ckow song: and all these texts
of Scripture we have already Sect. ^.
answered. This is a budget wide enough to hold all the trash of Romish
Traditions; it is his gladius Delphicus, which serves for all uses. If this
argument be found, there needs no more Scripture then this, Obey the Church.
This gives you power quid^^b^^ addend^, to say what you list, and it will
bear you out. But it is a false argument, consisting of quatuor termini; for
the Scripture speaks of one Church, and the Jesuit of an other: the
Scripture commends written Traditions, and the Jesuit is all for unwritten
Traditions.

The holy Scriptures not only are able to make us ^. Tim. 3.
wise Answer.
unto salvation, (which they should not be able to do, if they did not
contain all things necessary to salvation) but also by (...) of God, (that is,
the 1. Tim. 6. 11.
Minister of Gods word, (...) whom i^ (...) to Act. 20. 27.
declare all the counsel of God) may be perfectly instructed to every good
work: which could not be, if the Scripture did not contain all the counsel
of GOD which was sit for him to learn or if there were any other word of GOD
which he were bound to teach, that should not be contuined within the limits
of the Books of GOD. Thus says the Answerer.

The Jesuit would willingly writ he himself out of these words: he windeth
and turns himself every way. like an Eele that is taken: he snatcheth and
catches (like a man ready to be drowned yet every thing that comes in his
way. His first shift is this.

[There is no such saying in the Apostles writings as this; Reply page 131.
The Scriptures are able to make us wise unto salvation. He says indeed that
they are able to make Timothy wise un^o salvation: ^t less^ he will say, th^^
whatsoever S. Paul affirms of Timothy, may be applied unto us all: which is
most absurd. For who will say that the Apostle 1. Tim. 5. 23.
forbidding Timothy to drink water; does thereby forbid us all in like manner?]

6. There is not the least word in Scripture spoken of the Church, of the
Apostles, and of Traditions, but our Adversaries do apply it generally unto
themselves: only this (because it concerns the power of the Scriptures) must
be peculiar unto Timothy, and not applied unto all. But evil should not the
Scriptures be as able to make us, at Timothy, wise into Salvation? either it
must be because he had better means to be made wise, then we have: or
because having the same means he was more to (...) of this wisdom. Not the
first if it be true which the Jesuit observes; [That Timothy (...) only the
old Testament.] (...) we have both the old and the 1. Cor. 2. 14. Psalm. 119,
18.
new. Nor the second, because the understanding is alike corrupted in all
(...), it is not ^ capable of this saving wisdom until GOD ^ (...) it. And
this (...) of his absure instance of Timothyes not drinking (...) (which
declares his brains to be as weak us Timothyes stomach) because all,
stomack^ ar^ not ^ike weak; but all men^ understandings (until they are
sanctified) are alike wicked, and incapable of holy things. What therefore S.
Paul here affirms of Timothy may be applied unto all, and it is applied unto
all by Chrysostom on this text, saying, Verily the Apostle speaking this of
Timothy ^^th th^r^py admonish all men. His second shift is this.

[Though we should grant this, that the Scriptures are Reply page 1^1
able to make us wise unto salvation: yet is does not follow from thence, that
they contain Expressly all things necessary to Salvation.]

7. Expressly is an express lie, an addition of his own: for the Answerers
inference is this; Therefore they contain all things necessary for Salvation.
Now things are contained in Scripture not only expressly, but like wise by
inference. His third shift is this.

[It is confessed the chiefest of our Adversaries, that the Reply page 131
Apostle in that place means none other but the old Testa^ent only, as
himself declares plaint enough: Thou have learned the holy Scriptures of a
child, which are able to make thee wise. And the new Testament was not written
when Timothy was a child. And will our Answerer grant, that the old Testament
alone contains all things necessary to Salvation? then consequently the new
Testament i^ ^^^d^lesse.]

8. It is the better for our cause if the Apostle h^^re speaks only of the
old testament, that it is able to make in wise unto Salvation. for then both
old and new being joined together must needs contain all thing (...)
Salvation. It is confessed that when Timothy was a child he learned only the
old Testament, and then the new was not written but (...) when Paul wrote this
^ 1. Thr^. 4. 6.
Epistle unto him; he was a (...) he was Bishop of Ephesus: this Epistle was
write him a little before S. Paul death, and then all the new Testament was
written, but only that which (...) added. If I should say of an old Judge,
that he has known (...) of a young Student, this does not exclude his
knowledge of such lawe^ as were made in after times: so S. Paul's speech of
Timothy, that he knew the Scriptures of a child, does not exclude his knowledge
of those books which were penned afterward. But why should not we say. That
the old Testament alone contains all things necessary to Salvation? seeing
Christ says of it, Ioh 5. 39.
Search the Scriptures, in them yet think to have eternal life, and they are
they which testify of me^. [Then consequently the new Testament is needless,]
says the Jesuit* This consequence is false and absurd; you hold that the Pope
has os and sapientiam, a mouth to utter, and wisdom to declare all things
necessary to Salvation: Will you therefore infer, that Universities, Doctors,
Fathers, and all other helps are needless* If this consequence be true, then
this Reply of the Jesuit is needless; because it contains no new thing, but
that which has been often objected. What need so many books be printed of the
same subject in every kind of learning, if this consequence have any truth in
it? The old Testament may contain all things necessary, to Salvation, and yet
the new be very needful.

1. For confirmation of the same truth, both of the Scriptures, and of the
doctrine contained in them, God would have many witnesses of the same truth,
all the penmen of Scripture, writing as it were with the same pen, speaking as
it were with the same mouth, and all testifying the same things, that out of
the months of so many with esses speaking the same things at sundry times, in
sundry places, and in sundry languages, the whole Scripture might be proved to
be the word of God. In this store house many weapons of the same kind are
needful: Cant. 4. 4.
A thousand shield hang therein.

2. For the better manifestation and explanation of those things that are
contained in the old. In the old, the new is vayled: in the new, the old is
revealed. In the Old some things are delivered obscurely to exercise the
learned* ^n the new the same things are delivered plainly to edify the simple.

3. For the augmentation of our wisdom and knowledge; for though the old be
able to make us wise unto salvation: yet because the Lord would not have us be
dwarfes and children in knowledge, to have no more wisdom then will keep life
and Soul together: but to abound in wisdom and sp^rituall understanding, and
to b^ men in knowle^ge, therefore he thought it needful to add the new unto
he old, that we may attain unto a more perfect m^asure of wisdom. There are
many things in the new, which are not so nec^ssary to salvation, but that
without the knowledge of them a man may live the life of grace, (as a man may
^ive: he life of nature without some of his ou^ward parts) but there is nothing
in it which is needelesse. The fulfilling of the prophecies contained in the
old serves for confirmation of our faith: the narration of Christ his life and
death kindles love in our hearts ^ the good we read is for our imitation: the
evil for our forewarning. His 4th shift is this.

[It is well known that S. Paul there may be understood to Reply page 1^1
have taught Timothy, that the old Testament was able to instruct him as full,
that salvation comm^th by says in Christ Jesus, and not by the law of Moses
etc: And in all this he means no more then what he writes to ^he Romans. c.
3. v. 21. Now the Justice of God is made known without the law, being
t^stified by the law and the Prophets. The I^stice, I say, of God by the faith
of Christ.]

9. I know very well that this is one thing which Timothy might learn both by
the old Testament, and by the new but that is a false gloss upon this place,
that This is all which the Apostle means in this place. The Apostle shows
that the Scriptur^s are able to make us wise unto Salvation through the faith
which is in Christ Jesus. And again, That by them the man of God may be
perfectly instructed to every good work. Here we see that the Apostle teaches
us two things which are necessary for him that is made wise unto Salvation.
Faith, and good works, and that the Scripture effects both these. In regard
of faith, teaching wha^ is to be believed: reproving what is misbeleeved: in
regard of works, correcting what is evil: instructing what is good. He
shows likewise that Christ Jesus must be the object of our faith, and until
we know all this we are not made wise unto salvation. Now if the Jesuit will
stand unto his exposition, That by all this the Apostle means no more, but
that the old Testament was able to instruct Timothy at full that salvation
comes by faith in Christ Jesus, then these absurdities will ensue from hence.

1. That there was no Scripture, but only the old Testament, when Paul wrote
unto Timothy.

2. That the Scriptures were able to work this wisdom, and to give this
instruction unto none other but only unto Timothy.

3. That the knowledge of this Article, Salvation comes by faith in Christ
Jesus, without any distinction of come or to come, and without any other
Article of faith, might make Timothy wise unto Salvation.

4. That without good works he might be wise unto salvation, and perfectly
instructed to every good work. His 5. shift is this. [Againe the verb (...)
which the Reply page 132
vulgar Latin Translation renders, instruere, to instruct, our Adversaries to
make wise, may there be understood i^itiatively, or in a beginning. So he that
catechiseth a heathen, that is desirous to becom^ a Christian, when he
instructs him in the very first point of Christian faith, may be said to
instruct him, or mak^ him wise unto Salvation, not perfectly, but initiatively.
So the Scripture says that Apollos was instructed, and taught the way four
Lord. Act. 18 24 and that he was powe^full in the Scriptures, and yet he knew
no more but the baptis^e of John. v. 25.]

10. The verb (...) being derived (...) is rightly translated to make wise, so
Cajetan, Ar^as Montanus, Salmeron, Erasmus, with many more do render it; yea
the Jesuit himself page: 129. lin: 6.
confesses it: but here he limitethit, with this distinction of initiatively,
and perfectly. So the Psalm: 19 1. Rom: 1. 20.
Heavens may teach an Heathen initiatively the first point of Christian faith:
but the Scriptures do more, they teach Prove. 2. 9.
Every good way, and 2. Tim. 3. 18.
Every good work. They are both for theory, and for practice, both for faith,
and for fact: they teach, reprove, correct, and instruct; the 1. is for
confirmation of the truth: the 2. for confutation of errors: the 3. for
correction of abuses: the last for direction in good duties: and all this they
do, not only initiatively, but even absolutely, perfectly and sufficiently:
they make the man of God (...), a perfect man. Non simpliciter dixit, ut homo
Dei bonorum operum sit particeps, sed instructus his ipsis, and absolutus:
neque i^ unica aliqua in re, sed ad omne opus bonum Theophil. in hunc locum
He says not, says Theophylact, that the man of God may be partaker of good
works, but by these instructed, and made absolite: and that not only in one
thing, but to every good work. The Apostle says, they make him (...), a
perfect man, Aquinas upon this place says, Vltimu^ effectus Scripturae est, ut
perducat homines, ad perfectum; non enim qualiter-cunque bonu^ facit, s^d hoc
perfecit. Aqu^^ in 2. Tim. 3.
The last effect of the Scripture is this, that it brings men to perfection;
for it does not only make him good, but perfecteth this. The commentary which
goes under the name of Anselmus does render it instruere, to instruct: but it
shows withal what kind of instruction is meant; To instruct, that is, to
make him sufficiently learned to attain unto everlasting life. This initiative
wisdom we leave to such wittals as are bred in the Church of Rome, whose
wisdom consists only in one point, to believe in the Church, or as the
Church of Rome believes. As for Apollos he was skillfull in the Scriptures,
and Act. 18. 18.
mightily confuted the Jews by them, he had more then this initiative
wisdom, and knew better the difference between the baptism of Christ, and
of John, then it seems this Jesuit does. His last shift is this.

[Finally it may be understood of a mediate, or remote ability: as who should
say, the old Testament is able to instruct a Reply page 132
man unto Salvation, not immediately by it self, but by directing him unto
Christ, whose coming the Jews did expect, to receive from him the
accomplishment of their instruction to Salvation, according to that of the
Samaritan woman. Ioh. 4.
When the Messiah comes, he will teach us all things.]

11. Ala, poor Sr William, is this your best shift? The vicar of S. Fcoles may
be your ghostly Father, in sending you where to get wisdom. You may as well
say, that the Sama^itan woman was able to make all the Samaritans wise unto
Salvation, because she did send them unto Christ. A beggar may make you rich,
if telling you where riches are will make you rich. This mediate ability is no
ability. S. Chrysostom upon this text gives an immediate sufficiency to the
Scripture, saying. If thou will learn any truth, thou may learn it thence:
if thou will confute any error, thence thou may have this also. And again
showing the cause why S. Paul did so commend the Scriptures unto Timothy, (to
wit, because he being to leave him, the Scriptures might teach him, and comfort
him after his death) he says. Thou have the Scriptures to be thy Master in
stead of me, from them thou may learn, whatsoever thou will learn. Gabriel
Biel in like manner commends the Scripture for this selfe-sufficiency or
immediate ability. Quae ^usta sunt, vel injusta quae agenda, et fugienda: quae
amanda, and contemnanda: quae timenda, quae audenda: quae credenda, and
speranda, saluti nostrae necessaria: haee omnia sola docet sacra Scriptura Gab.
Biel. in Can: Mis. lect. 71.
Whatsoever things are just, or unjust: whatsoever is to be done or eschewed:
whatsoever is to be loved, or hated: whatsoever is to be feared, or to be
embraced: whatsoever is to be believed, or hoped, that is necessary for our
salvation; sola Scriptura, the Scripture alone does teach all these things. And
when the Jews came unto Christ to have life he sent them back again to the
Scriptures to have Ioh. 5. 39. 40.
^ternall life. Thus notwithstanding all his cursed glosses, and filly shifts,
this first branch of the argument stands firm and evident against unwritten
Traditions. That, that is able by it self alone perfectly to make us wise unto
salvation, contains all things necess^ry for our salvation: but the Scripture
is able to do this: therefore the conclusion is most certain. And now, Sr
Gaggler, wherein has the [Answerer falsifi^d the Scriptu^e in the Antecedent,
or in the conclusion offered wrong unto right Logic?] The argument is rightly
grounded upon this Axiom. Nihil dat quod non habet. The Scripture is perfect
effective, and therefore it is perfect subjective.

To the second branch of the argument, which is this. By the Scripture the man
of God (that is the minister of Gods word, unto whom it appertains to declare
the whole counsel of God) may be perfectly instructed to every good work:
which could not be, if the Scripture did not contain the whole counsel of
God, which was fit for him to learn, or if there were any other word of God,
which he were bound to teach, that should not be contained within the limits of
the book of God. The Jesuit answers in this manner.

[First by the man of God the Apostle understands not Reply page 132.
the minister of Gods word.]

12. If this exception were true, yet the argument is sure: let the man of God
be Prince, or Prelate, Magistrate, or Minister, if by the Scripture he may be
perfected, and instructed to every good work, then the consequence is most
evident: But it is false, for the Scripture gives this title, 1. Sam. 9. 10.
2. King, 23: 16. 17. 1. Tim 6. 11. 2. Tim. 3. 1^.
The man of God, only unto the ministers of his word. The Jesuits reason is
this [As there are many men of God, that are not Ministers of Gods word: so
many profess themselves to be Ministers of Gods word, who are so far from
being men of God, that they are mere lims of the Devil.] There is more malice
then reason in this answer: for though the Scriptures were penned by 2. Pet.
1. 21.
holy men of God, yet they may be preached by unholy men, who in regard of
their office may be called men of God. The Angel of the Church of Laodic^a was
an evil angel, yet the Scripture gives him this title, Revel. 3. 14.
The Angel of the Church. And the Pope may be a wicked person, the man of
sin, the son of perdition, will you therefore deny him this title, The man
of God, or the vicar of Christ? This spirit of malice, which rages in the
hearts of Jesuits against the Ministers of Gods word, declares what they are,
even Revel: 16. 14.
The spirits of Devils, and limbs of Ignatius Loyola, whose limbs were
carried away after his death by him that was his companion always at his elbow
at Mass, that is, the Devil, as Hasenmul. i^ fine Histor. Jesuit c. ^1.
Hasenmullerus one of his own order, witnesses. And this Doctrine of
Traditions discovers of what spirit they are, namely of a diabolical spirit:
for Diabolic. spiritus est extra Scripturarum Sacrarum authori^^tem divinum
aliquid puta^e. Theoph. Alexan. i^ 2. Paschal.
It is a diabolical spirit that thinks that any one thing from God should be
without the authority of holy Scripture, says Theophilus of Alexandria. The
Secular Priests say, that Jesuits are Quodlibet 3. art. 3.
Statists, Atheists, Iudasses. Others say, that their denomination from Vt a
luce lucus dictus, and ut homo est, b^mo pictus, si^ a Jesus Iesuita.
Jesus ita is a contrary, for they are more like Esauites, Gehezites, or
Iebusites. And I may say, the Devil is an invisible Jesuit, and Jesuits are
visible Devils, and yet they will be men of God.

[Secondly, where is it found that all this counsel of God was ^ver yet
written? or that S. Paul in this place does not speak as well of the unwritten
word, as of the written word and counsel of God?]

13. We find that S. Paul submitted all his doctrine to Reply.
be Act. 17. 11.
tried by the Scriptures: that he preached nothing but what ^. 2^. 22.
was written: and that making confession of his faith, he says, c. 24. 14.
I believe all things which are written, and if he had believed unwritten
Traditions, he would have added, and I believe all the unwritten Traditions:
but seeing he believed none of these, how can he speak of an unwritten word of
God? The word of God is not like to a sick man's ^^ncupative will, of which some
is written, and some is unwritte^, only delivered by word of mouth: but it is a
perfect will and testament, it needs not addition of things unwritten.

[Thirdly by all Scripture the Apostle means only the old Reply page 133
Testament. He then that is well seen in the old Testament alone, has he
knowledge of the whole counsel of God?]

14. In the eight division of this Section, we have showed the contrary: but
suppose the Apostles meaning is so, what does it make for the Jesuit? David had
but a part of the old Testament to be his Ps. 11 (...) ^4.
Counselor; yet he confesses, that it was so large that he could see Verse. ^6.
no end of the perfection of it, that by it Verse. 99.
he had more understanding then all his teachers, and that by it he Verse. 101.
refrained his foot from every evil way; thus by it alone he understood the
whole counsel of God.

[Againe when the Apostle says, All Scripture, the particle Reply.
All signifies distributively every parcel of the Scripture: and not the
whole Scripture together collectively: but our Adversary will not say, that
every books of holy Scripture, yea every parcel of a book, or chapter, is
able to instruct the minister of Gods word perfectly.]

15. This is Ad paucarespicere, to stop one gap, and to open ten: for it
overthrows all his distinctions. 1. That of mediate and immediate
sufficiency, for every parcel of every Chapter of Scripture has not a
mediate sufficiency it self to make us wise by sending us unto Christ,
neither does every parcel send us unto the Church from her to learn
Traditions. 2. That of counsel written and unwritten, for every parcel of
every Chapter does not contain all the written counsel. 3. That of
profitablenesse, and sufficiency, for every parcel of a Chapter is not
profitable it self for those four uses, to teach, reprove, correct, and
instruct. 4. That of the man of God, and a godly man; for every parcel is not
profitable to enable a godly man to every good work. This is to grant us more
then we desire, that every parcel of Scripture is profitable for these four
uses; how much more then is the whole Canon of Scripture profitable unto the
same? The words, (...), all Scripture, are taken here for the whole body, or
Canon of Scripture. In the same sense Athanasius uses the same words, when he
says: (...). Athanas. in Sy^op*
All Scripture, or, the whole Scripture (translate it as you please) of us
Christians is inspired of God: and then he adds, and contains certain
books contained in a certain Canon. Thus (...) with Athanasius is taken for
the whole Canon, and not for every parcel, for every parcel has not certain
books. Omnis, id est, tot^, is the usual note upon this place: but Estius is
most plain, Non id velle Apostolum, quod una qu^^que pars Scriptur^^ sit utilis
^d ist^ quatuo^* hic ^nim sensus liq ^do salsus est. sed quod in universa
Scriptura (...) quatuor utilitates reperiantur. Guil. ^stius professor Dua^.
The Apostles meaning is not this, that every parcel of Scripture is
profitable for these four, for this sense is manifestly false; but that these
four profits are found in the whole Scripture.

Here the Jesuit insultingly taxes us for minching, mangling, and chopping
of the Scripture, when himself is guilty of the same, of chopping the whole
Scripture into several parcells of a book and of a Chapter.

[Moreover he seems to infer a sufficiency where mention Reply p. 133.
is made only of a profitablenes. All divine Scripture, says S. Paul, is
profitable to teach. Hence our Answerer deduceth, that nothing else is
requisite to teach.]

16. The Jesuit deals not sincerely with his Answerer, when he not only
seems to chop, but does mangle this argument, as he did formerly the
Scriptures. S. Paul says, The man of God may be perfectly instructed to every
good work by the Scriptures. Hence the Answerer infers, That there is no
other word of God which the man of God (who must declare the whole counsel of
God) is bound to teach. S. Paul sets forth at large the profitablenesse of
the Scripture for four uses, to teach, to reprove, to correct, and to
instruct: and shows how fully, and sufficiently it does these, even that the
man of God may be perfectly instructed to every good work: But the Jesuit
repeating the words of S. Paul, diminishes the profitablenesse of the
Scripture, only accounting it profitable to teach: and explaineth this of
sending us unto Christ, and Christ's sending us to his disciples, and the
Disciples bidding as to hold fast unwritten Traditions. If this be all the
profitablenesse of the Scripture, then there is little sufficiency in it: but
this is not the profitablenesse of which the Apostle speaks, for All
Scripture, (that is, (as the Jesuit expounds it) every parcel of a book
and of a Chapter) does not send us unto Christ, Christ unto his Disciples, and
the Disciples unto unwritten Traditions. Neither does the Answerer infer a
sufficiency from a bare profitablenes, the word Profitablenes, or sufficiency
is not at all in his argument: neither does he say, Therefore nothing else is
requisite to teach; for this is manifestly false. Let the Scriptures be never
so profitable, and sufficient, yet some thing else is required to teach: there
is required a Act. 8. 31. Romans 10. 14.
Teacher, yea though unwritten Traditions were admitted, yet there must be one
to teach them. In this Teacher learning is required, because it is profitable,
yet not sufficient to enable him to teach. But thus we argue; That that is so
profitable to to teach, to reprove, to correct, and to instruct, that thereby
the man of God may be perfectly instructed to every good work, that we say is
sufficient, Omne sufficiens est utile, this Proposition is most certain,
Whatsoever is sufficient is profitable: and it is not thus to be converted,
Omne utile est sufficiens. northus, Nullum utile est sufficiens: but thus,
Aliquod utile est sufficiens. Something that is profitable is sufficient. So is
the Scripture, it is a thing so profitable every way, that it must needs be
sufficient in suo genere for that end, there needs no unwritten word to be
taught. Such a profitable thing is Godliness, that it is likewise sufficient;
it is one of the instances which the Jesuit gives to prove, that the
Scriptures are not sufficient, because they are said to be profitable.

[Godlinesse, says he, is profitable for all things, is it therefore so
sufficient, that nothing else is to be sought for, neither meat, drink,
sleep. etc.]

The scope of the Apostle is to prove what is both profitable and sufficient
for the obtaining of the promise, especially of the life eternal: can it be
denied, that Godliness in suo genere is both profitable and sufficient for
this? As for meat, drink, sleep, etc. they are helps of an other kind,
they are needful for a godly man in regard of his weak nature to maintain
his natural life, but not needful to perfect Godliness to attain eternal
life. As Godliness is both profitable, and sufficient for that end, so are the
Scriptures for the end, of which the Apostle speaks, although helps of any
other kind are required. The Jesuit gives an other instance; [Learning, says
he, is profitable to the knowledge of the truth, is it therefore sufficient?] I
confess it is not; Is therefore the Scripture not sufficient, but only
profitable, because some things are profitable, but not sufficient? I pray you
in what mood, or figure is this Syllogism? Some things which are profitable,
are not sufficient: but the Scripture is profitable: Therefore not sufficient.
If learning were as profitable as the Scripture is, then it were sufficient,
but it is not by it the man of God cannot be perfectly instructed to every
good work.

[Finally, you either ignorantly or wilfully pervert and Reply p. 134.
deprave the sonse and meaning of the Apostles words, when making him to say,
that by the Scriptures the man of God may be perfectly instructed to every
good work, you interpret this good work to be the ministry of Gods word.
But Paul's meaning was far otherwise: to wit, that the Scriptures are
profitable to teach, to reprove, to correct, and instruct in the way of
righteousness, that the man of God, that is to say, a godly man thus
instructed, may be perfect in his godly life, and enabled to every good work,
not so much of preaching and teaching, as of justice and righteousness, wherein
he was instructed out of the Scriptures.]

17. For want of new shifts the Jesuit is forced to return to his old shift:
but we have Divis. 12. of this Section.
already started him out of this hole; and showed, that by The man of God, the
Apostle means the Minister of Gods word. But supposing this to be the
Apostles meaning, That a godly man being instructed by others out of the
Scriptures may be made perfeet in his godly life, and enabled to every good
work. What need we more, or what need then is there of unwritten Traditions,
if not only initiatively, but perfectly a godly life, and every good work may
be learned out of the Scriptures? This co^tradicteth his former distinction of
perfectly, and initiatively, and quite overthrowes unwritte^ traditions, the
great pillar of Popery: unless the Jesuit has this mental reservation, that
there is one faith for the Pastor, and an other faith for the People: one
perfection for the Man of God, and an other perfection for a godly man: one law
of works for the Priest, and an other for the Laytie.

In the last place he comes to his wrestling argument, as he terms it, of
which he seems to be as confident as if it were an invincible Armado: and yet
with a blast it may be overthrown.

[When you affirm that the written word alone is sufficient Reply page 134
for faith and salvation, you must mean either the entire Scripture wholly
taken together: or some one part thereof only. If the former, then you have no
sufficient rule of faith left you; forasmuch as many books of holy Scripture
are lost and perished: as the 3. King 4. 32.
Three thousand Parables, and the five thousand verses written by Solomon: 1.
Paralip. 29. 29.
The books of the Prophets Nathan and Gad: the books of Ahia: and the ^.
Paralip. 9. 29.
vision of the Prophet Addo.]

18. We mean as S. Paul means, the whole canon of Scripture, or the entire
Scripture wholly taken together; of which, if any part be lost, it being lost
before S. Paul wrote this, yet the whole Scripture, of which he speaks,
remains still. We believe not that many books of holy Scripture are lost and
perished, no nor any: as for that of Solomon the text does not say that Solomon
wrote, but that he 1. King. 4. 32.
spoke three thousand Parables, and a thousand and five, not five thousand,
Songs. It may be they were written, yet seeing the Proverbes contain 974.
verses: Ecclesiastes 222: and the Canticles 116: in all 1312. verses: and many
verses contain three, or four sayings, those things therefore may be
contained in them. The books of Nathan, Gad, Ahia, and Addo, are supposed by
(...) Semens. Bibl. Sanct. l. a. Dorothens in Synopsi.
some to be parcells of the books of Samuel, Kings, and Chronicles; each of
them writing the Acts and mouuments of those Kings under whom they lived. All
these may be lost, and yet not many books of holy Scripture lost, because
those of Solomon, as it may be, were neither written, nor canonical: and those
of Nathan, Gad, etc. were written, but not canonical. Alia sicuti homines
histerica diligentia: alia sicut Prophetas divine inspiratione scribere
potuisse. Aug. de Civitat. Dei. l. 18. c. 38.
Some things, says S. Augustine, speaking of the Prophets, they might write by
way of history as men: other things by divine inspiration as Prophets. And the
Jesuit Sanctius (whose books this Jesuit is not worthy to bear) says.
Sanctius I^^olegom, in l. Reg.
These books of Nathan, ad, etc. were like Diaries, or an Ephemerides in which
the acts of their times were written: and he proves at large, that The choice
things in them were transcribed by the penmen of the Kings, and Chronicles, and
that the remainder, which is lost, contained only leviora, things of little
account. Si canonici ejusmodi libri extitissent; ecclesia non fuisset depositi
sibi traditi a Deo fidelis custos, juxta illud. 1. Tim. 6. oh Timoth. depositum
custodi, etc. Salmeron. prolog. 9 ca^. 4
If these books, says Salmeron, had been canonical, the Church had not
been a faithful keeper of that which God committed to her, according to that:
oh Timothy, keep that which is committed to thee. It cannot then stand with
the care of the Church, which is Custes Rotulorum, the keeper of Gods oracles,
that any book of holy Scripture should be lost. Staplet. Defens. occles.
author. cont. Whitak l. 2. c. 1
It cannot stand with the providence of God, which never fails in things
necessary to salvation, says Stapleton. And he adds, That the Church is as
much to be blamed if she should lose a book of Scripture, as if she should
lose a Sacrament. But that we may wrestle the Jesuit with his wrestling
argument, let him answer this. God by his providence, and the Church by her
care, has preserved the volume of the written word whole and entire, so that
not one book of it is lost: but many volumes of unwritten Traditions are lost
and perished; witness the five books which Egesippus wrote of the unwritten
Traditions which the Apostles left unto the Church; the which the Sect. 2.
Jesuit alleges against us. And the book written by Clemens Alexandrinus of
the same subject: neither is the Jesuit able to tell us what particular
Traditions were contained in these books: with us therefore the rule of says
remains whole and entire, but part of their rule is lost and perished.

And thus our Doctrine stands firm and sure, notwithstanding all the shifts
and cunning windings of this Jesuit, there is in the Church perfectio
integralis of the whole volume of Scripture, not one book of it is lost: and
there is in the Scripture perfectio finalis for the Church, not one point of
faith, nor one good work is there, but it may be learned by the Scriptures.
This one testimony of S. Paul I prefer before the testimony of any Father:
yet because our Adversaries being convinced by the Scriptures, give out that
the Fathers are theirs; (as the Jews did, Ioh. 8. 39.
that Abraham is our Father) We will therefore be content to put our selves
to be tried by God, and the Country; not only by the Scriptures, but also by
the Fathers, whose verdict is returned in the next Section.

SECT. VI. Wherein the Jesuit produces senseless exceptions against the
Jury of the Fathers, giving their verdict against him.
YOur Masters have told you, that you disagree Reply p. 135.
from the Doctrine generally received by the Fathers.]

1. I could tell you, if it were not for manners sake, that you lie
notoriously. You read this on the backeside of Constantine his Donation, or of
some of your golden legends: for I am sure none of our Writers tell us so. Name
one (if you can) among our many Writers, that does acknowledge our disagreement
from the Doctrine generally received by the Fathers in this point: and if you
cannot, we may easily judge how you will deal with the ancient Fathers, when
you deal thus with our late writers. This is but a Jesuitical fiction; and it
is evident, that all our writers (in combating with you about unwritten
Traditions) have fought against you at this weapon, and have brought into the
field these champions of the truth helping to bring down to the ground the
Tower of Babel this sort of unwritten Traditions.

2. Tertullian is the foreman of the Jury, concerning whom the Answerer
confesses, That he was an earnest advocate for rituall Traditions unwritten,
and for doctrinall Traditions written etc. In the opinion of the Jesuit [this
distinction of Rituall, and Doctrinall Traditions serves to no purpose.] It
serves for the true stateing of this Question. It discovers the Jesuits
false stateing of this Question of Rituall Traditions only. And it shows his
folly in heaping up a number of Fathers defending rituall Traditions unwritten:
for such are allowed in our Church. But why serves it to no purpose? [Because
both of them may be Apostolical: Reply page 135
and are to be regarded as the written word, and worthy of the same faith,
being delivered to the Church by the same Authors.] Are there no Rituall
Ecclesiastical Traditions, to which you give the same credit and authority as
to the written word? Can those be Apostolical? Or were they delivered to the
Church by the Apostles? And although all Rituall Traditions were from the
Apostles, yet they are not to be regarded as the written word. All that the
Pope says, is not to be regarded as his Cathedral voice. All that his Majesty
says is not to be regarded as his laws and statutes. The authority of things
delivered may be different although they be delivered by the same authors:
Sect. 1. Divil. ^.
the intention of the deliverer or the dignity of the matter delivered may
make the thing delivered more worthy of faith; for this is certain there may
be a proposition believed in respect of the Author delivering, and yet the
matter delivered may be not worthy to be an article of our faith.

Yet Tertullian, having to deal with Hermogenes the Heretic in a question
concerning the faith, presses him with the argument ab authoritate negative.
Tertul. advers. Hermog ^. 22.
Whether all things were made of any subject matter I have as yet read no
where. let those of Hermogenes his shop show that it is written. If it be not
written, let him fear that w^e which is allotted to such as add, or take away.

The Jesuit painteth out an answer unto this, and colors it with false
glosses, as if he had gotten some relics out of Hermogenes his painting shop.
It would be too tedious to lay down all his words: but the sum is this.

[First this is no thing against us, unless we should hold that Reply page 136.
all points of faith are to be proved by unwritten Tradition only, and none
at all by Scripture. For what if he press the Heretic Hermogenes in one
point with the argument ab authoritate negative, must it follow that therefore
he thought all points might be proved in the like manner? The boys of the
Logic School do know, that an Inference universal is absurdly deduced from
particular Premises.]

Has not the Jesuit told us, page 126.
They that deny unwritten Tradition can have no sure ground for their faith?
The Popes infallibility is the a, and o, the formal reason, and only
persuasive demonstration of a Papists faith: for although, materiale fidei, the
thing which he believes be a written Doctrine, yet firmale fiaei, or ratio
credendi, the reason why he believes it is, because the Pope says it. He will
not believe that there is a written word of God, and that the Scripture is that
word, and that these and those Doctrines are delivered in the Scripture,
unless the Church (that is the Pope) say it: and if he say it, it is believed,
because Ipse dixit. Is not this an unwritten Tradition by which all points of
faith must be proved? He that truly holds the Doctrine of the Roman Church
must not believe any point of his faith, because he believes the Pope has
decreed it aright in decreeing i^ according to the Scriptures because it is in
them contained: but he must believe that it is contained in the Scriptures,
because the Pope says so. Is not this to teach, that all points of faith must
be proved by unwritten Tradition, and none at all by Scripture? We confess
that in humane writings this argument ab authoritate negative is not of
sufficient force; because non omnia vidit Bernardus. Neither in the divine writ
is it of force against Rituall Traditions: yet it is of sufficient force
against him that holds any one point of faith to be unwritten, as well as it
is against him that holds all points of faith to be unwritten. Admit
unwritten Traditions and then indeed the argument ab authoritate negative is
of no force; because Tradition-mongers may answer, All points of faith are not
proved by the Scriptures. but seeing the Scriptures make use of this kind of
argument, as in proving the glory of Christ to excel the glory of the Angels,
because Heb^ 1. 5.
It was not said to any of the Angels, Thou art my s^nne, this day begat I
thee. Seeing the Fathers make use of it, as Iren. l. 1. c. 1.
Irenaeus, Origin bo^ 5. in Levit.
Orige^, Hilar. in psalm. 132.
Hillary, August. cont. li^er, Petil. l. 30 c. 6.
Augustine, Hierom cont. Helvid:
Hierome, and now Tertullian. Yea seeing our Adversaries themselves make use of
it, as Bellarm: l. 1: de Romans Pont. c. 16.
Bellarmine, and the Page 177.
Jesuit; how then can this be true? that this kind of argument is of force
only against them that hold all points of faith are to be proved by unwritten
Tradition only, and none at all by Scripture. In all these places it is but a
particular point which is handled, and all of them depend upon this universal
proposition; That which is not written is not to be believed. As in this of
Tertullian (in which the Jesuit choppeth Logic, like one that may talk of
Robin Ho^ds butts, and never shot in his Bow) In this, I say, the Boys of the
Logic School will not say that the Premises are particular, for then
Tertullian had no skill in Logic to argue thus. Some things which are not
read are to be rejected. This is not read. Therefore it is to be rejected. Let
the Iesuit^ with all his Logic (if he have any) frame Tertullians argument
into a Syllogism true both in mood and figure, that we may see for our
learning, whether the Premises will be particular, and the Inference universal,
and not rather contrary; the Premises universal and the Inference particular.
Thus Tertullian disputes against Hermogenes; Whatsoever is not written is
accursed. This is not written. Therefore it is accursed. In like manner we
dispute out of Tertullian against unwritten Traditions by the same general
medium. Whatsoever is unwritten is accursed. The Traditions which we oppose are
unwritten. Therefore they are accursed.

[Secondly, we confess when any thing is maintained contrary Reply p. 136.
to the express text of the Scripture, as we see in this error of Hermogenes,
then the argument ab authoritate negativ^ may rightly be pressed, according to
this example of Tertullian by you produced.]

Some of your Traditions are of this nature, as your worshipping of Images, and
your halfe-communion: the one expressly contrary to the second commandment;
and the other expressly contrary to this text, Math. 26. 27.
Drink y^e all of this. And if this answer be sound, that the argument ab
authoritate negative is only to be pressed against such things as are defended
contrary to express Scripture, why then do the Fathers formerly named use it
against such opinions as were defended not contrary to any express text of
Scripture? Tertullian in his book De Coron^ (out of which presently you shall
hear the Jesuit disputing) uses this kind of argument to prove, that a
Christian may not we are a crown, or garland on his head as the heathen did,
because the Scripture commands it not. And yet this is not contrary to any
express text of Scripture. Why does Cardinal Bellarmine use this kind of
argument not only against us in the point of the Popes supremacy, Bellarm. de
Ro^. Pont. l. 1. c. 16.
Because it was not said to any of the Apostles, but only unto Peter, Pasce
oves meas. But also against the Greek Lyturgies. Bellarm: de ^u^^ 21. l. 4. c.
13
Because many things in them are not commanded by the Lord? And why does M.
Malone himself use it against us, [ Page 117.
Where do we read that Christ gave any commandment to his Disciples to write
his Gospel? And where are we commanded to read i^?] Yet neither the writing
of it, neitheir the reading of it is contrary to any express text of
Scripture. Maintain what you will as a point of Salvation that is not contrary
to the express text of the Scripture, yet if it be not written either
expressly, or by firm consequence, in the Scripture, it is threatened with a
w^e, and it may be condemned with this kind of argument; Isa l. 1. 12.
who required this at your hands? not only direct murder expressly contrary
to Scripture, but likewise pretended religion in burning children in the valey
of Ben-hinn^^, is condemned by God himself, because Iere^. 7. 31.
It is that which he commanded them not. Such things cross the perfection of
Scripture, and are as bad as those things which cross the verity of it.

In the Se^ that of appealing answered in the former part.
last place he opposes those things which Tercullian wrote when he was not a
man of the Church, but an Heretic, against this which he wrote against an
Heretic. Reply page 137


[He tells us that there be many points Te^^^: de Coron^ Militis.
which we d^^ hold without any testimony of Scripture, only by the tittle of
Tradition, def^nded by the patronage of Custom. And if thou demaundest
authority for these out of Scripture, thou shall get none at all. Tradition
shall be assigned for the Author, use and custom for the conformer, and faith
for the observer of them. by these examples then it shall be confirmed that the
use and observation of unwritten Tradition may be def^^ded.] Unto this he
adds an observation of his own [Behold now how this place produced by our
Answerer out of Tertullian against unwritten Traditions, makes no more against
the same, then it does against Tertullian himself.]

His observation is true; for Tertullia^s first writings being sound make
against his latter works which were corrupt. This book de Corona was written
by him after he became an Heretics; and if that be true which Hill a^y tells
of him, and of his writings; Consequens error hujus hominis detraxit Scriptis
probabilibus authoritatem. Hilas. in Math: can. 5.
The last ^^or of this man, took away the authority of his f^rmer probable
writings. How little credit is then to be given unto this book, which he wrote
in the depth of heresy? He^ wrote it against the Christians, who held that it
was better for a Christian to wear a Crown, or ga^land of flowers upon his
head, as the heathen did, being commanded by the Emperor to do so; then in
such an indifferent thing to oppose his authority, and thereby to incur his
displeasure. Te^^ulliun held the contrary, and having no ground for his opinion
in the Scriptures, he fled (as our Adversaries do) unto Tradition. And this
made him ^xtoll unwritten Traditions, and to affirm that which here the
Jesuit alleges. Thus he that formerly taxed the Heretics, that they were
Tertul. de ^^esur^ C^^n^.
Lucifug^ Scripturarum, may be taxed for the same. He that rejected any thing
that could not be road in Scripture, now believes many things without any
test^^^ny of Scripture. He that said, Ni^il deside^amus ultra crede^^ ho^ ^nim
pri^^ credi^^^, ^^ ^sse ultra quod cr^dere debemus. Tertul de Praescript c. 8.
When we believe the Scripture, we desire to believe no more; for this we
believe first, that there is no thing else for us to believe: Now receives
unwritten Traditions into his belief. And therefore the Jesuit says well,
[This of Tertulli^^ makes no ^ore against unwritten Traditions, then it does
against Tertullian himself.] His former writings being Orthodo^^ll make
against his latter which were here^ic^ll; and so they do against unwritten
Traditions. There is one thing more which he observes out of Tereullians words.

[And here by specifying such unwritten Traditions as are Reply page 137.
observed by faith, he gives ^nhandsome bobbe unto our Answerer when ^e is not
ashamed to declare him for an Adv^cate of unwritten Rituall Traditions only.]

That Tertullian defends only unwritten Rituall Traditions is a thing most
manifest by the particulars which he names; as, To be thrice dip^ in Baptism:
after to ^st^ a little ^ilke and honey mixed together: then not to ^us^ the
body of the party baptized for a week after: ^ot i^ f^s^ upon sundays: and to
cross our selves upon every occasion. And if thou demaundest authority of
Scripture for these, and such like Disciplines, thou sh^l^ got n^n^ at all;
Tradition shalb^ assigned for the Author etc: says he. Now if these be
doctrinall Traditions, and points of faith, why then do not you use them? why
is asp^rsion used in stead of immers^^n^ why is the party baptized w^ sh^d e^e
the week be out? why do you fast on sundays? And why do you cross your
selves so little? His jest is spoiled, and the bobb^ put upon himself: he
promised to page 135.
Confirm it by the testimony of this Fathers, that ^e allowed Doctrinall
Traditions unwritten. And yet he brings him in as an Adv^cat^ of Rituall
Traditions only; so that Tertullian in this is not so bad as he would make
him. And for his flout of standing in Her^^genes shop; The place becom^eth him
better: such peddling Merchan^^ stand in need of dark shops to ^ell their
naugh^ie ware^ to their deceived Customers.

In the two Testaments, says Origin. i^ Levit^ Hom. 5.
Origin, every word that Answer.
apper^ineth to God may be discussed: and all knowledge of things out of them
may be understood. But if any thing do r^^aine, which the holy Scripture do ^^
not determi^^, ^o other third Scripture ought ^^ be received fo^^ ^o authori^e
any knowledge, but that which remains we must commit to the fire, that is, we
must reser^e it unto God. For in this present world God would not have us to
know all things.

3. In these words ^rigan takes ^he shm^ oath which his foreman took. But the
Iesuit^ cannot s^e the wood for trees, ^e cannot see how these particulars are
applied. And therefore he tells us a tale of [A Painter so unskillfull in his
Art, that having p^inted the images of several creatur^^, he wa^ a^^ustomed to
write under every one, what they ware: a^, this is ^^ ^erse, this is a d^gg^.
etc.] Sr I need not write under, that you are a Cocks: etc. to tell such a tale
of a Cock, and a Bull. Like Painter, like Replyer, in wishing that th^^
example had been follo^ed. He that cannot s^^ how this makes against
unwritten Traditions is as senseless as the Painters horse, and in
controversies Asinus ad Lyram. His answer is like to be without understanding,
when he answers to that which he understands not, and in this manner.

[We say with Origin, that in the two Testaments every Reply page 13^
word that appertains to God may be discussed, and all knowledge of things
out of them may be understood, either immediately, or mediately: that is by the
help of unwritten Traditions, unto which the holy Scripture does expressly
send, and direct us.]

It is in vain to call for the weapons of holy Scripture, by them to fight for
unwritten Traditions, seeing you have already received the worst at them. The
holy Scripture does not send us to unwritten Traditions to learn the knowledge
of God, or of any necessary thing unwritten, Seeing ^^ it every word that
appertains to God may be requ^^^d, and discussed. That which the Scripture
leaves to the Tradition of the Church is either the delivery of Rituall
Traditions unwritten, or the explanation of Doctrinall Traditions written in
the Scripture. And suppose the two Testaments did send us unto Doctrinall
Traditions unwritten, yet to say, [They are Scripture, and no third Scripture,
because the Scripture sends us unto them.] Is as true, as if I should say;
The Pismire is Scripture, and yet no third Scripture, because the Scripture
does Prove. 6. 6.
send us unto the Pismire. And to say, that all things may be required, and
discussed in the two testam^nts, [Because they send us for help unto unwritten
Traditions.] Is as if I should say, The gold that is acquired, and refined in
the I^dies may be acquired, and refined in Spain^; because Spain sends for
gold unto the I^dies. The gold, says Aurum, quod ^ueri^ extra Templum, non est
sanctificatum: Sic omnis qui suerit extra divinam Scripturam (quamvis
admirabilis videatur qu^busdam) nonest ^nctus. Orig. ^om. 25. in M^tth:
Origin, which was not in the Temple, was not holy: so that, that is not in the
Scripture (let it appear never so glorious unto some) is not holy. Unwritten
Traditions are not in Scripture; and therefore (though they be glorious things
in your eyes) they are not holy. That of Origin, which the Jesuit alleges
concerning the baptising of Children (that it is a Tradition from the Apostles)
is Sect. 4. divis: 11.
formerly answered.

Hippolytus the Martyr in his third Homily against the Heresy of Noetus. There
is one God, whom we do not otherwise Answer.
acknowledge but out of the holy Scriptures. For as he that would profess the
wisdom of this world, cannot otherwise attain hereunto unless he read the
doctrine of the Philosophers: s^ whosoever of us will exercise piety toward
God, cannot learn this elsewhere, but out of the holy Scriptures. etc.

[All this runs upon the same strain with that which Reply page 13^
you even now produced out of Origin: and therefore as you repeat the same, so
we return you the same Answer. And withal we desire you with this holy
Martyr to understand whatsoever the Scriptures do teach. For they teach you to
hold such Traditions as the Apostles gave, whether by writing or by word. They
teach you to hearken unto the Church.]

4. Hippolytus here takes the same oath with Origin, and both give their
verdict against unwritte^ Traditions. This is the same strain upon which they
run. His answer unto that of Origin is already confuted, and if this be the
same, (as indeed it is no wiser then the former, but threed-bare, and worn out
at the elbowes) I need not again confute it. It cannot fit with the words of
this holy Martyr; for as it were ridiculous to say, The wisdom of this world
may be attained unto by reading the doctrine of the Philosophers: and then to
interpret this, Not immediately by reading their writings; but mediatly by going
to the living Philosophers: So it is as absurd to say, Our piety toward God
may be learned out of the holy Scripture; and then to interpret this, not
immediately out of the Scriptures themselves; but mediatly by going to the
Church. Yea it is more absurd, because the writings of the Philosophers are not
so well able to make a man wise for the world, as the Scriptures are to make a
man wise unto salvation. The scriptures teach us to ^^ld such traditions as the
Apostles gave: but they taught the same doctrines both by Scripture, and by
word of mouth. This makes nothing for Popish Traditions, such the Apostles
never gave by writing, or by word of mouth. They teach us to hearken unto the
Church, when the doctrine of the Church is consonant with the doctrine of the
Scriptures: and not to hearken unto the Church when it tea^heth otherwise. Ien
^3. 16.
Thus says the Lord of hosts, Hearken not unto the words of the Prophets that
prophesi^ unto you, and teach you vanity* they speak the vision of their own
heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord.

Athanasius in his ^ratian against the Gentiles: The holy ^ Answer.
Scriptures given by inspiration of God, are of themselves sufficient for the
discovery of Truth.

5. This is an evident testimony directly opposite to the position of our
Adversaries, which they have learned from condemned Heretics, Iren. l. 3. c.
2.
That truth cannot be found out of the Scriptures by them that are ignorant of
Traditions. And yet the Jesuit painteth this likewise with false colors,
answering,

[First the Scriptures discover this truth, That we must Reply p. 139.
^old fast unwritten Traditions.]

We have often discovered this to be an untruth: and for the better discovery of
it we will observe one thing more from the force of the Greek word, (...),
which Athanasius uses. (...) signifies not a mediate sufficiency, as if the
Scriptures were sufficient for the discovery of truth, because they send us to
the Church: nor such a sufficiency as needs any other help, as if the
Scriptures were sufficient for the discovery of truth, by having the help of
unwritten Traditions joined with them: but as Lambine in his notes upon
Aristotle's Ethickes observes, Plur^bus ver^ ^is haec vox (...), cui nulla
respondet Latina est de claranda. Est autem (...), is qui ^^s bonis contentur,
satisque copiose instructus est, quique nullas externas opes desiderat. Lamb.
in Arislot. Ethic. ^^. c. 7.
This word (...) must be expressed by more words, for there is no one Latin
word that can fully declare it. He is (...), that is, con^ent with his own
store, and is furnished with enough, and with abundant, and desiteth no other
help^. It is such a self^-sufficienci^ as is in the heavenly Kingdom, of which
Theophylact says, (...). Theophyl in Ioh. 18.
It is sufficient, and needs nothing. Such then is the fullness, and the
selfe-sufficiencie of the holy Scripture, that it has store in it self, it is
fully furnished, yea so abundantly, that it needs not the help of unwritten
Traditions to discover any truth.

[Athanasius here speaks not of all Truth, but of Two special Reply p. 130.
points of faith only, to wit. That Idols are not Gods, and that Christ is the
only true God: concerning which two articles, he wrote th^se two books to
Maearius. And for the discovery of those two points, the holy Father says,
that the Scriptures are sufficient.]

As in these two books to Macari^s he wrote of these two points, and also of
many other points; (for in the first he wrote of the deity of the Father, of
the immortality of the soul, etc. And in the second, of Christ's manhood, his
incarnation, death, resurrection etc.) So here he speaks not only of those
two points, but of all truth in general, that The Scriptures are sufficient
for the discovery of truth. And therefore in his Tractate of Christ's
incar^ation, he taxes them of great i^^desti^ which speak^ the things which
are no^ written.

[Athanasius in that pla^e makes mention, not only of the Reply p. 13^.
holy Scriptures, but also of the books of holy Fathers: and to both does he
attribute this sufficiency, forasmuch as a man by reading of those books may
discover the true sense and meaning of the Scripture.]

This is not the true sense and meaning of this Father. In the words following
though he makes mention of the books of the Fathers, yet he never intended
to impart any part of this sufficiency unto them, or to make them equal with
Scripture, as you do with Traditions: but he declares that they are good
co^men^aries, or helps for the understanding of the holy Scriptures. His words
are these, There are also many books of the holy Fathers, in which if a ^an
employ himself, he may in some sort a^taine unto the interpretution of the
Scripture. It is one thing to say, that by reading of the books of the Fathers
a man may in some sort attain unto the interpretation of Scripture, and an
other to teach that the books of the Fathers are to be compared with the
Scripture. If the Jesuit would say no more of unwritten Traditions, then
Athanasius says of the books of the Fathers, then the co^troversy were ended;
for you see he brings not the commentary into the Text, but distinguishes
between the co^mentary and the Text: you make no difference between the one and
the other, but make the interpretation Page 124.
as authentical as the Text, even as S. John's Gospel. He attributes unto the
scriptures the sufficiency to discover al truth to be learned, and to the
Fathers the interpretation of Scripture, as an help that the same truth may be
more easily learned: you attribute to the Scriptures a sufficiency only to
teach some truths, not all truths which are to be learned; and teach that those
truths must be taught by unwritten Traditions. Unwritten Traditions are not
therefore only interpretations of Scripture, but even additions to it. In the
last place he objecteth out of Athanasius in this manner.

[Athanasius disputing against the Arians, did most frequently Reply p. 119.
beat them down with the authority of the Church, and of unwritten
Traditions. Yea he thought it Athanas. Epist. ad Epicte^.
sufficient for their confutation, to tell them without any more ado, that
their Doctrine was not agreeable to that of the Catholick^ Church, nor yet was
held by the Fathers of former ages.]

I think it sufficient for your confutation to tell you, Op^rtet mendacem esse
memorem. You told us even now in your second Answer, That the Scripture was
sufficient for the discovery of two truths, whereof one was this, That Christ
is truly God. Did not the Arian^ deny this article of faith? And yet now you
tell us, That the Arians could not be everthrowne but only by the help of
unwritten Traditions. Sir, where was your memory when you wrote this?

Yet for your more full confutation I tell you, that in the same Epistle he
says, The f^^th confirmed in the Nicen Council (at which he was present)
according to the Scriptures, was sufficient to beat down the Arian Heresy.
And in an other place he declares his mind, saying: Athanas in Exhort. ad
monach.
Let us think that the well ordered Canon is sufficient to attain the
knowledge of God. And not only by the Scriptures, but likewise by the
authority, and Tradition of the Church (that is, the succession of the truth of
this doctrine) does he confute them. Now, good Sr Wiseakers tell me in your
wisdom; If this holy Father had only used the Tradition of the Church, and
not the authority of the Scriptures, to beat down the Arian Heresy, would it
follow, that he could not beat it down by the Scriptures? Does the use of one
means exclude the possibility of the other? Because now we are beating down
unwritten Traditions by the Fathers, have we not, or can we not therefore beat
them down by the Scripture? Seeing the Arians held such a wicked and manifestly
perverse a doctrine, therefore says this holy Father it is sufficient to tell
them etc. so we think it sufficient for confutation of unwritten Doctrines, to
tell you, This Doctrine is not agreeable to that of the Catholic Church, nor
yet was held by the Fathers of former ages; so far are we from condemning the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church, that by it we condemn this new Doctrine of
unwritten Traditions.

[Againe, Idem de decret. Synod. Nic. cont. ^useb.
Let the Arians answer me if they can, where do Reply p. ^4^.
they fiade in the Scriptures this solemn word, and by what reason do they
hold God to be unbegotten? Behold we have evident demonstrations that this our
Doctrine was delivered by Traditions from hand to hand by the Fathers.]

We confess with Athanasius, that the words unbegotten, or ^oessentiall, are
no^ written. but yet the Doctrine signifi^d by these words (as we have Sect. 4.
Divis. 1^.
formerly showed) is written in other words Is the doctrine unwritten, because
the word is unwritten? And is the Doctrine not taught in Scripture, because it
was preserved in the Church* and delivered by Tradition from hand to hand ^
Athanasius shall answer for us. (...). Athanas Epistol. de Senten. Dionys con.
Aria^.
Although I cannot find that word in the Scriptures, yet gathering the Doctrine
ou^ of the Scriptures, I know, that he that is the Son, and the Word,
cannot be of an other substance then the Father.

[Lastly, Idem in Epist. ad ubique Orthodox.
The constitutions of the Church, says he, are no novelties lately brought
in: but they were delivered by our first Fathers. Neither did our Faith now
begin, but it descended from our Lord by his Disciples unto us.]

When the Arian persecution was so hot against the Catholics, as that
Athanasius was thrust out of his Bishopric, and an Arian by Simonie purchased
it, then this holy Father wrote this Epistle. This made him complain Reply p.
140.
that the Constitutions of the Church were overthrown, and a new faith set up
by these Intruders. What does this make for unwritten Traditions? If it be,
because the Church has Constitutions; we grant it; but these are nihil ad
rem, no points of faith. If it be, because our Faith descended from the Lord by
his Disciples unto us, we grant this likewise: but what is this? Even the
form of wholesome Doctrine contained in the Scriptures, as it was taught first
by the Disciples of our Lord, and after preached viva voce by the Church. We
plead for the same Faith which was at on^e delivered unto the Saints. We
acknowledge no faith, but that which from Christ by his Disciples is descended
unto us. And we deny that the Church in after ages had any power to coin a
new Article of faith. With you are the Novelties, Traditions of a later
invention, not so old as from the time of Athanasius, nor descended from our
Lord by his Disciples. You have coined many new Articles of faith. What will
you say for your Ecclesiastical Traditions, which you make to be of the same
faith and authority with the written word? By the judgment of Athanasius they
cannot be points of faith, Because our faith descends from the Lord by his
Disciples unto us.

S. Ambrose: S. Ambros. offi l 1 c. 23:
The things which we find not in the Answer.
Scriptures, how can we use them? And again: Idem in virgin. instit. c. 11.
I read that he is the first, I read that he is not the second, they who say
he is the second, let them show it by reading.

[S. Ambrose instructing Churchmen how they ought to Reply p. 140.
carry themselves in their conversation, propounds the question, whether they
may use such pleasant and merry jests in their speech as the Philosophers do
commend? Whereunto he answers negatively in these words. The things which we
find not in Scripture how can we use them? In which words he does not condemn
unwritten Traditions, but disalloweth only jests and light talk in
Ecclesiastical persons, whose speech ought to be grave.]

6. If their light talk be condemned, how then can railing accusations and
slanderous speeches (against him that wrote so gravely against you) beseem a
man of your coat? The condemning of merry jests, I confess, does not condemn
unwritten Traditions: but the medium or argument which S. Ambrose uses against
merry jests, is as powerful against unwritten Traditions. Thus his argument is
framed. Whatsoever we find not in Scripture, we are not to use; but I may
assume, unwritten Traditions are no more found in Scripture then merry jests:
And therefore we must not use them. Thus this learned Doctor condemns not
only merry jests: but also whatsoever is not written in the Scriptures. And if
in the things of least moment, as in the form of words, he would not have
Ecclesiastical persons go beyond the limits of the Scripture, how much more
is it unlawful for them to pass the same bounds in the things of greatest
moment, as in points of faith, and doctrines of salvation?

Unto the other sentence of S. Ambrose he returns his Answer in these words.

[We read that unwritten Traditions ought to be received, Reply p. 141.
we read that they ought not to be rejected, they that say they ought to be
rejected, let them show it by reading.]

This counterfeit answer is a silly shift. It is not the voice of Jacob, but of
Esau. He still flies from the Fathers unto Scripture (at which weapon he has
already received the foil) for defense of unwritten Traditions. This
discovers that this great pillar of Popery has no foundation to uphold it in
the Scriptures, or Fathers.

It is well Hilar. l. 3. de Trinit.
says S. Hilary, that thou a^t content with those Answer.
things which are written. And in another place Idem l. 2. ad Constan. Aug
Reply page 141
he commends Constantius the Emperor for desiring the faith to be ordered
only according to th^se things which are written.

[We have often told you, that our Traditions in particular are authorized by
holy Scripture, in as much as it does send us unto the Church to learn them of
her.]

7. A Jesuits affirmation is no confirmation; I confess you have often told us
so, and we see that it is your only answer in all your distresses: but if you
did swear it as often as you tell it, we would not believe you, because your
Traditions are not the Traditions, of which the Scripture speaks: neither is
your Church the Church unto which the Scripture sends us. There is only a
nominall agreement; but a real difference; as between Simon Peter, and Simon
Magus: Judas the Apostle, and Judas the Traitor.

S. Basil, Basil ho. 29 advers. calumn. S. Trinit.
Believe those things which are written; the Answer.
things which are not written, seek not.

[S. Basil disputed against the Arian Heresy, which denied the Godhead of
Christ Jesus: concerning this, says he, Bele^ve Reply page 141
those things which are written, the things which are not written, seek not.
That is, seek not in what manner the Son was begotten of his Father. Do
thou believe that he was begotten? Seek not, how? Where we see that he
speaks only of such things as concern the manner, how the Son was begotten
of the eternal Father. How can you apply this against Tradition? Do you not
observe that this makes more for Traditions, then against them, seeing that S.
Basil ^ere confesses of a point of faith (to wit, that the Son i^ c^^ternall
with the Father) that it cannot be found written.

8. Be it so, that S. Basil, writing of the manner how the Son was begotten
of the Father, says concerning it. The things which are not written seek not.
Yet we may well apply this against unwritten Traditions. He that believes
unwritten doctrines will never say, seek not those things which are not
written. But if any man were too curious in searching after secret things, he
would add this. seek not those things which are not written, nor taught by
unwritten Traditions. Neither would any man rest satisfied with this answer if
he did believe unwritten Traditions; but he might reply, why should I not
seek after this though it be not written? May not this, as well as many other
mysteries, be taught by unwritten Tradition? The Jesuit forgets what he
said before, Page 1^9.
That the Scriptures are sufficient to prove the Godhead of Christ. And that S.
Basil Page: 141.
alleged this text to prove the same, In the beginning was the word. Yea not
remembering his own exposition, That S. Basil speaking of the manner how the
Son was begotten says, seek not that which is not written, he now crosses
all this, and tells us, This makes for unwritten Traditions, seeing that S.
Basil here confesses of a point of faith (that the son is coeternall with the
Father) that it cannot be found written. We know the manner is not written how
the Son was begotten of the Father; we are not able to comprehend that
unspeakeable generation: neither is the manner of it a point of faith. But that
the Son was begotten of the Father, and that he is coeternall with the Father,
this is a point of faith, and written in the Scriptures. Basil de fide,
The Scripture does contain all the knowledge of that infinite D^ity, so far as
such divine Mysteries may be comprehended by an humane nature in this life.
says S. Basil.

Basil de fide.
It is a manifest falling from the faith, and an argument Answer.
of arrogance, either to reject any point of those things which are written, or
to bring in any of those things that are not written.

The Jesuit doubts of that book, which we can prove to be S. Basils: but
seeing upon better consideration he accepts of the book we will spare that
labor, and hear what he answers to the matter.

[S. Ba^ill, and the rest of the Fathers, did hold, that whatsoever was Reply
page 142.
delivered by Apostolical Tradition unwritten, was not absolutely and
altogether out of the holy Scriptures, no more then what the Ambassador
(having letters of credence from the King) does deliver, is out of the said
letters Royal, but is virtually and mediately cont^ined therein.]

We dispute not against Apostolical Traditions; prove yours to be
Apostolical and we will receive them. Is it not strange, that this distinction
of containing things ^^diately, and immediately should be sufficient to answer
all the testimonies of the Fathers (as that the Scripture contains all things
not immediately, but mediately) and yet none of the Fathers would ever expound
their meaning to be so? S. Basil compares the Scripture unto (...), etc.
Basil de virtut. Psalm. in Prolo. ad Psalm.
An Apothecaries shop wherein ali souls may be cured, and from which every man
may take a medicine to heal his disease. Now as it is absurd to say, This
Apothecaries shop contains all medicines for all diseases, because it is
written on the shop door, Go to such a place for them: so it is a senseless
thing to say, the Scripture contains all medicines for the Soul, because it
sends to an other for them. That of the Ambassadors letters of cr^dence is
already Sect 5. Div. 3
answered. And so is that of S. Sect. ^. Div. 2
Basil in commending unwritten Traditions. S. Basil teaches further, Basil: in
Ethicis. Regul. ^6.
That every word and action ought to be confirmed by the testimony of holy
Scripture Answer.
etc. And that it is the property of a faithful man, to be fully persuaded of
the truth of th^se things that are delivered in the holy Scripture, Idem ibid:
reg: ^^. c ^2.
and not to (...) either to reject, or to add any thing thereunto. For if
whatsoever is not of faith be sin, as the Apostle says, and faith is by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God: then whatsoever is without the holy
Scripture, being not of faith, must needs be sin.

These two testimonies the Jesuit passes over in silence.

9. Many other testimonies are produced out of the Fathers by the most reverend
Primate, as that of Gregory Niss^ne, Greg. (...) Dialog. de Anima and Resur:
In that only the truth must be acknowledged, wherein the seal of the
Scriptures test^mony is to be seen. Of S. Hier^ms, Hieron. adv. Helvid.
As we deny not those things which are written; so we refuse those things t^ a^
are not written. That God was borne of a virgin we believe, because we read it:
that Mary did marry after she was delivered we believe not, because we read it
not. With those of Theodoret, Theodor, dial. 2.
I am not so bold, as to a^^irme any thing that the Scripture has pass^d in
silence. Idem in Exodus quaest. 26
It is an idle and a senseless thing, to seek those things that are passed in
silence. These the Jesuit passes not over in silence: but as he is idle and
senseless in seeking after unwritten things: so he makes an idle and
senseless answer in defense of things unwritten.

[These Fathers did always suppose holy Traditions to be Reply p. 143.
virtually contuined in the Scripture, howsoever they be not plainly
expressed in the same.]

We believe the same, that there are many holy doctrines (which are holy
Traditions) which are not plainly expressed word for word in the Scriptures;
and yet we call them doctrinall Traditions written, because they are virtually
cont^ined in the Scriptures, and by sound inference deduced from them. But this
makes nothing for Popish Traditions; they are not holy, but profane: not
written, but unwritten: not plainly expressed, nor virtually contained in the
Scriptures, but only taught and delivered by a Church and that no true Church,
but a false Church. I have heard of a subtle disputant, who would undertake by
three distinctions to avoyde any argument were it never so evident; the Jesuit
goes beyond him, for with this one distinction only of mediate, and immediate
he has answered all the testimonies of these Fathers. The vanity of this
distinction we have often discovered, and now leave it to the judgment of an
understanding Reader.

10. And now the Jesuit contrary to the duty of the Defendant becomes the
Assailant, hudling together a confused number of testimonies for unwritten
Traditions out of the Fathers. But that nothing may escape us without due
examination, we will be content once more to run the wilde-goose chase, and to
hunt him out of every corner.

[The Arians denying that the holy Ghost ought to be worshipped Reply page 143
as God, and with God, alleged that it was no where written in the Scripture.
To that we answer thus: says S. Basil. Basil l. de spir. Sanct. c. 29.
If nothing else that is unwritten be admitted, then let this also be rejected:
but if many mysteries besides this be received of us without writing, then I
pray you, among the rest, let this also be received. For truly I hold it to be
Apostolical doctrine to adhere also unto unwritten Traditions. Amongst which,
this which we now have in hand is not the meanest: for as much as they who in
the beginning did govern all, delivered it unto those that came after them,
and so by use in process of time, and by continual custom it has now taken
strong r^^ting. etc.]

The Jesuit doubted of that Treatise of Basil de fide; there is more cause to
doubt of this book de spiritu sanct^ whether it may not be accounted among the
Postuati. The Author of it speaks of Meletius as if he were dead long before
him, Lib. de Spir. Sanct. c. 19.
They that lived with Meletius say, that he was of this opinion: but what need
I remember the things long past. Yet the true Basil and Meletius were Co^t^ne^;
S. Basil wrote four Basil: epist: 56, 57. 58. 59.
Epistles unto him. Yea S. Basil dyed three years before; for Basil dyed an.
378. and Meletius dyed an. 381. as Baron. Annal Tom. 4.
Baronius observes.

Admitting the Author, we answer to the matter, by distinguishing the doctrine
contained in the fo^me of words, from the form of words it self. This
doctrine, The Holy Ghost is to be worshipped as God, is no unwritten Tradition;
Basil c. 25.
It is agreeable to that which is written in other words. says S. Basil. And he
proves it by the des^ension of the Idem c. 29.
Holy Ghost upon Christ in his baptism. The form of words of which he
disputes, is this; Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, with the holy
Ghost. The question between him and the Heretics was about the syllable Cum,
whether it were lawful to say, Cum spiritu sanct^, and not rather In spiritu
sanct^? And in proof of the lawfullnesse of this form of words he a^^irmeth
this, which the Jesuit alleges, proving it to be lawful, though it be not
written expressly in Scripture, as many other rites, and customs of the
Church are observed though they be not written. This Tradition we willingly
admit, and desire most reverendly to use it in the Lyturgie of our Church. Yea
we allow the decent rites, and orders of the Church, and those are the
Traditions of which S. Basil disputes, namely of Rituall Traditions.

[Listen a little more, and you shall hear him declare, that Reply page 144
Basil. c. 27*
The Doctrines, and Constitutions of the Church, some of them we have out of
the written word, and some others we receive by the secret and hidden Tradition
of the Apostles; and both have equal f^ree unto Godliness: neither can any
man, that has the least sight in the things of the Church, contradict any of
these. For if we go about to reject such customs as are not delivered by
writing, accounting them to be of little force, we shall unawares da^^age the
Gospel very much, and bring the preaching thereof unto a bare name of words.
Neither are we content with such things only, as the Apostles or the Gospel
does express, but we say many things both before consecration, and after, of
great avayle for that Mystery, which we have received by Tradition without
writing.]

What a Bull-head is this? to confound (...), and (...), Constitutions, and
Doctrines, as if they were the same, whereas they differ very much. S. Basil in
the subsequent words distinguishes them, saying; (...). Idem ibid.
Constitution is one thing, Doctrine is another thing. Constitutions are the
rit^^ customs, decrees, or ceremonies of the Church, so (...) is translated a
Luc. ^. 1.
d^cre^: and (...) ^phes. ^. 15^
ordinances. Doctrines are the points of salvation, perpetual and not
changeable, as the Ceremonies are. And in the very words alleged S. Basil
distinguishes them, for he says not, Unwritten Traditions are Gospel; but If
we reject them, and account them of no force, we may da^^age the Gospel, and
bring Preaching to a bare name. We should soon see this, if there were no
Ecclesiastical orders. What kind of prayers, or preaching, or administration
of the Sacraments would there be, if every man might be his own carver in these
things? Surely there would be a Babell of confusion, Quot capita, tot placita.
The Jesuit in favor of his cause corruptly translath S. Basil in this manner.
(...), etc.
The Doctrines and Institutions which are preached in the Church, some of them
we have out of the written word, and some out of the Tradition of the
Apostles. Whereas S. Basil is thus to be translated, The Institutions and
Doctrines which are preserved in the Church, these (that is the Doctrines) we
have out of the written word: those (that is the Institutions) we have by the
Tradition of the Apostles. So that the doctrine of S. Bas^l in this differs
nothing from our doctrine; That the unwritten things, which come by Tradition,
are the rites, ceremonies, or institutions which are preserved in the Church;
(of which sort he reckons these, Signeing with the cross: praying toward
the East: standing in prayer between Easter and Pentecost: thri^e dipping of
the party baptized: a certain form of prayer both before, and after
consecration) These, we confess, are not written, but they all are Rituall
Traditions, and belong not to our controversy. The Doctrines (of which we
dispute) are taken out of the written word; this is the doctrine of S. Ba^il,
to which we su^scribe. There is one thing in that of S. Ba^il which he uttered
unadvisedly, That both the Institutions and Doctrines had equal force unto
Godliness. But we must consider, that S. Ba^il being in the heat of
disputation in defense of these orders of the Church spoke thus (...); but
after being in more cool blood he speaks like himself (...) for having
showed that some things are given by word of mouth, he shows that those were
not necessary things, saying; (...) etc. Idem in R^^ul. contract. can. 1.
Concerning th^se things which are given without writings the Apostle Paul has
given ^^ this rule. All things are lawful, but all things are not expedient.
We deny not the lawful use of Ecclesiastical ordinances: but that they should
be so expedient, as to be of equal force unto Godliness with the written
Doctrines, this is denied not only by us, but even by the wisest Papists
themselves. And in the practice of the Roman Church many of the unwritten
constitutions, of which Basil speaks, are not observed; as, Durand: de ritib.
Eccl. l. 1. cap. 3.
praying standing to the East; and Catech: Romans de Baptis.
The thrice dipping of the party baptized. This omission Bellat. de verbo non
script: l. 4. c. 7.
Bellar^^^^ excuses by distinguishing the observation of them from the first
Institution of them. And if they be not necessary for our observation, how can
they be of equal force unto Godliness.

[At last S. Ba^il concludes thus. Idem ibid,
The day would, fail Reply p. 144.
me, if I should take upon me to number up all the unwritten mysteries of the
Church. I ommit the rest. Only I dema^nd in what written word have we the very
profession of our faith, to bel^eve in the Father, and the Son, and the Holy
Ghost?]

As for the rest we have answered. And for the profession of our faith we
profess this faith, that all the points of faith contained in the Creed are
taught us in the Scriptures. It is the confession of the Jesuit in another
Page 146.
place [As for example, the Creed the Scripture declares plain enough.] Unto
whose confession I might add that of Cyrill, (...), etc. Cyril. Catech. 5^.
The choice things of the whole Scripture being knit together make up the form
of our creed. And that of S. Augustine, Aug. l. 1. ad Catechum: de Symbol.
The words of the Symbol^ are seatte^ed in the Scriptures, and from them
collected into one. So that by the profession of our faith S. Ba^^l does not
mean the Articles of faith contained in the Creed; but that profession, or
manner of reciteing it, which the Church required of those that were baptized,
when they came to the years of discretion: (as we require in confirmation) or
else the whole frame, Syntaxe, and form of words, as they are k^it together in
the Creed. And this, we confess, is not written ver^atim altogether in any one
part of Scripture, but it is taken out of diverse parts of Scripture, and
collected into one form of words.

[Clement of Alexandria upon the words of the Apostle to Reply page 144
the Romans. c. 1. I desire to see you, that I may impart unto you some
spiritual gift for your confirmation. Clem: Alex: Stro: l. 5.
Such gifts a^ these, says Clement, could not be published openly by writing,
being a Tradition, which he desired to deliver unto them being present, and not
by Epistle.]

11. What spiritual gift S. Paul means, he declares in the next verse, Romans
1. 12.
That is, that I may be comforted together with you, by our mutual faith.
Comfort was that spiritual gift which he desired to impart unto them, and to
receive from them: and this could not be done so well by writing, as by mutual
speech and conference. It was not to teach any unknown unwritten doctrine unto
them, for that he might have delivered unto Phebe, (the bearer of his Epistle)
and she unto them. Yea Paul professes of them, that they were already Romans 15.
14.
filled with all knowledge. What Paul desired to impart unto them, he desired
to receive the same from them: but I hope, you will not say, that Paul desired
to be taught any unwritten Tradition by them.

[Eusebius also tells us, Eusebius. ^ 1. de demo^str. Evang. c. ^.
That the Disciples of our Lord Reply page 14^.
commended unto the faithful such things as they learned of their Master,
partly by writing, and partly without writing. And therefore Idem co^t: Mar^:
Epis^. Ancyran.
The Church from one end of the world unto an other, confirms her doctrine,
by testimo^^es out of the Scriptures, and by unwritten Tradition.]

12. I tell you, that Eusebius, by such things as were delivered without
writing, means not such things as were doctrinall; for he commends (...) in
1. Ti^. 3.
Constantine his good admonitions given to the Council of Nice, (amongst which
Theod^ret relates this for one) Theod^r. l. 1. cap. 7.
Consult only with the Scriptures, which do fully instruct ^^ in such things.
Other things, such as were Rituall, might be commended without writing. Neither
does E^s^bius say, That such things were delivered to the Faithful without
writing: Illis autem qui animas adhuc affectibus obnoxias gerebant,
curationisque indigentes, tradidisse, quae ijs con^enire a^bitrabantur, idque
partim (...), partim sine literis. Eusebius. ibid.
But unto those, whose souls were as yet misled by their affections, and stood
in need of curing, they delivered those things, which they judged fit for them,
partly by writing, partly without writing. Now if they were delivered unto such
as were not perfect, but carried away with the storm of their affections, how
can they be unwritten Traditions.? For according to your Doctrine, unwritten
Traditions, by reason of the dignity of such great mysteries, were not
delivered by the Apostles unto such as were unsound, and wavering; but unto
them that were sound, stayed, perfect, and faithful. It is true, that the
faith was delivered by the Apostles in a diverse manner according to the
capacity of their hearers; Sometimes more accurately, and sometimes more
plainly; Sometimes more briefly, and sometimes more fully: but the same points
of faith were still delivered unto all, both by writing and without writing.

The Jesuit in favor of his cause; falsely translateth that other testimony
of Eusebius. Thus it is to be englished; Ecclesia ex divinis Scripturis
testimoni^, ex non scripta Traditione confirma^.
The Church confirms the testimonies of Scripture by unwritten Tradition.

Howsoever it be translated, it makes no more for unwritten Traditions, then
it does for the writings of the Fathers, and of the Heathen themselves, because
the Church confirms her doctrine by the testimonies of the Fathers, and
likewise of the Heathen. This inference is as sound; S. Paul* confirmed his
doctrine by the testimonies of Heathen Poets, and so the Church confirms her
doctrine by the writings of the Heathens, therefore those Poets, and those
heathenish writings are the word of God, and are to be compared with the
written Word; this inference ((...)) is as ^ound as this, The Church confirms
the testimonies of Scripture by unwritten Tradition; or the Church confirms
her doctrine by unwritten Tradition, therefore unwritten Traditions are as sure
as Scripture, and are to be compared with it. The proof is not always to be
compared with the thing proved. In this present controversy (as in all others)
we make use of the writings of the Fathers, and of other helps; yet we give
the honor of the day unto the Scriptures, they must make the onset; they are
infallible, and are sufficient for the final determination of all questions of
faith. yet the field being fought, and the enemy vanquished, ex
superabundanti, we make use of the Tradition of the Church, of the writings of
the Fathers, and of other helps rather ad pompam, then ad pugnam, for our
greater glory, and your greater confusion.

[S. Epiphanius. Epiphan. haeres 69.
The Father is uncreate, and unbegotten: Reply page 145
but where is this saying written? So the word Coessentiall, or Consubstantiall
is not written. And Idem. haeres. 75.
God has taught us both by Holy Scripture, and also by Tradition.]

13. In the stateing of this Question we allowed unto the Church the delivery
of wholesome words according to the Doctrine contained in the Scripture; So
that we dispute not against unwritten words, but against unwritten Doctrines.
And though these words, Unbegotten, Coessentiall, etc. are not written, yet
the Doctrine signified by them is written in other words, as we have Sect. 4.
Divis. 12.
formerly declared. This is a doctrine taught us both by holy Scripture, and by
Tradition. By Tradition, that is, by the preaching of Gods word, by which (we
confess) God teaches us, and not by writing only. This only concerns
^^dum tradend^, the manner of delivery; but the Question is de re tradi^a, of
the matter delivered, whether God by Tradition has taught us any unwritten
Doctrines?

The Jesuit plays ^ack on both sides, now again^ he leaves his assayling us
by the Fathers, and returns again to answer the Fathers objected against
him, like a tired lade he desires to ^hange his pace, and yet is neither good
at trot, or amble. The holy Scripture, Answer.
says S. Cyril. l. 7. cont. lu^an:
Cyrill of Alexandria, is sufficient to make them which are brought up in it
wise, and most approved, and furnished with sufficient understanding. And
^gaine, That which the holy Scripture has not said, by what means should we
receive and account it among those things that be true?

[S. Cyrill, as the rest of the Fathers, under the Reply page 145
name of Scripture comprehend^th always unwritten Traditions.]

14. Surely the Seas made his brains adle, he went far to suck a Bull, and
here is a Bull indeed. He may as well s^^, by a man is meant a bull, or under a
man is comprehended a bull, as to say, under Scripture the Faibers always
comprehended unwritten Traditions. Tradition is often taken for Scripture, but
the Scripture is never taken for unwritten Traditions: they are as like as
light and darkness. This is as good nonsense, as the Roman Catholic Church.
And this, says he, appears by [Cyrils exhortarion, Cyril. ho. ^. Heortast.
Lay up in the inward closet of thy heart the Tradition of the Church, as a
certain Treasure, lay hold on such actions as are acceptable unto God.] Call
you this an evident proof? It is an evident proof that your assertion is
false, seeing you can bring no better a proof for it. Here is no mention of
Scripture, nor of Traditions, nor of unwritten, how then does this prove, that
under Scripture Cyrill comprehends unwritten Traditions? I know the word
Tradition may be taken for Scripture: but under Scripture to comprehend
unwritten Traditions, is as usual with the Fathers, as truth is with the
Jesuit.

In Theodoret we meet with these kind of speeches. Theodor. dialog. 1.
By the Answer.
Scripture alone am I persuaded: Idem in Genes. q 45.
we ought not to seek those things which are passed in silence; but rest in
the things which are written.

[Vnwritten Traditions are not passed in silence by the Reply page 145.
Scripture, neither ^ought you to gainsay them, if you will be persuaded by the
Scripture. And truly we may not doubt of the meaning of Theodoret, if we note
well what he records in his History: to wit, that the Fathers of the Nicen
Council condemned the Arians by unwritten Tradition.]

15. As unwritten Traditions are not Scripture, so they are not contained in
Scripture. I confess the Scripture does not pass them in silence, no more
then it does Iuda^, but it is to condemn them. The Scripture does contain
some Traditions, such are written Traditions; and such was the Tradition
established in the Council of Nice, against which the Arians disputed. This
Jesuit has gathered his basket of scraps from Bellarmines full table, out of
whom he might have learned to cite the place, as well as the words. The words
are these Theodor. l. 1. c. 1.
By unwritten words (yet some books read it, by written words) pio^sly
understood they were condemned. It is not material how we read it, either by
written words, or by unwritten words, for our Question is not of unwritten
words, but of unwritten Doctrines. The unwritten words were Coessentiall, or
Consubstantiall; which words though they are not written letter for letter in
Scripture; yet the Doctrine signified by those words is written in other words
as we have often showed, and once more will make it appear. Athanasius was one
of the Nic^n^ Council, and the words cited out of Theodoret, are taken out of
Athanas in Epistol. ad Afros.
Athanasius, and yet the Jesuit has page: 119.
formerly declared unto us the judgment of this holy Father, That the
Scriptures are sufficient for the discovery of this truth, that Christ is God.
So that by the opinion of this holy Father, the Arians might be condemned by
Scripture, as well as by unwritten words; the words being unwritten, and yet
the doctrine written. Theodoret in the same Chapter cited by the Jesuit adds
this out of Athanasi^^, that they of that famous Council, Gathered testimonies
out of the Scriptures, and by them condemned the Arians. Add unto this the
grave oration which the great and learned Emperor Cons^antine made in that
Council, in which he concludes with this exhortation, unto which they all
yielded, (...). Theodor. l. 1. c 7.
Let us resolve the things in question by the divine Scriptures.

In those things, says S. August. de doct. Christian. l. ^. c. 9. Reply page
146.
Augustine, which are plainly laid down^ in the Scriptures, all those things
are found which appert^ine to faith and direction of life.

[Can you infer therefore that Traditions are not necessary? Answer.
and may you not infer also that therefore your Doctrines deduced by sound
inferences are as needless? S. Augustine speaks in this place not of all and
every point in particular; but only of such points as are generally necessary
for every one to know, as the Creed, the ten Commandments, and the like.]

16. Unwritten Traditions and sound inferences differ as much as truth and
error; sound Inferences are plainly, though not expressly word for word
contained in the Scriptures: but for unwritten Traditions there is neither
plain nor express warrant in them. You declare S. Augustines meaning contrary
to his mind; he speaks of all things, you of some things appertaining to
all persons: he speaks of the Scripture, that in some places it is plain,
in other places obscure, you of points of faith, which are necessary for some,
but no^ for every one to know: he says in the plain places all things that
appertain to faith are l^ide down, you say, all plain points of faith are
laid down in Scripture. Is there not a plain difference between your
interpretation, and S. Augustines text? We know that there are some things
necessary, and some things not necessary to be known. Whosoever will be saved,
says Athanasius in his Creed (which is sung in your Church) it is necessary
that he hold the Cutholicks faith. Other things there are which are not
necessary. Athanas. ad. Scrap.
We must know that God i^, and that be is a rewarder: but how, we need not
know, says the same Father. And S. Augustine (writing of the Question, how the
soul becomes tainted with original^ sin) says, Credo eti^m divinorum
^loq^oru^ claris^im^ authorit^^ esset, si ^o^o ill^^ sine dispendio promiss^
saluti^ ignorare ^on poss^^. August. l. ^. de peccat. merit. c. ultimo
I believe that the Scriptur^^ would ^ikewise declare this plainly, if it were
a thing of which a man could not be ignorant without the less of salva^i^^.
But this doctrine was never known to S. Augustine, neither do we receive it,
That there should be paints of faith which are necessary for all, and those
should be contained in the Scriptures; and that there are points of faith not
necessary for all, but only for some, and those should not be laid down in
the Scripture. ^phes. 4. 5:
There is one Lord, one faith, one baptism. As one Lord of Priest and people,
and one baptism for all, so but one faith for all; even an Verse 1^.
unity of faith for Pasters, Teachers, and for the Saints. How can this faith
be Catholic, if the same faith be not necessary for all? his only answer
must be this, That unwritten Traditions are no part of the Catholic faith,
and that they are not generally necessary for all to know, if they were they
would be found among those things which are plainly laid down in Scripture.
Vna fide^, quia unum and idem creditur a ^unctis fidelibus, unde
catholicadi^tur. Aquin. in Ephesians. 4.
There is one faith, says Aquinas, because one and the same thing is believed
of all the faithful; and therefore it is ^alled Catholick^. There is no
specificall, but only a graduall difference between the faith and knowledge
required of the Priest and of the people: and the Scripture makes both the man
of God, and a godly man perfect, and thoroughly furnished to every good work.
This answer of the Jesuit is not unlike that answer made by a Chaplia of
Bishop B^^ners, unto the Martyr Ha^kes, Fox his Acts. page 1586.
That the Scriptures are sufficient for salvation, but not for instruction. And
I answer as the Martyr did, God send ^e the salvation, and you the
instruction. If in the things plainly laid down in Scripture all things are
found which are generally necessary for every one to know; why then do you
teach, That it is not found in S^ripture, that the page 116* page 118.
Father is unb^g^tt^n: that the S^nne is ^onsubst an^iall with the Father; and
that the Holy Ghest is to be ^^^red and w^rshipped ^^ page 143.
God: Are not these things generally necessary for all to know?

Again, August. l. de Pastor. c. 11.
Whatsoever you he are from the holy Scriptures, Answer.
let that savor well unto you; whats^ever is without them, re^^se, l^st you
wander in a cloud.

[Your meaning was not sure to hurt as by these saying^ Reply p. 14^.
of S. Augustine, seeing you bring them to so little purpose: for S. Augustine
was so far from thinking the Traditions of the Church to be without
Scripture, that he assu^eth ^^ to ^^ (...) ^^try truth of Scripture, when we
do that which ^^ pl^^sing to the Church.]

17. It is true, our meaning is not to ^urt you, but to (...) your madness, if
it may be healed; if not, it is to little purpose for your benefit. It is no
wonder to see this ^^ly Jesuit wander in a ^^ud, embrac^ing a cloud in stead
of ^nno, following after an Igui^ fat^u^ for the light of Gods Word, forsaking
the beaten pathe of Gods Commandments, to follow the doubtful track of
humane Traditions, not refusing those things which are not written.

It is the duty of the Church to teach no unwritten ^o^trinall Traditions, but
only to teach such Doctrines as the Scripture teaches her: and as long as the
Church performs her duty, so long the Scripture wills us to hear her. But
what if any Church (though once never so famous) fail in her duty, and hold
untruthes against the Scripture, do we then hold the truth of the Scripture
when we do that which now pleases such a Church? In this thing, says S.
Augustine, we hold the tr^eth of the Scripture, when we do that which now
pleases the universal Church. He says not In all things, but in this thing:
and this thing was no unwritten, but a w^itten Doctrine: to wit, the Doctrine
of ^^baptisation established by the Church out of the Scripture. He says,
which now pleas^th; he says not, which Always pleas^th the Church. S.
Augustine speaks of the Universal Church; but the Jesuit of the Roman
Church, for no Church else holds unwritten Traditions.

And in an other place: August. epist^ 4 ^.
All those things which in times Answer.
past our A^^cestors have mentioned to be done toward mankind, and have
delivered unto us all those things also which we see, and do deliver unto our
^osterity, so fa^r^ as they apportain^ to the seeking and maintaining of true
Religion, the holy Scriptures have not passed in silence*

[He pauseth not where you break off his sp^^^h, but proce^deth Reply p. 147.
to declare that be treated only of Prophecies, and Predictions, which are all
fulfilled according as they are laid down in the Scriptures. And could you
wrong S. Augustine so unconscionably, as to teach, that has therefore al^wed ^^
thing to appertain to the seeking and maintaining of tru^ Religion, but what
the holy Scripture has not passed in s^l^^e?]

18. The former part of S. Augustines words, Th^se things which our A^^cestors
in times past have mantianed to be done toward mankind, may be understood of
Prophecies and Predictions: but the latter part, All th^se things also which we
see and do declare unto our posterity etc. can by no means be so understood;
for S. Augustine was no Prophet, neither are we Prophets to deliver
predictions to the posterity to come; but as it was his, so it is our office to
declare the writings of the Prophets, and Apostles, and to deliver the
doctrines contained in them. And although we were Prophets to deliver
Predictions of our own, yet how can we say, The Scripture has not passed
them in silence? We hate those Anabaptistical Revelations, and all your
Papisticall Traditions; and we desire to follow the practice of S. Augustine,
not To deliver unto others those things ^^ points of Religion, which the
Scripture has passed in silence.

19. And thus we have discovered the silly shifts, and gross dunsery of an
ignorant Jesuit in answering of the Fathers, who (for all his tampering with
them) will not be persuaded to alter their verdict; but find him, and all such
Tradition-mongers, guilty of treason, for coining new Articles of faith, such
as have not the seal of the living God, namely the authority of holy Scripture
to make them current in the Church. And as the petty Jury have given their
verdict against them, so the grand Jury (consisting of 318. Fathers in the
first general Council of Nice) have condemned them, for in the name of all
the rest E^sehi^^ Pamphili delivers this; Gela^. Cy^icon: Act. Conc. Nic:
part. 2d^. c. 19. as it is cited by the most learned Answerer in his reprinted
Answer.
The things that are not written, neither think upon, nor inquire after.

The Jesuit, knowing full well that his answer to the testimonies of the
Fathers will not give content to an indifferent Reader, (for the truth is they
are ^nanswerable) leaves again his answering, and observing no order or
method, but only heaping up a number of Sayings, he betaketh himself again
to the objecting of the Fathers against us.

[And first for S. Augustine all the world acknowledges Reply page 147
that he stands for our Doctrine; out of whom we will heap a number of
saying^ here together.

20. If by the world you mean (as you do by the Church) the Roman universal
world, I doubt not but you may have witnesses enough to swear it: but what
need we witnesses when we may hear himself speak? You promise an heap, and
a number of his sayings; but I believe by the time that we have sisted your
heap, and cast up your number, we shall find nothing in your heap but
^haffe, and in your number only Ciphers. And I hope every judicious Reader
will prefer those three direct testimonies objected against you before your
Bakers douzen of impertinent testimonies objected against us.

The 1. is against Maximi^^^ the Arian, [where have thou ever read that God the
Father is unbegotten?] To this we have Sent. ^. Di^. ^
for^erly answered, and answer so again, though this form of words, God the
Father is unbeg^tten, be not written; yet the same Doctrine is written in other
words. And our Question is not of unwritten words, but of unwritten Doctrines.

The second is against the D^^atists [Many things are not ^ound in the writings
of the Apostles, but were delivered by them without writing. For whatsoever the
Church does hold, if i^ b^ not ^ound ordained by some Counc^ll, it is believed
to be a Tradition of the Apostles.] This is likewise Sect. 2. Div. ^.
formerly answered, and so we answer again, that many things are not found
expressly written in the writings of the Apostles, and yet by ^ound ins^rence
they may be deduced from those things that are written, and such things we call
written Traditions, because they are all one with those things that be
expressly written. As for example, Whether Children shall be baptized or no? Or
whether the baptized by Heretics shall be rebaptised or no? We read no express
commandment, nor evident practice either way; yet by sound consequence these
points may be determined out of the Scripture. And of this in this testimony S.
Augustine disputes against the D^^atists. Reply page 14^


The third is against the Non-conformists [ Aug: Epist. ^^ ad Casul.
In th^se things whereof the Scripture has delive^^^ (...), the (...) of Gods
people, and the (...) of our A^^^est^r^ are to be held for a law.] In this he
disputes of the rites, customs, or constitutions of the Church, and specially
of the Saturdayes fast; concerning which in the same Epistle ^e gives this
advice. Let the ^aith of the univers^ll Church ^^ one, al^hough the unity of
faith be ^^^nded upon with diverse observations, by the (...) th^^ which is
true in the faith is ^^ way (...). Here he distinguishes these observations of
the Church from ^^th; ^^ith is one, they are diverse: they are not of faith,
but attend upon faith. So that they are to be held for (...), yet not for the
law of faith, which is of divine ^ight, universal, and binds all: but as the
law of man, which is but of humane right, particular to some places like the
Law of G^^all kind, and binds not all like the by-l^wes of a Corporation.

The fourth testimony which he cites out of Augustine I find it in his 118.
Epistle, and it is Sect 2. Div. 6.
formerly answered. [ Aug: ad Inquisit. la^^a^: l. 1. c. 1;
All those things which we hold without writing, only by unwritten Tradition,
were commended, and ordained, either by the Apostles themselves, or by general
Counsels.] All such things are not Doctrinall, but Rituall Traditions: not
points of faith, but orders and constitutions for the Church. This appears
both by the words all^adged, and by the subsequent words in the same Epistle.
We see in the words alleged S. Augustine cannot well tell upon whom to
father such things; but he leaves it doubtful: it may be they were from the
Apostles, and it may be they were ordained first of all by general Co^^^lls.
But all points of faith are elder then the eldest Council. The Jesuit
himself tells us out of A^hanasius, Page 140.
It is not n^w^dayes that our faith received its beginning, but it is derived
from the Lord himself. And Athanasius himself was one of the first general
Council. That of Gerson i^ most c^rtaine, Nec Papa, ne^ generale Concilium
potest facere aliquid esse de side, quod ante, non ^u^t. Gerson. part: 1: de
err. cir^a p^aecept. Non Occides.
Neither the P^p^, ^or any general Council can make that to be a point of
faith, which was not so before. And in the words immediately following S.
Augustine declares what such things were as were delivered without writing, As
the Passion, re^^^rection, and ascens^^^ of our Lord, and the desc^nsion of the
holy Ghost are y^^rely solemnly celebrated. These Feast^ put us in mind of
greater things, but the Feasts themselves a^^ to be accounted but as rites; and
ordinances belonging to the Church.

The fif^ is against the Do^atists, and it is like wise Sect. 4. Div. ^
formerly answered. [The Apostles have not comman^ded any thing in this poin^,
but that custom^ which was opposed unto Cyprian, must be held to have taken its
original from their Tradition.] The point of rebaptization is the point of
which he disp^teth, concerning which we often declared the judgment of S.
Augustin^ to be this, that the Apostles expressly commanded nothing in this
point, and yet that this point may be determined by sound inference out of the
holy Scripture.

The sixth is this [He would not believe the Gospel it self, but that the
authority of the Church moved him.] The sum of our former Sect. ^. Div. 2
answer unto this is this. S. Augustine spoke this of the time when he was a
Manichee, but after his conversion he makes a better confession. He speaks
of the primitive Church, not of the now Roman Church. That power which he
ascribes unto the Church is to be a mover to persuade us to believe: not to be
a lawgiver to coin Articles of our belief.

The 7th is likewise Sect. 4. Div. 8
answered. [Although we have no certain example hereof out of Scripture, yet
we hold the truth of the Scripture in this thing, when we do that which now
pleases the universal Church.] The Example which is sought for, is an example
how those were received when they returned to the Church who were baptized by
Heretics, whether they were rebaptised or no? We confess the Scripture
gives no example how they were received; but none can infer, because the
Scripture contains not an example in this point, therefore it contains not
the Doctrine of this point.

The 8th is likewise Sect: 2. Div. ^
formerly answered. [This neither thou nor I can fi^de plainly, and evidently
in the Scripture.] This is against the D^natists in the same point; and I
return the same answer. This, that is, an example of this how they were
received into the Church that were baptized by the Heretics, neither thou nor
I can find in Scripture. Yea we confess the point of Doctrine is not written
plainly, evidently, and expressly, word for word; but by sound consequence it
is deduced from the Scripture.

And now let the understanding Reader judge of the reason that moved the
Jesuit to object all those testimoni^s which were formerly answered; surely it
was only to make his promise good, to heap up a number without any regard of
their nature. He mustereth his testimoni^s, as some Captains, when their
companies are not full, muster their Soldiers, presenting some of them three
or four times over.

The 9th is this. [ Aug. l. ^. cont. Crese. ^.
I receive not that which Cyprian held, because Reply p. 14^.
it is not received by the Church.] And I receive not that which is held by the
Jesuit, because it is not received by S. Augustine. Do I therefore hold
unwritten Traditions? Cyprian held rebaptization: Augustine held the contrary,
and confuteth him by the authority of the Church: but does the use of one
means exclude the power of another? Because he confuted him by the authority
of the Church, could he not therefore confute him by the authority of
Scripture? Cyprian would have this question to be tried by the Scripture;
Cyp^ian. epist 74. ad Pomp^ium.
whence, says he, is this Tradition? Is is descended from the authority of
our Lord, and the Gospel, or does it come from the Acts or Epistles of the
Apostles? And a little after, Let us go to the fountain, to the Evangelicall
and Apostolical Tradition. This is so evident that Bellarmine confesses,
Bellar de verbo non script. l. 4. c. 8.
He speaks of the Scripture. And S. Augustine approves of his admonition Aug.
de bapt. cont. Donat. l. 5. c. 26.
That which Cyprian admonishes us, That we should have recourse to the
fountain, to wit, to the Apostolical Tradition, that is best, and ought to be
done. So that in S. Augustines judgment this point may be determined by the
Scriptures. He accounted the testimony of the Church one good means, but the
testimony of the Scripture the best means, to judge it by.

The 10th is this. [ Aug. in Psalm. 57.
The truth surely harbors in the belly Reply p. 148.
of the Church.] The truth is, while Christ is the head and husband of the
Church truth must needs harbor in the belly of that Church: but if Antichrist
become the head and husband of a Church truth cannot harbor in the belly of
that Church. The man of sin, the Son of perdition, does set as God in the
Roman Church which was once ^ The ^. These. 1. 4.
temple of God. He equalizeth all his Decrees, and his Cathedral voice with
the voice of God sounding in the Scriptures. She was along while like a woman
sick of a timpany, or some swelling disease, and at length brought forth a
monster, Nec Deus es, nec homo, quasi nevter es inter utru^que Clemen: proem:
in Glos.
Neither God, nor man, but a nevter between both. And this monster is the
Father of this monstrous doctrine of unwritten Traditions.

The 11th follows. [ Aug. epist. 56
The whole height of authority, and light of reason for the reparation of
mankind, consists Reply.
only in the saving name of Christ, and in his one only Church.] As we give
unto God the things which are Gods, so to the Church the power belonging to
her; that is, the supreme power and absolute authority unto God^* and under
God a subordinate power and ministerial authorit^^ unto the Church. And this
is all which S. Augustin^ means.

He adds the 12th [ Aug: cont. Faus^: Manich: l. 11. c. 2.
Thou see of how great forc^ in Reply p. 149.
th^^ matter the authority of the Catholic Church is, which by the orderly
succession of Bishops, from the most assured soa^^ of the Apostles unto these
our days, and by the consent of so many nations and people is confirmed.] As
in all things we give due respect unto the authority of the Catholic
Church, so likewise we do in this point, of which S. Augustine speaks, which
is of the truth of holy Scripture, that it is the word of God. We confess, the
authority of the Catholic Church is of great f^rce to confirm our faith in
believing which is the Scripture, and what is the true meaning of it: yet her
authority extends not it self so far, as to add unwritten Traditions to
the Scripture, or to give any other interpretation of the Scriptures then is
contained in them. Her authority is one means, but no^ the only means, to
confirm this point; for in the same place S. Augustine shows that there are
other means likewise, as Searching into other copies of the Scripture, and
comparing the copies with the original. And yet this is nothing to the Roman
Church, it is not the Catholic Church: in it there is no orderly succession;
if there be, it is not from the most assured seats of the Apostles, but from a
doubtful seat of an Apostle: in it the consent of nations and people is not to
be heard, but only the voice of the Pope is to be regarded.

And to make up his Bakers douzen he concludes with this.

[ Aug. cont. Iul: Pelag. l. 2. cap. 1.
It is necessary that all Christian people prefer the judgment Reply page 149
and testimonies of holy Fathers before your Novelties, and choose rather to
adheare unto them, then unto you.] I should but slander you with an action of
truth, if I should say, Popery is a Novelty: Unwritten Traditions are
novelties. We have ever preferred the testimonies and judgments of holy
Fathers before such Novelties, and if we will adheare unto them, we cannot
adheare unto unwritten Traditions. You prefer Novelties before the judgments
and testimonies of the holy Fathers. The Popes Cathedral voice is preferred
before the judgments and testimonies of all Councels, and holy Fathers, and
this is a Noveltie never heard of until it was hatched of late (no^ much above
an 100. years since) in the Lateran Council. Melch: Canus Ioc: theolog. l. ^.
c. 5.
In general Councels, says a flatterer of the Pope, matters are not to be
judged by the number of suffrages, but by the weight. Pondus autem dat summi
Pontific is authoritas. but the authority of the Pope makes up the weight. So
that among the Fathers, and in Counsels, he has not only a negative voice,
to stop that which they conclude, but even a divine voice far transcendent
above them all. As Pharaohs lean kine eat up the fat, so has he eaten up the
authority of Church, and Fathers. And as Jack Cad^ would have all written law
banished that the law might proceed out of his mouth, even so deals the Pope.

Thus we have sifted your ^eap^ and find it but chafe, and cast up your
number and find it nothing but ciphers. The testimonies are weapons whereby
Heretics and Schismatics, such as deny the true doctrine of the Church, may
be wounded and put to flight: but unto us, who defend S. Augustines doctrine,
they are defensive, and not offensive. And if dropping of testimonies out of S.
Augustine might bear away the bell, I dare hazard the game upon it to drop
three for one: but I dare not take that liberty unto my self (as the Jesuit
does) to be both Respondent, and Opponent, least I should be censured for
gresling from the right rule of answering: wherefore I tie my self to answer
those testimonies which follow.

[ Chrysol. ser. ^5.
S. Peter Chrysologus. A Christian mind knows not Reply p. 149.
how to dispute against such things as are strengthened by the Tradition of the
Fathers.]

21. The same Christian mind is in us, for we dispute not against such things.
Chrysologus his sermon was upon that text of S. John, Ioh. ^ 1.
There was a Feast of the Jews. This gave him occasion to discourse of holy
days, and specially of such fistivall days as were strengthened by the
tradition of the Fathers, and long continuance. These we account as ordinances
of the Church, and give that respect unto them as is due; but we dare not give
them that authority which belongs to the word of God, as to be points of
Reply p. 149.
faith, or necessary doctrines.

[S. Leo affirms, Leo sermon ^
That true learning does acknowledge, and piety does embrace that, which
Tradition has long since d^creed, and custom has established. Leo de Iejun
Pentecost.
Neither is it to be doubted but whatsoever is observed by the Christian
people comm^th by divine Tradition.]

22. In both these places Leo writes of Rituall Traditions, as of set days of
fasting; concerning which we confess wi^h S. Augustine, ^^ceptum esse
Iejunium; q^^bus autem diebus non oporte^ ^ejunare and q^b^^o porte^, praece,
to Domini vel Apostolor^m no^n^enio de (...) Aug. c^^st ^^. ad Casul.
Th^^ the duty of fasting is comman. ded; but on what days we must fast, and
when we must not fast, we find not this determined by pr^cept of the Lord, nor
of his Ap^stl^s. What then shall we d^^ in this case? May we conte^^e the
ob^ervance of a^y fasting day? No, for if we live in such a place, where such
days are by tradition decreed, and by custom established, it is our duty to
obey authority in such a case. Remembering always to distinguish these customs
(as Leo there calls them) from Gods commandments. And if Leo spoke any thing
hyperbolically concerning such Rituall Traditions, we do excuse him because
having taken upon him to defend them, he strained his wits to find out
arguments to commend them. He makes no difference between Divine and
Apostolical Traditions, and wholly takes away all Eccle^iastical Traditions;
whereby he overthrows that known division of Traditions into Divine,
Apostolical, and Ecclesiastical, our Adversaries have need to excuse him in
this.

The two subsequent testimonies (the one of Chrys^stome, the other of
Epiphantus) being Chryso^^. Sect 3. Divis. a^ Epiphan. Sect. 2. Divis. ^1.
already answered, I proceed to that which he objecteth out of Epiphanius,
concerning the custom of praying for the dead at the time of administration of
the divine mysteries. [ Epiphan h^res. 76. It is haeres. 7^.
The Reply p. 149.
Church performs this necessarily, having received it by Tradition from the
Fathers: and who may dissolve the ordinance of his mother, or the Law of his
Father? God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost has t^ught both in the
Scriptures, and without writing and the Church our mother has inviolable
statutes laid up in her, which may not be broken.]

23. The m^aning of Epiphanius in this place is most evidently declared by the
most learned Prim^te in his page 23^.
Answer. Such prayers for the dead as were generally used by the Primitive
Church, want not the testimony of the Scripture to consirme the lawfulnes of
the^. As S. Paul prayed for O^esiph^rus while he was alive, so may we pray for
him being dead, 2. Tim. 1. 18.
The Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day. But
such prayers as are used by our Adversaries for the dead, are not war^anted by
Scri^ture, nor by the Tradition of the Church. Not by Scriptures, because this
is one of their unwritte^ Traditions. Not by the Tradition of the Church,
because the Primitive Church denied Purgat^rie, and yet held Prayer for the
dead: but our Adversaries hold, Aquinas contgent. l. 4. c 91.
That if Purgat^ry be not admitted, prayer for the dead is unprofitable. I need
not light my candle to give light to this truth, for the light of this truth
shines as bright as the Sun in the Answer to this Article. The doctrine how
the dead may be prayed for, differs from the practice in praying for them at
such a time, namely at the administering of the sacred mysteries; Epiphanius
writes of the latter of these, and for not observing of this ordinance of the
Church, he condemns Aerius in the words alleged, The Church does perform
this, having received it by Tradition from the Fathers, and who may dissolve,
(...), the ordinance of his mother? As we have Sect. 4. Divis. 10.
showed formerly, so here we see it again, this practice (to pray for the dead
at such a time) is placed by Epiphanius among the ordinances of the Church, and
of this nature are all those things which he says, were delivered and taught
without writing. These are not the Traditions against which we bend our forces.

[Cassiodorus also reads this less^n, Cassiod. Insti^ divin l. 1
Let us not doubt to Reply page 150.
mount up into the height of the Scriptures by the approved exposition of the
Fathers, as it were by a certain ladder of Jacobs vision.]

24. We have ascended so high upon the ladder of the Fathers approved
expositions, that we descry the falsehood of your Traditions. This ladder, says
Cassiodorus, should bring us to the sight of our Lord. But behold the Pope
sits on the top of this ladder, to over-turne all the expositions of the
Fathers, but only such as are approved by him; yea all the Fathers, and the
Scripture too has he put under his feet. So that whatsoever exposition he
gives of Scripture, Though it cross the sense the Fathers gave, yet, says
Cus^n. ad ^o (...) epist 7.
Cus^nus, it must be believed, because the sense runs with the practice, and
the Scriptures follow the Church, and not the Church the Scripture. Reply p.
150.


[S. Basil persuades thus, Basil. h^^. co^^. (...).
Let the Tradition of our Lord terrify thee. Our Lord himself has given this
less^n, the Apostles have preached it, the Fathers have observed it, and the
Martyrs have confirmed it.]

25. That the holy Ghost is God, this is the point which S. Basil prooveth. And
lest thou should separate the holy Ghost from the Father and the Son, says
he, let the Tradition of our Lord terrify thee. etc. This should terrify the
Jesuit to sin against the holy Ghost, in holding it is not written, that the
holy Ghost is God. Our Lord himself had given this less^n, John. 14. 26. The
Apostles have preached it, and written it, 1. John 5. 7. S. Basil observes it
in the words precedent by the form of Baptism, which is laid down, Math.
28. 19. And all Gods Saints are ready to confirm it with their blood. He is an
Arch-haereticke, and deserves the stake rather then an answer, that accou^teth
it no written doctrine.

In the end he concludes with the sayings of Basil. epist 61
Basil, and of Hormisd. epist. 67.
Hormisda applied unto us, that we [condemne the Doctrine of the Fathers;
despise Apostolical Traditions; sell the inventions of upstarts: have none of
that Charity which is commended; are so puffed up with ^rrogancie, that we
imagine that all judgment of Heaven and earth ought to yield to our opinion,
that worldly wisdom detesting the glory of Christ his Cross, domine^reth in
the first and chiefest place.]

26. S. Paul describes the worst of men that ever were or shall be by these
properties, ^. Tim. 3. 3.
They are false accusers, intemperate, fierce, despisers of them that are good,
Traitors etc. These are the proper marks of Jesuits, they are always false
accusers: and therefore it is no wonder that this detracting, standering, and
carping Mo^us should accuse us thus falsely. Nero set Rome on fire, and laid
the blame upon the Christians: your selves are guilty of these things, and yet
lay them to our charge. This Domineering is in the first and chiefest place:
the Church of Rome challenges this pri^acie and principality above all
places. The judgment of Heaven and earth, namely the Tradition of the
Apostles, (which is contained in the Scripture) and the doctrine of the
Fathers, must y^eld to her opinion. This deformed Church, not unlike a
toad-stoole, all head, no body, (for the Hervae^ de potest, Pap^. c. 23.
Pope, says Harvie, virtually is the whole Church) is so swollen up with
arrogance, that whatsoever interpretation he gives of Scripture, though it
cross the sense which the Fathers gave, yet it must be believed, if we will
believe Cusan epist. 7.
Cusanus. And whosoever is absolved by the Pope from Gods Law, he is safe
enough with God, if we will credit Bodin. de Rep. ^. 1. c. ^.
Bodin. The touling of Bells, the sight of relics, the forgivenes of sins,
Masses for the dead, are some of the rotten wares sold by these
soule-marchants; Is not this to sell the Inventions of ups^arts? And from your
Charity good Lord deliver us.

Thus, gentle Reader, thou have heard the verdict of the Jury, the senseless
exceptions which the Jesuit has taken against them, all that he can say for
himself answered and confuted; and now take upon thee the office of a Judge:
consider, consult, and give thy sentence as God shall direct thee.

SECT. VII. Of the original of unwritten Traditions.
1. THE contrariety or diversity of any Doctrine from the Doctrine of the
Apostles is sufficient, as Tertul. p^aescript. advers. haere^ c. 12.
Tertuslian held for the confutation of it. We have showed, that the Doctrine
of unwritten Traditions does either cross the verity of the Scriptures, and so
they are contra legem: or else they cross the perf^ction of them, and so are
prater legem. To find out the original of all Heresies is as difficult a thing,
as to find out the head of Nilus, Hic labor, hoc opus est: and yet for the more
full discovery of the falsehood of this Doctrine unto your Fatherhood, the
original of it is thus found out.

If now is be demanded in what Popes days the contrary Doctrine was brought
in among Christians: I answer, that if S. Peter were ever Pope, in his days
it was, that some Seducers first labored to bring in will worship into the
Church: against whom S. Paul opposing himself, Coloss. 2. counts it a
sufficient argument to condemn all such inventions, that they were the
commandments and doctrines of men.

[You tell us a tale of a tub, for the Traditions which we Reply page 15^.
^aint^ine, are not commandments and doctrines of men, but delivered unto the
Church by the Apostles.]

2. This is a tale of a tub, that you defend no Traditions but such as were
delivered by the Apostles unto the Church. Will you be content to renounce all
your Ecclesiastical Traditions; and only to cleave unto Apostolical
Traditions? The Scriptures tell tales of your Traditions, and we have
discovered them to be no better then Aesopes fables, or tales of Robin Hood.

[The Apostles words are these, Coloss. 2. ^.
Beware lest any man deceive Reply p. 15^.
you by Philosophy, according to the Tradition of men, according to the
elements of this world, and not according unto Christ: In this place he
treats ^ot of any Traditions which ^e different from the Scriptures, but of
the observation of the Ceremonial law, which he terms the Tradition of men,
because it was now expired by the coming of Christ. By Philosophi^ he does
not mean^ the Philosophical Sciences of the Schools, but the doctrine of such
as were accounted, Sages and wise among the Hebrews. The el^ments are not the
four elements, but the weak elements of the Jewish Religion. He speaks
this, says S. Hieron. Epist. ad Algas. q. 10.
Hiernme, against certain of the Jews, who desired to bring in Jewish
Ceremonies. And again. He sw^lleth with pride, who endeavors to bring in
Jewish Traditions. And thus he presents u^ with a mass of Jewish
Traditions.]

Here is a great cry, but little wool: much a do to little p^^pose about
Philosophy, and the four ^ Elements with this Foolosopher. The sum of all is
this. That here the Apostle speaks of the c^r^moniall law. I confess that
the Apostle se^keth to weane the Colossians from the ceremonial law, and to
win them unto Christ. In presenting you with a mess of Jewish Traditions, we
serve you with your own souce; for this mess of Jewish Ceremonies is served
up, and observed in your Church: you have dug Mose^ out of his grave, and a
great part of your Religion (as a late Reynolds against Heart. page 567.
Writer well observes) consists in Jewish Ceremonies. But this is not the
principal thing against which the Apostle disputes. Bellarmine denies your
exposition, saying, Bellar. de verbo Dei. l. 4. c. 10.
In those places of the new Testament which condemn Traditions, they were such
Tradition^ a^ were contrary to the written word. The Apostle hoar cond^mneth
Traditions, and you say, They are not such as were different from the
Scripture. Bellarmine gives his reason, Because they are never called
Traditions of Moses, or of the Prophets, but Traditions of men: you ^ee; they
are called Traditions of men, and yet say, they were so called, Because the
ceremonies were now expired by the coming of Christ. Bellarmin^, and this
Jesuits do both cite this place of Hi^rom^, the one to prove that those
Traditions were contrary; the other to prove that They differed not from the
Scripture. And thus the Cardinal and the Iesu^te differ in their opinions, and
agree like Harp and Harrow. I approve of Bellarmin^s reason, Traditions of men
cannot be said to be Traditions of God; and though the Ceremonial law was
abolished by the coming of Christ; yet it is not therefore to be called a
Tradition of men. And if that be true, which the Jesuit page 159.
observes out of our English Translations, [Th^^ (...) use the word Tradition
only where the Scripture speaks of certain Traditions of the Jews, partly
frivolous, partly repugnant to the Law of God.] Then the Traditions here
spoken of, must needs be not only different, but also repag^^^^ to the Law
of God; for in this place all our Tra^llations have the word Tradition. That
the Apostle here speaks of Traditions different from the Scriptures, this
does evidently appear by the particular Traditions which he condemns, as
Verse 18. 19.
worshipping of Angels. And touch not, tuste not, handle not. These are Popish
Traditions; they worship Angels in praying to them: and some of them must not
touch fine li^^en: not t^ste flesh: not handle money. These are Traditions of
men, not different from the Scriptures.

And if you had not stinted us to show, In what Popes days unwritten
Traditions were brought in among Christians, we could easily have showed, not
only the Grandfathers of this Doctrine to be Heretics among the Christians;
but also that the S^ducers among the Jews were the great grand Fathers of it.
In a book of theirs called Pirke Aboth, Capitula Patrum, we read thus: God
gave by Moses not only the written Law, but also an unwritten Law. And Peers.
de Tradit eccles. part: 2. asse^. 1.
Peresius cites this out of Rabbi Moses, That God gave unto Moses several
Doctrines by word of mouth, besides the written Law, which Moses delivered to
Joshua, Joshua to the 70. Elders, the 70. Elders to the Prophets, and the
Prophets to the chief of the Synagogues. These Traditions the Apostles
condemned, as I^en. l. 4. e. 25.
Iren^u^ declares, Not the Law of Moses, but the Traditions of the Elders
corrupting the Law of Moses, were condemned by them. These were condemned by
the Prophets, Isa^ 29. 13.
As Doctrines ^f men, even then when the Ceremonial Law was of force. And
these were received in the days of S. Peter, not from the Law of Moses, but
1. Pet. 1. 18;
By the Tradition of the Fathers, namely those Seducers among the Hebrowes.
Neither does S. Hicro^^ in that Epistle cite this t^xt at all, and therefore his
words are here impertinently alleged.

Shortly after them started up other Heretics who taught, Answer.
that Iren. l. 3. c. 2.
the truth could not be found out of the Scriptures by those to whom Tradition
was unknown: for as much as it was not delivered by writing, but by word of
mouth: for which cause S. Paul also should say, we speak wisdom among them
that be perfect. This sticks so close unto the Jesuit, that with all his
idle shifts he cannot shake it off.

^^. He answers ex concessis [Those Heretics were so Reply page 153
mad as to say, that they were wiser then the Apostles themselves etc. How
then can they have any part with us, who ad^it all Apostolical Doctrine?]

3. Are you not likewise told, that All of them did not break forth into that
open impiety? Some of them, and not all of them, were so mad as to say, They
were wiser then the Apostles. And you may be stareing, though not stark
mad. Do you admit all Apostolical Doctrine? Why then do you not admit the
Communion sub utra^ specie? The inconstant Council of Constance saw good
reason to take away the Cup, and to make it a dry Feast, although as the
Council. Constan. Sess 13.
Council confesses, Christ appointed it, and the Primitive Church used it.
This declares that you are as badd as the worst, and as mad as the maddest
Heretics that ever were. How could you do this, to make a new law contrary
to the law given by Christ, observed by the Apostles, and by the Primitive
Church, if in this point ye did not think your selves wiser then the Primitive
Church, then the Apostles, yea then Christ himself? Cardinal Hosius breaks
forth into this impiety, Hosius Confess. Petricovi^^s^ de Tradit. 9^.
That the Church which now is has more revealed unto it, then was revealed
unto the Apostles. And thus, The same mystery of iniquity which wrought in the
forerunners of Antichrist th^^, is discovered in his ministers now.

His second shift is to put the Heretic upon us, [You are in the same
predicament with those Heretics in denying unwritten Tradition.] Whatsoever
can be proved to have been delivered by the Apostles either by writing or by
word of mouth, we deny it not, we willingly receive what soever is truly an
Apostolical Tradition. But (...) nomine, it is you that are in the same
predica^^^^: for we can evidently prove it, and our Council. Constan ses. 13.
Bellarm. l. 4. de Sacram. Lucharist. c. ^4.
Adversaries confess it, that the Church received this written Tradition from
the Apostles, and did likewise observe it, to administer the Cup in the Supper
of the Lord: this Apostolical Tradition delivered both by writing, and by word
of mouth is little counted of by you, and therefore you may take up your
standing among those Heretics, and enter your name in Catalog^ Hareticorum.

His last shift is this, [This holy Father Ir^n^us was accustomed Reply page 153
to urge the Here^^ckes with the Tradition of the Apostles which is preserved
in the Churches by the succession of Priests. And if he were now alive he would
as earnestly ^rge you with the same looly Traditions.]

With what weapons Irenaus fought against the Heretics, we have Sect. 4. Div.
5
already showed. Traditions are either written, or unwritten; unwritten
Traditions were the heretics plea: they spoke disgracefully of the scriptures,
that they were obscure, might be diver sly interpreted, could not be understood
without Traditions, and that Traditions were before them: the same spirit
possesses our Adversaryes, as if those Heretics by some (...) were
transformed into them. Against these Heretics Iren^^^ fought, first by the
Scriptures; then, when they appealed unto Traditions, he fought against them by
the Tradition of the Apostles preserved in the Churches. If Iren^us were alive,
he needed not ^rge i^ against us, we urge it against you, we are now upon
trial by it, we say that we follow the Tradition of the Apostles preserved in
the Churches, that is, the succession of true doctrine in the Churches as it is
contained in the Scriptures. But what is this to Popish Traditions? They are
not from the Apostles, they are not contained in the Scriptures, nor preserved
in the Churches; but only maintained contrary to the Scriptures, and the
Tradition of the Churches, as they were of old by Heretics, so in latter times
by an Antichristian faction.

They confessed indeed (as witnesses Tertullian) Tertul. de pr^scrip^. c. 25.
that the Apostles Answe^.
were ignorant of nothing, and differed not among themselves in their
preaching: but they say, they revealed not all things unto all men; some things
they delivered openly and to all, some things secretly and to a few. Because
that Paul uses this sp^^ch unto Timothy: O Timothy, keep that which is
committed to thy trust. And again; That good thing which was committed unto
thee, keep.

I confess in one thing our Adversaries are not like th^se Heretick^s; they
conf^ssed that the Apostles were ignorant of nothing: but our Adversaries hold
this, That there is more revealed unto the Church which now is, then was
revealed unto the Apostles, as we have heard from Hosius the Cardinal. Setting
aside that part of the testimony, in all things elfe they are as like those
Heretics as if they had been spit out of their mouth: and therefore, lest
their agreement should be discovered, the Jesuit in his wisdom thought it
the best way, not to lay down these words of the Answerer; but only to
return a blind answer unto them.

[It is confessed that Tertullian was a maintainer of unwritten Reply page 154
Traditions. Neither does he find fault with Heretics for maintaining
unwritten Traditions; but only because they ^^aintained such Traditions as
were unknown to the Church, and only known to themselves: and were different
or repugnant to the faith delivered in the Scriptures. As Tertullian ibid.
confesses, That although the Apostles delivered some things to their
domestical friends, as I may call: yet we ^^^sh believe that they did not
deliver such things as should bring in another rule of faith, different, and
repugnant to that which they generally propounded i^ public.]

4. It is confessed, that when Tertullian was an Heretic, then he maintained
unwritten Traditions against the catholic Doctrine: but now, writing against
Heretics, he is a bitter enemy of them, and of unwritten Traditions. Mali
co^vi malum ovum; the Heretics first hatched this brood, and our Adversaries
have reared them. Sect. 2.
Their agreement may be seen in many things. 1. They held that all things were
not delivered, by writing: so does Page 125.
this Jesuit. 2. That th^se things were high Mysteries: so does Page 155.
the Jesuit. 3. That it was unfit those high Mysteries should be written,
^^ast they should (...): so does the Jesuit. 4. They pleaded (...)quity for
their unwritten Traditions; that from the beginning those things were delivered
unto them: so does the Jesuit in every page. 5. They pretended the consent of
Doctrine with the Scriptures, and with the Church, although their Doctrine was
different, and repugnant to the Scriptures, and to the Tradition of the Church,
so does the Jesuit continually brag of their consent with the Scriptures,
and with the Tradition of the Church, and yet we have in many particular
unwritten Traditions showed their contrariety both to the Scriptures, and to
the Tradition of the Church. As therefore Tertullian did not find fault with
those Heretics absolutely for mantaining unwritten Traditions; but because
they defended such Traditions as make up another rule of faith, and were
different, or repugnant to the Scriptures, (as appears by that which the
Jesuit cites out of him) and also for defending Mysteries delivered in secret
(as appears by that which he adds in the same place.) Dominus palam edixit
sine ulla significati^ one taciti sacramenti, ipse praeceperat, si quid in
tenebris and in abscondito audissent, in luce^ and in tectis pr^^dicarent etc.
Ipse docebat luce^am (...) sub modi^ abstru^ lice^^, ^ed in candela^ brum
consti^^^ ut luceat o^nibus qui ^unt in domo. Tertul^ ibid.
The Lord spoke openly and not in hidden Mysteries, he commanded that
whatsoever they had heard in darkness and in secret, they should preach it in
the light and on the housetop. And again, He taught them, it was not lawful
to put a candle under a bushel, but in a candlestick, that it may give light
unto all that are in the house. So we condemn not all unwritten Traditions, we
use some and allow of them, these we account to be ordinances of the Church, to
be Rituall, and not Doctrinall Traditions: but we find fault with you for
defending such Traditions as make up another rule of faith, as that the rule of
faith, necessary for all to know should be contained in the Scriptures, and
that there is another rule of faith necessary for some, but not for all, which
cannot be found in the Scriptures, but is to be learned by unwritten
Traditions; as the Jesuit Page 146.
has taught us. To make the Scripture a rule for some points of faith, and to
make unwritten Traditions a rule for some other points of faith, this is to
bring in another rule of faith. Again we find fault with you (as Tertullian
did with those Heretics) for defending Traditions different, and repugnant,
to the Scriptures, and to the Tredition of the Church; and for maintaining many
hidden Mysteries delivered and kept in tenebris, unknown to the Church of God,
and only made known to the papal faction. Finally we parallel you with those
Heretics in this; they alleged these texts: We speak wisdom among them
that be perfect. O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust. And
again, That good thing which was committed unto thee, keep. The very same
Texts do our Adversaries (as Bellarm: de verb. Dei. l 4. c. 5. and ^.
Bellarmin, and this page: 125. and 158.
Jesuit) usually allege against us even unto the same purpose. To prove the
dignity of many mysteries to be such, that they require silence; and that it is
unmeete they should be opened in the Scriptures which are read to the whole
world, and therefore can only be learned by Answer.
unwritten Traditions, Wherein they consider not, how they make so near an
approach unto the confi^es of some of the ancientest Heretics, that they may
well shake hands together.

[The Jesuits consider well enough that they are out of all Reply p. 155.
danger of approaching unto the confi^es of ancient Heretics, whilst they
follow the approved Doctrine of the ancient Fathers, who constantly avo^ch the
dignity of many mysteries to be such, that they require silence and ought not
to be opened in the Scriptures which are read to the whole world. Does not
Dionys. eccl. Hier: c. 1
Dionysius, the disciple of S. Paul, deliver the some doctrine? Does not Clem:
Stro: l. ^.
Clement of Alexandria, Origtho. 5: in (...).
Origin, Innoc. 1 in epist. 1.
Innocentius the first, deliver the same? S. Basil shall answer for all the
rest, Basil de (...) 27.
The Apostles, and the Fathers, who in the beginning of the Church did
prescribe certain rules and institutions, did preserve the dignity of the
Mysteries by keeping them hidden and in silence etc.]

5. As the Heretics, so the Jesuits, do claim the patronage of the Fathers
in this poin^and yet for this very thing the Fathers did condemn the
Heretics. You may well shake hands with Heretics, in alleging and
commending that work of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, which was at first
alleged by the Heretics, and conde^^ed by the Catholics; (as I have Sect.
^. Div. 2
formerly showed) and it is certain that it was not written by Dionysius, S
Paul's convert, but rather by some notorious Heretic. Your worship wanted your
considering cap, to consider how ne^re in this it self you do approach unto
the confines of an^cient Heretics.

Your second approved Author is not approved in all things, his Stromma^^ are
Aenigma^^, as, Idem. l. ^^ Strom.
That Christ preached but one year. And that the Gentiles were saved by
Philosophy. And that Christ seemed to hunger, and thirst; but did not so
indeed. Yet I think, the Jesuit charge him with an error of which he is
not guilty, for I find no such Doctrine expressly delivered by him, but
rather the contrary, that the Scripture contains many Idem ibid.
deep and unsearchable mysteries.

Origin in that Homily writing upon this Text, (Aaron and his s^nnes shall
cover the sanctuary, and the sons of Kohath shall bear it,) gives this
Allegory, (which is too weak a foundation for this great pillar of Popery) Cum
ple^^s agit ^ i^plet quae mandatur non tamen co^um quae geruntur intelligit
rationem; quid aliud nisi operta and velata sancta sanctorum super humeros
p^^tantur? Id^m: ibid:
When the common people do those things which are commanded, and yet
understand not the reason of the doing of them; what then do they but carry
the sanctuary covered and hidden? He speaks not of any such high mysteries as
are not contained in scripture because of their dignity, as appears by the
special instance which he gives, of standing in prayer, this is no such great
mystery, it is but an indifferent thing, it is allowed by ^a^ 11. 2^.
the Scripture, and yet we read of S. Paul's Act. ^^. ^6.
kneeling in prayer between Easter and Pentecost. All that can be gathered out
of Origin is this, when the common people do that which they are commanded,
and yet understand not the reason of it, (as for example, when they stand in
prayer at such a time, and understand not the reason of it) then they do (as
it were) carry the sanct^^^y, ^^ the holy things covered, and hidden. But what
is all this to unwritten Traditions, which are such great and excellent
mysteries, that neither the thing it self to be done, nor the reason of the
doing of it must be written. We confess the doctrine taught must be fitted to
the capacity of the hearers; Aaron and his sons may be capable of those
things that others are not: but that there are profound Mysteries, and the most
excellent things which are not written, neither ought to be written in the
Scriptures, this is more then the Jesuit (with all his wit) can fish out of
Origin.

Where is the innocence of Innocent the first, if that first Epistle written
ad Decentium be truly his? It is said therein that none of the Apostles, save
Peter only, taught in Italy. And yet the Scripture teaches us that S. Paul
Act. ^^. ^5.
taught at Rome. Neither do we read in that Epistle any thing of high
mysteries unfit to be written; but rather of temporary rites, or rituall
constitutions, not in use in these days, in the Roman Church it self. As of
anointing the sick with oil, Quo non solum sacerdotibus, sed and omnibus
Christianis uti licet in su^ aut suorum necessitate. Idem, ibid.
The which was not only lawful for the Priests to do, but also for all
Christians when themselves or others were in need.

S. Basil had need speak for all the rest, for all the rest say no thing to
the purpose. That book de spiritu Sancto fathered on S. Basil (as we have
Sect. ^. Div. 10
formerly showed) is in the case of the Post-nati. Neither does the Author of
it treat of unwritten Doctrinall Traditions, but only of unwritten Rituall
Traditions. To blind the Reader, the Jesuit translateth the word (...) (used
by that Author) Doctrines; not only contrary to the meaning of the Author,
(who distinguishes between Doctrines and Constitutions, and by (...) means
not Doctrines, but Constitutions) but also contrary to his own rendering of it
by the word Page 1^^. if truly ^igured.
Ordinances, or Decrees. And now S. Basil (supposing him to be the Author)
being in the heat of disputation for these rites and ordinances spoke this
(which the Ies^^^^ alleges) very hyperbolically of them.

Those are all the Fathers which he alleges, to prove the dignity of many
mysteries to be such, that they ought not to be opened in the Scriptures which
are read to the world. Di^nysins his H^emrchi^, Basils book de spiritu Sancto,
and the first Epistle of Innocent the first, with Clement his Str^ma^^ are not
generally received in all things; and for Origin he says no such thing. This
is a thing contrary to the doctrine of the Scripture, and of the Fathers.

Christ says thus of his doctrine, Ioh. 18. 20.
I spoke openly to the world. And in secret have I said nothing. And if he
spoke any thing privately unto his Apostles, yet he commands them to Math.
10. 27.
speak it in the light, and to preach it on the houses. S. Paul likewise
testifies for the Apostles, that they did teach Coloss. 1. ^1.
every man in all wisdom.

S. Chrys^stome on the words of our Savior observes, why he commanded his
Disciples to preach in the light, and on the houses, because he would not have
any thing h^dden or kept in secret. And with him Theophilact agrees, what he
said to them alone, and in one place, that he would have them teach with all
freedom, and with a loud voice, that all might hear. Now if the Apostles did
speak those things in public, and before all, which they learned from Christ
when they were in private, and alone with him, why should not the same things
be written in the Scriptures which are read to the whole world? Silence is
opposed to speaking, as well as unto writing, and the hearing of such things is
more like to bring in the contempt of them then reading, because all cannot
read, but all have ears to hear. Concerning S. Paul's preaching and writing
Nicephor^s observes this; Ea quoque quae secretioris mysteri^, magisque
abstrusa ante^ silentio prae^erierat, postea per sacra scripta sua aut
grandioris ^apientiae verbis accurate, declaravit; aut saltem parabolarum more
ta^qu^m per ^nigma^^ ad^^bravit. Ni^^ph: l. 2 ^4^
Those hidden mysteries, and things more abstruse which formerly he delivered
not by word of mouth, after by his holy writings he evidently declared them
with the deepest words of wisdom; or at least by dark sentences by way of
Parahles shadowed them. And if the Apostles did deliver any divine mysteries of
faith by word of mouth which are not contained in holy writ, how then could
Cyrill teach this? Cyrill Hieroso illuminat: cateches 4. de Spir: Sancto.
We ought not to deliver, ne minimum quidem aliquid, the least thing that can
be, touching the divine mysteries of faith, without the holy Scriptures.
Neither did this doctrine prosper in the days of Prosper, for he says;
Prosp. de vocat Gent:
If the Scriptures speak not, who shall speak? And if any be so bold, as to
speak; who shall believe him? says Aug: hom. 96 in ^oh:
S. Augustine. The time was, when we might have found this in Aquinas delivered
as the doctrine of the Fathers, Non est intel ligendum quod aliqu^ secreta
doctrinae taceantu^ fidelibus parvulis, scorsum docenda majoribus, sed omnibus
fideli proponuntur quae sunt fidei, Aquin, in 16. Ioh lect. 3
We must not understand that there were any secret Doctrines concealed from the
little ones that believed, which were in secret revealed to the great ones: but
all points of faith were propounded before all the faithful. but now his
tongue is clip^, and these words in the late editions (because they cross
them) are crossed out. Where then is the uniforme consent of the Fathers for
your Doctrine? This is not the voice of the Fathers, but of the Heretics, if
you will believe your own Salm^ron, Ex grege Haereticorum nostri seculi quidam
est insignis, Castellio dictus, qui docet, Apostolum reconditio em aliquam
Doctrinam habu isse, quam Scriptis non commendaverit; sed quibusdam perfectis
hominibus eam tradidisse Salmer: in 2. Tim. 3. Tom. 15.
There is a notable Heretic of late days, called Castellio, who teaches,
that the Apostle had a more secret kind of doctrine, which he would not
publish to the world by writing; but delivered it to certain perfect men. If
this be heresy in him, then the same is heresy in you; so that he may well
shake hands with you, and you with the ancient Heretics.

This doctrine is likewise built upon most false propositions.

1. That he greatest mysteries are reserved for Traditions; and the least are
contained in the Scripture: but what grea^er mystery is there then the mystery
of the Trinity? The wonderful union of the two natures in one person, Christ
is declared by the Scripture to be a 1. Tim. ^. 16.
great mystery. So is the mystica^l union of Christ and his Church a ^phes. 5.
32.
great mystery. All unwritten Traditions are but trifles unto these.

2. That the dignity of those mysteries requires silence, least too much
knowledge should bring them into contempt. Trut^ never blusheth, but when it is
concealed. says Nihil veritas crubescit, nisi abscondi Tert. Cont. Valentinian.
Tertullia^. And ignorance, not knowledge, causes pride and contempt. S. Paul
would not have the Romans ignorant of a great mystery, lest they should be
Romans 11. 25.
arr^gant. What made the Athenia^s speak basely of S. Act. 17.
Paul, and of his doctrine, but only their ignorance? When the Apostles spoke,
(...), Act. 2. 11.
the wonderful things of God, ignorance made their hearers floute them for it.
The mysteries of Gods word are not like juggling tricks, which being often seen
and discovered, become contemptible: but rather like the Sun, every day seen,
and yet desired. Aug. epist. ^.
Such is the depth of holy Scripture, says S. Augustine, that if I did study
nothing but it all the days of my life, yet I may still learn more out of it.
How then can the knowledge of those things cause contempt, of which the ripest
understanding can never know enough? And if those things were not to be taught
to the people, which in fact thorough their own foolishness they do
sometimes contemn; th^n surely the Apostles would never have written such
mysteries, as are contained in Scripture; neither would they have preached
Christ crucified both to the Jews, and to the Gentiles, 1. Cor. 1. 2^.
To the jews a stumbling block, and to the Gr^^ians foolis^nes. And as these
positions are false, so their practice is contrary to their own grounds. For
if those great mysteries are not opened in the Scriptures, which ^^^ read to
the whole world; but are locked up under unwritten Traditions, and only the
things of less dignity are opened in the Scriptures; why then are the common
people debarred from reading the Scriptures, and not from unwritten Traditions?
Why do you teach these great mysteries of unwritten Traditions unto them,
seeing they may be sooner brought into contempt by hearing then by reading? The
reason is, because all cannot read, but all have ears to hear. Yea what
authority have you to write those things which the Apostles thought not ^it to
be written? Dionys. Halicarn. l. 1^
Those things, says D^^nysiu^, which all may n^^ see, I think all ^^^uld not
hear them, neither ought they to be written. Wherefore (that hereafter your
practice may not be contrary to your positions) take away your Missals,
Rationals, Rituals, Pontificals, Breviaries, Legends, and the like, from the
eyes of the common people; seeing in these are the greatest mysteries, which by
too much familiarity may be contemned: and allow the Scriptures unto the
common people, seeing the Apostles would not open these mysteries in the
Scriptures which are to be read unto the whole world, lest they should be
contemned.

To shift his neck out of the collar, that he may not be couppled with those
Heretics, he uses this as an other shift.

[Must we shake hands. with Heretics forsooth, if we Reply p. 155.
do but once touch the same texts which they have produced?]

He learned his manners, forsooth; but he has lost his w^^s. Here is a
witless demand; we know the Devil used Mat. 4. 6.
Scripture, and yet we lawfully use the same text. He said to our Savior, Mat.
8. 29.
What have I to do with thee? And yet our Savior used the same words to his
mother. Ioh. 2. 4.
What have ^ to do with th^^? Heretics will range th^rough the Scripture,
and so must we: but we say, you may well shake hands with those Heretics,
when you make use of the same texts for the same purpose for which they were
condemned. The Jesuit denies the fact [Those Heretics did reject such
Traditions a^ the Catholic Church did then maintain. And they brought in
such Traditions as they of themselves found out, teaching against the nature of
Christ, and the like.] In this likewise you may be paralleled with those
Heretics, for re^ecting such written Traditions as the Catholic Church did
then maintain, as the giving of the Cup, the reading of the Scripture, the
perfection of the Scripture, and the like. And also for bringing in unwritten
Traditions of your own invention, which from the beginning were not, and yet
are fathered on the Apostles by you. And though in the particular Haresies
defended by those Heretics you may differ from them, yet in the general
tenent, you may well shake hands together, as long as with those Heretics you
defend, The dignity of many mysteries to be such, that it is unmeet they should
be opened in the Scriptures; And that the Apostles had a more secret kind of
doctrine, which they would not lay down in their writings, but delivered it by
word of mouth unto perfect men; that so under the color and pretense of
unwritten Traditions you may say what you will, as against the nature of
Christ's body, that it may be in 10000. places at once, and yet this pillar of
Popery shall uphold it, whatsoever it be that you teach.

The Jesuit having entered his name in Catalogo H^reticorum, he takes much
pains to little purpose, to find out our name therein. [What can you say for
your self, when you Reply p. 164.
allege not only the same Text which ancient Heretics alleged, but also
directly in the same sense? When S. Augustine urged Maximinus the Arian with
unwritten Traditions, he received this Answer from him, Aug. l. 1. cont. Max.
These sayings which are not in Scripture, may not be received of us, seeing
our Lord warning us, does say; Without cause do they worship me, t^^ching for
Doctrines the commandments of men^^ and is not this selfsame text the first
which you in like manner produce against un^ritten Traditions?]

6. S. Augustine did not urge Maximinus with unwritten Traditions; they
disputed of unwritten sayings, not of unwritten, but of a written doctrine, and
by unwritten sayings he urged him. Wherefore we say for our selves, it is a
directlye, for directly in the same sense we allege it not. We allege it
against unwritten Doctrines, not against unwritten sayings, as that Arian did:
and we receive unwritten sayings which are not in Scripture, although we
refuse to receive unwritten Doctrines. This is a verbal argument taken ^
verbis ad res. How can it be in the s^^^ sens^ and against the same truth, when
we receiu^ both the saying, and the Doctrine rejected by that Arian.

[Irenaus and Tertullian do openly make it known, that the Valentinians,
Gnostics, and Mareionits condemned unwritten Reply page 156
Traditions. Hilarie, Epiphanius, and Augustine do testify the same of the
Arians. S. Basil of the Eunomians. The Donatists pleaded only for Scripture,
denying the authority of the Church, and of Traditions: and yet S. Augustine
still pursued them with unwritten Traditions.]

7. In all this the Jesuit harpeth upon three strings. 1. That the Heretics
did plead only for Scripture. 2. That they rejected unwritten Traditions. 3.
That the Fathers pursued them by unwritten Traditions.


To the first I answer; suppose it were so, that the Heretics did plead only
for Scripture, are they therefore Heretics that do the same? What then shall
we say of the Fathers, who were as earnest to try all controversies by the
Scripture, as the Heretics were? This makes men Heretics, says S.
Augustine, Non quod Scripturas non contemnunt, sed quod eas non intelligunt
Aug. Epist. 222.
Not because they fly to the Scriptures, but because they understand them not.
The Fathers did not condemn the Heretics for appealing unto Scripture, but
(as we ha^^ showed out of Irenaeus and Tertullian) for speaking disgracefully
of it; that truth could not be known out of Scripture by them that were
ignorant of Tradition, because all things were not delivered in Scripture.
Theodo^et sets forth the practice of the Heretics in this manner, S. vides
ni petitise Scripturis demonstrationibus stultitiam suam constringinum
Scripturae recusant and scopum, and usum. Si quando vero putart nudum aliquod
effatum a genuina recisum Orationis seen ad suum propositum, accommodant ^uis
confirmandis. Theodor in opusc. cont vanas haeres.
Whenever they saw that their folly was discovered by demonstration taken out
of the Scriptures, then they denied the scope and the use of Scripture. And if
at any time they thought, that there was any bare saying, which being severed
from the (...) meaning, might serv^ for their turn, that they made use of to
confirm their opinions. Yet whenever they appealed unto Scripture, the
Fathers accepted of the challenge; and ^ought with them at those weapons.
Lapidando^ esse Haereticos Scripturarum argume^tis. Athan. Orat. co^t. Ar^an.
They accounted the Scriptures to be the touchstone of truth, Heretics are t^
^e stoned with the arguments of Scripture. says Athanasi^^, Sicut sal^at^r
v^rbo doctrinae suae silentium imposuit Sadduc^ is: sic ^aeient Christi
imitatores ex^mplis S^rit turarum, quibus oportet secundum sanam doctrinam
omnem vo^em abm^^es ere h^raonis Origin. tract. 23. in Mat.
As our Savior by the word of his Doctrine put the Sadduces to silence: so
must we by the examples of Scripture, if we will be the f^llowers of Christ, by
the which, according unto sound Doctrine we ought to stop the mouth of every
proud Phara^h, says Origin. S. Augustine did not reject the appeal of the
Donatists unto Scripture, as if it were cora^ non Iudice; but commends it as
the best way: as appears by his Answer unto Aug. l. 5. contra Donat. c. 2^
Cyprians appeal in the same point unto the same Judge, and by his several
Answers to the Donatists themselves; Sunt libri dominici, quorum
authoritatiutrique consentimus; ibi quae^anius ecclesiam, ibi discutiam^s
causam nostram Id^^ de unitat. ^cles. cap. 3.
There are the books of the Lord, unto whose authority we both submit; in
them let u^ seek for the Church, by them let us examine our cause, And again
in his sixth Chapter, Read this out of the Law, out of the Prophets, out of
the Psalms, cut of the Gospels, and Epistles, read it, and we will believe
it. The hope of prolonging the controversies, of tiring the Orthodoxe, this
moved the Heretics to appeal to the Scriptures, that so the sentence might
not finally pass against them; as if the Jesuit, being questioned before an
inferior Judge for his Religion, should appe^le unto his Majesty to gain
time thereby. And as we see some men that love trouble, appealing from Court
to Court to vex their Adversaries, though their cause be never so bad. S.
Paul Act. ^5. ^^
appealed unto Caesar, so did his enemies; was Caesar therefore no sufficient
Judge? In like manner as the Fathers appealed unto Scripture, so did the
Heretics; Is therefore this practice evil? Or is the Scripture therefore no
sufficient Judge? The more do appeal unto it, the more witnesses there are of
the sufficiency of it. Origin gives this reason, why the Tempter used
Scripture, Origin. (...) 3. in Luc.
Because if he had spoken without book, his words could have had no
authority. You may as well say, that we learned this doctrine from the Devil,
as from Heretics. It is a truth which the Fathers have taught, which the
Heretics acknowledged, and the Devil believes it, and he is worse then an
Heretic, then the Devil, that will deny it.

To the second I answer: As all Heretics rejected not Traditions, so all that
reject Traditions, are not Heretics. Traditions are either written or
unwritten; they rejected some written Traditions, and those were points of
faith, else they could not be Heretics: but all poinis of faith necessary for
all to know (as the page ^4^.
Jesuit has confessed) are expressed in the Scripture. He names the
Valentinians, Guosticks, and Marcionites; and these taught against the nature
of Christ, and against the resurrection, and the like, as he confesses. Again
the Arians, and the Ennomians, and they taught against the Deity of Christ,
and of the holy Ghost. And for the Donatists they taught against the uniti^ of
Bap^ism^. All these we have proved to be written Traditions rejected by these
Heretics. As for unwritre^ Traditions, doctrines not taught in Scripture, but
delivered by word of mouth, they rejected them not; they laid the foundation,
and upon their foundation you have built this pillar of your Religion, this
tower and fort of your salvation. This is not only discovered by Irenae^^ and
Tertullian, but likewise I may add S. Augustine, who declares this to be the
practice of all Heretics; Aug. tract. 97. in Ioh.
All of the most foolish Heretics use to color their bold fictions with this
saying, I have yet many things to say unto you. And this very text the Jesuit
page 119.
likewise uses to the same purpose to color this bold fiction of unwritten
Traditions therewith. Thus the Heretics, yea omnes insipientissimi Haere^i^i,
if you will believe S. Augustine agreed in urgeing unwritten Traditions. And
yet the Jesuit says, they agreed in rejecting unwritten Traditions.

To the third, [That the Fathers pursued those Heretics by unwritten
Traditions.] I answer. If a man be to dispute against an Heathen, it is in
va^e to press him by the authority of Scripture, which he denies. Many of the
Fathers disputed against Heretics that did sapere cum Ethnicis, as Tertullian
Tertul. de resurrect cain,
affirms, and would not be trye^ by the Scriptures: but reje^ted them as
counterfeit, as imp^rfect, and liable to various interpretations, as Ire^^us
h^th recorded their actions; to d^pute against such by the Scriptures, would be
but labor lost. Cyrill teach^th us how to deal with such, Contra co^ qui
^eri^ta non admittun^, pug^ato a^^ is non scriptis, ex solis ratiocinationibus
and demonstrationibus. Cyril H^erosol. catech^s. 18.
Fight against such as deny the Scriptures by unwritten weapons, only by
strong reasons, and demonstrations. Thus Cyrill in the same place, prooveth the
Resurrection of the Body by the renewing of the Moon: as S. Paul proves it by
1. Cor. 15.
the springing of the Corn. The same Apostle makes use of Heathen Poets, as
of Epim^nides, Tit. 1.
Arati^, and Act. 17.
Menander. And so the Fathers made use of all kind of learning, by unwritten
arguments, they proved written Do^trines against such as denied the written
word. And when the Heretics appealed from Scripture to unwritten Traditions,
they pur^ued them by the true Tradition of the Church, which was and is the
same with that which * 1. Cor. 15.
is contained in the Scripture. This is nothing for unwritten Doctrin^s; it
only concerns modum probandi, not rem probat^m. The thing proved may be
written, although the m^dium, or argumentum whereby it is proved, be not
written.

[What enemies those famous Heretics Nestorius, Euty^hes, Reply p. ^^7^
and Dioschorus were unto unwritten Traditions, is discovered by Basil Bishop
of Anc^ra. S. Bernard tells us the same ^le of certuine Heretics of his time
called Apostolicks: who were followed herein by Wickless^, as Thomas Waldensis
does recount, and by the Hussites, as Cocklaus bears witness: and from these
Bellarmine says truly, the P^otestants did receive their opinion. And this is
your Pedigree.]

x. We receive not our opinion from man, but find our doctrine delivered in
the Scriptures, and from time to time confirmed by the preaching and writings
of the Fathers. As for Basil Bishop of Ancira, he was an idolater, and one of
that second conventicle at Nice, wherein by unwritten Traditions, idolatry was
established: so that his testimony is little worth. Those famous Heretics
Nostorius, Entyches, and Dioschorus, were not condemned for denying unwritten
Traditions, but for opposing written Doctrines. Although Bernard lived in a
declining age, yet he defends no unwritten Traditions against the
Apostolicks; but being urged by them, to show where in the Gospel this is
written. He accepts of their Appeal to the Gospel, prosecuteth them in
their appeal, and examineth the cause by the Scripture. Be^^ard. ^erm. 65. in
Ca^^ic.
Evangelium appellasts? Ad Evangelium ibis. Have th^^ appealed unto the
Gospel? To the Gospel thou shall go. Wickliffe defends no heretical
Doctrine, but the doctrine of the Primitive Church, as Thomas Waldensis
relates it, Quod nulli quidquam in materi^ fidei debent defini^e, nisi ad hoc
habent authoritatem Scripturae Tho. Wald. l. 2. Doct. ^id. antiq. c. 19
That none ought to determine any thing in a point of faith, without the
authority of Scripture. If this make Wickliffe an Heretic, what then will
you say of Thomas Waldensis himself, who says as much, if not more against
the authority of the Roman Church? Idem ibid.
In the doubts of faith we must inquire what the Apostles taught. And if any
shall ask, who shall declare what the Apostles taught? He answers, Not the
African Church, as Donatus said: Not the Roman Church, (as the Jesuit will
say) but the universal Church; not as gathered in a general Synod, (which
^ft has erred) but the Catholic Church of Christ dispersed over the world.
Where then was the Popes Cathedral voice? This Doctrine was not then hatched,
that whatsoever power is extensive in the whole Church, the same is intensive
in the Pope. And that it must be a thing taken pro Concesso, that i^
determining doubts of faith, the Pope cannot err. Huss opposed the errors of
the Church of Rome, and therefore it is no new thing to hear his enemies
speak evil of him, and of his adherents. Finally, the Jesuit concludes with
a rotten lie, that our pedigree is from those rotten Heretics. It is a Brute
raised by a Brute, as true as the tale of the Britanes from Brute.

S. Chrysostom in like manner gives this for a mark of Answer.
Antichrist, and of all spiritual thieves: that they come not in by the door
of the Scriptures. Chrysostom. (...) in Ioh. 10*
For the Scripture (says he) like unto a sure door, does bar an entrance
unto Heretics, safeguarding us in all things that we will, and not suffering
us to be deceived. Whereupon he concludes, That who so uses not the
Scriptures, but comes in otherwise, that is, betaketh himself to an other,
and an unlawful way, he is a th^efe.

To this the Jesuit retnrneth no answer, he durst not touch it; it discovers
him to be a spiritual thief, and a minister of Antichrist; and that things
unwritten are an other way, and therefore an unlawful way.

How this mystery of iniquity wrought when Antichrist Answer.
came unto his full growth, was well observed by the author of the book de
unitate Ecclesiae (thought by some to be Waltram Bishop of Na^mburg) who
speaking of the Monks that for the upholding of Pope Hildebrands faction,
brought in Schisms, and heresies into the Church, notes this specially of
them; lib de unitat: Eccles:
that despising the Tradition of God, they desired other doctrines, and brought
in maisteries of humane institution.

[Waltram his invective against Pope Hildebrand is to no Reply page 157
purpose at all, it was written above a thousand years after the beginning of
the Church, and it is but the calumny of Schismatics against a man, whose
sanctiti^ and miraculous life is commended by many Anton S. 21. Lamb Scha^h.
Onuphrius etc
writers.]

9. Is it to no purpose because it was written above a thousand years after
Christ? Can the writers of the 1. 2^. or 3^. age declare what was done in the
6. 7. or 8. age? To what purpose do you allege writers not so ancient, as
Bernard, Thomas Waldensis; and some but of yesterdayes birth, as Cochlaus, and
Bellarmine? Neither can it be an invective, or calumny of Schismatics, seeing
it is backed with the testimonies of S. Benedict, Benedict. in Regulae*
That the Abb^t ought to teach nothing which is without the precept of the
Lord. Of S. Authonie, Athanas in vita ^^^on
The Scriptures are suffi^^^nt for doctrine. And of S. Ba^il, Basil. in Regul.
brevior.
It is fit, that every one should learn out of the holy Scripture that which
is for his use; both for his full settlement in Godlin^sse, and that he may not
be accustomed unto human^ Traditions. Were these men likewise Schi^matickes? If
not, why do you make no answer at al^ unto their testimonies? You only ^ell
us, that Hildebrand was a man of sanctity, and of a mi^^culous life. And to
prove t^^s you allege the favorers of his faction, and the ^a^^^^ers of the
papal dignity: yet such was the open impiety of this Hildebrand, or brand of
h^ll, (who set the whole world on fire) that those authors (cited by you) have
published it to the world. Antoninus re^ateth his confession of his sinful
life on his deathbed, V^lde pe^cavi in Pastoralicura, and s^adente D^abolo
contra ^manum genn^ iram and od^u^n concitatari Anton ibid
I have sinn^d exceedingly in my Pastoral care, and the Devil persuading me I
have kindled anger and hatred against mankind^. Lambertus confesses, that
Lambert. schaph. in hist: an 107^.
the Clergy called him an Her^^icke. And that the world spoke foully of ^im
about his dealing with Math^^dis, who left her husband, and prostrated her
self so unto him, Idem in hist: an ^077.
Quod die ac no^te impudenter Papa in ejus ^oluturetur amplexibus. Onu^hrius
relates that which all men know, Onuph in vita Gr^gor ^
He was the first Pope that ever excommunicated the Emperor, took away his
Crown, and gave it to another. If any man desire to hear^ the ^anctity and
miraculous li^^ of this Hild^brand (or Gregory the 7th) commended by many
writers, let him read the 5^ Chapter of that De Christ. Eccles. success: and
staru page 104.
unanswerable work long sin^^ published by the most learned Primate. In the
R^man fa^^ion t^ings are thus decreed; All Jesuits shall be in^hrald to their
General: all Generals to the Pope: this Pope has decreed it, Con^ l. ^dit^
Binij^ ^o^. 3. part. ^.
The Pope may absolve subjects from their ^idelity unto heretical. Kings. By
the judgment of the Pope. our gracious Lord and King (whom the Lord long
preserve from such d^sloyall Loyolists) is of the heretical Religion. Let the
world judge, if such a man, as defends the sanc^ity of this Pope (who deposed
the Emperor, and gave away his Crown to another) be fit^ to live within his
Majesty's Kingdoms.

Mark here the difference betwixt the Monks of S. Basil, Answer.
and Pope Hildebrands br^eding. The Novices of the former were t^ay^ed in the
Scriptures, to the end they might not be accustomed unto humane Traditions:
those of the ^atter were kept back^ from the study of the Scriptures, that they
might be accustomed unto humane Traditions. For this, by the foresaid author,
is expressly noted of those Hildebrandine Monks, that they lib. de vnitas.
Eccles.
permitted not young men in their Monasteries to study this saving knowledge: to
the end that their rude wit might be ^ourished with the husk^s of Devils, which
are the customs of humane Traditions, that b^ing accustomed to such filth,
they might not taste how swe^te the Lord was. And thus in the times following,
from Monks to Friars, and from them to secular Priests and Prelates, as it
were by Traditi^n from hand to hand, the like ungo^ly policy was continued, of
keeping the common people from the knowledge of the Scriptures, as for other
reasons, so likewise that by this means they might be drawn to humane
Traditions. which was not only observed by Erasm. in e^nar. in 1. Psalm.
Erasm^^, before ever Luther stirred against the Pope: but openly in a manner
conf^ssed afterward by a bitter adversary of his.

To all this the Jesuit likewise replyeth nothing.

Petrus Suitor, a Car^husi in Monk^, who, among other inconveniences Answer.
for which he would have the people debarred from reading the Scripture,
alleges this also for one. S^tor de tra. Bibl c. 22.
Whereas many things are openly taught to be observed, which are not expressly
to be had in the Scriptures: will not the simple people observing these things,
quickly ^urmure, and complain that so great burdens should be imposed upon
them, whereby the liberty of the Gospel is so greatly impa^red? Will they not
also be drawn away from the observation of the o^dinances of the Church, when
they shall observe that they are not cont^ined in the law of Christ?

Thus Suitor has cut out the doctrine of the Church of Rom^ after the new
fashion, and stitched together the practice, in debarring the common people
from reading of the Scriptures, with the reason of it, least they should see
that the Traditions of the Church ^ not in the law of Christ.

[Neither ^ this observation of Sut^r be disliked.] Reply p. 157.


10. How do you like this, that many things are taught to be observed, which
are not expressly to be had in the Scriptures? And again that by reading of
the Scriptures, the common people will see, that the Traditions of the Church
are not contained in the law of Christ? How unlike is this to your usual
answer, That the Scripture expressly commands, and commends the use of
Traditions? And that they are not out of the Scriptures, not passed in silence;
but virtually contained in them, in that the Scriptures send us to the Church,
and the Church unto unwritten Traditions. Thus Suitor the Monk, and this
Jesuit differ in their opinions: the Monk thinks, the Traditions, or
ordinances of the Church are not in Scripture; the Jesuit answers, that they
are. And if they be, why then do you not suffer the common people to read the
Scriptures? The Jesuit answers, because of the great my^^eries contained in
the Scripture; and because of the great inconveniences which come thereby. But
Sut^r would have the common people debarred from reading, not for fear of
seeing too much; but for fear of seeing too little: not because of the great
mysteries contained in the Scriptures; but because the ordinances and
Traditions of the Church cannot be seen in them. And this is the mystery of
unquity, that it is the usual and constant doctrine of the Fathers, (as the
Jesuit has Page 155.
taught us) That the Apostles did preserve the dignity of the mysteries, by
keeping them hidden and in silence; and therefore they are not opened in the
Scriptures, which are read to the whole world. And that all the ancient holy
Doctors have taught, (as here the Jesuit tells us) that there is such
profound knowledge, and such deep^ and unsearchable mysteries are said down in
the Scriptures that the people of the would ought to be debarred from reading,
judging, and interpreting of them. We allow the reading of them to the common
people; but the judging and interpreting of them, we say, instrumentally and
subordinately under God does belong unto the Pastors of the Church. And in this
we follow the practice of the primitive Church in which reading was allowed,
(...), unto Children and little ones; but judging and interpreting unto those
that had (...), wisdom to discern. As Eusebius Eusebius de prepar evang. l. 12.
records it. To prove this (that the scriptures are not to be r^ad by all,
because they contain such great mysteries as are not meet for all to read)
Clement of Alexandria is the only Author alleged by the Jesuit: but what,
does Clement play on both sides too? so the Jesuit would have him do; for Page
155.
even now he alleged him to prove this, That many mysteries are not opened in
the scriptures which are read to the whole world, lest the knowledge of them
should become contemptible unto the common people by too much familiarity. And
now he alleges him to prove this, That there is profound knowledge, and such
unfear chable mysteries are laid down in Scripture, that the Scripture must
not be read of all, because all are not capable of that profound knowledge. Are
not these contradictions? mysteries are opened in the Scriptures; mysteries are
not opened in the Scriptures. The Scriptures are read to the whole world; the
Scriptures are not read to the whole world. The common people (...) known
mysteries; The common people (...) not capable of the knowledge of those
mysteries. If the Jesuit, to avoid these contradictions, (which without all
contradictio^ are most false) shall answer; that he speaks not of all, but
only of some mysteries. I would willingly learn, why some mysteries should be
fit to be written, and some not? Why some may be read, and some not? why some
should be contemned thorough too much knowledge, and some so unsearchable that
they cannot be known? All that Clement says is to this effect; that the
Pastors of Gods people ought to be careful how they dispense the mysteries of
Gods word, of which some are as deep as a pit, in which a man may drown and
some are shallow, of which the thirsty may drink. Shut therefore the
fount^ine, says Clement, and cover the pit from such a^ are not capable of
profound knowl^dge. What does he mean by this; take away the Scriptures from
the common people? No: how then shall the thirsty drink? And what shall become
of those things in Scripture, which are so shallow that every one may wade in
them? Take it then likewise away from many Priests, who are not the wisest
always in the Parish; and no more capable of those deep and profound things
then many of the common people: but cover the pit. That is, let the Pastor
teach according to the capacity of his hearers; giving Heb: ^. 13.
milk unto babes, and strong meat unto them of age. So that in this Clement
speaks not of reading the Scriptures, but of Preaching out of them by the
teachers of Gods people. This is the practice of our Church; we give meat to
every one, and such meat as is meet, to every one his portion in due season:
and yet the Jesuit charge us with thi^^ [N^w adays among the Protestants,
all sorts of meats ^re Reply p. 15^.
propounded unto the people, and it is lawful for every weak stomach to glut
it sel^^ with the strongest meats and mysteries, which S. Paul judged fit to be
spoken of 1. Cor. 2. 6.
among the perfect only.]

If we sometimes do glut our hearers with too much meat, yet our fault is not
so great as theirs, who starve their people for want of meat, who take away the
sincer^ milk of the word, and feed them only with the d^^ffe of their own
inventions, and with the l^^^kes of human^ Traditions. With us you may find
Masters careful of their servants, Parents of their Children, Pastors of their
Novices, catechizing them to make them fit for stronger meat: and before any
may come to the Supper of the Lord, (which we account the strongest meat of
all) it is ordered by our Church, that they first eat and d^gest, learn and
remember^, that Ca^^chisme published by authority. You not only neglect these
things, but even mock, and scoff at them that do them: and those you admit
to the grea^est mystery that can be to the Supper of the Lord, who are so
f^rre from being able to give an account of their faith, that they know no^ (I
speak it with grief) the very first principles of the word of God. I am glad
to hear the Jesuit confess, that with us are the strongest meats and
mysteries, which S. Paul judged fit to be spoken of among the perfect only.
With us are no unwritten doctrines; and therefore unwritten Traditions are not
the strongest meats, but rather strong poison; not mysteries of Godliness, but
rather mysteries of iniquity. And as the Heretics in former ages, so the
Jesuits in these our days err in citeing this text (We speak wisdom
among them that be perfect) for unwritten Traditions. In which S. Paul only
means this, that the doctrine of Christ, which is preached unto all, is not
received alike of all: when it is spoken unto a wicked and a carnal minded
man, it is by him accounted as foolishnes: but when it is spoken to a godly and
spiritual minded man, then it is accounted wisdom.

11. The Jesuit proceeds on to his second reason of debar^ing the common
people from reading of the Scriptures, because of the great inconveniences
which come by allowing the Scriptures unto such. Christ says, Mat. 12. 29.
Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures. (...). Chrysostom. in prae^at. in Epist. ad
Romans
Infinite avils have sprung from hen^e, from ignorance of the Scriptures, says
S. Chrysistomes And again in a treatise written purposely of this point, he
shows at large, that (...) etc. (...). Tom. ^. edit. Savil.
The knowledge of the Scriptures is very profit^ble, and freeth us from b^ndage
and ignoran^^. And likewise, that all evils did spring from this, because the
common people did not read the Scriptures. He expounds the words of our Lord,
Search the Scriptures, in this mann^r, Idem hom. 14 in John.
Our Lord exhorted all the Jews to search the Scriptures. 2. Pet. 1. 15*
Ye d^e well, says S. Peter, that ye take he^d unto them. But thus says the
supposed Successor of S. Peter, ye do ill, to read them, for innumerable and
great inconveniences come thereby. Thus we see a manifest opposition betwixt
Christ, and his supposed vicar: betwixt the practice of the Primitive Church,
and of the now Roman Church.

Let the evils be never so great, yet our taking away the Scriptures from the
common people can be no more justified, then your taking away the cup; you
may as well take away meat and drink from them, because evil comes sometimes
by them: you may as well forbid them the hearing of the word, as the reading of
it, seeing evil may come by preaching being misunderstood; you may as well take
Christ from them, because he is to some a rock of offense, and a stone to
stumble at. If this reason be good, then take away the Scriptures from the
Priests likewise; yea rather from them, because they may pervert the meaning of
the Scriptures, and not only thereby fall themselves into evil; but likewise
draw Disciples after them. And, as Bellarm. de Pontif. Romans l. 1. c. ^.
Bellarmine observes, the Ringleaders of the people into heresies, have
been, for the most part, Bishops or Priests. But will you hear the particular
inconv^ni^nces.

[1. Does not the licentious li^^ of your people, against Princes, Reply p. 158.
Pastors, and Church, show plainly that which Suitor mentions?]

This is a lie of the longest elevens. Let the world judge, whether obedience
unto Princes be better taught and practiced by us, or by you. A Princes Crown
cannot sit sure upon his head, if this doctrine be true, The Pope may depose
Kings, and dispose of their Kingdoms; the which is defended by the Jesuit
Marian de Rege, and Regis institut.
Mariana, and I de abdicat. Hennc. 3 ^^. ascribed to Bucher.
Bucherus. As for obedience unto Pastors, and the Church, setting aside that
blind obedience, the common proverb declares what you are, The nearer Rome,
the worse Christians.

[2. The loss of souls, as ^ee page 2^. of the Reply.
Calvin confesses, that the Devil did gain more ^oules, by permitting the
Scriptures to the vulgar Reply page 1^^
sort, then by k^eping the word from them.]

Calvin speaks only of corrupt Translations, as the Jesuit himself
confesses in the place cited; what therefore Calvin says of corrupt
Translations, that the Devil gained souls by them; is rather true of yours,
then of ours: for they are more corrupt then ours. The vulgar Latin
Translation (upon which you dote so much, that you prefer it before the
Original) has many corruptions of all sorts, as a Bishop Lindan. de opt
gener. interp l. 3 c. 1.
of yours confesses.

[Every old wife is able to chop Scripture with the best of you all.] You
should rather pity the ignorance of your own silly women, who are like those
women spoken of by S. Paul, 2. Tim. 3. 7.
who are never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. Their ignorance, I
say, you should rath^r pity, then envy the knowledge of our women, whose
glory it may be, and not their shame; that they are more skillful in the
Scriptures, then many Jesuits, and are able to discover your errors in many
points of Divinity. Pamphilus approved this practice not only in men, but
likewise in women; for as Hierome reco^deth it, Scriptur^s quoque sanct^^ non
ad legendum tantum, sed and ad habendum tribu^bat promptissime, non ^olum
vitis, sed and foeminis. quas vidisset lectioni deditas. Hi^ron in Apol. cont.
Ruf.
He gave most freely the holy Scriptures, not only to read, but to keep them
for their own, not only unto men, but likewise to as many women, as he saw
did give themselves to reading.

In the conclusion of this Section, he tells us a tale of an old wife.

[They are living yet, (and perhaps your own self are not ignorant of it) who
can testify that one of your Predecessors in that dignity which you once
enjoyed, being challenged for taking a second wife, contrary to ^he pres^ript
of the Apostle, ordaining that a 1 Timothy 3. ^6
Bishop should be the husband but of one wife only; returned a short answer
for himself out of the same Apostle, 1. Cor. 7. 9.
that it was better to marry then to burn. Reply p. 158.
Choosing rather to separate S. Paul from S. Paul, then his second wife from
himself.]

I know the person by your description, the first letters of his name are G. M.
His fame lives after his death unto his glory; and were he living, h^ would
have curried your cockscombe for this tale. S. Augustine says, that Montauns
the Heretic was the first that condemned August. de Haeres. ad Quod^ultd.
second marriage as fornication, and from him our Adversaries have received the
same opinion. S. Paul condemns it not, no not in a Bishop himself:
Praecipitur ^t non nisi singulas ^no tempore habeant uxorea Hicron. epist. ad
Ocean.
To avoyde the multiplicitie of wives, which was common with the ^ewes, at the
same time, it is commanded, says S. Hierome, that they shall have but one wife
at once. If the Apostle allow one wife to a Bishop, why do you condemn that
by your Traditions, which God allows? The forbidding of it crosses the truth
of the Scripture; for the Scripture says, Heb. 13. 4.
Marriage is honorable among all men: but whoremongers and adulterers God will
judge. And these Tradition mongers say, marriage is damnable among some men,
but whore mongers and adulterers are not so. Do we not see it among them?
that a Priest may not hold one benefice with one wife: but he may keep two
benefices with three concubines. When Hildebrand (an adulterous Pope) resolved
to bring in this doctrine of devils, 1. Tim. 4. 3.
in forbidding of marriage, the Clergy with one consent cried out against him,
Lambert. Schaphnaburg. hist. an. 1074.
He was an Heretic, he forgot the sayings of our Lord, All men cannot receive
this saying. And of his Apostle, He that cannot abstain, let him marry: for
it is better to marry then to burn. That renowned Prelate might answer the
same for himself, and yet not separate S. Paul from S. Paul. To conclude this
Section, daily experience shows it, that as greater inconveniences come by
debarring the common people from the Scriptures, then by admitting them to
read them: so greater evils proceed from debarring Priests their wives, then
from the allowing of them. Platina saw this long since, and therefore in the
life of Pius Secundus, he secondeth this, Sacerdotibus magnaratione sublat ^^
nuptias, majori restitu^ndas. There was great reason to take away marriage from
Priests, but there is greater reason to restore it unto them again. And so we
proceed to his next Section the title whereof is this:

SECT: VIII. [For what cause all Heretics have been accustomed to reject
Apostolical Traditions.]
WHen I first read the title of this Section, I expected no other stuff, then
I find therein; even a deal of bombaste to stuff it out. And as the title is
a digression, so the whole Section consists of three digressions from the
Question.

The 1. is of the affinity of Heresy, and Idolatry.

The 2. about the Interpretation of Scripture.

The 3. is touching the Translation of the word, (...), Tradition. Concerning
the 1. he begins thus.

[The Reader must observe, that Heresy is a kind of Idolatry, Reply page 15^
for as S. Cyprian observes, C^prian. de unit. Eccles.
the enemy of mankind perceiving how by the coming of Christ, and by the
preaching of his faith, men were drawn from Idolatry unto the true service of
God, he be thought himself how by a new illusion he might entrap poor souls
under the very title and profession of Christianity. Hereupon, says S.
Cyprian, he invented new Heresies and Schisms.]

We confess all this, and are able to prove, that with you are these things,
Idolatry, Heresy, and only the title of Christianity, or a show of
Godliness. There was never greater Idolatry among the Heathens, then is at
this day defended in the Church of Rome, for which cause, namely for her
Idolatry, S. John compares her unto Revel. 11^.
Egypt. This is descended unto her from the ancient Heathens, as this Heresy
of unwritten Doctrines to perfect the rule of faith is descended unto her from
the ancient Heretics. As for the title of Christianity, and the outward
form of Godliness, this is all you have to b^agge of; ye are wolves in
sheep skins: ye have the horns of the Lamb, but the voice of the Dragon; as
S. John Revel. 13. 11:
describes you. Ye speak lies in hypocrisy, as if they were truth. And the
mystery of iniquity, that is, the cov^rt of piety, is the only means
whereby ye entrap poor souls. To free themselves from Idolatry, he gives a
strange description of it.

[Idolatry, placeing a senseless creature in Gods st^^d, does Reply page ^59
give religious worship thereunto.] A senseless description; and yet as
senseless as it is, such Idolatry you are guilty of, in worshipping of Idols
of silver, and gold, and of brass etc. If a man worship the Devil, is it not
Idolatry? Yet he is no senseless creature. Your Demi god the Pope is an
heretical Idol, to whom that may well be applied, which you lay to our
charge. For he is set up on the altar of your souls, and adored as God. He is
so far besotted with a selfe-liking of his own opinion, that he treads
under-foo^ all other authority, both divine and humane, as the power of
Scripture, of Fathers, and of Councels, which are nothing without him, and he
far above them. And yet because he has some apprehension of the authority
of holy Scripture, and finding it pliable to his humor, he admits no other
Interpreter thereof but himself. Hence it comes that these places must
needs be understood of him, Council. Later, Sess. 9.
All Kings shall worship him, Psalm. 72. 11. All power is given unto him in
heaven and in earth. Math. 28. 18. This is the heretical Idol, whose
essential parts are Heresy, and Idolatry.

2. His second digression is about the Interpretation of Scripture; and therein
he pus^eth himself to show, by what means it must be interpreted; and by
what means it must not be interpreted.

[It must be Apostolical Tradition, which the ancient Fathers always have
taught to be the certain ^ule whereby Reply page 159
we must find out the assured sense and m^aning of the holy Ghost, speaking
unto us in the Scripture, Vincent. Li^in. c. 1.
Inquiring often, says Vincentius Li^inensis, with great care of very many
holy and learned m^n, in what sort I might by a certain, and as it were, by a
general and regular way, discover the truth of the Catholic faith, from the
falsehood of heretical perversitie, I received still this answer from them
all: that if I would find out the deceit of uprising Heresies etc. I must
fortify my bele^^e with two things: first by the authority of Holy Scripture,
next by the Tradition of the Catholic Church. But seeing the Canon of
Scripture is perfect, and sufficient to it self for all things, what need is
there of the authority of the Ecclesiastical interpretation to be joined with
it? Because the Scripture is so profound, that all men do not take it in one
and the same sense. etc.]

If you will stand to the judgment of Vincentius, the controversy is thus
determined by him.

1. That the Canon of Scripture is perfect, and sufficient to it self for all
things. He believed a selfe-sufficiency, or an immediate sufficiency, so that
there needed no unwritten Traditions.

2. The Tradition which he allows, is that kind of Tradition which we allow;
the Ecclesiastical interpretation. Not the interpretation of Heretics, of the
Pope, of the Roman Church: but that of the Catholic Church.

3. The end of this kind of Tradition is, that Heresies might be discovered
and confuted. not to be a rule of faith, nor to supply the defects of
Scripture, as if it were an imperfect rule.

4. He does not account it a good means to discover all Heresies: but only
uprising Heresies, (as the Jesuit translateth it.) that is, of new Heresies,
or Heresies lately sprung up. Ceterum dilatatae and inveteratae h^reses
nequ^quam hac via adgrediend^ sunt, ^^ quod prolixo temporum tractu ^onga his
furand^ veritatis patuerit occasio. Idem de Haer: c 39.
For far-spread and inveterate Heresies are not to be dealt with all this way;
says Vince^tius, because by long continuance of time a long occasion has lain
open unto them (unto the Heretics) to steal away the truth, Majorum volumina
vitiando, by corrupting the books of the ancient. Such heresies he would have
confuted, sola Scripturarum authoritate, only by the authority of Scripture.
This ^eresie of unwritten Traditions is not now newly budded, our Adversaries
have received it from the ancient Heretics, and whatsoever the Heretics
did, we are sure our Adversaries have not been backward from corrupting the
writings of the ancient; they have fitted the monuments of antiquity to their
opinion, as the Tyrant used to fit his guests to his bed; wresting them,
cutting them off, and adding to them Adscripta sunt Patribus, quae ipsis
nunquam ne per quietem quidem in mentem venerant. Ludov. Vi^es de cause.
corrupt. art.
many things which the Fathers never dreamed of. Yet we except not against this
kind of Tradition, we have tried and examined unwritten Traditions by this
Tradition of the Church; and notwithstanding all your corruptions of the
writings of the ancient, yet there remains enough to find out the deceit of
unwritten Traditions. Let the Scripture have the first place, (which Vincentius
assigns unto it) that so God (the Father of our faith) may have the first
audience: and the^ let the Tradition of the Church come up in the rear, to
back that which the Scripture teaches.

But the Jesuit would have all done by the Church, and nothing by the
Scripture.

[For our Savior foreseeing the presumptuous and ras^ Reply page 160
boldness, which some would take upon them to interpret the meaning of his
written word, has ordained that his Church should be provided of a singular
means to find out, and to declare the true meaning thereof, being always
end^ed with that sup^rnaturall gift, which our Savior imparted unto his
Disciples, when Lu^. 24. 45.
he opened their understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures.]

That which our Savior foresaw, we see in you, A presumptuous and ^ash
boldness in interpreting Scripture. Christ says of himself, All power is
given unto me in Heaven and on earth. This is presumptuously applied to the
Pope. S. John says, I saw another Angel come from the East, which had the
seal of the living God. This is rashly and boldly applied to S. Francis. And
yet the Church interprets both these places of Christ. The Church has his
supernatural gift; but what Church? Tho. Wald. l. 2. doct. fid. entiq. c. 19.
Not the African Church, as Donatus said: nor the Roman Church: (as the Jesuit
means.) But the Catholic Church of Christ dispersed over the world: As
Thomas Waldensis says. And where will thou find, or how will thou know, which
is this Church? The author of the imperfect Work on Matthew, hom. 49.
answers, The Scripture is the only way whereby to know which is the true
Church of Christ. And again, The Lord knowing that in the last days there
would be such a confusion, commands Christians to fly only unto the
Scriptures. For if they do otherwise, They shall perish, says he, not knowing
which is the true Church; and by that means shall fall into the abomination of
desolation, which shall stand in the holy places of the Church.

He shows, that the Scripture must not be interpreted [by private imagination,
private fancy, or private spirit.] Can he charge us with this? Interpretation of
Scripture is a 1. Cor. 12.
gift of the spirit. He that denies this, is an Heretic. The same spirit that
inspired them, must interpret them. This spirit (which, like the Ioh. 3. 8.
wind, blows where it lists) may blow on private men. Private men, having
this spirit, may discern the sense and meaning of the Scriptures, as well as
the Priest: either grant this, or else condemn Act 18.
Apollos, Aquil^, and Priscilla, who are commended in Scripture for this: yea
condemn the Homilies of Le^ the Emperor, commended by Gretzer in his edition
of those Homilies; or else grant this, that private men may discern the sense
and meaning of the Scriptures. When private men, through the help of Gods
spirit, do discern the sense and meaning of the Scriptures, and deliver the
sense intended by the Holy Ghost; will you call this private imagination, private
fancy, private spirit? It is the doctrine of the Devil, and of Antichrist, which
possesses our Adversaries, and persuades them that their doctrine must not be
examined, nor their Spirit tried: but whatsoever Interpretation their Church
(that is the Pope) gives of any part of Scripture, be the Interpretation never
so private, never heard of before, never so contrary to the exposition of the
Fathers; yet it must be believed as sure as that S. John's Gospel is Scripture.
And neither S. John's Gospel, nor any part of Scripture is (by them) accounted
true, because it is written: but it is accounted true, because it so pleases
the Pope. What then he alleges out of S. Augustine, may fitter be a^plyed unto
them, then unto us. Aug Ep. 222.
They are Heretics, not because they contemn not the Scriptures (for so S.
Augustine is to be read) but because they understand them not aright. Again
Aug. tract 18. in Ioh.
Good and holy Scripture is not rightly understood, and what is wrongfully
understood, is audaciously affirmed by them. And again, Aug. cont. Faustum.
This does not please them, because it is written, but it must therefore be
true Scripture, because it pleases them. If S. Augustine were now alive to ^ee
the doctrine and practice of the Roman Church, he could not more fitly express
it, then he does in these sayings. His third digression is about the
translation of the word (...).

[Wheresoever the Scripture speaks against certain Traditions Reply p. 161.
of the Jews, partly fcivolous, partly repugnant to the Law of God, there all
the English translations follow the Greek exactly, never omitting the word
Tradition. For example Mat. 15. Contrariwise wheresoever the holy Scripture
speaks in commendation of Traditions, there all their Translations agre^ not
to follow the Greek. but for Tradition they translate ordinance, or
instruction, as 2. These. 2. 15. etc. and any word else rather then Tradition.
Insomuch that Bezatranslateth it, Traditam 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15.
doctrinam, the doctrine delivered, putting the singular number for the
plural; and adding, Doctrine, of his own.]

3. This is transcribed out of Gregory Martin, a learned divine, as he styles
him, who is censured by one of his own side for an The treatise of renunciat.
ignorant divine. But all his geese are swans; and as the proverb is, Asinus
asinum scabi^, one good turn requires an other; he could do no less then
afford him some worthy title, who stored him with such a deal of worthy matter.
He harpeth much upon Allour Translations, and yet I know but only of one
Translation, the Bishops as they call it, which was published by authority,
until after the days of cavilling Martin. As that translation does justify
our doctrine, so we are able to justify that, and all other our translations in
this point from the slanders of this Martin. We confess the fact, in those
places cited by Martin; the Translators have not englished (...), Traditions.
D. Fulk (who has discovered Martins discovery to be an heap of senseless
cavillations) confesses the same. This I observe to free that learned Dr (yet
M. Fulk says, it is found there. If he give not us an instance, let him give
himself the lie.)
from this marginal note, in which (setting aside all good manners) the he is
given him. He has answered for himself in his confutation of Martins
discovery in these words. I say there is no law nor statute made against it,
but the word, Tradition, may be used by our Translators. This is no more then
if I should say, Papists may be suffered to live as good subjects, not that they
are good subjects.

The evil of the fact we deny, for though they used not the word Tradition, yet
they used such a word as declared the meaning of the holy Ghost in those
places. What will you say for your vulgar Latin, in which (...) is not always
translated Tradition, but sometimes 1. Cor. 11. 2.
Praecepta, and in English not Traditions, but precepts? I may say of the
Septuagint, as sometimes Galatinus said of the Chalde Paraphrase that it is
rather an exposition in some places, then a Translatio: yet the Apostles in
alleging the old Testament, did usually follow the Compare Prove. 3. 34. with I
am 4. 6. and Prove: 11. 31. with 1. Pet. 4. 18.
Septuagint, rather then the Hebrew. So that Translators may sometimes vary
from the original word, and yet be blameles aslong as they retain the sen^e
intended by the holy Ghost in that word. Thus our Translators have done; there
is only a verbal or grammatical, no real or doctrinall difference betwixt
the original and the translation. Tradition is a doctrine, ordinance,
instruction or institution: and again, doctrine, ordinance, instruction, or
institution is a Tradition. And if Beza must be censured for translating it,
The doctrine delivered, and not Traditions; then what say you to those books
which are approved, and yetrender it by Syrus Interpres.
commandments, and Vatabl. Bibl.
Institutions, and not Traditions? If it be a Tradition, it is a deliverie; a
delivery must have something delivered: it could not be a delivery of rites,
because they have little power to keep out the man of sin (and the Apostle gave
that exhortation) it must needs be a deliverie of doctrine, or a doctrine
delivered. As for his exception at the change of the number, we may account
this among the number of his Cavils; for by doctrine delivered, he means not
one singular doctrine, but all the whole sum of S. Paul's doctrine. Many words
grow out of use thorough abuse, Tyrannus of old signified a King, Hostis a
stranger, Sophista a wise man; he would not be accounted a wise man that
should now english them so: So of old Traditio was taken diverse ways, for the
manner of delivery either by writing, or by word of mouth; and for written
doctrines, as well as for things unwritten: but now our adversaries abuse the
word, and wheresoever they find it, they apply it to unwritten Traditions;
therefore our Translators did well, not to use this word Tradition, which,
being perverted by our Adversaries, might become a stumbling block to the
Reader; but rather to use another word which might agree with the Original,
and declare the meaning of the Holy Ghost, and yet might not be so easily
perverted to a false meaning.

This cavilling Martin has another fling at our Translatours.

[Yea, they do so gladly use the word Tradition, when it Reply page 162
may tend to the discredit thereof, that they put the said word in all their
English Bibles, when it is not in the Greek at all; as Coloss. 2. 20.
why are ye led with Traditions? And as another English Translation more
heretically, Why are ye burdened with Traditions? Tell us, you that profess
to have skill in the Greek, whether the word (...) does signify Tradition?
Justify your Translation, if you can, either out of Scriptures, or Fathers
etc. Tea, tell us, if you can, why you translate for Tradition, ordinance; and
contrary, for ordinance, Tradition.]

Tell me, why your vulgar Latin, allowed by Clement the eight, is guilty of
the same fault, if it be a fault? In it the word (...), which ^ignifieth
Customs, is translated Act. 6: 14.
Traditions; and in like manner (...), which signifies Traditions, is
translated 1. Cor: 11. 2.
precepts, or customs. Tell me that, and I will tell you this. Tell me, why
the Translator of Theod^ret printed at Cullin an. 1573. translateth (...),
Traditions, and why Hentenius, translating Oecumenius, translateth (...),
Institutions? We can justify our Translations by Scripture; for it calls
these (...), Coloss. 2. 22.
(...), doctrines of men, and it calls doctrins of men Mat. 1^.
Traditions. The interpretation of the Fathers does likewise justify this
translation, for S. Ambrose interprets this place of such errors, Quos humana
invenit Traditio, which humane Tradition found out. What were (...) Pythagoraea
but the Traditions of Pythagoras? (...) signify ordinances, and if ordinances
signify Traditions, why may not the word be so translated? Why did the Jesuit
himself not distinguish more accurately, in his translations of the Greek
testimonies, between these words? For commonly he translateth page 143. ^.
page 150 1. page 155. 1.
(...), Doctrines; and takes (...), Ordinances, Preachings, and Traditions for
the same.

At last he concludes this Section with a wise observation of his own.

[The last Translations correcting all the former, does Reply p. 163.
clearly declare, what a handsome Scripture the poor people relied upon all
the while before: that it was not the pure word of God, but the corrupt
invention of Translators.]

Here is an handsome observation of as wise a divine, as Martin himself. There
is but a verbal difference betwixt Tradition, ordinance, and institution, if a
verbal difference corrupts a translation, and makes it a false invention,
and no pure word of God, what then shall become of all your Latin
Translations? They cannot be numbered, says S. Aug. de doct. Christ. l. 2. c.
11.
Augustine, Hieron. praesat. in Josh.
As many books, so many several copies, says S. Hierome. Until the Council
of Trent decreed the vulgar Latin, what pure word of God could the Roman
church have? yea, if a verbal difference corrupt a Translation, then at this
day they have no pure word of God; for the vulgar Latin differs more from
the original then our English does. Lindanus, a Popish Bishop, confesses
Lindan de optim. generinterpret. l. 3. cap. 1^
It has many corruptions of all sorts etc. some things are translated too
intricately, some improperly, and some not truly. And such variety, and
difference there is between the Copies themselves, that hardly is one like
another. Yet if they convert the words, and do not pervert the sense, no wise
man will call them a corrupt invention of false Translators; because the truth
of Scripture is the sense, and not the words; and variety of Translations,
differing only verbally, does not hinder, but rather does further us to find
out the true sense, if we will wisely compare them together.

SECT. IX. The whole sum of the Iesuit's Reply being cast up, the remainder
is nothing.
1. NOthing but insolent bragging, and vain tau^ologies do here in his last
Section at the first light present themselves. Folly is so ^e^pely rooted in
him, that though he were brayed in a mortar, his foolishness will not depart
from him. As for b^aggs, they are essential to him, and therefore confute him
never so evidently by the Scriptures, and by the Fathers, yet a man may as well
make a scould l^ave railing, as make him leave his bragging. I will not, actum
agere, answer that again which has been already three or four times
answered: yet that the Reader may see, that I have not lef^ one testimony it
self unanswered, the margin Ignatius sect. 2. the las^ testimon^. Ter^ul.
sect. 6. Divis. ^ Eureb, sect. 6. Divil. 12.
does direct him where he shall find these testimonies taken out of Igna^ius,
Tertullian, Eusebius, Epiphanius, Basil, Chrysostom, and Augustine already
answered. Epiph. sect. 2. Divis. 11. Basil sect. 6. Divis. 10. Chrysostom. sect. 3.
Divil. 2. August. sect. 4^ Divis. 8.
The pleading is ended, and the verdict is given against you, conclusum est in
causa, all your witnesses come too late, and your testimonies a day after the
fair: but because we are willing to give you a full hearing, you shall have
your witnesses examined.

[The Fathers of the Council of Gangers do plead our cause as if they had
been fie'd to that end. Conc. Gang. can. ult.
We desire that all Reply p. 164.
things delivered by the Scriptures, and Ecclesiastical Traditions (by
Apostolical Traditions it is in the Greek) be observed in the Church.]

2. The Eustathians, against whom this Council proceeded, erred both in point
of Doctrine, and in Ceremonies; in doctrine absolutely condemning the Christian
duty of fasting, and the honorable state of marriage in all men: in ceremonies
they allowed not the received kind of apparel, but would have a strange kind
brought into the Church. Against the first, their errors in doctrine, these
Fathers pleaded the Scripture; against the latter, their error in Ceremonies,
they alleged the Tradition of the Apostles. And therefore desired that All
things should be observed in the Church, which were delivered by the
Scriptures, and by Apostolical Tradition. You have need to fee these Fathers
again, for this, which they have pleaded, is nothing for you.

[Some Protestants tell us, that in these sayings the Fathers Reply page 165
do not speak of points belonging unto faith.]

3. It seems you answer without taking out the copy of our Answer. What we
have answered, we have, and will ever make it good, that in many places, where
the Fathers speak only of rituall Traditions, you allege them as patrons of
doctrinall Traditions unwritten. We say not in all those places they speak
not of points of faith; in some they do, in some places they do not. And here
again he brings in the same witnesses to be reexamined; as Basil concerning
the worshipping of the Holy Ghost, Augustine for rebaptization, Tertullian
touching prayer for the dead, Epiphanius about single lift, Chrysostom,
Augustine, and Epiphanius about prayer for the dead, those points, says he,
they accounted necessary, and unwritten Traditions.

S. Basil being duly sworn testifies this, that the worship which is due
unto the holy Ghost is taught in Scripture; but for the use of this syllable
Cum in this form of words, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, cum
spiritu sancto, with the holy Ghost, this form of words he confesses is not
written: but that it may be defended by Tradition.

S. Augustine confesses the same concerning the point of Rebaptization, that
although this form of words, Those that return from the Heretics shall not
be rebapti^ed, be not written: yet from most certain grounds of Scripture he
concludes the same. And no Protestant says, this is not an article of faith.

Tertullian is only an advocate for Rituall Traditions unwritten. And the
anniversary oblation, or yearly prayer for the dead at such and such times, is
not to be reckoned among the points of faith; but among the Customs, or
ordinances of the Church.

Epiphanius says, that the obligation to abstain from marriage is such in
those that have so vowed, that it is a finne to marry after single lif^ is
vowed. The Popish practice declares it to be no sin, else how could Cromer.
de rebus Polon. lib. 4.
Benedict the 9th dispense with Casimirus the heir of Polonia, to marry after
his vow? It is the Popes dispensation, which is above law, which makes it
lawful. This is a case of Conscience, as we hold, which may be determined,
though it be not expressly written, by sure and certain principles of the
Scripture in this manner; If the vow be solemnly made, and the party by any
means be able to keep it, it is unlawful to marry although the Pope would
dispense with it: but if not, we say with Epiphanius, Epiph. haer. 61
It is better to marry after the vow, and at length to return home to the
Church though he be la^e: then always to be wounded with inward darts. And
wherein does this differ from the Scriptures conclusion, 1. Cor. 7. 9.
It is better to marry then to burn?

S. Chrysostomes saying that the Apostles have not delivered all things by
writing, cannot prove that they did not deliver all their doctrines, or all
necessary things by writing; because all things which the Apostles delivered
were not doctrines nor things necessary. And yet the Jesuit, to help his lame
dog over the style, corruptly reads S. Chrysostomes words, in stead of All
things, he reads All their doctrine, saying, the Apostles have not delivered
(all their doctrine) by writing.

Epiphanius, and Augustine are in the like manner to be answered; they say the
Apostles delivered many things without writing. Hence the Jesuit infers,
that they delivered many points of faith, or doctrines of salvation; without
writing. I may as well infer, the Jesuit is an animal, ergo an ass. But
Chrysostom, Augustine, and Epiphanius, says he, tell us in particular, that
the Custom of the Church in praying for the dead is a Tradition given by the
Apostles unto the Church without writing. If it be a Tradition given without
writing, how then can you make good this part of your Challenge? [For the
confirmation of all the points of our Religion (of which prayer for the dead is
one) I will produce good and certain grounds out of the holy Scriptures, if
the Fathers authority will not suffice.] If you can bring no Scripture for this
point, then you must eat these words: if you do produce Scripture, then it was
not given without writing. Qui been distinguit, been docet; here we must needs
distinguish the point it self of praying for the dead, from the Custom of the
Church in praying for them at set times; this custom we must distinguish from
the reasons of it as they are given by these three Fathers; their reasons we
must distinguish from the reasons given by our Adversaries. The point it self,
how we may pray for them, is grounded on 2. Tim. 1. 1^.
the Scripture. The custom or practice of the Church to pray for them at a set
time, as when the divine mysteries were in celebrating, is no point of doctrine,
but a custom or ordinance of the Church. The reasons given by these three
Fathers of this practice were different, being compared by themselves, or with
the reasons given by our Adversaries. Chrysostom Chrysostom. hom. 2^ in Act.
because the damned souls might receive some ease thereby; this was but one
Doctors opinion. S Augustine denied case of torments, yet held it good for Aug.
Enchir. ad Laur c. 108.
release of lighter sins, which Gods Children might bear with them o^t of
this world, into that hidden receptacle. Epiphanius denied ^ase of torments, or
release of sin after death, and yet held it good for Epiph. haer. 75
testifying of our faith concerning the happy state of them that die in the
Lord. Our Adversaries deny these reasons, and give another, for the more speedy
deliverance of the Souls in Purgatory from all torments. The Primitive Church
held no Purgatory, and yet held prayer for the dead: our Adversaries hold, if
no Purgatory, no prayers for the dead. These grounds being laid I answer to all
that he objecteth out of those three Fathers. 1. That they called it an
unwritten Tradition. I con^esse it, that to pray for them at such a set time,
they accounted it an unwritten Tradition; but withal they placed it among the
customs or ordinances of the Church. 2. That it was an universal Tradition.
It is true, the practice was observed by the whole Church; but the reasons of
it were different. 3. That they accounted it a necessary Tradition. Not as if
it were a necessary doctrine, or a point of Salvation, but necessary, in regard
that the Church had received it as a general custom, and that upon good
grounds, and therefore every man might not at his own will and pleasure spurn^
against it. 4. They placed the denyers of this doctrine among Heretics as we
read of Aer us. Hereti^kes commonly as they are contrary to the ^ai^h of the
Church, so they will be contrary to the ordinances of the Church; and therefore
we m^st ^ot think that every thing which is condemned in Heretics is
h^resie; nor that all were Heretics indeed who are placed among Heretics.
But suppose it were so, that Aerius was an Heretic in deed, because he denied
the practice of the church in this point; I am sure then you are
Arch-Hereticks, who far outstrip him in this. If he were over shoes, because
he held the prayers for them that were in bliss to be unprofitable, you are
over head and ears in the same heresy, because you Azo^. Instit. Moral. To.
1. l. 8. c 20.
hold prayers for them that are in bliss to be impious and absurd. I have
contracted my answer to this point, in which the Jesuit is somewhat large,
because I would not fore-stall the market; and though I have gleaned in a most
plentiful field, yet I would not gather all, because I must leave it for him
that comes after me.

[S. Hierome tells us, that Hieron. epist. 54. ad Ma^cell.
Lent is an Apostolical Tradition Reply ^. 166.
necessary to be kept. And again, fore going Section.
that the unwritten customs of the Church do receive the force of a law.]

4. In what sense S. Hi^rome calls it Apostolical, we have Sect 4. Div. 9.
formerly showed. We deny it not to be an unwritten Tradition. But for the
necessity of it, that it should be of absolute necessity, as a point of faith,
or as a matter of salvation, that we deny. We say with S. Hierome, it is
necessary to be kept conditionally, not absolutely, as in regard of the
ordinance of the Church, wheresoever it is commanded: and in regard of loving
society, wheresoever it is observed. If it be absolutely necessary, how can you
so easily dispense with it? He sends us to seek for his other testimony of
S. Hierome in his eight Section: but you may as well find a candell sieve in a
country town, as any such thing in his foregoing Section. I find the same
words inhis 3d Section, but they are the words of the Heretics and not of
Hierome.

[When Eusebius affirms, The Apostles delivered some Reply p. 166.
things without writing, as it were a law unwritten. No man can be found so
gross witted, but may understand he meant necessary articles.]

5. This is a gross conceit of a nimble pated Jesuit, to think whatsoever is
as a law, must needs be a necessary article of faith. The Apostles delivered
some things without writing, as befitting those times and places, not intending
thereby to make them parts of the divine law; those things may be as law, as
humane laws, which are mutable, not as the divine law which is immutable and
unchangeable. The Church in these days may alter the orders and customs which
have been as law in former times, and may ordain such rites and customs as
shall be as law for aftertimes; yet such things are not necessary doctrines, nor
points of faith. It is not in the power of the Church to cross the truth of
Scripture, by making that to be no point of faith, which was a point of faith;
neither can the Church cross the perfection of Scripture, by making that to be
a point of faith, which was no point of faith. Te^tull. de veland. Virg. c. 1.
The rule of faith, says Tertullian, is always without change or alteration;
other things which are of discipline and behavior, admit of change and
correction. The Apostles commanding the believing Gentiles to abstain from
things strangled etc: prohibit this as a Act. 15. 28.
necessary thing. If the Jesuit be so gross witted, as to think whatsoever
is called necessary, is necessary to salvation, and is a point of faith; let
him hereafter take heed how he feeds upon rabbets, capons, and the like
strangled meat, lest he eat his own damnation. Lorinus may be his
Master-Iesuite, he teaches him it was Lorin. in Act. 15.
but a positive law, though it was called necessary. If there be no carnal
Israelite in the Church, says S. Aug. cont. ^aust l. 32. c. 13
Augustine, what Christian need to observe this, to ^ate no birds but only
such whose blood is po^red out? It is an absurd thing in this Jesuit, from a
conditional neces^itie, in regard of the authority of the Commander, or of
the infirmity of the weak, to infer an absolute necessity in regard of
salvation. This he has done in those former proofs, and yet we shall have
more of it.

[Eusebius means necessary things, for h^e produces Reply page 166
the necessity of Priests abstaining from Marriage, Eusebius. de demonst. Evang.
l. 1. c. 8.
Now they that are employed in the preaching of the Gospel, do necessarily
abstain from marriage. And the second Council Conc. Carthag 2. c. 2.
of Carthage declares the single life of Priests to be a thing necessary,
and an Apostolical Tradition.]

6. His assertion and this instance hang together like pibles in an halter:
necessary doctrines, or points of faith, are perpetually the same: but Priests
abstayning from marriage, has not been perpetually so, from the beginning it
was not so. I could allege in^inite testimonies of antiquity, to prove that
the Priests in the Primitive Church were allowed to marry; our adversaryes
Alphons. de Castro l. 13 advers. haeres.
confess the same. Howsoever some of them allege Scripture to prove it; and
others Apostolical Tradition; yet the most of them, according to the doctrine
of the Council of Conc. Trid. ^. 24.
Trent, account it to be only an ordinance or institution of the Church; so
Scotus in 4. Sent. did. 36. Aquin. 2. ^dae, q. 88. ar. 11. Cusan. epist. ^^ de
usu co^mun. Panorm. extra. de Clericis conjug. cap. Cum olim. Peers. de Tradit.
part 3tia consider. de voto contined. art. 4.
Scotus, Aquinas, Cusa^us, Bellarmine, Panormitane, Peresius, with many others.
And in regard of the great inconveniences which come thorough the single life
of Priests, the two latter, as Panormitane a great Canonist, and Peresius a
great Bishop, think it necessary that this custom were altered. Bernard says
truly, Bernard. in Cant. sermon. 66.
Take away honorable marriage out of the Church, and the unpolluted bed; and
do you not fill the Church with fornicators, incestuous persons, unclean,
effeminate, and Sodomiticall persons? As for E^sebius, he did not think that
single life was a virtue in a Priest, or that it was necessary for his
salvation, no more then S. Paul did think it necessary for every man, in
saying, 1. Cor. 7. 1.
It is good for a man not to touch a woman. And again, Ibid. verse. 26.
It is good for the present necessity. This is S. Paul's meaning, it is good in
regard of the troubles and cares which accompany marriage, not in regard of any
commandment from the Lord. Eusebius speaks to the same purpose; first he
commends that supernatural state, or manner of life, which is like unto that
of the Angels in Heaven, who neither marry, nor are given in marriage, have no
cares of the world, no children, no possessions; this manner of life he
commends very much. Then concerning Priests, he says not that this state or
manner of life is necessary: but that, for the avoiding of cares and troubles
of the world, this manner of life is necessary. This is all that ca^ be
gathered out of that passage of Euscbius. And this is no more then the
Scripture teaches us. Ma^th. 19. 12. 1. Cor. 7. 7.
He that can receive it, let him receive it. And S. Paul would have all men ^
to be unmarried, and as himself was, if they have that gift of God.

The Council of Carthage requires Priests, (...), to observe chastity,
temperance, or sobriety. What is this for single life? These virtues are
required of them in the Scripture and may better be observed in marriage, then
in a single life. Behold how the Jesuit corrupts antiquity, that he may have
some show of defense for this corrupt Tradition, which is no Apostolical, but
a Papisticall, or a 1. Tim. 4. 3.
Diabolical Tradition. It crosses the truth of the Scripture, 1. Cor. 7. 2,
To avoyde fornication, let every man have his wife. And Heb. 13. 4.
marriage is honorable among all men. How can it be an Apostolical Tradition,
when some of the Apostles were Math. ^. 14.
married, and put not off their wives after they were 1. Cor. 9. 5.
called to the office? The Jesuit seems to confess, page 158.
that a Bishop may be husband of one wife. Marriage is so precious, says
Chrysostom. him. ^. in Tit.
Chrysostom, that it hinders no man's promotion to the Episcopal chair. Our
Adversaryes teach the contrary, and hold it to be Coster. enchirid. art. de
coe libat.
A greater sin for a Priest to marry, then to commit fornication. And thus,
ex ungu^ leonem, by the print of Hercul^s foot, you may judge of his whole
body; by this one Tradition you may judge of the rest, and so see how like the
Traditions of the now Roman^ Church are unto those things which the Apostles
delivered unto the Primitive Church.

7. The Jesuit, finding no help from the Fathers, flies for succor unto the
writings of Cardinal Pervon, from whom he borrows these six observations
following.

[1. When the Fathers speak of the sufficiency of Scriptures Reply p. 167.
in one point, our Adversaries extend it unto all points of faith.]

The Fathers disputing against particular errors do often use such a medium to
confute them, as may serve to confute all other errors. Tertullian his general
proposition, (Whatsoever is not written is accursed with a woe) extends it
self not only against Hermogenes his error, but likewise against all
unwritten Doctrines. The same I may say of S. Ambrose his argument against
light talk in Churchmen, The things which we find not in Scripture, are not
to be used. This not only condemns that one thing, but likewise all points
of faith which are not found in Scripture. In these two, as in many others,
although the conclusion be particular, yet the proposition is general, and
declares the sufficiency of Scripture in all points of faith.

[2. When the Fathers speak of a mediate sufficiency of the Reply page 167
Scripture, being attended upon by Tradition, which utters that by retayle,
which the Scripture propounds in gross, and serves as a k^y, or as an
interpreter of the same, they apply it to an immediate sufficiency.]

8. A mediate and an immediate sufficiency is a gross distinction to proceed
from a learned Cardinal; for a mediate sufficiency is merely an
insufficiency. Athanasius has taught us that the Scriptures have a
selfe-sufficiencie for the discovery of truth. If any part of this
sufficiency be given unto Traditions, where is the selfe-sufficiencie? This
pedlar-like phrase of uttering by retayle what is propounded in Scripture in
gross, befitteth not the mouth of so great a Cardinal; ye are like them, of
whom S. Paul speaks, that make 2. Cor. 2. 17.
merchandise of the word of God, uttering by retaile that which is not in the
Scriptures. The Tradition of the Church, which serves for a key to open the
meaning of the Scriptures, is to be received, this concerns the manner of
teaching not the matter taught: but when men will open the wrong door with
this key, will utter by retaile rotten war^s, and if any in stead of bread will
give a stone, in stead of fish will give a serpent, in stead of the sincere
milk of the word will teach bloody doctrine, this is damnable: and of this the
Church of Rome is guilty.

[3. When the Fathers, speaking of the Scriptures as they are Reply p. 168.
compared with the writings of men, which are but of humane authority, say,
that the Scriptures alone have the prerogative of undoubted truth; our
Adversaryes give forth, that the Fathers hereby do reduce the certainty of all
truth unto the sole Scriptures absolutely.]

9. As comparisons are odious, especially with the Scriptures, so this
observation is ridiculous. we have often showed, that the Fathers do give unto
the Scriptures, not only a co^parative certainty and infallibility above the
writings of any Doctors whatsoever, but likewise do attribute unto them the
only assured certainty, and the absolute infallibility. When S. Peter says, 2.
Pet. 1. 1^.
We have a more sure word; with what does he compare the certainty of the
Scriptures only with the writings of the Doctors of the Church? No, but even
with this voice, or unwritten word when it was first spoken, This is my
welbeloved son. Then it was not certain, whether it were the voice of God, or
no, it might have been the voice of an Angel: but at that time the writings
of the Prophets concerning Christ were more sure, because there was more
certainty and assurance that the Scriptures were the word of God, then that
this voice was the word of God. S. Peter's supposed successor holds many
unwritten Traditions, such as God never spoke, and such as the Doctors of the
Primitive Church never delivered unto him, and all those he would have to be as
sure and certain as Gods written word. And suppose the Doctors of the
Primitive Church had delivered these Traditions, are they therefore as certain
and infallible as the Scripture? The Jesuit affirms it, Page 171. if truly
figured.
These Traditions being corroborated by the written attestation of the Saints
and holy Doctors, this is a warrant of it self infallible and und^^bted. The
Cardinal denies it, even in this his observation; for he grants us, that
though the certainty and infallibility of all truth is not to be reduced
only and absolutely unto the Scriptures: yet he holds, that the Fathers did
esteem the Scriptures to be more certain and infallible then the ^ritings of
the Doctors of the Church, or writings of humane authority. Here is Manasseh
against Ephraim, and Ephraim against Manasseh, and both against the truth. The
written attestation of the Doctors is the best authority which the Jesuit can
produce for unwritten Traditions; thi^ written attestation is not so certain
and inf^ll^ble as the Scripture, as the Cardinal confesses: then the
consequence is sure, that unwritten Traditions are not as certain and
infallible as the Scripture; and consequently the certainty and infallibility
of all doctrine must be reduced only and absolutely to the Scripture. As for
the obedience due unto the commandments of the King, given only by word of
mouth; whenever it is proved, that God gave necessary commandments only by
word of mouth, which are not written; and that the unwritten commandments of
the Roman Church are the same, we will give obedience to them.

[4. When the Fathers disputing with Heretics, do Reply page 168
argue, as they say, adhominem: that is, when they urge them out of their own
erroneous principles, and provoke them unto the sole authority of the written
word; our Adversaryes step forth, and will have this kind of arguing to be
universal withal; whereas this is the conclusion to be drawn from hence;
Therefore the Fathers admitted no mean to be with the Heretics, for trial
of true doctrine, but only the Scriptures. For the Heretics for the most
part in the beginning of their disputations would disav^w all authority, of
Tradition, and of Church, save only that of the Scripture, etc. Therefore the
Fathers to keep their noses to the grindlestone, did only press them with
Scripture.]

10. This observation is a very heap of untruths. 1. That the Heretics for
the most part in the beginning of their disputations were accustomed to reject
Tradition, and to fly unto Scripture only. As the Heretics were many, and
their opinions different, so their practice was diverse; the Cardinal cannot
prove, that ten of the hundred, in the beginning of their disputations, did
renounce Tradition, and only betook themselves to Scripture. It was rather
their practice to allege Tradition of their own, and never to forsake that
fastness, until they were beaten out of it. They were as earnest pleaders for
unwritten Traditions, and as great enemies against the Scripture, as our
Adversaries are, or can be. And therefore in regard of the first they were
styled Hieronym l. 2. in E^av c. 3.
Deutorotae, Tradition-mongers; and in regard of the latter, they were called,
Tertullian. de resurrect. car^.
Lucifugae Scripturarum, owls flying from Scripture. 2. That it was an
err^neous principle in the Heretics to fly only unto Scripture. I read of
the Fathers condemning of Heretics for flying from Scripture, for not
understanding the Scriptures, for misinterpreting of them; but I never read
where they were condemned by the Fathers for flying to the Scriptures. It is
true, that the Jewish Cabbalists would reproach those that were given unto the
Scriptures with this nickname of Karaim; as Roman Traditi^n-m^ngers call us
Scripturia^s: but the Fathers never accounted it an error. S. Augustine has
cleared this to be no error in commending Aug l 5 cont. Donat. c 26.
Cyprians appeal unto the Scriptures. and Aug. epist. 1^2
this makes men heretics says he, nor because they do not contemn, but
because they do not understand the Scriptures. These two untruthes we have
Sect: 7. Div. 7
already fully confuted. 3. That the Fathers admitted no other mean for trial
of true doctrine with the Heretics, but only Scripture. I will not question
the truth of this conclusion, because it serves to our purpose; 1. To show
that this is no erroni^us principle, to fly only unto Scripture. 2. It
overthrows what the Jesuit affirmed, page 153. and 156.
that the Fathers still produced unwritten Traditions against the Heretics;
and that they made Tradition, and not Scripture, the only means whereby to
try true doctrine with Heretics. 3. It manifestly declares what the Fathers
thought of the sufficiency of Scripture, seeing they durst try the points in
controversy, between them and the Heretics, even at their own weapons, and
by their own principle; supposing Scripture to be their weapon and their
principle. As therefore the Fathers dealt with the Heretics, pressing them
only with Scripture; so might we deal with you: but we have been content to
be tried both by the Scripture, and by the Tradition of the Church delivered
by the mouth not only of twelve but also of CCCXVIII. Fathers giving their
verdict against you.

[5. When the Fathers do dispute of a custom or question Reply page 169
not yet determined by the Church, and consequently Tradition cannot be
alleged for the same: then the Fathers provoke their Adversaryes unto
Scripture only. And this our Adversaryes enlarge unto all articles of faith.
As in that of S. Hierome (which the Jesuit adds in the margin) That God was
borne of a virgin we believe, because we read it: that Mary did marry after she
was delivered, we believe not, because we read it not.]

11. The Fathers provoke their Adversaries unto Scripture only, not only in
doubtful questions not determined, but likewise in points of faith determined
by the Church out of the Scriptures. The first Council of Nice determined this
point, That the Son is consubstantiall with the Father, and yet about an 100.
years after S. Augustine disputing against Maximinus the Arian about the same
point, provokes August. cont. Maxim. l. 3. c. 14
him unto Scripture only. The Iesuit's instance of the perpetual virginity of
the blessed Virgin cannot agree with the observation of the Cardinal. If it
was a question not determined in the Church when S. Hierome wrote against
Helvidius, why then does the Jesuit insert it into his ag 126.
Catalogue of unwritten Traditions? For as Julius Rugerius, once one of the
Popes Protonotaries, observes, I^l. Ruger de lib. Canoni^is.
A Tradition is of no force if it have not been believed even from the times
of the Apostles.

[6. When the Fathers cry out upon the abominable impostures Reply p. 169.
of the Heretics, who ^athered upon the Apostles execrable Traditions; our
Adversaries make use of this against such Catholic and Apostolic
Traditions, as the universal Church in all ages, and thoroughout all nations,
has evermore observed.]

12. We admit all Catholic and Apostolic Traditions, and yield to the
doctrine of the Catholic Church, if by the Catholic Church he do not mean
the Roman Catholic Church. The Traditions of that Church are as execrable and
abominable as those Traditions which were invented by those Heretics; and we
have just cause, as the Fathers did, to cry ou^ against such Traditions.

These are the fraudulent inventions by which these Tradition-mongers seek to
avoyde the verdict which the Fathers have given against unwritten Doctrines;
whose fraud and craftiness do ^like wise appear in alleging the testimonies
of the Fathers for unwritten Traditions: for (as we have discovered in the
stateing of this Question) whereso^ver the Fathers use the word Tradition,
(meaning thereby either the manner of delivery, or the matter delivered, eith^r
Rituall Traditions unwritten, or Doctrin^ll Traditions written) all those
places, without any respect to the sense, most senselesly and deceitfully they
produce for their unwritten Traditions. When the Fathers use the word
Tradition, for the delivery of the written word in writing by the Apostles, or
for their delivery of the same things which are in the word by preaching, or by
practice; or for the Churches delivery of the written word, or of written
doctrines, either expressly written, or by consequence deduced, or delivered
in an unwritten form of words; or for the succession of true doctrine in the
Church, or for unwritten rites and ordinances used by the Church; all such
places they allege against us for their papisticall Traditions.

We confess that which follows in his Reply, [That Reply page 170.
the condition of being written, or not written belongs nothing at all unto
the nature of a precept, but only unto the manner of delivery: and therefore
if once we be assured it was delivered, we must not doubt of it.] This is the
true state of the Question, whether the Apostles did deliver such things or no?
Prove this, that the Apostles did deliver such doctrines as are not contained
in the Scriptures, and that your unwritten doctrines are the same, and we will
make no doubt of them. To prove this the Jesuit prop^undeth three rules,
whereby we may be certainly assured of this. 1. By the testimony of the
Church viva voce. 2. By the daily and constant practice of the Church. 3. By
the written attestation of the Saints and holy Doctors.

His 1. rule is thus squared, [Seeing our Adversaryes have Reply page 170
no other warrant for the written word, but the continual testimony of the
Church thoroughout all ages, having the same authority for the unwritten word,
why do they not embrace the same?]

13. If we had as good authority for the one as we have for the other, we would
embrace it; for the written word we have more sure grounds then the testimony
of the Church, as we have Sect. 4. Div. 16
showed: but for unwritten Traditions we have not so much as the continual
testimony of the Church throroughout all ages. Produce, if you can, the
continual testimony of the Church thoroughout all ages, for adoring of Images,
for denying the Cup and the Scriptures unto the common people, and marriage
unto Priests. To prove unwritten Traditions by the testimony of the Church is
to prove idem per idem; for they account the testimony of the Church an
unwritten Tradition. This is to prove obscurum per obscurius, because it is a
most di^^icult thing to find out the continual testimony of the Church
thorough all ages. Howsoever we put it to the trial of the Church exceptis
semper excipiendis. 1. That it be the testimony of the truly Catholic Church,
not of the Roman Catholic Church whose fame is cracked, and ^he is ^mficti
pravi^ tenax; the case is her own, and she must not be a witness in her own
cause* Aug epist. 9.
If one false thing be found in the Scriptures, says S. Augustine, what
authority can there be in them? In the Roman Church there is at the least one
false Tradition which is not from the Apostles, as the taking away of the
Cup, and then what authority can there be in her testimony? 2. The testimony
of the Church must be believed; (the Jesuit might spare his labor in proving
it.) but it cannot beget that (...) full assurance which the Scripture does: so
that I may easily answer his question, [What deposition of witnesses, I pray
Reply p. 170.
you, can be more certain and authentical, then tho voice of the whole
Church?] Why, the voice of the Scripture is a more ^ure word; holy men may be
deceived in some things, and their a^^irmation makes a thing probable: but the
Scripture is infallible, so certain as non potest ^ubesse falsam; the
Scriptures affirmation is a most certain demonstration. And now, having made
our exceptions, let us hear the continual testimony of the Church. [The voice
of the Church is an uniforme consent and agreement of six or seven Reply p. 170.
thousand Chayres, and Episcopal Successions derived without any interruption
from the Apostles, and their successors, and of many millions of subordinate
Churches ^h^rough the which, as thorough so many c^nduit pipes, ordained
assisted, and authorized by the holy Ghost for this effect, the Traditions of
the Apostles have with a great uniformity, sliden, and ^^owen through all ages
unto us.] This is not the vo^ce of Jacob, but of Esau; we expected to hear the
continual t^stimony of the Church, a^ least to hear some of the 6000 or 7000
chaires, or one of the many millions of subordinat Churches; and we hear only
the testimony of a ^esuite, who will make no bones o^ it to lie for the good of
the Church; Part^rit Oceanus, prodit de gurgite squ^lla. Our exc^ptions have
prevented his testimony; you may as well ask the daughter if the mother be an
whore: Thais, or Lais will never condemn her self. Neither does he tell us
what the Church says by her testimony; but it is a ^esuiticall description of
the voice of the Church. An uniforme consent has not been continually in all
ages in the Church about such Rituall Traditions it self as the Apostles have
delivered unto the Church. He that knows any thing in antiquity, cannot be
ignorant of that dissent in the Church about the observation of Easter day. Six
or seven thousand Chayres, and Episcopal Successions, derived without any
interruption from the Apostles, and their Successors, and of many millions of
subordinate Churches. This is like the eleven thousand virgins; Where shall we
find them? Were there so many Apostles, did they sit in so many Chayres, and
are there so many Chayres that can be derived successively from the Apostles
without any interruption? The Roman Church is none of these, in which there
has often been a personal interruption, and at this day there is a doctrinall
interruption in succession from S. Peter. Through which, as through so many
conduit pipes, the Traditions of the Apostles have, with a great uniformitie,
sliden thorough all ages unto us; It stands you upon to prove this, for we deny
it. It is false, impossible, and improbable.

False, because the Roman conduit pipe is so stuffed up with mire and filth,
that the water, which passes thorough it, is the water of Marah; and not the
water of life: her Traditions are not Apostolical, but Apostaticall.

Impossible, because if this Jesuit were as strong as Sampson, as wise as
Solomon, as long lived as Methusalem, and did nothing but study this point all
his life, yet he is not able to declare what was believed and practiced
continually, thorough all ages, with an uniforme consent, in those 6000. or
7000. Chayres, and many millions of subordinate Churches.

And it is improbable, that things unwritten, trusting to the bare memory of
man for their pre^ervation, should, continually, in all ages, thorough
thousands and millions of Churches, with such an uniformity slide unto you;
seeing it is most certain, vox audita per^t. The Jesuit foreseeing that this
rule would not hold, frames his second rule after this manner.

[Those matters were not trusting unto the bare memory of Reply p. 170.
man for their preservation, but were surely stamped in the custom and daily
practice of the Church, never to be obliterated, but it was continually extant
most apparently, at every hour, and moment.]

14. This rule is likewise liable to the same exceptions.

It is false, 1. Because our Adversaries hold many things to be unwritten
Traditions, which cannot be seen in the daily practice of the Church, and are
not continually extant most apparently, at every hour, and moment. Such are
those Traditions which the Jesuit has Page 126.
alleged, as That the Father is unb^ggott^n; that the Son is
consubstantiall with the Father; that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the
Father, and the Son, as from one beginning. These things we believe, we see
them not; how then can they be seen continually extant most apparently? Such
likewise are those secret and hidden mysteries, which for their dignity least
they should be contemned by too much familiarity, (as the Jesuit has Page 155.
said) were not to be written. If they might not be read, then surely they
ought not to be continually extant most apparently, at every hour, and moment.
2. Because Custom is not to be the rule of faith, unless we have the
authority of the Scripture for that custom. Basil. epist. ^0.
It is not good, says Basil, to make custom the law and rule of true
doctrine: the Scriptures inspired by God must be the Judge. 3. Because such
Traditions as are now defended in the Roman Church were not continually
observed in all the Churches of God. 4. Because all the points of faith, which
were surely stamped in the daily practice of the Church, were likewise more
surely stamped in the holy Scriptures. [The Apostles did not write their
Traditions in letters of paper, and ink, but in the heart, and forehead of the
Church, (says the Jesuit) because the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 3. 3:
you are manifest to be the Epistle of Christ ministered by us.] Those things
were written in their hearts, therefore they were not written in paper and ink;
this inference is so absurd, that with all the paper and ink in the world he
can never make it good. Whatsoever is written in the Scriptures ought to be
written, as it were, in our hearts, and on our foreheads; thus we read of the
blessed virgin, she laid up in her Luc. ^. 19.
heart, those things which are written. With the heart we Romans 10. 10.
believe; Do we therefore believe things unwritten? No, for those things are
written that we may Ioh. 20. 31.
believe. The writing of things in the heart does no more exclude writing in
paper and ink, then it does exclude teaching by word of mouth. S. Paul calls
the Corinthians his Epistle, because in their practice he read the doctrine
which he taught them, he may as well infer, therefore S. Paul did not write
two Epistles unto the Corinthians in paper, and ink. The instances, given by
the Jesuit, of the baptizing of Children, and of the observing of Sunday, are
of this nature, things seen in practice, and things written in the Scriptures.
This is so evident, that after all his labor and toil to prove unwritten
points of faith, he concludes with us against himself in these very words, [
page 171.
All those points of Christian Religion which do absolutely belong unto the
naked Theorick, or speculation of our faith, are touched, either directly, or
indirectly, in the the Scripture: and those articles which are reserved unto
sole Tradition, are rituall points.] This shows that there is some hope of
the man, for he renounceth all Doctrinall points of Popery, and only holds
with it in such Rituall points as are unwritten.

As this is false, and therefore is no rule in it selse: so it is impossible to
be known, and therefore it is no rule unto us. Can a man be at every hour,
and moment, in those thousands, and many millions of Churches, to see their
practice most apparently extant? You tell us that the Jews had unwritten
Traditions, as well as the Christian^, among which this was, one, Bella^^ de
verbo Deil. 4. cap. 4.
The remedy for original sin in women, and as you cannot tell us, by the
daily practice and custom of that Church, what the remedy was; so if we should
ask you, what the practice of the primitive times in all those Churches was?
If you have no better rule then the practice it self, in many things you may
answer ignoramus.

It is likewise improbable, that the custom and practice of so many Churches,
being not written, though it were never so apparent and common to themselves,
should with such an uniformitie descend down unto us. What is more common and
usual in daily practice then speech and language? Yet all languages are
corrupted, and have lost their original purity, notwithstanding the common
use of them* and the purity of the ancient languages, as of the Hebrew and the
Greek, is best preserved by the writings of the old and new Testament.
Traditions were in use from Adam unto Moses, and those Traditions might have
been seen in the daily practice of the Church: yet the Lord, seeing this was
not a sufficient means to preserve the purity of those Traditions, gave a more
ordinary help of extraordinary means, as of Dreams, Visions, and
R^velations: and as these extraordinary m^anes failed, so the Lord perfected
the Canon of Scripture, as the best means to preserve the purity of doctrine.
And when these means failed, says S. Chrysostom, (...). Chrysostom hom. c. in
Math.
It was necessary that there should be Scriptures and written tables, and such
admonition a^ is according unto them. Were those things s^amped in the
practice, and written in the heart, of many men, or of one? If of many, hardly
could there be an uniforme consent; for so many men, so many minds: if of one,
then, when this one dies, the Church must needs lose a great part of her
necessary Doctrine. And thus it appears, that neither m^morie, nor practice,
without writing is sufficient, but that writing is the surest and the only
sufficient means, to preserve from time to time, and at all times, the purity
of Doctrine in the Church from oblivion, alteration, and decay. Wherefore God
gave this commandment unto Moses, Erod. 17. 24.
Write this for a remembrance in a book. And to the Prophet Isaiah, Isa: 30. 8.
Write it before them in a table, and note it in a book, that it may be for
the last day, for ever and ever. In perpetuam rei memoriam. The Jesuit
likewise foreseeing this adds his 3d. rule in these words.

[God has ordained, that from age to age, the said Rituall Reply page 17^
or practical Traditions, should be corr^borated by the written attestation of
the Saints, and holy Doctors: whose uniforme relation in matters universally
practiced by the Church of their times, whereof they were eye witnesses
themselves, is a warrant of it self infallible.]

15. I his rule is liable to more exceptions then the former.

It is impertinent, because he pleads the written attestation of the Doctour^
for Rituall Traditions; whereas he should plead for unwritten Doctrinall
Traditions.

It is improbable, that God has ordained the Doctors of the Church to write
those things, which he would not have his Apostles to write.

It is false, 1. Because all the Saints and holy Doctour^ have not given a
written attestation for unwritten Traditions. 2. An uniform-relation is not
found among them that have written of Rituall Traditions. 3. All rituall
Traditions have not been universally practiced by the Church. 4. If all this
were t^^e, yet this is not a warrant of it self infallible. An humane
testimony is fallible, and cannot beget faith; for Romans 10 17.
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. The testimony of the
Doctors is but the word of man, and as men they might err. The Apostles could
not err in their delivery, yet the choice men, to whom those supposed
Traditions were delivered, might err in not understanding the Apostles aright,
or in not remembering those things which they heard, and understood: if they, to
whom those things were delivered by the Apostles immediately, did not err in
their relateing of the same things unto others: yet those relators after them
might err in process of time: and so at length false Traditions might be
fathered upon the Apostles. Yea, they did err in relateing false Traditions;
What say you to Irenaus his Tradition, that Christ lived 50. years? And to
Clemens Alexandrinus, that he preached but one year? Their warrant therefore
is not of it self infallible, who were themselves fallible, and sometimes
deceived by their own errors, or by false relators.

It is likewise an impossible rule to be known, because some Saints, and
Doctors did not write: all that did write we have not: all that we have is
not truly from them, many counterfeit things have been fathered on them, and
many true things corrupted in them: all that are truly theirs do not declare
the universal practice in every age: all that declare the universal practice
do not declare any practice of many Popish Traditions, which are observed in
this age. All of them he cannot name: if he can name them, yet he never saw
them: if he saw them, yet he never read them.

These things we write, not to contemn the testimony of the Church, nor her
practice, nor the writings of the Fathers; for both the testimony, and the
practice of the Church, and the writings of the Fathers plead for our cause:
but to give that honor unto the Scripture which is due, to show the shortest
and easiest way to en^ thi^, and all other Controversies, and to manifest to
the world, the thrasonicall bragges, and great boastings of thousands and
millions of this bankrup^ Jesuitical merchant, w^o answers an objection, and
objecteth one thing mo^e, and so concludes with a curse.

He f^ameth his objection and answer in this manner.

[How idle, and ridiculous an objection i^ it to say, that if Reply page 171
way be given unto Apostolical Traditions unwritten, there is nothing so
^bsurd but may be brought in by this gate? As though i^ lay in the power of any
whosoever, to make a new invention to mount up against the current of
Antiquity, and to gain the attestation of all the ages of the Church. The
like argument may be urged against the writings of the Apostles: for why may
not false Scripture he invented? but only because it is impossible for the like
frand to rec^ile back through former ages.]

16. We dispute not against Traditions, merely because they are not written,
but because they are not from the Apostles; and yet are pretended by you to be
from the Apostles. If we give way unto such, there is nothing so absurd, but it
may enter in at this wide gate, which leads to perdition. ^f this do ^rin be
sound in the general, whatsoever the R^ma^ Church says is an Apostolical
Tradition is so indeed; then any particular evil may enter thereby. This is a
budget wide enough to hold all the devilish devises that can be, as deposing
of Kings, adoring of Images. forbidding of marriage unto Priests, and the Cup
unto the common people. In which although you cannot gain the attestation of
all the ages of the Church, nor make those new inventio^s to mount up against
the curre^t of antiquity: yet we know and can discover your slu^tish tricks in
chopping and changing, in wresting and wri^ging, in boasting and bragging of
the test^monies of antiquity. And surely whatsoever you say concerning the holy
Scriptures, had you any hope of attaining good success, as you have fathered
false Traditions on the Apostles, so you would not spare to invent false
Scripture under the name of Canonical Authors. We know your good will by
adding Apocryphal books unto Canonical Scripture, and by equalizing Papal
Decrees, and Ecclesiastical Interpretations with the written word: but it is
not so easy a thing for you to bring in counterfeit Scriptures, as counterfeit
Traditions, because the Scripture has more helps to hinder the effecting of
it, then Traditions have. 1. The Scripture has Gods providence to preserve it
from addition, as well as from diminution: but unwritten Traditions want Gods
providence to preserve them either from the one, or the other; where shall we
find those five books of Apostolical Traditions written by Egesippus, which
you allege against us? As those are lost, so we may find many volumes of
false Traditions. 2. The number of the Books of holy Scripture is so well
known, that none can add unto it, but it will be presently discovered: it is
not so with unwritten Traditions, the Pope himself cannot, or will not lay
down the certain definite number of unwritten Traditions, and say, These and
no more we hold as unwritten Traditions. I desire the Jesuit to do one thing,
nay, I hold out the flag of desiance, and avouch it, that he is not able to
do it, To lay down the definite number, neither more nor less, of unwritten
Traditions. If he ever reply again, let him not forget this Challenge; but I
know he dares not for his ^ares to do it, because this is the only shift they
have to color their new Inventions; It is a Tradition. So that there may be an
addition unto Traditions, and yet by the number it shall not be discovered;
because the number is not yet, nor shall hereafter be discovered. 3. The
Scripture is a thing it self extant in fa^t, always visible, and not trusting
to the bare memory of man, or to the attestation of others: So that, if any
add unto it, it will testify of it self, and for it self: but unwritten
Traditions, (taking them at the best hand) as they come from their first
Authors, (...) things extant in fact, nor always visible; but (speaking the
best of them) trusting unto the bare memory of others; so that others must
testify for them, they cannot testify for themselves: and therefore they are
more subject to addition, even by those that testify for them. And thus we
have discovered his proofs to be false, or impertinent; and his three rules to
be foolish, or impossible.

That of S. Paul to the Thessalonians, of Basil, of Chrysostom, and of the
Council of Gangers, is Paul to These. Sect. 3. Divis. 1. Basil. Sect 6. Divis.
10. Chrysostom. Sect 3 Divis. 2. Conc Gang. Sect 9. Divis. 2
already answered; and now there remains only the Curse thundered forth by
that cursed conventicle of Nice, commonly called, the second Council of Nice.

[ Conc Nic. 2. Act. 7.
If any man contemn the Tradition of the Church, which is authorized either by
writing, or by custom, let him be accursed.]

17. We are not nice to deny this conventicle of Nice, Reply page 172
seeing it was called by an insolent woman, Irene, domineering over her
husband, was compacted of a sort of Idolaters, and condemned by a better council
Francos. iuxta Maenum. an. 794. Walafrid. Stra. and Ado Viennens. in Histos.
Council. This causeless Prove. 26. 2.
curse we fear not, it shall not come upon us: but rather like Noah's dove, it
shall return from whence it came. We fear not Balaams curses, though he do
vent them with Bell, Book, and Candle; for though they curse, yet the Psalm.
109 28.
Lord will bless. But let all Tradition-mongers fear that dreadful curse,
which the Lord pronounces against all such as shall teach prater, or contra,
otherwise, or contrary wise then the Scripture: expound the word (...) as you
will (all such are beside the way, or in a contrary way.) Let all such, I say,
fear that curse written by S. Paul, Gal. 1. 8.
If we, or an Angel from heaven preach otherwise unto you, then that which we
have preached unto you, let him be accursed. And lest you should think to
avoyde this curse, in saying, S. Paul speaks not of what was written, but of
what was preached: S. Augustine forewarneth you thus, Si quis, si^e d Ch^i^^o
sive de cius Ecclesia, sive de qu^^un q^e a^i^^e, q^ae pertinet ad si them
vitamque nostram; ^n d^c^m si nos, sed qu^d Pau lu^ (...) it, ^ A^g^us de c^ l^
vob sa^nun ^iave^it, prae ^^rqua ^^ q^od in Scripturis legalibus e^angelicis
acc^pi stis, an^ them sit. Aug lib 3. cont. liter. Pe til c. 6.
If any one, concerning Christ, or his Church, or any other thing, which
^elongeth unto faith, and life; I will not say, if we, but as Paul adds, if
an Angel from heaven prea^h unto you otherwise then what you have received in
the writings of the law, and the Gospel, let him be accursed. And who can
declare what curse this i^? for though there be no unwritten Doctrines; yet
there are unwritten Deuteronomy 2^ 6
curses.

I^ the Jesuit have any mind to reply again, let him begin when he will he
shall be answered, for this time the combat is ended, and the day is ours: the
Arc stands, and Dagon is fallen: the great Fort of Popery is battered down
and all Popery tottereth at the ^all of it.

In this Adversary we have discovered many shifts, but little learning a
spiteful heart, a b^^ter tongue, and a brazen f^ce are his best arguments. His
whole discourse like an aerie meteor, being composed of a deal of matter
imperfectly mixed together, is quite vanished; as his proofs are weak, ^o his
position is wicked: and therefore let nothing draw thee from Scripture to
follow after other Doctrines, but let that be the Lyains Lapis, the touchstone
of truth and then I will say of unwritten Traditions, that which Saul said to
Jonathan concerning his Kingdom, 1. Sam. 20 31.
As long as the Son of Isha^ lives, thou shall not be established, o^ thy
Kingdom.

Faults to be amended.
In the Title page line 17. for were read are.

IN the Epistle for Ze^^crates read Xenocra^es. Page 2. lin. 11. for fibolist
read fikher. p. 5. lin. 27 for that read thus. p. 6. l. 2. for Jesuits read
Jesuit p. 9 l. 19. for speak read speak p. 11 l. 10. for as it read as if
it p. 16. l. 18. for Tradition read Traditions p. 1^. l. 32 for the read this
p. 32 l. 4. for Le^s^us read Lense^s. p. 41. l. 35. for them read him. p. 54.
l. 36. for handles read ^oldeth. p. 84. l. 8. for to to read to. p. ^6 l. 6.
for wrestling read wresting p 87 l 24. for wrestle wrestling, read wrest
wresting p. 135. l. ^. for not read and* p. 138. l. 21. for call read call
them. p 160. l. 3. for our read your. p. 171 l. 12. for (...) read if (...).
p. ^69. l 36. for and the read and to this end the.

In the margent.

P. 6 for 129 read 120. p. 9. for Chrysostom. read Chrysol. p 36. for sap read
sip. p. 57. for (...) read (...). p. 81. for 26. read 96. p 106 for (...) read
(...). p 111. for (...) read (...) p. 111. for (...) read (...). p. 136. for 92
read c. 92 p. 140 for mandatur read mandantur. p. 143. for c. ^^ read 3^. p.
144. for fidel^ read fidelibus. p. 147 for p. 164. read p. 156. p. 149. for
hom. 3. read hom. 31. p. 159. for Mat. 12. read Mat. 2.

Add p. ^0. l 14. All that was inspired was preached. p. 27 l. 23. blot out
the comma between Euchari^t, fasting. and between Person, Christ. p. 144. l.
30. and after (...) page 36: marg.


