MVSARVM DELICIAE.

CONTAINING MORE then a select Century of royal Latin Anagrams, besides
diverse written in English, upon the sacred name and titles of our Dread
Sovereign and of his dearest Consort, and their most Princely Progeny.

Together with apposite Anagrams upon all the English Monarchs that have lived
and died since the union of the royal roses and houses of York and Lancaster.

Some few of those extracted from his Majesty's Imperial Name, have been
heretofore presented to his Royal hands with gracious acceptance.

The Latin Anagrammes are expressed in English verses in the opposite Column.

Perused anew, and now published altogether, (with the Authors assent) by
Arthur Pyne Esquire, to whom the Anagrams made in honor of the Prince his
Highness were in special manner directed.

Cicero. Non contentio animi, sed relaxatio.

London printed by Anne Griffin. 1635.

PRAEFATIO POETICA.
Ad Carolum Regem Augustum.
Carole qui triplicis fulges diademate Regni,
Ter populo dilecte, Deo dilecte ter-uni;
( Virgil.
Semper honos nomenque tuum laudesque manebunt;)
Scripta tuam accipias in laudem, nomen, honorem.
Great Charles with three rich diadems high-crowned,
Thrice loved of men, the Trinities delight;
For your great Like Gods peculiar people, high in praise and in name, and in
honor. Deuteronomy 26.19.
honor, name, and praise renowned:
In praise of your most honored name I write.
To the Queens Majesty.
Great Queen, great Britains other greater light;
My Muse (although least worthy) here brings forth
Choice Anagrams (in which French wits delight)
To testify her service, and your worth.
Ad Carolum Principem infantem.
Haeredum flos sum, haeres dignissime ^^sorum and liliorum.
florum,
Gallica quos tellus, quosque Britanna tulit;
Ecce tibi, Princeps, Musarum flosculus horti
Ad Tamisim a Tamarae margin missus adest.
You He alludeth to the flowring month of May in which the Prince was borne.
flower of Princes whom French lillyes shield,
And the fair roses of these British Realms;
Accept some flowers of the Pierian field,
From The author lives near the banks of Tamar.
Tamar brought to Thames the Prince of Streams.
To the Duke of York.
James now is what Charles was in th'unions Spring,
Yorkes duke descended from the royal race:
Charles is what James then was, the Sovereign King
Of all this Island, through Gods Sovereign Grace.
Since th'heav'ns are pleased thus to transpose great names;
Deigne your acceptance to these Anagrams.
To the Lady Mary.
Most princely Lady, some poeticke Lays,
Presuming on your leave, I here advance
To you, who raised are to be the praise
And ornament of Britain and of France.
My chaste Muse free's from fears of just offense,
Clad (like your infant years) in innocence.
The fourefold Anagram following compares the Kings Majesty for his princely
literature to the Laurel, the crown of learning; for his rare eminency and
constant piety, to the Cedar, whose lea^e never falls, and whose fruit never
fails; for the gracious br^ghtnesse of royal majesty, to the morning
inlightening and enlivening the earth; and for all perfections of grace and
government, to that sacred and learned king Alured, otherwise called Altered,
whose valor and virtue are so highly extolled by our historians.
Anagramma quadruplex.
Carolus Stevvarde.
1. Tu laurus es decora,
2. Tu sola vera Cedrus:
3. Sed luces vt Aurora,
4. O sacer vt Aluredus!
Like the fair laurel you appear,
You like the goodly Cedar spread:
But you shine at the morning clear,
A sacred King like Alured.
In the next Anagram his majesty is most fitly likened to that gotlly and
gracious king Oswald, whose name (says our Antiquary)'s equivalent in
signification with Steward. This Oswald having been baptized among the Scots
was afterward crowned King over the English, and (so Bid writes) did cause
this whole Island to flow with peace and flourish with plenty.

Anagramma
Carolus Stewardus.
Tercarus Oswaldus.
Like dear Saint Oswald whom historians found
In Scotland christend and in England crowned.
Other Anagrams acknowledging his sacred Majesty to be as the clear light, and
the dear delight of his loyal people.

Anagramma duplex.
[Carolus Steuarde.]
1. Dote rarus luceas;
2. Sol acer et arduus,
Enriched with heavens rare dower, continue shining;
Like the high placed Sun in power, not in declining.
Carolus primus Steuardus totius Albionis Rex serenissimus.
Anagramma.
Nostra lux or suet usu clarissima, nos si deseris tu, peribimus.
Our light whose ray and rising does us cherish;
Should you away, we drowned in tears must perish.
The two following Anagrams, the latter of which is contryved into an exact
hexameter and pentameter verse, do declare his majesty to be the beauty and
safety, the ornament and the muniment of his dominions.

Carolus Stevvardus Angliae et Scotiae Monarcha.
Anagramma.
Suorum decor, ac genti suae laeta salutis anchora.
He under God his great Protector, stand.
As th'ornament and anchor of his Lands.
Carolus primus Stevvardus, et Anglorum, et Scotorum Rex ac Monarcha
serenissimus.
Anagramma.
Arx suprema suis, summus decor, anchora grata,
Cor, turris, columen, lumen et esto suis.
His peoples stay, their refuge, and safe fort,
Their heart, their eye, their beauty, and support.
Hi^ Majesty's royal marriage with the Lady Mary Burbon was thus celebrated in
Heroical Anagrammaticall verses, and in sundry other Anagrams to them annexed.

Carolus primus Angliae et Scotiae Monarcha.
Anagramma.
Carus amore cito, ac Gallis pius, enthea Norma.
His nuptial love was dear and undelayd;
He to the French an heavenly rule and aid.
Carolus unitae Angliae et Scotine Monarcha.
Anagramma.
Sic volat alina, venit castae Regina coronae.
The fairest Queen came flying on loves wing
Unto the crown of Charles the chastest king.
Anagramma
Carolus Stevvartius Rex.
Creaturus Vxori Salutes.
He having taken her to wife, will make her
Of most abundant happiness partaker.
Anagramma
Carolus primus Stevvartius
Angliae Rex potentissimus.
Erat (sic Gallae notus, unitus)
Pius semper Vxoris Maritus.
Thus known and knit unto his peerless Queen,
A pious Husband he has ever been.
Anagramma.
Carolus Stevvartius Angliae et Scotiae Monarcha.
Sis Cato, Numa, Curlus,
Ter carae Gallae vita et honos.
Like Numa, Curious and Cato chaste;
Her life and honor whom his love embraced.
Carolus I. Stevvartius Monarcha Britanniae.
Anagramma.
Constans Mariae turtur haberis, vnica viola.
The Turtle dear that to his Peer
has constant love expressed;
The violet that heaven did set
for Mary's fairest breast.
Carolus I. Stevvardus, et Britannorum
Scotiaeque Monarcha optimus.
Anagramma.
Vultu atque motibus perdecotus,
Nova norma sancti et casti amoris.
Whose modest look and life are rules to move
Our looser times to learn a chaster love.
Carolus I. Stevvardus praecellentissimus
et Rex et Monarcha Britannicus.
Anagramma.
Sic tursus virtus ipsa amorum excellens
et alta viret, bina corda nectens.
We now behold (like those of old)
loves highest power to reign,
Which in this fair and high borne pair
has made one heart of twain.
Carolus Stevvartius vnitae Angliae simul
ac Scotiae Monarcha serenissimus.
Anagramma.
Sunt Musis aevo hoc natis vere aurea secla,
Nam Regum castis lilia iuncta rosis.
The golden age, as I presage,
Shall now the Muses nourish;
Since with the Rose the Lilly grow's,
and being crowned does flourish.
Carolus I. Steuartius vnitae Angliae Scotiaeque Monarcha.
Anagramma.
Lilio casto iuuenique natae
Amantur Rosae, succis gratae.
The tender Lilly through loves chaste device,
Enioyes the pleasant Roses cordial juice.
The heavenly protection extended toward his Majesty through the whole course
of his life is thus anagrammatically acknowledged.

Carolus Steuartius et Rex et Monarcha Angliae.
Anagramma.
-- Te amavit
(O terra laetans Rex!) chorus Angelicus.
O king on earth triumphing! from above,
You, the triumphant Angels guard and love.
The late deplored condition of his Majesty's exiled only Sister was thus
commiserated in an Anagram.

Anagramma
Carolus Rex, Britonum Caesar.
Cur soror exul sacra manebit?
Why shall his sacred Sister thus remain
An exile and exposed to foes disdain?
The following Anagrams were composed in relation to his Majesty's most pious
and virtuous endowments, which make him parallel to the most famous Princes,
and precious to his loyal people.

Anagramma
Carolus Steuart.
Clarus sort tua.
His lot befell him in the fairest field.
Anagramma
Carolus Steuartus.
Solus sacra tuetur.
He Is under God, our Churches only shield.
Anagr. duplex
Carolus Steuartius.
1. Vt cor salutare suis
2. Ortu et ausis clarus.
His loyal Subjects healthful heart and mirth;
Renowned both for enterprise, and birth.
Anagramma
Carolus Stuartius est
Carus et ut ros salutis.
Carolus Stevvartius Angliae
et Scotiae Monarcha.
Anagr.
Tuae et ara gentis ac oculus:
Amor, oris ac anhelitus.
His peoples refuge, love and sweet delight,
Breath of their mouth, and of their eyes the light.
Anagramma
Carolus Stevvardus.
Ades vt rarus oculus.
Anagramma
Carolus Stevartus Rex Britanniae.
Virtute Rebus annexa, stas clarior.
Who stand's the more renowned in men's opinions
For joining virtues great with large dominions.
Anagramma
Carolus Steuartus Britannorum
Monarcha serenissimus.
Musis en Constantinus rarus;
Orbi almus, ter amore charus!
A Constantine unto the Christian Muses;
The fairest and dear'st Prince that the world produces.
Anagramma
Carolus Stevvartius
Verus auctor salutis.
Whom all true-hearted Britons do confess
To be th'Augmenter of their happiness.
Anagramma duplex.
Carolus Steuartius.
1. Tuta salus. vires, cor.
2. Sicut rosa salvetur!
Their safe health, and their strength and heart is he.
O let him as the Rose preserved be!
Carolus primus Stevvartus validissime potens vuitae Angliae et Scotiae
Monarcha.
Anagramma.
Carum adeo cor, vita, salus Anglis venit; Ipsi
Mars venit, et Musae, Clio, Arethusa, potens.
When he our so dear heart, life, health became,
Breath of our nostrils, glory of his name:
Mars and the Muses with Diana's mate
Came to him to attend his royal State.
Carolus primus Steuartus, Angliae Scotiae
Hiberniacque Monarcha ter honoratissimus, et munificentissimus; valde acer ac
mitus
Veritatis et Fidei Defensor.
Anagramma.
En fecit nostris Is sane haec otia Musis:
Verum Virtutis gloria calcar habet.
Nam laudi est huic mitis amor, neque forma fereno
Ipsi, nec virtus rara, fidesve deest.
Lo thus the glory that our king has won,
Gave spur to my dull verse, and made it run.
For, gentleness, faith, ^ew^y, virtues rare,
Crown Charles the Titles given by historians to the royal name of Charles.
wise, the welbelou'd, the fair.
A twofold Anagram.
Charles Steuart.
1. Cal's true hearts.
2. Hate's cruel arts.
Mercy and Truth have met in him as Mates,
He cal's true hearts, and cruel arts he hate's.
The Queens Majesty is compared in the six fold Anagram following to the
Turtle for her conjugall chastity and fidelity; to the Asian myrrh and Phaenix
for her incorrupt sincerity, and singular excellency, and concluded to be a
most gentle and gracious Lady.
Anagramma hexasticon.
[Maria Stevvartia.]
1. Ea turturi amasia,
2. Marita, vera, iusta.
3. Vt avis etiam rara.
4. Aut ut Asiae mirrha.
5. Viris amata vt hera
6. Mitis, aurata, vera.
She Is mate unto a Turtle fair,
A faithful wife and ever true.
She Is of her sex the Phoenix rare,
And like Myrrh which in Asia grew.
A Lady, of all men beloved,
Most gentle, excellent, approved.
The royal abundance of the Queens virtues, and her earnest desire to bind
the British and French scepters in an everlasting league, together with our
devout prayers that she may flourish like the pleasant Vine in her royal
branches, and long live with her Lord, the King, have occasioned this fourefold
Anagram,

Anagramma quadruplex.
Maria Stevvartia Regina.
1. Ara virtutis regia, amaena;
2. Vis maritare regna avita.
3. Ramis vireat grata vinea,
4. Vna sit vera, regia Marita.
Virtues fair Altar, richly furnished,
You royally will ancient kingdoms wed.
O let this pleasant Vine her branches spread,
And never deck a -- coniuge gaudeat uno,
Et semper natis gaudeat illa tribus.
Martial.. epig. 54. lib. 11.
second husbands bed!
Upon her Majesty's admired virtues, mildness, beauty, royal descent; happy
marriage, peace-loving disposition, rare perfection and excellent sharpness
and ripeness of wit and judgment, these Anagrams have been written.

Anagr.
Maria Steuarta Regina.
T^n' Astraea mira, regia?
A just Astraea you have ever been,
Justly admired, and most royal Queen.
Anagr. duplex.
Maria Stuartia Regina.
1. Ave Martis atri ignara;
2. Mitis, niuea, grata, rara.
Hail Lady taking no delight in war,
Most calm and comely, gracious and rare.
Anagramma duplex.
Maria Stevvarta Regina.
1. Ave nimis arguta et rara;
2. Grata tuis Minervae ara.
Hail worthiest Queen in wit excelling far,
You to your train Minerva's Altar are.
Maria Stevvartia Anglorum Regina.
Anagr.
-- natu
Tu re regalis, magna (Maria) Viro.
Borne of a royal house, and grown like Maud the Empress who was also the
daughter of an Henry, of whom we read Magna ortu, maierque Viro --
great since,
By being the Spouse of so renoun'd a Prince.
Maria Stevvartia Anglorum Regina.
Anagramma
Regali or natu sum margarita nivea.
For royal ornaments deserving praise,
As the white orient pearl of these our days.
Maria Steward vnitae et Angliae ac Scotorum Regina.
Anagramma.
-- Advenit (o) sic
Alma Ceres, et Juno grata, arguta Minerva!
Fruitful as Ceres, for a graceful gate
Like -- incedens Juno, Minerva loquens. Ang.
Juno, for sharp wit Minerva's mate.
Anagramma.
Maria Steuard.
Marti adversa.
Anagramma
Maria Stevvart.
Tu Martia versa.
Your self you show (through all your life)
To be a Foe to war, and strife.
Anagramma
Maria Steuarta.
Atas tueti amat.
Your love to peace that lovely mak's,
Staye's crowns and altars which war shake's.
Anagramma
Maria Stevvart.
Maturitas vera.
You in true ripeness of perfection shine,
Anagramma
Maria Stevvarta.
Aurea maturitas.
Like perfect gold dig'd from the purest Mine.
Of the Queens thrice amiable countenance and admirable carriage winning
affections at first view, these Anagrams have been written.

Anagramma
Maria Stevvart.
Visa ter amatur.
This gracious Queen of all approved,
Where she is once seen, is thrice beloved.
Anagramma
Maria Steuarda Regina.
Tu hera digna eras amati.
A Lady merely for great worth affected,
Beloved sincerely, worthily respected.
Maria Steuarda Regina Anglica.
Anagr.
Amati digna es vt rara, Angelica.
Love's precious Iemme, the dear delight of all;
Beauties bright beam, rare, fair, Angelical.
Anagram.
Mary Steward.
Draw's my heart.
O how attractive are her virtuous parts,
The lodestone and the load-starre of men's hearts.
Anagr.
Marie Steuard.
Vesta married.
She Is chaste as Vesta, and upon fames wing
Mounts higher, married to the chastest king.
The great Blessings which Great Britain hops to enjoy in her young Prince
Charles have been anagrammatically expressed as follows.
Anagr.
Carolus Stevvartius haeres Britannicus.
Tun' ut alba viris rosa sua viter crescens?
Like to the fair white rose you do arise,
Which so, delightful growe's to all men's eyes.
Anagr. duplex.
Carolus Stevvartius.
1. Vir esto lautus, catus.
2. Coelitus satur arvus.
Grow fair and dear by grace and nature dressed,
And like a field with heavenly fullness blessed.
Carolus Stevvartus regiminis haeres.
Anagr.
Cum vestris iunge laurea serta rosis.
Still with your royal english roses join
The Laurel garland of the Arts divine.
Anagr.
Carolus Steuartius haeres.
Art charus sis et aureolus.
Grow dear through learned arts (while wars wax cruel)
Be in this iron age a golden Jewel.
Anagramma
Carolus Stevvartius.
Cultus ut rosa vireas.
Grow fair and flourish, and fresh odours yield,
Anagramma
Carolus Steuartus.
Vt rosa cultus eras.
Decked like the rose that does adorn the field.
Anagramma
Carolus Stuartius haeres.
Iustus heroes art clarus.
Most nobly just, and for ca^h art renowned,
Carelus Stevvartus Princeps Angliac.
Anagr.
Is apt ornatus, clarus, Angelicus puer.
From heaven fitly furnished to be crowned,
Anagramma
Carolus Steuardus Walliae Princeps.
Ille novus, purus, ac reparatus Alcides
In whom Alcides is restored a new,
Strengthened with virtue, vices to subdue.
In the following Anagrams the Prince as the hopeful heir of his royal
Fathers resplendent vertu^s, is compared to those glorious heavenly bodies the
Sun and Stars, and to those renowned Princes of Britain King Arthur and
King Lucius, of whom the former has his name derived from that northern fixed
star Arcturus, and the latter from the light which the Sun shed's upon the
earth, etc.

Anagr.
Carolus Steuartius haeres Britannicus.
Essicut Arthurus ac vere Sol Britannis.
Yare like Prince Arthur in our British Story,
And like the Sun rising in perfect glory.
Anagramma
Carolus Steuartus.
Tu Sol es, ac Arthurus.
Carolus Stevvartius Insulae Britannicae Princeps.
Anagr.
Ortus an is iuuenis praeclarus pace Britannis
Lucet? --
Shining from th'youthfull Spring with radiant rays,
Upon the Britons in fair peaceful days.
Carolus Princeps Stuartius Borboniusque, et proles Britannica.
Anagr.
-- Sol perbonus, atque Britannis
Ac orbi Princeps Lucius ortus erat.
In you both we and all the world have won
Another Lucius Rex, agnomine magni splendoris. Nennius.
Lucius, yea another Sun.
Anagr.
Carolus Stevvardus Princeps Britanniae.
Tu rarus orbi Natus, principale sane decus.
A rare son borne unto the world, and sent
To be its honor and chief ornament.
Anagramma
Carolus Stevvartius.
Tu carus ut sol aerius.
Dear as the Sun which from the heaven does shine;
Anagranma
Carolus Steuartus.
Orsu ut astra luces.
Clear as the Stars, and every way divine.
Anagr.
To Charles Steuart.
Thou clearest Star.
Anagr.
Charles Steward.
Such a dear luster!
Thou clearest Star now rising in the North,
The load-star of the Christian Worlds affection:
Spreading bright beams of rarest Princely worth,
Stand fixed, and give to Sea and land direction.
Shining in graces and in virtues here,
Such a dear luster to the Britons give,
(Till thou reach heaven like to a Star most clear)
That in that light they may see how to live,
Anagr.
Unto Charles Stevvart.
No Turtle was chaster.
Anagr.
Charles Steuart.
As the chaste Ruler.
He Is fit to rule, then whom no Turtle's chaster,
Whom chastity it self shall rule and master.
Anagr.
Charles Stuart.
A Rachels trust.
Our Royal Rachel linked with Jacobs heir
Long trusted for a princely propagation,
Till God fulfilled unto that happy Pair
Both Rachels trust, and their realms expectation.
When this young Prince from Charles his loins descended,
Then Rachels mourning for lost issue, ended.
Anagr.
Charles Stevvarte.
A true sure castle.
A true sure Castle providence divine
Has given to Britain since her civil wars.
Princes descended from the regal line
Are sorts against foreign foes, and homebred jarres.
Anagr.
Charles Stevvarte.
Shall Virtues trace.
Your steps (if you your Parents paths regard)
Shall virtues trace: virtues shall you reward.
The happy expectation raised by the birth of the Duke of York, has been
attended by the following Anagrams.
Iacobus Steuartus regius Eboracensium Heroes.
Anagramma.
Svavi ego virtute crescens Musis rosa habebor.
Behold the rose that (as the Muses say)
Most sweetly grows in virtue every day.
Anagramma
Iacobus Steuart.
Tu satus Eboraci.
Planted at York through honors princely due,
Where anciently the royal white rose grew.
Anagramma
Iacobus Steuartus.
Tuis o carus, beatus!
O dear, O blessed Babe, borne to increase
Anagramma
Iacobus Steuartius.
Tuos carus beavisti.
Your Parents hopes, your Countries happiness.
Anagramma
Iacobus Stevvartus Princeps.
Tune pius ac castus Puer Orbis?
Mirror of pious and chaste moderation
To all the world in happy expectation!
Anagramma
Iacobus Stevvartius Heroes.
Herus eis vocabor, at Iustus.
Follow your Grand-sire (as your name does bind you)
So shall your followers a James Stuart. A Just Master.
Sylvesters Anagram.

just master find you.
Anagr.
James Stewart of Britayne.
Streams of a witty brain.
Anagr.
James Steward of Brittayne.
Of rarest majesty and Beauty.
Anagr.
James Stevvart.
Aim's at virtues.
We in the fountains whence you sprang, descry
That you shall flow with streams of wit most clear,
That virtue, bewty, and rare majesty
Shall you endow, and to the World endeere.
The great hopes that Great Britains Inhabitants have conceived of the Lady
Mary their Princess, and the great love they bear her, are set forth in the
following Anagrams.
Anagramm.
De Matia Stevvartia Caroli prole.
Clara viris Dea, vita, amor et lepor.
To Men you will prove a goddess bright,
Their life, their love, and their delight.
Anagr.
Maria Stevvartia Regis Proles.
Grata viris Matris lepore suae.
Pleasing in showing forth your mothers Grace.
Anagramma duplex.
De Maria Stuartia.
1. Ter viris adamata.
2. Amata terris Diva.
Thrice loved for princely worth in every place.
Anagramma
Maria Stevvartia.
Vita aurea Matris.
Your mothers life, a child whom Heaven endeer's;
Borne to prolong the Parents golden years.
De ter-foelicis et regalis tori prole, Maria Steuartia ac Borbonia.
Anagramma.
Foeliciter de altera orbis securitate bona gloriari Maria potes.
Well may you glory that you did supply
The World with other good for royal succession.
security.
Unto the fairest Britain Lady, Mary Steward.
Anagram.
Art virtuously maintained by thy dearest Father.
Let golden virtues crown your maiden days,
And in your nurture spread your Parents praise.
Anagr.
To the Lady Mary Stevvarde.
Al do admire at thy virtues.
A double Anagr.
[Marie Stevvarde.]
1. True as ever Maid.
2. A sure true Maid.
Anagr.
To the Lady Mary Steward.
Art esteemed a worthy Lady.
A double Anagr.
[Vnto the Lady Marie Steward.]
1. Art the virtuous Diana.
Delian maid.
2. Art the virtuous maiden Lady.
You are in riseing worth and virtues rare,
Like that chaste Delian Maid Diana fair.
Anagrams upon all the English Monarchs that have lived and dyed since the
union of the royal roses and houses of York and Lancaster; from Henry the
seventh surnamed Theodore alias Tider, the author of that happy union, unto
James the first, the blessed uniter of the kingdoms of Great Britain.
Anagr.
Henricus septimus Theodorus Monarcha.
Tu rosis numen eras ac decor optimus.
You were that power which did both roses raise,
Adorning them with fair and peaceful days.
Henricus septimus Theodorus Monarcha Angliae.
Anagramma duplex.
1. Tu rosis decor, ac open tua munimen Anglis eras.
2. Tu notus unione rosis pacem declaras regiam.
To The English Roses which did long dissent,
You were a safeguard and an ornament.
Fame spread's your worth, whose wisdom did connect
The Roses, and a royal peace effect.
Henricus octavus Theodorus Monarcha Angliae.
Anagramma
En viramatus! O decor Anglis, ac novus Hector!
Lo he was Englands beauteous love and praise,
And like another Hector in his days.
Edvardus VI. Tiderus Rex Anglicus.
Anagramma.
En dulcis arvus Dei dextra riguus!
This Prince like some fair plot of pleasant land,
Was watered every jot with Gods right hand.
Maria Theodora olim Regina Anglorum.
Anagramma
Oh genti molli dura! An mot igero amata?
Hard to the mild! Biller in indignation
To the obedient child! Oh where is compassion?
Anagramma duplex.
Elisabetha Regina.
1. An hera sit Belgiae.
2 Sitne Belgiae Ara?
This royal Maid, in Belgia's great distress.
Was her re^itse, her aid, her Governesse.
Elisabetha Theodora Regina Angliae.
Anagramma.
Lactabaris Regina, Deo magno vltore.
Though foes arose, she had a joyful reign:
God did revenge her cause; their force restrain.
Iacobus primus Stuartius, Angliae et
Scotiae Monarcha pacificus, doctissimus.
Anagramma.
Rectius (o!) doctus chartis, Legis pia meta,
Norma fuit Musis, ac pacis vi, Hic, bonus Asa!
Through learnings better helps be sought to hound
Strict Laws within right limits. Him we found
A Rule unto the Muses, and invested
With peace, like The Land had rest and he had no war. 2 Chronicles. 14.6.
Asa, when all Judah rested.
FINIS.

