Questions worthy to be consulted on / for the weal publyque.
FIrst whether hypocrisy / feigned relygion called / and wicked laws called
Cacanomia, might be put out of this Realm without counsel of Auaricia.

Whether evil order long abused might be redressed by good laws well observed.

Whether the laws of the kings of England made before the conquest, be the
common laws of this Realm, and might be revived again.

Whether the process at the common law is grounded on any law positive.

Whether the said process is daily abused as well in court, as at the Shriffe
his hands by manifest collusion or not.

Whether manifest calumnye to sue false plees be suffered at the common law.

Whether by Justice a man may let fall his action and not answer costs.

Whether process of outlawrye, made upon feigned contumacie does give the party
plaintiff better remedy up on a decree, than season on his goods unto the
party will appear in court.

Whether good and equity called, Stet, may be pleaded in every the Kings
Majesty's courts as well as in the Chauncerye, the Star Chamber and the white
Hale, in case not ruled.

Whether Sergiantes and men at law ought rather to pleede upon been et equo,
then upon similitudes of judgments in every the Kings Majesty's courts
where there is no law certain for the case.

Whether the Judgment given upon the verdite of.xii. men, is rather in
opinion, than in verity.

Whether any corruption may ensue upon euydence given by witness to the
jury openly when as the second witness has herd the first witness
deposition.

Whether the Iuries does understand more of the pleadyng in Nisi prius and
such like, then the Judges.

Whether a.M. pound gotten yerelye by one man at law, was truly deserved at
all men's hands.

Whether the Salarie of men at law might be taxed to any certain sum for
every term and for every plee.

Whether the number of retaynyng learned counsel might so be a brydged that but
only one man in one cause should be admitted to plede.

Whether there be mo Studientes and men at law, in this Realm of England then
be laws positive.

Whether that it were necessary that the Salarie for men at laws Clerks
should be taxed by the line for writing or not.

Whether certain laws would better be practysed in this realm by sum
inducement to honestye and worship than by laws penal.

Whether Actions Populer and Statutes Penal may be sued to forfetture without
breach of christen charity.

Whether Jurisdiction ecclesiastical and temporal may concur in the kings
majesty's Courts only to be determinable.

Whether the probates of testamentes and causes testamentarie be ecclesiastical
or temporal and when it was changed with iure patronatus.

Whether the lack of good laws has been more the decay of this realm then
the negligence of princes.

Whether it be more for a commonwealth justice to be ministered in every city
and shere Town in all matters then in one place only.

Whether Appeles upon wrong judgments and errors in plees may be determined
in place certain.

Whether any Archedeacon having Jurisdiction for probates of testame^tes whose
Seal is not allowable at the common law deceaueth the people and is
aunswerable of extorcion for the money he takes therefore.

Whether the Ecclesiastical causes united to his majesty's Courts in every
shere will bear the kings charges for the exercise of his imperial
Iurysdictions toward the Judges fees.

Whether it be for the publyque wealth to have many Cities Towns and ports
well maynteined repaired and inhabited then for the maynteynyng of one to
decay the hole realm.

Whether pryncelye buyldynges of goodlye houses does more bewtyfye a realm
than repairinge decayed Towns does beawtifye the same.

Whether if every sheep master should sell his woll in yearne, not other to
pass the sees might a void the great occasyon of the ydelnes and poverty of
this Realm and all such charge of common pasture.

Whether every encloser compelled to have in tillage the third Acre so
enclosed were more profitable for the common wealth then to pull down encloses.

Whether the land water and the Sea has wasted more good grounded in
England then has been gotten in foreign Realms.

Whether the degrees of all States and personages to be known and dyseuered by
apparel or otherwise does keep good order in the realm.

Whether Merchants leuing their course of Marchaundyse and following the ydell
trade of usury is worthy to be put out of any city.

Whether Magistrates reformers of the manners of men is as mete to be had in
every body politic as the civil Judges.

Whether those Magistrates might have by coheccion, power to repair high
ways, walls of Towns decayed, Hauensstopped, or noyed, tyllage laid down,
enclosers reryd.

Whether good laws, can be ordained and made where evil men of law shall be
chief of counsel.

Whether any profit has ensued of the last Statute made for beggars and
vacabondes.

Whether Justice and equity and bonum publicum should be the ground of every
law positive.

Whether the body politic of this Realm would be directed in like order
without confusion of Magistrates and degrees as the body material the king and
this counsel super intendant the Judges and magistrates their laws exequete,
nobilite, and me^ of lands to be the Realm defenda^te, merchants, and
negociators, the wealth public practisant, husbandmen and crafts men
laborant, the other members to be obedyent.

Whether ye Spiritualte, the Bishops, and the Clergy, be within the same
body politic or they be a body of them selves.

Whether Justices of Sewers in places suru^dered keeping the quarter
Sessions.iiii. times by year in circuit might save the lower parts of
Northfolke, Southfolke, Cambrydge shere, Huntingdon shere, Northa^pton shere,
Linconshere from drowning conteming in circuit.Clxxx. miles by estimacion.

Whether it were better for the husbandman, noble men and gentilmen to ride
post on other men's Sadils, on their own horses then to ride post on other
men's horses in their own sadilles.

Whether temporal possessions and godly Religion may consist in any
spiritual person.

Whether every bishop and priest not called of god as Aaron nor elected of
the people has the spiritual charter of priesthode.

Whether the priests that sue for pluralities of benefices does more offend
before God then the powers which dyspence for lucre.

Whether any man by dispensacion may have as well sunderye wyfes as priests may
have sunderie benefices.

Whether the divines and learned in gods laws settinge forth gods word
after their own fantasies ought all to be believed.


