A TRVE TABLE OF ALL SVCH FEES AS ARE Due to the Bishop of London, and all his
depending Officers, as Commissaryes, Registers, Proctors, and Apparitors, as
has been given in to his Majestyes Commissioners in Starchamber under their
own hands in the month of November M. DC. XXX.

Whereto is added a true discovery of such fees ordinarily exacted by them upon
his Majestyes good subjects contrary to this their own table and the statute
laws of the land.

Published by STEVEN PVCKELL and sent as a love token for his countries good.

Isa. 8. 61. I the Lord love judgment, I hate robbery for a burnt offering. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. with. 6. For this is the will of God, etc. That no man go beyond
and defraud his brother in any matter, because that the Lord is the avenger of
all such. Imprinted, Anno M* DC. ^XX*

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS of his Majestyes Commissioners for new
erected offices, and innovated fees, and to all others that are doers and
lovers of justice, health and prosperity attend you in all your lawful
designs, with all increase of honor and favor both with God and men.
RIght honorable when I considered, not only the wisdom which God has
furnished your Noble Persons withal, together with the power and authority
putt into your hands by his Majesty for the seeing and inquiring into all
extorted and innovated fees, it made me to conceive your honors were the men
that God had appointed to deliver the oppressed from the hand of the
oppressor, which did encourage me to seek release under your honors
protection, against my cruel oppressors, in which I freely confess I found
(to Gods glory be it spoken) more then ordinary success, by your honors means,
in that your honors effectually procured my peace for awhile in commanding
that Commissary my accuser to suspend his suite against me, in the high
commssion, but yet it was but for a while, in that my busy and malicious
adversary (getting something in respect of my conscience as your honors well
know) insenced against me some high Commissioners as the Archbishop of
Canterbury and Bishop of London, who (contrary to your honors order made) did
forthwith pursue me with such violence, as if they thirsted for my blood, and
nothing but my life would serve their turn, for which cause I was enforced to
leave my own native country, to seek shelter in foreign parts, where through
the Lords goodness having found a place of breathing, I have thought it my duty
to speak, according to my strenght, from a far, and to present to your
honors a brief discovery of some of their extortions I have taken knowledge of
in their proceedings, to give your Honors occasion to dive into this mystery
of iniquity, where I doubt not but your wisdoms will soon find out much more
then my shallownes can extend to, yet by this little I discern and discover,
they are no other then merciles oppressors, intruders upon the subjects rights
and privileges, and who is appointed under God and his Majesty to curb them,
and to restrain their inordinate and lawles courses but your honors, but they
having bee^ much fleshed by prevailing against all sorts, happily their
insolency, will not fear to attempt to make an assault against yours honors in
case you question them for their injustice and oppression in these or other
their proceedings, yet I trust they shall not prevail, but having begun to
fall they shall fall more and more, till their usurped power (under which many
mourn) be utterly overthrown. To call to your honors remembrance their late
injustice in my own particular, I have presumed once again to renew my
complaints to your honors against them, and for farther evidences, every day
affoards his just complaint against them, wherever they keep their courts, or
exercise authority over his Majestyes subjects in any part of his dominion.
If therefore God shall move your honors hearts to go on with so good a work
as to purge not only them of these evils, but free the churches and people of
God of these strange offices, God shall have much glory by you, the Church and
people of God, much peace and freedom, the land purged of many a crying sin,
and the Kings throne established in justice and righteousness; which that your
honors may be enabled to do the God of truth and justice be with your
honors, and double the spirit of courage, and wisdom on you, I rest at your
honors service to be commanded.

STEVEN PVCKELL

To the truly and well affected Christian Reader.
CHristian Reader God by his wise providence ordering all things to his own
glory, has been pleased after many and sore trialls to bring me the
unworthyest of his servants to a place of more rest and safety in respect of my
present condition, then I either had, or possibly could look for in mine own
land; I therefore seriously consideringe by how many bonds I stand bound to
Almighty God for those many great mercys and str^nge delyverances which I have
received from his mere goodness and (...) ^vidence, as also well considering,
how nearly my soul is k^nt to you my ^^ning Countrymen: I could not but out of
pity to your present estate, and conscience of mine own duty to God, and you
all, answer your reasonable requests and earnest expectation in adventuring to
put these few lines to the open view of the world, the which thing God who
knows my heart, knows I aim not at any man's person, neither have I added any
thing but have taken a true copy of all the fees as they were presented before
his Magesties Comissioners in Starchamber, confirmed under every of their own
general hands, without adding any thing thereto, by the which the wise and
discrete reader may in some sort from his own experience (who is the best
scholemaster) plainly see how tre^blingly these shoulders and posts by the
which the kingdom of Antichrist is yet upheld in our Kingdom of England do
tyranise, not only over the souls and consciences, but over the bodies and
goods of his Magistyes loving subjects, their Cannons and Constitutions,
Injunctions and Decrees, tending to no purpose but only to be snares and gins
to the souls and bodies of men: thus those who would be thought to be the
prophets of England are all like those prophets in Israel: Hosea 9. 8. the
suare of a fowler is in all their ways, all their projects being how to grow
great and maintayn their pomp and state, allthough it be with the blood of the
poor fatherless and widow; yea though it be to the overthrow of King and
state, which I will endeavor to clear by these propositions. For proof whereof I
will appeall to none other but to thine own experience. First who sees not
that all their Cannons and Decrees both new and old tend to no other end but
the inthralling of the souls and bodies of Gods people, and the bringing of
them under an Antichristian yoke, which appears first that since the year
1624. they have changed the oath of Curchwardens and sidemen (as they call
them) into that form that it is now become nothing else but a rack for the
consciences of men and may truly be called an injurjous and blooddy oath 2.
What else is the ground, why they have taken away all those Cannons that
respect them selves, that the people cannot see them, but that they might more
peaceably and freely prey on the bodies and souls of men at their own
pleasures. 3. What is the reason they do of late use so many shifts and
tricks to maintain their standings as they do by devising all the
inchrochments upon the liberty of the subject, the like whereof cannot
beparalelled by robbing of the nobility of their honorus, tytles, offices, and
dignityes, and conferring them on their own heads or the heads of their
favorites; yea is it not matter enough (if not a friend to the prelacy) for any
(though otherwise deserving never so well) to stand like a beakon on the top of
a hill not respected. 4. who sees not, that all the good and whollesomme laws
of the Common wealth is by them turned upside down, and like a leaden wand
bowed to every end that suits them selves, be it right or wrong; thus like
horses are they prepared to battle with strong unresistible power to bear
down all before them that does but mute against their cursed usurpations. 5.
what rank or order of men comes not under their tyranny and oppression in
their matchles extortions? they slight the rich in the height of their pride,
they regard not the cries of the widow and fatherless, but like men void of
compassion or bereft of humanity wring and wrest from all men in all causes
abundantly more then is allowed them by their own Cannons and Ecclesiastical
laws; and especially in the probats of wills and administrations they are as
the Proph. Zeph says. 3. 3. Like the evening wolfs that leave not the bones
until the morning, my brethren may not the Lord complain against us as against
his own people. Ier. 5. 26. that among his people are found wicked men that
lay wait as he that sets snares, they set a trap to catch men; as a cage is
full of birds, so are their howses full of deceyt, therefore they are become
great and wax rich, also they Judge not the cause of the fatherless, but as in
the 29. shall not the Lord visit for these things? shall not his soul be
avenged on such a nation as this? Therefore brethren and loving countrymen
considering these things, let me in a word speak to you all under these two
ranks, other as you are the called of God, or as yet uncalled by him. And first
to you that are called of God, let me speak to you in the words of the Lord by
the Prophet Ierem. 2. 18. What have you to do in the way of Egypt, to drink
the waters of Sihor? or what have thou to do in the way of Assyria, to drink
the waters of the river? Or for the fear of man to be found in the way of
Gilgall, for all their wickedness is in Gilgall, there does the Lord hate them,
and for their iniquityes will in his time arive them out of his house; therefore
come not at their courts, obey not their summons sent out in their own names
against the law of the land and honor of the King, so that if the Kings
Majesty were not very patient toward them, and those that submit to their
usurpations where were they? Trust God with your goods and lives, he is able to
recompense all with better, ad not fire then to this altar of Baal, neither by
purse nor presence, Walk not after these commaundemens of men lest Ephraim
like, ye he oppressed and broken in judgment, and the Lord become to you (as to
him) a moth, or as he was to Judah rottenes, Hosea 5. 11. 12. My brethren be
not afraid of man in Gods cause, consider what the Apostle says to Timothy 2.
epist. 1. 7. God has not given to us the spirit of fear, but of power, of
love, of a sound mind, Where observe, this fear of man for the prevailing
power thereof, is called the spirit of fear, and is opposed to the spirit of
God, as power, and love and a sound mind, whence then we may learn. That where
ever his fear of man is residing in the strength and power of it, there no
sound power of godliness, nor soundnes of judgment, nor power of action, is to
be looked for. Besides this fear of man will be a snare to you, for the fear of
man brings a snare, but who so trusts in God shall be sure. Prove. 29. 25.
Besides there is a lake prepared for the fearful, say not then with the
fainthearted spies, there be giants, and walls up to heaven, and we shall never
overcome, for we overcome in sufferring. Consider also, that God, the Gospel,
and the people of God, are more beholding (if I may so speak) to one constant
sufferrer sent of God, then to ten thousand fainthearted apostates and
backsliders, therefore my brethren look what Gods worthyes have done, and do
likewise, as Paul to Timo. 2. epist. 1. 8. so I speak to you all in his words,
Be not you therefore ashamed of the testimony of our lord, nor of me his
prisonner, but be you partakers of the afflictions of the Gospel, according to
the power of God who has saved us and called us with an holy calling.

And to you my countrymen that are yet uncalled what shall I say? to set you a
work about the works of a living man that have not a principle of life in you,
were but a vain thing, I therefore say no more to you but thus, Take courage to
your selves as you are men, and know your own privileges and stand to them,
consider the laws of a kingdom are the subjects inheritance, and no subject
can be deprived of them without manifest injustice, therefore suffer not your
selves to be gulled in these things, look the Statute for the probate of wills
and testaments, observe the penaltyes upon all that shall extort upon the same,
the law saying directely in these words That if a Bishop or Archbishop or any
other ecclesiastical jurisdiction shall extort or take of any of his
Mayestyes subjects, either more or greater fees then is allowed them by law,
they shall forfeit to the party wronged three times that they take to the party
greived, and over and above they shall forfeit to the King ten pounds the which
shall be levied by way of trespass, or of debt recoverable by law in any of
his Majestyes courts of record, against which action there shall be no appeal
nor act of error to be granted but the moneys so levied shall be one half to
the King, and the other half to the party wronged. Or else thou must maintain
thy right by an indictment at the common sessions of the quarter where the
offense was committed. Thus in as few words and as punctually as I can I have
commended these small labors of mine to thee, which I desire may be to Gods
glory and thy direction, and then let God deal with me as seems good in his
own eyes. Farewell in the Lord farewell.

From my lodging in Amsterdam the 6. of December 1631. STEVEN PVCKELL.

TO ALL THOSE IN ENGLAND exercising Ecclesiastical power and jurisdiction over
Gods people, Bishops, Archbishops, Archdeacons, Deans, Officialls,
Commissaries, and all other their depending Officers, from the highest Prelate
to the meanest Apparitor in the Kingdom.
OH that my counsel might become acceptable to you all, that you would break
of your offenses by repentance, and your crueltyes by mercy to Gods saints and
people, and that you would leave lording of it over your fellow brethren, let
not the Lord when he shall come in the clouds, find you smiting Jeremy on
the cheek, lest Pashurs portion prove your inheritance, and the Lord make you a
terror to your selves, for know you all for a certain, that your vinyards are
most ripe to the winepresse, and that the Angel wbo has that sharp sickle in
his hand, is coming forth to cut down all the vines of the vineyards of the
earth, and to cast them into the winepresse of the wrath of almighty God,
therefore let me again and again entreat you, to leave lording of it over Gods
inheritance, and rob not the Kings Majesty of his maintenance; nor the
nobility of their titles and dignityes, nor the magistrates of their power and
authority, nor the subjects of their rigths and inheritances, take not the
garmente from the widow, nor the bread from the fatherles by your extortions,
eat not up the Lords people like bread any longer, lest the Lord bring a
plague upon you, out of which you shall not he able to pull your necks, let
the Lord Christ's name be honored and set up in all his offices and
ordinances on Sion his holy mountain, jussel him no longer out of his Kingly
throne; lest he reckon you among his enemies, and so slay you all before him,
build not up your Syon with bloods, nor your Jerusalem with crueltyes, lest you
make a fruitful land become an heap, or a desolate wilderness, think not by
cruelty to suppress Gods truth, for rather then it shall want witnesses, God
will make the stones to do it, and so raise up witnesses out of the dust of
them, whom you and your forefathers have slain, dig no longer so deep to
hide your counsels from the Lord, for the Lords knows, and has revealed it
to his saints; that you are no other, then the very bellows of Antichrist, by
which he blows up and kindles that fire of superstition and idolatrye in our
English nation, therefore display no longer the colors of Antichrist in the
Lords camp, hold no longer up the ensign staff of that man of sin, by which
you have so long beaten the Lords people, lay down your bucklers now at the
length at the Lords feet, that if it he possible you may find mercy; oh hear,
hear, and be not proud, lest your bonds increase; let not the souls of Gods
saints (whom you contemn) weep any longer in secret for your pride, be not
you a means to cause the Lord to forsake his people and to suffer his people to
be led away captive and to sing the songs of Sion in a strange land, and be not
so in love with an Italian Lord, as for him to engage your souls, King and
cou^trye; But why do I thus speak unto you? can a blackemoore change his
skin? Not unless it be flead of, no more can you, unless the Lord change your
natures, and make you of wolvs, sheep, and of lions, lambs, which the Lord in
his time will either effect in you, or else will give you your portion with the
beast and the false prophet, and with all those that with you have received
the mark of the beast, in their foreheads and hands. Think not that I aim at
any man's person, but at the unlawfullnes of your callings and standings, for
my soul pittyeth your persons to see so many excellent natural parts, which
many of you are endued withal, bewitched with those strong delusions, which
the just God has sent for the damnation of all those that receive not the love
of the truth, yea the Lord knows I would be glad to become any thing to do
you good, but of that I have little hope therefore farewell.

S. P.

A TABLE OF ALL SVCH FEES AS ARE DVE TO THE Ecclesiastical courts under the
Bishop of London in the liberty of Essex and Harford, and to all the depending
Officers of them, both Judges, Registers, Apparitors and Proctors in causes of
instance between party and party.
Commissary. Register. Apparitor. INprimis for decreeing the original citation
and for sealing of it vj. d. vj. d. nil. Item for decreeing the original
citation in a matrimonial cause with an inhibition and for sealing of it xij.
d. xij. d. nil. Item for the decree for every party principal ix. d. ix. d,
nil. Item for every decree viis and modis ix. d. ix. d. nil. Item for every
excommunication or suspension in writing ix. d. ix. d. only iv. d. at nil. the
release. Item for every absolution from an excommunication or suspension ix. d.
ix. d. iv. d. Item for letters testimonial to be made upon a search or any
other cause vj. s. viij. d. vj. s. viij. d. nil. Item for the oath of every
witness upon any matter nil. nil. ij. d. Item for examination of every first
witness upon any matter ix. d. ix. d. nil. Item for examination of every other
witness iv. d. ob. iv. d. ob. nil. Item for the examination of witnesses upon
interrogatories ix. d ix. d nil. Item for the examination of every party
principal ix. d ix. d nil. Item for the oath of every party principal nil.
nil. ij. d Item for the copy of every witness upon any matter produced and
examined nil. viij. d nil. Item for the copy of the parties principal answer
nil. xij. nil. Item for every commission for the examination of a party
principal or witnesses, or for the praising of goods of a deceassed or to take
the oath of a party upon an inventorie or accountes or any other matter v. s.
v. s. nil. Item for the constitution of a proctor nil. iv. nil. Item for
exhibition of every proxy in writing nil. ij. d nil. Item for every act nil.
iv. nil. Item for every act upon the opening or receieving of a prohibition,
consultation or any others of the Kings writts xv. s. xv. s. nil. Item for
every deffinitive sentence and interlocutorie decree v. s. v. s. xij. d Item
for every significavit, to the chancery for the taking and imprisoning of an
excommunicate person in any cause as well of instance as office v. s. v. s.
nil. Item for every significavit, to the chancery for the freedom and
enlargement of an excommunicate in any cause as well instance as office v. s.
v. s. nil. Item for the copy of every order of penance vj. d. vj. d to see it
executed xij. d Item for transmitting every process Judicis a quo ad Judicem ad
quem, to the Register according to the taxation of the Judge ad quem or
according to the composition of xxx. between the Register and the party
appellant nil. xiij. s nil. Item for the seal of the Judge a quo set to the
process transmitted vj. s. viij. d nil. nil. Item for all letters of gardionship
under seal vj. s. viij. d vj. s. viij. d nil.

IN CAUSES OF OFFICE.
Commissary. Register. Apparitor. INprimis for every original citation and
appearance of every party vj. d vj. d iv. d Item for every decree viis and
modis ix. d ix. d iv. d Item for every excommunication or suspension under
seal ix. d ix. d iv. d Item for every absolution from an excommunication or
suspension ix: d ix. d nil. Item for letters testimonial to be made upon any
cause and for the writing of them if the vj. s. viij. d vj. s. viij. d nil.
cause so require. Item for the examination of every party principal ix. d ix. d
nil. Item for the copy of every parties principal answer nil. xij. d nil. Item
for the oath of every party principal nil. nil. ij. d Item for the drawing of
proxy for apearance at all visitations and synods nil. ij. s. vj. d nil. Item
for the exhibition and co^signation of every proxy in writing at the
visitations and synods only nil iv. d nil. Item for registering the names of
the churhwardens and sydemen of every parish nil. iv. d for warning of them iv.
Item for every certificat made to the Bshop by the Commissary for the
commutation of any penance vj. s. viij. d vj. s. viij. d xij. Item when any
penance is commuted by the Bishop and the commutation extended to the
Commissary x. s. x. s. nil. Item for the writing of any bond taken for the
indemnity of the Judge or his commissary upon any cause nil. xij. d nil. Item
for every act passed in court nil. iv. d nil. Item for every faculty grants
lisence acceptance for teaching. v. s. v, s. nil. Item for exhibiting every
bill of presentmens at the visitations only nil. iv. d nil. Item for the
purgation of every person to whom purgation is assigned and for his own hand
ix. d ix. d iv. Item for every compurgator first sworn and for his hand ix. d
ix. d ij. Item for every other compurgator vj. d vj. d ij. d Item for every
intimation sent out for all those that will object against a purgation of any
man and his compurgators xv. d xv. d iv. d Item for a dismission of every man
out of the court for any cause what ever vj. d vj. d iv. d Item for any search
made by the Register for any act of court or any other insterment after a
cause is ended nil. xij. d nil. Item for every sequestration of the fruit of a
benefice and publication of the same under seall v. s. v. s. xij. d Item for
letters commendatorie for a curat going out of the jurisdiction iij. s. iv. d
iij. s. iv. d nil. Item for every caveat entered nil. xij. d nil. Item for the
copy of every order of penance to see it executed vi. d vi. d xij. d Item for
transmitting a process Judice a quo: to register according to the taxation of
the Judge ad quem, or a composition made betwixt the register and party
appellent nil. xiij. s. nil. Item for the seall of the Judge to the same
process vi. s. viij. d nil. nil. Item for the drawing of articles against any
man convented of office for lawful proof made of the truth of the^ xx. d xx.
d nil. Item for every act upon the redeluding and withdrawing of a caution out
of the registery nil. xj. d nil.

IN CAUSES OF OFFICE.
Commissary. Register. Apparitor. ITem for every dispensation for exhibiting of
an inventory into court vj. s. viij. d vj. s. viij. d nil. Item for an
administration of the goods of a deceassed not extending to the sum of five
pounds nil. vj. d iv. d Item for the administration of the goods of a deceassed
amounting above the value of five pounds and under forty ij. s. vj. d ij. s.
vj. d x. d Item for the administration of the goods of a deceassed admounting
to forty and upwards let it be as many thousands as it will, is vj. s. viij. d
vjs. viij. d xj. d Item for the probat of a will the value does not exceed the
sum of five pounds nil. vj. d iv. d Item for the probat of a will where the
goods exceed five pounds and not above forty pounds ij. s. vj. d xij. d x. d
Item for the probat of a will where the goods do exceed the value of 40 l. and
upwards let it be as much as it will ij. s. vj. d ij. s. vj. d x. d Item for
the engrossing of every will according to the length thereof not exceeding viij.
s. for every larg skin of parchment for every skin nil. viij. s. nil. Item for
engrossing every inventory and accounts according to the length thereof not
exceeding two shillings for every press of parchment nil. ij. s. nil. Item for
exhibiting of every inventory and for subscribing the same vj. d vj. d nil.
Item for the copy of eyery act extracted out of the registery under the
registers hand nil. xij. d nil. Item for the copy of every inventory testament,
libell, matter, allegations, or articles, whatsoever extracted out of the
register under the registers hand nil. according to nil. the length thereof.
(...) ^^tters of request made to (...) ordinary, to cite one dwelling out of
the Judges Jurisdiction xx. d xx. d nil. Item for every renunciation of an
administration of the goods of a deceassed, or an executor of a will admitted
and inacted vj. d vj. d nil. Item for every decree made upon the distribution
of goods among the next of kin, and for registering of the same vj. s. viij.
d vj. s. viij. d nil. Item the fee of a proctor every courtday in which he is
retained upon any cause what soever xij. d xij. d. the proctors fee.

FINIS.
CHRISTIAN READER, TO THE EN^* thou may the better understand the abominable
extortions of these men, in their Courtly government: I will give thee an
Abstract, of all such fees, as in mine own experience I have known, and
observed to be taken by these men: in which, I will deliver nothing, but with a
little observation of thine own, thou shall see to be most clearly true. And
herein for thy better direction, I will go over the whole table offees:
showing their error in every particular I know, and where I know nothing, I
will pass is over with silence, leaving it to be further skanned by them which
are judiciously wise.
In causes of instance between party and party.
INprimis, whereas there is due for the original citation and sealing of it,
twelve pence only, they take that 12. d. and 12. d. more: which they pretend to
be for the serving of it, which 12. d. is not due.

For decreeing a citation in a matrimonial cause, there is two shillings due.
But taken three, or indeed what they can wring out, sometimes it cost 5.
sometimes 7. shillings.

For a decree, there is due one shillinge six pence. But taken by them, 2. s.
6. d. when the least is taken, except it be of some rare man, whose experience
taught him to give less.

For excommunications and suspensions 18. d, taken by them 4. s.

For absolutions due 1 s. 10. taken by them, ordinarily 3. s. 6. d.

For their letters testimonial, there is 13. s. 4. d. due, taken of them
besides 12. d. the Clarke, besides that which is taken by other of their
Officers, as also dyvers encroachments, to get monyes in these causes, as
experience proves it.

For the oath of every witness 2. d. taken 4.

For examination of the first witness, one shilling six pence, and the second
9. but taken of all, one and other 2. s. 6. d. a piece, excepting some bold
spirited men, that have courage to detect them in their proceedings.

For the examinations of witnesses on interrogatories 1. s. 6. d. taken by them
2. s. 6. d. commonly.

For examination of the party principal 1. s. 6. d. due, taken of them 2. s.
6. d. commonly.

For the oath of the party principal 2. d. taken 4. d.

For the copy of every witness his examination 5. d. due, taken by them 12. d.
commonly.

For the copy of the parties principalls answer 12. d. due, taken 1. s. 6. d.
commonly.

I pass over the commissions to pryse goods, and their constituting of
proctors, as having nothing to pay, but this, that whereas the proctors should
take but only 12. d. a day, for their fees, in one and the same case: they do
constantly take 3. s. 4. d. a day, and will have no less, allthough the law
alowes them no more, as they well know, and have confessed to me: but they
plead, they can not live of it, for they say that law was made in the old
time, when housekeeeping was better cheap, which is the only argument they
have to justify their extortion.

For exhibition of a proxy in writing 2. d. due, taken 4. d. commonly.

For the acts of court 4 d. a day due, but they commonly take for acts, when
none are done, but do delay men's causes, and speed them not: till at length,
both plaintiff, and the defendant, are both wearyed out, their monyes spended,
them selves made fools to their own faces, and their suits as far from end,
as when they began, and so they again came home by weeping cross. As daily
experience have showed to be true.

What they usually take for breaking open the Kings writs, for Sentences, for
significavit to Chauncery, I have had little experience: yet as he, who seeing
but the foot of a man, guesseth at his whole body, so we seeing the whole body
of this court, may, in some sort guess at the members of it.

For every order of penance 12. d. due, and 12. d. to the Apparitor, to see it
executed, and here they do take 2. s. for the order of the party that takes it
out, and 12. d. for the Apparitor, and yet make the party on whom it is
executed, pay that 12. d. again too some times, as is to be proved.

For their transmittinge of process, and the Judges seal, and their letters of
gardionship, I have little to say but this, where so many small things are sold
at so high a rate: matters of such consequence can not be cheap.

In causes of office.
FOr every original citation, and the appearance of every party 1. s. 4. d.
due, taken 8. groates commonly.

For every decree 1. s. 10. d. due, taken 2. s. 6. d.

For an excommunication under seal, 1. s. 10. d. due, taken 4. s.

For an absolution, due 1. s. 6. d. taken 2. s. 6. d. commonly.

For their letters testimonial, I say no more, but let him that has them
look to his purse.

For excommunications, copyes of answer and oaths, before in causes of
instance between party and party.

For the drawing of proxe and visitations and exhibition and suspension, I have
little to say, but when the putlouck is hungry, let the hen look to her
chickins.

For registring the names of their Officers in every parish 4. d. and 4. for
warning of them: but what is taken, the country is witness of it self.

For their commutations of penance and the charges of it, it is incredibile
almost to conceave the deepnes of Satan, by the which he works in these
sons of Belyall sometynes for monyes, passing over incest, condemnable among
heathens, and intolerable adulteryes: taking sometimes 20. or 30. yea
sometimes 40. pounds, for such a business doing, which monyes, goes all, or
the greater part into their own pursses: whereby they become great, wax rich,
and are like princes in the common wealth. Here also they have such strange
devices to get monyes, and to satisfy their own ends, and others corrupt
humors, in changing the penance from this, to that, from this time, to that,
and from this place, to an other, and all to get money and to boulster men in
sin, as indeed a modest man would blush to think of, for it is no more with
them, but sin and pay and pay and sin.

For the bond they ought to take but 12. d. they take 2. s. commonly, till of
late.

For every act of court 4. d. but see before.

For every license to teach 10. s. but let young Scholars make much of their
moneys.

For putting in of bills by churchwardens 4. d. due, but taken 7. d and here
note the whole charges for the whole year, to every parish, coms but to 1. s.
or two at the most, but what is paid, all men know, that come among them. That
parish speeds well that coms off with 10. s. charges, and somtymes more, as
experience proves it.

For their purgations, and their practices herein, this is to be marked among
them, that no act so plain and clear, if but denied by the party, they will
give him his purgation for it for his monyes, whereby it coms to pass, that
allthough the fact be as clear as the sun, it shall escape the censure of
the law, as appears most plainly, some having been purged, which afterward
have been condemned by the Civil Magistrate to corporal punishmente for the
same fact, as is clearly manifest, and here what sumes of money are taken for
purgations and swearing of compurgators and for intimations sending out, is in
deed incredible, as experience proves it: some men's estate being almost
consumed by their delays in this kind, yea let any man that has but the face
of honesty in him, come among them, allthough the accusation be never so false,
yet hardly gets end in 12. months with much charge, and more disgrace then
those shall have, that are most clearly guilty many times.

For a dismission of a cause out of court 1. s. 4. d. due, and for a search
made by the Register, after a cause is ended 12. d. but they take for that, for
the most part 1, s. 6. d.

For the sequ^stration of the first fruits of benefices, and publication of it
under seal 11. s. due, but what is taken, I leave to the Clergy to skan, who
best know, because they have paid it.

For their letters of commendations for a Curate that goes out of the
jurisdiction 6. s. 8. d. but what is taken, they know that make accounte of
them.

For every caveat entered 12. d. but what is taken, try and then trust.

For process transmitted and the Judges seal thereto, I have no more to say
but this, things far fetched, are dearly bought.

For the drawing of articles against any man, consented of before after lawful
proof made of the truth of them 3. s. 4. d. but they take a noble besides,
many times with out drawing.

For every act upon reducing and with drawing of a caveat out of the Registery
12. d. but somtymes, taken 2. s. somtymes more, yea what they can get of
ignorant people.

In causes of office.
Here Christian Reader, I would have thee to mind that all their extortions,
formerly mentioned, are as nothing, in comparison, of these that follow, for
here they will pretend law, where none is: and make them that be, to stand
aside, to serve their turns, and bring in such strange devices to entrap men,
and spin out such long threeds with widows and fatherles, who for the most
part are weak, and unskillfull, and therefore a fit prey for these kytes to
sease upon, as is almost incredible, having such shows of friendship and such
turning devices, to bring things about, that a modest man, may blush at, to see
their impiety, which shall be manifest in their due place, as follows.

For every dispensation, for exhibiting an inventory into court 13. s. 4. d.
but taken 20. s. yea somtymes sums of money are given in this case, with many
other extortions raised thereupon, if the cause be of any consequence to the
party.

For an administration of the goods of the deceased, where it exceeds not 5.
pounds, there is 10. d. due, but commonly taken 5. s. somtymes 7. and 10.
often, besides the cunning put-offs, by which the cause shall be prolonged only
to weary out the party.

For an administration of the goods of a deceased, amounting above 5. pounds
and under 40. pounds, there is due 5. s. but taken commonly a mark, and 20. s.
taken besides, if but referred to pay the cause prolonged, yea it may be one
thing or other, shall be checked at, whereby the party shall be excommunicated, and
so not make an end of his accounts, and all for less then 3. or 4. pounds,
more or less, as they can wring and wrest from the party.

For an administration, where the goods do exceed 40. pounds, there is due, by
their law, a mark, for all charges, but taken for their account and all,
somtymes 3. or 4. or somtymes 5. pounds, and never coms of, without some rare
time, for less then 40. shillings and here they will not stick to say, they may
take what they can g^t, because say they, the common law has not set down,
how much they shall take for an administration, but have left it free, to take
what they can get.

For the Probate of a will, where the goods do not exceed 5. pounds, there is
due 10. d. only, but taken seldom less for the Probate, then 3. or 4. s. as is
clearly to be proved, besides, they will have the engrossing of it, although it
be engrossed before, and will take for it what they list.

For a will, where the goods do excede 5. pounds, and under 40. pounds, there
is 3. s. 6. d. due, but taken 10. s. yea so mtymes 20. s. as is to be made good
upon them.

For a probat of a will, where the goods do exceed 40. li. due 5. s. but
taken 5. pounds, 6. pounds, so mtymes 7. pounds, yea sometime, 10. and 12.
pounds charges they will raise upon such a cause, by devysing such tricks, and
devices, and putting them on the executor to such wills, that if he look not
well to it, one Child's part must go to the court.

For the engrossing of every will according to the length thereof not exceeding
8. s. for every long skin of parchment, and here note, that it must be done
by the Register, or else there is nothing due, note also the party free, and at
his choice, whether he will not ingrosse it himself, or set any other to do
it, at his advantage, either for brevitie or profit, and that the Register
ought not to refuse to prove any will, of what consequence soever, all though
it be engrossed by some other, only he may examine the ingrossment, and if he
find it not true, he may reject it till it be perfected, but to refuse it,
being truly done, he cannot, if he thincks 2. s. 6. d. be to little to pay the
writing of the probat, then the law alowes him to tell by the line, and to
take for every 10. lines of 10. inches long a penny. all ways by the statute,
for the probat of wills and Testaments: therefore for the Register to refuse to
prove any will when the ingrossments are truly made by some other, or otherwise
to detain and keep the executor from such wills, so engrossed, is a most
sinful oppression, and punishable by the laws of England.

For engrossing every account, and the inventorie thereto 2. s. for every patch
of parchment, and here note (as before) the Administrator may do it himself,
or imploye some other for his own advantage: and that it is no less then
extortion, for a Judge, or Register, to refuse either the inventorie, or
accounts so made, if it be truly done,

For exhibiting of every inventorie, and for subscribing the same 12. due, and
so taken, but here lies the extortion, in this particular, they will force men
to pay for their accounts too, and that at such rates, as do exceed, some
times 20. s. somtymes 40. s. sometims 3. or 4. pounds, as is to be proved, yea
somtymes they will urge to receive accounts for monyes, before the
administrator is capable to pass his account: note also, that if any refuse to
pay for their account, and that for this reason, because they see no law
commanding them, how, or what to pay, their Apparitor shall never leave
haunting of them, nor their selfs excommunicating them, till they have
compelled them to pay these monyes.

For the copy of every act extracted out of the registry, under the registers
hand, there is due 12. d. taken 2. s. or somtymes 2. s. 6. d. as they can get.

Item for every copy of every libell, inventorie, will, allegation or articles
according to the length thereof, not exceeding the statute, which alowes them
for every 10. lines of 10. inches long, one penny, which must be under the
registers hand.

For letters of requests made to another ordinary, to cite one, dwelling in
some other dyoses 3. s. 4. d. what is taken, they know best that have occasion
to use them.

For the renunciation of an administration, or an executorship for a will 12. d.

For the decree of the Judge, in distributing of goods, amoung the next of kin,
and for registring of the same 13. s. 4. d. but what besides have been given,
and taken are easy to prove, whereby some had their portions enlarged some
diminished at the Judges pleasure, or the pleasure of the register.

For the fee of a proctor in any cause 12. d. but constantly taken 3. s. 4. as
all by experience know to be true.

Thus have I run over all these particulars one by one, to this end that the
Reader might be informed of their unjust proceedings in every particular,
wherein I have only showed thee what is taken by way of inhaunsed fees. But
now give me leave, in a word, to give thee a taste of their innovated fees,
that is of fees taken for which there is no law, nor color of law, as also
to discover to thee some other of their practices, to increase their fees,
which shall be done very briefly.

And first take notice, they have changed the oath of their churchwardens into
that it is now become of the nature of an inquisition oath, whereby they rack
the consciences of men, and by it do draw out of them, such presentations to
their courts, as otherwise they should not meet withal, and this is done by
them since the year 1624. what it then was, and now is, may at large appear
by comparing them together, by the new oath they compel men to swear, to
present, all whom they suspect, for want of conformity to any of the articles
given them in charge: what the effect of this oath is to them, is plain in
these particulars.

First hereby they meet with some tender conscience, which dare not meddle with
this oath, and then they must buy it of, for their monyes: and hereby great
and large fees comes to them, 2. ly. they meet with some also, that will not
come to this, but will reason out the matter with them, these they
excommunicate, (even to death as it were) if they stand it out with them, then
a significavit, or else, into the high commission with them, and if there once,
what the consequences will be, I spare to write, and if they take the oath, and
that the year comes about, and they present no body, then they put him to his
oath, upon his former oath, and will make him to swear whether all his parish,
both minister and people do duly observe all the articles given them in
charge, and thus the consciences of men, are taintered out upon this rack,
thereby to confess, who and what they be, and in what part they have offended
against the premises, whereby their courts come to be filled with complaints
against men, for toys and tryfles. 3ly. If any son of Belyall through
malice, envy, or what ground soever, will sue any so sworn according to the
tenor of his oath, for perjury in not presenting either minister or people in
neglect of any of these devysed articles given him in charge, he shall proceed
against him, as against a perjured person, and shall have all favor and
respect among them, with all the aid they can affoarde them, even to the utter
undoeing of the party so sued, as mine own experience has proved. Fourthly:
to the intent this oath might be made the more officious to them, and offencive
to others, they have added diverse new articles of late years, and by virtue of
this oath, do bind all their church Officers to see them executed, and to
present the neglect thereof, in which how contrary to the laws of England,
they do proceed, I leave to be skanned by them who are judiciously wise.

And now for their fees, take notice, that as the law alowes them not to take
any thing for this book, nor once so much as names what should be given for
it, they take 12. d. and sometimes 1. s. 4. d.

Secondly: whereas but one book ought to be given out for one year yet they
compel men to take two, at their price.

Thirdly: they compel their officers to pay for their oaths, where nothing
is due.

Fourthly: they will let no bills pass the court, but such as are of their
own making, for which they take 6. d.

Fifthly: these bills will not pass unles one or other be presented.

Sixthly: what silencing, and deposing, excommunicating, and imprisoning of Gods
people for not conforming to this book of articles, and how greatly they
increase their fees thereby, and what sum, and sums of monyes are daily
brought into their treasuries thereby, is easy for all to understand.

Seaventhly: to the end that they may freely preye upon the bodies and goods of
men, and houlde men in bondage to them selves, they have taken out all these
articles out of the book which concern their own behavior, and might any
way tend to the benefit of the subject, as may appear at large, by comparing
their books now, with their books for the year 1624.

Eighthly: whereas they should maintain a table of the rates of all fees in
every office of the court, that all whom it concerns might come to take a copy
of it, they have of purpose taken it away, and do persecute them to death (as
it were) that do call for it. see Cannon 136.

Ninthly: what fees are daily given, and taken for granting of administrations
to this man: and not an other, yea somtymes to the unlawful party, is not all
together unknowen, which practice produces this two foulde effect: it somtymes
deposes the lawful heir of his inheritance, or secondly causes unnecessary
and endless suits in their own courts, even to the undoeing of many a man's
estate, thus as a cage is full of birds, so are their howses full of deceyte.

Tenthly: what other devices to get monyes, they have, may appear in their
delaying and protractinge causes, continuances of suits upon suits, demurrings,
some of their proctors offering, that for so much by the year, as he shall
agree for, with the party whose cause is bad, he will hold the opposite party
from trial 7. years, do what he can, and at last, force him to agree for
half his right.

Eleventhly: To the end that strength may be in the hand of the oppressor, end
none to deliver the oppressed, nor no place left for the innocent to escape,
they have made them selves masters of the high commission house, that if any
do but mute against their proceedings they get him thither, and then he is
gone, either he must fly, or else spend his estate, conscience and all, or to
their new erected prison, to Newgate, Colehowse, the Clincke, or the Counter
must be his dwelling, one of these he cannot avoid.

Good Reader, if I should relate all the cariages in their commissions and
purgations, changes of penance and the like, I should both weary thee, and my
self too, what devices and turnings of things about there is, I leave to thy
own experience to observe, and what sums of monyes are taken for these
things, were intolerable to relate, and also their devices to bring men on
bare crimes without proof, and what is daily paid among them, in these
causes, experience shows the truth of. For probats of wills, and
administrations, I have showed before. I will now proceed to show their sinful
abuse of that sentence of excommunication among them, which yet is the only
weapon they fight withal, by which not a little profit and gain, does day lie
acrew to them and their depending officers, and by which they hold men's souls
in tyrannical bondage, and by which they hook not a little profit to the^
selves, making it the very snare and ginne to catch men, as experience proves,
every man being so daunted at it, as if inded what they so sinfully do, were
ratyfied in heaven, in which for thy better information, I will open these
things.

1. I will show what this censure is according to the ordinance of Christ, in
the Gospel. 2. Who was the author of it. 3. To what end it was ordained in the
church of Christ. 4. The great benefit of it in the church. 5. By whom it is
to be administered. 6. How it differs from this censure now in use among us.
For the first, we must know that this censure is a solemn and fearful, and
powerful censure of the church, cutting-off lawfully, and according to Gods
word, casting out of their publik socyety, and present followship, all such as
publikly offend in some grievous crime, or be obstinat co^temners of the
lawful admonitions of the church for private faults, that by such shame they
may be drive^ to repentance and others by their example be kept from the
infection of sin, and is warranted by these script. Mat. 18. 15. 1. Cor. 5. 5.
6. 7. 2. These. 3. 14.

2. For the Author, it was no other but the Lord Jesus Christ, whose laws and
ordinances are all unchangable by man, and to be kept pure and unrebukable,
till the apearing of the Lord Jesus Christ, as appears by that 1. Tim. 6. 14.
compared with Mat. 18. 17. where an express command is given to tell the
church.

3. The end for which it was ordained, was three fould: first, in respect of
the party offending it is for the destruction of the flesh, that the soul may
be saved in the day of the Lord 1. Cor. 5. 5. Secondly in regard of others,
that by their example, they may learn not to blaspheme. 1 Timothy 1. 20. Thirdly:
in regard of the whole body of the church, that they may be purged from the old
leaven of sin, as appears 1. Cor. 5. 8. and these are the ends, and no
private respect.

4. The benefit of these ordinances in the church, appears by this.

1. By these ordinances, the superfluous members of the church, are kept from
hurting and annoying the rest of the body, for it is Gods pruning knife, whereby
he cutts off every branch in his vine, that brings not forth good fruit,
that so those which do bring forth some fruit may be purged, to the end they
may bring forth more fruit John. 15. Secondly: hereby are kept out all those
that are openly discovered to be profane and wicked, from polluting the
ordinances of God: by it the wicked, and sin it self, is greatly stopped in
their course, yea this is yet more, the church is terrible to the wicked, as an
army with banners, for this ordinance of God, being in the right use of it, is
as terrible as death it self.

Thirdly, hereby is it, Gods Church is fenced (as with a wall) that the wild
boore out of the forest, and the foxes that destroy the vines, cannot enter,
or if they do through their craft, yet by this ordinance of God, the church
can be purged of them. Thus Paul purged the church of Hymeneus and Alexander
1. Tim. 1. 20.

Fourthly, The setting up of this ordinance in all the parts of it, would
indeed make the church beautiful, and the glory of this second temple, to
exceed the first: whose heart can choose then to be affected with the want of
so useful an ordinance as this is. And who can see any man running to his own
house, letting the Lords housely waste and not mourn for it? alas the profane,
do not now as in old, com only to the outer court, but into the holiest of
all, and pollute all the holy things of God therein: but oh the cvill time in
which we are fallen, in which peace and plenty brings security, every man
running to his own house, and thinking that must be builded with hewn stones
and timber, hewn by the skill of the builder, but Gods house may be builded
with stones, as they come out of the rock, or trees as they grow in the
forest, without any difference a respect at all.

Fifthly, the persons in whom it rests are the body of the church being met
together in one place, the grave elder being as the mouth of the rest, in
pronounceing of the sentence.

Sixthly, the difference between this ordinance of Christ, and that in use among
them apeares in these things. 1. In regard of the Author, the one being of
Christ, the other of Antichrist: it being the same for nature and
administration now, that it was when he ruled among us, and the same now in use
in his own kingdom, therefore not to be respected nor submitted unto by the
subjects of the kingdom of Christ, seeing every subject ought to be governed
by the scepter of his own king, and that because he is his king.

2. They differ in nature, the own is divine, and heavenly: the other is
sinful and wicked, the one is ahe truth of God: the other a lie in the right
hands of them that put them forth.

3. They differ in the end of them, one is only for the gaininge of sinners,
and to purge the church of them: the other to gain monyes, and to Lord over
the bodies, goods, souls and consciences of men.

4. They differ in the manner of administration, the one used as the last means
for the gaining of a sinner, when nothing else will, and therefore never used,
but for sins duly convicted and obstinatly stood in: the other used sinfully
for toys to get monyes by, and to be as a snare or net, to catch men by.

5. In regard of the manner, the one is administered by the body of the church,
being met together in one place: the other alone by some one man. And by these
things we may see what cause men have to fear this censure, as if what they
sinfully do, were confirmed in heaven, and God does indeed pour shame and
contempt on them and their Censures, for who sees not all men to esteem of it,
as it is, for all men see it is not the destruction of the flesh, but of the
man, and his monyes, that they seek.

And now to speak one word about the oath by which officers are sworn, let the
oath it self be minded the form whereof here stands.

You shall swear that you and every of you shall duly and diligently inform
your selves of these articles given you in charge, and that all favor, hatred,
through fear or any other corrupt affection, set aside, you shall present all
and every such person now or lately of your parish, which has committed any
offense comprised in any of these articles, or which are vehemently suspected
or defamed of any such offense, wherein you shall deal according to an upright
conscience, neither presenting, nor sparing to present any person contrary to
truth, so help you God, and his faithful promise in Jesus Christ.

How far this oath is changed from that it was in the years before 1624. let
the reader judge.

The evils contained in this oath are briefly these. First whereas an oath
ought to be done in righteousness, in truth, and in judgment, this is
unrighteously taken and imposed, and without judgment, as appears in these
particulars. 1. In that it is not imposed by a lawful Magistrate. 2. It swervs
from my allegiance to other laws besides the laws of the land, and servs to
all those inventions that a Lord Bishop can thrust into an article book, which
is contrary to the statute of 25. Henry 8. and 1. Elizabeth. Thirdly it binds
me to a necessity of sining on one hand or other, either I must present my
neighbor for toys, yea for mere suspicious without grownd, or break my oath,
and whoever thou art that take it, thou bindst thyselfe by this oath to
submit thyself, and so have made thyself the servant of sinful man, yea by
this oath as an enemy to God, a persecutour of his saints, and do sit under
the banner of Antichrist, in that thou have put to thine hand and sworn with
thy mouth to put all such laws and articles in execution, and pursue those
that do not the same, consider that in these words, so help me God thou do
call God to witness thy faithfullnes in these things, and do invocate his
name, that if thou do fail to do according to the tenor of this oath, he
would do so to thee, and more likewise, that is, bring some eminent judgment
on thee, consider these things and fear and tremble.

FINIS.
AN ADDITION*
By the foresaid Author.
AFter the finishing of the table of Fees, and those observations of their
abuses, upon my short experience taken, a copy coming to the hand of a
mourner, for such burdens upon his loving Countrymen, was grieved that so
many and intolerable abuses should be so briefly passed over; whereupon
knowing something farther that might discover the iniquity of this present
evil generation, I thought it my duty to spare from my own necessity, some
farther charge, for my countries good. Unto their abuses then forementioned, I
will ad something of their extortion even in their visitation, pretended for
the Churches good, to ease burdens, and to reform abuses and corruptions, but
effecting nothing less, as may easily appear, by comparing these times, with
the times of darkness.

In the times of darkness no more procuration might be taken then did
necessarily serve for the expenses of the day, whether it were taken in
victuals, or in money; neither might the Visitor, whether he were a Bishop,
Chancellor, or Comissary, visit any more Churches then one in one day; or if he
did, yet was he not to take more then one procuration, to the which all
Churches so met, were to communicate; and this appears to be true from that
constitution of John Stradford, Bishop of Canterbury; which Procuration is
limmited by a decree of Bennet the 12. not to exceed the value of So. Turons of
silver, every 12. Turons making one Florence of pure gold, according to the
English estimate, not amounting in coin the sum of five shillings at the
most, for a Bishops substitute, and the whole charges for him and his
followers, not to exceed 35 s. although he should call forty or fifty, yea a
hundred Churches together. And if the Archdeacons substitute visit, then not
to exceed 12 s. 6 d. and if the Archdeacon visit personally himself, then he
was to have 20 s. And if the Bishop visit himself, then he was to have for
himself and his reteiners 5. marks only; and none of them to take more,
although they should visit an hundred Churches in one day. And these have also
been mittigated since, as being thought too much, by a Provincial constitution
in Linwood, whereby an Archdeacon is allowed for one days diet for himself and
his followers, but 3 s. 4 d. which (as the gloss says) seemed to suffice
four persons, and their horses, with one Summoner for one day. But now if they
be compared to these times, we shall see them to exceed in their procurations
at their visitations, as they do in other things; witness their extraordinary
pomp, gluttony, I had almost said, their drunkenness too; but if I had, I
could make it good on some of them whom I have known: but their excess is
known to all, they drink wine in bowls, and rejoicing when they have robbed
some Churches for their inordinate expenses. Besides, what sums of money are
taken and carried away by them, is easy to be proved, and what tricks they
will have to increase their fees for every toy, appears by one example known to
the world, in which they excommunicated the Churchwardens of T. because they
had not finished the repairing of the Church in their year, and would not
absolve them without paying an unreasonable sum of moneys. If I should repeat
all their extortion in this kind, I might make a volume of complaints.

But to leave these great master-Theeves, whose daily oppression all sorts
groan under, yet none daring to reprove them, lest he be reputed as he that
rebukes the Priest, and so accounted as an enemy to the Church, and an opposer
of the Kings Prerogative, when as in truth it is themselves that are both
enemies to the Church, and prejudicious to the Kings Prerogative; for although
they pretend to uphold the Kings Prerogative, yet it is their own they seek
indeed, that they may live like princes in the Common wealth; neither, if the
thing be duly searched into, will it be found they exercise any other power,
then what was received from the Pope, in the days and times of darkness, now
contrary to the laws of the land, which may appear by these particulars.

1 In that all their citations, summons, actions, proceedings, sentences,
decrees, and judgments in all causes and controversies determinable before any
of them, are begun, continued, and ended in their own names, titles, and
dignities, without any relation or mention of authority given to them from the
King, but as they formerly had their power from the Pope, so do they exercise
this power and jurisdiction by Popish constitutions and customs, and by virtue
thereof challenge power and right so to do.

2. This appears to be true, from that statute of 28. H. 8. which statute
being the rule of our Archbishops, Bishops, and other the like Officers, with
all their ushering ceremonies, shows plainly that they are the same they were
in the days of darkness, and so contrary to the Laws of God and the King, yea
even to the same act in the true meaning of it, as all, who will, may see to be
most plain, for first the King, Peers, and commons, being at this time not
instructed in the unlawfullnes of the Prelacy and their ushering ceremonies,
did not only not aabridge any of their former rights and Privileges, but
gave them power to exercise them as before, so they were not contrary to the
word of God, and the Laws of the Land, now the Prelates being cunning
Politicians, and knowing what great revenues came into them, and to the holy
Father the Pope, made use of their ignorance and the Kings clemency, and so
continued all, or so many of their Popish customs as might be sufficient to
bring such an estate to them and their followers, as whereby their pride, pomp,
and tyrannical rule might be maintained, and hereby is it they Lord it over
all. Hereby is it they maintain their courtly governments, and that they cite,
Summon, and draw all causes and controversyes before themselves and their
courtly government, and do challenge power and right to do so, from their
popish customs and constitutions, which have been heretofore added to the
several seats and Seas of government, and do begin, continue and end them in
their own name, even as they did in the days of darkness, only they use not
the Popes name, but have left off his Supremacy, although it seems to be their
grief, which appears in this amongst other things in that they use him and his
triple crown for their character and superscrption in their seals of office.

Obje: But it will be said to me they do not exercise this rule from
themselves, nor from the Pope, but as from the King, and by his prerogative.

Ans. To which I answer, do they not stand in relation to the Pope, and more
to him then to his Majesty when they will execute his laws to full, and
persecute his Majesty's faithful subjects even to death by imprisoning, syning
and banishing of them for the least neglect of them, does not every King speak
by his own laws, and by his own officers? Now when the Popes laws are thus
executed by them, does it not declare them to be Subjects of his Kingdom.. 2.
The Laws of the Land and so of the King are they not all snapped in pieces by
them? what Law can stand before them if they take-in with the offender?
Thirdly, if they do fine any (as they do many not only without but against
law) under pretense for the King, do they not prefer one or other of their
favorites to beg the fine of the King, and so he is never the better for it.
But if it were granted that they stand by the King, yet why should they
execute these Laws among us, seeing they do us no good, but hurt and annoy us,
and are needles and burdenous, and I would to God both they and all their trash
were footles too. 3. No way can we more gratify the Pope, nor give him hopes of
a reentrance amongst us, then by authorizing and practicing his Laws amongst
us, and this is the cause he has so many abetters and favorites amongst us,
and this causes him to look for a day still among us, therefore can we do
the Lord no better service, or his Majesty a better turn, or the Land more
good, then by rooting out the pedlery wares of that man of sin, and by
overthrowing this courtly governme^^, by which these merchants of Rome are
grown rich and mighty amongst us, but alas my brethren may we not renew the
complaint of the Prophet Habak: 1. 1. 2. 3. 4. to the Lord and say, Oh Lord how
long shall I cry unto thee and thou will not help, even cry out and thou vvilt
not hear, cry out unto thee of violence and thou vvilt not save, etc. The Law
is dissolved, and Judgment does never go forth, for the wicked does compass
about the righteous, therefore wrong judgment proceeds.

But let Gods people be comforted, the plowman has a time to sow, and a time
to reap, and therefore let them know God has a time for them, and in his time
will send forth that Angel to reap, and command him to thrust in his sickle
and reap for the harvest is ripe Apoc. 14. and to cut down all the vines of the
vinyards of the earth, and to cast them into the winepresse of the wrath of
Almighty God, although now the locusts be like horses prepared to battle,
Revel. 9. 7. strongly linked together with ready prepared minds against all
such as do but mute against their cursed usurpation, yet let them know they
and all their popish titles and dignityes with that head of theirs the Pope,
from whom they received their life and power are now almost if not altogether
ripe unto the harvest, they are now become as a baskett of summer fruit, and
the Lord will not long pass by them any more, let them look on the year,
1539. and gnaw their tongues with grief with the remembrance thereof, as they
have often done, and remember that that lopping of their vines that then was,
was but a beginning to prepare them for the fire of the wrath of God which
shall be kindled here, and shall burn in the bottom of Hell, at the kindling
whereof they and all other the merchants of these things which are wexen rich
shall stand afar off, for fear of her torment, weeping and wailing and saying
alas alas, Rev. 18. As I am persuaded some of them have done already, and
shall do more, for he that rides on the white horse whose name is the Word of
God will go forth and conquer and smite the heathen and rule them with a rod
of iron, for he it is that treads the winepresse of the wrath of allmighty
God, Revel. 19. 15. Then shall the Churches rejoice, and all the holy saints
therein, when God has revenged their bloods, for among these men is found the
blood of the Prophets, and of the saints, and of all that were slain upon the
earth, Rev. 18. 24.

Having thus far enlarged according to my poor ability to strike at the maine
pillars of the body of this beast that tyrannise over the bodies and
consciences of all, I will ad a notable project or compact plotted between some
of their under officers, the thing is no fable but a certain truth found out
and confessed by the chief actor before the justice, who at first thought to
have punished it according to justice as he judged the nature of the offense
required, but afterward the Parliamant then approaching, he judged such a
notorious fact was more fit to be punished with a more powerful hand, for the
terror and example of all such ungodly wretches, but the Parliament breaking
up before things for common good were effected, this vermin escaped censure and
execution.

About Rutland side as I was credibly certified by a minister of good credit of
the Church of England, there came a pariter in good apparel like a gentleman
to a shepherd keeping sheep in the field, with whom he entered into familiar
speech to know what news, the shepherd answered he knew none, no said the
pariter do thou not dwell in such a town? yea said the shepherd, why said
the pariter do thou know nothing of such and such in your town, no said the
shepherd I know nothing but well by them, oh said the pariter thou art a fool
and know nothing, and thereupon he relates to the shepherd a very heinous
scandalous offense of those persons, himself had nominated, and by and by went
his way. The shepherd coming home relates what he had heard in the field, at
the last it passed so from hand to hand that it became a common fame, whereupon
the poor innocent were scandalized, and so far as my memory servs me, were
presented upon the fame as the oath of the Churchwarden constrained, but by the
gracious providence of God the evil doer was found out, who appeached the
Register or some such officer, who had laid the plott with him to get money,
and this I suppose is one trick more to get money cleanly, then the common
cheaters before knew of, and indeed the cheaters now a days are but novices
and new upstarts in comparison of theses lawles thieves. Now when I consider
the boldness of these base underlings, and weigh the exorbitant power of the
superior officers of this Antichristian brood, it makes me call to mind the
verse of the Poet

Quid Domini faciunt, audent quum talia fures. Now before I conclude I desire
to propound these things following to the sereous consideration of the
judicions godly wise. 1. Whether any of his Majestyes subjects stand bound by
any act of Parliament to submitt to any new constitutions made by them, and
whether they be compellable thereunto by law, or in pain of excommunication for
their neglect?

2 Whether it be lawful for any to exercise an absolute power of them selves
within his Majestyes Dominions or not? and if any so do, whether they be not
under the statute of praemunire, and whether the prelacy do not exercise such a
power?

3 Whether it be lawful for any Bishop or Archbishop or any other bearing or
exercising ecclesiastical power, to bring any of his Majestyes liege people
into inquisition, sifting them by oaths to force them to accuse themselves, or
others for want of conformity in any of their injunctions, especially when
they live in conformity to all his Majestyes positive laws.

4. Whether any of them have a prerogative above his majestyes statute laws
now in force to exact and take of his majestyes subjects more or less fees
then is allowed them by law.

The reasons why I propound these things for resolution are many and wieghty,
because the Prelates and their confederates and subordinates do most grossly
and intollerably incroach both upon Laws divine and humane, to the dishonor
of God, shame of all lawful authority, and hurt of the Kings Majesty's
faithful subjects, yea so violent and cruel are these unreasonable men, that
they are impatient to see any to live by them, that are not more zealous
Ceremoniou of their states and traditions, then truly zealous faithful
orthodoxall, both preachers and people. as if they envyed the image of God in
any, witness their constant persecuting of the Saints in all places where
their power extends, and that in most savage manner, I could speak much of
their cruel injustice to my self, but let that pass, considering my own
weakness and meannes could little benefitt any, yet it shows their thirst for
blood, who will not spare pains and cost to catch a flea, yet since their
crueltye ceasseth not to silence the Lords worthyes, that they say to the Seers
see not, yea inhumanely hale them out, whiles pressed under the Lords hand of
visitation, unmercifully pill them by their pursuivants, fine them against law
and equity to the impoverishing of them and theirs, even after they have
suspended, silenced, and excommunicated them, deprived them of all benefitt,
yet as if all this were too little, and that for no offense committed, (unles
it be offense to look upon them, yet we say a Catt may look on a King) the
Pursuivants must take them, and carry them to prison, or take bond to appear at
the High Commission, who have their Inquisition which will soon sift men
either of their goods or goodness. To avoid this snare, alas whither would not
poor men, that know them, run? For better to loose much, then goods and
liberty and all, I could instance a couple of famous preachers, my neighbors,
who by the hard measure of the Bishop of London (that outward demure sheeplike
Prelate, but inward ravening wolf) were chased to these parts, the one only
for coming into a Church where the Bishop was visitting after their Religious
exercises were ended to speak with a friend, but because he stood
excommunicate, he might not tread upon holy clodd, but the pursuivant must take
him, and carry him away, and no entreaty of any, nor sincere and deep
protestation of the party, could prevail for his release, but he must putt in
bond to appear at the high Commission, and what better there expected, but
utter undoing.

The other was inhumanely handled for preaching one Lords day after he was
suspened, although it was without the Liberty of the Bishop of London, yet he
and two others his like, can at the private pleasures make a Commission, and
pack out as many pursuivants, to make a prey of the afflicted, or Saule-like
to bring him bed and all that they may ad the worst they can to the poor
afflicted members of Christ's body. What Bonner or Story of more cruel
disposition? Let the reader understand I presume to give these two instances
without either of the preachers privity, and therefore it is doubtless too short
to express the haynousnes of the Prelates extreme cruelty toward either of
them.

Christian reader I not being by the press to give the Correctour some help to
understand perfectly my true intentions in my scribled hand, some faults (and
those matereall) have escaped which I pray thee to take knowledge of, and
lovingly to correct, or any else overseen by me, in the title page is a
transposition of the text of Esai. 8. 61. for. 61. 8. in the first page of
Epistle to the reader line 18. tremblingly for terribly, in the 2. page of D.
there is lest out a matereall thing I had writ in the margin which now I am
constrained here to insert, you shall swear that you will from henceforth
submit to all the good laws of the Prince and the lawful demands of your
Ordinary, by the good laws of the Prince, they mean all their articles and
constitutions both new and old, and by the lawful demands of their Ordinary,
they mean all those intrapping demands that their wits can putt to them for
the insnaring of themselves and others, their demands being all to this
purpose, whether does your Minister read divine service on holy days, and
other festival days? and whether does he observe all the articles contained
in your charge? and whether do all in your parish duty observe the like? or
any gadders to Sermons? or that refuse to receive the holy communion kneeling?
or any that are otherwise suspected of these or any other thing? where they
do force them to confess the names and surnames of those persons, or else
charge them with perjurye.

These things thus dispatched, and their remaining yet a little white Paper in
this sheet, there coming to my hands a book of a man of note in defense of
these persons and superstitions here complained against, I knew not how better
to supply the defect then by commending a few words to him.

To Doctor John Burges of Sutton Coldfield in Warwicksheire.
GOod Sir, whilst this last sheet was underhand, there came to my hands by
Gods providence a book of yours called a rejoinder to D. Mortons 3 nocent
Ceremonies, by the which I perceived how much service you have done to the
Prelacy, and how deeply their engagements must by consequence be to you, I
therefore presuming thereupon, have been bold to salute you with these few lines,
which if you will be pleased to take to heart, and to cause them to lay down
their extortions in these or other like proceedings, God shall have much honor
by you, and the Saints and people of God much benefitt, you have said much in
defense of their offices, laws and administrations, although to me it seems
but to little purpose, as to cover their nakedness with figleaves, or to daub
with untempered mortar, if you will justify also their proceedings in this
their courtly government, your service I dare say, shall not be unrequited, for
the truth is, I am but a poor Weaver, and have no learning, but what I have
gained in Christ's School, and by my experience amongst them, having these 14
years been hunted among them, and now at last forced to draw my breath in a
strange Land, I dare say there is nothing presented to you, nor to the world,
but if you please, your experience will teach you the truth of it, if therefore
you shall prevail for their reforming, it will be well, but if not, yet do so
much, if you can, as procure my peace that I may again possess my own
Country, what it is to be driven out, you know, especially for me who have no
means to live on in a strange Land, but if your engagements to them be such as
you will not be drawn to that, yet let me entreat you to be seen abroad to the
cries of the poor widows and Fatherles with other oppressed ones, and then
consider that when you have said all you can for them, and their
administrations, you have but made a plaster for a scabbe, that will not be
healed, but causes a crying out, even in the ears of the Lord of Hosts, as
you may see in that 5 Isa. 7. compared with the 9. I pray you therefore whilst
you shall receive a further reply spend your spare hours on these things, and
if you shall do any good therein, your self and other shall reap the benefitt
thereby. Thus I rest

Yours in all duty S. P.



