
Annos aeternos in mente habui.



Memorare nouissima tua.



THE SWEET THOVGHTS OF DEATH, and Eternity.

Written by Sieur de la Serre.

AT PARIS, 1632.



TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HENRY NEVILL, BARON OF ABERGAVENY.
SIR,
YOU may behold here a sensles Statue, made to the Life, but without Life,
till the Promethean Fire of your well known piercing Judgment gracing it,
give it a true subsistence. It has a Mouth without Words, Words without
Spirit, till you the Mecaenas, through your Honors gracious acceptance,
affoard it strength and energy. As for the Heart, expressed in the pure
Intention of this Address to your Honor, it is wholy yours; nor needs the
spoils of feigned Deityes, to give it breath, to make it more your own, then
now it is. Or rather if you please, you have here two nevv-borne Tvvins, put
forth thus naked as you see into the vvide World, to shift for themselves; and
like to be forlorn, unless your Lordship, pitying their poverty, take the^
into your Honorable Patronage, and safe Protection.

France has had the happiness to give them their first birth; your Honor
shall have the trouble to afford them a second: That to have bred a Spirit able
to conceive and bring forth such issues; And your Lordship through your noble
Favor, to make them free Denizens of this Kingdom. Or lastly, to speak more
properly, I here present your Lordship with the Svveet Thoughts of Death, and
Eternity, expressed in our tongue. Not to undertake, to make that svveet unto
you, (which otherwise were bitter) who through a fair preparation of a
Christian and virtuous life, have confidence enough to look grim Death, in the
face; and with good serenity of conscience, to vvayt on Eternity: but rather
that your Lordship, would please to commend the same to others of like
quality, who follovving the vogue of the allurements, pleasures, and delights
of this world, may have need of such noble Reflections, as Monsieur de la
Serre, Author of this Work, well versed with people of that rank, has
learnedly, and piously shevved to this more free and dissolute age. So shall
your Honor, do a charitable work of mercy, the world be edified, and I well
satisfied, to have put to my hand.

Your Honors most humbly and truly devoted. H. H.

THE TABLE OF CHAPTERS.
Chap. 1. OF the sweet Thoughts of Death. page 1. Chap. 2. What Pleasure it is
to think of Death. page 6. Chap. 3. That there is no contentment in the world,
but to think of Death. page 22. Chap 4. That it belongs but only to good
Spirits, to think continually of Death. page 30. Chap. 5. How those spirits
that think continually of Death, are elevated above all the Greatness of the
Earth. page 41. Chap. 6. A Contemplation upon the Tomb of Alexander the Great.
page 50. Chap. 7. He that thinks always of Death, is the Richest of the
world. page 61. Chap. 8. A Contemplation upon the Tomb of Cresus. page 66.
Chap. 9. That he who thinks always of Death, is the Wisest of the world. page
73. Chap. 10. A Contemplation upon the Tomb of Solomon. page 80. Chap. 11. A
Contemplation upon the Tomb of Helena. page 90. Chap. 12. That of all the
Laws which Nature has imposed upon us, that same of Dying, is the sweetest.
page 113. Chap. 13. How Worldings dye deliciously without ever thinking
thereof. page 119. Chap. 14. Goodly Considerations upon this important verity;
That whatsoever we do, we dye every hour, without cease. page 124. Chap. 15.
The Tomb of the pleasures of the Sight. page 127. Chap. 16. The tomb of the
Pleasures of the Sense of Hearing. page 130. Chap. 17. The Tomb of the other
Pleasures, that are affected to the Senses. p. 132. Chap. 18. How he who has
imposed the Law of death upon us, has suffered all the pains thereof together.
page 135. Chap. 19. The pleasure which is found in Living well, for to Dye
content. page 143. Chap. 20. The Picture of the Life, and Death of a sinful
Soul. page 148. Chap. 21. A goodly Consideration, and very important both for
life, and death. page 159.
THOVGHTS OF ETERNITY.
The Triumph of Death. page 3. The Glory of Paradise. page 55. Of the Infernal
Pains. page 190. The Hour of Death. page 145.
Of the svveet Thoughts of Death.
CHAP. I.
THERE are no sweeter Thoughts, then those of Death. Spirits being raised to
the knowledge of Divine things, do ever occupy themselves in counting the time
of their banishment in this strange Land, where we sigh under the burden of our
Evils. Slaves live not, but of the hope to see themselves at liberty: their
prisons and their irons are objects, both of horror and dread, which put their
souls upon the rack. The Sun shines not for them at all, and all the sundry
pleasures agreeable to their senses changing their nature, serve but to afflict
them. So as in their captivity, they breath the air of a dying life, whose
moments last for ages. We are those slaves so enchained within the prison of
our bodies, as exiled from the paradise of our delights, where the first
innocence of our parents, had established us a Mansion: so true it is, their
disobedience has changed our bodies into prisons, and the delights of our
Souls into thraldom. What feelings then, may we have in this servile
condition, whereunto we are brought, but those of an extreme dolor, and bitter
sorrow, to see our selves deprived of the Soueraygne God, where Souls do find
the accomplishment of their rest? The hearts being holily enamoured, speak so
sweet a language both of sighs and sobbs, in the absence of that they love, as
if the Angels were touched with envy, they would desire to learn it, to make
thereof a new Canticle of glory in their Eternity.

Of all the dolours that may tyrannize a soul, such as know what it is to
love, find not a more intolerable, then that of the absence of the Subject
with they love perfectly indeed. And if it be true, that affections draw their
force from their merit, what should our love be toward this Savior, whose
perfection so wholly adorable, cannot brook comparison but with themselves. And
how be it this great God be infinitely lovely, yet would he needs be borrowing a
heart of nature, to resent the draughts of our love, and to dye on the Cross of
their woundings. What excess of goodness? How may they resist the sweet strokes
of his mercy? He espouses our Condition, for to suffer all the miseryes thereof;
(sin and ignorance only remaining without power against his person) in so
much as dying, he changed the countenance of death, and makes it so beautiful,
as generous hearts at this time, sigh not, but in expectation of their last
sigh, since even the selfsame moments that lead us to the Tomb, conduct us
also to immortality.

The pains which my Savior has suffered on Mount Caluary, have been
fruitful to bring forth diverse punishments, in favor of the infinite number
of Martyrs, who loved not life, but to ressent it is death. His Nails have
forged them others of that sort. His Thorns have thence produced new Thorns;
and the form of his Cross has made them to invent some others of the like;
and the turning vpside down of his, has served S. Peter for a Couch to dye
in. For joy rather, then of pain, I would say, that all the deadly instruments
of the passion of my Redeemer have been the preparatiues of the Triumph, that
a million of souls have carried away in their Martyrdom. The Scourges have
been for S. Bartholomew, the Nails for S. Andrew, the Sword for S. Paul, the
wounds for S. Francis, and the Cross serves on earth, for a new subject of
Envy, for the whole world together, since that every one can pretend no better
then to this glory to sacrifice his life, upon the same Altar, where the
Author of life has been immolated.

O how the amourous plaintes of that great Apostle make all to resound with a
sweet melody! Me thinks the sweet acce^ts of his cries do eue^ ravish my
Spirit through mine ears. The time of my life is too long (said he in the
strength of his Passion) I am troubled to reckon up the moments of it is
durance. When shall it be, that I shall live forth of my self, to go to live
in him, whom I love much better then my self? Quite contrary to those guilty
Souls, who stand discoursing of death as of a loss, where he desires it for
recompense: So as the Sun had never a fair day for him, and Nature so
beautiful in its diversities, and so fruitful to bring forth so many wonders,
was barren for his contentment; in so much as the objects of his pleasures was
quite without the world: and yet through a Miracle worthy of him, he lived, and
dyed of Love at once. O sweet Life! But yet more happy death! The Swan after
she has measured diverse times, the humide spaces of the banckes, even tired
out with living, calls for death unto her succor, with accents of melody, so
sweet and so pitiful withal, as that it cannot choose but then, even yield
to the assaults of Compassion. This bird being richly dressed up with
innocence, proclaymes the truth of her Death to Forests, to Champaygnes, and
to Rocks by the sad accents of her tunefull notes, whose harmony does ravish
all those, that have sense of feeling in them, and gives them a desire to die
with her. This Divine Apostle, dying on the shore of his tears, represents to
us this bird. For being now weary to live so long time absented from his life,
he sends up his amourous sighs to Heauenwards, and with a voice full of
allurements, cries out, how he desires to abandon his body, for to go, to
behold the God of his Soul. The harmony of his cries, so powerfully attracts
the hearts unto him, as all those who are able to hear but the Echo of it, and
to perceive i'ts sweetness, do borrow wings of al sides to fly out of
themselves, while the Earth is in contempt with them. You Souls of the world,
I inuit you here to hearken to this Consort of Music, where the Angels hold
their part; but you must purify your senses, if you will be ravished with
Pleasure, and Joy.

What Pleasure it is to think of Death. CHAP. II.
A TRAVAILLER strayed from his way, and puzzled in the full of the night, within
a thick forest, finds himself on a sudden brought into streights, through a
thousand assaults of fear, wherewith his Soul is strooken. He casts his eyes
on every side, but sees nothing but shadows of horror which presage the
sunset of his life. The noise of the impetuous winds that puts a garboyle into
the boughs, beat so roughly on his ears, as he breathes but in a deadly
fear, more intolerable well nigh then death. His imagination being troubled,
lets him see in dream, in the midst of the darkness, as many precipices, as the
steps he makes on his way. In so much as he belieues every moment he is
buried quick in some pit or other, with the whole burden of his evils. The
fear of being devoured by the savage beasts, makes him to apprehend a new
punishment, whose dolor redoubles evermore, through the sensible appearance of
some evident danger. The heavens and earth being hid alike from his eyes within
obscurity, for remedy represent to him despair, and in effect, his Judgment
being now stupid with terror, has not the liberty of discourse but to conclude
upon his loss, al things the while co^tributing to his most disadvantage.
Himself sees not himself awhit, as if already he were quite besides himself;
and the little sense he has left him, serves him but to suffer evils, which in
their excess do rob him of his speech.

Thus brought to this extremity, where death is more present with him then
life, since he wholly dies and lives but to halfes; he lifts now at last his
eyes to Heauenwards, where he discryes a ray of light to disclose through the
birth of the Aurora, which serves him as a Beakon or Watch tower to remit him
into the path of his way which he had lost. The day by little and little makes
the shadows of death, with enuirone him, to vanish out of sight, and with the
hope of living, affoards him the contentme^t to behold the precipices which he
has escaped: in so much as he arriues to the places of his desires with a
great deal more pleasure then he felt pain.

Let us now say, We are these Trauaylours, wandering in the thick Forest of
this world, during the darkness of Sin, which enwraps us one every side. The
winds of temptations bluster without cease in our ears; every stepp we seem
to make forwards, leads us into the Tomb, since we dye every hour; and the
abysses are always open to swallow us up, as culpable of a thousand sorts of
crimes. Being brought to this estate, the Heaven hides it self from our eyes,
as not able to pretend awhit for it is glory: So as being oppressed with diverse
disasters, we breath the air of a life, full of annoyes, and of insufferable
afflictions.

The light of Eternity, which shines to us in the port of the Sepulcher, is
this goodly Aurora, whose day disperses the shadows of our night for ever.
What contentment to arrive at this port amidst so many stornes? What happiness
to enjoy the brightness of a Sun, which is not subject to Eclypses, after so
many tedious nights? We are all Pilgrims, who continually travail, from this
world into the other. The darkness of sin is the shadow of our bodies, since
they accompany us without cease. What incomparable felicity, to go forth of our
selves, to find out that day which should illumine us eternally? What may we
desire in Slavery, but Liberty? In darkness, but light? and in Travail, but
Rest? This earth is a prison, let us never think then, but to recover our
liberty. This unlucky dwelling is a place of obscurity, let us gape after the
light. This fatal Mansion, is fertile only but with thorns and troubles, let
us get forth of it is bounds, to find the true tranquillity: and according as we
shall approach to the good of death, so shall we distance our selves from the
evils of life.

O sweet death where our miseries termine themselves* O cruel life, where our
disasters take their beginning! O welcome death where our annoyes do find their
sepulcher! O dread life where our dolours find their cradle! The most afflicted
draw al their consolation from the hope of death. Are we not of this number, as
subject to all the disgraces of Lot, and to the cruel laws of Fortune? With
what sweeter hope may we mitigate our pains, then with that of a speedy
breaking the chains of our captivity? If we dyed not every hour, there would
be no contentment to live. For what likelihood is there that a trauailour
should take any pleasure to stop in the midst of his way, during the time of a
storm? Now the world is never without tempests: What remedy were it to make a
stop at a flash of lightening, or a crack of Thunder, in the midst of the way
of our life?

Being pressed with a storm, and encompassed with Rocks, shall we not be
se^ding our desires before hand to the port, with this grief, for not having
wings to fly more swiftly thither? So as if the ship of our life, cannot land
but at the shore of the sepulcher, is it not at this port whither we are to
aspire every moment, to put us in the Lee from Shipwrackes, whereof so many
wise Pilots have run hazard? I have no fear but of old age, said Zenon, For
of all evils, that of life is the most intolerable. In effect, if we think on
the diverse torments, that pull away our life, by little and little from us, we
should be of Socrates his opinion, who of all the mome^ts of our life, prizeth
none but the last. O happy moment* and irksome to those that go before! I am
troubled (said David) in the house of men: when shall I arrive into that of my
Lord? He was always going thither, but the way seemed so long and tedious to
him, as he sighed continually after the end of his journey.

All things tend to their Center; the Stones being raised from the earth, do
borrow wings to their weighty nature, to descend down beneath, where they
always have their look. The Rivers, though insensible are touched with this
amourous curiosity to reuisite continually their Mother. And the Piramidall
flames of fire do witness they burn, but with desire of joining themselves with
their first beginning. And howbeit their endeauours are unprofitable, yet have
they never other scope. The Heaven is our Center; with what more violent
passions may we be quickened then with that of being ravished from our selves, to
join as Atoms to their unity, and as rays to the body of their light? Those
Torches of the night whose number is infinite, and beauty incomparable, not so
galla^tly show us their twinkling baytes, but to enthrall us with their
wonders. They shine not to us, but to show us the way of their Azure vaults, as
being the only place of our repose. And it seems the galloping course of the
Sun, goes not so turning the great globe of the Heavens* but to show the way
from aloft unto the Inhabitants of the Earth.

If some one had the gift of prophecy, and that it were foretold us, in a
certain time set down, that we were to possess an ample fortune, be it of
goods or greatness, all transitory a like; were it not credible, the day of
this attendance would be to us of a long put-off? How many sighs, as witnesses
of our languours, should we be sending forth, before this felicity so promised?
The greatest dolor we could possibly suffer, would be but of impatience; for
through force of passionately desiring this good, all sorts of evils would be
insensible to us. The Sun that posts so swift would then go sluggishly, and
its diligence could not stay us a whit, from accusing it of sloth, as often as
we gazed upon Heaven.

Let us now consider, the mystery of this Proposition, and say, that our
Savior and the King of Prophets has given us this assurance from his mouth,
that the last instant of our life shall be the first of our immortality; and so
on the day of our death, should we possess an infinite number of felicityes,
be they in immortal goods, be they in the greatnesses of nature it self. From
what sweet disquietnesses, might we seem to be exempt in the expectation of
this happiness? The holy Souls who breath in this world the air of grace, live
not, but of the joy they have of continually dying. With how many sighs of
love, and languour, smite they Heaven at all hours? All the fair days the
Sun affoards them to their eyes* seem to be so sad and lowering, as hardly do
they mark the difference between the light and darkness, because they love but
the eternal days, which are to shine to the birth of their felicity. And this
is the day of death, where ceasing to be men, we begin to be as Angels.

S. Frauncis wounded on all sides with a thousand darts of love, sighs in the
presence of his Master, for grief that he cannot dye of his wounds. He
contemplates the wounds of his Redeemer, and his looks have this Divine virtue
with them, as ^o make his soul to ressent the smart. And through the force of
his sweet torments, the amorous passion wherewith he is taken makes him to
ressent the dolours of his Master, in so much as the marks thereof themselves
are imprinted in his stigmatized Body ^hen it is, that soowning with joy,
extasied with pleasure, and ravished with a thousand ^orts of felicityes wholly
Divine, he sequesters himself from the earth, to approach unto Heaven. He
feels himself to dye of love, without being able notwithstanding to loose his
life: for though his wounds be mortal, since all termine at the heart, yet
their cause is immortal. So as dying in his life, and living in his death, he
dies, he lives, without dying, and without living. Of dying, what appearance,
since he is sunk in the spring of life? Of living who would believe it? Let us
then say, that if he dye, it is of a Death a thousand times more sweet then
life; and if he live, it is of a life of ecstasy, which feels nothing of the
humane.

This sweet Saint, seeing himself under the wound of the blood of his Master,
believed verily he should make shipwreck, through force of desiring the same,
in so goodly a sea, whose tempests were so much the more grateful to him, as
love served it self of his sighs, to drive away the storm. And in truth, how
could he loose himself in the presence of his Savior, whose Cross serves
him, as well for a watchtower, as for a Haven in the midst of the torments,
which his wounds have caused to grow in him? He would feygne have found some
rock, within this sea of love; but the Pilot who steeres the ship of his life,
is a Port of assurance for all the world; since he commands the winds and
tempests.

What pleasure needs must this great Saint take, to see himself thus smitten
with the self same wounds of his Master? The Cross fayles him; howsoever yet
he has it in the heart. The Crown of Thorns he misseth; but what say I? he
wears it in his Soul. But then at least, he seems not to be deprived, but of
Nails and Gaul? I deceive my self. For as for the nails he caryes the
marks thereof, as well in hands, feet, as side; and for gaul, the tongue
takes very greedily the sweet bitterness thereof. O great Saint thrice happy! Tell
us the pleasure which is to dye, since you die so sweetly in the ecstasies of
your felicities? How irksome needs must life be to you, and the earth be in
contempt with you, in this tra^sportation of joy, whereunto you are raised?

S. Stephen has beheld the Heavens opened; and you his heart, who has created
them. S. Paul has seen so admirable things as might not be told; and you
felt such delicious as cannot be expressed. S. Peter has been dazeled through
a beam of glory; and you by one of love, whose light having pierced your
darksome body, has made it transparent to the eyes of all the world: so
communicating it is divine qualityes thereinto, as the marks thereof remain
eternal. S. John has slept upon the bosom of his Master; and by a sweet
transport your heart got through, and sought, within the bosom of his heart,
your most assured repose. This same disciple has been a witness of his
torments; and you participant of his pains, with this glory yet moreover, of
bearing as well the wounds in the Soul as the marks on the body. So as your
favors are so dear, as none dare envy them for fear of presumption, though
otherwise they be most worthy of envy.

I wonder the thoughts of Death should be displeasing, since we dye with
pleasure in the life we lead. There are none so blind in the knowledge of
themselves, that know not how they die every hour; were it not just then, that
we should think upon that which we are continually a doing? And wherefore
shall we not take pleasure at this thought, if it be the most profitable and
sweet that we are able to conceive? It is impossible to think of death, but we
must needs be thinking of Eternal life which succeds the same: or rather say
we, It is impossible to think of the Sovereign God, and not to think of the
imaginary evil of death. And where shall we be finding of thoughts both
sweeter and deerer, then those of our Sovereign Good? So as if, for the
raising of our spirits thither, we are to pass into the imaginations and
idea's of death; the light of the Sun which shall serve us for object, shall
disperse all those vain shadows, which subsist not but through a false
opinion.

The star of the day, never shows more bewtifull the^ when it has escaped,
through flight, from a shole of clouds which do hide its light. Those obscure
clouds, so strongly relieve the flash of its light, as thence it appears to be
radiant in excess. The like may we say of our Reason, being as the Sun of
our life, that from the time it escapes from all these vain shadows of fear
and dread, which do veyle its brightness; it appears so shining, as it serves
for a torch to pass very confidently withal, from this life to the other. The
Will loves but the Good; it is the Needle that is always a pointing at this
Pole. It is the Iron, which incessantly follows this Adamant, as its only
object: In such sort, as we are not capable of love, but to purchase the good
which is presented unto us, be it false, imaginary, or true. And therein is
judgment given us to know the difference, that is from the one, and the others.

Now, that life is a false good, there may no doubt be made, since it has no
other foundation in it, then misfortunes and myseries. That it is an imaginary
good, we are enforced to believe, whiles its pleasures are but of fancyes and
dreams. But that death is a true good, we are to hold for certain, since it
is the end of the term of our exile, of our captivity, of our sufferances. For
we cannot enter into glory but by the gate of the tomb, where being reduced to
our nothing, we return to our first beginning. Sweet then are the thoughts,
which make the life fastidious and death pleasing; and yet more sweet the
desires, that termine all our hopes in Heaven. Such as know not the Art of
dying well and diliciously, are unworthy to live. Impatience in the expectation
of death, is more sensible to a holy Soul, then the greatest pleasures to a
man of the world. We cannot love life, but in cherishing the fatal accidents,
that are inseparable from it, which made Terence to say, That he loved not any
thing, of all that which was in him, but the hope of a speedy dying.

In effect, there is no greater consolarion in life, then that of death. For
were it immortal, with all the encombrances that cleave unto it, of all the
conditours that are found in nature, that same of man would prove to be the
most unfortunate. The afflicted love not, but by the sweet expectation of
death, and the others of the hope of a second life, with reason imagining with
themselves, that if on earth they be touched with some pleasure, they shall be
one day accomplished in Heaven with all desirable delights. And through the good
of our death it is, that we possess the sovereign good of eternal life. It
is the entry of our felicity, and the passage from the false and imaginary, to
the true and always permanent. He is yet unborn, whose heart being glutted
with all sorts of contentments, has never gaped after new pleasures.

There is not a Soul in the world, how happy soever it think it self, that
points not its pretensions beyond that same which it possesses. We hold it
good to be rich, our desires are always in chase of Good. We are raised to the
top of the greatest dignities; we build new Thrones in our imagination, not
finding on earth scope enough to satisfy our Ambition withal. In so much as
man has always unrest in the repose, which he has once proposed to himself;
which makes us sensibly to perceive, that the object of our desires, is forth
of nature; and that if we sigh in the midst of our felicityes, it can be but of
the hope we have to possess some greater then they. We have lived long enough
then, in Tantalus his Hell, where we are continually a thirst, without being
ever able to drink. We must be using of some violence with our selves, and go
courageously before death, since it is that which withhouldes this second life
from us, wherein abides the accomplishment of our happiness.

To dye, is but to cast into the wynd the last sigh of our miseries. To dye, is
but to make a partition of our selves, commending the body to the Earth, and
the Soul unto Heaven. To dye, is but to bid a last adieu to the world,
preferring the company of Angels before that of men. To dye, is to be no more
unhappy. To dye, is to despoyle us of our infirmities, and to reuest us with a
nature exempt from sufferances. O sweet death, since it leads us to the spring
of life! O sweet death, since it gives us the Eternity of glory in exchange of
a moment of dolor! O sweet death, since it makes us to revive for ever, in a
felicity immortal!

O ye Souls of the world, think then always of death, if you will taste with
pleasure, the sweetness of life. For it shall be even in this last moment, where
you shall receive the Crown of all the others; you may sigh long enough in your
chains, you are never like to be delivered thence, if death come not to break
the gates of your prison. Go before it then, and carry in your countenance the
desire of meeting it, rather then a fear to be touched with it. We should
suffer with a good cheer, that same which we must of necessity endure. What
say I endure? Were it a pain, to approach to the end of ones evils? Were it a
pain to become for ever exempt from their sufferances? Let us rather say, a
Contentment, since thereby do we get forth of sadness, to enter into joy. Let us
call it a Happiness, since so we do abandone the dwelling of misfortunes, to
live eternally in that of the felicities of Heaven.

That there is no contentment in the world, but to think of Death. CHAP. III.
DEATH has it is delights, as well as Life. Job was never more happy, nor more
content then at such time, as he saw himself upon the Throne of his dunghill,
oppressed under the burden of his miseries. He dyed so deliciously in the depth
of his dolours, as he would have suffered always, and have dyed incessantly in
that manner. His wounds served him as a mirror to his love. For in looking
thereinto, he became amourous of himself; but yet loved he not himself, but
to dye continually: so pleasing was death unto him, thereby to obey him who had
imposed that law upon him. Love changes the nature of things. From the time
that a Soul is chastely taken with this passion, it never suffers for the
subject which it loves. The pains and torments thereof are changing the name
and quality within the heart. They are Roses rather then Thorns. For if it
sigh, it is of joy and not of pain: if it be necessary to die, to conserve this
lovely cause of its life, it is no death to it, but a mere rap^ of contentment
which seuers it from it self, in favor of another self, which its loves more
then it self: In such wise, as it begins to live content, from the point it
begins to dye in; or rather to take its flight, toward the object it has
proposed to it self, of the full perfection of its love.

From this goodly verity, do I draw this like consequence. That the hearts
wounded with divine love do never sigh in their torments, but of the
apprehension they have of their short durance: and Death, which to us seems so
foul and deformed, upon the sudden, changing it is countenance, in their
respect appears a thousand times more beautiful then life. Whence it is, that
they are always thinking thereon, to to be always content; since it is the
point where their pains do termine, and where their felicityes begin. The most
pleasing thoughts, which our spirit can tell which way to conceive, can have
no other object then that of contentment, of profit, and of virtue; in so much
as they are the three sorts of goods whereto our will is tied.

Now, where shall we find more pleasure then in the thought of death, since it
is the great day of our Fortune, where we take possession of the delights of
Heaven? Where more profit, then in the self same thought; since the soueraygne
good, which is promised to us, is the But, the End, and Object thereof? And
where more virtue, then to think always of Death; whilst with the arms of
these sweet thoughts we triumph over vice? I believe it is impossible to taste
pleasures without thinking of death, in regard these delights are continually a
flying away, and incessantly die with us: in such wise, that if we cannot
ressent the contentments but within their fruit, and in running always after
them; they are rather displeasures, then pleasures, and therefore we hold there
are no greater delights, the^ those of thinking of Death, as being the only
mean to make them eternal.

When I resent unto my self S. Laurence extended upon the devouring flames,
but yet more burned with the fire of his love, then with that of his
punishment, how he cries out with a cheerful voice, in the midst of the
heates which consume him, to be turned on the other side, as if he thought he
should not dye, but by halfes, being so but half burned; I do feel my self
ravished with the same iumps of joy, that transported him. Death is so welcome
to him, as he deliciously roles his body on the coals, as if they were very
beds of Roses. So as if he be touched with any pain at all, it is for not
suffering it; for that his life being all of love, finds its element in the
fire that consumes it, and therefore he sighs of gladness in the height of his
torments. In effect, how shall he expire admidst those heats, if his heart be
all aflame already, and his Soul of Fire? For if he were to be turned into
ashes, the stronger must needs prevail. So as he cannot be consumed, but
through the fire of his love. O sweet encounter! O welcome combat! And yet more
dear the Triumph! Death assayles him with flames, it assaults him with heats,
but the fire wherewith he is holily burned, triumphs, and reduces him to
ashes, so to render them as consecrated. This great Martyr never tasted in his
life more sweet pleasures the^ that of feeling himself to die upon this bed of
flames, because resenting death, he felt the delights of immortal life, whereof
he made himself a crown.

Kings, Princes, and all those who are raised to some great fortune, confess
it to be a great pleasure to die, since they die every hoar so sweetly amidst
their greatnesses. I say, so sweetly, for their spirits and their senses are so
strongly occupied with their continual joys, as the Clock which keeps
account of the hours of our life, may sound long enough its 24. hours a day,
and they heed it no more, then if they were stark deaf. And the night full of
horror, which represents to us the same of the Sepulcher, cannot fright them
any more, then if they were quite blind. Needs must the charms of their
pleasures be strong, to make them insensible to that which touches them so
near. S. Augustine said, how the greatnesses of the world, aspersed a kind of
leprosy on the soul, which even benumbed all the senses of the greatest
Potentats of the earth. In effect, all their sighs, all their actions do but
carry the countenance of Death with them, and yet perceive they no whit thereof.
A strange thing! To live, and not to think of life at any time, or rather of
Death, since to live and die is but one thing! It is yet true notwithstanding,
that we dye without ever thinking of death; wherein do we spoil our selves of
the sweetest contentments of life, because our whole felicity consists in dying
well; and the means to incur a glorious death is always to think of the
miseries of life, to the end to be encouraged through hope, to possess the
eternal glory which is promised unto us. We do naturally love our selves with
so strong affections, that all the powers of the world, are not able to burst
the chains thereof.

But what more mighty proofs may we affoard of this verity, then that of
thinking continually of Death, since the same is the day of our Triumph? When
shall I begin to live not to dye for ever? says the Royal Prophet. Our life
is a continual combat, and the day of our Death is that of our Victory. All
the Martyrs though they were in the thickest of the fight, and always in the
action of defending themselves, yet in this war of the world, thought
themselves very happy to find the occasion, where they might make to appear
the last endeauours of their courage in the midst of torments; for that they
found in Death the crown of immortal life. O sweet life, and cruel the
attenda^ce!

As often as we carry our thoughts beyond nature, and even to Heaven, our
spirit remains wholly satisfied therewith, because that in this divine pitch,
where it sees it self elevated above it self, it begins to live the life of
Angels. The earth is in contempt with it, and when the chains of it is body
fall off in their first condition, it suffers their tyranny through constraint.
So that, if it be permitted us at all moments to aba^don the world in thought,
to have thereby some feeling of heavenly delights; should we be our enemies so
far, as to contemn these divine pleasures, in groueling without cease in our
miseryes, while the only means to be touched with it, is to think on Death;
since there is no other way in life, to find the felicity we seek for?

We may piously say that the Virgin purest, and most holy lived on earth a life
little differing from that life which is lived in Heaven; her spirit all divine
intertayned it self always with the Angels, or rather with God himself; while
she had the glory of bearing him within her sacred womb, or in her arms; In
so much as her life was a voluntary Death, all of love, seeing that through
love, she took no pleasure but to dye, so to possess more perfectly the only
object of her life. She prized not her days but in the expectation of their
last night, as knowing its darkness was to produce the brightness of an eternal
day, whereof herself had been the Aurora. O how sweet would it be, to be able
to live in that sort, for to dye deliciously! It is not a life truly immortal
to be always thinking of death, if death afford us immortality? How fastidious
is the life of the world, the Prophet cries? Let us now then be joining our
voice to his cries, and say, that death only is to be wished for. All the holy
Souls, which in imitation of my Savior, have adorned themselves with thorns,
have been turning the face to the tombwards, there to gather Roses. With death
it is, where they termine their dearest hopes. So as if they live content, it
is not but through the sweet hope which they have to dye.

O ye profane Spirits, who sacrifice not but to voluptuousnes, pull off the
hood of passion that thus blinds you, to destroy those aultars of Idolatry,
whereon you immolate your selves, without thinking of it, for punishment of
your crimes. If you will know the true pleasure indeed, it consists of thinking
of Death, as of the Spring that produces our delights. Our Crowns are at the
end of their cariere, nor shall we ever come to possess the Soueraygne God, to
which we aspire with so much fervor and unrest, but by the way of Death. When
shall I cease to live with men, says David? He is even troubled amidst the
greatnesses of the earth. His Scepter and his Crown are so contemptible to
him, as he would willingly change his Throne with the dunghill of Job, on
condition to dye with his constancy. To live, is no more then to be sequestered
from that which one loves: and after God, what may we love? After him what may
we desire? So as, if now these holy affections and these divine wishes cannot
look on glory, but in passing by the Sepulcher, let us think continually on
Death, as of the way we take, and which we are yet to make. This is the only
mean to render us content, for that these thoughts are inseparable from the
eternal felicity which is promised us.

That it belongs but only to good Spirits, to think continually of Death.
CHAP. IIII.
SVCH as know the Art of familiarizing death with life, through continual
remembrance of their end, do never change the countenance in any perils. They
look to resume both their blood, and life at once, with the same eyes they
behold the things which are agreeable to them: so as they remain invincible in
their miseryes, through the knowledge they have of their condition. Wounds
never hurt their souls, and all the maladies wherewith they may be touched,
afflict but their body only. Their good Spirit habituated with the ordinary
encounter of a thousand sad accidents inseparable from life, tastes their
bitterness in its turn, and feels their thorns without any murmuring. The end
of all actions ought to be the first aim of the judgment that conceiues them,
if it will shun the grief of having done them. So as from the time that we are
capable of reason, are we to serve our selves of it, to consider the necessity
of our mortal and transitory condition; that the continual object of our end,
may serve as a condition and means to arrive happily thereunto.

The wiser sort are those, who repent at least, for that which they have done;
and true wisdom consists in not committing folly. And what more great may a
man admit, the^ that, to never think of death, since it is the end where all
our actions receive their prize or pain? Remember thou Death (the Wisema^
says) and thou shall never syn. O glorious remembrance, who raisest us to so
high a degree of honor, as never to offend God, which is the only perfection
of the Soul, next to the knowing him, and loving him withal! O glorious
remembrance, which changest our frail and guilty Nature into one which is
wholly innocent! O glorious remembrance that make us deliciously to breath the
air of Grace, since they live in the estate to dye every hour, for to live
eternally! O glorious remembrance, which on earth make us the inhabitants of
Heaven? O glorious remembrance, where the Spirit finds both its Good, and
repose.

When I represent to my self the pitiful estate of our Condition, I am afraid
of my self: for disasters and miseryes do so attend us at the heels, as there
is almost no medium between dying and living. We sigh without cease, the whole
air we breath, and our very being that so tumbles always toward its end,
wishes not, but its not being, whither every instant leads it without
intermission. What better thoughts may we now conceive, then of these
verities; since it is too true, that we are borne unhappy, for to live
miserable, until the point of dying? And the only mean to change this misery
into happiness, is every moment to think upon it, for fear of falling ever
into neglect, or forgetfulness of our selves.

There are feeble Spirits, who dare not carry their thoughts unto the end of
the cariere of their life; they even faint in the mid way; their shadow
affrights them; they fear every thing they imagine, without considering the
object of their fear subsists not but in their fancy only, and how by that
means, to become ingenious to torment themselves. To fear death, is to fear
that which is not, since it is but a mere priuatio^; and to have a further
fear of the thought is to fly the shadow of his shadow which is nothing.
Wherein these Spirits do but feed their own weakness, living in death, and
dying in their life, without dreaming once of Death. But what goodly matter
(will they say, so to mayntaine their error) for one to think of that, which
naturally all the world abhors? Is it not to be miserable enough to be borne,
and to live, and dye in myseries, without one be burying his spirit before his
Body, through the continual memory of his end? It is even as much, as to make
ones self unhappy before hand, so to dream of the evils, which we cannot
avoid. It is enough to endure the^ constantly, when they arrive, without going
to meet with the^, as if it could ever arrive too late.

Feeble apparences of Reason! Admit that Nature abhorres Death, as the ruin of
this strait vnio^ of the body with the soul, know we not also how this nature,
blind in all its passions, and brutish in all its feelings, takes always the
false good for the true, not being able to work, but by the Senses, which as
material, take its part? To believe now that our miseryes augment, by this
thought, that we live and dye miserable, were much; while on the contrary we do
blunt the point of their thorns, in so thinking of them, in regard this
continual consideration of our misfortunes in this life, makes us to take the
way of virtue, for the attayning one day, the glory, and felicity of the other.
To imagine it also to be a grief, to dream assiduously of Death, as of an
inevitable evil, is a mere imagination which cannot subsist, but within it
self. For we are never to think of Death, but as of a necessary good, rather
then of an infallible evil, since otherwise, it i^ nothing of it self. We
should only represent to our selves that we are to change both condition and
life; and how this change, can be no ways made, but at the end of our course*
whither we are continually running and that without pause awhit. Our being of
it self destroys it self, by little and little, withal things else of the
world besides. It is a funeral Torch burning by a Sepulcher, that shines as
long as the wax of our body lasts, while even the least blast of disaster is
able to extinguish it for ever. For howbeit the earth be large and spacious,
yet has it noe void place, in its whole extent, but where to point every one
his Tomb; even as nature, which though fruitful of it self to produce many
wonders, yet finds an impotency withal to engender twice its living works.

The Fables inform us well, how Euridice was delivered from her chains in
Hell but not from her prison; she had the power to approach unto the bounds of
the dismal place of her captivity, but not to set her self at liberty. So as
if the Poets, within the Empire which they have established to themselves, have
religiously held this inviolable law, of not to be able to dye twice; with what
respect ought we to adore the truth so known to every one, and so sensible to
all the world? And the knowledge which we have thereof, should incessantly draw
our pirits, to these thoughts, to the end they sstray not, in the labyrinths
of sin, which is the only Death of the Soul.

When I represent to my self the faces, which these men of the world do make
when they are spoken to of Death, I have much ado to believe, they are capable
of reason, since they fail thereof, in the consideration of this important
verity, that they are but mere putrefaction, and a little dust, ready to be
cast into the wind in the twinkling of an eye: That walk they where they
will, they but trample their Tomb underfoot, since the earth seems to
challenge its earth whereof they are molded and framed. They shut their ears
to the discourses that are made to them of Death, which they are one day to
incur; and open them to hearken to the Clock, whose hours and minutes
insensibly conduct them into the Sepulcher, whither willingly they would never
go. In so much, as howbeit they are hasting every moment to death, yet they
dare not be casting their eyes on the way they hold, as if the sight could
forward their paces: wherein truly, I can not abide, nor excuse their
pusillanimity, since the danger whereinto they put themselves, produces an
irreparable damage.

This same is an infallible maxim, That such as never dream of death, do
never think of God, forasmuch as one cannot come at him, but by Death only.
On the other-side, not to think ever of the end, which should crown our
works, were as much, as to contemn the means of our Salvation and so to
forget our Savior who with his proper life, has ransomed ours. The eye cannot
see at one and the self same time two different objects, in distance one from
the other. The like may we say, of the Spirit, though it is powers be diverse,
yet can it not fasten its affections upon two subjects at once, unequal and
several one from the other. If it love the Earth, then is Heaven in contempt
with it: if it have an extreme passion of self-love to its life, the
discourses of death are dreadful to it. And by how much it sequesters it self
from thoughts of its end, the less approaches it to God through those very
thoghts. Lord, I will think of my last days (said the Prophet) for to
remember thee. This great King and great Saint withal, did believe the memory
of Death was inseparable from that of his Master, since dye he needs must one
day himself.

O sweet Death, and yet more sweet the remembrance, if it be true, that it
powerfully resists against all manner of vice! We cannot know good spirits, but
through good actions, and there is none better in life, then then of preparing
ones self for death. Whatsoever we can do which is admirable indeed loses
the whole admiration, if it have not relation thereunto, nor may a man be
thought to have lived, but to die rather, who thinks not ever of this sweet
necessity, whereof the law dispenses with no man. The greatest perfection
consists, for one to know himself, so as the Spirit cannot make its Eminency
appear, but by beholding it self in its nature, created to render the
continual homage of respect to its Creator. And being abased in this
necessary submission, it should consider that its immortality bounds upon
either an eternal pain, or else on a like glory, and that it is not at all,
but to be happy for ever, or eternally unhappy. Upon these considerations, it
may found the verity of its glory, since it could not tell how to purchase
either a iuster, or a greater then that of knowing well it self. For as then,
its divine thoughts make it to take it is flight toward the place of its
origin, not prizing the earth, but to purchase there the merit of Crowns,
which it pretends to possess in Heaven.

Among the infinite number of errors, which make the greatest part of the
world to be guilty of crime, this same is one of the most common of al; To
esteem (forsooth) those extremely, who are eloquent, be it of the tongue or
pen, and to put them in the rank of the more excellent Spirits: As those
also, who through a thousand sleights, being al very criminal, ca^ tell how to
amasse a great deal of riches to ariue to the highest dignityes. Thus do the
spirits of the world, and are so esteemed by such as they. But I answer with
the Prophet, how all their wisdom is folly before God. The good spirits
indeed are always adhering to good, and there is no other in life, then that,
to be always thinking of death, for to learn to die well. Since in this
apprentiship only, are comprised all the sciences of the world. Eloquennce has
saved neither Cicero, nor Demosthenes. Riches have undone Cresus; and
greatnesses have thrown Belus King of Cyprus out of his Throne, into a
dunghill. To what purpose serves it, to know how to talk well, if we speak
not of things more necessary, and more important of our saluauation? To what
end serves it to be rich, since we must needs be a dying miserable?

On the other side, there is no other riches then that of Virtue; and I had
much rather possess one above, then the crowns of all the Kings of the World
below. What pleasure may a man take to behold himself raised to Thrones, since
he must needs in a moment, be descending into the Sepulcher? What is become of
all those, who have been mounting the degrees of Fortune, and been seen on
the top of most eminent dignities? Disastres, or time which changes all things,
have let them fall into the Tomb; so as there remaynes no more of the^, but
the bare remembrance, that sometimes* they have been. Consider we then, and
boldly let us say, how it belongs to good Spirits only, to be every hour:
thinking of Death, since we die every hour* That these thoughts are the most
sublime, where with a good soul may entertain it self: That of all the ways
which may lead us to Heaven, there is none more assured, then that of
continually thinking of the last instant, which must justify or condemn all
the other of our life; for that our actions take their Rule from these
thoughts to receive the price of them. All the rest is but vanity, and mere
folly.

Out of these thoughts, there is no good; Out of these thoughts, there is no
repose. Who thinks not of death, thinks of nothing since al seem to termine at
this last moment The most happy are miserable, if this thought make not up the
greatest part of their happiness. And the richest are in great necessity, if
they dream not of that, of their mortal condition. Whatsoever is said, if
Death be not the object of the whole discourse, they are but words of smoke,
that turn into wynd. Whatsoever is done, if Death be not the object of the
actions, all the effects are unprofitable. In fine, all glory, all good, all
repose, and all the contentment of the world, consists in thinking always of
Death; since these thoughts are the only means to atteyne the eternal
felicity, whereto they termine. And a generous Spirit cannot give forth more
pregnant proofs of its goodness* then in thinking on the Death of the body,
whiles even of this moment depends the life of the soul.

How those spirits that think continually of Death, are elevated above all the
Greatness of the Earth. CHAP. V.
IT is impossible to know the world without contemning it since the disastres
and miseryes, wherewith it is stuffed, are the continual objects of this
knowledge. And from the point that our judgment has broken the visards of the
false and imaginary goods, which under the mask of their goodly apparences
deceive our will, it suddenly abhors in them, that very same which passionately
heertofore it seemed to cherish. Whence it happens that we can never enter into
knowledge of the world, but we acquit our selves of it at the same time through a
sorrow, for not having despised it sooner; since all its goods are but in
appearance only, and its evils in effect. So as, if it be a Tree we may boldly
say, that miseryes are the leaves thereof, misfortunes the branches, and death
the fruit. And it is under the shadow of this unhappy Tree, where our
forefathers have built our first tomb.

Man may seem to disguise himself, if he will, under the richest ornaments of
Greanes, and with the fairest liueries of Fortune. Well may he trample Scepters
and Crowns underfoot, in the proudest condition, whereto Nature and Lot might
have raised him up. He is yet the same; I mean a piece of corruption, shut up
in a skin of flesh, whereof the worms have taken possession already from the
moment of his birth. Let him measure as long as he will a thousand times a day,
the ample spaces of the world, with this proud ambition, to make a conquest of
them all; yet he must be feign to let them fall, if he would find the true
measures of them without compass, enclosed all within seven foot of earth,
which shall mark out his Tomb. If he assemble with the same ambition, all the
Thrones of Kings, for to make them serve as Aultars, whereof himself shall be
the Idol; he shall not choose but lend his ears to the Oracles of sweet
Necessity, though cruel for him: for he must die, and consequently serve one day
as a victime upon those very Aultars, where they shall be yielding of
Sacrifices to his, person.

Let him bestow Empires, as favors, Kingdoms for presents, and whole Cities
for the least recompense, and then when he returns into himself, for to know
what he wants, he shall find, that he needs no more, but a piece of a sheet to
shroud (with all his miseryes) the horror of his infection and corruption. Let
the Sun never rise, but to give light to his triumphs, if he join not ^o
his victories those other of his passions, ^e shall celebrate but his own
overthrow, and triumph on himself without thinking of it. Let the heavens be
rayning on his head as many felicityes, as there are disasters on earth; all
his happynes concludes with Death, while by the way of his prosperities, he
goes on every moment to the Sepulcher* In fine, although through his great
possession of goods, he know not what to desire, not what to look for; yet
shall I not forbear ere the less to put him in the rank of the most
miserable of the world, if virtue be not the richest of his treasures. For not
changing his condition awhit, in the accomplishme^t of his greatnesses, and of
all his delights, he is always the same, a little ashes, a little dust a
little earth. And howbeit of the ashes of the wood of Libanum, of the dust of
Azure, or of some more noble or fertile earrh; yet is al but mere
putrefaction, and the crust of all these goodly apparences is full of infection.

I esteem him very happy, great and rich, who contents himself, with the
meriting of these greatnesses, these felicities, and these riches: for the
glorious contempt which he makes of the^, for being abused in the knowledge of
himself, he beholds all the world beneath him, and desires but the
continuatio^ of his repose; since in the only thought of Death, he possesses
all the goods of life. The great Monarkes of the world seek the inte^tions of
living happy in their greatnesses; and he, the mean of dying content in his
miseries: they are always in care, to extend the bounds of their Empire; and
he pleases himself to bound his ambition, with what he possesses, since he
wants not any thing for his voyage. They make a mass of riches; and he takes
glory in poverty, knowing that the richest are robbed at the end of the course
of ^ife, and that we go forth of the world, in ^ike manner as we enter into it,
with the first habit of those miseries, which we have inherited from our
parents. In such sort as ^hinking perpetually of Death, in the way where it is
to approach every moment, he casts not his eyes upon greatnesses, but to have
pity on those who possess them. He contemplates not the favors of Fortune,
but to publish the inconstancy thereof. So ^f he regard Thrones, it is but to
measure ^he depth of the precipices that enuiron the^, since all crowns for
him are made both of tare and thorns. And the Scepters as light as reeds,
give him not any other Envy ^hen that of trampling them underfoot, instead of
holding them in his hands, since ^hey are the marks of a glory of smoke,
which resolves into nothing, to return to its first beginning.

There is no doubt, but such as think continually of Death, are raised above
all the greatnesses of the earth, because Eternity is the object of their
thoughts. So as if they desire greatnesses, they wish they may be eternal: if
they envy Treasures, they mark the possession of them beyond Nature, to the
end Inconstancy of time may not bereave them of them. They have no ambition for
this vain glory of the world, which the least mischance may change into
infamy; nor for these Crowns, which a little wind of disgrace, makes to fall
from the head. All their glory is to think of death, for to be able to attain
at the last instant of life, the Crown of immortality, wherein consists the
perfection of all felicityes possible to be desired.

Greatnesses are of the same nature, with those who possess the^, they are but
smoke, they are but wind; for we see the^ to vanish away in the twinkling of
an eye, with their subject. So as if they seem to subsist, notwithstanding in
their continual flight they are changing the countenance every hour. To be
great above the common sort of men, in honors and in riches only, i^ to be
miserable, if the true greatness of man consist in meriting all, and possessing
nothing. In so much, as he who thinks o^ Death in despising the felicityes of
this life, makes himself to be worthy of the glory of the other; and in these
only thoughts is he raised so above himself, as if he were capable of vanity,
he would not know himself. For from the time, that he ioynes the thoughts of
Death, to the verity of his mortal condition, he tastes before hand in the
midest of his course, the sweetness of the goods, which he pretends to receive
at the end. I would say, that the sensible imaginations which he has of dying
continually (as there is nothing more certain then it) makes him to tread
under foot, all the greatnesses of the earth, since that his soul directs his
looks unto Heaven,

In effect, were it not as much, as to offend a Prince, to offer him at sea,
the Crown of a Kingdom, in the midst of storms and tempests, wherewith his
ship were miserably tossed? or else at such time, as he were seen to be taken
with a mortal disease? For he might answer very pertinently, they should
attend him, to make him those offers on the shore, or when he were recovered of
his health. Now, we seem to represent this Prince, since like unto him, do we
floate upon this sea of this world, where the Ship of our life, is incessantly
tossed with diverse misfortunes. Fortune comes to present us in the fury of this
tempest both Scepters and Crowns; would it not be accounted rash now for us,
to receive them at her hands, in this pitiful estate whereinto we are
reduced, and not to hope for a calm or cessation, for fear of seeing our
hopes quite buried with our life, in a cruel shipwreck, whose danger even
follows us as near, as the shadow does the body? So as if she make us the
same offers, during the mortal malady wherewith we are seized from the moment
of our nativity (since we begin to die, from the instant that we begin to live)
were it not a folly to accept them? And for us to answer her, and to wish her
to expect till we come upon the shore, is a vain attendance; while there is no
other port, in the sea of life, then that of the tomb: and to attend also for
the cure of this contagious malady; which we have taken of our parents, were to
expect that same, which shall never come to pass. So as indeed we should be
throwing al these Crowns at her head, and make use of the Scepter, she
presents us with, as of a staff to be auendged of her for her perfidiousnes,
and to testify to her that our constancy scorns her leuity; and that our
contentment and repose, depends not awhit of the rolling of her wheel, if we
learn every day to live forth of her Empire.

Let us conclude then and say, that spirits that know well the art of thinking
of Death do mark out the thrones of their glory in heaven, not being able to
find any thing on Earth, that were worthy of their greatness. Hence it is, they
take such pleasure, to die without cease and to increase their contentment yet
further, that they always are thinking upon it. O sweet remembrance of death,
a thousand times more sweet then all the delights of life! O cruel
forgetfulness of this necessity, a thousand times more cruel, then all the
pains of the world! O sweet memory of our end, where begins our only felicity!
O glorious oblivion of our mortal condition, the only cause of our disasters!
Let us not live then, but to think on the delight of Death; and let us not dye
but to contemn the pleasure of life: let us forget all, but the remembrance of
Death. Let us love nothing, but its thoughts: and never essteeme, but the only
actions which have relation to this last, since this is that alone, whence we
are to receive either price, or pain.

A Contemplation upon the Tomb of Alexander the Great. CHAP. VI.
O ALL ye Great Kings, Lo I here sommon you to appear about this Tomb, to
behold therein the worms, the corruption and infection of the greatest, the
happyest, the mightiest, and the most dreadful Monarch of the world; and to
say all in a word, of Great Alexander; whose Valor could never admit
comparison; whose Victories have had no other bounds, then those of the
Universe; and whose Triumphs, have had all the Heavens for witness, all the
Earth for Spoils, for slaves all Mortals, for Trumpet Renown, and Fortune
for Guide. Descend then, from your thrones upon this dunghill, where lies the
companion of your glory, and your greatnesses. Behold and contemplate this
Pourtrait of your selves drawn to the life, after the original of your
miseries.

Cyrus, approach you unto this unlucky place, upon your Chariot al of massy
gould, and come attended with that magnificent pomp, which made all the world
idolatrous in admiration of it; that the infinite number of your subjects, may
be an infinite number of witnesses, to convince you of vanity and folly, in
behoulding this Victorious Prince here beseiged by all sorts of miseryes, with
in a little hole, which serves as bounds and limirs to his power.

Consider, how this great Taker of Towns is surprised himself by the worms;
how this Triumphant soldier is defeated by the^, and how this Invincible
captain, has been vanquished by death, and brought into this deplorable
estate, wherein you see him. Are you not ashamed to be seated in that
glittering Chariot; since needs you must descend thence to enter into this
dismal dwelling, where the worms attend your corruption? This great number of
subjects, which enuiron you on all sides, to set forth your glory, is a troup
of the miserable. For they dye in following you; and on which side soever you
go. Time conducts you all together into the Tomb.

Impose your laws upon all the people of the Earth, yet needs must you receive
those same of Death. Build you as long as you will a thousand proud Palaces in
your Empire, you cannot hold them but in fee-farme though you be the
proprietary thereof, because every moment you are at the point of departing.
Well may you deck your self up with the richest robes of vanity, and play the
God here beneath, with Crown on the head and scepter in the hand; yet look
what you are, consider what you are like to be, and contemplate your miseries
at leisure, in the mirour of this sepulcher. To day you loure on Heaven with an
arrogant eye; and to morrow you shall be seen metamorphozed into a stinking
piece of earth. To day you make your self adored of such as have no judgment,
but in the eyes only; and to morrow shall you be sacrificed in the sight of all
the world for expiatio^ of your crimes, and hardly shall be found a handful of
your ashes, so true it is, that you are nothing.

Xerxes, descend you a little, from the top of that mountain of annoyes, where
they sad thoughts do hold you besieged within this Vale of disasters and of
miseryes, to behold therein, the pitiful overthrow of the proudest Conqueror
of the world. Spare your tears, to mourn upon his Tomb, if you will but
acquit your self of the iustest homage, you may yield to his memory. You weep
before hand, for the Death of your soldiers, in foreseeing their end, with
that of the world. What will you say now of the death of this great Captain
who for a last glory, after so many triumphs is devoured of worms and
metamorphosed into a stuff al of corruption, encompassed all with horror and
amazement. So as if you will needs be satisfying your self, afford your tears
for your own proper harms, since you are to incur the same lot, without
respect, either of your greatness, or power. All your armies are not of force
enough to warrant you from Death: you must bow your neck under the yoke of
this necessity, whose rules are without exception, whose law dispenses not
with any.

Alexander is dead, Cyrus his predecessor has dyed also, after a thousand
other Kings who have gone before him, and you run now after them: but to me
it seems, you carry too great a port of Greatness with you. The earth whereof
you are molded and framed, demands but her earth; you must quit your self of
all, and your scepter and crown shall not be taken for more, at that last
instant, then as sheephookes: for that if we be different in the manner of
living, we are yet all equal in the necessity of dying. Now therefore, it is a
vanity to say, you are of the race of Gods. Come and see here, the place of
your first beginning, for as you are borne of corruption, so you return to
putrefaction. If you doubt thereof as yet, approach with your infected flesh to
these rotten bones, and with your clay to these ashes: If they differ in ought,
it can be but in color only.

Tell me, to what end serve all those Statues of your resemblance, which you
caused to be erected on the lands of your Empire, since time destroys and
ruins the original? Think you, belike, they dare not meddle with those
pourtraits, which are but vain shadows of a body of smoke? You trouble your
self too much, to make it credulous to the world, that you are immortal, as
if this belief could affoard you immortality. If you have but never so little
knowledge in you, know you not your own misfortunes? If you have sense, have
you no feeling of your miseries? I know well you are a King, but a King of the
dead, since al those to whom you give the law, do receive it from Time, which
makes them to dye every hour. Admit you be the chief of men, yet if they be
miserable all of them together, as subject to a thousand sorts of accidents;
may we not well say, that you are the vnhappyest of them all. You play the
omnipotent, when you are set upon your Throne of snow, not considering the
while, that within your Palace, as well as without, you are but a heap of
dust, which every little blast of wind, may scatter on the ground to dissolve it
into nothing.

Apelles, thou took'st a pride to be called the Paynter of Alexander; come
then, and see the subject of thy glory, if thy heart serve thee to endure the
horror of it. This same, is that Alexander, whose Majesty so dazeled thee
heertofore, and whose stench at this time so infects the whole world. I
mistrust thy audacious pensill to be able to represent the greatness of his
miseryes to the life. Do thou remember him at such time as thou drewest him,
armed at all points, upon his Bucephalus, even upon the point of his forcible
retayning the last crown of his Triumphs, not having ought to conquer else
besides? And sometimes again sitting on his Throne with the Crown of a
Conqueror on his head, and with the Scepter of the Empire of the world in his
hand? Durst thou maintain now, these ashes are the draughts of thy original?
if thou will save thy credit from reproach, do thou imitate Thymantes, draw the
curteyne over Alexanders face, that he may not be known, so is he no more
himself.

And thou Lisyppus, who employed so often, have made use of such rich materials
to mantaine this great Monarch on foot; these rotten bones, which make up this
Carcass which thou see, have been the subject, both of thy glory, and thy
labors. If it be true, that water eats into the stone, then weep thou freely
on thy own works, to destroy them thy self, since their object is buried,
while time prepares their Sepulcher.

Caesar, Mark-Antony, Pompey, Annibal, and Scipio, step you a little aside from
the way of your Triumphs, to come, and see as you pass, the miserable spoils
of this great King always victorious, of this great Monarke always
triumphant. Approach you unto his Tomb, behold, contemplate, and smell the
horrible corruption; would you say this carcass here that stinkes so
abhominably, were the body of that invincible Alexander? whose valor has
despoyled the earth of its Laurelles, and who being not able yet, to bound his
ambition, with the compass of one world, goes seeking him another; howsoever
in digging the earth, he has found but the place of this Sepulcher, where he
is buried with all his greatnesses. All those gallant Courtiers, that followed
him, are changed into worms, and are nothing else but mere putrefaction; and
their proud Palaces into this little trench; and all their ornaments into these
spiders webbes, which encompasse him round.

Cast your eyes upon these images of horror: This is the draught of him, who
styled himself the son of Iupiter-Ammon, and who exacted Aultars from men,
to make himself adored. Judge you now of the perfection of this Idol. Go your
ways into all places, where your ambition guides you, conquer all, triumph
upon all, and for a last victory make Fortune herself as your Tributary, that
the rouling of her wheel may receive its motion from that of your wills; al
these Victoryes, and all these Triumphs, accompanied with all the glory of the
world, shall not warrant you awhit from Death: nor shall all the perfumes of
Arabia exempt your flesh from putrefaction.

Caesar, dispute no more with Mark-Antony about the Empire of the earth: Nature
would have you to take up this difference between you, since neither of you
both ca^ justly pretend, but to seven foot thereof. And if you can hardly
believe it, measure you the spaces of Alexanders Tomb, who has worn the
Crown upon his head, which you desire. This is the only mean to finish your
quarrel, rather then to quenh your fury, in the blood of your subjects. Caesar,
play not the proud man so, in the midst of thy felicityes; it is now a long
while, since that death has stood waiting upon thee, under the Throne where
thou sit in the Senate, for to let thee know, and perceive at once, that he
mockes at thy greatnesses, and contemnes thy power, by drowning thy life within
thy blood.

Stoop a little to the pitch of thy vanity Mark-Anthony, there is no
likelihood at all thou should ever be triumphing over thin enemy, since thou
can not so much as vanquish thy passions, which is the best victory that we
can possibly obtain of our selves. Thou shall even loose the Empire of all the
Earth, where thou shall find so shameful a Tomb, as they shall not dare to
speak of thy life, by reason of thy Death.

Anniball, thou gloriest much in entering in Triumph, within thy proud City of
Carthage, after so many, and so great victories, which raise thee to the
highest Throne of Honor; but takst not heed the while, that if thou leadest
thine enemies in triumph, vices seem to triumph upon thy soul, fitter that
miseries do the like with thy body. And again, if Fortune favor thee to day
as king, she will dregg thee to morrow as a slave. To day the Laurels grow on
thy head, and to morrow thorns shall grow beneath thy feet* to let thee see that
nothing is certain in the world, but change, since it changes every hour, in
making all things else, to change their countenance withal. I do even flout at
thy vanity; for the witnesses of thy glory, and very Carthage it self, which
is the theater thereof, shall follow soon after the course of of thy ruin.

Pompey, flatter not thy self thus in thy prosperities, the very same Sun,
which has seen them grow up, shall see them wither ere long. It is true that
all the world even trembles at thine arms. Renown has no voice, but to
publish thy valor; but how then? know thou not, how the self same fate
which affords thee Crowns and Scepters, takes them away again when it
pleases? Victory pursues thee every where, both on sea and land; but this is
but for a while. After the moment of thy birth, death aims at thy head, to
pull off all the Lawrells thence, wherewith thou have so often crowned it; and
knowing that the sea has no rocks for thee, it has scored out thy Sepulcher
already on the shore.

Weep, weep you great Kings, at the sight of these miseries, or rather at the
feeling of your own. If the greatest of the world, be naught but corruption,
what shall become of you? If this invincible Monarch, who had so many marks of
immortality with him, be the prey of worms, and sport of the winds, what
shall be your lot? Whereto may Fortune seem to reserve you? Go to then, I grant
you, whatsoever you can possibly demand; I affoard your ambition an age of
life, an Empire of a new world, and a happy success to all your desires. What
shall become of you after all this, since this long life, this glorious Empire,
and all your felicityes together must have an end, with this world? As often,
as you shall issue forth of your condition, for to enter into the forgetfulness
of your self, you do send your thoughts into this tomb; and you shall
suddenly return from this wandering. Do not flatter your self; your Crown is
but of earth, as the head that wears it. Your Scepter is but a stick of wood,
subject to corruption, as your hand is that holds it: and the rest of your
ornaments are but a work of worms, whereof you are the prey. Judge you then,
whether your vanity, can subsist any long time, upon such feeble fou^dations,
or no.

You are accustomed lykely, at such time as you build some proud palace or
other, to go a walking in the compass thereof, taking pleasure to admire the
goodly situation, where you have destined the place of your dwelling: do you
the like with your tomb, go visit every day the solitary place where you are
to lodge for so long a time; and this will be the only mean, to make death
even as sweet unto you, as life it self; and to bury your pride, your vanity,
and al your vices together, before your body; according to the saying of the
Wiseman, for he that thinks continually of death, shall never stray from the
way of virtue.

He that thinks always of Death, is the Richest of the world. CHAP. VII.
I MERVAILE much, that Cicero should put this Truth into Paradox; That he
(forsooth) is the richest, who is most content, whiles there is nothing more
certain then it. For the Soul has no other riches, more properly her own,
nor more in affect, then that of contentment. In what condition soever, where a
man finds himself with repose of Spirit, may he well be said to be perfectly
rich. True treasures are not of gould of silver, or of other things of like
value, but rather of good actions, since by their price one may buy Eternity.
Besides whose fruition, what may we desire? Besides whose glory, what may we
pretend? Withal the riches of the world, we can buy no more, then the world it
self. Alas, what good in the possession thereof, if it be wholly stuffed with
evils? See we not every moment how it quite destroys it self, and that it
runs without cease, to its end, as the Su^ne to its West?

The richest are ordinarily, the most unfortunate of all others: for that
having by lot of nature, some little Empire on earth, they fall absolutely to
attribute the Soueraignity thereof to themselves; and in the vain thoughts of
their greatnesses, seem never to sigh but for them, nay they even die with
them. O dreadful Death! He then may be only said to be rich, who makes
profession to follow virtue; his way being bordered with Thorns, represents to
us that same of Death, whose Roses are at the end of the course, to crown our
labors withal. In so much as we cannot love virtue, but with the continual
thoughts of Death; since to see its Body, we had need to sever our selves from
the shadows of the Earth. We much admire some feeble ray of its image only,
under the obscure veyle of our mortal condition; but that only in idaea, and
as it were in a dream. We had need to awake yet once more, and come to be
reborne from our ashes again, as the Phoenix, in the presence of the great
Sun of Justice. I would say, that we must needs die one day, for to revive
eternally in the accomplishment of all the felicities of Heaven.

Alexander has no greater a treasure, then that of his hopes. The aim or
scope of his Fortune was always upon the future; and what goods soever he
possessed, he every day yet attended for more, as if he had some intelligence
with Chance, to receive from its prodigal hand, all the effects of his
desires. The merchants, that go in pursuit of riches upon the Ocean, live not
but of the hope of their mercinary conquest. How miserable soever they find
themselves, on the way of their navigations, they so mainly forget themselves,
in the sweet thoughts of their expectation, as they think themselves the
richest of the world; and they will sooner be loosing their life, in the midst
of the rocks, then the belief they have thereof. So much their imaginary hope
seems to carry them away.

Let us say then, more boldly, and with more reason, that such as termine all
their hopes to the Eternity, as to the only object, which is able to quench
the thirst of our souls, still increasing more and more, may be said before
hand, to be the richest of the Earth. For their hope, is not that of Alexander,
whose vows were addressed to Fortune; and much less, that other of those old
Martiners, as changeable as the sea that guides them; but another quite
different, that for foundation has but Virtue, and in the hope of possessing
one day the treasures of Heaven, they take the pains to purchase them, through
the continual meditation of Death, as the only lesson that teaches us to
live well. They pass deliciously their time in the expectation of their last
day on earth, and like to those merchants, stand counting all the hours of
their voyage, with impatient desire to see out of hand, the very last of them,
so to be always perfectly happy. And howbeit this voyage be long, and
troublesome, yet they esteem themselves so rich withal, as they, would not
change their hopes, for all the gold of the world.

In effect, we must needs confess, that the only hope of glory, joined with
virtues is the only good of life, for the atteyning one day, of the possession
of them; where a holy soul may find the full accomplishme^t of its desires.
But it is yet to be considered that this hope, and all these virtues can have
no surer foundation, then that of the continual thoughts of Death, since all
our good does absolutely depend of this last hour, wherein the important
sentence of our life, or Death is to be signified unto us. Hence it is, that
man being holily rich, heaps up good works, during the course of his life, as
divine Treasures, to enrich his soul with all the eternal felicities, which
may accomplish it with glory and contentment. He lives always conte^nt and
rich at once, in this pleasing thought (forsooth), that he will never seem to
dye, until such time as he be quite dead. Whence it happens that he tramples
underfoot very generously all sorts of greanesses and riches, through the
knowledge he has of those, which his spirit possesses without ever being
touched with other envy, then to finish readily his voyage, to make exchange
for Death, with a life exempt from Death. So as we may well mainteyne, that he,
who is always thinking of Death, is the richest in the world; seeing that even
such thoughts only, may make him to purchase the treasure of Eternity, wherein
consists our sovereign Good.

A Contemplation upon the Tomb of Cresus. CHAP. VIII.
YOU Rich-men of the world, who know no other God, then Gold and Silver, come
and see the treasures, which the greatest King of the Earth has carried with
him, into the Tomb. And this is the mighty King Cresus, to whom the mines
served him for a Coffer the Indyes for a Cabinet, and the Ocean for a new river
of Pactolus, where he vainly endeavored to quench the thirst of his guilty
avarice, and of his most haughty ambition. Represent unto your memory his
passed greatnesses, and behold now his present miseries. If you think of the
riches of his life all of roses, consider the poverty of his Death all of
thorns. If you remember the magnificences of his Court, turn the lease at the
same time, to see the horrors of this his dismal solitude. If you muse yet on
the rich ornaments of his golden Palace, see and contemplate through your
tears, the corruption which is enclosed with him in the Tomb. If you have
seen him seated on the highest top of greatnesses, behold him now with the
same eye abased on the dunghill of misery. He has lived, he has reigned as an
Idol within the Temple of Fortune, on the proudest Altar of Vanity, but the
torch of his life, is put out, the date of his reign is expired, the Temple of
his glory is demolished, the Altar of his Empire is destroyed, and this
carcass which you see, is the Idol that serves as a prey unto the worms.

Gobrias, do thou cause thy self, to be drawn here by thy Lions, on thy
Chariot of massy Gold, before thou dyest. The deceiptfull glasses of thy goodly
Mirrours, hide from thine eyes, the truth of thy defects, and let thee see, but
the gilded case of thy rich apparences. On the other side, they but represent
to thee by halfes, while this Sepulcher shall depaynt them forth to thee at
large with the same draught, and with the self same lineaments, which Nature
has marked upon thy body, from the moment of thy birth. In coming hither, to
visit this place thou shall not stray awhit out of thy way, since every moment
of Time, directs thy steps unto the Sepulcher. Enter a little into the
knowledge of thy self, and reuert from thy wandering. Thou reposest for the
most, upon a Couch all of gold: And what pleasure take thou the while, to
pass some nights upon this bed of Flowers, since thou must lodge so long a
time, upon a clod of earth, whereof thou art framed and molded? thou take al
thy repasts upon a silver Table, thou see this carcass, whereof thou art the
original, how it serves for a table and meat all at once for the worms to
feed on? Why do thou prize so much thy treasures? Behold to what estate is
he brought, who has possessed all those of the World. At his birth he had for
portion, all the good of the earth* and in dying he has inherited all the
miseries of nature. Imagine that which he has had, and see what is left him.
He has purchased al, and yet possesses nothing, nor can thou avoid his lot,
whilst thou hold the same way of his life: hence it is, that I point thee
out thy sepulcher all ready within his Tomb.

Policrates, come see the coffer of the Treasures of Cresus, to glut thy
covetous appetite with all; his rotten bones I mean (whose marrow the worms
devour) the stench of this prey covered with a linen sheet, newly weft
together with the infection. Behold now all, which this mighty King was able to
save from the Shipwreck of his life and riches al together. These are the
lamentable relickes, as well of his Majesty, as of his greatnesses; and thou
runst into danger of the same rocks, so sailing in a like sea, if thou change
not the Pylot. Take profit then from the damage of another, and master thy
brutish passions, that prepare for thine enemies, the triumph of thy life.

And thou Lucullus, come and visit the Sepulcher of this great Prince, before
thou vnpeoplest the air of birds, the land of savage beasts, and the sea of
fishes, if thou will see displayed the vanity of thy enterprises. Thou take a
glory, while thy life lasts, to afford entertainment to all the world: Behold
awhile, how thou art like to be entreated after thy death. Cause thy tables to
be furnished with meats, the most delicious that are, yet of necessity must all
the company, serve one day as a last course for the worms. Let thy festival
days, hold out for a whole year together, the Sun which shines upon thee,
will not fail to conduct al thy ba^quetting ghests into the Sepulcher; In such
sort, as look how the time deuoures it self, so likewise do thou seem to
devour thy life by little and little, with the same food that does nourish and
mainteyne it. What reckoning can thou make of all the glory of thy prodigious
magnificences, if it have no other foundation with it, then that of corruption?
For all the proud preparations of thy Feasts do metamorphoze themselves into
infection, with thy miserable subjects, which have caused the expense.

You mercinary Souls, who are not capable of love but for your treasures, nor
of passion but to make you Idolaters of them, you stand counting your Crowns
every day, and you keep no account by order, of a wise foresight of the small
time which is left you to enjoy the same. To what end serves you your Book of
accounts, where you reckon up the sums which are due unto you; if you want
understanding to calculate that which you owe to your conscience, whose
interests termine themselves, either to your loss or safety? You vnbury the
gould and silver out of the earth, not considering the while, that you are
going to occupy their place in the same earth. You buy with their money, the
pleasures of your life, and you sell those of your death: for living in
delights, you dye in torments. Know you not that whatsoever is on earth, is
but Earth?

Wherefore tie you then your affections so to that, which you cannot love
without hating your self? what will you do, when you dye, with your treasures?
I doubt very much you will leave them to your children; but yet the crimes which
you have committed in procuring the^, shall still be abiding with you: so as, to
make your Heirs pass deliciously this life, you shall loose the eternal,
which is promised us. You damn your selves, for them, as you were not borne,
but for others. Quit the world, before it quit you, and bid an eternal adieu
to its vanities. Cresus was all gould, as you are, and now is he all dust. The
flash of his riches, did dazzle all the world, except Solon, who discovering his
miseries, in the midest of his greatnesses, maintained him to be poor with all
his treasure. Go you sometimes, before your death, and imagine the hour which
you breath in to be your last, and then consult with the Oracle of your
judgment, for to know the good which you would have done, before this cruel
separation of your self from your self. And after it shall have taught you
your duty, suffer not your self to be overtaken by the sundry disasters, which
every moment may be taking away your life. Serve your self of your Riches,
without glewing your affection to them. Since you are the master of them,
suffer them not to be your master. You have found them in the earth, and there
let them rest for you, nor let any one be fetching the^ forth. Well may you be
hiding them in your coffers, for a time, but the day of Death discouers all,
and it is in your hands to make up the last account, either of the profit, or
damage, which they shall peradventure have caused to you. You might have
purchased Heaven with your alms; where it may be you have rather bought eue^
Hell with your prodigalities. You might have built Temples to the glory of him,
who has bestowed them on you; and you have offered them in sacrifices, upon
the Altar of your passions, to the Idols of your souls.

Will you never open your eyes to discover the precipices, which encompasse you
round? Will you be always cruel to your selves, to the preferring of the
mansion of the earth, before that of heaven; the delights of the world, before
those of Eternity; and the vain riches of here beneath, before the treasures
of the eternal glory? Imagine you that before you were borne you were nothing;
that being borne, you have but quickened a piece of corruption, whose life
co^ceales the infection, and whose Death bewrayes the same. Say now then you
Rich men as Cresus, shall I term you miserable with Solon, since Death takes
all away from you, save only the sorrow of having lived so ill a life?

That he who thinks always of Death, is the wisest of the world. CHAP. IX.
VERITY is the object of all Sciences. And of all verityes there is none more
known, nor is more sensible then that of our mortal condition, since we dye
continually without cease. In so much as the best science of the world consists
in the knowledge of ones self. The disasters and miseries that befall us every
hour, are goodly schools for us to become learned. As for me, I hold, that
the only meditation of death, instructs us in all that which is necessary for
us to know. Who doubts, but that he who thinks always of his end, is a great
Divine; if all the goodly Maxims of this divine science, termine at the
eternal life, which follows death? That he is a Philosopher, we must needs
believe; for if Philosophy learn us the art of reasoning, we can serve our
selves of reason, no ways better, then to be always a thinking of death, and
the contemp of life. That he be an Astrologer, is a mere necessity, because,
through the moving of his life, he understands that same of the stars, which
shine upon him; imagining with himself, that as he goes by little and little, to
finish his course in the Tomb; so likewise the Sun approches to the end of its
lucid race, where it is to find at last its utmost.

That he is a Mathematician, the resemblances are too plain, since that
according to the measure of the knowledge he has of himself, he can measure
the height, depth, and breadth of all things, being of the same nature with
him. That he should be ignorant of Arithmetic, it were not credible; for since
he can tell how to count all the moments of his life, he must needs be very
skillful in numbers. I should think, he had skill in music too, since he puts
his passions in accord, to charm his spirit with their sweet harmony. He must
of necessity be a great Physician since he busyes his soul so, in the chief
health of his innocence, to attain immortality, in musing always upon Death.
So as with reason might we hold him, to be the wisest of the world: and the
wisest that are to authorize my saying, may well be glad to imitate him.

Aristotle, thou have ill employed thy time to stand so much in discourse of
the world, without knowing the miseries thereof. For if thou had had the
knowledge of them, why had thou not followed the example of Alexander, in
seeking forth a new one, not for to conquer it, as he, but for to live in,
eternally happy? And as his valor had put the conceit into his head, so might
thy spirit have given thee the same project. It is plain therefore, thou have
spoken of the Earth with the language of heaven, and of heaven with the
language of the earth. Thou have made an Anatomy of nature, discoursing with
judgment, of all the second causes which do make the springs of the whole to
move. Thou have given the definition of al things, but only of thy self; as if
thou could not have remembered them all, but with forgetting thy self. Thou
wast busyed much in counting the number of the heavens, without assigning thy
place there put aloft. Thou have noted the diverse motions of the Sun; thou
have spoken of it is Eclypses, without once informing thy self of the cause,
which has given it the being, and light.

Thou have discourst very aptly of the revolution of ages, and of the
continual vicissitude of time; without taking any heed to the perpetual
inconstancy of thy life. Thou have maintained, that whatsoever subsists in the
world, runs post to it is ruin; and yet, as if thou perceiuedst not thy self
to run awhit toward the To^be with the rest of created things, thou have
spoken not a word of this second life, wherein abides the perfection of all our
happiness. Thou have yielded the Sun to be eclypsed. Thou have afforded the
Moon to take diverse cou^tena^ces upon her. Thou have given leave to Serpents
to be changing their skin, and to the Phoenix to revive of it is ashes; and
cruel to thy self the while, thou have taken away the hope from thee of ever
arising again. Thy spirit has been like to a torch, which consumes it self
to give others light. For thou labourest to discover to men all the goodlyest
secrets of nature; and have voluntarily hidden from thy self, the secrets of
thine own salvation. Thou have lent Ariadnes thread to an infinite number of
spirits who were entangled in the labyrinth of the world, without once being
able, to get forth thy self, though the knowledge of its causes and effects:
and thou have even damned thy self. Fools, speak not but of thy Prudence,
and wise men of thy Folly. It had been a great deal better for thee, thou
had possessed all the Virtues, then to speak so of them, without them, and in
their absence. Thou madst profession to teach me^ the language of reason, and
thou have never been speaking with thy self thereof, thereby to bring thee,
into the contempt of the earth and desire of heaven. Thy light has dazeled
thee, thine arms have vanquished thee, and the greatness of thy Spirit has
made thee miserable. For with endeavoring to merit Crowns, thou have raised
thy self above all the Empires of the world, to make thy self to be adored;
and that thy Example might serve as a law unto others, thou have been the
first Idolatour of thy self,

Thou would not believe that there was one God in heaven, because thou said
thy self to be a God on earth. Thou would not speak of the other life, as
knowing well, that he who distributes the good, and the evil to each one, should
seem to prepare there a Hell for thee to punish thy arroga^cy. So as if it
were once affoarded thee, to re-begin thy course again, thou would doubtless
forget the vanity of all thy learning, to be thinking continually of Death,
whiles these only thoughts do learn us all manner of sciences. The glory which
is left thee, for having spoken of the world, is shut up in the world, and
though it should last as long as it, yet shall it always dye with it. Thy
reputation is reuereneed on earth, and thou art trod on under foot in Hell. Men
do honor thy name, and the devils torment thy soul. Behold all the recompense
of thy travails. Let us say boldly then, that he who is always thinking of
Death is ignorant of nothing; and that, for to be esteemed wise, he should live
with his thoughts, as the only object of the glory we hope for, and of the
felicity we attend every hour.

Plato, to what purpose serves thee, that fair Renown, which thou have caused
to survive thy ashes? They speak every one of thee, but if they fetch any
argument of thy wisdom, they conclude upon thy folly, while Death dishonours
thy life. We may compare thee to Hanniball; for after he had triumphed over
others, he let himself be vanquished by himself, having received a law from
his passions, and a servitude from his vices. In like manner may we say of
thee, that thou had courageously triumphed over all thy popular errors,
which are thy chief domesticke enemies: after, I say, thou had left thy
goodly actions, for so many examples of moral virtues; thou buryedst the
richest Crown, within thy Sepulcher, and that which surmounts all time, and
the inconstancy thereof: for at thy Death, thou adoredst many Gods, as
repenting thee of the opinions, yea of the belief thou had in the course of
thy life.

Thou tookest a great deal of pains to procure the surname of Divine, through
thy divine thoughts; but in the highest of thy soaring pitch, thy spirit, as
an illegitimate young Eagle, not being able to endure the splendor of the sun
of faith, was cast down headlong from the top of the heavens to the lowest of
the earth, where dying always in punishments, and reviving every moment in
their dolours, it shall live for ever in eternal pains. Let us say then
again once more, that all sciences are but mere vanity, except such as teach
us to live well, and die happily. And that after this manner, who thinks
continually of Death, is the wisest of the world.

A Contemplation upon the Tomb of Solomon. CHAP. X.
RETVRNE yet once again O great Queen of Saba, to behold this wise Solomon,
and come attended with your magnificent train, that even the self same
subjects, who were the witnesses of your joy, may be the same likewise of your
sadness, in this cruel change, both of time and fortune. You have passed
through many a sea, and happily been quit of a thousand dangers on the land,
for to visit this great Monarke, as the only Abridgement of the wonders of the
world. Put your self once more into the perils of the same rocks, and into a
new danger of so long a voyage, to see the setting of this Sun, the ashes of
this Phonix; I would say the Tomb, and corruption of this incomparable, of
this inimitable, of this mighty King of Sages.

What metamorphosis? The splendor of his Riches, had once dazeled your eyes,
and now the horror of his poverty, does beg even tears of your compassion.
Heretofore you co^templated his power with astonishment; and now see into what
plight of feeblenes have miseries brought him. You admired the greatness of his
Empire* and that likewise of his spirit, joined with the perfection of his
wisdom; but now consider how all these goodly qualityes have not been able,
to exempt him from the Sepulcher, where he serves as a prey unto the worms. You
have adored him on the Theater of his Vanities at such time as he represented
the personage of the greatest King that ever wore a Crown; and turning the
leaf, within the twinkling of an eye, is this very King, no more then a
loathsome carcass, whom horror and amazement hold in pledge, until such
time, as he be converted into dust; which he has been indeed, but that is
all. And hardly dare we now maintain him to be he, since that in seeking him
out, within himself, is he not to be found: So vanishes the glory of the
world, all flies into the Tomb.

Solon, since thou have borne the surname of all the seven Sages of Greece,
come and visit this tomb, of the wisest of the world, of this incomparable
Solomon. He was great of birth, great in happiness, great in power, great in
riches, and most great in knowledge; But behold now, how his rich cradle is
changed into this poor Sepulcher; How his felicity, has taken the visage of
misfortune; How his power is bounded in the impote^cy thou see him in. He is
not great but in miseries, he is not rich but in worms, and in the knowledge
of the follies which he has wrought. Among so many goodly laws which thou
have given to the Athenians, remember thy self of that, which nature has
imposed upon thee, to die at all hours, until such time, as thou be quite dead.
Thou do in vain command thy bones to be cast into diverse places after thy
Death; for if they putrify not all at once, each one of the^ shall produce a
stench from the marrow, in the place, where it shall be buried. Thou must
necessarily follow the lot of this great Sage, since you are brothers both of
the same condition. Thou have taught others long enough; learn thou that,
which as yet thou know not. Thou teach all the world to live; learn thou
thy self to die well. Thy knowledge is but vanity. For though thy precepts be
engraven in marble and brass* time which deuoures all things, shall deface the
remembrance of them, to so bury thy glory. If thou lyuest not for thy soul,
rather then thy body, they will scarce believe thou have lived at all.

Periander, come and behold thy Companion of renown, so as if thou know
him not, in the estate he is brought into, touch but thy own miseries with thy
finger, and thou shall plainly discover on their face, all the draughts of his
resembla^ce. He has been King as well as thou, as good, as wise. And if thou
bearst the Surname of Tyrant above him and that he has not been a Tyrant of
his people; yet the vanities of his life have been so. He is dead howsoever;
and at the very same time, wherein truly thou behold'st his putrified bones,
the fire of thy life has brought thee by little and little, into ashes, near
unto his ashes. If thou tracest the same way with him, thou shall put the truth
of thy salvation into doubt. I would have thee be a Tyrant also, but that only
against thy self, to be cruel to thy passions, nor ever to pardon thy faults;
otherwise reason shall be depriving thee of the Surname of a Sage, which thy
folly has given thee.

Pittacus, be thou a partner likewise, to behold the miseries of thy like, and
if thou will learn thy good spirit wisdom, employ thy reason, and eloquence
to chase away vices from thy country, rather then the Tirant though thy force
and courage. Thou say, we ought to foresee the accidents afar of, which
may happen to us, for to be able to suffer them, with the more constancy, when
they light: why think thou not then, always of this accident, inseparable
from Death, which pursues us nearer then a shadow the body; not for the
suffering of the pains with the greater constancy, but rather with more
profit, that Death might make thee a successor of a more happy life? Behold
in this tomb, the image of all thy errors. See wherein consists the glory of
the world, and this vain renown, whereof thou beco^mest an idolater. If this
great Sage have been so taxed, how shall thou be able to avoid the blame and
shame at once? I leave thee to think and meditate upon it.

Bias, come and behold through curiosity the ashes of the wisest of the world,
to judge whether there be any difference between them, and those of the most
fools. I know well, that the horror of the tomb will not astonish thee
awhit, since thou have seen thy country sacked already with a dry eye, and thy
children dead before thee. But in these actions it is not, where thou art to
make the force of thy spirit to appear. After thou had lost all, thou
oughtst to have saved thy self to be rich for ever. Thou belieuest, thy virtue
should appear, with saying, that thou carryest all thou have about thee, and
had saved all thy goods from the fire of thy town, wherein thou mistakest
thy self. For thou were puffed greatly with thy vanity, and charged with the
weighty burden of thy vain sciences. Thou know all that, which we ought to
be ignorant of, to become well skilled in the knowledge of true virtue indeed.

And to let thee say plainly thine own folly, so it is, that the precepts of
thy wisdom have never yet saved any one of those that observed the same. Thou
preachest virtue, and adorest but a false image thereof* wisdom consists not
but in always thinking of death; and thou have nothing more dear, then life
in the blindness, wherein thou art. Misfortune robs thee every hour of a part
of thy self, through continual loss of that, which thou love most, and thou
art insensible of all these attempts. But heerin thou letst thy vanity appear,
rather then any virtue at all, since thou referrest not the effects of thy
patience to the absolute cause, which gives thee grace thereunto. Thou Enemy to
thy self, thou pullest the wings of thy spirit, that it may not fly above thy
nature to know the Author thereof. Consider the glory that shall rest, and be
left for thee. The stone of this tomb which thou see shall wait upon thy
flesh to cover it with all, in corruption and infection; and if thou will be
reputed wise, think continually upon this verity.

Thales, thou must be a party likewise, for to come and see, the master of the
Sages, in this poor little lodging, which nature has prepared him from his
birth. He has been far more wise then thou, but yet with all his knowledge,
he has hardly been able to find the way of his salvation. He knew so perfectly,
the effects of all the second causes, as he forgot oftentimes to yield due
homage unto the first and soueraygne cause, only adorable. Take thou thy
profit then, from the example of his loss. Thou studyest vaynly to mark the
courses of time, consider rather, how it pulls thee by little and little into the
Sepulcher.

Why breakest thou thy brains, to know from whence the winds proceed, since
thou oughtst to fear that of vanity, for it threatnes thee with shipwreck?
Thou further notest sundry motions of the stars, it suffices thee, that that
of the Sea be favorable to thee, to shun the rocks of that other of the world,
whereto nature has made thee to embarke thy self. Thou make lessons to thy
scholars upon thunder, it is but a very curiosity of thine; thou should not
seek for shelters, but for the thunders of divine Justice, which shall shortly
punish thee for thy foolish errors. If thou will be wise indeed, forget thou
all what thou know, nor do thou ever remember but this verity, that thou art
of Earth, and soon shall thou return into Earth again, as this great King
whose ashes thou beholdest, environed with horror and infection. Go now, and
make a lesson to thy scholars, of that which thou have seen, and then shall
thou deserve the surname of a Sage.

Chilon, step thou a little, out of thy way, to come and see the ruins of this
Colossus here of Greatness, whose unmeasurable height astonished all the
world. This is the King Solomon, the wonder of all the Monarkes of the earth.
Demand of him now what he has done with his crown, with his Scepter, with
his Treasures, with his Courtiers, with his slaves, and where now his pleasures
are. And if he answer thee not a word, make the same demands of thine own
spirit, and it shall answer for him, that all is vanished like smoke, that all
is slid away like waves, that all is rouled thence like a torre^t, that al is
melt a way like snow; and that al these shadows have pursued their bodies,
into the ruin where thou see it. Thou oughtst to have engraued this precept
which thou gave forth of Nosce teipsum, on thy heart rather, then on the
Temple of Apollo. For this knowledge is not compatible with thine errors. Thou
have given forth this second Precept, Of never coveting too much, wherein
truly, thou art not culpable at all, since thou desiredst not enough. Thou
assignest all thy pretensions on the earth, as if thou were borne but for it;
it seems the Sun never rises, but to convince thee of ingratitude, since for
the goodness of its effects, thou never did homage to the cause from whence
has it received the being and the light it has. If it had as many tongues as
beams, it would have published at once, both his glory, and thy forgetfulness.
Confess then the error of it, if thou would have men justly to attribute
wisdom to thee.

Ceobulus, come thou in thy turn likewise, to visit the King of Sages, not in
his Palace, but in the little house, which the harbingers of death have
appointed for him. Thou bestowest thy time but ill; for thou should be
making of verses, and thou art full of them thy self, to wit, of worms. So as
if thou love thy Poesy so much, make verses on thy worms, describe thy
miseries, and never speak but of thy misfortunes; otherwise, shall thou loose
the Surname thou have of a Sage. Thou see well how the science thou
professest, teaches not but vanity, and how all the world is the great master
of it. True wisdom consists in possessing all the virtues, and thou yet
live in the hope of atteyning the first, which is to know ones self. Solomon
was wiser then thou art, and yet with all his knowledge, and wisdom both, was
he taxed of folly. He has been the greatest of the world, and this little
trench which thou see conteyneth all his greatnesses. The lands of his Empire
are comprised within this little hillocke of earth, whereinto he is reduced: if
thou will forgo thy vanity, behold somewhat near, his miseries, and thou shall
learn all the Sciences of the world in the meditation of his nothing. You Sages
of the world if you establish the foundation of your glory on your prudence,
all is but vanity. Behold, contemplate, and publish freely the truth you know;
I for my part will not learn other science then that of living well, since this
is the science of the Eternity, which has for object an immortal glory.

A Contemplation upon the Tomb of Helena. CHAP. XI.
RETVRNE thou, O Menalaus, with thy Army, to the conquest of this fair Helena,
to triumph now at last upon her utmost spoils. Imagine the Tomb wherein she
is enclosed, to be the the proud Troy, which deteynes her from thee. Marshall
thy Army about her Sepulcher, and let the valiantest of thy soldiers, well
armed against the horror and affrightes of all the infections of the world,
give the first onset to this fortress of miseryes. There is no need to reduce
her into ashes, since she is wholly full of ashes now. Encourage then thy
Captains to the assaults. Thou have now, no more to deal with an infinite
number of men, but rather with an infinite number of worms, as owners, and
possessors of the subject of thy victory. But me thinks some new Achilles, or
some Ajax has already demolished the rampires of this little Troy, wherein thy
Helena is captiued.

Approach then, brave Menalaus, with napkin at thy nose, tears in thine eyes,
sighs in thy mouth, and plaintes in thy soul, to behold the Idol of thy
passions, and the object of the triumphs. Behold this fair Helena, whom the
greatest Monarks of the world have adored. Behold this fair Helena, whom
Theseus took away, and Paris ravished as a thrall of her perfections. Behold
this fair Helena, who has peopled Greece with widows and Orphans. Behold
his fair Helena, who has drowned a good part of the earth with a deluge of
blood. Behold this fair Helena, the wonder of all the wonders in the world,
the shame of ages past, the despair of such as are to come, and the miracle of
her present age. Behold this fair Helena, whom Paynters never durst to
represent, nor have Poets been able ever to praise enough. Behold this fair
Helena, whom no man has admired but with Idolatry. Behold this fair Helena,
whose merits have armed the one part of the world against the other, as if for
^er alone they would have utterly destroyed the Universe. Behold at last this
fair Helena, whose life has cost a million of deaths: behold this stinking
carcass which here you see, this heap of putrifyed bones, and this lump of
infection full of worms.

Command thy imagination, to represent her unto thee, in that estate she was
in at such time as thou adoredst her on the Throne of her graces, for to
acknowledge sensibly the difference. Demand of her head, what is become of that
fair golden hair of hers, so always curled, where Love had wrought a
thousand Labyrinths, to make a thousand of the freest Souls to wa^derin? Her
hair, I say, whose flash dazeled the eyes, and whose wreathes captiued hearts?
Where is that Alabaster brow, where Majesty's appeared in troops, as always
ready to impose new laws of respect to mortals? Where are her eyes, which you
termed The eyes of Love, since he had not been blind, but for her sake? Or
rather those two fair stars eclipsed, from whence thou receiuedst both the
good and the evil influences of thy life? say we yet more, those two fair
Suns, arrived now at their last West, whose splendor ever blinded the whole
world? What is become of them? we can hardly discern the dreadful ruins of
their being. Where may that godly feature be, whose flowers always spread and
disclosed, the winter reuere^ced much? Where is that mouth of Coral, whose
voice was an oracle of good and evil fortunes? Where is that neck of Iuory,
that snowy bosom, and all the other parts of that body, where Nature had
employed the last endeauours of her power? I see nothing but worms. I smell
nothing but a stink. All is vanished quite away. The flesh of that Maiesticall
brow, lets her hydeous bones appear. Those fair eyes show forth the holes,
where the worms have built their Sepulcher. The flowers of this visage are
changed into thorns: and this mouth sometimes of Coral is now become a sink
of Infection. And for the rest of the parts of the body being al of the same
nature with the whole, we may know the piece by the pattern.

Menalaus, behold the subject of thy affection, of thy pleasures, of thy
pains, and of thy triumphs. Behold her, whom thou so dearly louedst, so
highly reuerencedst, and ^or whom thou have a thousand times put ^hy Scepter,
thy Crown, yea all Greece in danger, with thy life, and honor. Behold thy
vanity discovered, consider thy ^hame, contemplate thy folly. This heap of
Ashes has made thee to reduce into ashes the proudest City of the world. This
stinking Carcass has been convinced in dying for putting a Million of men to
death. This Colossus of miseries, full of infection, has changed the most
flourishing Empire of the world into a mere dunghill. Muster up thine Army
about this Sepulcher, that thy Captains and Soldiers may lament with thee thy
folly, bewayling the time they have employed for the conquest of this heap of
stinking earth. So as, if the Ghosts, wherewith she has peopled Hell, were
able to break their prisons, they would bring a new war upon thee, as the
partner of all the crimes, which they have committed, in following thee.

I attend you, Dames, near unto this Tomb, to make the Anatomy of your
beauties, of your sweets, of your allurements, of your charms, of your baits,
of your wa^tonesse, and of all your vanities together. It is time for me to
unmask your Spirit, to let you manifestly see the truth of your miseryes. You
make a show to all the world of your body, painted and washed every day with
the bathes of a thousand distilled waters, and I will show you the infection
and putrefaction which is within. You say that a woman is then fair, when she
has a good body, with a handsome garb, the hair flaxen and naturally curled,
a soft skin, and as white as snow, a large and polished brow, the eyes blew or
black, and pretty bigg, the chyn short and somewhat forked, and the rest of the
parts of the body equally proportioned one to the other. But this is nothing
yet. This goodly piece must needs be accompanied with some Graces, to be
quickened with Majesty. Her flaxen and curled hair had need to be trimly
dressed; her skyn how soft soever, should be nourished in water like a fish,
for to co^serue it in its bewty and luster. The brow had need be taught, to
hide its pleights and wrinckles, to appear always most polite. Those fair
eyes must learn the art of charming hearts; and to have this secret industry
with them, to wound in their sweetness, and to kill in their choler. That
little mouth of Roses should be always sounding in the cares the sweetest
harmony of eloquence, for to calm the harshest Spirits. In fine, each part of
the body is to learn its lesson of quaintness, and the spirit that animates
the same to teach it every day some vanity or other, and some new instructions
to win love withal, or rather folly, as if there were not fools enough in the
world.

Besides, this fair piece had yet need to be decked up with the richest habits
that may be found, to give life to her gravity. This gallant hair had need to
be wreathed with chains of pearl, and diamonds, to allure the eyes more
sweetly in admiration of them, and hearts unto their love. This delicate skin
should be heightened through the shadow of a fly. This painted visage should
be daubed anew with a huge number of trumperyes, and instruments of vanity, be
it in Rebato's of all fashions, in Pendants for the ears of all colors, in
Carcanets of diverse inuentio^s, and in Veyles of different stuffes. This body
thus quickened with folly, rather then with reason, should be every day tricked
up with new habits, to the end, the eyes might not be so soon weary to
co^template the vanities of them. In fine, she should have a magnificent train
with her, of Horses, Caroches, and Lakeys, to maintain the greatness of her
house.

But let us now break the crust of these wily bayts, that blind our spirits
so, and charm our reason, for to make us run into our overthrow. This rich
piece is but a faggot, or a bundle of putrifyed bones, of nerves, and of sinews
full of infections, and whose Cemeter serves for a theater to let us see the
miseries of them. Those frizled locks are but the excrements of nature,
engraffed in a soil full of lice. That delicate skyn is but a piece of
parchment pasted upon blood. Her frail beauty, but that of flowers, subject to
the parching of the sun and the scorcching of fire: one dropp of the serene,
and the only alteration of the pulse, and but one night of unrest only, are
enough to ruin it quite. That large and polite Brow is notable to save it
self from the assaults of the wrinckes, which from moment to moment take up
the place, whatsoever resista^ce be made against them. Those fair eyes are but
as waterish holes, subject to 60. several maladies, all different; being so
many mischiefs disposing to their ruin: a little Rheum makes them so
ghastly, as they are constrained to hide them, for fear they make us not
afraid. That Nose and mouth are two sincks of corruption, from whence
infections issue at all moments. And for the rest of the parts of her body,
being all of the same stuff, one may well judge of the whole piece by a
pattern only.

On the other side, the action that animate this piece is but a breath of wind,
which fills up the sails of our Arrogance in this sea of the world, where
vanity serves for Pilot, to hazard us in the Shipwreck. Those flaxen locks in
vain are tricket so on the face, through an art of niceness; the invention is
as guilty, as the matter frail and contemptible. Let her wash her delicate
skyn day by day, the self same water that nourishes, does putrify it no
less; for according as the slight thereof makes her appearance to seem young
anew, nature causes the being to wax old. That smooth Brow to no purpose
hides its furrows so, whiles Age discouers them by little and little. If those
eyes have the skill to charm the hearts, yet have they not the trick to charm
their miseries. I grant that little mouth of Roses, for a time may yield
oracles of Eloquence; yet we must consider that as the words are formed of
air, so into air again do they resolve; their glory is but wind, and their
harmony but smoke. In fine let the spirits which quicke^ these fair bodies,
know all the lessons of vanity and quaintness that are, may it not be said
yet, that the art is black, and as pernicious as the instructions are.

As for the habits, which deck up this rich Piece, they are but the
workmanship of worms, since they have wrought the silk. Those pearls and
Diamonds so enchased in the hair, are of the treasures of the Indies, where
the Riches of Virtue are unknown: but they are as so many subjects of contempt
to holy Souls, who know that Heaven is not bought with the gold of the earth.
And for all these toys, that serve thus for ornaments to women, they are but
as so many veyles, to shroud their defects with all, while they are so full of
them. Let them show themselves as beautiful as they will, yet will I count
more imperfections in their bodies, then they have hayres on their heads. They
appear not abroad till Noone, to show that they employ one half of the day,
for to hide the half of their miseryes; and during the small time they are
seen abroad in, if we look near into all their actions, they give forth a
great deal more pity then love. One shall be always holding a napkin in her
hand, for to voyed a part of the corruption which she has in her. Another
shall be forced in company to step aside unto the chimney, to spit forth at her
pleasure, the infection she holds in her breast. There she shall be houlding her
muffe upon her cheek swollen with Rheum for to cover the ill grace it has.
Here will she never pull of her gloves, for fear of discovering the itch of
her hands.

Behold the lesser defects of women, whiles of discretion, I conceal the
greater, but I believe in vain, since all the world beholds the^ well enough;
so as if they would yet see more sensible verityes of their miserable
condition, let them approach to this Tomb.

You Courtiers, I conjure you, by the power of those Beauties, which you have
adored so much, to come hither and behold their ruin. What say I? nay
horror, infection and putrefaction rather. Theseus, send thou hither thy ghost
to this body, where thou had lodged so long a time both thy heart and soul.
Behold this fair Helena, whom thou had stolen away with the peril of thy
life, as idolatrous of her imaginary perfections. Search now in her, the baytes
that charmed thee so, the charms that ravished thee, the bewty that made thee
such a thrall, and all those sweetnesses which have forged the chains of thy
servitude. Those bayts now have no more force, but to allure the worms; those
charms have no more power, but to conserve the infection; and those bewties
and sweetnesses changing the nature, do afford amazements, rather then any whit
of Love. But yet me thinks, thou art well revenged. For this cruel Tyrant, who
had reduced thee so by little and little into ashes, is even now but ashes her
self. This mercylesse woman who would seem to love no man, is hated of all
the world. This proud Dame, who made her self adored, serves as a victime to
the worms, and sport to the winds. Yesterday her bewty did please thee so
much, as thou had no eyes, but to admire her; and to day is her foulness so
hideous, as thou have no contempt but for her. Yesterday thou sighedst for her
love, and to day the same heart even sighs for her miseryes. Yesterday her
perfections did ravish thy soul, to make them adored; and to day her defects
extort thy tears, and sighs, to bewail in their fashion their ruin. Look
then, see here that which thou have loved so much, and that which thou hate
so maynely. See here, what thou have admired with astonishment, and that which
thou abhorrest with so much reason; what cruel change is this from thy self,
with thy self? or rather from the subject of thy love, with the same subject
it self? Shall I dare to say, that this stinking Carcass here is the fair
Helena? That this heap of rotten bones are the sad spoils of her perfectio^s?
And that this little Ashes, is the doleful head of that wonder of the world?

Paris, Return thou from Hell, into the earth again, for to see the cause of
thy disastres. Approach to this Sepulcher, and contemplate the infection and
corruption near at hand, with thou have adored under the name of Helena. How
many times have thou been kneeling before this carcass, and before these
rotten bones? How many mischiefs have thou run into? How many perils have thou
escaped? How many seas have thou crossed over? How many evils have thou
suffered, for to possess this heap of worms? Thou verily belieuedst, thou
had all the riches of the world in thy ship, whiles thou had thy Helena
therein. The Coffer is open, behold now wherein consist thy treasures. Art thou
not ashamed for having so made love to this heap of Ashes? and for having
sighed so, a thousand, and a thousand times after this stinking Earth? Thus the
glory of the world does pass away, all flies into the Tomb.

Your Courtiers, come, yield you a last homage of visit, to this Idol of your
passions. I have heard indeed the Persians heertofore, have adored the Sun, and
that there have been other Paynims, who in their brutishnes have adord
likewise diverse sorts of beasts; but I have never seen a more prodigious
thing, then now at this day, while they adore even Clay, Corruption, and
Infection. There is nothing more certain* then that in adoring women, they
become Idolatours of their putrefaction; since their body is a sack of worms.
Behold the goodly subject of your watchings, of your troubles, of your
extrauagancies. How is it possible, this heap of ashes here should affoard
you such ill days, and so long nights? That this sink of infection should
make you shed so many tears, and send so many sighs into the wind? Are you
not jealous, trow you, that the worms should possess this subject of your
affection? Can your wayward courages ere endure these worms should be taking
their Fees thereof in your presence, and to your scorn? For they glut
themselves of the one part of what you have adored, and for the other, they
make a dunghill of it. These are no Fables, these. Look, and smell your
selves, all is but misery and stench. So passes the glory of the world away.

I inuit you, my Dames, to a feast, which the corruption of Helena's body
makes unto the worms, in the presence of Heaven and Earth. This Tomb which
you see, is the Hall, where the banquet is prepared; come you hither in
troops, attyred all in the richest Ornaments you have, as you would go unto a
wedding-feast. I license you herin, to bring a glass with you hanging at your
girdle, for to admire with an dolatrous eye, the good Graces you have. And if
you affoard any whir of intermission at all, cast but your eyes awhile, upon
this stinking carcass here, since it is the body of your shadow, and the
original of your living pourtraicts. You now see enough, that you are but
ashes, but earth, but clay, but mere putrefaction and infection; and yet
suffer nevertheless your selves to called Goddesses; and to heap yet more crime
upon crime, you accept the Sacrifices. I have not seen, nor read of so
prodigious Metamorphoses, that even very Clay should be raised upon a Throne,
and the worms and corruption should be meriting of titles of immortal glory.
You suffer them to be kneeling before you, and fear not the while, least the
wind of your vanities be carrying away the dust, whereof you are framed. You
walk upon cloth of gold, and after your death, are the beasts trampling under
foot your stinking earth. You suffer them to kneel before you: Alas! what a
sight to humble ones self, before a dunghill! Deck up, and adorn your
carcass as long as you please, the stench at last shall discover the miseries
thereof, to the sight of all the world. This handful of ashes, which you see
here, is the beautiful Helena, whose allurements charmed hearts, and whose
charms did ravish souls. And yet notwithstanding is there left no more of
her, then the mere infection, which was bred with her.

I do even laugh at all your vanities, my Dames, and mock at those who admire
the^ so. When as your bewties do assail me, I break the very crust of them,
and approaching to the corruption which is within, it makes me hate them more,
then ever any man had loved them heretofore. I take pleasure sometime to behold
your sweetnesses, your allurements, your nyceties; but it is only to be touched
with compassion of your miseries. For whatsoever is the frailest in the world,
is not so frail as your nature is; whatsoever is more variable here beneath,
is not so changeable as your being is. I dare hardly eye you any long time, for
fear, least even while I look upon you, you vanish from my eyes, since you
dye every hour.

Flatter not your selves, my Dames, before your Glass; your body is even just
of the same nature, with the shadow which you see therein. You are indeed
nothing. But if you force me to say, you are something, you are a mere dunghill
covered with snow, a sink of infection environed with flowers, a rich coffer
full of worms, and in a word, an abridgement of all the miseryes of the world.

You Courtiers take a pride, forsooth, for having carried away a thousand
Favors from the hands of Ladies, either through the force of your spirit, or
thorugh the charms of your subtilties. One bragges for having enthralled a Lady
with the chains of her own hair. Another for inueagling a new Mistress in
his love, through letters written with his own hand. There, one more perfect
the^ the rest shall be publishing his triumphs. Here another more happy yet,
shall avouch al his passions to have been crowned. There shall not fail some
one that will be ordinarily busiyng his spirit with these vain thoughts that he
was even borne into the world, to tempt the pudicity of Ladies, so lovely he
is. But let us pull the wings of this proud one, and make these bodies of earth
to walk upon the earth, who raise their Spirits upon Thrones of smoke,
believing they do well.

Thou, that vauntest thy self for enthralling thy mistress with her own
chains; what glory it is, whiles the hair, which so charily thou keep
within a box of musk, are but the roots of lice, which shall putrify in
sight, and thou shall sent them anon, in despite of al thy powders and
perfumes. So as if thou will needs have me call those wreathes of excreme^ts,
so full of infection, by the name of chains, they are even the chains which
the Devil put into thy hands, to help thee to draw that body, which thou have
idolatrized into Hell; but take not heed the while, that in drawing it
thither, they draw thee; and haling it thither, they hale thee also. Behold a
trim piece of Glory to be proud off.

Thou that have yet more secret ties of Friendship, with a Lady, written with
her hand, and with her blood; if thou think so, thou art rich indeed, if thy
treasure consist in a piece of paper, bespotted over, and blurred with black
or red: yet to hear thee speak of this favor of hers, they would verily say,
thou possessedst the Empire of the world. An intolerable vanity the while. For
admit that all the fairest Ladies of the world had signed to thee with their
guilty and corrupt blood, that they loved thee perfectly indeed, on which side
would thou find thy glory in these assurances? In so promising their love to
thee, they but promise thee to get thee damned, since a love so unlawful as
that, leads souls into Hell. And And do thou make any reckoning of these
promises then, poor soul? All the testimonies of their passions do witness thy
folly against thy self; and take thou pleasure to blind thy self, with
their hood, not to see the precipices that beset thee round? Thou imaginest it
straight to be a great honor to be favored of Ladies: represent to thy self,
what a glory it were, for thee, that a piece of Clay being quickened with life,
should seem to be beloved of a Dunghill. Whiles thou becommest thus an
Idolatour of a beautiful body, thou even adorest the worms, the infection and
corruption it self, where with it is stuffed. What a crime is this?

And thou Companion of vanity, and folly at once, that so vauntest thy self to
have dispeopled the earth of Myrrhes to crown thy amourous triumphs withal,
tell me what is become of this glory, and of this contentment, which thou
seem to exalt so much? I grant, thou have trampled on flowers: But where
art thou now? If therein thou have found the way of roses, thou shall enter
anon into that of Thorns. For this is the order and course of things in the
world, that Pleasure begets Sorrow. Either thy delighs are past, or present: if
past, thou art already in the Hell of their privation; if present, thou art
likewise in another Hell of their crime, and of the apprehension to loose them.
In so much as which way soever thou admirest thy fortune, if it be a body,
misfortune is the shadow. What glory do thou think thou have gotten by the
victory of thy guilty enterprises? Thou have peopled Hell with an infinite
number of souls. Are not these very glorious actions trow you? Thou have lent
thy cunning to the evil spirits, to deceive thy neighbors, as if he were not
deceived enough with his own deceypts; and yet still thou braggst thereof,
thereby ^o heap crime upon crime.

I summon you, Courtiers, to appear in ^hought and imagination, upon the
thorny bed, where you shall cast forth to the winds ^his breath of life, and to
represent withal to your self before hand once a day the horror and amazement
you shall then have of your self, when you shall be calling to mind, the ^essons
of the vanity and folly, which you have given to an infinite number of feeble
^pirits, whose companions in loss you have ^uer been. Put off the time to
this last hour, to make your account of the favors which you have ever
received from Ladies, if you will know the true price of them. The^ even then it
is, when you shall feel very lively, the assaults of your guilty conscience;
the crust of your pleasures shall be broken, and you shall plainly see, what
lies within. Your spirit unmasked of the veyle of your passions, shall sensibly
discern the truth of its passed offenses, but there is no more return to be
had unto life, to do penance in, for them. You must go further the^ sorrows.
What sorrow soever I am able to express, is no part of that which you shall
suffer. All torments whatsoever being joined together have not gal enough to
comprehe^d the least part of the bitterness of that cruel Adieu, which is then
to be made to the world. The^ it is, I say, that you shall sigh, but not of
love. Then it is, that you shall play the extasyed and dead person, not in
presence of your Mistress, but before your crucified Judge* Your tongue so
eloquent before, shall be then struck dumb, in punishment of your too much
speech. So as of force, shall you court Death in your fashion, and according to
the sad humor which shall then possess you. You must of necessity be playing
your part in this last moment upon the theater of you^ bed. I would be loath
for my part to troubl^ the Reader, with the faces which you shall make: it
suffices that you imagine the one part, and that you doubt not of the rest.
Think the^ of death, you Courtiers, since the Eternity both of glory and
pain, depends of a moment. O sweet, and dreadful moment!

And you, my Dames, you believe you have conquered an Empire straight, as soon
as you have once subjected any spirit to you power: to what end do you study
so, every day, since you learn each moment but vanity, and new lessons of
nicenes, be it for actio^ or grace sake; but therein what think you to do?
Your purpose is to wound hearts, and you undo souls; for when you make a man
passionately in love with you, you do even make him a Fool. You cannot be
taking away his heart, without depriving him of reason. And to what
extrauagancies is he not subject the while, during the reign of his passion, I
would say, of his folly? You are al which he loves, and very often all which he
adores; what cry me? I should think it rather to please you, then to save
himself. If he look upon the Sun, he is but to make comparison between the
light of your eyes and that of this bewtifull star, which I leave to you to
imagine how far from truth* He seems to maynteyne very impudently, in scorn
of all created things, that you are the only wonder of the world, and the very
abridgeme^t of all that nature has ever made bewtifull; which yet no man
belieues but he, and you. If he carry up his thoughts to Heaven, he compares
you to the Angels, with these words, That you have all the qualities of them.
Judge now without passion, whether these terms of Idolatry do not fully, and
wholly pass sentence, to convince him with a thousand sorts of crimes. And yet
do you take pleasure to make the Devil more potent then he is, for to cause
others to be damned.

Return then again unto your self, and consider how you ought to render an
accoumpt one day of all those spirits, whose Reason you have made to wander in
the labyrinth of your charms. For she that on earth, shall have subjected the
most, shall be the greatest slave in Hell. What glory take you to join your
charms with those of the Devils, thereby to draw both bodies and souls unto
them? I attend you at this last moment of your life where your definitive
sentence is to be pronounced. Think you always of this moment, if there be
yet remaining in you, but never so little spark of love for your selves. When
you shall once have enthralled all the Kings of the earth; there would yet be a
great deal more shame, then honor in it, since all those Kings were no more
then mere corruption and infection. Think of your selves, my Dames, you are
to day no more the same you were yesterday. Time which deuours all things,
defaceth each moment the fairest lineaments of your face, nor shall it ever
cease to ruin your beauties, until such time as you be wholly reduced to
ashes. So passes away the glory of the world, all flies into the Tomb.

That of all the Laws, which Nature has imposed upon us, that same of Dying
is the sweetest. CHAP. XII.
FROM the time that our first Father had violated the sacred Laws, which God
had imposed upon him; Nature, as altering her nature, would acknowledge him no
more for her child. Anon she rayseth a tumult against him, with all created
things. The Heaven arms it self with thunders to punish his arrogance. The
Sun hides himself under the veyle of his Eclypses, to deprive him of his
light. The Moon his sister, defending his quarrel, resolves with her self to
be often changing her countenance, toward him, to signify unto him the
displeasure she took thereat. The Stars being orherwise innocent of nature,
became malignant of a sudden, to power on his head their naughty influences.
The Air keeping intelligence with the Earth, exhales her vapors, and having
changed them into poison, infects therewith the body of that miserable wretch.
The Birds take part with them, they whet their beakes, and claws to give some
assault or other. The Earth prepares the mine of its abysses, for to swallow
him up, if the dread and horror of its trembling, were not sufficient to take
away his life. The savage beasts stand grinding their teeth to devour him. The
Sea makes an heap of an infinite number of rocks to engulfe him in their
waves. But this is nothing yet; Nature is so set on revenge against him, as she
puts on his fellows to destroy their pourtraite, I mean to combat with the
shadow of their body, in causing them to quench the fire of their rage, with
their proper blood. In so much as man has no greater enemy then man himself.
Let us go forward.

To continue these evils, do miseries, enter into the world, accompanied with
their sad disastres, and followed with despair, grief, sadness, folly, rage,
and a thousand passions besides, which do clean unto the senses, for to seize
upon souls. This poor Adam sees himself to be besieged on al sidess if he
look up to Heaven, the flash of the lightenings there even dazles and
astonishes him quite; the dreadful noise of thunder makes him to wish himself
to be deaf; he knows not what to resolve upon, since he has now as many
enemies as he had vassals before. Adam may well cry mercy for his syn; what
pardon soever he obtain thereof, yet will nature never seem to pardon him for
it. Whence it is, that in compass also of these ages of redemption it self,
wherein we breath the air of grace, we do sigh that same of miseryes. So as if
there be nothing more certain, according to the experience of our sense, then
that the Earth is a Galley, wherein we are slaves; that it is the prison,
wherein we are enchained, and the place assigned us to suffer the pains of our
crimes in; can there possibly be found any souls so cuell to themselves, and
such enemies to their own repose, as not to be continually sighing after their
liberty, after the end of their punishments, and the beginning of an eternal
life full of pleasures? What would become of us, if our life endured for ever,
with its miseryes? if it should never have an end with our evil? and that it
had no bounds, or limits, no more then we? For then should I be condemning the
laughter of Democritus, and allowing of the continual tears of his companion,
since the season would be always, to be always weeping and never to laugh.
Then would it be, that cries and plaints would serve us for pastimes, and
tears and sighs, should never abandon either our eyes, or hearts.

But we are not so brought to this extremity of unhappiness; The Heavens being
touched with compassion of our evils, and of the greatness of our miseryes, in
giving us a cradle for them to be borne in, have affoarded us a Sepulcher also
for to bury them in. O happy Tomb, that reduces to ashes the subject of our
flames! O happy Tomb, where the worms make an end to devour the rest of our
miseryes! O happy Tomb, where our souls do recover their liberty, and where
our bodies do find the end, and term of of pains! O happy Tomb, where we are
reduced to corruption, to arise in glory! O happy Tomb, where death even dies
with us, and where life reuiues with our selves for an Eternity! O happy Tomb,
where we render to the earth, the earth of our body, to put our souls in
possession of the inheritance of heaven! O happy Tomb, where we pass from
death, to life; from sadness, to joy; from infamy, to glory; from pain, to
repose; and from this vale of tears, unto the mansion of delights.

From the time that the children of Israel had tasted in the desert the
sweetness of the heavenly Manna; the most delicious meats of the earth, were
grown to be contemptible to them; their hearts even cha^ging their nature, fell
incessantly gaping after this celestial food. So likewise may I say, that from
the instant, wherein a holy Soul is once fed with the food of the grace which
is found in an innocent life; the world is an object of horror and amazement
unto it; its thoughts and desires creep not on the earth any more; if it sigh,
it is but after its last sigh; if it complain, it is only for the long term
of its banishment in this vale of miseryes. The hope of dying serves it as a
comfort in its trobles, and solace in its pains; it lives in the prison of its
body, as slaves in the prison of their crimes, with a necessary constancy,
always attending on the last hour thereof, and this last moment where begins
the eternity of glory.

Me thinks the sentence of death, which the divine justice pronounced once to
our first Parents, in that earthly Paradise, was much in their favor, against
the evils, wherewith their life was fraught. For if God had made the same to
be immortal with all mischifes which succeeded their offense, of all created
things had man been found to be the miserablest of them, and most worthy of
compassion; but the same Goodness, which moved the Creator to effect this
goodly work, did even move him likewise to conserve the same. His sentence was
of death, but in the rigor of his justice, he let his merry to appear at the
same time, since from the pain of death we pass to the delights of a
permanent and immortal life. In so much as this sweet consolation, is
inseparable from our torments, for they shall one day finish. O sweet End, since
thou breakst the chains of our captivity! O sweet End, since thou make us to
revive, never for to die! O sweet End, since thou putst an end to all our
sufferances! O sweet End, since we dye to revive for ever!

How Worldlings dye deliciously without ever think^ng thereof. CHAP. XIII.
WE must needs confess how the souls of the world, are so deeply taken,
with the sleep of their pleasures, as they are even drowned in their blindness,
without fear of the precipices, that encompasse them round. Joy transports
them, gladness rauishes them, rest charms them, hope comforts them, riches
moderats their fear, health fortyfies their courage, and all the vanities
nurse them, and bring them up in the forgetfulness of themselves, so, as they
may never be able to use any violence, for to break the chains of their
captivity. A pitiful thing, how they never consider the while, that this joy
wherewith they are so carried away, eue^ vanishes quite like a flash of
lightening; that this gladness wherewith they are ravished, destroys it
self, with its own violence, in running incessantly unto its end; That the
repose which charms them, co^cludes with an eternal unrest; that the hope
which co^forts them, quite changes it self by little and little into despair;
That these riches which do moderate their fear, during their life, augments it
at their death; that the health which strengthens their courage, whiles the
calm and tranquillity of their fortune lasts, does bread them a thousand
storms through the absence thereof, where they run danger of ship wrack. And
finally that all those vanities, which serve them as a Nurse, and School
mistress to train them up in vices, are as so many bad Pylots which make a
traffike of their loss and ruin.

When I image with my self, the blindness whereto the men of this world are
brought, I cannot choose but be moved with compassion for them. Is it not a
strange thing and worthy of pity, that they run as fast as ever they can unto
Death, without cease, without intermission, without fetching of their breath,
and without ever taking any heed of the way they hold, as if they lived
insensible in all their senses? The Sun, which rises every morning, sets
every evening, for to let them see, how the light of their life, should have at
last, a last setting as well as it. The Age, which makes them hoary, and which
keeps reckoning of their years, through the account of the wrinckles which it
causes to grow on their face, preaches naught else, but the necessity of their
departure. All their Actions termine not a whit, but to the ruin of the body,
from whence they fetch their motion, since every action of it self still
tendes to its end. How can they choose but think of death, if all the subjects
which are found in Nature, do even carry the very lineaments thereof in the
face? The Sun dies in running his race. The Moon dies in her perpetual
inconstancy. The air dies with its coruption. The birds seek death in flying.
The brute beasts in running, and the fishes in swimming in the water. The
seasons dye, in springing again as well as the trees. The flowers dye, with
the day that has seen them blow forth. The earth dies in the order of time,
since her years are counted. The Sea sinckes it self by little and little into
its proper abysses. The fire consumes it self in its heat; and Nature it self
that serves for a second cause, in the generation of all things, destroys it
self, by little and little with them.

I speak nothing of men, since they have nothing more proper then Death. What
means, trow you, to forget this sweet necessity of dying, whose law very
happily dispenses with none? yet for all that, do not doubt but there are many
in the world, who would never be dying: but this were a childi^h language of
theirs, so far from reason, and common sense, as one had need to declare
himself to be a stark fool, for to excuse himself of the error, or rather
of the crime. We do all ways contemn the good unknown; and as we naturally
live in the apprehension of loosing that which we possess, we cleave to the
present; so true it is that all things do escape us, and fly away from us. What
a life were it for us to live eternally in the miserable condition, wherein we
are borne? What a life would it be, to be always breathing in sighs, in
mourning, and in playnts? What a life were it to die never, and to suffer
without cease, since miseryes and pains are the miserable accidents of our
bodies? it would even be a living death, or rather a dying life, a thousand
times more cruel and intolerable then death it self. Happy then, yea thrice
happy is that last instant, which makes us get forth of the Empire of time!
most pleasing is the moment, which leads us into the Eternity! O sweet agony,
full of ecstasy and rauishment! O glorious Joseph, guide now my pen in this fair
labyrinth of death, wherein it is wandering, to touch at some thing of your
last rauishments, when as you gave up your soul on the lips of himself that
created them.

Life has nothing so delicious as your death: you die in the arms of the
mother of life, and of life it self. And shall I say, that is a death? You
amorously expire on the mouth of your Redeemer, that is to say, on the gate of
Paradise; what joy! The pen falls out of my hand, as if it were sensible of
these incomparable pleasures, wherewith the end of your holy life was crowned,
but I hope to recover it again very shortly, for to speak more worthily
thereof, if these secret Vows, which I have already offered you, may be
grateful to you. Let us say then confidently, that of all the actions of life,
the last of death, is the welcomest of al, to such as have lived well; and it
is permitted to all the world to live well.

Goodly Considerations upon this important verity; That whatsoever we do, we
dye every hour without cease. CHAP. XIIII.
THE inhabitants of Nylus are so accustomed to hear the dread^ull noise of its
waters always roaring, as they have no ears to feel the inco^modity thereof.
Let us say the same in a diverse sense, of men in the world, that they are so
habituated to this sweet feeling of dying, without cease, as they perceive not
themselves to die awhit. They breath, in dying, the air of the Death which they
sigh forth, without thinking ever of Death. A strange thing to live continually
in Death, and to die every day in life without once dreaming of the necessity of
their end, whither they run always! They do nothing else but die, and they have
no care but to live. For if they speak, the air whereof they form their
words, causes the lights to dye, which is the Clock of life, the respirations
the minutes; these minutes are counted, and one succeding to the other, the
lasts strikes the hour of Death. If they eat, the very food that nourishes
them, does putrify in their bodies, as in a dunghill, in sign that they are
full of corruption; and this infectio^ by little and little ruins the infected
vessel wherein it is enclosed. If they sleep, they exteriourly carry the
countenance of death, which they hide within. In fine there is no action,
wherein they may be any ways employed, which is not a Symbol of Death.

If the foolish errors of these men of the world, concluded not in an
irreparable damage, they would afford as much pleasure as they move pity. For
one gets into his Caroch, with purpose to go to some fair house of his in the
Country, without considering the while, how that very way of his walk, is even
the same of Death, whither Time, which is the Coachman, leads him insensibly
with all his company. So as if they go not to lie, for this days journey, at
the lodging of the Tomb, it is put of for the morrow after. Another embarkes
himself in a Pinnace for to sail into the Indyes, and himself is a Pinnace
the while, embarked in the sea of the world, from the moment of his birth,
sailing without cease, at the pleasure of the wind, wherewith age does
replenish the sails, and that without once being able to land, but in the
haven of the Tomb. This Gallant here shall be going in post, to see his
Mistress, and he has no other object in all his course, then to arrive as
soon as he can, to the place where she lodges. Fool as he is, he considers
not the while, how that every step he puts forward on his way, he approaches
the nerer to the Tomb, whither he runs with full speed, upon the same
Posthorses he takes to compass his amourous desires. Another there, will be
going more easily in a Litter, and with less incommodity for fear the heat
or cold may seem to prejudice his health; but let him go as easily as he will,
yet Death will not fail to lead his mules in such sort, as he shall but pass
only by his howses of pleasure, so to go forwards in his way directly to the
Tomb, what digression soever he seems to make, to put it off.

Think on this truth, my Dames, during the calm and tranquillity of your
fortune; the spring time of your life, will not always last: even as the
seasons of the year succeed each other, so those of age pursue one another. But
as we see often how the intemperance of the air, causes the winter to arrive
in the midst of summer; take heed the intemperance of your humors, produce not
the winter of death in the midst of the spring time of your life. In vain do
you set forth all your deceiptfull marks of immotality, the time scorns them,
and I laugh at them. For if to day you be something, tomorrow are you like to
be nothing: So passes away the glory of the world, all flies into the Tomb.

The Tomb of the pleasures of the Sight. CHAP. XV.
LET all the fairest Objects, which are in Nature appear in my presence, to
behold each one in its turn, the foundation of their Sepulcher. Let the Heaven
show forth, open to view, its serene countenance; the Sun his lively brightness;
the Moon her silver day; the stars their twinkling sparks; the Air its
fair nakedness; The birds their warblings, and their richest robes of plumages,
enamelled with every sort of colors; The Trees the ornament of their
blossoms, and the decking of their fruits; the Meadows the tapestry of their
greenes; and Mountains the mossy stuff, wherewith they cover their crumpt
backs; the forests their thick branches; the sauadge beasts, the extrauagant
beauty which Nature has impressed in their brutish kind, through the diversity
of the forms which they represent; the Earth, the inside of its coffers,
replenished with all sorts of riches; the Rivers, the Crystal of their
streams; the Fountaynes, the liquid glasses of their waters; the Sea its huge
waterish ma^tle; and the fishes, the infinite number of their figures, wholly
different. Let the world yet give forth new wonders, and beauty exhibit to our
view its fairest living pictures; yet all those objects, taken altogether, are
no more then a little dust, enclosed in the crust of artificiousnes, which Time
quite ruins, by little and little.

Thou man of the world, who see but only by thine eyes, in cherishing thy
life so with the pleasures of the sight, admire yet once in thine Idea, the
objects, whose beauty heretofore thou have adored; then represe^t to thy self
according to the argument thou can draw from the nature of their being, what
is become of them, or what are they like to be. If it be some proud palace,
wherein the order, the riches, the magnificence, and the industry of the
workman be in dispute about glory, to know who shall carry away the prize;
consider that Time destroys it at all hours, and that it shall never give
over, till it see the ruins of it.

If the charms of Art do charm the sight, in admiration of the fairest
colors, laid on a rich subject, think but a little of the fraylty of those
accidents. For all the beautifullest colors that are, do fetch their birrh
from that of flowers. And can we see any thing more changeable, or of so small
a date as they? So as if the allurements of the beauties of Nature, do ravish
thy soul by thy eyes* defend thy self forth with through the knowledge thou
have of their misery; since in effect the fairest Lady in the world, is but a
mass of flesh, which corrupts every moment, until such time, as it be wholly
formed to corruption, and this corruption into worms.

As for all other things whatsoever which thou may have seen, being no whit
more noble then it, thou May well be judging of their defects by the
consequence. In so much as whatsoever the Heavens, have glittering, the Earth
rare, Nature gay, and Art more admirable, if thou seruest thy self of the
touchstone of thy judgment, to know the matter which supports the image, thou
shall soon find all to be no more then dust; and so may fear least it
happen to fly in thine eyes, to make thee blind, if thou look but too near
upon it.

The Tomb of the Pleasures, of the Sense of Hearing. CHAP. XVI.
YOU Souls of the world, who suffer your liberty to be taken away through your
ears, with the deceiptful charms of Sirens: You I say, who sigh for joy, for
delectation, and ecstasy, amidst the pleasures of a sweet harmony, either of
voices or instruments, le^d your guilty ears to hear the reasons, which seem
to condemn your errors. I doubt not a whit, but the purling of a silver
brook, the sweet running murmur of a fountain, the pretty warbling of birds,
and the amourous accents of a delicate voice, joined with the sweet allurements
of the melody of a Lute, are of force enough to captive your spirits under the
empire of a thousand sorts of delights. But yet return a little from this
wandering of yours; Content your self, with the loss of liberty, and save
your reason to repair your damage.

At such time as you stand listening to the humming noise of this river, and to
the murmur of this fountain, imagine this truth the while, That all passes
away, that all slides along like to the waves. Their language preaches naught
else. Those birds even call for death, at the sound of their chaunting like the
Swan. And if the harmony of a voice, or Lute so charm you, consider awhile how
the pleasure of this melody is formed of the air, and that in the same
instant, it resolves into air again, so as the delights even die in their
birth. You let your ears be tickled with the charms of Eloquence; imagine you
that since it is true, that as neither Cicero, nor Demosthenes were exempt from
the Tomb, or corruption, with all their fair elocution, so shall you never be
able to persuade death with all your gallant discourses, to prolong the term of
your life, but a moment. True Eloquence consists in preaching Virtue, and true
Harmony to hold reason always at accord with the Will, for to desire nothing
but what is just.

The Tomb of the other Pleasures, that are affected to the Senses. CHAP. XVII.
OPEN your eyes, you worldlings, to discover plainly the truth of your crimes:
You take your pleasures to cherish daintily your bodies, as if you knew not
their miseryes. But why say I, your pleasures? Can you take any contentment, to
stuff your putrified body, with a new matter of corruption? Whatsoever you eat
is a symbol of Death, and so shall you die in eating. You do nothing but heap
dung upon dung, and add but infectio^ to infection. I grant that your life,
passes ever its days in continual banqueting. But I would feign have you
let me see the pleasure which is left you of all this good cheer at the latter
course. Is this a contentment, trow you, to have the Belly stuffed with a
thousand ordures, to put your spirit on the rack with the stinking fume of
meats, not well concocted, which arise up in the brain? Is it well with you
to have the head drousy, the pulse distempered, the spirit benumbed, and reason
astray?

Behold here a part of the delights which succeed your delights, and you have
no care but to pamper your bodies, as if you lived but only for them, not
considering the mean while, how the same very food, which affoards them life,
even brings them to death. Inebriate your self with these brutish pleasures,
and by the example of the new Epicures, have no passion but to conserve them;
yet of necessity, must the imaginary paradise of your life, conclude in a true
Hell on the day of your death. For all these roses shall be changed into thorns
in that last moment. Glut you, and crumme your bodies for to satiate the worms
withal. But this is nothing as yet. Your souls being the companions of your
evils, must needs be everlastingly punished in an eternity of pains. O
dreadful Eternity! It seems in a fashion, that those men of the world may
well be excusing their vanity, that causes them to carry both amber and musk
about them, since they are all full of of infection and corruption, which makes
me believe, that they fear, least men come to sent the stench of their
miseries, and so engage them, or rather enforce them to serve themselves of
this cunning. In effect, all these odours, and these perfumes smell so strong
of earth, as we cannot love the smoke without running into danger of the fire.
So as those who tie their spirit to these vain idea's of pleasures* are in
love with shadows and despise the bodies. They smell very well, that smell not
ill; and such as habituate their bodies to Perfumes, can never endure the
stink of the mortuary Torches, which shall encompasse their b^d, at the hour
of death.

I speak to you, my Ladies, who do so passionately affect these foolish
vanities. I remit you ever to the instant of Death, for to receive the
judgment of your actions, full of shame and reproach. Deal you so, as your
soul may savor well, rather then the body; since the one may every moment be
cited to the presence of God, and the other serves as a prey for the worms. It
were better your teeth should savor il, then your actions; for those are
subject to corruption, and these here shall live eternally, either in pain or
glory. I leave you to think of these important verityes.

For the pleasures of Touching, being of the self same nature with the rest,
and having no more solid foundation then they; we may draw the consequence of
the same argument with them, and conclude; how this imaginary pleasure cannot
seeeme to cleave but to weaker spirits, who love only the earth; because its
object is so vile and base, as we had need to abase our selves, to observe its
aims. Let us resume the airs of our former discourses, and say that the
pleasures of the world, do not subsist in the world, but through the name
only, which is given them. For in effect they are nothing but a dream, and
the shadow of a shadow, whose body we never possess. Such as love them are not
capable of love, since they fix their affections on the pourtraicts only of
imagination, and of the Idea's which the wind defaceth every moment. True
contentme^t consists in thinking always of death. And this is the only
pleasure of life, since it termines in the delights of Eternity.

How he who has imposed the Law of Death upon us, has suffered all the pains
thereof together. CHAP. XVIII.
I NOTE an excess of love in the History of that great King who being touched
with a generous desire, to banish vice for ever from his Kingdom, and to bring
in Virtue, there to reign in peace; among an infinite number of Laws, which
he imposed on his subjects, the pain of pulling out the eyes, was decreed for
his punishment that should violate the most important of the^. The ill luck
was, that his only Son, should fall the first into that crime. What shall he
do? And what shall he resolve upon? For to quit himself from the assaults both
of love and pity, which nature gave him, every moment he could not do; since
the half of his blood, takes away fury from the other half. What likelihood
for one to arm himself against himself, to excite his arm to vengeance, to
destroy his body? He has no love but for the guilty, and how shall he have
passion to destroy him? He sees not but by his eyes, and how shall he be able
to see him blind? In fine, he sits not on his Throne, but to keep him the
place; and how shall he possibly mount this throne to prononce the sentence of
his punishment? Of necessity yet the error must be punished if he will not
soil the splendor of his justice, which is the richest ornament of his
Crown, and the only virtue that makes him worthy of his Empire.

Nature assayles him powerfully, Love gives him a thousand batteryes, and even
Pity often wrings the weapons from his hands; and yet Reason for all that,
seems to carry away the victory. There is no remedy, but needs must he yield
to Nature, Love, and Pity; but yet finds he a way to make Justice triumph in
satisfying the law. He pulls out one of his sons eyes, for one half of the
punishment, and causes another to be plucked forth from himself, for to finish
the chasticement. What excess of Goodness.

Let us draw now the mystical Allegory from this history, and say, That our
Redeemer represents this just King, at such time, as in the terrestrial
Paradise, he imposed this law of obedience under pain of death upon man, being
the Son of his hands, as the noblest work of his Creation. This man being
the first borne, becomes likewise at that same very time the first guilty in
contemning the commandments of his Soueraygne: He eats that fatal Apple, or
rather opens with his murderous teeth that unlucky box of Pandora, stuffed with
all manner of evils. The punishment even follows his offense so near, as he
instantly incurres the pain of death. But what a prodigy of love! The Creator
being touched with the miseryes of his creature, takes away the rigor of the
law, without destroying it quite or infringing the same: I mean, that he
seuers death from death in causing the guilty to arise again from his ashes,
for to live eternally. And the means, whereof he serves himself, is to dye
with him, and in the Chalice of his passion to drink all the bitterness of
death, for to change the nature thereof. In such sort, as this way of death
conducts us now to eternal life.

O sweet Death, a thousand times more plesing the^ whatsoever is most pleasing
in the world! O sweet Death, a hundred, and a hundred times more delicious,
then all the pleasures united together! O sweet Death, where the body finds
repose, the spirit contentme^t, and the soul its whole felicity! O sweet
Death, the only hope of the afflicted, the sole consolation of the wisest, and
the last remedy for all the evils of the world! O sweet Death, and a thousand
times more admirable, then his goodness that imposed the law, since through the
same very Goodness, he would needs be suffering the pain it self, for to take
away the pain. Who durst refuse to drink, in his turn, in the Chalice where
God himself has quenched his thirst? Let us go the^ very holily to Death; for
to go cheerfully thither, is to make love and virtue lead us into the
sepulcher, if we mean to find therein a second cradle, where we may be reborne
anew, never to dye any more.

I cannot forget that goodly Custom of the Egyptians, that when as a Son
being armed with fury, should pass to that extremity of cruelty, as to take
away the life from him, who had given him the same, he incurred this sweet
punishment withal, to be shut up for three whole days in prison together
with the body, whose Parricide he was: and I should think, that such as had
imposed the law, had this belief, that the terrible and dreadful object of
the crime, was a torment of force enough for the guilty, to extort the last
tears from his eyes, and the utmost playntes from his soul. For in effect
Nature never belyes it self, it is always it self, it may well affoard some
intermission of love and of pity, but yet at last, it snatches the heart from
the bowels, through a violence worthy of it self.

Let us see now the backside of this Meddall, so to draw forth the mystery, out
of this moral verity. We represent to day, this guilty son, since we have put
our Redeemer to Death, who is the common Father of our souls. The punishment,
which the law of his Justice, has now imposed upon us, it to look continually
on this Tree of the Cross, whereon our crimes have made him to expire, for to
repair their enormity withal! O sweet punishment! For spilling the blood of
him, who has filled our veins, the law exacts no more of us then tears! For
having nailed him on the Cross, Justice enioynes us no other pain, then that
of nayling our eyes on the same pillar whereupon he is nailed! For having
crowned him with thorns, he would have us to trample under foot, the roses of
our pleasures! In fine, for putting him to Death, he demaundes no more at our
hands, but sighs and tears for to testify our sorrow for the same! Who could
refuse to afford him this pity, or love, who for our love has had such pity
upon us? His heart has been melt to tears of blood, upon the Altar of the
Cross; and shall we not drown our selves, in the sea of our tears, being so
pressed with the storm of our sighs and plaints; Shall we suffer the rocks to
vpbrayed us of insensibility? The Sun has been darkened at the sight of our
crime, and shall not we wax pale for sorrow, of committing the same? The Moon
had been hiding her self for shame, and shall not our countenance awhit be
covered therewith? The earth has quaked, and shall not our hearts seem to
tremble for fear? The veyle of the Temple has been rent in twain, and shall
our bowels remain entire? In fine, Nature has suffered, and shall we be
exempt from suffering, at the sight of our Redeemer nailed upon the Cross?

Weep, weep you mine eyes, all the water of your humide springes; power you
forth boldly the last tear on this Cross, where my Savior has spilt the
last drop of his blood. Do you imitate the Sun, in your little course, drown
your selves within the sea of your tears, if you would, like to him be arising
again from your West, and shine without him in the East of an eternal light.
And thou my heart, vnty thy self a little, from all the feelings of the
pleasures of the world, since the only roses of true contentment, are found
amidst the thorns of the Cross. The whole felicity concludes in this point,
of never having any other, then that of carrying the cross. This is the ladder
of Jacob, which serves us to mount up to Heaven with all. This is the brazen
Serpent, that cures our souls from the poison of the vanities of the world.
Without the Cross there is no pleasure, nor repose in the world. He that
caryes the cross with him, may well say, more co^fidently then Bias did, that
he caryes all his riches about him. For therein alone are comprised all the
treasures of the world; therein consists the accomplishme^t of our happiness. O
dear Cross, the only wish of my soul! O dear Cross, the sweet object of
mine eyes! O dear Cross, in which alone I put my hope! O dear Cross, upon
which alone, do I establish the foundation of all my felicities! O dear
Cross, where my wishes find their end, and my envy, its utmost limits! O dear
Cross, dear Instrument of my victory, and rich Crown of my triumph! I
pretend to nothing else in the world, but the Cross, I aba^don al for it. For
as I revive not but through it only, so will I die with it, and deliciouly
expire upon its couch. And this is the only means to be insensible of Death.

You Souls of the World, I present you with the Cross, as with a new Ark of Noah, to warrant you from the deluge of the divine Justice, and that deadfull
day of judgment. Can you refuse to kiss the wood, whereupon you have nailed
your Savior? Behold the wonder! He has exchanged your cruelty into love. For
he has affoarded you the invention, to nail his hands, that he might have
always his arms so stretched forth to embrace you withal. The like may I
say, that he caused his Feet to be so nailed, to attend you at all hours,
since every hour is he ready, in his will, to pardon you. O prodigy of
goodness! O miracle of Love! Lord grant I beseech thee, I become not
ungrateful, for so many favors done me! Teach my heart a language, wholly
divine, to thank you divinely for them; whiles I can offer you no more, for a
whole acknowledgeme^t of al, then the only grief of not having any thing
worthy of you.

The pleasure which is found in Living well, for to Dye content. CHAP. XIX.
IT is impossible to express, the pleasures of a holy Soul, its contentments
are not to be so called, its sweetness has another name, its extasyes and
rauishments cannot be comprehended, but by the self same heart which feels
them. For not to lie, it has joys wholly of Heauene it tastes the delights most
divine, and with a like grace, it carries its terrestrial Paradise with it. If
its thoughts seem to touch upon earth, it is but only for its contempt, for
anon they take their flight to heauen-wards, as the only object, which they do
aim at at all times. In fine, as they are immortal, they never regard but the
Eternity. The pains it endures, have no bitterness with them, but only in name,
the miseries do even change their quality in its presence, as if they awed its
courage. If misfortune chance to light upon it, with some sad accident or
other, it receives it as a present from Heaven, rather the^ as any disgrace of
fortune. If death seem to snatch away from it, what most it Jove's, it pays
nature the tears it owes it, and at the same very time, satisfyes reason
through generous actions with its constancy. If it loose all the goods which it
had for portion on earth, it complaynes not awhit, but of it self, while its
offenses seem to deserve a great chastizement.

On the other side, as it places not its affection on the riches of the world,
fortune can take away nothing from it, but what it is willing to loose; because
it has nothing proper, but the hope of possessing one ^ay the richest
treasures, in a Land which is wholly situated out of the Empie of Time, and
inconstancy thereof. Let it thunder, let the sea mount up to the Heavens, upon
the back of its waves; let the wars dispeople towns, and all the disasters
of the world make al together an Army to set upon it, yet remaynes it firm,
and stable as a rock in the midst of this Sea* and if it fear any thing, it
is but the fear of offending God. O sweet fear! more noble then all the
courages of the world! Thus lives it content amids the broils, whereof the
world is so full. Thus lives it most happily amids the sad accidents which land
every hour on the shore of the world. Thus enioyes it a sweet repose amids the
troubles, and continual tribulations of Mortals. It loves not health, but to
employ its life in the service of him, who has bestowed it upon it. If it
laugh, it is for the joy it has, that it never had any such beneath, since the
Redeemer had never been gathering but thorns: and if it weep, it is for the
grief of its proper miseryes, rather then for those of its body, being very
solicitous to conserve entiere, and without blemish the image and semblance of
its Creator, whose impression it had received on the first day of its being.

In fine, it is capable, neither of pleasure nor yet of sadness, but for the
only interests of its salvation, whose thoughts are ever present with it. And
is not this a sweet life? So as if Time strike the hour of its retrayt from
its first disposition to death, it deduceth a last, for to yield up it self
into the hands of him that created it. In vain does evil seek to afflict its
senses, the light of its constancy would be always appearing through the
shadows of its sad countenance. To what condition soever had it been raised
unto* it takes no care to quit the greatnesses, because it had never tied its
affections thereunto. The Sun may well arise, and set again; yet she beholds
it always with the self same eye. Its East and West are equal to it, though
they be different, attending without anxiety, the West of the torch of its
life. The labor which it has, to prepare it self for death, is not very
great, since still it has lived in this preparation. Notwithstanding as we
cannot employ all our time in so important a business, it deliciously spends the
remaynder of its life therein: It smyles to behold all the world to weep about
its bed, and being not able to speak any more to complain of their plaints,
it sighs to hear them sigh. For it suffers, not but what it sees others to
suffer. All the grief is in the body, and if it seem a little, to reflect upon
it, it is but a grief of love, with sighing in expectation of its last sigh,
for to behold the only object of its good.

Let the wife cry, the children pull their hair, and the nearest of its kyn be
carrying on their visage the sadness, which they have in their heart; let the best
friends be partners of this condolement, and every one in his fashion complayn
of the disaster so befalne him; yet she alone stands praising the heavens for
it, and blesses the day, and hour now ready to produce this last moment,
where the eternity of its glory should begin Well may death seem to make its
visage pale, but not the heart, for lo it appears in these last extremes more
refulgent then ever, like a ca^dle which is ready to go forth; it has the
voice of a dying Swan, which is able to charm all the dolours that enuirone it
round. The Devils are astonished to behold it so deuoyd of astonishment; the
force of its invincible courage* does so weaken their power, as they are
constrained to pretend nothing, to triumph at. In such sort, as with the arms
of Virtue, it caryes away the crown unto the end of the race, even dying with
the desire it has to dye, rather then of sorrow, for not living long enough.
Thus through force of the sighs of love, it sends forth at last, through a
last push of love, the last sigh from the bowels, and so flies away upon its
wings, unto the fellowship of the Angels into Heaven, where its holy thoughts
had now along time established their dwelling. O sweet dwelling! O happy death,
which conducts us thither! O welcome dwelling, and most delicious, the moment
which affoards the Eternity thereof.

The Picture of the Life and Death of a sinful Soul. CHAP. XX.
OF all the miserable conditions, whereto a man may be reduced, that same of
living in Mortal Sin, is the most unhappy and unfortunate. The Slaves in the
Galleyes are a great deal more happy, then such a one. For their bondage is
limited to a term; and that of sin to a pain of an eternal servitude. It is
impossible, a guilty man should live content, in the midst of all the pleasures
of the world, for his crime is his hangman and torture. If he be present at
ba^quets, the remembrance of his offenses is mingling of some aloes in his
delicious meats. If he quench his thirst with the sweetest nectar in the
world, the same very thought will be distilling a drop of gaul into his Cup.
If he walk into some goodly garden, the imagination of his faults being always
present with him, makes him to feel the Thorns of the Roses he admires. If he
go a hunting, the Torturer of his guilty conscience runs after him. Let him go
where he will through the world, his crime is his shadow, which follows him
throughout. Whatsoever he does, he is ever ready to think of what shall become
of him, and what fortune soever he possesses, it is never great enough to put
his spirit in repose.

The least accident that happens to him brings him to Deaths door, because
that finding himself to be guilty, he lives alwais on the point of paying for
his crime. If it rain, he imagins straight the Heavens are prepared to power a
new deluge upon him, for to punish him with. If it thunder, he persuades
himself presently, that the lightening has no other aim, then to light on his
guilty head. If the weather be fair, he sees a summer without, and a winter
within; for his brutish passions produce a continual tempest in his soul. If
fortune present him with Scepters, he regards them, but as one apprehending
the^ shortly to be taken away from him, since he deserves them not. In fine he
wanders in vain, in the labyrinth of all vanities, and returns to himself
again at all times, to confess of force, that he is the most wretched of the
world, in the most of all his greatnesses.

If he be taken with a sickness, behold him on the rack; there are not Priests
enough to be found, nor Religions to confess him, and yet knows he not what
to say. For the number of his offenses, are without number, and his troubled
memory, can but only represe^t to him, the least part of them. The disease
seems to press him hard in the mean time and his pains do put him anew on
the rack. Of all whatsoever is represented unto him, there is nothing likes
him so much, as the Physician does; but he is now in the point to try his last
remedy, after he has turned over all his old Books. The Doctors are
assembled together about his bed, but it is only to bid him Adieu, in a
language which he understands not. Behold all the comfort they give him; in so
much as to see the Physicians so assembled about him, and set by his bed in
chayres of Gravity, one would say, they were the Princes of the Senate, that
come to pronounce the sentence of Death upon this guilty wretch. He hearkens
attentively to them, without hearing them. For the fear he has of
understanding all which they say, makes him even deaf to the half. The
Syncopes, are the Hangmen, which present themselves to him, for to execute this
cruel sentence of Death. Then the hope of his curing, begins to leave him.
Behold him yet once again in the strongest pangs of his agony. He would
confess the evil he has done, and that which he endures does hinder him from
it. He would recount the history of his life, but the dolours of his present
Death, will not permit him to do it. His heart through its vehement sighs, his
eyes through their forced tears, and his Soul by its necessary sighs, do
pray his tongue, each one in its fashion, to disclose their crimes; but the same
cannot speak, the rigor of a thousand punishments makes it to be dumb.

On the other side, his spirit in the disorder wherein it finds it self, can
have no other thoughts then those of sorrow, for eternally abandoning that,
which it loves so deerly. He knows not how to express a last farewell to his
pleasures. Whatsoever represents it self to his eyes are so many objects, that
renew his pain. If he take heed unto the beams of the Sun, with peer into
his chamber window for to take their leave of his eyes; he remembers
immediately all the pleasures he has taken through help of their fair light,
in a thousand and a thousand places, where it has been a witness of those
errors of his. If the weather be foul he thinks upon that time, which he has
ill spent, imagining withal, that the Heavens being touched with compassion of
his disasters, do even weep before hand, and bewail the loss they endure of
his Soul. It seems to him, that the sound of the bells does call him to the
tomb, and that of the Trumpets unto judgment. He sees nothing about him, that
astonishes him not. He hears nothing that affrights him not. He feels nothing
but his miseryes: his tongue is all of gaul, and wheresoever he lays his hand
upon himself, he touches but the dunghill of his corruption.

If his spirit seem to return to him again, by intermission of the trance
wherein he is, he quite forgets the hope of good, through the ill he has
committed, not being able to dispose his soul to any repentance. The sight of
his friends importunes him, that of his children afflicts him, and the presence
of his wife serves him as a new addition to his sorrow. They behold him not but
weeping, and he is never strooken with other noise, then with that of the cries
and plaints of his domestickes. The Physician goes his ways out of the
chamber, to give place to the Confessor. And the one knowing not how to cure
the body, the other has difficulty to heal the soul, by reason of the
despair wherein he is entangled. Judge now to what estate must he needs be
brought. His speech; that fayles him by little and little. His sight is dim,
with his judgment, and all his other senses receive the first assaults of
Death. They present him with the Cross, but in vain, for if his thoughts be
free, he thinks but of that which he bears of force. They may cry long enough
to him to recommend himself unto God, the deafnes he has had before to his
holy inspirations does astonish him now also at this hour.

How many deaths endures he, before his death? How many dolorous sighs casts he
forth into the air, before the breathing his last? All the punishments of the
world, cannot equal that which he endures. For passing out of one little Hell of
pains, he enters into a new, which shall not have end but with eternity? What
good then would he not willingly have wrought? But his wishes are as so many
new subjects of grief in this impotency, whence he is never to see himself
delivered. Into what amazement is he brought? The Sun denies him its light,
so as if he behold his misfortunes, it is but only by the light of the
mortuary Torches, which give him light, but to conduct him to the tomb. O how
the Hour of these last extremes, draws forth in length! Each moment of his
life snatches out the heart from his bosom every moment, without putting him to
death. On which side soever he turns himself, both horror and despair beset
him round. He caryes Death in his soul, for that which he is to incur; Death
on his body, for that which he now endures; Death in his senses, since they dye
by little, and little: in so much as all his life is but a living Death, that
consumes him slowly to reduce him into ashes.

Being now brought to these streights, the wicked spirits employ the last
endeavors of their power for to carry away the victory, after so many conflicts
had. What means of resistance where there is no pulse, no motion no voice, no
tongue? His spirit is now in extremes, as well as his life; and his heart being
hardened, is now ready to send forth its last sigh in its insensibility, as if
it dyed in dying. His eyes are now no more eyes, for they see no more. His
ears may no more be called so for they hear not awhit; and all the other
senses, as parts, precede the ruin of their whole. The Soul only resists the
cruel assaults of Death, in beholding its enemies in continual expectation of
their prey; but the hour presses, it must surrender. O cruel necessity! In
fine, for to finish this bloody Tragedy, the Devils carry it away to Hell, for
recompense of the services, which it had yealded to them. And this is the
lamentable end of sinful Soul.

You Souls of the world, who live not but through the life of your pleasures,
behold the fearful Death, where the life termines. And since the heavens, the
earth, the elements and whatsoever else in nature moves and changes without
cease, do you think to find any constancy, and stability in your delights?
Know you not, that with the very same action wherewith you run along, withal
your contentments, you run unto your Death? and that during the time it self,
that Time affoards them unto you, he takes even them away from you? We loose
every hour what we possess, what care soever we take in conseruing the same.
My Ladies, Keep well your galla^t beauties from the burning of the Sun. If
that of the Sun, or of the fire, be not able to mar them, yet that of Age
and Time does ruin them; notwithstanding all the industry of Vanity, which you
have to employ about them. Put your fair Bodies into the rack of another body
of iron, to conserve the proportion thereof; yet time but derides your
inventions. For it assayles you within, and you defend your selves but without
only. You have dared the Heavens enough, with an arrogant eye; you must needs
be stooping with the head now at last, for to look on the earth, whence you
are formed. You must needs bow the neck to the yoke of your miseryes, and
resume again the first form of your corruption. In going to dancing, to
feasts, and to walk abroad, you go to Death. In vain do you command your
Coachman then to carry you to such a place, since Time, as I have said, conducts
him also that caryes you thither. In so much, as on which side soever, you
turn your selves, you approach unto the tomb.

After you have tasted all the pleasures of the world, what shall be left you of
all, but a grief of the offenses in the soul, the sad remembrance of their
privation in the memory, and this sadness in the heart, for having made it to
sigh so after your ruin? I doubt very much, least death do astonish you; but
if you never do think upon it, it will astonish you a great deal worse, when
you shall see it indeed. If to live and die, be but one and the self same
thing, make the Thought of death* while you live, so familiar to your self,
that you never think of any other thing, since you never do other thing but
die. So as if to fear it, and never to think of it, do make its visage the
less hideous, I would counsel you, to banish this Thought out of your
spirit, but so, as you be in good estate. But on the contrary, the forgetfulness
you have of it, makes it so dreadful unto you, at the least remembrance thereof
that comes into your mind, as you seem almost to be in danger of dying, by the
only fear of dying. I cannot abide the weakness of those spirits, who apprehend
an evil so much, which they cannot avoid; whereas the evil of the fear which
they have, is often times a great deal more bitter, then that which they
fear. But the only mean to be cured of this fear, is to live always in that
of God. For the stro^gest apprehension of Death proceeds from the great number
of the Offenses, which one has committed in his life.

A good man fears rather to live too long then to die too soon, because he
hopes for the recompense of his trauayles, at the end of his course; whiles the
wicked can attend but for the chastizement of his sins. So as for to banish
this fear from our soul, we had need to have banished the offenses thence.
The innocent has no fear, but for the judgment of God, and this fear is
inseparable from his love; he fears him not but through love, so as this very
fear produces conte^tment, and banisheth sadness in the mean time. I leave
you this truth to meditate upon, that a life of Roses brings forth a death of
Thorns.

Let us say now for Conclusion of this work, that if one will avoid this
manner of Death, he must always be thinking of Death. There is nothing more
sweet, then these thoughts, nothing more welcome the^ this remembrance. Without
the thoughts of Death, there is no pleasure in life: without the thoughts of
Death, there is no comfort in anoyes: without the thoughts of Death, there is
no remedy for our evils. In fine, to finish all, he who is always thinking of
Death, does think continually of the means of attaining eternal life. O sweet
thoghtes! I would not have my spirit, to be capable of a thought, but only to
think every moment of death, since it is the only good, the only
contentment, and the only Repose of life.

A goodly Consideration, and very important both for life, and death. CHAP. XXI.
I SHOULD think there were no greater pleasures in the world, then to contemn
the^ all at once; since in effect, the best spirits do never find repose, but
in the contempt thereof. I know well, there are certain chaste Pleasures, which
we cannot miss; but as the soul has its senses affected like unto the body,
we are to hinder our spirit, from mixing its feelings, with those of Nature,
ever feeble and frail, thereby not to taste its delights too deliciously. Our
judgment has been given us as a Torch, to guide our steps by our actions,
and our thoughts, in this sea of the world, wherein we are as Slaves in the
Galley of our bodies; and the pleasures we seek therein are the rocks, where
we find our shipwreck. I know well also, that we are to be strongly armed for
to defend our selves, while our proper senses do so war upon us. But in this
manner of combat, the excess of pain, produces the excess of glory, let us
break the crust to see this verity discovered.

The greatest Saints, and the wisest men have been forced to confess, after a
thousand proofs of experience, that we can not taste any manner of contentment,
without the grace of God. Thou Covetous man, in vain thou rests thy vn-rests
on the coffers of thy treasures. I deny thee to be held content, for if thou
reasonest, even reason condemns thee. If thou seruest thy self of thy
judgment to be able to do it; what argument soever thou make, it but fully
concludes against thy opinions. So as thou can never enter into the knowledge
of thy vain pleasures, without departing from that of thy self. In a word,
thou can not be a man and be content together, in thy miserable condition;
since reason, and thy contentme^t can never subsist in one subject. Thou
Ambitious man, I would lend thee wings for to fly to the heavens of fortune;
and it seems to me already, that I see thee seated in her throne; but look
what greatness soever thou possessest, thou dare not say for all that, thou
were well content, for fear the truth should happen to belly thee. And know
thou not, how Ambition, and Repose do always break fellowship, the one with
the other? That Pleasure and Fear cannot couple together? and that desires as
well as hopes do make the soul to be thirsty? Represent to thy self then, the
disquietnes which thou findst in thy greatnesses, since thy Ambition cannot
limit its aim within their fruition. How the pleasures of thy possessions are
mixed with the fear of their short durance; and that by vehemently wishing more
and more, thou makst thy self unhappy. In such sort as thou may not dare,
to call thy self happy, without flattering thy self, or rather without
blushing for shame.

You Courtiers, let me see the pictures of your felicities, and bring to light
what seems most to afford it the luster and splendor it has. I grant that
in the midst of the spring time of your life, love and fortune, with a
prodigal hand, have bestowed upon you what they had most rare, and beautiful
with them; yet would you dare to maynteyne with all this, that you are content
during the reign of your Empire. Whereas if any one have the boldness to
persuade weak spirits thereunto, let him truly recount us the history of his
pleasures. I know that he will straight be showing us some Roses, but I know
withal, that he will be hiding the Thorns under their leaves, as frail as his
contentments, though they were of the flowers of a restles remembrance,
gathered in the sad memory of things past; since delights are of the same
nature, always dying, and subject to receive their tomb, from the very same
day they first sprung up. As for the presents of Fortune, if she give them with
one hand, she takes them away again with the other. So as, her favorites are
ordinarily the most unhappy of all, because that in snatching away the goods
from the^ again which she has once bestowed upon them, she dragges them often
along, for to bury the^ under their ruins. And will you call that a pleasure?

My Dames, you have but one fair wedding day in all your life, whose feast you
do secretly celebrate in your impatie^t desire and longing hope: but will you
confess me the truth, that it is but a day of rain and tempest? For you cast
forth a thousand sighs to the winds, and power out as many tears, being so
moved through the farewell you give to your selves, whiles you give your selves
to another, without knowing, for the most part, your owner: which yet were
nothing, if the clauses of your contract did not sign you out, the death both
of the one and the other, and the incertainty also, who shall be the first. For
you must confess, that if you love your selves perfectly indeed, you dye every
hour, of the apprehension you have of an evil, which neither the one nor the
other can tell which way to avoid. I will not speak a whit of the accidents
and miseryes without number, which are inseparable to this condition; I leave
the knowledge thereof to those, who have had the experience. But I pray you to
confess freely, if you be content with the felicities that remain to you, or
no?

Thou Covetous man, return then to thy self, after thou have pulled off the
hood of thy blindness, for to publish, how the sole treasure of Grace can enrich
the soul, with all sorts of contentments; and that with out this good, are all
goods false. Thou Ambitious man, the divine Justice now puts thee on the rack,
to make thee confess this truth, that in the only possession of Grace, are
comprehended all the desirable greatnesses that are, since he that possesses
it, is the greatnest of the world. You Courtiers, all the Favors which you
seek for, are but wind and smoke. It is time now to acknowledge your vanity,
and to bid a last adieu unto the world. The Kings and Princes, whom you court
so, are even as miserable as your selves, since they can afford you but
transitory goods. Alas! for a handful of earth, will you relinquish the
pretensions you have to heaven? If you will bestow your time well, then court
you an omnipotent King, as our God is, whose Favors have no price, whose
Graces are infinite, and whose Goods are eternal, as his Glory is, wherewith
he crowns our labors.

Know you not, that his Almighty hand stays, and mooues again, when he
pleases the wheel of fortune? How this blind Goddess receives from his
providence, whatsoever she gives, and that she so serves, but as a channel to
convey both disasters and prosperities into the Earth? So as if your heart do
sometimes fetch sighs of love, after those objects of dust, do you then
command your spirits not to stand so gazing on the beauty of a river, that
glides away incessantly like its waves. For whatsoever may be seen fair in
Nature, is but a feeble ray, and a first Idea of the purest of this sovereign
and adorable Essence, wherein consists the accomplishme^t of al perfection, as
the only inexstaustible spring, from whence they issue, without spring or
beginning. Represent unto your selves, that whatsoever seems so fair to day,
shall be changing the countenance to morrow. In so much as for to find a
permament beauty, and of lovely qualityes indeed that might always abide in
its purity, we had need to acquit our selves of the worlds circuit or bounds,
and to carry our thoughts into Eternity, as to an only mansion where all
things are eternal.

This is the lesson of that great Prophet, when he cried, Lord, when shall I be
able to quench my thirst in the spring of thy eternal pleasures? In vain do
you seek for a fountain of delights, to quench the thirst of your heart
withal; for what greedines soever you have to drink, after you have drunk,
you shall find your selves more a thirst then ever; and the reason is good,
which is, that the water of this fountain, retaynes the nature of the soil
that produces the same; whence it is, that all the goods of the world are not
able to satiate the Ambition of one holy Soul, as being created to the
possession of infinite goods. After one co^tentment had, they sigh anon after
another, and so after another and another, without cease. Our spirit being
quickened with a divine object, points always its looks, beyond what it
possesses, it permits it self sweetly to be drawn like the iron, by its divine
Adamant, for to unite it self unto it, as to its end, whither it tends without
cease or intermission. In effect what would become of us, if our desires and
hopes were buried in the tomb? Such as know what it is to live, live not but
of the hope of a sweeter life, and in this sweet hope do find nothing that is
worthy of them, but the contempt they make of all things. O generous contempt
of the world, wherein consists our whole glory!

You Courtiers, I leave you to think upon it, until such time as you be
disposed to put it in practice, for to exercise withal your more hidden and
secret virtues. My Dames, you will permit me to tell you the truth. The fairest
day of your life, is that of Death. This is that nuptial day of your Soul
with its Creator, a day of pleasure, rather then of tears, since therein do
you bid an eternal Adieu unto the world, and to all its myseries. A day of
gladness, rather then of sighs, since you give your selves through love to him,
who of his goodness has afforded you al things. In the expectation of this
happy day it is, that the fairest days should be tedious to you. Never cast
your eyes upon your glass, but to count the wrinckles, which age makes to grow
by little and little on your brow, as so many presaging marks of Death
approaching.

Represent unto your selves sometimes, how all the pleasures which you have had
are passed, that those you now enjoy do pass, and that those which you are
like to taste, shall also pass away; and then imagine with your selves in what
lamentable case shall you find your selves, at the end of the course of your
life, with all the Thorns of your withered Roses? with how many assaults of
grief, shall you have your heart the^ battered? With how many alarmes the soul
affrighted? and with how many tortures shall the one, and the other be rackt?
Perform betymes what good soever you would willingly have had done at this
last hour, and take you away their power, and liberty from vpbrading you one
day, for the evil, whose pains you shall carry in that last day. It seems, as
you lived not, but to repent you at your death, for having lived so ill, not
considering the while, that slow repentances are ordinarily changed into
despair.

I bewail you, my Dames, as often as I think of the infinite number of the
vanities which do busy your spirit. How much time you bestow every day in
trimming up that dunghill of your body, as if your guilty industry, were able
to drive away the miseryes from thence? You do all what you can to make your
self beloved: and know you not that nothing is more lovely then Virtue? Do you
then purchase them altogether, so to make you beloved of all the world and not
only for a day, but even for ever. The beauty whereof you make such account is
a fadyng quality that subsists not, but in its continual change; it flies
along with you into the Tomb, but it passes more swiftly then you; for it
even gets before you by the half way. When you are arrived but to the midday
of your life, is it come to its full West. When you enter into your Autumn, it
arriues to its Winter, where it finds its ruin. Alas! that for a small number
of days, you will stand so much to please men, and be displeasing of God for a
whole Eternity? O dreadful Eternity! how profound are thy Abysses!

My Dames, as often as this guilty desire shall possess you to offend God, in
your foolish vanities, think a little of the Eternity of the pain, which is
to attend your crimes. For one moment of false, and imaginary pleasure, you put
your selves in danger of suffering eternally an infinite number of true evils
indeed. What expect you of the world? It abou^ds but with miseryes. What look
you for of Fortune* She is prodigal, but only in misfortunes. All Riches are
but of earth, all Greatnesses of smoke, and all Honors of wind, and as for the
lovely qualityes, which are affected to the body, they even die with it. In so
much as Virtue only, I tell you again, is exempt from Death. You never think
but of taking your pleasures, without considering the while, that in passing
away the time so, you suffer to slide away in have, the small remaynder of life
that is left you. In loving life as you do, you should be striving to prolo^g
your days and on the contrary you seek digressions to pass them over,
without taking any heed thereto, as if you went to slowly unto death, and that
the way to the Tomb appeared too tardy and tedious to you: wherein truly you
take pleasure to deceive your selves.

Do not so flatter your selves, my Dames, you must needs die, there is nothing
in you that dies not every hour. Your fair golden hair, which you daily so
put unto the torture of the iron, does even die by little and little with you.
For in changing its appearance, it becomes of the color of Death. The wrinckles
of age do soil the polished glass of your brow, for to mar its beauty and
grace. Your fair Eyes, which I will here term two Suns, for to please you,
do run like to the Sun, without cease unto their last West, whither Death
conducts the^ through the help of their proper light. The Lyllies of your
Cheeks, do wither every hour, and the Gilliflowers of your lips do fade every
moment. The Iuory of your teeth corrupts with the breath of time, and of age.
The snow of your Neck melts, and all the lovely qualityes of your spirit, wax
old in their continual decay.

I admit you to be more beautiful then Helena; Helena is no more, she is even
passed away like a flower, and you are just in the same way of her ruin. Her
charms did ravish the whole world, and your bayts subdue the best part of
mortals: but as all is dead with her, so all dies with you. The time of her
Empire is expired, that of your Reign runs always away. She has been, she
has lived, they have admired her with astonishment, they have honored her
with sacrifices, but all the Temples of her glory are demolished, all the
Aultars are ruined, all the Idolatours are reduced to ashes, and scarcely
remaynes there any memory of these things, since even the very age, which has
seen them, is buried with them in the abysses of the passed.

You must dye, my Dames, and all those graces, wherewith you captive Spirits,
shall never obtain any favor of Death. You must dye, and all those
enticements, wherewith you ravish spirits, have not allurements enough for to
violate the laws of nature. You must dye, and all those charms, where with
you captive souls, have not the power to charm death in its fury. You must
dye and all those pretty graces that make you so admirable, cannot exempt you
from the Tomb, nor corruption. You must dye, and all your perfections together
cannot hinder the hour of your death for a moment only. You must dye, and to
speak more plainly to you, your golden hair must needs perish; your eyes so
clear and fair must needs make a part of the dunghill of your body. The
delicate skin of your face, must needs discover its putrifyed bones, and all
your beautyes together by changing the countenance, shall be taking the form of
dust, since you are nothing but dust: Nor do I fear yet to lie, since in
effect you are nothing. You must dye, and all your rare Coulises serve but
only to consume you; all your Physicians have no medicine for to cure the
malady of your mortal condition. You must dye, and therefore are you careful
of your health in vain, since age pardons not any; yea you dye living, and do
you what possibly you can do, the term of your life is always slyding. You
must dye, nor do all the moments of the day tell you of any other thing. The
hours continually strike this verity in your ears, and the Sun never sets,
without telling you, in its fashion, how it only foreruns the time of the
setting of your life.

We must dye, I say, at last; for we dye with out cease; and after so many
sighs of miseryes, we must cast forth to the wind, the last of our mishaps. We
must dye; the sentence is given, the execution is made, and the same continues
every day, before our eyes, whence they are so accustomed to weep. We must dye,
but since there is nothing more certain, we must always be in disposition to
die at all hours, since we dye every moment. We must dye, but we are to revive
eternally in glory, since we are created, but for it only. We must dye, but we
must be reborne again from our corruption, for not to dye for ever. Let us die
boldly then, since needs we must, but let us dye in innocence, for to shun the
death of death. We must dye, but we must rise again before that soueraygne
Judge, who is to give us the recompense of our trauayles, or else to impose the
pain of our crimes upon us. We must dye, but it is but for once, and of that
only moment depends our whole unhappiness, or felicity. We must dye, but we
must yield account of the life past, to receive the guerdon, or pain which is
due thereto for ever. We must die, and to deliver us happily from the danger of
this sweet necessity, must we live well. You must dye, you Souls of the world;
each one seems to carry his tomb with him. Laugh you always, sing continually,
be you every day at your banquets, and take your sports in a continual chase
of diverse pleasures, after all which notwithstanding must you needs die, and in
this cruel separation of you from your selves, your laughings change to
tears, your songs of gladness into lamentable cries of sorrows, and all your
banquets, and pleasures into bitter plaints, which torment your heart, and put
your soul upon the rack.

There might be some manner of satisfaction perhaps, to hear the discourses
which men of the world do hold, if their blindness the while do not afford
mattter of compassion. One takes pains to recount all the pleasures he has
taken, during his life; another keeps account of the good fortunes he has
had, a third assures us that he has possessed heertofore a great number of
treasures; and a fourth endeauours to persuade as many as will believe him,
that he has been on the top of the greatest dignityes. What discourses of
smoke are these? For he that has tasted so many contentments, has nothing
left him, but the sad remembrance of the having once had the possession of
them. Another, who yet now thinks on the good fortunes which once he has had,
makes himself a new unhappy, through the memory of his passed felicities. He
that casts his eyes on the ashes of his riches, insensibly consumes himself,
in the self same fire that consumed them. And another that reares up his head
aloft, for to behold through his tears, the place from whence he fell, even
loses the force for ever to rise again, notwithstanding that it be good for
him, to sleep often, so to be a framing of these dreams. For eue^ as all
those pleasures, and goods are slid, and vanished away, with the things that
seemed the most durable; so all the contentment, and all the goods which may
any ways appertain unto us, shall fly away; and the worst is, that we run
after them, for to sign out our Tomb in their Sepulcher.

Solomon has had so many pleasures; Cresus passessed so much riches; Alexander
received so great honors, and Helena so many praises for her incomparable
beauty. But Solomon is no more but dust, with all his riches; Alexander, but
earth with all his honors; nor Helena any more then corruption, with all her
graces.

Trust you not then to your pleasures, you great Kings, for their Roses shall
wither, and their Thorns endure for ever. Put not your hopes in Riches, since
they are of earth as well as you. Despise you Honors since all glory is due to
Virtue only. And you, my Dames, employ from henceforth all your cares and
labors, to deck your Souls, rather then your bodies, if you will have Angels
enamoured, and men to be emulous, of you. For so every one shall strive for
glory, to imitate you in this glorious enterprise. This is the counsel I give
you; and with it, will I finish my Book.

The end of the svveet Thoughts of Death.
THOVGHTS OF ETERNITY. Distributed into four Parts.

To wit The Triumph of Death. To wit The Joys of Paradise. To wit The
Infernal Pains. To wit The Hour of Death.
Written in French, by Sieur de la Serre: and translated into English.

Permissu Superioru^, M. DC. XXXII.

THOVGHTES OF Eternity.
The Triumph of Death.
O HOW sweet is it, to think continually on eternal things! All flies away
before our eyes, and in the course of their fight by little and little, life
escapes away from us. The Sun does well to rise every day anew; the moments
of its Reign are measured within the order of Nature; It must of necessity
follow the decay of time, whereof it is the dyall; and after it has presided to
all the unhappy accidents here beneath, it lends the light of its torch at
last to its proper ruin. Though the stars of the night appear thick in the
Heavens, with the same aspect, always glittering in wonders, yet can they not
choose but wax old; every instant robbes them of somewhat of their durance,
since they shine within Time, for not to shine within Eternity. Though the
heavens, being quickened by the sovereign Intelligence of the Primum mobile,
renew their paces every year within the round spaces of their Circles, their
turnings yet are counted; and though they return again by the same way, they
incessantly approach to the point that is to termine their Course.

The Fire which entertaynes it self in its Globe, insensibly deuoures it
self; for that Region of its dwelling is a part of the body which consumes it
self. The Air, that takes up all, yet can not fill up the voydnesse of the
Tomb which the last instant of time prepares for it. Though the Phoenix-King
of its subjects find a second Cradle within its first Sepulcher, yet at last
another self, shall arise again from its Ashes, though yet unlike, since it
shall not have the same power to communicate the same virtue to the Species of
its of spring. So as it shall dye at last through sorrow of its sterility.
Though the Serpent shift the skin never so much, yet does its Prudence extend
no further, whiles Age falls a laughing at its cunning, in devouring up its
being.

The Trees that do every year wax young again, continually grow old. The
Spring, the Summer, and the Autumn, are of force indeed to make them change
the countenance, but not their Nature: and the Brooks affrighted with this
continual vicissitude, go flying into the bosom of their Mother, believing
they are shrouded but in vain: for the Ocean carries their Wrack within the
valley of its waves. The Seasons growing from the end of one another, as the
day from the end of night, shall be disioyned, and severed by a new Season, which
with it shall bury all the others. The fairest mayster-peeces of Art, forasmuch
as they are laid upon the ground, pay cotinuall homage to the ruin of Time,
as he that presides within his Empire: witness those wonders of the world,
which subsist no more then in the memory of men, for a sign only of what the
famous Athens, the triumphant Carthage, the proud Troy have been heretofore,
they are now buried so deep in their ruin, as one can hardly believe they have
ever been. They go seeking the^ in historyes, but the memory of their reign
is so old, as they are no otherwise found, then in Fables only.

Let us speak of diverse People rather the^ of Towns. That great world of men
which the Earth has borne a thousand times on its bosom, and the Sea upon its
waves, was drowned at last in the river of Xerxes tears, for which he prepared
a tomb an hundred years before. The Kings have followed their subjects in
this common shipwreck, and all the Pourtraits of Apelles, and the Statues of
Lysippus, and of Phidias have run like hazard with them by this inviolable
necessity, that the shadow ever follows the body. Well might Alexander cause
himself to be surnamed Immortal, but yet purchased not Immortality. He took
the pains to seek out another world, and in the midst of his Triumphs had
need of no more, then seven foot of earth to be buried in.

Cyrus would feign have it believed, that he was Invincible, yet could Death
know well how to find the defect of his Arms, like as that of Achilles. Nero
would needs be adored; but he was sacrificed in punishment of his crime. Cresus
the richest of all men carried nothing into his To^be, but this only grief of
having had so much Treasure, and so little Virtue; his riches exempted him not
^ whit from the evils whereof our life is full, and at the end of his term he
dyed as others, with the Poverty incident thereunto. Caesar, Pyrhus and Pompey,
who had so many marks of Immortality, had the worse sort of Death, since they
al three were unhappily constrained to render their lives to the assaults of a
most precipitous Death. The which does let us see very sensibly, how things
that seem to us most durable* do vanish as lightning, after they have given us
some admiration of their being.

The wise men, as well as the valiant (all slaves of one and the self same
fortune) have paid the same Tribute to nature. Plato, Socrates and Aristotle
may well cause a talk of them, but that is all; for with their learning they
have yet been ignorant of the Truth. They have loved their memory a great
deal more then themselus, following a false opinion for to please that of
others, wherewith they were puffed up in all their Actions. They are passed
away notwithstanding, and their divine Spirits have never been able to obtain
this dispensation of the Destinies to communicate their divinity to bodies
which they have viuified: so as there is nothing left of them, but a little
dust* which the air and wind have shared between them.

The seven Sages of Greece are dead with the reputation of their worldly
wisdom, which is a Folly before God. They were mere Idolatours of their
wordly Prudence, which is a Virtue of the phantasy, more worthy of blame, then
praise, when it has but Vanity for the object. As many Philosophers as have
studied to seek the knowledge of natural things, without lifting the eye a
little higher, have let their life run into a blindness of malice, and have
left nothing behind them but a sad remembrance of their pernicious errors.

Let us speak of those marvelous works wherein Nature takes pleasure to give
forth the more excellent essays of her power; I would say, of those beauties
of the world, which ravish hearts before they have means to present them to
them: As of a Helena, of a Cleopatra, of a Lucretia, of a Penelope, and of a
Portia. All these beauties truly were adorable in the East, even as the
Persians Sun; but in the South the fervor of their Sacrificers began to
extinguish; and in the West they destroyed the very Aultars that were erected
to their glory. Their Baytes, their Charms, and their Attractions following in
their Nature the course of Roses, have lasted but a day of the Spring, they
have vanished with the Subject whereunto they were tied, nor does there remain
any more of them, then a mere astonishment of their short durance. Thus it
is, that the best things run readily to their end: Time deuoures all, and his
greedines is so great, as it cannot be satisfied but with devouring it self.

Who were able to number the men to whom the Sun has lent its light since
the birth of the world, and by that means keep account of the proud Cities,
of the magnificent Palaces, whereof Art has given the Invention to men, to
the shame of Nature: the imagination is too seely to reach unto this But. And
yet how great soever the Name thereof be, the shadows of their bodies appear
no more to the light of our days; the steps of their foundations, and the
memory of their being are buried within the Abysses of Time, and nothing but
Virtue can be said to be exempt from Death. All things of the world having
learned of Nature the language of change, never speak in their fashion, but of
their continual vicissitude. The Sun running from his South to its West,
seems to preach in its language nothing else unto us, but this cruel
necessity. which constraynes it to fly repose, and to co^mence without cease,
to warpe the lightsome web of days, and length of Ages. I admire the Ideas
of that Philosopher, whiles he would mantayne that all created things do find
their beginning within the concauity of the Moon, without doubt the
inconstancy of this Star afforded him those thoughts, since every thing
subsisting here beneath, is subject to a continual flow and ebb.

The Heavens tell us, in running round their circles, how they pull all with
them. The Stars illumine not the night, but to the coming of the last, which
is to extinguish their light. The Elements, as opposits, reygne not but within
the time of the truce which nature afforded them, since the ruin of the Chaos;
and their emnity therefore is yet so great, as they are not pleased but with
destruction of all the works they do. If they demand the Rocks and Forests
what they are doing, they will answer, they are a counting their years, since
they can do nothing but grow old. The fairest Springes, and the youngest
Brooks publish aloud with the language of their warbles, and of their sweet
murmur, that every thing in the world inseparably pursues the paces of its
Course; yea the Earth it self which is immovable, as the Center where all
concludes, being not able to stir, to fly far from it self, lets it self to
be devoured by the Ocean, the Ocean by Time, and Time by the soueraygne decrees
which from all Eternity have limited its durance.

S. Augustine endeavoring to seek out the sovereign God within Nature,
demanded of the Sun, if it were God; and this Star let him see, that it
borrowed its light from another Sun without Eclypse, which shined within the
Bower of Eternity. He made the like demand of the Moon, whose visage, always
inconstant, made answer for it, and assured this holy Personage, that it had
nothing divine, but light, within it, which yet it held in homage of the Torch
of day. He enquired of the Heavens the self same thing, but their motion
incompatible with an essence purely divine, put him out of doubt.

How many are there seen of these feeble spirits who seek the soueraygne God
within Greatnesses? but what likelihood is there to find it there? Thrones and
Empires subsist not, but in the spaces which Fortune affords them; her bowl
serves them as a foundation. Alas! what stability can we establish in their
being? Crowns have nothing goodly in them but the name only; nor rich but
appearance: for if they knew how much they weighed* and if the number of cares
and thorns which are mingled with the Rubies and Pearls wherewith they are
enriched could be seen, the most unhappy would be trampling them underfoot to
avoid the encounter of new misfortunes. Kings and Princes are well the greatest
of the Earth, but yet not the happiest; for that their Greatness marks their
ruin in their Eminency, and the Laws of the world persuade us to believe,
that great Misfortunes are tied to great Powers.

Whence it is that great Monarchs do never seem to resent little dolours, nor
suffer any thing with feeble displeasures. The least storm with comes upon
them, is a kind of ship wrack to their resentments; all their wounds all
mortal, they cannot fall but into precipices; and the crosses of their Fortune
make them to keep company with Job on the dungill. Let them tread Cloth of
Gould under their feet, as Tiberius did; let them satiate their hunger with
pearls as did Marke-Antony; let them metamorphize the feelings of their
Palaces like to a starry Heaven, as Belus King of Cyprus; and with the help of
Art let them hold the seasons at their beck for their contentments, as
Sardanapalus: notwithstanding needs must these Magnificences, and these
Pleasures vanish before them in an instant, to let them see the weakness of
their Nature, since the inconstancy of Time is annexed to all that which
subsists here beneath. In such sort, as their Greatnesses, and delights do
insensibly glide away with life; and though their reign has been full of
flowers, the remembrance thereof brings forth but thorns.

If Kings establish the foundation of their greatnesses upon their Crowns, let
them cast their eyes upon their figures, round and ever moving, and thereby
shall they know the instability thereof. And then besides, it is no great matter
to be able to command a world of people, if they make their laws absolute,
through force of Reason, rather then that of Tyranny. There is a great deal
more honor to merit a Crown then to possess it, which made Thales Melesinus
say that a virtuous man enuoyed all the riches of the world, if virtue be the
greatest treasure of it. So that if they trust in their Scepters to defend
themselves from the strokes of Fortune, they consider not the while she is able
enough to snatch them out of their hands, and cruel enough to metamorphize
them into a sheephooke, and to reduce them to such a state, as shall move Pity
rather then Envy.

What vanity were it for one to have a Scepter in the hand, and a Crown upon
the head, if with all these marks of Greatnesses he approches to the Tomb, to
bury up the Glory of it? What pleasure to see the greatest part of the world to
be under him, if they have altogether the self same way of Death? The great
ones run as swift as the little, in this carriere, where Miseries and
Misfortunes accompany our steps. How is it possible, that man which is but dust
and ashes, can find assurance in Greatnesses? Ah! What say you then, is it not
well known that dust and ashes are so much the more subject to be carried away
with the wind, as they are set in a higher place? The Mountains are always
environed with precipices, and thunders never turn their faces, but to the
highest tops. So as, they who apprehend a Fall, should clip the wings of their
Ambition, for not to fly too high. But if one would seek for Greatnesses, it
were necessary to be in virtue. The Magnificences of Darius his Army served but
as a funeral pomp to his Death. The Preparations to his Triumph were the
instruments of his Overthrow. In so much as the Laurels of his Hopes crowned
him not, but in the Tomb, in sign that in dying he had vanquished all the
mishaps of his life. So do we see the Glory of the world to fly before our eyes
with such swiftnes, as we can hardly follow it, through the amazement wherein
she has left us.

I admire the last thoughts of Celadine* when as he ordained, that after his
Death they should cause his shirt to be showed to the whole Army, and that he
who carried it should cry aloud, Behold here that which the greatest of the
world seems to carry from the world. This valiant Captain knew the verity of
his miseries by the vigill of his Shipwreck, seeing that of all his Treasures
he could carry away with him but the value of a Shirt. This is the share of the
greatest Kings. Nature thinks good to afford them Scepters in the cradle, and
she must rob the^ in the Sepulcher. And howbeit they are borne as little Gods
on Earth, yet stick they not to dye like other men; so as if they differ in
the manner of living, they are all equal in the necessity of dying.

S. Lewis would rest upon a bed of Ashes before his Death, to let us see, that
he was but Ashes; yet is it to be considered that the belief which he had,
proceeded from the divine Fire wherewith he was inflamed; and resenting in that
manner the divine flames, by little and little he went consuming of his life;
he would become ashes upon ashes, both through love and humility. David did
charge himself with a sack of Ashes, to diminish the flash of his
Greatnesses, and the trouble that possessed him. The knowledge of himself
persuaded him, to serve himself with this cunning, showing forth without, what
was within. His Flesh covered his ashes for to cover his defects, and he would
have his Ashes to cover his flesh, for to discover the miseries of his Nature.

When I consider how the greatest of the Earth, are of Earth, and that all
their Riches, and all their Greatnesses may not be had but in flying toward
the Center of their ruin, where they finish with them; I cry out, as that
Philosopher did, how the world is a Body of smoke, which the Air of Time
disperseth by little and little: for the eyes behold, quite through their
tears, the continual decay of the best objects, and they can hardly be known
within their inconstancy, so different are they from themselves. It is a
pleasure to read the Histories of Ages past, because all the wonders which
appear upon the Theather of their Reign, are but dreams, and vain Idea's
that subsist not but by the opinion of those that will lend credit unto them.
It were in vain to seek Rome at this day within Rome, when scarce can be
found within the Temple of memory, that of the ruin of its Aultars. Tyber only
which is always a flying, has remained stable, and permanent. The golden
Palace of Nero, the Stoues of Diocletiant, he Bathes of Antoninus, the
Sephizone of Seuerus, the Colossus of Julius, and the Amphitheater of Pompey;
all these proud wonders have not been able to resist the encounters of a first
Age; and the second has caused the day of their ruin to spring with it. So as
the Laborers, the works, and their proprietaries have followed the lot of the
decay, which was natural to them. If they enquire what are become of those
magnificences of Cyrus, those po^ps of Mark-Antony, those prosperities of
Alexander, and those greatnesses of Darius; I shall answer with that
Philosopher, that they have passed away like a wave without leaving any sign
of their being behind the^.

Philip, that great King of Macedon, gave in charge to one of his Pages to
awake him every morning, with the sweet harmony of this discourse, forsooth, To
remember that he was man, and by consequence subject to death. This Generous
Prince was afraid to be dazeled by the flash of Fortune, and to forget himself
in the presence of his Greatnesses, which therefore made him to impose this law
upon himself, of musing every day on the Miseries of his condition, for fear
least forgetfulness should convince him of this vanity, which ordinarily is
annexed unto great prosperities. He set open his ears to the sound of this
verity, that he, and al his Greatnesses were nothing else but dust, and that the
cruel necessity of dying was continually occupied in building him his Tomb, to
bury there with him both his Glory, and his Fortune. Remember, that you are
Man, said the Page to him, or to say better (least yet the name of Man may
seem to flatter you) that you are a little Corruption shut up within a skin of
flesh, quickened with a little breath of life, whose light may be extinguished
with the least wind; you are, notwithstanding all that, the greatest of Men,
but yet are not your Greatnesses exempt from Death, nor the Miseries that
forerunne its ariuall.

Remember that you are man, and that your Scepter and your Crown shall not
ransom you from the Tomb. Remember that you are man, subject to a great deal
more disasters, then the Heaven has Stars, and the sea Rocks. Remember that
you are man, that is to say, the shutle-cocke of Fortune, and brought into so
deplorable an estate, as you can afford but matter of Pity in consideration of
your Miseries. Remember that you are man, to serve as pasture one day to the
worms, and as matter to the air and wynd for to play with your dust, as with
a subject proper to their sports. Remember that you are man, yet a slave of
this sovereign, and absolute power, whose Scepter and Crown you hold in
homage, not knowing the limits of the time of your Reign. Remember that you
are man; it may be for an instant, or else for an hour, or yet for a day; the
which should make this remembrance always present to you, how your condition
is mortal and transitory. You are man, dying without cease, and running
without intermission toward the Tomb, withal things of the world.

This great King was afraid to wander within the Labyrinth of his Greatnesses,
and this fear of his was founded upon the reason of humane weakness, wherewith
we are all borne. He saw himself raised upon the highest Throne of Fortune,
with the power to command a world of people as tributaries all of his
Authority? His Arms always victorious found no resistance but in sight of
Humility. His enemies envious of his good hap would change both their hatred
and their envy into admiration. So as being accomplished with the sweetest
prosperities which are found in life, he feared with reason the shifting of the
wheel, and justly apprehended the turning of the Medall; as he was most
cunning in the knowledge of the maxims of the world, which had taught him by
experience, how Tempests attend a calm upon the waters, and on the land
griefs do succeed contentments. Hence it was, that he took such pleasure in
the acmonishment of the Page, when as every morning he so made him, to remember
that he was Man, and that it was time to rise, to look into the accidents
wherewith our life is full. This great Prince is dead in musing upon Death, and
he that advertised him so, pursued full near the paces of his course. The
King, the Scepter, the Crown, the Riches, the Greatnesses, the kingdom and
all his subjects together are vanished from our eyes, and are slid into the
Abysses of Time, where things that seemed most durable to us, are quite buried.

Nabuchodonozor led the Princes of Jerusalem as prisoners into Babylon, but the
Iaylour, the Prisoners, and the Prison it self are ingulfed within the
nothing. The Emperor Maximilian caused his Coffin to be carried before him,
taking much pleasure to behold the house, where he was to make so long
soiourning. Away then with all these vain Greatnesses of the world, since they
so post away like a Torrent, since they melt like snow, and since they pass
like a lightning. All those, who now are their Idolatours, shall one day
sacrifice themselves with grief, for having run so long time after those
vain shadows: for as many as love them, love not themselves; all those who
gape after them are enemies of their proper senses, forcing by an extreme
Tyranny their will to run the way of precipices. The stairs that serve to mount
up by, have the same use in descending; so as from the highest top of Thrones
and Empires, there is seen no other way then that of the fall. By those ways
of Greatness they mount not up to heaven: the glory of the Earth shuts up its
course within the earth; whence it comes that the Palms and Laurels, which
Honor does prodigally share to men, do fade and wither, how green soever, in
the same soil where they began to spring.

Well may they reckon up the Crowns which Alexander. purchased with his
combats, but not let us see their matter, since all is dead with him. They
speak much of Scipio's triumphs, but that is all* for time has imposed
silence to the Oracles of all the Muses that published his renown. Let them
bring forth hardly if they can, upon the Theater of the world the happyest
Monarch of the Ages past If Hanniball appear the first, they shall seem to
represent him, but as after having been Conqueror of a world of men, he was
vanquished by his own vices, and consequently reduced to such a point of
infamy and misfortune at once, as they talk rather of his defeats then of his
triumphs. If Pompey appear after him, they shall consider how his disasters
defaced the luster of his first prosperities. If Caesar come in his rank, they
shall mark how the Thorns of his death did wither the Roses of his life. The
great Pyrrhus cannot appear but overwhelmed with the burden of his
misfortunes, through the blow of a stone, or rather by a heap of earth in
sign that his greatnesses; and his Tropheys were to be buried in the earth by
a relation of the nature of this Element, with that of his Glory. Nero may
here appear with splendor during those five years of his raygne, but so
remembered, as that having caused his Statues to be adored, he was tra^pled
under foot in punishment of this vanity. Parmenides enjoyed a calm of life,
but he found rocks and tempests in his Death by the poison that was given him.
Pelosidas was happy in his Spring, in his Summer, and in his Antumne, but the
Winter of his old age made him resent a great deal of more miseries, then he
had tasted pleasures in his younger years. Marke-Antony was raised to so high
a degree of Honor, as he stood in compete^cy with his brother-in-Law about the
Crown of the whole world at once; and yet notwithstanding his miseries made
him an homicide of himself, through a stroke of despair. Maximus came to the
Empire from the lowest degree of a servile condition, but from the time that he
was on the ridge of Greatness, did Fortune make him to desce^d so low, by the
same degrees he mounted up with, as his Misfortunes had no relation with his
Prosperities. Thus passes the glory of the world, leaving a great deal more
astonishment behind, then ever it afforded admiration.

If a great Architect should seem to persuade us to believe, that our dwelling
house were on the point of falling, and that we were in danger to be buried in
its ruins; I would imagine with my self, we should live always in pain, to
avoid the effects of his presages, seeking with all solicitude the means to
eschew those perils. So as if I turn the Meddall, it will appear, this
tottering, and ruinous house to be nothing else, then that of the world, and
whereof that great Architect, who has laid the first foundations, has
affoarded us the truth of this assurance, that it shall fall to ruin very
soon. The Heaven, and the Earth shall pass away. What solidity then can we
establish here beneath in this soil, as well of Poverty as of Infamy, since
it shakes under our feet through its continual vitissitude? The ruins thereof
appear without cease before our eyes, and in the course of its deficiency, our
life pursues the same way. And nevertheless with what blindness do we fall a
sleep, in the ship of our deliciousnes, not considering how it floats upon the
stormy sea of the world, as abundant in shipwrackes as the land of Mishaps. We
must never turn away our eyes from the object of Inconstancy, since it is
natural to all that which has subsistence here beneath. The Monarchy began
with the Assyrians; It passed to the Persians; from the Persians to the
Macedonians; from the Macedonians to the Romans, and at this day the Empire is
in Germany. In so much, as after that this so famous, and illustrious a Crown,
shall have run through the four corners of the earth, it shall resolve into
earth, following the course of those that shall have possessed the title, either
by right of hazard, or by the right of Birth. So as, if Heaven and Earth do
pass, whatsoever shall bear the image of the creation, is co^prized within
this revolution of Ages, where all concludes in a last end. There is nothing so
great in the world, as the Heart which contemnes all Greatnesses. Time, as
Master of all which is in Nature, lets forth Crowns and Scepters to Kings; to
some for a day, to others for a month, to some others for a year, and to
others for more; but after the term is expired, it gives no more days; one
succeds in the place of another* under one and the self same Law of condition.
Let the infinite number of Kings here present themselves that have raygned
upon Earth; and if every one has had his Crown, it may likewise be said, that
each has had his Tomb.

Then seek not Greatnesses, my Soul, but in virtue, and in the glorious
contempt of things of the Earth. Thou see how Magnificences have not charms
but for a day, their glittering fades with their light, and what foundation
soever they have, they carry in their being the Necessity of their ruin. To
what end should thou raise thy Ambition upon Thrones, if they be States of
unhappiness, and inconstancy? Envy not Kings, their Crowns, nor Scepters, since
it is the title of a transitory glory. Felicity co^sists not, for to rule with
Empire, but rather to find repose of life in the condition wherein he is borne.
And what more sweet repose can one look for, then that of desiring nothing in
the world? This is a pleasing pain to be always in unrest, to find that
sovereign good which we seek for; I would say that Eternity, where delights
are durable in their excess. When thou should be exalted above all the
Greatness of the Earth; what happiness, and what contentement would be left thee,
since the Time of their possession glides without respit, with the pleasures
where with they are quickened: In such sort as if at the rising of the sun
thou receyuest Sacrifices in homage, at the setting thou shall find thy self
stripped by Fortune, or by Death. Fix not thy thoughts then, but on the objects
which hold touch with Time; nor seek thou ever to run after things that fly
away. Thy immortal nature cannot eye but Eternity; sigh then incessantly after
its Glory, if thou will one day have it in possession.

There be some who seek their repose, and all their pleasure in Riches, as if
Gould had this Virtue to eternize their contentments. Set not thy heart upon
things of the world, says the Apostle. When the Poets would speak of Riches,
they put before us the Gould of the rivers of Hebrus, and Paectolus, to let us
see how they fly away from our eyes, as the waters. Put case a man should
possess all the treasures of the earth, yet should he not seem to be richer
awhit for all that, since he were but the guardian, and not the owner of those
treasures. Riches consist not in possessing much, but rather in contenting ones
self with a little. Cresus could never satisfy his covetous desire during his
life, which induced his enemies to fill his Body with the gould wherewith he
could not fill his Soul. What Folly to seek Eternity in Riches, where is
ordinarily found but Death. This very man here made account to stuff his
Coffers with Gould and Silver, and knew at last, that his Treasures were so
many fatal Instruments that served for nothing but to take away his life; so
as being deceived in his hopes, he became sollicitous to conserve very charily
the means of his loss, and of his ruin. He therefore that goes to seek for
the Riches of the East, puts himself to the mercy of the waves; and in seeking
the repose of his life approaches so near to Death, as he is distant from it
no more than the thicknes of the shipboard. What feebleness of humane Spirit,
to put in hazard whatsoever one holds most dear on Earth, for the purchase of
a little Earth! I had rather a great deal be Job on the dunghill, then Cresus
on the woodpile; for the one flouted at Fortune in his miseries, and the other
had recourse to Solon, to repent himself for not having followed the way of
Poverty, rather then that of Riches, since the latter led him to Death.

Crates the Theban considering that he floted without cease within this vast
sea of the world, despised Riches, for fear to suffer Shipwreck with so heavy
a freight. The Wheel may well run about, but can never get forth of the lymits
of its Circle: so likewise man may well travail, and run over the world to
heap up treasures, but he fetches the turn only of the Circle of his life the
while; of necessity most the Ship be landing at this last port of the
Sepulcher, where he finds himself as poor, as when he entered into the cradle.
I know not for whom the Richman trauayles, for before the journey of his
travail be finished, his days are run out, and being on the point to reap
the fruit of his passed pains, death gathers those of the repose of his life.
The Mercinary souls who lend forth their conscience to Interest, instead of
their Money* sell, as in told Coin, the portion they pretend in Heaven, for a
little Earth. Blind as they be, they spin the web of their captivity, and forge
the Arms which are one day to revenge the enormity of their crimes. Abused
souls! they consider not how all the Gould of the world is yet now in the
world howbeit the greatest part thereof has been possessed by an infinite
number of Mortals, and so shall leave them behind them as others, how rich
soever they be now, without carrying ought else into the Tomb, but grief for
not having made so good use of them, as they should.

To what point of misery, was reduced the impious Richman of the Gospel in a
moment, after he had possessed an infinite number of Treasures? He behoulds
himself in estate of begging a drop of water for to quench his thirst. To what
end served all his pleasures past, but to augment his present pains? He
employed his Riches to purchase Hell, and all his goods to gain the evil he
endures. O humane Folly! To put ones self in hazard to loose Eternity for
enjoying of a fading Treasure! Good is not good, but as permanent; and yet
look they after transitory delights, that subsist not but in flying. Demand
they of Cyrus, what has he done with all his Riches, and he will answer, he
has left them in the soil that brought them forth. Xerxes has enjoyed the^
as well as he, and as he, so has he borne no part thereof into his Sepulcher.
They may cause monuments to be built to their Memory, but Time that deuoures
all, has wrought new Tombs, for their Tombs; in such fort, as if yet there
be memory of their death, it is but only by reason of their life. They make a
question, which of the two was more rich, either Alexander or Diogenes, the one
whose Ambition could not be bounded with the whole extent of the Earth; and the
other whose desire and hopes were shut up in the space of his Tub. For me, I do
hold with Diogenes, since he is the richest who is best content.

I could never yet imagine the pleasure which Caligula took to wallow upon
Gold; for if the luster of that metal, contented his eyes, he might have
beheld himself a far of, since the eye requires a distance proportioned to the
force, or feeblenes of its looks; but deceived as he was, he considered not
the while how this Gould, and He, differed not awhit, but only in color, since
they were both of Earth: And in effect they can not authorize its pleasure, but
through the relation which was there of the nature of the one, with that of the
other. The Poets represent to us how the Goulden fleece was guarded by a
Dragon, like as the Goulden Aples of Hesperides; and the Moral which may be
gathered from these Fables, is nothing else but the danger, and pain which is
inseparable from the conquest of Treasures.

The Historians observe, that in all the Countries where this metal abounds,
the inhabitants are so poor, as they have scarce a ragge of linen to cover
their nakedness withal. What may we imagine in contemplation of this Verity,
but that all the Gould of the Earth cannot tell how to enrich a man while the
riches of the world are borne and dye in a poverty worthy of compassion? Then
seek not, my Soul, other Riches, then those of Eternity. Thou can not tell
how to buy heaven withal the gold of the earth; and without the enjoying of
its felicities, all goods are counterfeit, and al Sweetnesses but full of
Bitterness. Imagine thee now to live under the Reign of a goulden Age, and that
through an excess of Fortune thou treadest under foot all the Pearls of the
Ocean, and all the goulden harvest of the Indies. And not to loose thy self in
this imagination, consider the estate of this felicity, and taste in conceyt, a
part of the pleasures which thou were to possess, if effects should answer to
thy thoughts, and then boldly confess with the Wiseman, how all these
transitory goods are treasures of Vanity, and that in the just pretensions
thou have to an Eternal glory, all these atoms of Greatness can serve thee no
more, but for object of thy contempt.

Suppose thou were the absolute Mistress of the world, what good could thou
hope for in the fruition thereof, if all be replete with evils? Crimes have
Temples there, and Vices have Aultars. All the Idols are of goulden Calves,
and such as make profession to follow Virtue, are within the order of a malady
of a contagious Spirit, according to the common opinion. So as, through a Law
of Time, the most laudable Actions are subject to reproaches. Leave then all
the goods of the Earth to the Earth, since thou art not borne for them, and
seek as a pledge in the sweet thoughts of Eternity, for the accomplishme^t of
thy delights. The world is not able to satiate thy desires, since it has
nothing in it, that is not transitory. And howbeit, it be sustained in its
inconstancy, it leaves not to wax old in changing, and to ruin it self by
little and little, in ruyning all things. Think never then but of Eternity.
Speak not but of Eternity. Let thy desires, and thy Hopes regard but Eternity.
Let always Eternity be in thy memory, and the contempt of the world within thy
heart. If thou be capabel of Hatred, be it but for the Earth; and if thou
be capable of Love, be it but for Heaven, since it is the mansion of
Eternity.

There are others who seek their contentment in magnificent Palaces as if
they were shelters of proof, against disasters and misfortunes. Charles the
VIII. took pleasure to build very proud Fabrikes, as believing it may be, to
close his eyes in dying, through the Splendor of their wonders; but his lot,
an Enemy of his hopes, snatched away his last breath, being sound of health,
upon a straw bed, and in place encompassed round with Misery. Heliogabalus
likewise was deceued of his purpose, for being on the point when the ^enormity
of his Crimes had passed sentence of his Death on behalf of the Gods, he shuts
himself in the fairest hall of his Palace, and prepares for his Enemies all
the Richest instruments of Death he could recover, as thinking to sweeten the
bitterness thereof with so goodly arms: but his foresight was unprofitable, for
the Gods permitted, that as he had tasted the sweetest pleasures of life, he
should feel in Death the cruelst dolours. Hermenides had, to much purpose
surely, caused very stately Palaces to be erected in the dominion of his
Empire, since he was to die in his Chariot, as in a rouling House that should
conduct him to his Tomb. That famous Temple of Solomon was twice ruined by the
Assyrians, then reedified by the Jews, and again was ruined by the Romans.
And after that Traian had caused that Magnificient Bridge to be built upon
Danubius, the waves never left roaring until such time as they had buried in
their bosom the last mark of its being. These Piramids of Egypt which with
their sharp points seemed to outface the Heavens have been quite overthrown
by time, within such an Abyss of ruin, as they put them now in the rank of
dreams, and fables.

Besides, it seems in all these magnifice^t Fabrikes how Art and Nature
contribute but a backewardnes. The Stones and Timber are made to be dragged by
force, and if they lend but ears to the pushes of this co^straint, they shall
mark how the wagons that bear them, and the Engines which sustain them,
seem to groan under the burden, as if they complained of their Folly. I
esteem a far greater pleasure to die under the roof of a Cottage, then under
the fret-worke seeling of a Palace, because in that they cannot be touched
with grief to abando^ the dwelling, and in this place, the Riches they admire
therein, seem to make us very sensible of the privation. To what end served
the great Buildings which the Queen Semiramis caused to be erected on the face
of the Earth, but for matter of shame and confusion in their Ruin? The Queen
of Saba had a whole town for her House, and after her Death, both she, and all
her Greatnesses were enclosed within a little space of a Cubits breadth. What
folly to go about to build upon a Territory, where one lodges not but in
passing as a Pilgrim? From the time we are borne, if we were but capable of
Action we should be occupied in making our Sepulcher, since Time seems to lead
us thereunto unto with an incredible swiftnes. So as if the infirmity of
building do seize and possess us, let us build Temples to the Glory of him who
prepares the Eternity.

What is become of that proud Babylon, is it not credible that its only ruin
eternized the name? The Locrians built a Temple to the Sun, but the Moon its
Sister being jealous of this Glory, obtained of the Destines the sentence of it
ruin; for during the raygne of the Night, the Air, and wind did satiate,
their hunger with its Ashes. When I think of this dreadful vicissitude of
Time, which alters all things, unto the point of making us quite to loose the
remembrance of them, I contemn whatsoever is presented to my eyes, and make no
reckoning thereof, since so in a moment the fairest objects change the face. If
your first Father were now risen again, he would quite forget the world, for a
thousand times in an age has it changed the countenance. Let us love the
change then in this inconstant and transitory life, and let every one follow
his lot without constraynt and without tyranny in the way of virtue, for to
arrive at this pleasing habitation of Eternity.

Man makes greatly to appear both his vanity, and his Pride in these
Buildings, where he would seem to establish, if he could, the foundation of
some shelter, that might be of proof against the storms of death. But the
crime of his vnknowledgement is so enormous a thing, as seems to pull on his
head the thunders of Heaven. Learn thou Earth (says Wisdom, speaking of
man) to put thy self under foot, it is thy property so to be trampled on: for
if thou flewest in the Air* it could be but as dust, so as thine Arrogance
cannot subsist but in folly. If man would consider without cease to what point
he is reduced, his spirit would not be able to conceive but thoughts of
Humility. Before his birth he was nothing; after his birth, he is so small as we
dare not speak it, for in a word is he nothing but a dunghill, covered over
with snow, where the disposition of corruption prepares a food, and nourishment
for the worms: whereof then should he seem to wax proud, whose end is poverty
and corruption? So as if he take any vanity at the Suns rising for the Greatness
he possesses, at the setting of this Star, we shall all be equal.

Mark attentively (says S. John Chrysostom) the sepulchers of Dead men, and
seek round about for some signs of their passed Greatnesses. For if those
Tombs do send forth any flash of Magnifice^ce to thine Eyes, convey thy
Thoughts thereinto, and thou shall find but corruption. Their joy is extinct
with their life, their pleasures past over with their days, and all their
riches are abiding in their Coffers, for to publish their folly touching the
unprofitable care they have had in heaping them together. They have left their
Palaces at the first term of their possession without so much leisure only as
to account with their Host. Earth, that art but Earth, in thy nativity, Earth
in thy life, in Earth the end! wherefore art thou proud, since thou art but
flesh in appearance, and putrefaction in effect? I commend greatly the custom
of those of the Molucca's, who build not their houses but for the time only
they imagine to live, and so dying oblige their children to do the same.
Arpilaus King of the Medes had caused a very stately Palace to be built, where
he would end his days: but from the instant that Time had struck the hour of
his retrait, his enemies entered into this Palace, and cast him forth of the
window. Cleophon the Lydian dyed overwhelmed with the ruins of his house, and
Iulianus notes how he had no other tomb. Rid thy self, my Soul, from these
vain ambitions, so to lodge in Palaces, knowing how the worms in pledge do
harbor with in the house of thy body. Thou beholdest so many goodly Edifices,
whose Gould and Marble seem to defye Time, as not able to destroy them, yet
within an age they abate their pride and with easy paces begin to follow the
way of their ruin, reteyning something of the nature of those workmen. Job had
a far better grace upon his dunghill, then on a Throne, for what spectacle
was it to put ashes and corruption upon cloth of gold? Leave these palaces to
men of the world, who blind with a brutish ignorance do establish the
foundation of their pleasures in the^. Thou know, that death enters every
where, and since thy God dyed in a desert Mountain, wherein the excess of his
Misery he had not a drop of water to quench his thirst, shut thine eyes to the
glistering of those gilded feelings, and suffer not this foul reproach at any
time to expire upon flowers, whiles thy Savior gave up the ghost on thorns. Do
thou follow him then in his glorious actions, and build thee a Temple within
thy self, where each moment of thy life thou may address to him vows thou
art to make for Eternity; since the goodly Palaces of his dwelling are of
proof against the inconstancy of the world.

If the imagination could attract to it self all the objects in distance from
it, to represent them in an instant before thy eyes; how many mischiefs should
we behold? How many Deaths, and how many dying lives? They hold, there is no
vacuity in nature, I will easily believe it, since miseries seem to take up
all. This is the accident, so inseparable to man, and which accompanies him to
his Grave. Every one has his dolours affected in like sort as his pleasures
are, but some ripen as they put forth, and others gather strength in their
feeblenes, to eternize their durance. How dreadful would this Theater of the
world seem to be, if one should behold all the Tragedies which are acted
therein. Phirra quenches her fury with her fathers blood. Eumenides is revenged
of her mother through poison. Curtius buryes his brother within his cradle.
Pernesius plucks out the eyes of his sister Etna. And Symocles, being an enemy
to his race, sets the Palace on fire where his parents were assembled; and I
should think the fire of his choler was the first spark of that consuming
fire. Nero seeks nourishment, for to satisfy his cruelty in the bowels of his
mother; but God permitted the Executioners should hold the place of delinque^ts
on the day of their death, when they gave up their life to the assaults of a
thousand dolours, a great deal more cruel then Death it self.

Consider all these dismal accidents, my Soul, which happen every moment. One
is consumed with fire, as Pliny, another is hanged, as Polycrates; here one is
cast down headlong, as Lycurgus; there was another burned with a thunderbolt,
like Esculapius. There have some been drowned in the sea, as Marcus Marcellus.
Curtius was swallowed up in a bottomeles pit. Eschyllus the Philosopher had his
head crushed with a Tortesse shell* Caesar was slain by such as he took to be
his friends. Cicero's head was cut off upon the boot of his caroch. Euripides
was deuored by dogs. Cleopatra died with the sting of a serpent, or rather with
that of her despair. Socrates is poisoned; Aristo dies of famine; Seneca
through the point of a launcet. Cold took away the life from Neocles;
Tarquinius Priscus was strangled with a fish-bone; Lucia the daughter of
Aurelius dies with the point of a needle. Elacea drownes her life in the ice of
a glass of water. Anacreon is choked with swallowing but the kernel of a
raysin. And Fabius the Pretour suffered shipwreck in a mess of Milk, and the
encounter with a little hair was the Rock he fell upon. Sophocles and
Diagoras dyed of joy, and Philemon with too much laughing, as well as Zeuxis.
Fabius Maximus dyed in the field, as Lepidus. I will nor make use of the
examples of our ages, since they are so fresh; and it suffices that their
memory is as sad as odious.

Thou see then, my Soul, how death disportes himself with Crowns; Thou
see how he tramples Scepters under foot, and how in the press of the world,
his Since spares not any one. Such a one to day lines Contented, who to morrow
shall dye Miserable. One moment only seuers us from death and mishap, there is
no other respit between living and dying, then that of an instant, which makes
me verily to believe, that Being, and not Being in man differ not awhit, since
he lives not but dying, and moves not but to bound his actions in the Tomb
whither he posts without stop. Earth! Who art but Earth! Earth within the
cradle. Earth in the course of life, and Earth in the end! Stay a while, and if
Time which leads thee will not suffer it, consider in so hasting to the
funeral, how the Earth goes to join with Earth, and that whatsoever is in the
world, does follow step by step, to resume its first form in the dust. They
would feign have made Job believe on his dunghill that he had lost all, and
that in his loss he was brought to the last point of misery; but I imagine the
contrary, for he sitting on his dunghill, was found to be in his proper
heritage: and by how much deeper he was buried in corruption, so much was he
the forwarder in the possession of himself, if it be true, that man is naught
but mire and dirt.

Let Kings make a show of their Greatnesses, either in feasts, as Lucullus, or
in apparel, as Tiberius, or be it in other sorts of Magnificences, all their
instruments of glory, are of Earth, and vanish into smoke as well as they. If
the ashes of Kings and Subjects were mingled together, it were impossible to
distinguish the one from the other, since they are all of the same Nature, and
al carrying the face of a like form. The greatest Monarchs are men for Death.
This flash of life which so dazels the eyes of subjects, fades away like the
beauty of the rose at the setting of the Sun. How many Kings have there been
in the world since the birth thereof, and yet were it impossible to find out
the least mark of their Tombs, whiles some are buried in the Ocean, as
Lertius; others in the flames, as Hermasonus; some here in gulfes, as
Lentellinus; and others there in the ample spaces of the air, where their dust
is scattered, as that of Pauzenas King of the Locrians. And of all together can
there hardly be griped an handful of dust: so true it is, they are turned to
their nothing.

Ah! how now, my Soul, will thou see buried with a dry eye, whatsoever Nature
has more fair, the Earth more rich, and Art more precious? Will thou see dye
every moment the subjects of thy Love, or rather a part of thy self, through
the alliance thou have made with the body, without abating thy vanity, and
humbling thy arrogance? What expects thou in the world, if all its goods be
false, and evils true? There is no assurance to be found but in Death, nor
consolation to be had, but constantly to suffer its Misery. Honors, they are
all of smoke, Glory of wind, Greatnesses of Snow; and riches of Water, sliding
from one to another without being possessed of any. Repose is not to be had but
in imagination, and pleasure but in a dream. The Thorns spring continually,
and the Roses blow without cease. Sweetness makes but its passage only here,
and bitterness his whole abode. If this soil do bring forth flowers, they are
but of Cares; if it bear fruit, they are but Pears of Anguish.

Tears are here continual, because the anoyes are always present. Joy is
not seen but running, and sadness makes here a full stop. It is a place where
Piety is banished as well as Justice; and where Vices reign, and Virtue is
made a thrall. Where the fires of Concupiscence do burn, and where those of
Luxury reduce the chastest hearts into Ashes: whence it comes, that that great
Saint demanded wings to carry him into the desert. Hope is here uncertain,
and despair assured. Happiness appears but as a lightning, and Misfortunes
establish their dwelling, with Empire. They can desire nothing here, but in
doubt of success: they can expect nothing, but with fear to loose their time.
Felicityes, even while they are possessed, do free themselves by little and
little from this servitude of being tied to us: So as if they destroy not
themselves in their sublimity, time snatches them from us at all hours, and
leads us away with them. What is the world but a den of Thieves? but an Army
of Mutiners? but a mire of Swyne; a Galley of Slaves? A lake of Basiliskes? and
therefore the Prophet says; shall I never leave a place so foul, so filthy,
and so full of treasons and deceipts?

Needs then, my Soul, must thou lift up thine eyes to Heaven, since the Earth
is merely barren of thy contentments. Thou seek the Sovereign good, and it
has but springs of Evil. Thou seek Eternity, and whatsoever is therein, is
but inconstancy. Change thy thoughts; the treasures which thou seek for,
are not here beneath, since this is the ordinary mansion of Poverty and
Misery. The objects here most frequent, are but Tombs; nor do we ever open
our eyes but to see them laid open. Our ears are touched with no other sound
then with that of Sights and Playnts. The sents of our putrefaction occupy the
smelling; and the gaul of a nourishment, dipped in our sweat, unfortunately
feeds the taste of our tongue. So as turn we which way soever we will, the
gulfes, the rocks, the fires, the punishmens, and mischiefs follow us, as
near as the shadow does the body.

Consider attentively, my Soul, the importance of these verities, and make thy
profit of another harm. Represent to thee, the horror and amazement whereto
the world was reduced with all those meruailes, at such time as the Sun
withdrew from it his light. All those proud buildings so enriched with Brass
and Marble, those famous Temples, where Art is always in dispute with Nature
striving to set forth their works* appear to be no more, but Collossus's of
shadows, that strike thine eyes as well with astonishment, as with terror,
during the reign of darkness; and imagine how the pourtraite of this horror,
draws before hand its being from the Original, since in the latter day the
world shall take upon it the visage of horror, of terror, and of ruin.
Represent unto thy self besides, in order of these verityes, how the shadows
which cover but half of the earth by respits, shall very shortly be filling up
the space of the whole Circle, according to the decree which has been made
thereof before all ages. In so much, my Soul, as since the day must end at
last, quenching its torch within the most ancient waters of the Ocean, seek
betymes another Sun above all the Heavens, that may not be subject to Eclypses;
and whose light being always in the East, may make thy happiness to shine
within his splendor, not for a day, for a year, or for an age, but for an
Eternity.

O sweet Eternity, with how many delights enchauntest thou our spirits, while
we address our thoughts to thee. They may not taste thy baytes, and not be
ravished from themselves with incomparable contentme^ts. We wander, I confess,
whiles we seek thee, but thy Labyrinthes are so delicious, as we are always
in fear to get forth thereof. The hearts which are taken with thy love, without
knowing thee, sigh after thy pleasurs; and howbeit they have never tasted its
sweetnesses, but by way of Idaea, yet find they no repose, but in hope to
possess them one day. O sweet Eternity! what feelings of joy and happiness do
thou breed in Souls created for thy glory! How tedious is the way of this
mortal and transitory life, to them that live in expectation of thy pleasures!
They resemble the Mariner being tossed with storms and tempests, who through
tears, measures with his eyes a thousand times, in a moment, the humide spaces
of the waves for to discover the Port he aspires unto: for they sailing in like
manner in this Sea of the world, and continually dashed with te^pests of
misfortunes, do count the hours, the days and the months of their annoyes,
in the long pretension of landing at the port of the Tomb, to be reborne, from
very Ashes, in the mansion of thy glory.

O sweet Eternity, what sensible repasts have thy contentmentes with them! The
more I think upon thee, and the more I would be thinking of thee, my Spirit,
rapt in this divine Elevation, is so violently pulled from it self, as it
lives of no other food, then that of thy divine thoughts! O how happy is he,
who establishes in thee, for an Essay, the foundation of his felicity! My
Soul, if thou will be content in the midst of thy pleasures, think of
Eternity. The only imagination of its delights, shall be stronger then thine
annoyes. What grief soever thou endurest, imagine with thy self, how it is
but for a time, and that the joy of Eternity can never end. The Fastings the
Hayrecloth, and all the sufferances of an austere life can never shake thy
constancy, if thy desires have Eternity for object. What accident soever stays
thee, in the way of thy pilgrimage, lift up thine eyes to Heaven for to
contemplate the Beauty of the mansio^ whither thou aspirest. Thou see, how
for the purchase of a little glory of the world men expose their lives to a
thousand dangers, and to possess one day that same of Eternity will thou not
hazard thy body, which is naught else, but corruption, to the mercy of torments
and pains?

Consider, my Soul, the instability of all created things, and put not thy
trust in the earth, since the waters, snow, and sands are the foundations
thereof. As often as the meruailes of the world attract thee insensibly to their
admiration, break but the crust of those goodly apparences, and thou shall see
within, how it is but a School of Vanity, a Fair of Toys, a Theater of
Tragedies, a labyrinth of Errors, a Prison of darkness, a Way beset with
Thorns, and a sea full of storms and tempests. That it is but a barren Land,
a stony Field, a greenish Meadow whose flowers do shroud Serpe^ts, a River of
tears, a mountain of annoyances, a vale of Miseries, a sweet Poison, a Fable,
a dream, an Hospital of febricita^ts where every one suffers in his fashion.
Their repose is full of anguishes, and their unrest is replenished with
despair. Their travels are without fruit, and their Joys are but counterfeit;
where no content is found above a day, and all the rest of the life is nothing
else but wretchedness. So as if the evils wherewith it is propled, could be
counted, they would surpass in number the atoms of Democritus, who could
reckon the maladies of the body, the passions of the Soul, and all the dolours
wherewith our life is touched. Now then, if it be true that we dye every moment,
is not every moment, I pray, a Death to us?

Let us go then, my soul, to God, since he calls us; the Sun lends us not its
light but to show us the way to him. The Stars shine not in heaven, but to
let us see the paths, and trackes thereof. So as if the Moon do hide her self
from our eyes by Interstitions it cannot be but of choler, as sensible of the
contempt we show of her light. Let us go to this holy Land of Promise, and
pass the Red Sea of sufferance and punishments, in example of our Savior, who
with no other reason, then that of his Love, would purchase, through his blood,
the Glory he atteyned to. The world can afford us but Death, Death but a Tomb,
and the Tomb but an infinite number of worms, which shall be fed with our
carcass. They run after the world, and the world is naught but misery; they
do love then to be miserable. What blindness, my Soul, to sigh after our
mishaps, and passionately to cherish the subject of our loss? Let us go to
this Eternity where the delights, ever present, reign with in the Order of a
continual moment. Let us get forth of this moving circle, and break the
chains of this shameful servitude, wherein to Syn has brought us.

Away with the world, since whatsoever is in it, is but mire and dust; it is
but smoke to the eyes, putrefaction to the nostrills, the noise of thunder and
tempests to the ears, thorns to the hands, and smart to our feeling. All
those who put any trust therein are utterly deceived. All those who follow it,
are absolutely lost. All those that honor it, are wholly despised, and all
those who sacrifice to its Idols, shall be one day sacrificed themselves, in
expiation of their crimes. Besides, we see, how all that know it, do abandon
it, for if it promise a Scepter, it reaches us a Shephooke. Thrones are seated
on the brimme of a precipice; nor does it ever affoard us any good turn, but
as the vigill of some misfortune. Away then with the world, and all that is
within it, since all its wonders now are but dust. Whatsoever it has more
rare, is but Earth; whatsoever it has more fair, is but wind. Every King is
no more, but a heap of Worms, where Horror, Terror, and Infection astonish
and offend the senses that approach unto it. Corruption (says the Wiseman,
speaking of man) vaunt thou as much as thou will, behold thy self brought
unto the first nothing of thy first Being.

Let us not live, my Soul, but for Eternity, since it is the true spring of
life. Out of Eternity is there no repose; out of Eternity, no pleasure; out of
Eternity, all hope is vain. Who thinks not of Eternity, thinks of nothing,
since out of Eternity all things are false. Let us behold but Eternity my
Soul, as the only object of glory. All flies away except Eternity: it is it
alone, which is able to satiate our defires, and termine our hopes. I will no
other comfort in all my annoyes, then that of Eternity. I will no other solace
in all my miseryes, then that of Eternity. After it, do I desire nothing, after
it do I look for nothing* I live not but for it, and my heart sighs not, but
after it. All discourses are displeasing to me except those of Eternity. It is
the But, and end of all my actions; it is the object of my thoughts. I labor,
but to gather its fruits; al my vigils point at the pretensions of its Crowns.
My eyes contemn all the objects, except those that convey my spirits to its
sweet Idea's, as to the only Paradise I find in this world. Whatsoever I do, I
judge my self unprofitable, if I refer not my actions to this divine cause;
whatsoever I think, whatsoever I say, and whatsoever I imagine, all is but
vanity, if those thoughts, if those words, and those imaginatio^s rely not, in
some fashion, on Eternity. In fine, my Soul, if thou will taste on Earth, the
delights of Heaven, think continually of Eternity, for in it only it is,
where the accomplishment of all true contentments does consist.

The Glory of Paradise.
AATER that rich Solomon had a thousand times contented his Eyes in admiration
of the fairest objects, which are found in Nature; That his Ears ever charmed
with a sweet Harmony, had deliciously tasted in their fashion, the most
sensible repasts they are affected to; That his Mouth had relished the most
delicate meats, where the Tongue finds the perfection of its delight: after, I
say, he had quenched the thirst of his desires in the sea of all contentments
of the world, and satisfied the appetite of his senses, in the accomplishment
of the purest delicacies, he cries out aloud, That all was full of vanity. The
Pomp of these magnificences may well represent themselves to his remembrance,
but he cries out before it, That it is but vanity. His riches, his Greatnesses,
his Triumphs, and all his pleasures, served him as a subject within knowledge
of their Nature, for to exclayme very confidently, that all was full of vanity.
What pleasures now after these delights may mortals taste? What Riches may they
now possess, after these Treasures? To what Greatness may they aspire, which is
not comprised within that of his Empire? To what sort of prosperities may they
pretend, which is not less then his happiness? And yet nevertheless after a long
possession of honors and delights, which were inseparable to his sovereign
and absolute power, he publishes this truth, that all is full of smoke, and
wind, and that nothing is sure here beneath, but death, nor present, but
miseries.

Souls of the world, what think you of, that you reason not sometimes in your
selves to discover the weakness of the foundation, whereon your hopes are
piched? You love your pleasures; but if it be true, that knowledge should
always precede Love, why know you not the nature of the Object, before it
predominate the power of your affections? Again, you love not things at any
time, but to possess them. Ah what! and know you not, the delights of the
world do pass before our eyes, as a lightning, and that in their excess, they
incessantly find their ruin? you think your self content to day because
nothing afflicts you; do you call that pleasure to run after pleasure? for it
is impossible for you to possess that imaginary contentment, but in running
after it, since it flies so away without resting. Let them represent to
themselves the greatest conte^tments that may be received in the world, and at
the same time, let all the diverse Spirits, who have tasted the vain
Sweetnesses appear, to tell us in secret, what remains to them thereof.

Thou Miser, tell us I pray thee, what pleasure have thou to shut up thy
goulden Earth, within thy coffers, to lend it to the interest of thy
conscience, and to make it daily to increase through thy guilty cares, and thy
fruitles watches? If the vain Glory to be accounted rich, possessed thee, thou
have been never so, but in opinion, and appearance only, since in the state
whereunto age now bringes thee, all the Riches thou have heaped together, and
which yet thou art gathering, are fruits whereof thou have but the flowers, by
reason of their frailty. Thou may carry the key of thy Coffers long enough;
thou art but the keeper of thy treasures, and as a mere Depositarian thereof;
for thy avarice lets thee from disposing them, and consequently to give forth
thy self to be the true owner of them. If thou could have any moment of
cessation in thy folly, I would demand the reason of thy actions, to know
where thy hopes do bound, and what glory is the But thereof? It may be thou
would dye rich: what feeblenes? know thou not, thou have need but of a
sheet only for to cover thy Miseryes withal. Have thou heaped up money in thy
Cabinets, with purpose to erect thee some stately Monument after thy death?
Fool as thou art, thou have past all thy life without considering where thy
Soul shall lodge after thy death; and thou studiest now to prepare a house for
thy body, or rather for the worms, which shall gnaw the same, as if
putrifactio^ were some rare and precious thing.

If thou have a desire to leave thy children rich, true Riches consist not but
in Virtue only, and with its sweet liquour, ought thou to milch their
infancy, and to murse them continually with its divine nourishment. Suppose
through excess of happiness thou against the whole world (a sport of Fortune)
and by a blow of a sad mischance, whereto thy vices shall have smoothed the
way, thou loose thy Soul in the last moment of thy life, what glory past,
what-domage present? The Reign of thy Greatnesses shall finish so; and that of
thy pains shall then begin. Verily thou shall have possessed all the goods of
the earth, but in truth likewise shall thou feel therefore all the evils within
the order of a divine Justice, which shall make thy dolours eternal. Be thou
co^uinced the^ by reason not to follow the way of a life, the most unhappy that
ever yet quickened the body, and confess with me how there has been but one
Matthew Apostle, whom this vast sea of the world has saved from the
shipwreck, whereinto the weight of gold and silver went about to engage him.
Bias despoyled himself indeed of all his Riches, but not of all his errors.
Laertius Neuola puts over the right of Maiority to his brother, and
consequently his richest pretensio^s; but in despising one good he embraced not
the other. Consider I pray to what point of poverty was the Richman brought
unto in an instant, since of all his Riches, there was not left him means to
buy a drop of could water, to quench his thirst.

Confess then, Miser, thy pleasures to be false, and how they subsist not in
thy spirit, but through a deceiptful opinion that blindes thee, to cast thee
into a pricipice. The keeper of a Vineyard that resembles thee, without
imitatio^ of thee, is a great deal more happy then thou art, for after he has
stirred the earth, he gathers at the end of his daies-worke, in the repose a
sweet sleep, the fruit of his pains; and thou on the contrary, the thorns of
thy thorns, since an eternal torment succeds the dolours of thy dying life. So
as Covetous men in seeking of gould and silver, in the bowels of the earth,
find hell without piercing into it, which is the Ce^ter thereof. Thou proud and
ambitious Man, tell us, I pray thee, what are thy pleasures? I know well how
thy Spirit full of vanity pitches thy hopes upon the highest Throne of Fortune,
and that blind in the knowledge of thy faults, thou findst no glory, which is
not far beneath thy merit. But wherein consists thy Contentment, if it be to
expect Thrones, and attend to Crowns? Did one ever see a feebler pleasure,
since the nature of it is nothing else but wind and smoke? Thou tramplest the
Earth with a disdainful foot, as if thou had reasons enough to persuade us,
that it were not thy Mother. Thou out-facest the heavens with an arrogant
look, and the force of thy ashes is dispersed in the air, not being able to
fly any higher, Again, thou make no doubt, that if the Heavens have found
thunder to punish the insolency of the Angels, it were like to want new
punishments to chastize the vanity of men? It may be thou flatterest thy self
with this vain belief, that being raised above the common sort, thou have
been formed in some new kind of mould, and that thou art so dispensed with, in
this law, condemning us to the sufferance of all manner of pains.

Return I pray thee, from this wandering, and open thine eyes to consider thy
ruin. Thy Pride, and thy Arrogance are the plumes of the Peacocke, sustained
by two foundations of Misery, figured by the feet of this Foul. Carry thy head
as high as thou will, it must necessarily fall of its pride in declining to the
Earth. And if thou letst thy self be dazeled with the glittering of thy
sumptuous Apparel, this verity conuinceth thee of folly, since all thou
wearest, is but the work of worms: nor do I wonder now, that they devour us
so, after death, for it is but to pay themselves for the pains they have
taken, in laying the web, wherewith we cover our nakedness. So as, if thou
regardest thy self near, thou shall see how the worms of thy apparel, cover
those of thy body; and that therefore thy Arrogance has no other foundation,
then that of thy corruption. And upon this assurance tell me now, what are the
delights of thy vanity?

And you great Monarkes, who find the Earth too little to bound, within its
spaces, the extent of your Empire, do you, I pray, make us participant of your
Contentments, and tell us something of the Sweetnesses which you taste, during
the reign of your absolute powers. It is a pleasure, you will say, to command
a world of people, and to impose the^ laws after your own humor. A feeble
Pleasure! Whiles it proceeds, but from a Sovereignty which subjects the spirit
of him that commands; because indeed he ought to correspond with the actions
of his Subjects. You do what you will your self. It is true; but that is not
the way to content your self, if your deeds be not exempt from reproach. If
they fear you, it is but for the knowledge they have of your Tyranny. If they
love you, to what end serves the affection of your subjects, while you seem
not to merit the same? You go into al places whersoeuer your desires call you,
without ever meeting with resistance in your designs: but why follow you not
the path of virtue? Displeasures rather then delights attend you at the end of
the Carriere. I know well how Greatnesses, Riches, and all Magnificences are
always in pledge with you; but therein ought you to consider the while how the
glory which enuirons you, seems to fetch the same course which the Sun does,
and how it flies away without cease toward its West, whence it shall never
rise again. Be it so, that your looks seem to astonish the stoutest, and
that they favor the more happy. Those looks in their sternesse, cannot wound
but the culpable, no-engage in their sweetness, but spirits which feed of smoke.

There is no doubt but your power is admired, but not enuyed of the wiser,
because the greatness of your might, concludes very ordinarily in vanity. We
must confess that the honor, and life of men are in your hands. But you must
needs confess withal, that your heads also, are beneath the Sword, which is
fastened to the feeling of Heaven, or rather suspended in the air by a little
thread, and how the least of your crimes may pull upon you the chastisement
thereof. So as, if you take pleasure to bath you in the blood of Innoe^ccy, as
an Otho, or a Caligula, the divine Justice prepares your last bath in your
proper blood, where your Soul suffers Shipwreck with your body. What then are
your delights? In what garden do you gather their flowers? Verily you have all
things at your wish, but what pleasure is it to wish for transitory goods,
whose priuatio^ causes a great deal more sorrow, then the fruition afforded
contentment? If your Crowns, and Scepters are agreeable to you during life,
they will cause a horror at your Death; for that you ought to give account of
your swaying them. You are but Lieutenants only in the Land of God, during the
time of your Reign. The hour approaches wherein you are to justify the
Sovereign actions of all the moments of your life, to know (in truth) in what
fashion you have disposed of the Greatnesses, and of the Treasures, whereof you
were no more then mere Depositarians. Do you now then refer all your
pleasures to this last instant, and you shall know how the way is a great deal
more thorny, then that of a low condition, and void of Envy.

Tell us I pray thee, Lucullus, what are become of the delights of thy proud
Feasts? I admit, that the prodigality of thy Magnificences, has unpeopled the
air of Birds, and the sea of fishes, and that Art has exposed to view, as in
a stall, her last inventions, to glut the appetite of thy foolishnes. Where are
now those contentments? Where is this Pomp, where is this luster, where are
the Palaces of these banquets, where are the Cupps of Gould, where the Meat,
where the Cooks, where are the Stewards, where the Guess, and the wayters of
thy Feasts? All is slid away without their memory. And if the Historyes (
Lucullus) do yet remember thee, it is but only to represent thy folly to
Posterity. What contentment may they take in feasts, if the sweet wines
wherewith they satiate their hunger, be changed to corruption? They take
pleasure to devour their pleasure, like as in the Chase they find contentment
in running after their sports. The honey which they put into the mouth, becomes
bitter in the stomach: for what inco^modities seem they not to suffer who
have filled their belly withal the sorts of Meats? And to what shame and
infamy submit they not themselves, while they drown their reason in wine, their
honor, and their conscience all at once? is it not to be cruel to ones self
to precipitate his paces to the Tomb-wards, as if we dyed not soon enough?

Again, for whom take we the pains to treat our bodies so, if not for the
worms, since the flesh is destined to them? All the fat which we gather, is
but for them, for the small time we live is not to be put into account. Why,
consider they not how every Banquet, has its last course, and every
wedding day its morrow; and that the joy of these feasts seems to pass away,
as swift as the day, which lends them light? What a goodly custom was it among
the Pagans to serve in at the last course of their Ba^quets, an Anatomy upon
the table, in sign how the worms were shortly to reduce the bodies of the
invited to that estate? How many are there now adays, who in the blindness of
Epicurisme put all their Gallantry in making of good Cheer? But what excess
of Bestiality the while to take such pleasure to pamper the body on the way of
death, whither it runs posting without cease? I grant thou have drowned to day
thy Troubles in thy Glasses, and have glutted thine appetite with meats the
most delicious of the world: what shall be left thee thereof to morrow, but gaul
in the mouth from the surfeit of thy riot? I say, but bitterness in thy heart, and
repentance in thy soul? Thy Crosses renew again more strong then ever, by
reason of the privation of thy delighs. Thou must begin again to morrow to
sooth thy sensuality, and the day following the same torments which thou have
suffered now already, shall succeed thy joy. So as when all the life should be
a feast, the last service thereof were always to be feared, since a life of
Roses brings forth a death of Thorns. Cramme then thy body withal sorts of
meats, as long as thou will, he that shall have fasted the while, shall be a
great deal more content then thou, upon the last day of thy Banquets. So as,
if thou have the advantage to be fatter then he, the worms shall fare the
better for it, in thy grave.

You sensles Souls that love but the pleasures of the Table, I advertise you
betimes that the Feast is ended, and the Company brook up: each one is retired
with himself. But there is now another manner of news, which is, that many of
your Companions are dead; one, as Ninus, with too much drink; another with
feeding over much, as Messina. He there has fetched an eternal sleep, as
Bogrias; and he here has cut his wives throat in his wine, as Thessalius. To
what end think you? They are the last services which misfortune presents at
the last Course of your feasts, the poison whereof is covered with sugar; take
you heed then, and play not with such formidable Enemies. It is all that you
can do to eschew the dangers in the world, with the light you have of Reason;
and you are drowning the same in your Banquets, without fear of suffering
Shipwreck with it.

Away with these Pleasures of smoke, which fill not the body, but with new
matter of putrefaction, I abhor you, and detest you with a hatred which shall
never die. Since my God has put Thorns on his head, why should not I be
putting them in my heart? I will from henceforth quench my Thirst within his
Chalice, and gather the fruits of my nourishment in his deserts. My Savior
has fasted all his life, and shall I pamper my self every moment? Let death
come upon me, rather then such a wish. I love thee, my Soul too well, to
prefer the pleasures of my Body before thy co^tentme^t. Take then thy
pleasure in the Thoughts of Eternity, since for thy entertaynement they are
able to produce the true Nectar of Heaven, and the purest wine of the Earth.

And you, profane Spirits, who sacrifice not but to Voluptuousness, confess
you now, that Lazarus was a great deal more happy in his Misery, then was the
impious Richman in his Treasure. The one dyed of Famine in the world, and the
other dies of Thirst in Hell. Again, what a thing were it that all
wedding-feasts should be held on the Sea, where the least tempest might troble
the solemnityes, and metamorphize them into a funeral pomp? And yet
nevertheless is it true, that the souls of the world give themselves to banquet
upon the current of the water of this life, where rocks are so frequent, and
shipwracks so ordinary. One drinks a dying, to the health of another who
drownes in his glass some moments of his life; and so all, Companions of the
same lot approach without cease to the To^be which Time prepares them. O how
sweet it is (said that Poet) to banquet at the Table of the Gods, because in
that of men, the last service is always full of Aloes. But I shall say after
him, what contentments without comparison, receive they at the Angels Table? It
is not there where the soul is replenished with this imaginary sweet wine, nor
with these bitter sweetnesses of the world. The food of its nourishment is so
divine, as through a secret virtue it contents the appetite without cloying it
ever.

Sigh then, my Soul, after this Celestial Manna, always fruitful in
pleasures, so sweet as desire and hope are alike unprofitable in their
possession, if what they possess in the^ may be imagined to be agreeable to
them: nor suffer any more thy body (since thy reason may master its senses) to
heap on its dunghill, corruption upon corruption, in the midst of its banquets
and Feasts, where they prepare but a rich harvest for the worms. If thy body
be a hungry, let it feed as that of Job, with the sighs of its Misery. If it
be a thirst, let it be quenching its thirst with the humide vapor of its
tears, as that of Heraclitus. And if it revolt, let them put it in chains and
fetters, for so if it die in torments it shall be resuscited anew in Glory.

Sardanapalus, appear thou with thy Ghost here, to represent in Idaa, those
imaginary pleasures which thou have taken in thy luxuries. O it would be a
trim sight to see thee by thy lascivious Elincea, disguised in a woman's
habit, having a distaffe by thy side and a spindle in thy hand; what are become
of those allurements which so charmed thy Spirit? What are become of those
charms that so ravished thy soul? What are become of those ecstasies, which so
made thee to live besides thy self? those imaginary Sweetnesses, those
delicious imaginations, those agreeable deceipts, and those agreements of
objects where thy senses found the accomplishment of their repose? Blind as
thou art, thou co^siderest not awhit, that Time seems to bury thy pleasures in
their Cradle, and even in their birth; how they run Post to their end through
a Law of necessity, fetched from their violence. The profane fire wherewith thou
wast burned, has reduced thy heart into Ashes, with thy body; and the divine
Justice has metamorphized the imaginary paradise of thy life into a true Hell,
where Cruelty shall punish thee without cease for the crime of thy lust. I
confess that the Sun has lent thee its light during an Age, for thee to
taste very greedily the pleasures and sweetnesses of transitory goods. But that
age is past, the sweetnesses vanished, thy pleasures at an end, and all thy
goods, as false, have left thee dying but only this grief, to have believed
them to be true.

Brutish Souls, who sigh without cease after the like passions, break but the
crust of your pleasures, and cry you out with Solomon, how the delights of the
world are full of smoke, and that all is vanity. He lodged within his Palace
360. Concubines, or rather so many Mischiefs, which have put the salvation of
his soul in doubt. I wonder not awhit that they hoodwincke Love, so to blind
our reason, for it were impossible our hearts should so sigh at all hours after
those images of dust, but in the blindness whereto the powers of our soul are
reduced. O how a Lover esteems himself happy to possess the favors of his
mistress! He preferres this good before all those of the earth besides. And in
the Violence of his passion, would he give* as Adam, the whole Paradise for an
Apple, his Crown for a glass of water, I would say, that which he pretends,
for a little smoke. He gives the name of Goddess to his Dame, as if this title
of Honor could be compatible with the Surname she bears of Miserable. He
adores notwithstanding this Victime, and offers Incense to it upon the same
Altar, where it is to be sacrificed. His senses in their brutishnes make their
God of it; and his spirits touched with the same error authorize their
Idolatry, without considering this Idol to be a work of Art, covered with a
crust of Plaster, full of putrefaction, and which without intermissio^ resums
the first form of Earth, in running to its end. Would they not say now, this
lover were a true Ixion who imbraceth but the Clouds? for in the midst of his
pleasures, death changes his Body into a shadow full of dread and horror. He
belieues he houlds in his Arms this same Idol, dressed up with those goodly
colors, which drew his eyes so in admiration of her, and he sees no more of
her then the ruins of the pourtraite, where the worms begin already to take
their fees. Away with these pleasurs of the flesh, since all flesh is but hay,
and that death serves not himself of his Since, but to make a harvest of it,
which he carries to the Sepulcher. What Glory is there in the possession of all
the women in the world, if the fairest that ever yet have been, are now but
ashes in the Tomb? All the flowers in their features are faded as those of the
Meadows, and the one and other have lasted but a Spring. Souls of the world,
demand of your Eyes, what are become of those objects, which so often they
have admired? Ask your Ears to know, where are those sweet Harmonies, which
have charmed them so deliciously? make you the same demand of all your other
Senses, and they shall altogether answer you in their manner, how their
pleasures are vanished in an instant, as the flash of a lightening; and that
they find nothing durable in the world, but grief for the privation of the
things which they loved. Admit you have all sorts of pleasures at a wish; for
how long time are they like to last? It may be a moment, it may be an hour;
and would you for a little number of instants, be reigning so long in your
vices?

Thou see then, my Soul, how false is the Good of Greatness; and that of
Riches how imaginary it is. How the pleasures of Banquets, full of Aloes, dye
in their spring, and the delights of the flesh have no other foundation then
that of corruption. It is now time, my Soul, that I let thee see sensibly this
difference that is between the contentments of the Earth, and those of Heaven,
to the end, that in the knowledge of their nature, the one so contrary to the
other, thou may shun those pleasures that fly away, and sigh for love after
the delights of Eternity. There is this difference ( S. Augustine notes)
between eternal and transitory things, that before we possess the transitory
goods, we passionately desire them; and from the time we enjoy them, we fall
sensibly to mislike them. On the contrry, the desire of eternal things we
never think of; yet from the time we possess them, we are not capable of
love, but for them. Consider a little, you Mortals, what this is but an age of
pleasures, whose last moment seems to make us forget all the others that went
before; in such wise, as there rests but a vain Idaea of the Time past. Search
you somewhat curiously within the memory of ages, into that of days, which have
run away, count their hours if you will, and you shall confess, that it
seems to you to be but yesterday, since our first Father was chased out of the
terrestrial Paradise; so true it is, that Time passes, and swiftly glideth
away.

The Sage Roman said; That if to these long years we add a great number of
others, and of all together make up a Reign of a life, the most happy that
ever yet has been seen, if we needs most destine a last day, to perform the
funerals of all the others, and upon that day a certain hour, and in this
hour the last moment; a great part of our life will go way in doing ill, the
greater in doing nothing, and the whole in doing otherwise then our duty
required. There is always a thirst of the delights of the world, and though we
seem to quench the same in its puddle springs, yet is it but for a moment; for
the heat will be renewing again, and the desire of drinking will press us then
more then ever. Untie thy self the^, my Soul, from all the feelings of the
Earth, and with a pitch, full of love, eleuate thy Thoughts to this sweet
object of Eternity. If thou aspirest to Greatnesses, represent to thy self how
the happy spirits trample underfoot both the Sun and Moon, and all those
Stars of the Night, whose infinite number astonish our senses. S. Paul was
but lifted to the third Heaven, and yet nevertheless could he not express, in
his language, the Meruayles which he admired. And S. Peter on the Mount Thabor,
being dazeled through the glittering of one sole Ray, most confidently demands
permission of his Master, to build in the same place three Tabernacles, having
now quite forgot the Earth, as if it had never been.

Alas, O great Saint, with what ecstasies of joy should thou be accomplished
in this divine Bower of Eternal felicityes, if one feeble reflection of light,
so ravished thee from thy self, as made thee breath so deliciously, in a life
replenished with clarity, as thou did put in oblivion the darkness of the
world where thou made thy abode? What might thy Glory by now? To what point
of happiness might we seem to termine it? Thou possessest the body, whose
Shadow thou have adored; thou behouldst uncovered that divine Essence, whose
Sple^dor makes the Cherubims to bow the head, for not being able to endure the
sweet violences of its clarity. Judge with what feeling I reverence thy
felicity, if the only throughts I have of them do make me happy only before
hand. The Kings of the world, my Soul, establish the foundation of their
Greatnesses upon the large spaces of the earth, and all the earth together is
but a point in comparison of Heaven. And therefore the only object they have
in their combats and triumphs, is no other then that of the Conquest of this
little point.

Get forth then, my Soul, of its Circumference, since thou art able to aspire
to the possession, not of the world (for it is but misery) but of a mansion
whose extent may not be measured, and whose delights are eternal. Would thou
have Thrones? The Imperial Heaven shall be thy footstool. Would thou have
Crowns? The same of immortal Glory shall enuiron thy head. Would thou
Scepters? Thou shall have always in thy hand a sovereign power, which shall
make thy desires unprofitable, not knowing what to desire out of thy power.
Have thou a desire to have treasures? Glory and Riches are in the house of our
Lord: And not this tra^sitory glory of the world which chaunges into smoke, but
another wholly divine, that depends not a whit upon Time, and which reaches
beyond all ages. Not those riches of the Ocean, nor those of the Land, which
are unprofitable in their virtue, and full of weakness in their power; but of
Riches that have no price, and which make thee owner of the Sovereign Good,
where all sorts of felicityes are comprehended. If thou be delighted with
Banquets, hear the Prophet what he says; Lord, one day alone affoards more
contentment in thy house, then a whole age in the feasts of the world. The
divine food wherewith the happy Spirits are fed has not in it self only these
sweetnesses in quality, but it nature. So as, this is a virtue essential to
it, continually to produce what soever they way imagine in its chief
perfection. We rejoice in thee, O Lord, in remembering thy breasts, a great
deal more sweet then wine.

They write of Assuerus, that he reigned in in Asia, over one hundred and
twenty seven Provinces, and that he made a Banquet in his City of Susa, which
lasted an hundred and fourscore days, where he set forth with Prodigality,
all the Magnificences which Art and Nature, with common accord could furnish
him, at the price of infinite riches. But the end of this Feast did blemish the
Glory of its beginning and continuance, for that all the pleasures which dye,
are not considerable in their Birth, nor in the course of their Reign. Hence
it is, my Soul, that the only delights of these Banquets, which the King of
Kings prepares for thee, are worthy of thy desires, since they shall last for
an Eternity. Those there have begun upon Earth, for to finish one day; and
these here shall begin in Heaven for never to have end. Some are borne, and
dye in Tym^; and others are borne in Eternity to endure therein as long as it.
Would thou lodge in Palaces? The Rich house of our Lord shall be the
habitation of the just. But what house do you believe it is? Represent unto thy
self, that when they enter into the Palace of some Great Prince, they find the
particular seats of all his Subjects, before that of his dwelling. The like is
it in this stately Palace of the Universe, which this Almighty King has built
with a word only, where al his Creatures make their abode, as in certain
Teneme^ts which he has destined to them. The Air serves them for a Cage, the
Sea for a Fishpoole, the Forests for a park, the Champaignes for orchards,
the Mountayns for their Towers, and the diverse Villages are as sundry places of
pleasure, which Kings and Princes hold as tenants of Time.

Walk then boldly, my Soul, within this vast Palace of the world, since it
is the place of thy dwelling. The starry Heaven is the feeling thereof; the
Moon the torch of the night, and the Sun that of the day: the birds learn
not to sing of nature, but to charm thine ears, through the sweet harmony of
their warbling. The Sun, the Aurora, and the Zephyrus take pains each one in
its turn to cultiuate the Earth, for to help it, in the shouting forth of its
delicate Flowers, from whom beautiful Iris has robbed the pourtaite of their
colors for to dress up her Arc, whence it is that thine eyes continually
admire it. The trees ever stooping under the burden of their fruits, grow not
but for thy delight. The woods, they people their trunkes with leaves, of
purpose to make thee taste the pleasures of their shades, in the chiefest of the
heats. And the Rocks though insensible, contribute to the perfection of thy
contentme^t a thousand goodly fountaynes, which with the murmur of their
purling, fetch sleep into thy eyes, for to charm sometimes the annoyes of thy
life. The Meadows do never seem to present themselves to thee, but with the
countenance of Hope, knowing well how it comforts the whole world; and its
Champaignes, as witty to deceive thee, do hide their treasures under goulden
Cases, to the end to dazzle thine eyes through the glittering of so goodly a
show.

And now, my Soul, if in this Palace where the Subjects of him who has built
the same, do soiourne, thou see but wonders every where; to what degree of
admiration shall thou be raised, when passing further, thou discouerest the
dwelling of the sovereign Master? Thou needst but mount up an eleauen steps
only to behold the spaciousnes of the place where is assembled all his Court.
Go then fair and softly, because upon every step thou shall be discovering of
new subjects of wonder, and astonishment at once. The first step is the Heaven
of the Moon, whereby passing only, thou shall admire the clarity wherewith it
is adorned, to give light to all those that mount, which is noted in the
Palaces of great men, where the Stayer-cases are made very light-some. The
Moon presids in the midst of its Heaven, and within its Circle is it always
waxing and wayning, where the divine Philosopher Plato has established the
spring of the Idaea's of all the things here beneath; and then consider how in
the space of this, degree might a thousand worlds be built.

The second Stayre is the Heaven of Mercury. The third, the Heaven of Venus.
The fourth that of the Sun (names which the Astrologers assign unto the
Heavens.) Co^template here at leisure, this Stare of the day, whose benign
influences do make the earth so fruitful, and whose light gives pride to
colors, and consequently the virtue to all beautiful things to become
admirable. It was this very Sun which Iosue arrested in the midst of its
Course, and which the Persians heretofore have adored, not considering the
while it was subject to Eclypses, and how it borrowed its light, and all its
other essential qualities from a sovereign and absolute Cause, which had
given it the Being.

The fifth Stayre is the Heaven of Mars. The sixth of Jupiter, and the seventh
of Saturn. They eight Stayre is the Firmament, The ninth the Primum mobile.
Stay here a little, my Soul, upon this Step, for to listen as you pass along
to the sweet Harmony of the moving of the Heavens, and of all that is in nature;
for by the swindge of this Heaven, as with a Mayster-wheele, are all the
springs of the world moved, and are no otherwise capable of action then through
its moving. But the motion is so melodious through continuance, and through the
iustnes of the correspondency of all the parts with their ground, as Plato that
great Philopher was not touched with any other desire, the^ that of hearing
this Harmony.

The tenth Staire is the Cristalline Heaven. Here it is, my Soul, where thy
feeling, and thy thoughts are to be attentive. This tenth Step is beyond the
limits of the world. Thou beginst but now, to enter into the Mansion of the
Glory of thy Lord, mingle respect here amidst thy joy, and join humility with
thy contentments. Thou beholdst thy self now illumined with another light, then
that of the Sun and Moon not suffering intermission in its durance. It
shines always, and thou may know in the near admiration of its divine
Clarity, the price of the delights it communicats to thee. Let us finish our
voyage, and mount we now to the Imperial Heaven, whither S. Paul was rapt, and
where he saw wonders, which had no name; where he tasted Sweetnesses, whose
Idaea's are incomprehe^sible; and where he felt pleasures, whereof his very
Senses could not talk, even when they had the use of speech. But thou may
yet cry with S. Stephen, how thou see the Heavens open: for now behold thee
upon the last step, and at the gate of that great Imperial Heaven.

It is not permitted thee, my Soul, to enter into a place so holy and sacred;
do thou only admire by order, the Porch without, and the infinite greatness of
the miraculous wonders there, whence all the Saints, incessantly publish the
Glory of the Omnipotent who has wrought them. Contemplate the perfect Beauty
of the Angels, each one in his Hierarchy, that of the Archangels, that of
Powers, that of the Virtues, that of the Principalities, that of the
Dominations, and that of the Seraphims, with this Astonishment to behold how in
clarity they surpass the Sun. Admire all the happy Spirits, each one seated
in the Throne of Glory which he has merited, the Virgins, the Confessors, the
Martyrs, the Apostles, the Prophets, and the Patriarchs, being raised all to
the degrees of Felicity, which they have purchased.

Represent unto thy self besides, the incomparable happiness, wherewith the
Immaculate Virgin Mother of our Savior, is accomplished. Cast thine eyes upon
her Throne, and even ravished in astonishment of her Greatnesses, publish with
confidence how they are without comparison, and that the Sun, the Moon, and
all the Stars are of a matter to vile, and profane for her to tread upon. And
if thou will be casting thy view upon the Tabernacle of thy God, do thou shroud
it from the flash of his rays, under the Robe of the Cherubims; and being
ravished as they, in the dazeling where they breath accomplished withal sorts
of felicityes, adore the divine Object of their Glory. And while thine eyes,
shall be tasting, in their fashion, the delights which are found in the
admiration of things perfectly fair, lend thine ears to that sweet harmony,
wherewith al those happy Spirits make up a Consort in singing without cease,
Holy, Holy, Holy is our Lord; the Heavens, and Earth are filled with the
majesty of his Glory.

O divine melody! How powerful are thy streynes, since through our thoughts
they make themselves so sensible to our hearts! With how many different
pleasures, and all perfectly extreme, art thou ravished now, my Soul! With
what rauishments of Joy art thou transported besides thy self? In what sweet
ecstasies art thou not wa^dering? After what sort of goods, can thou seem to
aspire unto? Thou beholdest all Greatnesses in their Thrones, Riches in their
mines, Glory in its Element, and the Virtues in their Empire. Thou tastest the
true Contentments, in their purity, after a manner so divine, as thou
possessest all without desiring any thing; and yet nevertheless not all, since
the object of thy delights is infinite; which makes thee taste new Sweetnesses,
not in the order of increase of pleasure, but in that of the accomplishment of
the rest, as being always perfectly content.

Nor yet is this all, my Soul, to make thee admire, in Idaea, the Meruailles
of all these divine objects of glory, and of felicity. It behoues me now to
represent unto thee besides, the strayte union that ioynes the happy Spirit
with his sovereign Good, I would say, the Soul with God. But how may it be
done? God cannot produce a Species, or an Image of himself, which is able to
represent him, in regard the Species and the Image are always more pure, and
more simple then is the Object whence they proceed. Now, what Species, or Image
may be purer, and more spiritual then God? Besides that, all the Species, and
all the Images are so determined in the form of the thing they represent, as
they cannot seem to represent another. And it is true, that God is not a thing
determinate, because it has not a particular Being, separated from others; in
such sort, as he eminently conteynes each thing, as the Apostle says, Portans
omnia verbo virtutis sue. There is no Species, which is able to determine this
God indeterminate; there is no Image created, or produced that can represent
this God increated. Hence it is that God cannot unite himself to the Soul
through a Species or Image, as we do other things. The Deuines say, that God
unites himself to the Soul, per se, really; and they call this union, per
modum species. But for to clear the obscurity, which is in all this mystery,
you must note, that when as God unites himself to the Soul, he eleuates the
same to a being which is supernatural and divine. In so much, as it rese^bles
God himself; not so, as it loses its proper Essence, but within the
perfection whereto it is elevated, it deriues from the Object which co^municates
to it, all the glory that it possesses, (...) relatio^s to his similitude; in
such sort as in regarding this happy Soul, they behold God.

Moreover, it may be said more clearly. that God unites himself to the Soul
in such manner, as the Fire, is united to the Iron: and forasmuch as the Fire;
as agent, is more noble then the Iron, it conuertes the Iron into its
semblance, with so much perfection, as one would say, the Iron had changed its
proper form into that of the Fire; yet notwithstanding the Iron loses not
awhit of its essence. Now this union of Fire with Iron is a real union, per
se, and not through Species, nor through Image. So God who is called the ( Deus
noster ignis consumens est) is united to our Soul, per se, really, and
receiving the same into himself, reduces it to a being supernatural, and
deified; in so much as it seems to be no more a Soul but God himself. A
verity, which S. John publishes when he says, we shall be like unto him. From
the Time, that a Soul is united with God, he illumines it with a light of
glory, to the end it may see him, and conte^plate him at its pleasure, and with
him all things which are in him, formally and eminently (to use the terms of
the Schoolmen,) in so much, as it is ignorant of nothing within the
perfection of its wisdom.

O admirable Science! Then shall it be, when it shall clearly see within the
Abysses of divine secrets, that which God did before he created the world. How
he produced eternally another himself, without multiplication of Deities, and
how between the producent, and the person produced, proceeds an eternal love
of him who engenders and of him who is engendered, which is this adorable
Trine-vnity. It shall see besides how this God, being engendered Eternally in
himself without mother, might be borne once on earth of the most glorious
Virgin without Father. With what Providence he gouernes all things; with what
Goodness he created Man; and with what Love he redeemed him. How he iustifies
inuisibly without forcing the liberty; How the works of his Justice accord with
those of his mercy; How he saues through his grace; How he leaves them
reprobate without fault; How his infallible Science agrees without the
Contingency of things; How the Predestinate may damn himself, and the
Reprobate be saved, though the Science of God remain always infallible, and
immutable as it is. The verity of all these secrets shall be represented to its
eyes, more clear then the Sun.

O what Science, my Soul, or rather what incomparable felicity proceeds from
all these sundry pleasures? When shall this be, that thou cryest out with the
Queen of Saba, speaking to thy Lord, in like manner as she spoke unto Solomon:
What wisdom is thine, O great King, what glory, and what magnificence admire
they in thy Kingdom? What City is this same, replenished with so many goods;
what delicious meats and what precious wines, do they taste at the table of thy
banquets? What luster of greatness appears, in all those, that attend upon
thee? Renown may well publish thy praises in all places of the Earth, if all the Heavens together are not large enough to conteyne the rumor of them. O
happy Spirits, who reign in the mansion of this immortal glory! I wonder not
awhit, at your so trampling under foot the Crowns and Scepters of the world,
in just pretension to the felicity you possess. What fires, what torments, and
what new punishments, would not one suffer for to purchase this soueraygne
good, where repose is so durable? Gibbets, Hangmen, and all the instruments of
Death, are as so many Trophies of the glory, which succeeds shame and pain. O
how these divine words of S. Augustine, do cause a sweet melody to resound,
while he says; Let the devils prepare me from henceforth as many ambushes as
they will; let them address the last assaults of their power to encounter me;
let fastings macerate my body; let Sackcloth and Cilices torment my flesh; let
tribulations oppress me under their weight; let the long vigills shorten my
life; let him there give affronts of his contempt, and here of his cruelties;
let cold freeze the blood within my veins; let the scorching of the Sun tanne
me; let its parching reduce me into ashes; let aches clean my head in pieces;
let my heart revolt against my Soul, my visage loose its color, and all the
parts of my body stoop to their ruin; let me yield my life to the suffering
of diverse torments: let my days slide away in weeping and continuull tears;
and let the worms, in fine, take hold of my flesh, and the corruption of my
bones: All this would be nothing to me, so I might enjoy Eternal Repose in the
day of Tribulation.

I will believe it, O great Saint: for what is it to endure all the evils of the
world within Time, for to possess all desirable goods in the bower of
Eternity! O sweet residence, where Joy eternally endures, and where delights
are immortal! Where nothing is seen but God; where they know nothing but God!
If they think, it is of God; if they desire, it is God himself. And howbeit
the hearts do there sigh without cease for love, those sighs proceed not, but
from the contentments of fruition, where Love always remains in its
perfection. Let Antiquity vaunt as much as it will of the Temple of Thessaly,
of the Orchards of Adonis, of the Gardens of Hesperides, of the pleasures of
the fortunate Islands: Let Poets chaunt the pleasures of their Elizean fields,
and let humane Imagination assemble in one subject whatsoever is more beautiful
and delicious in nature, and they shall find in effect that all is but a vain
Idaea, in comparison of the immortal pleasure of this Seat of Glory. Let them
imagine a Quire of Sirens, and let them join thereto in Consort both the harp
of Orpheus, and the voice of Amphion; Let Apollo and the Muses likewise be
there to bear a part: all this melody of these consorts were but an ircksome
noise of Winds and Thunders in competency of the divine harmony of Angels. Let
them make a Perfume of all what Sweets soever that Arabia and Saba has had;
let the Sea co^tribute thereto all its Amber, and the flowers all their Balm;
such a perfume notwithstanding would be but a stench and infection, in regard
of the divine odours, which are enclosed in the Emperialll Heaven.

O how S. Paul had reason to dye of love, rather then grief, in his
prolongation to reuiew the felicity which he admired in his rauishment! I
desire to dye in my self, for to go to live in him, whom I love a great deal
more then my self, said he, at all seasons. O sweet death, to dye of Love, but
yet the life more sweet, that makes this Love eternal! Me thinks the sad
acce^ts of that great King David strike nine ears, when he cried out aloud,
This life to me is tedious in the absence of my Lord. This Prince possessed the
goods of the Earth in abundance, and Greatnesses and Pleasures equally
environed the Throne of his absolute Power: in such sort, as he had all things
to his hearts content. But yet for all that, he could not choose but be trobled
in the midst of the delights of his Court, since so we see his heart to send up
sighs of Sorrow unto Heaven, to live so long a time on Earth.

What say thou now, my Soul, of the Greatnesses and Magnificences of this
divine Palace, where Honor, Glory, and all the Majesty's together expose to
view whatsoever else they have more precious and more rare: where Beauty
appears in its Throne in company of its graces, of its sweetnesses, of its
baytes, of its allurements, and of its charms; where, with power always
adorable it attracts the eyes to its admiration; and through a virtue, borne
with it, subdues their looks to the empire of its perfections. In such sort,
as the eyes cannot love but its object after admiring it, they are so taken
with the meruailes, wherewith it abounds: where Goodness exercising its
sovereign power forges new chains of love to attract the hearts unto it; and
after having made a conquest of them, it nourishes them with a food so
delicious, as they never breath but of joy, transporting them wholly in the
acco^plishment of their felicity. In such sort, my Soul, as all the pleasures
together being elevated in their first purity are there found to be collected
in their orige^, to the end the Spirit might never be troubled to seek its
desires.

Consider the difference that is between the Contentments of the Earth, and
those of heaven; I would say, those of the Palace where Creatures make their
abode, and of those where the Omnipote^t lodges. Thou have seen within this
first Palace, the Meadows enamelled with flowers, the Champaygnes covered
with rich haruests, and the Valleys peopled with a thousand brooks; but these
spring up at the peeping of the Aurora, and wither at its setting. These
haruests fetching their being from corruption, return in an instant to their
first beginning, after they have run danger, to serve as a prey to tempests,
and disport to the winds. And these Brooks, feeble in their virtue, may well
moderate the ardour of a vehement thirst, but not quench it wholly, since the
fire thereof always renewes from its ashes. On the contrary, within this
celestial house, the Lyllies wherewith the Virgins are crowned, and the Roses
which the Martyrs wear equally on their head, remain always disclosed as if
they grew continually. The haruests there are eternal, and in behoulding them,
their divine nature has this property, that it satiates the Soul through the
eyes, after so perfect a manner* as it is ravished in its repose. The
Fountaynes are of bottomless Springs of all the immortal delights that may
fall under the knowledge of the understanding; and howbeit they quench not
thirst, yet have they power to do it: but to make their sweetnesses more
sensible, they entertayne the drougth within their Souls, without disquietnes,
to the end, that being always a dry with a thirst of love full of pleasure,
they may always drink, that so without cease they may rest contented.

Within that first Palace the chaunting of the Birds did charm thine ears;
and within this here the sweet music of the Angels rauisheth Spirits. Within
that terrestrial dwelling, the Spring, the Summer, and Autunme were
incessantly occupied in producing thy pleasures, and in this celestial bower an
Eternity accomplisheth thee, withal the goods whereto imagination may attain.
There beneath had you diverse houses of pleasure for to walk in; and here on
high, the first thought of a desire is able to build a number without number,
within the spaces of the Heavens, with a perfection of an incomparable Beauty.
So as if thou be delighted with the Courts of the Kings and Princes of the
world, to behold the Greatnesses that attend upon them, turn away with a trice
the eyes of thy memory from those little Brooks of a transitory Honor, and
admire this inexhaustible Ocean of the immortal Glory of the Heavens, where
all the happy Souls are engulfed, without suffering shipwreck. Be thou the
Echo then, my Soul, of those divine words of the Prophet David, when he cried
out so, in the extremity of his languor; Even as the Heart desires the curre^t
of the living waters; so, O Lord, is my soul a thirst after you, as being the
only fountain, where I may quench the same.

Thou must needs, my Soul, surrender to the Assaults of this verity, so
sensible, as there is nothing to be desired besides this sovereign good, whose
allurements make our hearts to sigh at all hours; How beautiful are your
Eternal Pauillions? and how exceedingly am I enamoured with them (says the
same Prophet?) My soul faints, and I am rapt in ecstasy, when I think, I shall
one day see my living God face to face. O incomparable felicity! ^o be able to
co^template the adorable perfections of an Omnipotent! To behold without
wincking, the divine Beauty of him, who has created all the goodly things that
are! To live always with him, and in himself! Not to breath but the air of
his Grace and not to sigh, but that of his Love! Shall I afford the names of
pleasures to these contentments, whiles all the delights of the world are as
sensible dolours, in comparion of them? For if it be true, that a flash of a
feeble Ray, should cause our eyes to weep in their dazeling, for the temerity
they have had to regard very steadfastly its light; is it not credible, that the
least reflection of the divine brightness of the Heavens, should make us blind,
in punishment, for glauncing on an object so infinitely raised above our Power?
In so much as whatsoever is in Eternity can admit no comparison, with that
which is comprehended in Time* The Felicities of Paradise cannot be represented
in any fashion, because the Spirit cannot so much as carry its thoughts to the
first degree of their divine habitation. Hence it is that S. Paul cried out,
That the eye has never seen the Glory which God has prepared for the just.
Whatsoever Saints have said heerof may not be taken for so much, as a mere
delineation of its Image. And when the Angels should even descend from the
Heavens to speak to us thereof, whatsoever they were able to say, were not the
least portion of that which it is. It is well known that Beautitude co^sists in
beholding God, and that in his vision, the Soul does find its sovereign good;
yet for all that, were this as good, as to say nothing: for howbeit one may
imagine a thing sweet, agreeable and perfectly delicious in the contemplatio^
of this divine Essence; yet were it impossible this good imagined, should have
any manner of relation with the Sovereign, which is inseparable to this Glory.
Let us search within the power of Nature, the extreme pleasures, which it has
produced in the world hitherto from our Nativity, and their Flowers shall be
changed at the same time into thorns, if but compared to those plants of
Felicity which grow in the Heavens. Gold, Pearls, the Zephyrus, the Aurora,
the Sun, the Roses, Amber, Musk, the Voice and Beauty, with all the strange
allurements that Art can produce, for to charm our senses with, and to ravish
our Spirits, are but mere Chimera's, and vain shadows of a body of pleasure,
formed through dreams, in equality, to the least object of contentme^t which
they receive in Paradise. Which makes me repeat again those sweet words with
S. Paul, When shall it be, Lord, that I die to my self, for to go live in you?
And with that great other Prophet; I languish, o Lord, in expectation to see
you in the mansion of your Eternal glory.

What Contentment, my Soul, to see God! If the only thought of this good so
ravish us with joy; what delights must the Hope produce, and with what
felicities are they not accomplished in its possession? The Spirit is always
in ecstasy, the Soul in rauishment, and the senses in a perfect satiety of
their appetits. Dissolve then, O Lord, this soul from my body, for I dye
always through sorrow of not dying soon enough, for to go to live with you.
When as those two faithful Messengers brought equally between their shoulders
that same goodly bunch of Grapes from the land of Promise, the fruit so
mightily encouraged the people of Israel to the Conquest thereof, which had
produced the same, that all fell a sighing in expectation of the last Triumph.
Let us turn the Medall, and say that S. Stephen and S. Paul are those two
faithful Messengers of this land of Promise, since both of them have tasted of
the fruit, and have brought to Mortals the happy news thereof. So as if in
effect we would behold another Grape, let us mount with S. Peter up to the
Mounth Thabor, where our Savior made the Apparition, through the splendor of
the Glory which environed him. And it is to be noted they were two to bring
this fruit, since there were two Natures united to one Person only. So as, my
Soul, if curiosity and doubt transport thy Senses to behold the body of those
beautiful Shadows of Glory which I represent to thee; harke^ to S. Stephen,
while he assures thee that he saw the Heavens open. Lend thine ear to the
discourses of S. Paul, when he says, How all which he had felt of sweets and
pleasures in that bower of felicity, cannot be expressed, because it cannot be
comprehended.

The desire which S. Peter had to build three Tabernacles upon this mountain
all of light, enforces thee to give credit, and believe through this show of
fruit, that the soil that bears it, abounds in wonders. And that thus we are
to pass the Red Sea of torments and of pains, within the Arc of the Cross
of our Savior, for to land at the Port of all those felicities. They are put
to sale, my Soul; so as if thou should say to me, what should be given to
buy the same; demand them of thy Creator, since he it is that first set price
upon them, on the mount Caluary. The money for them, is Patience in adversity,
Humility in Greatnesses, Chastity in presence of profane objects, and finally
the Exercise of all virtues together, in the world, where Vice so absolutely
reigns. And if thou will buy the^ with that Money which is most current, and
whereof God himself made use, thou art to take thee to the Scourges, the
Nails, the Thorns, and the Gaul, and by a definitive sentence to condemn thy
life to the sufferance of a thousand evils.

But let it not trouble thee awhit to pronounce this Sentence against thy
self: for if thou cast thy self into the burning furnace of divine love, thou
shall find the three Innocents there, in company with the son of God, where
for to sing forth his glory, thou shall bear thy part. If thou cast thy self
into the Sea of thy tears, Jonas shall be affording thee room within his little
Oratory, for the publish together the divine meruailes of the Omnipotent. If
thou crucifiest all thy Passions, S. Peter will lend thee another half of his
Cross, to participate of his Triumph; so as in the extremest dolours, shall
thou be tasting the extremest delight. What may happen to thee in thy
suffera^ces worse then Death? Ah, what is more glorious then to suffer and die
for love! And after God, what may we love besides him? What may we desire,
since his divine presence very perfectly fills us, as well with happiness as with
Glory? If we must needs be stoned, as S. Stephen was, what joy to have our
Soul enforced to go forth of the body with the strokes of flints, that those
very stones might serve as Stayres to mount up to Heaven by?

If we be to be laid on the gridiron as S. Laurence was, shall we seem to
complain against the fire, for reducing us to ashes, while we are but ashes
ourselves? And then a Heart which is truly amourous, does burn of it self; in
such wise, as the flames of the world, cannot but help it to die readily, which
is all it desires. If we be drawn in pieces with four horses, as S.
Hyppolitus was, are they not sweet streynes of pleasure, rather then of pain,
for to have the life snatched away with the arms and legs, for the Glory of
him who has created the Soul of that body? And besides, what an honor was it
to S. Hyppolitus to see his Spirit carried on a triumphant Chariot, so drawn
with four horses to the Palace of Eternity? If one should be fleaed with S.
Bartholomew, what a happiness, trow you, would it be to him, who living but of
the love of God, should behold this amorous life, by a thousand wounds, to
abandon Nature it self? and after having made of his blood a Sea of love, to
find on its waters the port of Eternal joy? If they throw us down headlong,
from a pinnacle of the Temple, as S. James was, how sweet a thing to be
oppressed under the weight of this Cross! Should we have so little courage
amidst so many companio^s, who with their blood have tracked us out the way of
glory.

The Pagans who even buried their hopes in their Tomb; not pretending other
good, then that of a vain Renown, have let us see some kind of magnanimity in
their actions; for whatsoever horror and amazement Death may have with it, yet
could it not daunt them awhit, till the last shocke of its assaults. Mutius
vanquished the fire with one hand, which vanquished all things in seeing it
devoured with its flames, without being moved with it. Rutilius found his
country in his exile. Socrates drunk up a glass of poison to the health of
his Spirit, for to give testimony to his friends, that he was not sick of the
fear of death. And Cato, he made of his bosom a sheath for his poynard. Ah!
and what! Shall all these Souls of the world have offered such glorious
triumphs to virtue without knowing it; and we trample its Aultars, and profane
its Temples, after we have adored them? for though all be impossible to base
Spirits, yet a generous heart can do all. What a shame were it for thee, my
Soul, to fly those perils that give Crowns? can thou not boldly thrust thy
self pell-mell into a throng of ten thousand crucified, fifty thousand
beheaded, an hundred thousand rent with Scourges, two hundred thousand
overwhelmed, and murderd with several punishments, wherein cruelty exercised
its tyranny? Of a million of poor Hermits, and of Religious who have happily
yielded up their life to the rigorous austerities of a number without number of
dolours? And finally of two Millions of holy Souls, all sacrificed on the
Altar of the Cross?

Dare thou go to Paradise, by a way all strewed with roses, knowing thy
Savior to have passed by that of Thorns? What a shame is it for thee, to be
in Paradise alone without having suffered a little evil for him, who should
bestow so much good upon thee? What wonder shines in this divine Thought, that
he who has created the world, should have suffered all the evils thereof for
recompense? He has made the Thorns to grow, for to crown his head withal.
He has formed in the Earth the mines of Iron, for to forge the nails; and
with the liberal hand of his Providence, has he watered the trees, which
furnished the Jews with those stakes whereunto he was tied; and at the same
time fed, and protected the false witnesses that accused him, the Judges that
condemned him, and the Executioners who tormented him. It is true, in the order
of his justice, he condemned Adam to death, and in the order of his love he
executes the Sentence upon his own life. He would have miseries to reign in
the world but it was but for himself, since he has suffered them altogether.

So as, my Soul, if in the extremity of thy Sorrows, the feeblenes of thy
courage should make thee to let fall some complaint, turn thy face to the
Crosse-ward to admire the glory which is inseparable to it. One cannot go from
one extreme to another, without passing through the midst; I would say, that
from the Paradise of the Earth, we cannot ascend to that of Heaven, without
passing through the fire, which is that midst where we are necessarily to be
purified, lik^ as gould in the furnace. But since the generous are more
animated through Hope of Recompense, then fear of pain; be thou touched, my
Soul, with the sweet feelings of the felicity which is promised us, rather
then with the rigor of the Flames which are prepared. Thou would yield to
Love rather then to Force, to the end thy desires be not mercinary. And
represent to thy self that as the punishments of the guilty are eternal, so
are likewise the joys of the blessed immortal. After the tasting of a
thousand years of pleasures, they have not yet begun; after an hundred
thousand years of rest, they find themselves in the first moment according to
our manner of speaking. After a hundred thousands of millions of years of
contentments of joy and felicity, they are always in the first point of their
happiness, with so perfect a joy of the knowledge, as they do nothing but
rejoice in those delights. In so much, as even as long as God shall be God, shall
the Glory last, where the happy Spirits are filled with all sorts of pleasures,
and consequently for ever.

O Eternity, how profound are thy Abysses! The Imagination cannot sink its
plummet into the bottom of the^, but is always grieved to have so ill
employed its Time. After it has thought all its life on the meruailes, or
rather on the miracles, which are enclosed within thy labyrinthes, it dies in
the impotency of approaching to the entry. This Dedalus has no thread, this
Carriere has no stop, this Circumference has no Center, nor this Line a
point. Eternity termines to God alone, and God alone to Eternity. O
incomprehensible Mystery, that a God should recompense a sigh of Love, with an
infinite love! one moment of pain with an Eternity of Glory! For having tasted
never so little of the vinegre of his Chalice, to quench our thirst for ever,
in the torrent of these divine Sweetnesses! For having shed one tear of
repentance, to make us live eternally in joy and smiles! For having fasted one
instant, to satiate us for ever with meats the most delicious, which are found
in Heaven. And finally, to recompense one night of travail, with a day of
eternal Repose.

Think never, my Soul, but upon this Eternity? What pleasures soever thou
tastes in the world, represent to thy self they shall one day finish, and that
in their end all the Thorns of their Roses shall assemble to make thee feel
the sorrow of their privation; if thou would have content, be it not but for
Eternity; it is to dye continually, for to live with men, and it is to live
always to live with God. It were to be unfortunate to be happy on Earth,
since the true way of felicity is Heaven. Felicity is as immortal as
immortality it self, and whither Time cannot reach to, because it is out of
Time. In such wise, my Soul, as thou should learn to speak this divine
language of the Angels, whose Echo the Prophet is, when he says, I languish,
O Lord, in the expectation of seeing you in the mansion of your glory. Let this
Languor devour thee, to the end, that dying of love for thy God, who is
soueraignely lovely, thou may go to live for him, since this is the only
Spring of life.

Of the Infernal Pains.
THE Great King Ezechias was brought to such a point of fear and astonishment,
when the Prophet assured him he should dye the morrow after, as that if his lot
had reserved him for shipwreck, he had now run that danger in the Sea of his
tears. That fatal Sentence took away his life before he dyed; for from the
moment that the same was once pronounced unto him, he breathed but the air of
Approaches to an inevitable death, where all Sorrows heaped together in one
what they had of bitter or rigorous, to torment anew his afflicted Spirit. This
poor Prince had but Sighs and Tears to defend himself withal against the
batteries of a sovereign Will. He plains, but of himself; he cries but only
to move Pity; he arms his hand with fury against his bosom, and with
redoubled blows smites his breast, believing he laid hard on his heart the
while, as complice of the crimes, whose punishment he carried. What shall he
do? the night steals away insensibly, and the light which shall succeed his
darknesses, is not to shine, but to show him the way to the Tomb. Sleep has
already taken its leave of his eyes, for fear of being drowned in his
continual tears. Repose abandons his spirit in fear of Death which
possesses him. In so much as being reduced into a last point of Sufferance, he
apprehe^ds that every sigh which he casts to the wind, is to be the last of his
life. The remembrance of his faults so forcibly aggrauates the punishment, as
he dares not think of them, but with the sorrow of heauing committed them: a
Sorrow indeed, so powerful, as disarmed the divine Justice of its Thunders.

This great King lifts up his heart through Fear dejected, and constraines it
to seek for hope in that midst of despair. He humbly confesses the truth of
those crimes, but with the same tongue wherewith he publishes them, he
protests before his God, and his Judge to commit them no more; and for
assurance beseeches the same God, and the same Judge to cast down his eyes
into the depth of his Soul, to see the feelings thereof; in so much as he was
heard. Isay the Prophet receaues commandment to revoke the Sentence of his
Death, to prolong the term of his life, and to make the Sun turn back for
some part of its way. O admirable Goodness! The whole course of the Universe
is changed, rather the^ to refuse a man's request who promises to God to
change the course of his life! But what difference between the Sentence which
the Prophet pronounces on the behalf of God to a guilty King, and that which
God himself shall pronounce on that great day of his Justice to the criminal
Souls? They are both verily two Sentences of Death; but the one is signified
in Time by a living man, to a man that is living yet; and the other is
proclaimed out of Time by a God, to Spirits which are criminal, and incapable
of repentance. Besides, we see how the first Sentence was revoked through
grace, while the other remains inviolable by Reason. Mercy moderates the
rigor of that there, and Justice augme^ts the pain of this here with an
Eternity! O most dreadful Sentence!

There was with the Persians a certain Prison, whence the guilty were never to
go forth, which they called by the name of Lethe, as who would seem thereby to
represent a place of Oblivion, and where the Thoughts of men do never approach.
This Prison may well be compared to that of Hell, from whence the Thralls do
never get forth, nor where the happy Spirits do never descend in thought. It is
a place of forgetfulness, since God remembers not the wicked Souls, but to
cause them only to be tortured by the instruments of his Justice: They have no
other dwelling then that of their sepulchers, cries out the Psalmist; which is
as much to say, as they shall be buried eternally in the tomb of Hell; or as S.
Augustine says, they shall be full of life in the midst of their torments, in
being always renewed again amidst their pains, without ever dying. O cruel
life! Seeing it is more unsupportable then Death! Let the most afflicted Souls
appear, forsooth, upon the Theater of their Martyrings; let Iultius recount at
large the history of his suffera^ces. Let Persindas represent to us sensibly
the cruelty of his punishment, at the light of the Sun, where he is exposed
al covered with honey to the mercy of the Flies. Let Lepidus Crassus
communicate with us through Contagion, a part of his evil at such time as they
straightly bound his body to a carcass, to the end the stench might serve as a
Torturer to tyrannize his life to death. Let Phocinas the Locrian, show us
clearly by the light of the Fire which consumed him, the torments wherewith he
was tyrannized, in feeling himself by little and little reduced into Ashes.

Let Pamindus the Philosopher express to us, in the Amazement of his mortal
silence which the punishment of his tongue cut out had brought him to some
feeble dolor of his smart. Let Lysander buried in the brazen Bull by the
Tyrant of Syracusa make us to hear the sad accents of his cries for to publish
with the language of his plaints, the truth of his torments. Let Lelius Cooles
discover in his countenance, the terror and the anguish of his heart, upon the
Cliffes of the Sea, from whence he was cast down headlong. Let Martius Neuola
mixing the wind of his sighs with those that enkindled the flames which
consumed him, conueigh to our ears the sad harmony of his last groans. Let
Virgilia the wife of Lertius the Roman, relate to us at leisure the traunces of
Martyring of a heart impoysoned by the cunning Enemy, who by little and little
extinguished her in a long course of years, to make her sensible by degrees of
all the rigors of death. Let Emilia represent to us, in her despair, the
anguishes of a dying Soul, amidst the press of her disastres. Let the wife of
Brutus send to our eyes the smoke of the burning coals, that consumed her
bowels, to let us feel the heat wherewith she was burned. Let Messina, before
she plucked out the Heart from her bosom, partake us with her torments, where
through a Sentence of her fury, she condemned her self in making the one part
of her Body to serve as a Hangma^ to destroy the other. Let Eugenia making a
halter of the silk of her Harp, give us some testimony of the dolor of her
precipitous Death. Let Cleopatrae infect the Air with the Poison, which
devoured her life, for to make us Companions of her evils.

All these kinds of Martyrings, these Tortures, these dolours, these uncouth
torments and these evils without example, and these tyrannies exercised by men,
more cruel the^ Tygres and Bears, can admit no comparison with the least
pain of the damned. The Thorns of these sufferances, are Roses; and the
bitterness of these anguishes is but honey. One moment of the pains in hell is
more intolerable then an Age of Afflictions in this world. Let them lend their
ears to the lamentable cries of Ampilaus King of the Pyroti, when as being
fastened to his rich Couch with the rude chains of a thousand dolours procured
through a Sciatica, his torments plucked out the heart from his bosom without
snatching away the life, and with a cruel encounter drew his Soul to his lips
without suffering it to go forth. To bewail the rage whereto his evil had
brought him, makes him to throw out fire by the eyes, rather then to power out
water; to complain with Sighs, of the excess of his sufferances, learnes him
a language so dreadful, as the noise of Thunder is not more terrible the^ that
of his voice, made hoarse with the force of crying. They do well to deck his
bed with the richest ornaments that may be found, to bring him rest, while his
body is a Bush of Thorns, wherewith his Soul is straytly hedged in: In such
sort, as the points of its thorns do afford him a thousand pricks of dolor
and martyrings, whose very thought is full of horror. They may cast their
looks of pity on him long enough, while Cruelty, which incessantly butchers
him, makes them so feeble in his succor, as he always breaths in the death of
his pains without being able ever to dye.

But turn we the Medall, and lend the ear of our imagination to the warnings
of of that great King Pharao, bound in hell on a bed of devouring flames,
which burn without consuming him, and which consume him, without reducing him
to ashes. What inequality of evils, and what difference of cries? The one in
time feels very piercing dolours upon a couch of Thorns, and the other
suffers a thousand pains, all eternal, upon a bed of fire. He there yields up
his miserable life, to the last shocke of a cruel torment; and he here
reviving always of his Ashes amidst his punishment, lives not but to dye in
his sufferances of a death eternally living. The former comforts himself with
the hope of a Tomb, and the latter finds increase of his torments, in the
despair of ever seeing an end. Let them think a little on the sensible
torments, wherewith Tegonus, that great Prince of Almaine was afflicted, when as
his heart served before hand as a Coffin for the worms, which gnawed him without
cease to devour his life. A punishment as cruel as prodigious: this was a
living death, gliding in his bosom, where it forged darts of incomparable
dolor for to martyr him withal. He wants for nothing in the midst of his
Greatnesses, and yet wants he all, since all fayles him of his content. His
subjects are about him to receive his Commandments, but he knows not what to
command them for his succor. The remedies they offer him are unprofitable in
the ignorance of his malady; for the skilfullest Physicians of them understand
not the cause thereof, which makes the^ ingenious without thinking of it, to
afflict him a new, in steeping his mouth with a thousand sorts of bitternesses.
He cries out in the extremity of his languours, but each one by his eyes makes
answer to his tongue, in weeping at the noise of his sobs and his complaynts.
And after having suffered as many deaths as he sent forth sighs, he paid at
last the tribute which he owed to Nature.

Cast yet the view of your imagination upon the backside of the Medall, to
hear the cries, a great deal more hideous, of another Prince abiding in Hell,
being touched with the malady of a worm which gnawes him eternally, without
devouring him. He sees all his Subjects about him, as culpable as he, but in
the astonishment they are in, they answer him but by the eyes only, as unable
to succor him, or to help themselves. The Devils are his Physicians, who not
knowing the means to cure him, inuental sorts of punishments to tyrannize his
Soul. But what difference of pains? That Prince of the world finds this
consolation in his afflictions, that after the worms shall have devoured his
Heart, his life shall have an end with the end of their prey, and consequently
his punishment. And on the contrary this Prince of Hell, finds always the
beginning of his evils in the end of his pains. The worm that gnawes him, is
immortal like as the prey which it deuoures: In so much, as his dolours
remain extreme in their excess. The one turning his Face to the Tombwards,
beholds there his sufferance buried with him, and the other sees himself
buried yet living within a tomb of Fire, which through a cruel property
entertaines that which it burns, to the end it may never want matter.

What may be imagined more insupportable, then the torment wherewith Charles
King of Navarre dyed of? The Physicians knowing he had a very little life left
him in the body, employed this vain device for his comfort, forsooth, to sow
him up in a sheet steept in Aqua-vitae, of purpose to prolong his life; but the
ill luck was, that the servant who had sowed him therein, burnt the end of his
thread instead of cutting it asunder, where to say better, he burnt the whole
sheet, and the King that was shut within. Represent we to our selves now the
fearful cries of this unhappy Prince, who being enchayned in a strait Prison
all of Fire, casts forth the last sighs of his life, in the Flames, quickened
with so excessive an heat as they may not be compared but to chose of the
Furnace. They come to his Succor, but Death at that instant, touched with
pity, preuents the help they could afford, in finishing his evils with the
end of his life.

But look we yet still in the backeside of this Madall, upon the torments and
cruelty which a new King suffers in the midst of Hell, being fast enchayned
within a burning prison, where he always burns without ever dying. What
difference of Torments! The one is left to the mercy of devouring flames, being
watered with a water which increases the heat; employing in vain for his
Succor, the endeavor of his voice; and the other environed with despair,
endures the pain of eternal Fire, which burns him without taking away his
life. You see very sensibly, O you souls of the world, how the pain which one
suffers in this vale of tears, cannot be compared, how cruel soever, with the
least dolours of the damned. I I grant the Stone, or Gravel, the
windcholicke, the Sciatica, and a thousand other Maladies besides, deliver you
into a restles combat of punishments, and torments, yet their sharpest fits,
their piercing points, their gaul, and their rigours are true pleasures, joys,
and rauishments of Spirit, in comparison of the sufferings of Souls eternally
criminal.

Let Lucius Fabius maintain as long as he will, in the discourse of his
miseryes, how the last day of his life had lasted three Months, he living the
while without being able once to close the ey-lids at the approach of sleep. Let
Theocrates, publishing his unhappiness, vaunt contentiously in the presence of
the most afflicted Soul, how he had lodged thirty six years in a bed, in
company with a thousand sorts of pain, which visited him one after another.
Let the unfortunate Caricles, trayling without cease the dirt of his body,
through that of the streets of Athens, for the space of sixty years, move
compassion in the hearts of those, which never had it, in consideration of his
Misery; yet is the lamentable history of al these evils a very Canticle of joy
and gladness, in comparison of the sufferances of the damned. For if Fabius have
watched three months in the world, Cain never sleeps in hell: if Theocrates
have passed his Thorny life in a like couch, and that he never came forth to
re-enter into the Tombet; it is fifteen hundred years or more since the
Richman has lodged in a bed of flames, in the midst of Hell, without hope that
the ice of death shall ever slake the heat of its fires. Let Caricles trayle
his living carcass, in the diverse ways, which lead him to the Tomb, he finds
yet a Port after so many storms; but Pharao may be dragged long enough, by the
devils in Hell, ere there be any death, or sepulcher for him, which may afford
him an end to his pains. So as the difference is so great between the evils
of the one, and the punishment of the other, as one cannot think of it, but
with a profound astonishment: How profound, O Lord, are the Abysses of thy
Justice!

You Souls of the world, pull off the veyle that blinds you so; Break you the
rackes of your Passions, that with-hould you in your vices. To what purpose,
think you, is a moment of pleasure, while it robs you of eternal glory, and
brings you forth a Hell of dolours? A little shiuering of a Fever makes you to
quake for fear. A fit of Heat makes you to breath the air of a burning life,
and to sigh at once with the ardour which consumes you quite. Alas! What would
you do in Hell, where the Cold of Ice, where the Heat of the flames shall by
turns torment you eternally? One glass of a potion, one little twitch with a
launcent, two nights without sleep, within a bed very softly made, brings you
to the last gasp. Ah! What shall it be in those darkesome places, where a
gaul, more bitter then gaul, shall be always in your mouth! Where a thousand
strokes of the launcets of fire shall pierce you, not in the vein, but to the
heart, with a wound always bloody, and ever new, for to eternize the pain
thereof; where a perpetual unrest shall banish rest for ever from your spirit,
and sleep from your eyes.

There was a great Personage of our time who had so great a horror of
Medicines, that all the evils whose dolours he had proved were a great deal
less sensible to him then their bitterness; In so much, as after he had tasted
the gaul thereof diverse times, this co^ceipt came into his mind, that when
there should be no other punishment in Hell then that of taking continually
medicines, it would be insufferable. But I should think that if all the gaul,
and all the bitterness of the Earth were put together in a vessel, one would
take that liquour for imaginary Nectar, in comparison of the puddle, and salt
waters, whereof the damned are made to drink. Bethink your selves, profane
Spirits, who establish in the world the foundation of your repose. Open your
eyes to behold the disastres which enuiron you. You seek a Paradise on Earth,
but you find not in it, any other Center then Hell. What pretend you? Pleasures
can accompany you no further the^ the Tomb, you must quit their company wirh
life. Now what a grief has one in dying to abandon the seat of delights for
to enter into that of torments?

Admit, one had passed very pleasantly a hundred years of life, at the last
moment of that time, what satisfaction remains him thereof, since by the law
of divine Justice, it must necessarily ensue, that every one in his turn
shall be gathering the thorns of all his Roses? Every joy has its sadness, every
fortune its crosses: so likewise may we boldly say, that every pleasure has
its pain. If we let our first life run out in contentments, the latter shall
become immortal in punishments. This is an inviolable decree pronounced by God
himself, upon the Mount of Caluary, that he who will not follow the way which
he has taken upon him* for to go to Heaven, shall never enter therein. Flatter
not your selves, you Princes of the Earth, who being raised upon Thrones of
snow and smoke, forget your selves so much in your Greatnesses, as you become
Idolatours of your good Fortune. If you be borne puissant, consider how your
power is of glass, and that with all your Treasures you shall not be able to
purchase a moment of assured life. All the advantage you have above others, is
to be able to hide your faults with the more artificiousnes, under your
sumptuous habit; but upon the uncertain day of your Death, shall you make
demonstration of your misery; and the Corruption which you carry within, must
necessarily appear without. Think you that the Empire which you have here
beneath, extends any further then the Sepulcher? Even as at your birth you were
wrapped in Clouts; so likewise dying, will they be foulding you in a sheet, how
rich soever you be. And your Diadem shall remain in your Palace for to
Crown others withal, in the self same way where they are to follow you,
since they likewise are continually to dye.

But this is not all, you are also to pass the examine of your life before a
sovereign Judge, and dreadful in his Justice. You shall have no other succor
the^ that of your works. If they be good, their recompense is prepared; and if
they be naught, then pains attend them. In what amazement, and in what terror
is a Soul brought unto before the face of his God, whiles his crimes accuse
him, and condemn him to everlasting fires? O how the Judgments of God are
different from those of men, cries that great Saint! You delicate Souls, whom
a little grief makes to look pale with fear, astonishment and feeblenes,
what will you do in Hell, where evils are in their excess, without finding
any end in them? The noise of a fly troubles you, and that of a Caroch hinders
you from sleep. Ah! What shall that be in those darcksome places, where the
dreadful cries of the Torturers, and of the guilty shall continually strike
your ears? If you pass but one might only in the world without a wink of
sleep, you fall to complaining after you have fetched a thousand and a thousand
sighs, in expectation of day; and there below, within those obscure dwellings,
the darcknesses are eternal, like as the disorders and disquietnesses are.

One winters day killes you quite within the goodly prisons of your chambers,
and a summers-day within that of your Halles, built of proof against the heat
of the sun for to avoid alike, the incommodityes both of cold and heat; And in
Hell shall you always burn, if the cold of ice do not give you some respites
to the torments of your fires, and by that means one punishment come to
succeed another. Hence it is that the Prophet cries; Lord have pity upon me,
in the day of thy Justice. O day full of horror and amazement! Where the
living flames, after they have devoured the world, shall prosecute the guilty
Souls in the deepest Abysses, for to exercise the Justice of the Omnipotent!
What unprofitable cries, what vain lame^ts! They may sigh long enough, for the
voice of their repentance shall be so feeble, as it shall not be able ever to
co^uey its acce^ts to the cares of God. But what disorder also of a just
cruelty? The innocent shall curse the guilty Father, and shall rejoice in his
torments, as in so many effects of the divine Justice; for the punishments of
the damned make a part of the felicity of the happy Spirits, rejoicing in the
Justice of God, as well as in his Mercy. The cries of the accursed Souls, O
Lord, are as so many Canticles of thy Glory, since they publish incessantly the
truth of thy Justice.

O impious Souls, in your voluntary blindness! Why will you not suffer your
reason to see how the pleasures you taste in this world, do bring the
consequence of the evils, which you suffer in the other? When will you
confess, that the hope which makes you to embrace with so much affection the
future, is vain and deceiptfull, and that it has for foundation of its
promises, but the argument of your Misfortunes. You run after imaginary goods;
and in the end of your Carriers, you shall find but true evils. Since repose
seems as naturally sweet unto us, why have we not the Eternity thereof? Our
life is a new Hell of annoyes and disquietnes, and yet nevertheless within the
Hell of this life, we build to our selves another Hell, to live there eternally.
What a prodigy of cruelty do we seem to exercise against our selves, for to
sell an immortal felicity, for a moment of pleasures? So as if the joy which
is promised us, has not baits which are powerful enough to attract us to it,
let the pain which follows the offense, purify our desires, and justify all
our enterprises.

O, how S. Augustine makes, on this subject, a sweet harmony to resound in our
ears, when he says; I love thee not, Lord, for the fear I have of thy Hell,
nor for the hope of thy Paradise, but rather for the love of thy self. How
many mercinary Souls do we see in the world, who have no other object in their
actions, the^ that of Glory, or that of Pain; and in a word who love not God,
but for his Paradise, nor fear him awhit but for his hell. What affection? As
if virtue had not Charms enough to make it self beloved without the help of
recompense, and of pain? Alas, Lord! what manner of respects would the wicked
affoard you in this world, if you could be without Paradise, or if you had not
a Hell, for to exercise your Justice in? since with all your felicities, and
your punishments, they so deeply forget the Greatness of your infinite Glory,
and your equal power, as to live without yiedling to your divine Majesty, but
the least homage of thought. Who as if they were Gods themselves on earth,
regard not Heaven, but to look on the Stars.

My Soul, Love then thy God, for his own sake, since he is perfectly lovely;
nor ever think of his Paradise, but in thinking of him, since he is thy
sovereign Good. Fear him in like manner, without musing on the Thunders of
his Justice, with an amourous fear, which has for object, but Humility, and
Respect. So as, if in this world the Good be always good, content thy self
with the satisfaction, which is inseparable to it. For Virtue has this proper
to it, that of it self, it recompenceth those who put its precepts in
practice; even as Vice incessantly racks and tortures those, who follow it. All
laudable actions produce in generous hearts, certain feelings of joy, so
extreme, as when Renown shall have no Laurels nor Palms for to crown them
with, yet he that is the Author of them, shall not compain thereof, since he
has been already rewarded for it, even before he looked for any certain
recompense at all. And the contrary is noted in pernicious and criminal
effects. Pain can hardly be severed from the Offendour, nor the Hangman from
the Guilty. A secret torment glides in his entrails, and himself serves as a
Hangman against himself, for to tyrannize upon himself: So true it is, that
divine Virtue of it self communicates the good of its Nature, and Vice the
evil. But let us not go forth of Hell with our thoughts, for not to enter
thereinto in effect.

Flatter not your selves so; my Dames, as to think that Hell belonges not to
you; it is for the guilty. Judge your selves without passion, whether you be
exempt from crime or no, since at all times, and at every moment you offend God
diverse ways. If you will mount up to Heaven after your Death, first descend
into Hell during your life, and represent to your selves lively the deplorable
estate, whereto the miserable are reduced; I mean those Souls, which have
lodged heretofore in as beautiful bodies, as yours are; and pursue you with
your thoughts the toilesome occupations whereunto they are eternally condemned.
You rise in the morning to take a liquour all of Amber for its sweetness, and of
Pearls for its price; and going forth of your bed, you enter into your
sumptuous Cabinet, where your fair Mirror attends you, to represent you as
fair as ever. There it is, where you consider at leisure the dumb* Oracles of
its deceiptfull Glass, of purpose to learn of it some new secret or other in
favor of your Beauty, be it to shadow it with a little fly, or with some
tresse of hair, disheueled in disorder on your cheeks, and upon your brow,
least the wrinkles cause not a fear in your Thralls. What new charms, what
graces never seen before, do you borrow from the care you take, to cultiuate
the Flowers of your face of Earth?

You pass over at your pleasure three hours of time, and a full whole day if
the humor take you, to teach your eye with what grace, how, and with what
force it should cast its look, for to wound the heart withal; with what
smiles, and with what proportion, you should open the mouth, to let the doble
rows of your pearls appear, or rather to speak truly, of your rotten teeth,
which incessantly devour the pleasures of your life. You shamefully lay open
your bosom, all of Snow, which melts with the glaunce of the eye; and by a
means which you have taught it, you make it sigh with pauses, for to move the
rocky hearts with its sweet pulses. What crime so plain to make the whole world
guilty? For the furthering of these errors, you dress up your body, all of
dust and earth, with the richeh Ornaments, and then it is, that imitating the
Peacocke, you wax proud of the beauty of your plumes, without casting your
eyes the while upon the miseries which serve you as foundation. What turnings
and windings of Vanity do you fetch before your glass? But which way soever
you turn, if you open the eyes of your spirit, you shall see the corruption
which you cover under a frail skin, bedawbed al over with a plaster. Issuing
forth of your Palace, you go to visit the Temples to profane them, for instead
of adoring God, who has guided your steps thither, you make your Vassals to
adore you there, and through a guilty power snatch away the vows, and
sacrifices which belong to their Creator.

You are now returned again into your Palace, you count the number of your
co^quests; your naughty Genius always in action to deceive you, persuads you
to believe that your eyes work the same miracles, which the Thunders do, since
they wound the hearts, without any feeling of the bodies; and in this belief
you commit a thousand crimes of vanity. In the mean while a Page comes to call
you to the Table, where all the delicious meats are served in, by order,
before you. And during the repast, after an eloquent Parasite shall have
charmed your Spirit, with the melody of praises, which you deserve not, a
Music of instruments charms your ears with new allurements of Sweetness. They
present in the plates of your latter course, the sweetest spoils of the four
Seasons. And while of custom the Musicians are tuning the Motect of your
Perfections* you sollicitously enquire of some one of yours, what manner of
weather it is? If it chance to rain, you shut your self up after dinner
within your Cabinet of pleasure, for to hear in particular the sweet voice of
a Page, whom you cause to sing the Air which best agrees with your passion.
The rain is blown over, and the Caroch attends you at the gate of your
Palace, for you to walk abroad, in the company of those who are most agreeable
to you, into the Forests and Parkes, whose ways are bordered with flowers,
and enriched al along with clear fountaynes, where the water appears so
limpide, as persuades hearts with the dumb language of their purling, to quench
in their silver streams the thirst they feel.

In the mean time the Sun is set, to cause freshnes to arise from the humide
embraces of its dear Thetis; and then it is, when the Air powers on the
plants, the drops of the sweat, which the heat of the Sun has caused in it,
during the time of its course, whiles the Birds fall a bathing themselves, in
singing in the little waters of this dew. The night comes slowly on, and its
return seems to bring you a thousand pleasures; for during the repose of its
reign, an infinite number of suns, whereof art is the workman, hung upon
the seeling of your chamber, illumine its objects for to make the beauty thereof
appear. What idle discourses are there brought forth in jest? The flatterers
play anew their parts in the presence of your blind Spirit, and in their
Comedyes they represent to you, the fabulous History of your Acts, worthy of
praise, with warrant of their credit, but full of reproach according to the
truth. The Time notwithstanding is slipped away, they call you to Supper, where
the appetite is contented with delicious meats, whose sweetness art seems to
vary diverse ways. After the repast, you return to your Cabinet, or rather
into your terrestrial Paradise, where the Music attends you, for to charm
the senses of your ear, since those of the eyes, of the smell, and of the
tongue have been satisfied already.

The Clock which ever wakes, does admonish you, without thinking of it, how
the night is slid away for to fetch us day again, which sweetly constraynes
you to pass from the repose of your waking to that of sleep, for to give more
liberty to your spirit to entertayne it self with dreams. But then to bring
you a sleep more sweetly, you still cause delicious Music to be sounded even
to your bed. The Damosells bring in your bags, and prepare your night-stuffe,
which attends you at your glass, where before you undress your self, you
admire anew the Sweetnesses, the Graces, the Moles, the Charms, the
Allurements and the curiosity of your Beauty, and with an Idolatrous eye, you
often co^template the imaginary perfections of your face. The^ glau^cing your
eyes on the very same eyes, you love them now more then ever, in remembrance
of the new co^quests they have made that day: your cheeks of lilyes and roses,
your neck of iuory, your snowy bosom, and alabaster hands; these are the
foolish terms of your servants which have part in this affection, as having
contributed their power to the achieueme^t of these conquests. And then do you
cultiuate yet more, according to your custom, by a guilty care, those Roses
and those Lillyes of your feature, that they wither not in the absence of the
Sun, I would say, during the Ecclypse of that of your Eyes, whose sweet
influences make them to blow forth.

At last they lay you on a bed most refulgent, all gorgeous in riches, and
whereon it seems, as if the happy Arabia had powered forth a part of its
odours; and to attract the sleep more sweetly into your eyes, you cause to be
sent for some pleasing Music of a Voice, which rauishes your senses with so
much sweetness, as they dye with joy, without dying notwithstanding. Are not
these great pleasures, trow you, if they could last? I speak to Souls who
seek their Paradise on Earth. But the common calamity so preuailes, as these
delights eue^ die in their birth, and their privation affords them a great deal
more torments then does their presence produce sweetnesses.

Let us cast now our eyes at the last, on the backside of this Medall, and
consider the cruel Metamorphosis of these contentments, in the intolerable
punishments which Eternally torment a damned Soul. Let us behold the cruel
exercise of its paynfull progress in Hell. You must take no great heed to the
terms of Day, of Mattins, of Evening, or Morning-calles, whereof I serve my
self in this ensuing description, for that I am forced thereunto, to keep
some order in my discourse. The devils in the morning then, come to awake this
damned Soul, howbeit indeed, she sleeps not a wincke through the dreadful
noise of their howlings. These are the Chambermaydes which fetch her out of her
bed all of fire, for to conduct her into a Cabinet all of Ice, not of Myrrors,
for she durst not have looked thereinto, for fear of the fear of her self, so
hideous and dreadful she is. These wicked Spirits do help to dress her after
they have made her take a draught of Sulphur within a rotten Vessel, where
the worms do breed in sholes. One combs her head, and that with a comb of
iron with sharp points which makes the blood to follow. Another colors her
cheeks with the red of Spain with a pensill of fire. He there washes her face
with puddle water, and scalding hot withal; and he here puts on a robe of
living coals on her back; and in this equipage a new Devil more hideous then
death presents himself to her, and serves her as an Usher to conduct her to a
burning Chariot, to convey her not to a Temple, but to the foot of a dreadful
Altar, where she is cruely sacrificed without loosing her life.

They lead her afterward in the same chariot into a dismal Palace, where she
finds the tables covered, and set with all sorts of poisonous and contagious
Serpents, wherewith they feast her. All that dinner while a hideous noise of
howlings, and dreadful cries, serves for the Music to charm her ears
withal. After repast is she brought back again to her Cabinet, where all the
objects of horror, and amazement are assembled together for to afflict the
sense of her sight. And after that, a Devil sings her an Air, whose ditty is
the Sentence of her condemnation, and this verity the burden of it, How the
pains she endures shall be eternal. What a Song? The time of her walking
approaches, they bring then the fyery Chariot before the gate of her darkesome
Palace. She mounts into it, and thence rage despair, fury and cruelty draw
her into an obscure forest of Cypres, where the Owls and Ravens do screech
incessantly; so as she hears but the noise of death, not being able to procure
death. She is now returned, she finds the same Table spread again, and with
the like Cates, whereof she feeds of force, to the noise of a like Music to
that of dinner. Being risen from Table, the Devil that has the charge to
wait upon her, comes again into her Cabinet and sings her likewise the same
Canzonet of her dreadful Sentence, with the self same burden as before, How
the pains which she endures shall be eternal. In the mean time they bring her
to a bed of thorns, whereinto they cast her at such time as she was wont to
take her rest in the world; and thus passes she over the night in these
torments, without ever seeing any end thereof. Is not this a fearful life?

Behold, my Dames, the exercise of those who have imitated you in your
pleasures. Behold the employments of their whole progress. These are no fables
I tell you, for like as the noise of the swindge of the world does hinder you
from hearing the sweet harmony of the motions of the Heavens; so the self same
noise seems to hinder you likewise from understanding the hideous cries of a
Cain, of a Pharao, of an impious Richma^, and of a thousand of others your
like, who have hitherto after so long a time been burning in Hell, and so
shall burn for ever, without hope to see any end of their panes. That depends
now on you, my Dames, to choose to you one of these two lives here. If you be
tasting of honey in your youth, you shall have but bitterness in your old age. If
you gather the Roses in your spring, the Thorns shall be reserved for your
winter. Choose hardly, behold your selves expressed as Ulysses at the entrance
of two ways, far different the one from the other. That of Virtue is stwowed
with Nettles, and covered with Stones, and that of Vice is enamelled with
flowers, and bordered with brooks, whose sweet murmur inuites you to follow
the traces of their course. So as if you would needs know, where both these
ways do termine themselves; the one in eternal Death, and the other in Life.
And herein the example of an infinite number, which have been saved by the
one, and lost by the other may seem to put you out of doubt. All the Saints,
and in word, all those who are in Paradise have held the first, and all the
damned have wretchedly followed the other. Demand you of the Rich-man what way
he took? he will answer you, that he has always walked upon Flowers, and
that he never met with Thorns, till the arrival at his Sepulcher. Make you
the same demand of Lazarus, and you shall hear of him, that he has never
trod but upon the Earth, all covered with briars, nettles, and sharp stones,
and that even at the end of his travails he found the beginning of his glory.

Think not, my Dames, to be gathering of the Flowers in this world, and then
to be reaping of the Fruits in the other. All things are created in a Species
of Contraries, which serves as a Ciment to hold them together. The fair
weather of your life seems to menace Rain at your Death, and God grant it be
not a Flood of unprofitable tears, where without thinking thereof, you find
not your Shipwreck. The calm of your days presages the storm of your nights,
and take heed you find not some rock in the time of the tempest. I must needs
confess, how the Poets have hid very excellent verities under the veyle of
their Fables; that Cerberus with three heads, whom they figure to us in hell,
is nothing else but the devil, who as a Monster of many heads eternally
deuours the damned. Their River of Cocytus, or Phlegeton, demonstrates to us
the torments of death. The lake of Auernus where troubles and sadness inhabit,
what else may it seem to represent unto us, then the dismal dwelling of the
wicked Spirits? The great Famine they faigne of Tantalus, lets us clearly to
behold the scarcity and penury of all goods which the damned have. The Vultur
of Titius which incessantly preyes on the heart without devouring it, does
figure naught else, then the worm of unprofitable Repentance, which gnawes
without end those unhappy Spirits. The wheel wherein Ixion is tortured, as
likewise the Pitchers which the Danaides filled in vain, are as so many
witnesses of the Eternity of pains of the damned Souls; which lets us see how
even those who establish their true Paradise in this world, have built the^
without thinking of a Hell in the other, where they are everlastingly punished.

O cruel Eternity! What torments do thou truly comprehend in thy long
durance there beneath in Hell, where a million of ages in punishments cannot
form a first moment of some end! After one has endured and suffered an
infinite number of pains, during as many years as there has been insta^ts in
the Time since the birth of the world, may he not well affirm, that he had
lived in those torments, but for the space of an hour only, if he were to live
always in dying, and always to dye living, in Hell, without release or
respit? My Dames, I speak to you, because you have the Spirit wa^dering in
vanity. If you sigh for anguish in expectation of a Day, upon a bed of roses,
with what impatience will you be rackt in Hell, during those Eternal Nights?
You shun the breath of the fire, and the burning of the Sun, as the enemies of
your beauty; why fear you not rather the tanning, and burning of the eternal
flames? Let me dye rather, said Nero's wife, then to become foul and
wrinckled. Would you be conseruing your beauty which is so dear unto you, for
a few days, and live without it eternally in Hell? If you could but behold the
foulnes and deformity of one damned Soul, the only remembrance of the
horror, and amazeme^t of that object, would be an intolerable punishment to
you.

If Nature have not a stronger tie of love then that wherewith it has
enchayned us with our self, is it possible, my Dames, that you can exercise
such a cruelty against your selves, as not to wish to live content, but in the
world, where your pleasures are like to dye with you? If Hell affright you not
for its punishments sake, let the Eternity thereof breed a terror in you, to be
unhappy for ever. To be in the company of devils for ever, does not the thought
thereof only seem to astonish you, since there is nothing more true then it?
If nature, as a Step-dame, has denied you the fortitude of men, at least it
has given you the force of a Spirit, for to know your errors. Love not your
beauty but to please the Angels, rather then men, since it is a divine quality,
whose admiration appertaynes to them. To burn always! Alas. Seem you not to
resent, in reading the lamentable history of the punishments of Fire wherewith
the damned are tormented, some little sparkle of its flames, through a strong
apprehension of incurring one day those pains? I speak here to Thee, who
read these verities, to bethink thy self of this singular grace, which God
seems to vouchsafe, in permitting this same Book to fall into thy hands, so
to discover this sentence, which I have signified to thee on the behalf of
God; That if you change not your life, you shall be damned eternally. O cruel
Eternity!

O My Soul, think always of this Eternity, what torments soever thou
suffer in this world, say thou always with Job, My evils shall one day have
an end. O how happy was this man to be exposed on the dunghill of all the
miseries of the world, as on a mountain, where tuning the Harp of his
feelings, and of his passions, to the Key of his Humility, and of his Patience,
he sung the glory of his Lord in the midst of his infamy. What can thou
suffer here beneath, more cruel then the pains of the damned? And yet if
thou should even suffer a part of their punishments, without the privation of
grace, thou should be happy, because those evils would termine one day, to
the fruitio^ of thy sovereign good. Then trample thou the thorns under thy
feet, give thy self in prey to dolours and sufferances, nor have thou ever any
other consolation then that of Job, in saying without cease, My evils here
shall one day finish.

The Hour of Death.
WE MVST DYE: This is a law of necessity* whereof himself who made the same,
would not be exempted. We must dye: This is a sentence pronounced, now for
these six thousand years, in the Palace of the Terrestrial Paradise, by an
omnipotent God, whose infinite Justice has not spared his proper Son. We
must die: All such as hitherto have been, have passed this way; those who now
are, do hold the same; and they who are not as yet in approaching to the Cradle,
do approach to the Sepulcher. We must die: But we know not the hour, the day,
the month, nor the year: we know not the place, nor the manner of the Death,
whose pains we are to suffer. We must die. Since we hold the life but as
borrowed of him that created the same. We must dye, it is an evil that has no
remedy; al our children must die, as our Fathers did, after they had showed them
the way, which our Grandfathers had tracked for us. We must die at last, since
we die every hour, because the air which we breath, being none of ours, we
cannot serve our selves of it, but as others do in passing on till to morrow.
We must dye, since that all which is in us continually tends to death, without
release or intermission. The very fetchings of our breath are counted, as well
as our steps. In so much as all our actions are not wrought, but for a certain
term, whence Time conducts us by little and little to death. We must die: This is
a verity which experience proclaymes to all the world; and to the end no man
may ever doubt thereof, the Son of God has signed the Sentence with his
blood on the mount of Caluary.

You must dye great Monarkes, what marks of immortality soever you have. Be
you as eloquent as you will, Demostenes is dead; be you never so valiant,
Alexander is laid in his Tomb: If you have force for your inheritance, Sampson
is buried under the ruins of the Temple which he demolished. If you be fair,
Absalom is reduced into Ashes. If rich, Cresus is no more of the world; if
wise, Solomon is now not living; if happy, David is expired in the midst of his
felicities. In fine, what quality soever you have, it is always inseparable
from the mortal condition wherein you are borne. You must die and appear in
this fatal Couch, not with your gorgeous Attire, nor Royal Mantles, but
rather with shirts, well steept in a cold sweat, where your lives are to run
shipwreck. To carry your Crowns upon your heads, they are so feeble, as they
cannot endure the weight. To hold your Scepters in your hands, candles rather
would beseem you better, to affoard you light to find the Sepulcher. Your
Subjects are already assembled about your beds, to see anew this verity, that
you are all equal in the necessity of dying. Those Titles of Majesty, which
they affoard you, have no more grace with them amidst your miseries.

Me thinks, in truth, it is very much to call you Men, since you begin to be
no more so. It is even just now that you are to die, the day is come, the hour
approches, death is already on the way to your Palace, you may do well if you
please to put your Soldiers in Centinell, for to stop him in the entry. Behold
how he knockes at your Chamber door, you must necessarily vouchsafe for to
speak unto him, since he comes on the behalf of God, to signify the sentence
of death unto you. I doubt me that you have the Spirit much occupied, in the
apprehension of your present affairs, and that you would willingly put of the
account to some other day, but that may not be; Time has struck the hour,
which is to bear sway at the end of your days. What sighs, what sobs, what
plaints cast you forth to the wind? the remembrance of your Greatnesses past
torments you now, while your guilty consciences put your souls on the Rack,
like as the dolours already have put your bodies. For to cast your eyes upon
the gilded Seelings, were to increase the horror of the Sepulcher which they
prepare you. To behold likewise your Courtiers who stand about you, the
displeasure you find to leave them, makes you to turn your view another way.
Whereas it were better to set your eyes on the approches of Death, and in the
feeling of your present Miseryes, to publish in dying this verity, that you are
but ashes, dirt, and corruption.

Diogenes was walking one day in a certain Churchyard, where he entertained
his sad thoughts in the meditation of death, at what time Alexander surprised
him by a sudden approach, and demands of him what he was doing in so dismal
and solitary a place? I am busied, said the Philosopher, in seeking out the
bones of Philip your Father, amidst so great a number of these you see here,
but the pain which I take is unprofitable, because they are all equal. This
Answer is full of Mysteries, for it seems to represent us to the life, this
Verity, That the greatest Kings of the world differ not awhit, but in goods and
greatnesses only, from the wretchedst that are, since in the Tomb they
resemble each other so much, as it were impossible to mark any difference
between them.

But me thinks, the hour is already spent, and that Death knockes harder now
at the Chamber door then before. Behold how he enters in, carrying his Sith
in the one hand, and an Hower-glasse in the other, to let us see that if he mow
the hay of your life with his Sith, the sand of the Hower-glasse which he
carries, being taken for the Foundation of your vainglory, is even now run
out; so as if there remain any little behind, it is but only to give you
leisure, to open your mouth, for to cast forth the last breath in this last
moment. O fearful moment, whereon depends the Eternity of Glory, or the
Eternity of pain! This is that last breath which condemns, or iustifies all
those who have gone before. O fearful moment, wherein is pronounced the
Sentence of our second life or Death! O fearful moment, since it presides the
birth of our wretchedness, or of our felicity! O fearful moment, wherein all
our good, or evil consists! O fearful moment, wherein Paradise is offered, or
Hell afforded! O fearful moment, wherein we are made companions for ever of
the Angels, or of the devils! O fearful moment, where the Soul before God,
finds the Eternal recompense of its good deeds, or everlasting pains of its
crimes!

O fearful moment! what joys, what sorrows, what pleasures, and what
dolours do thou comprize in thy short durance! As often as I think on thee,
I do tremble with fear, for this moment is a great deal more dreadful, then
death it self. This only moment is it, my Soul, whereupon the Eternity
depends. Employ thou all those of thy life upon the thoughts of this last. Thou
approchest unto it every hour, every instant robs thee of somewhat of thy
former life. Whatsoever thou do, thy body does nothing but dye, and from its
transitory life, depe^ds thy eternal life, for out of the Earth can thou
merit nothing for Heaven. Think thou always on this last moment, where
Crowns and Punishments are prepared; Crowns of an infinite glory; Punishments
of a dolor immortal. All thy actions shall there be receiving their price or
pain: Price of Paradise, or pain of Hell. Hence it is that the Prophet cries;
I shall remember the day of my death for to live eternally.

Cast your eyes now upon those Kings, extended dead upon their rich Couches.
What say I, those Kings? can Majesty and corruption be compatible together?
What appearance of belief, in beholding them to be such, that they are Kings*
since all their Royal qualities are dead with them? Would not a man say, they
were heaps of Earth, so raised above the Earth, where the worms are beginning
to take their fees? Approach to this fatal couch, you proud Spirits, who
measure the globe of the Earth through this vain belief, that you merit the
Empire of it, and in your imagination contemplate the while those that possess
them in effect, and you shall behold them quite through tears laid stretched
at your feet, without pulse, and without motion. Their Majesty's are full of
horror, and miseryes in their turn have taken hold of their own, since they
are all borne mortal, and consequently miserable; what strange Metamorphosis
from Colossus's of Greatnesses, quickened with a life full of splendor and of
glory, to be changed in an instant into an heap of dirt, whose putrefaction
infectes the whole world?

You Monarkes, Kings, Princes, be you Idolatours of your Greatnesses as much as
you please, I attend you at the end of your Carriere, to let you see on the
backside of the Medall, that you are but corruption; and if you doubt thereof,
let him that suruiues another, approach to his Tomb, and he shall sensibly
know, that there is nothing more true in the world. Thou miser, approach to this
mournful Couch, there is place enough for thee. Thou needs must dye, the hour
is struck; but tell me, how much gold and silver do thou leave in thy
coffers, and to what end serve they but to purchase thee Hell? Thou must yield
an account of thy extortions and oppressions. Death comes to summon thee on the
behalf of God, to appear within an hour before the Tribunal of his Justice,
to hear thy sentence of death pronounced by his own mouth. What would thou
not give to prolong, yea but a day only, the term of thy departure? But all
thy treasures cannot buy thee a moment of life, thou must dye.

O cruel necessity, and yet more cruel the dolor, which now seems to martyr
thy soul! Thou must dye; Thou may weep long enough, for death is blind;
thou may cry as fast as thou will, while he is deaf; for to hope that the
Greatness of thy miseryes may move him to Pity, he neither has heart, nor
bowels; and if he live notwithstanding, it is for nothing but to enforce all the
world to die. Thy hour is come thou must dye; Alas! How many deaths do thou
suffer, ere thou loosest thy life. Thou leauest thy children rich, it is true;
but dyest miserable thy self, in the state of damnation. Behold thee well
recompensed for the pains thou have taken, in heaping so much wealth,
forsooth, to loose thy soul! Cruel to thy self! Thou have not lived, but for
others. Infidel! thou have betrayed thy self. Murderer! thou have snatched
away thy life, with an unnatural hand, employing thy care to fill thy coffers
with gold and thy soul with crimes.

You Misers, if you read the history of these Verities, derive your profit from
the damage of others, and for the avoiding of these piercing griefs, and the
intolerable dolours of this last moment of life, employ all the others to
thoughts of the Eternity of glory, or of Pain. And imitating the Prophet, say
with him: Lord I will remember me of the day of death, for to live eternally.
You must appear, my Dames, each one in her turn in this lamentable couch. The
watch which Death seems to carry in his hand, has struck the hour already of
the departure of the fairest. She must needs dye, but assist, I pray, at this
sad spectacle. Me thinks I see her now far different from that which she was
wont to be. Alas! What a change! I seek for the Majesty's which I have
sometimes seen in her brow, and I find nothing else but horror, and amazement
there. I demand of her eyes, what is even become of them, for they are buried
so deep in her head, as they but loose sight of them who seek for them. Her
cheeks as sticht one to the other, do hinder her from opening the mouth, in
such sort as her tongue can speak no more then a sad language of sighs, to
call upon Pity, to contemplate her miseryes withal. Her arms very carelessly
stretched forth, even die with their feeblenes; In fine her body of Earth
deuoures by little and little the flesh that couers it.

Who would say now, seeing this Dame in the state whereunto she is brought,
that she was the other day the fairest of the City? Her company was a duncing
with her at such a time, where all the Gallants that were there, fell a
striving to court her most. One valued the Gold of her hair; another the Iuory
of her teeth. This here, admired the snow of her bosom; and he there, the
alabaster of her hands. The casts of her eyes did wound many of them, and the
allurements of her graces, increased yet the number. The more indifferent to
love, would become great Masters thereof, with the sight of her perfections:
and yet nevertheless is it true (a strange thing) that her hair heertofore of
gold, and now staring as it were, has lost its luster; that her teeth of Iuory
are become black with the blast of death; that the snow of her bosom is
dissolved; that the alabaster of her hands is faded; that the species of her
eyes are dulled, so as if they wound as yet, they are but the wounds of Pity.
That her graces are without grace, and that in fine all those, who admired the
same heertofore, come to repent themselves, and such as had loved her when time
was, are now displeased with themselves, for having ever so much as dreamed of
her.

What cruel Metamorphosis, my Dames! If you cannot give credit to the
faithful report, which I make you of these verityes, cast but your eyes upon
this doleful Couch, and you shall see a living image of your self, or rather a
dying of one, now brought to the last extremes. You make such account of your
charms, behold them in the To^be; you prize your bayts so much, contemplate
the same in ruin; you cherish your Sweetnesses so dearly, consider their
feeblenes; you make a show of your deliciousnes and your allureme^ts, behold to
what pass they are now brought. Vaunt you of the Roses of your face, as much
as you please, they are no more but Thorns. If you lay forth to view the
whitenes of your delicate complexion, see you not how pale now dolor harh made
it for to take away its beauty? All those locks so curled in nets of love; all
those eyebrows so carefully elaborate with a trembling hand; that face so
washed and plaistered over with a secret art; those painted lips; that neck so
erected through force of endeavor; those curious actions, those smiles, those
Vn-voluntaries of hers, and all those agreeable fashions are vanished now in an
instant, and horror and dreadfulnesse possess their place.

Alas! how the pourtraite of this Dame* which I see there hanging at her beds
head, is different far from its original? The shadow of that body moves to
love, the body of this shadow to pity. The allurements of this liueles image
are all full of charms, and the draughts of this beauty yet living, wounds
with fear, instead of love. The hour in the mean time seems to pass away,
and she must die. Alas! what dolours do they feel in this cruel departure?
From what pain are they exempt? This poor Dame beholds her self abandoned of
all the world and which is worse of the Physicians themselves. She sees not but
by the light of mortuary torches, which are lighted round about her bed. A
confused noise of sighs and plaints does smite her ears; Her own savor
begins to infect her, and her feeling is exercised with the sufferance of a
thousand sorts of pains, and all very different in themselves. Whatsoever she
beholds afflicts her, because all the objects which are represented to her, do
carry the image of her dolefulnes with them. Her Parents and her Friends are
about her indeed, but they are as so many executioners that put her heart upon
the rack by reason of the grief she feels to forgo them for ever.

Her only Brother comes to her, to give her a kiss, all bede^wed with tears,
and his moaning plaints do even pluck out the heart from her bosom, as knowing
them to be the very last. Her Father oppressed with sorrow comes to bid her the
last Adieu, but all of sighs, in regard her evil now grown to extremes,
seems to put him to silence; in so much as his tears and sighs are feign to
speak for him to his dying daughter; who makes him answer in the same
language, both of the eyes and heart, without being able to let fall a word. Her
mother has her eyes glued upon her pale and diffigured countenance; and in
this dumb action of hers, whereto an excess of dolor has brought her, she
suffers a great deal more pain to see her dye, then she had pangs before to
bring her forth. And so in order al those that loved her, and whom she dearly
loved, came in, to yield her this last duty of visit. But howbeit they
premeditated somewhat to say unto her, their tongues became mute at their
approach, and their eyes made supply of discourse in their fashion. For what
means is there to speak in a doleful place, where Death goes imposing an
eternal silence? The Priest approaches to the bed, with a Crucifix in his
hand, which he presents to this foul sick wretch: she takes it with a
trembling hand, knowing it to be the Cross, whereupon the Omnipotent Judge was
nailed. If she cast her eyes upon his Crown of Thorns, she draws them into
her heart, by her looks, in remembering the roses, which she had deliciously
troad under her feet during her life: But there is now no more time to be
carrying the same into the soul, because her senses, as half dead, are
insensible of their prickings.

If she reguard the visage of this her Savior all covered with comtempt, she
sinckes down with the confusion of the outrages, that she has done to
herself, remembering the guilty care which she has taken, in playstering her
face of earth, and ruyning in that manner with a sacrilegious hand the sacred
workmanship of heaven, and of Nature; and for having employed the better part
of her time in these errors, to the disparagement of her soul, as if the same
were corruptible like the body. The torments which her God, and her Judge has
suffered for her upon this Cross which she holds in her hand, and which she
never had borne in her heart, do shamefully upbraid her now, for the delights of
her life. Then falls she a sighing at it, but her sighs of wind are taken but
for wind; she weeps thereat, but her tears of water, are taken but for a
little water, since she cannot wipe away the blot of her crimes, because their
spring deriues not from the heart; and that her tears proceed from the fear of
present death, rather then from a sorrow of life past.

There need no other witnesses to condemn her withal, then the wounds of her
Savior; for as he had suffered all the pains of the world, so she had tasted
all the pleasures. Alas! if she could but turn back again, and return to
the midst of the course of her life; if her words might have the same virtue,
which those of Iosue had, for to command the Sun to return back again to
its East, to affoard her leisure to do penance in; is it not credible, my
Dames, but that she would be dipping the bread of her nourishment, within the
water of her tears, for to bewail her sins? But that is in vain to desire
the return of life, since she must die and the hour is already struck. Alas!
how many living deaths devour this poor body, before her life be snatched
away at last? What strange torment seems to rack her soul? she dies with
sorrow, for not being able to live any longer, and notwithstanding every moment
of life is to her an age of dolor. She is so engulfed in torments, as she
imagines, that all the afflictions in the Earth, are assembled in her Chamber,
or rather in her Soul, since now she is brought into extremes, through the
force of anguish. Sorrow for the past, apprehension of the future, horror of
the Sepulcher, and the uncertainty she is in of her salvation, do hold her
spirit continually on the rack.

That little which she sees, is but to bid Adieu to the light; that little
which she understands, is for her last: and being thus brought into this
extremity, now it is when the devil lets her see to the life, the pourtrait of
all the offenses which she has ever committed, to the end the enormity of them
being joined with their number, might make her to turn her face to despair.
To make yet an exact Confession, all her Spirits are in disorder, and the
powers of her Soul so feeble, as they can serve but for resentment of her
evils. She would feign speak, but a mortal stuttering with-holdes her tongue
half tied; and on the other side the smart of the pain which she suffers, is
so sharp, as she cannot open the mouth but to cry. A dolor without cease
torments her continually: her dying life is wandering every moment, in the
punishments she is in, and when she finds her self, it is but to loose her
self again in her syncopes, which are the forerunners of her Death. The eyes
bolt out of her head, as if they had this knowledge, that they were
unprofitable unto her; her mouth awry, and half open, gives passage, by the
eye, unto her bowels, to behold the torments she is in. It is now time, my
Dames, you present her with a Mirror, for to employ her last reguards, on the
sad contemplation of the dreadful ruins of her beauty; what faces makes she
the while? her hideous look affrights not only little children, but even
likewise the most courageous.

Behold your selves, my Dames, within this glass, if you will but apparently
see the faults which are hidden under your own, from point to point, or rather
under the Spanish white, wherewith you are painted. Behold into what estate are
reduced your allureme^ts, your charms, your sweetnesses, and your bayts, which
you so put in the rank of adorable things. These are no Fables, no Illusions,
nor Enchantements, these; you have seen the other day this foul dying wretch,
with a luster of beauty, that dazeled all the world, who to day seems to move
you to pity, and horror at once. Mark well all her actions, but quickened
with dolor and dread: these are the true examples of those, which you shall
one day suffer, it may be to morrow, or even to day who knows? And then, dare
you wax so proud of your beauty as you do, while the crust thereof is now thus
broken as you see, in the presence of so many persons, who have seen, how the
inside was all, but full of corruption?

In this mean while, the sick person dies by little and little. It is now time,
to make the funeral of those fair eyes, since their light is thus extinct.
The Priest may cry in her ears long enough, for death has taken up his
lodging there, and every one knows that she is deaf. Her hands, and her feet
are without motion, as well as without heat; the heart seems to beat as yet,
but it is only to bid Adieu to the Soul, which is now a departing; and to
tell you whither* I leave you to think. Such a life, such a death. Let me only
say, That the Judgments of God are far different from those of men. Approach
then, to this corpse, you profane Spirits, and through a sensible sorrow of
having ever heertofore adored its Beautyes, participate with its death. Behold
its hair, which once you termed golden, and wherewith Love used to serve
himself, to tie the Freest; the luster now is vanished from it, the beauty is
defaced, nor can it serve for ought, but to move pity. That brow heertofore
so full of Majesty in your eyes, and where the Graces appeared in troops
(these are your terms is now become an object of hate, and contempt. Those
eyes which you called, your Sunns, resemble now two Torches newly put out,
whose stink drives away as many as approach unto them. The Roses of those
cheeks are changed into Thorns; the coral lips are now of alabaster; the
iuory neck is now of earth; the bosom now is no more of snow, but all of ashes;
and finally this whole beautiful body, is flesh no more, but even dirt. And if
you will not believe me, approach nearer, and you shall resent the infection*
thereof.

Behold, O you Courtiers the Idol of your Passions. What a shame is it now
for you, to have adored this carcass, so full of worms and putrefaction? You
made of its presence, during its life, an imaginary Paradise, and now you would
make it a true Hell. Heertofore you could not live without seeing her daily,
and at this time, you even dye, with the only beholding her. It is not yet
three days, since you kissed the picture with an action of Idolatry, and now
at this present, you dare not to cast your eyes upon the original, so
dreadful and formidable it is. Represe^t unto you then, for your satisfaction*
that all the fairest Dames of the world shall be reduced one day to this piteous
estate; and that all their graces, which are borrowed of Art, accompany them no
more, then as a day of the Spring; in so much as if they wax old, they pass
the most part of their age out of themselves. For without disse^bling with the
times, a Dame when she is grown in years, is fair no more, she lives no
longer in the world, they put her in the rank of things which are past, and
whose memory is lost.

Look when a beautiful face comes to your view, and make you at that instant
an Anatomy of it: if you cast your eyes upon her fair eyes, represent to your
self in that moment, how they are subject to 63. diseases, all different one
from another, and that one drop of defluxion produces a contagion in those who
behold the^. Her nose which you judge so curious, is as a Silver box full of
ointments, for one cannot defend himself from the infectio^ which issues
thence, but with Musk and Ciuet. Her mouth is ordinarily infected, with the
corruption of her teeth. If the Hands of this fair body seem to please you,
know you not how she steepes the^ every day in lie, for to make them white; I
would say, that she is feign to wash them every moment to take away the spots
and foulnes of them. In fine, whatsoever you see of this beautiful body, is
but plaster, and what appears not otherwise, but mere corruption.

Dress then, and trick up your selves, you Dames, as long as you please; yet
shall you not change, for all that, the nature you are of. If you charm the
world through your false allurements, the world charms you with its vain
promises. Do not flatter your selves, you are but clay, infection, and
corruption. So as, if nevertheless you enforce any love, it is but through
imposture; for that, covering your face with a new visage, it is easy to
deceive those who have no judgment but in the eyes. If then you would leave of
Vanity, muse always upon Death, since you may happen die at any hour, be it in
banqueting, be it in walking. Go whither you will, your paces conduct you to
the Tomb. And at such time, as you stand before your Glass, in the action of
washing your face, imagine how it shall putrify one day, and perhaps to morrow,
and that all the care you take, to make it white, will not hinder the worms
from devouring the same. Yet after you have employed about it, a whole phiall
of sweet water, shed at least one salt tear of sorrow for your sins, to wash
your most enormous Soul.

What a shame is it then, for you to trick and trim up your body so every
day, whereof the worms have already taken possession, and to abandon your soul
on the dunghill of your Miseryes, whereunto your crimes have brought you?
Hearken to the Hour that even now strickes: what know you, whether if shall be
your last? do you find your self, trow you, in a good estate, to present your
self before a dreadful Judge, who has so many Hells to punish the guilty?
Your companion is dead already, and you take no heed, but even run after her,
every moment without cease, or without any respit. How then is it possible,
that you can run so to Death, in the estate of damnation, wherein you are?
Rather imitate the Parthians who in flying, triumphed of their enemies. And
weep for sorrow of your life, in running to Death; and sigh in way of
repentance to the last gasp. Imitate also that great Personage who caused
himself to be painted on a B^ere, with his face bare, his hands joined
together, even in the very same posture wherein he was to be laid forth after
his Death, and every morning would he go to make his prayer before this
picture; which succeeded so happily with him, as he dyed without any trouble,
or disquietnes.

Syrs, I have represented to you in the beginning of my Book, how there is
nothing assured in this world; the which, me thinks should oblige you first to
lift up your eyes to Heaven, for to see the Eternity of the glory which is
there promised unto you; and then as all dazeled, to cast them down again,
with the help of your imagination, into Hell, whose punishments also in part I
have described to you. Then returning to your self, consider how these
felicities, and Eternal pains depend on a moment; and this is the moment of
Death, whereunto you approach every hour. Repose your self then, every day,
for a quarter of an hour, upon this doleful Couch, where this late beautiful
Dame has expired; and divert your Spirit in this time of grace, to think upon
that, which you would then be thinking of, when you shall come to be tied
thereunto with the chains of dolor and anguish. And these be the true
Thoughts of Eternity.

FINIS.

