MEMORIALS UPON THE DEATH OF SIR ROBERT QVARLES, Knight.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Cotes, for Nicholas Alsop; and are to be sold at the
sign of he Angel in Pope's Head Alley. 1639.

TO THE MVCH HONORED LADY, AND MY MOST DEAR SISTER MARY Lady Quarles, Late
Wife of Sir Robert Quarles of Romford, Knight, Deseased.
Madam,
MY beloved Brother, your dear Husband, had a name (purchased by his own
worth) which needed the help of no quill, either to perpetuate or vindicate
it: But Affection will be doing. Losers may challenge leave to speak, and it is
a ventall vanity to repeat that loss, which admits no recovery. A busy hand
will blow, although the fire burn: But let the world excuse the Tautology of
my affection, and know there is a secret cause that bred these lines, which I
had rather should be imagined then revealed: However Madam, one of my ends are
to comfort you, who have made your self a prisoner to your sorrows, and whose
blessings I desire may be multiplied by your tears. Let your confidence of
his happiness moderate the extremity of your mourning, lest all that loved him
begin to mourn for you: Madam I present you with the Abstract of his story,
for your affection to enlarge, which I recommend as a president for his
Children to follow. Less I could not, and more I cannot do, to testify the
dear remembrance I owe his ashes, and the true love I bear his memory, for
whose sake and yours, your Ladishippe shall ever be beloved, and truly
honored by

Your most affectionate Brother, Fra: Quarles.
To The everlasting memory of my dearly loving, and as Dearly beloved
Brother, Sir Robert Quarles, of Romford, Knt.

Justice of peace and Quorum, in the County of Essex; Francis Quarles, a
disconsolate mourner, In the depth of his just sorrow, and height of true
affection, presents and consecrats these sad Memorials, in testimony of that
dear love, which Time cannot dissolve, nor death divorse.

Reader, who ere thou art, That with an obvious eye do happen to peruse these
lines, tax not my quill whose zeal commands a task which may incur the
censure of officious Partiality; excuse that hand which rather seeks to ease a
heart burdened with a faithful grief, then to magnify his name whose own
deserts require no other Herault than popular Report; no other Plaudit than the
voice of heaven and Angels.

His family, If Antiquity may challenge honor, receivd it before the martial
Drum of the victorious Norman left to beat his conquering marches in this
glorious Island: but, birth nor blood, nor what his Ancestors have done, can
challenge ought in him that might redeem his Name from dull oblivion, had not
his undegenerate actions out-spoke his long-lin'd Genealogy.

His youth Had all advantage of education which Careful parents could contrive
to give and a sweet ingenuous disposition could take; bred in the illustrious
Academy of Cambridge, and the honorable Society of the Innes of Court; wherein
He sucked such literature and manners, as seasond his youth, and ripned his age;
to the honor of the Church, to the good of his Country, to the glory of his
Family.

He was The faithful husband of three wives; the first Esther; the daughter of
Sir Edward Lewknor, in the County of Suffolk Knt. the second, Anne; the Widow
of Sir Thomas Sackford in the County of Suffolk, Knt. the third, Mary; the
daughter of Henry Parvish, of the City of London, Esquire, a true and faithful
Mourner.

His obedience to authority gave him Authority to command; and his Gentleness
in Commanding made him a necessary Commander: wherein, he so wisely compounded
Severity and Clemency to the making up of true Justice both Commutative and
Distributive, that the very mouth of malice was muzl'd at his Actions, not
daring to impeach The uprightness of his Civil Govenment:

There was no Moral virtue, wherein he attained not to high Perfection; which,
like a rich perfume, breathd so much sweetness into his name; and, like a
diadem so crowned his days with Honor and Opinion, that timorous vice, not
daring to approach his sight, would stand and blush, or shrink away, and seek
a safe protection From those false hearts that loved him not.

He was a friend to all goodness and to all that lovd it: faithful without
ends; constant, without suspicion; loving, without dissimulation: his words
were the exposition of his thought; his actions were the confirmation of his
words: in respect of which, he was neither apt to glory nor upbraid; Excusing
defaults, without Censure: Acknowledging deserts, without detractio^

The two great Pillours which supported and maintaind his Oeconomick
government, were, Piety and Hospitallity; wherein, Sobriety so moderated
Plenty, that Men and Angels were equally refresht at his repasts, sweetened with
the Symphony of a cheerful and a charitable heart; seasoned with the music
of conjugiall Harmony.

He was the faithful servant of two illustrious Princes, James and Charles; in
whose acceptable service He so demeaned himself in Humility, wisdom, and
fidelity; that his known faith still rectifyed him in the gracious eye of
popular Opinion; whose loyalty Could have no greater Evidence than a smiling
Conscience, and two sovereign Princes.

The true sincerity of his Religion had, but sought not the applause of men;
who, pressing on toward the high Reward, both in his practice and profession,
neither blushed nor bosted: He was the Orphans father; the Oppressors Enemy; the
poor man's Advocate: apt to forgive, and willing to be forgiven: Zealous
without faction; Charitable without ostentation; Orthodoxe, without
superstition.

His breast was a Cabanet of ^iety, faith, and compassion, whose careful keeper
was, a true Nathaniel, In whom there was no guile: He was the master of his
word, wealth, and passion; Lord of his Affections both Concupiscible, and
irascible; curbing all extremities with Prudence; conquering all adversities
with Patience.

His life was a happy continuation of well spent hours, devoted to the glory
of God, the good of his country; the service of his Prince; wherein, his Piety,
Justice, and Fidelity proposed him an example to all that would desire the love
of God and Man, and purchase to themselves the underpriz'd Inheritance of an
honorable name.

His death was the Confirmation of a well led life, being the other moity of
his happy story; wherein, he appears just weight, without the allowance of the
least grain of flattery, or affection; It was the subject of his
Contemplation, Expectation, Preparation; in respect of which, it was neither
strange, sudden, nor terrible, but a welcome passage from mortality, by
corruption, to eternity.

And now his blood-washt soul has entered the pearly gates of New Jerusalem;
where he sits roabd, and crowned, and glorified; enjoying the beatifique vision
of Jehovah Elohim; triumphing and singing to the name of JESUS, in the
sacrosanctious Quire of Angels, and Archangels, Hosannas, Anthems, and
Halelujahs.

The end.

