A POEM, ON The KINGS most Excellent MAJESTY'S happy Progress into SCOTLAND,
and much desired return.

MAY. 1633.

Imprinted at LONDON, MDCXXXIII.

To all True-hearted Subjects, that wish well to our Gracious Sovereign, His
Royal Queen, Prince, Princess, and State: The Author, no Poet, but on this
occasion, directs his ensuing Poem.
He Is gone, the Sun goes Northward, and it was now
Fit time of the year; I Will tell you why, and how:
Some in a Map do trace each step He makes,
And with his Compass one the distance takes
From town to town, and, guided by his sight,
Dares to avouch that there He lay last Night,
And here He dined this day, and then, amain,
He and his Troops passed ore such a Plain
And such a Meadow green, and fields that lay
Close to a River running by that way.
Thus his Finger walks the Journey through.
Lastly he says, This is Edinborough.
Here must I point at things in general,
For that were infinite to touch them all,
Or to describe the ways, or Towns, or woods,
Or Hills, or Dales, or Fields, or dainty Floods
And Brooks that glide along, I leave that to
Some other Muse, for mine has much ado
To find a Clew of thread to lead her out:
Of this great Labyrinth she is about;
Thus some take Pleasure, and Recreation,
To see Him in Imagination,
To think they see Him present, hear Him speak,
As in a Dream, though absent when they wake:
And whilst they this contemplate, thus they sing,
No State so happy, never so sweet a King.
When they have done in speaking what they may,
Unto His praise, with bended knees they pray
For Him and all that his Attendants be,
Praising, and wishing their Felicity,
And that all blessings on His head may fall,
To make His Royal race perpetual.
Mark how He mounts higher then Cancers Sign,
And walks with equal steps beyond that ^ Line The Gests.

Which Phoebus never could pass, The Tropic.
His Tropicks stand
Before the Sun, take them by Sea or Land:
Eastward He goes to France, and West to Spain, By Do^er.

Northward to Scotland, Southward back again
To England, Royal Traveler; See here,
H' exceeds the Sun, quarters the Hemisphere; The Suns Summer beigne.

Now in His Apogaeum does He shine
Nine days in the North, more then in the Sothern Clime.
Astron'mers say it is common, yet mistake,
'Twas never but for James and Charles his sake;
See how Don Phoebus strives for to exceed,
Breathless, and windlesse, till his Coursers bleed,
Drinks up the Sea for thirst, and lets it fall
In Tears, into the Earths vast vrinall,
And when he cannot compass his desire,
With burning heat would set the world on fire;
He rises early, and goes late to bed,
Yet ere one Month he yields, as vanquished,
Stands, The ^^^stice.
gazing after him, and does admire,
But cannot move, is forced for to retire.
The Sun, though glorious, needs must lay aside,
During this Progress, all his glittering pride,
Turns ^ Phosphorus to our Phoebus all the way, The Day star.

Serves for a morning Star unto the Day,
And bears the Mace to Charles: See how goes
And comes before his Majesty, and shows
As he ascends to Northward, more and more,
Great light to them that were all Night before. Dwellers under the North Pole.

But when the King returns, the Sun with speed,
Comes South again, as if 'twere so decreed,
They of the Orcades rise, and wondering say,
They never observed it so since Jacobs day. King ^ames.

For when of light they saw such curious streams,
They did suppose it had been Phoebus beams,
In hopes that he for his long absence might
Give more then half year day; for half year night.
Now they pluck on their clothes, awak't from sleep,
Rejoicing much for to see the day peep,
One for his doublet, one for his breeches calls,
Rowsing their Servants from their Funerals,
Near dead asleep: they that dwell farthest North,
That for six months at least never ventured forth
Of their own doors, in haste without dispute,
Run to the tops of the Hills for to salute
The rising Sun: by use the case is clear,
The first that sees him shall be King that year.
It Is not your usual Sun that now you see,
But it is King Charles, a greater Sun then he.
Up to your mountain tops therefore, and pry
For to behold him first as narrowly
As e're you did your Sun; who can allege
The Conquest, shall not lose his Privilege.
When by Gods grace He shall return, then we
His loyal Subjects shall contend to see
Our Sovereign first, no hills for this so high,
As we desire, no Alps can satisfy.
For when He took His Progress, then each one
That could not Him attend where He was gone,
Looks at his Coach wheels, as along they past,
Striving with greedy eyes to see him last.
Those of the Antarctike Pole have cause to fear,
The Arctick day will almost make a year;
And they in the night must all that while abide,
Whereas the Sun did commonly divide
The Day and Night betwixt them, good success
Be to the Northern world, the Almighty bless
Denmark and Swede, and all the rest that are
Confederates for that League, and German war,
The Sun comes nearer you, and gilds the Sky
Till of your foes you get the victory.
The birds most sweetly chant it all the way,
Bid him good morrow and good night each day:
Each Wood and Grove, each Tree, and each Briar
Yield Choristers to make a dainty quire:
Sometimes the Partridge one another call,
Morning and Evening sings the Nightingall.
It Were endless to recount the Notes they sing,
When all the birds do homage to the King;
Under his window, ere the day appear,
Ioying and clapping crows loud Chanticleere.
Fishes and Beasts do the like, but that my song
Cannot assoord them room, 'twould be too long,
And over the Hills and Valleys, with the bounds
Of Horses and Coaches the Echo sounds,
Repeating all that's done, or said, as crossed,
That any word, or tittle should be lost.
The end for breuity by her expressed,
Shows that she keeps a Iournall of the rest.
The highway Criples run by's Coaches side
To ask an alms, which never is denied.
You Would laugh, how some, at the end of every town
With wooden legs will put the Footmen down.
The Majors and Aldermen of every place,
And Under-officers, for a great space,
Come forth to meet him, and to offer up,
Some silver Flaggons, some a golden Cup,
Some one thing, some another, any thing
They judge to be most pleasing to the King.
And thus in humble manner, as it is meet,
Lay down their keys, and power at his feet.
With them the rural Lads, and Lasses too,
Staring and gazing to see what they do.
He Is a despised clown eternally,
That comes not forth to see the King pass by.
The Country Hoydens gain thus much, they can
That saw the King, write always Gentleman.
You Would wonder how they will boast, it is their glory,
When to their sweet-hearts they tell this story.
Sun stand thou still, and let thy Solstice be
So long in the Heaven, till thou clearly see
His safe arrival, and return again:
Leave him not there, as once thou did in Spain,
Hoping to meet him, sent with swift careere:
Perchance, Express, to see how all did here.
Our Sun to Scotland gone, does make our night,
Our Moon His royal Consort gives us light, Queen Mary.

Two pretty Stars increase it, that stand by
Conioyn'd with her, Venus and Mercury. Prince Charles. Princess Mary.

Mark a Parhelium now, two Su^nes for one
Do shine above our Northern Ho^izon,
In Scotland one, in England one, yet the,
So far asunder make a goodly day:
And if thus distant they can shine so sweet,
How bright a Sky will it be when they next meet
His sacred head all happiness attend,
The Queen, the Prince, the Princess, Subjects, Friend:
Let Angels guardians, God Protector stand,
By Sea His Pilot, and His Guide by land:
By day His Cloud, by night His burning Torch,
Nor cold by night, nor heat by day may scorch
His royal Person; let His clothing be
Eliahs Mantle, and His company
Eliahs Chariot, Tobies Raphael
In The way He goes; for thirst give Jacobs Well,
For hunger Jacobs Venison, which may send
A blessing to all those that Him attend;
For sleep give Jacobs Pillow, at his head
Set Jacobs Laddar, that which I have said,
Give all those blessing which His conuoy found,
Unto our King for ^o begirt him round.
O let His sleep be sweet, His dreams divine,
Of heavenly angels, and his heart incline,
Good God, that King Solomon's dream may be
Confirmed to Him and His posterity;
And that in full assurance God may please
Conduct Him safe, and bring Him back in peace.
Viuat Rex.
J. R.


