The true description of this marvelous strange Fish, which was taken on
thursday was sennight, the.xvi. day of June, this present month, in the year
of our Lord God. M. DLX. ix.


A declaration of the taking of this strange Fish, with the length and
breadth. etc.
Doing you to understand, that on thursdaye the.xvi. day of this present
month of June, in ye year of our Lord God. MD. LV. ix. This strange fish
(which you see here picttured) was taken between Callis, and Dover, by
sertayne English Fissher men, which were a fyshynge for mackrell. And this
strange and merueylous Fyshe, following after the scooles of Mackrell, came
rushinge in to the fisher men's Netts, and brake and tore their nets
marueilouslie, in such sort, that at the first they wear much amassed there
at: and marueiled what it should be, that kept such a sturr with their Netts,
for they were very much harmed by it, with breking and spoiling their Netts.

And then they seeing, and perceiuyng that the Netts would not serve by reason of
the greatness of this straung Fish, then they with such instruements, ingins,
and things that they had: made such shift that they took this straung Fish.
And upon fridaye the morrow after brought it up to Billynges gate in London,
which was the.xvii. day of June, and there it was seen and vewid of many
which marueiled much at the straungnes of it. For here has never the like of
it ben seen: and on saterdaye, being the.xviii. day, sertayne fish mongers
in new Fishstreat, agreeid with them that caught it, for, and in consideracion
of the harm, which they received by spoylinge of there Netts, and for their
pains, to have this strange fish. And having it, did open it and flaied of
the skinn, and saved it hole. And adiudging the meat of it to be good, broyled
a piece and tasted of hit, and it looked whit like Veale when it was broiled,
and was good and sauerie, (though sumwhat straung) in the eating, and then they
sold of it that same saterdaye, to such as would buy of the same, and they
them selves did bake of it, and eat it for dainty: and for the more
serteintaintie and opening of the truth, the good men of the Castle and the
Kings head in new Fish streat, did but a great deal and bakte of it, and this
is most true.

THis strange Fish is in length.xvii. foot, and.iii. foot broad, and in
compass about the body.vi. foot. and proporcioned as you see here by this
picture, and is round snowted, short headdid as you see, having.iii. ranckes of
teeth on either iawe, maruaylous sharp and very short.ii. eyes growing near
his snout, and as big as a horses eyes, and his heart as big as an Oxes heart,
and like wise his liver and lights bige as an Oxes, but all the garbidge yt
was in his belly besides, would have gone in to a felt hat. Also.ix. finns,
and.ii. of the sormost be.iii. quarters of a yeard long from the body: and a
very big one on the fore part of his back, as you see h^^^ by this picture,
blackish on the back and a little whitishe on the belly, a slender tail, and
had but one bone and that was a great rydge bone runninge a long his back,
from the head unto the tail, and had great force in his tail when he was in
the water. Also it has.v. gills of each side of the head, shoing white as you
see. There is no proper name for it that I know but that sertayne men of
Captain Haukinses, does call it a Sharke. And it is to be seen in London, at
the red Lion, in Flete street.

Fininis.
Quoth. C. R.

Imprynted at London. in Fleetstreate, beneathe the conduit, at the sign of
Saint John Evangelist, by Thomas Colwell.


