ARGALVS and PARTHENIA

The Argument of ye History

Written by Fra: Quarles. Lusit Anacreon

London Printed for John Marriott in S Dunston's Churchyard fleet street. 1629.

Tho: Cecill sculp.



The mind of the Frontspiece.
Reader, behind this silken Frontspiece lies
The Argument of our Book; which, to your eyes
Our Muse (for serious causes, and best known
Unto her self) commands should be vnshowne;
And therefore, to that end, she has thought fit
To draw this Curtain, t'wixt your eye and it.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HENRY LORD RICH OF KENSINGTON, EARL OF HOLLAND,
CAPTAIN OF HIS Maties GVARD, AND GENTLEMAN OF THE BEDCHAMBER, CHANCELLOR OF
THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE, KNIGHT OF THE MOST NOBLE ORDER OF THE GARTER, ONE
OF HIS MAJESTY'S MOST HONORABLE PRIVY COUNSEL: AND GREAT EXAMPLE OF TRVE
HONOR AND CHIVALRY.

FRA: QVARLES PRESENTS AND DEDICATES HIS ARG ALVS AND PARTHENIA.

To the Reader.
Reader:
I Present thee here with a history of Argalus and Parthenia, the fruits of
broken hours: I was a Sience taken out of the O^chard of Sir Philip Sydney, of
precious memory, which I have lately (...) upon a Crab-stocke, in mine own: It
has brought ^orth many leaves, and promises pleasing frui^, if m^leuolent eyes
blast it not in the bud. This Book differs from my former, as a Courtier from
a Churchman: But if any think it vn^, for one to play both parts, I have
presidents for it: And let such know, that I have taken but one play-day in
six: Howeuer, I should beshrew that hand that binds them all together to make
one Volume. In this D^scourse, I have not affect^d to set thy v^derstanding on
the Rack, by the tyranny of strong lines, which (as they fabulously report of
China dishes) are m^de for the third Generation to make use of, and are the
mere itch of wit; under the color o^ which, many have ventured (trusti^g to
the Oe^ipean conceit of their ingenious Reader) to write nonsense, and
felloniously father the crea^ed expositions of other men; not unlike some
painters, who first make the picture, then, from the opinion of better
judgments, conclude, whom it resembles. These lines ^re strong enough for my
purpose; If not for thine, yet read them, and your understandings may be
magnified by their weakness. Reader, thou sh l^, in the progress of this
Story, meet with a (...) S^licisme; which is this; Demagoras his so f^ule a
deed, ^ted upon the fair Parthenia, is fully exp^st; and yet, the revenge
thereof p^st over in silence; wherein (as I conceive) I have not dealt
unjustly. When Prometheus stole fire from heaven to animate and quicken his
artificial bodies, the seuerer Gods (for punishment of so high a Sacrilege,
struck him not d^ad with a sudden Thunderbolt, but (to be more deeply avenged)
let him live, to be tormented with Vulters, continually g^awing on his Liuor.
The some kind of torture had Ixion: so had Sisyphus: so had Tantalus: Did then
Demagoras fault equal (if not exceed) theirs, and should his punishment be
l^sse? H^d my pen delivered him dead into your hands, what could ye have had
more? His accursed memory had soon ro^ted with his b^ser name, and there had
been an end of him: In which respect, I have suffered him to live, that he
might stand like a lack-a-Lent, or a Shrouing Cock for eue^y one to spend a
Cudgel at, to the wo^lds end. Ladies (for in your (...) l^ps I know this book
will choose to lie, which being far fetched, if the Stationer be wise, will
be most fit for you) my suit is, that you would be pleased to give the fair
Parthenia your noble ^ntertainment: She has crossed the Seas ^or your
acquaintance, and is come to live and dye with you; to whose gentle hands I
recommend her, and kiss them.

FR; QV.
Dublin this 4. of March. 1628.
ARGALVS AND PARTHENIA.
The first Book.
WIthin the limits of The Arcadian land,
Whose grateful bounty has inricht the hand
Of many a Shepherd swain, whose rural Art
(Untaught to gloze, or with a double heart
To vow dissembled love) did build to Fame
Eternal Trophies of a pastoral name;
That sweet Arcadia; which, in antique days,
Was wont to warble out her well-tuned lays
To all the world; and, with her oaten Reed,
Did sing her love whilst her proud flocks did feed;
Arcadia, whose deserts did claim to be
As great a sharer in the Daphnean tree,
As his, whose louder Aenead proudly sings
Heroic conquests of victorious Kings;
There (if th'exuberance of a word may swell
So high, that Angels may be said, to dwell)
There dwelt that Virgin, that Arcadian glory,
Whose rare composure did abstract the story
Of true perfection, modellizing forth
The ^eight of beauty, and admired worth;
Her name Parthenia; whose unnamed descent
Can serve but as a needless complement
To gild p^rfection: She shall boast, alone,
What bounteous Art, and Nature makes her own.
Her Mother was a Lady, whom deep age
More fi l'd with honor, then diseases; s^ge,
A modest Matron, strict, reserved, austere,
Sp^ring in sp^ch, bu^ liberal of her ear;
Fi^rce to her fo^s, and violent where she l kes;
Wedded to what her own opinion strikes;
Fr^quent quent in alms, and charitable deeds,
Of mighty spirit, constant to her beads,
Wisely suspicious; but what need we other
Then this? she was the rare Parthenia's mother;
That rare Parthenia, in whose heavenly eye
Sits maiden-mildnesse, mixed with Majesty,
Whose secret power has a double skill,
By frowns or smiles, to make alive, or kill;
Her cheeks are like two bancks of fairest flowers,
Inricht with sweetness from the twilight showers,
Whereon those iarres which were so often bred,
Composed were, betwixt the white and red:
Her hair raught down beneath her yuory knees,
As if that Nature, to so rare a piece,
H^d meant a shadow, laboring to show
And boast the utmost, that her hand could do:
Like sm^llest flax appea^'d her Nymph like hair,
But only fl^xe was not so small, so fair:
H r lips like Rubies, and you would think, within,
In stead of teeth, that orient Pearls had bin:
The whiten^sse of her dainty n^ck you know,
If ever you behold the new-salne Snow;
Her Swan-like breasts were like two little Spheres,
Wherein, each a zure line in view appears,
Which, were they obuious but to every eye,
All liberal Arts would turn Astronomy;
Her sl^nder wast, her lilly hands, her arms
I dare not (...) to view, because all charms
Forbidden are: My bashful Muse descends
No lower sleppe: He^e her Commission ends,
And by another virtue does enjoin
My pen to treat perfection, more divine:
The chaste Diana, and her Virgin-crew
Was but a Type of one, that should ensue
In after ages, which we find expressed,
And here fulfilled in chasts Parthenia's breast:
True virtue was the object of her will;
She could no ill, because she knew no ill;
Her thoughts were noble, and her words not lavish,
Yet free, but wisely waigh'd; more apt to ravish,
Then to entice; less beautified with art,
Then natural sweetn sse: In her gentle heart
Judgment t^anscended: from her milder breast
Passion was not exiled, but represt:
Her voice exce^'d; nay, had you heard her voice
But warble (...), you might have had the choice,
To (...) her for some smooth-faced Cherubin,
O^ el^e some glorious Angel, that had bin
A trebble sharer in the eternal joys,
Such was her voice, such was her heavenly voice:
Merry, yet mod^st; witty, and yet wise;
Not apt to toy, and yet not too too nice;
Quick, but not ^ash; Courteous, and yet not common;
Not too familiar, and yet scorning no man:
In bri^fe, who would relate her praises well,
Must first bethink himself, what is to exc^ll.
When these perfections h^d enhaunc'd the name
Of rare Parthenia, nimble winged Fame
Grew great with honor, spreads her hasty wings,
Advanced her Trumpet, and away she springs,
And with her ^ull mouthed blast she does proclaim
(...) glory of Partheniaes name:
Who now (...) Parthenia? what report
Can find admittance in the Arcadian Co^rt
But fair Partheniaes? Every sol^mne feast
Must now be swcern^d, ho^ourd, and poss^st
With high discourses of Partheniaes glory,
And every mouth must b^eathe Partheniaes story.
The Po^t summons now his amorous quill,
And scorns a^istance from the sacr^d Hill:
The sweet lip^ Orator takes in hand to raise
His prouder style, to sp^ke Partheniacs praise.
The curious Painter wis^ly does displace
Fair Venus, sets Parthenia in her pl^ce.
The Pleader burns his books, disdaines the Law,
And f^lls in lou^ with whom his ey^s never saw.
Healths to the f^ire Parthenia fl^ about
At every board, whilst others, mo^e (...),
Build Idols to her, and adore the some;
And Parrats learn to (...) Partheniaes name.
Some trust to f^me; some secretly disprise
Her worth; some emulates, and some enuies;
Some doubt, some fear lest lavish same belie her,
And all that dare believe report, admire.
Upon the bord^rs of the Arcadian Land
Dwelt a Laconian Lord; Of proud command,
Lord of much people, youthful, and of fame,
More great then good; Demagoras his name,
Of stature tall, his body spare, and meager,
Thick shoulderd, hollow cheek'd, and visage eager,
His g^shfull countenance swarthy, long and thin,
And down each side of his reuerted chin^e
A lock of black neglected hair (be friended
With warts too ugly to be seen) descended;
His rolling eyes were deeply suncke, and hiew'd
Like fire; It Is said, they blisterd where they viewed.
Upon his shoulders, from his fruitful crown,
A rugged crop of Elfclocks dangled down:
His hide all hairy; garish his attire,
And his complexion merely Earth and Fire;
Perverse to all; extenuating what
Another did, because he did it not:
Maligning all men's actions but his own,
Not loving any, and beloved of none:
Reuengefull, envious, desperately stout,
And in a word, to paint him fully out,
That had the Monopoly to fulfill
All vice; the Hieroglyphick of all ill.
He viewed Partheniaes face: As srom above
Fireballs of lightning hurld by angry Jove
Confound the unarmed beholder at a blow,
And leave him ruined in the place: Even so
The peerless beauty of Partheniaes eyes,
At the first sight did conquer and surprise,
The slavish thoughts of this amazed lover,
Who void of strength to hide, or to discover
The tyrannous scorching of his secret fires,
Prompted by passion, with himself conspires.
Accursed Demagoras! Into what a fe^
Has one look struck thy soul? O never, never
To be recur'd: If I had done amiss,
Has heaven no easier plagues in store, but this?
Promethius pains are not so sharp as these,
Our sins yet labored both of one disease;
Our faults are equal; Both stole fire from heaven;
Our faults alike, why are our plagues uneven?
Be just; O make not such unequal ods
Of equal sins: Be just, or else no Gods:
Why send ye down such Angels to the earth,
To mock poor mortals? or of mortal birth,
If such a heauenlike Paragon may be,
Why do ye not wound her, as well as me
But why do I implore your aids in (...),
That are the hi^hest Agents in my p^ine?
Poor wretc^! What hope of help can ye assure me,
When only she, that made the wound can cure me?
Divine (...), earths (...) Jewel,
Would thou (...) been less glorious or less cruel.
When (...) thine eyes did to these eyes appear,
I read the (...) of my ruin there,
My necessary ruin^: Heaven, nor Hell
Can salve my sores, by help of Prayer, or spell;
Gods are unjust; and if, with charms, (...) haunt her,
Her eyes are counter charms, to enchant (...):
Why do I thus ex^lcerate my disease?
By adding torments, hope I to find ease?
Is not her cruelty enough, alone,
But must I bring fresh torments of my own?
Cheer up Demagor^s: It Is a wise man's part
Not to lose all, if his vnpractis'd art
Serves not to gain: A Gamester may not choose
His chance: It is some conquest not to loose:
Look to thy self: Let no injurious blast
Of cold despair chi^ thy green wounds too fast
For time to cure: O, hope for no remission
Of pain, till Cupid send thee a Physician.
She is a woman. If a woman, then
My title's good; Women were made for men:
She is a woman, though her heavenly brow
Write Angel, and may stoop, although not now;
Women, by looks, will not be understood,
Until their hearts advise with flesh and blood.
She is a woman; There Is no reason why,
But she (perchance) may burn as well as I.
Move then, Demagoras, let Parthenia know
The strength of her own beauty, in thy woe:
Fear not, what thou ador'st; begin to move,
Chriscrosse sore-runs the Alphabet of love:
It Is half perfected, what is once begun;
She is a woman; and she must be won.
Like as a Swain, whose hands have made a vow
And sw^rne allegiance to the peaceful plough,
Pressed out for service in the (...) camp,
At first (vnentred) finds a liuelesse dampe
Beleagring every joint; as often swounds
As ere he viewes his sword, or thinks of wounds;
At length (not finding any means for flying,
Switcht and spurd on with desp^rate fear of dying)
He hewes, he hackes, and in the midst he goes,
And freshly deals about his frantic blows;
Even so Demagoras, whose vnbred fashion
Had never yet subscribed to loves sweet passion:
Being called a Combitant to Cupids field,
Trembles, and secretly resolves to yield
The day without a parley, till at length,
Fiercely transported by th'vntu^'d strength
Of his own passion, he himself assures,
That (...) torments must have desperate c^res
And thus to the divine Partheniaes ears
Applies his speech, deuo^d of doubts and f^ares.
Fairest of creatures, If my ruder tongue,
To right it self, should d^e your patience wrong:
And lawless passion make it too too free,
O blame your heavenly beauty, and not me:
It was those eyes, those precious eyes that first
Enforced my tongue to speak, or heart to burst,
From those dear eyes I first received that wound,
Which seeks for cure, and cannot be made sound,
But by the hand that struck; To you alone,
I sue for help, that else must hope for none:
Then crown my joys, thou Antidote of despair,
And be as merciful, as thou art fair.
Nature, (the bounty of whose liberal hand
Made thee the jewel of the Arcadian land)
Intended in so rare a prize, to boast
Her masterpeece: Hid Jewels are but lost.
shine then, and rob not nature of her due,
But honor her, as she has honored you.
Let not the best of all her works lie dead
In the nice Casket of a Mayd^nhead:
What she would have revealed, O do not smother,
Thou Art made in vain, unless thou make another:
Give me thy heart, and for that gift of thine,
Lest thou should want a heart, I Will give thee mine,
As richly fraught with love, and lasting duty,
As thou, with virtue, or thine eyes, with beauty.
Why do thou frown? why does that heavenly brow
Not made for wrinkles, show a wrinkle now?
Send forth thy brighter sunshine, and the while,
O lend me but the twilight of a smile:
Give me one amorous glance: why standst thou mute?
Disclose those ruby lips, and grant my suite;
Speak (love) or if thy doubtful mind be bent
To silence, let that silence be consent:
Nor beg I love of alms, although in part,
My words may seem t^implead my own desert.
Disdain me not, although my thoughts descend
Below themselves, t'enioy so fair a friend:
(...) that have o^t, with tears, bin sought to, sue;
And Queens have bin his servants, that serves you.
The beauties of all Gr^ece have bin at strife
To win the name of great Demagoras wife,
And bin despised, not worthy to obtain
So high an honor; What they sought (in vain)
I here present thee with as thine own due,
It being an honor fit for none but you:
Speak then (my love,) and let thy lips make known,
That I am either thine, or not mine own:
Have you beheld when f^esh Auroras eye
Sends forth her early beams, and by and by
Withdrawes the glory of her face, and shrowds
Her checkes behind a ruddy m^ske of clouds,
Which, who believe in Erra Pater, say
Presages wind, and blustry storms that day,
Such were Partheniaes looks, in whose fair face,
Roses and Lillies, late had equal place.
But now, twixt maiden bash fullness and spleen,
Roses appeared and Lillies were not seen:
S^e paused a while, till at the last she breaks
Her long kept angry silence, thus; and speaks,
My Lord,
Had your strong Oratory but the Art,
To make me conscious of so great desert,
As you persuade, I should be bound in duty
To praise your Rhet'ricke, as you prize my beauty;
Or if the frailty of my judgment could
Flatter my thoughts so grossly, as to hold
Your words for current, you might boldly dare
Count me as soolish, as you term me fair.
If you vye Courtship, fortune knows that I
Have not so strong a Game, to see the vye:
Alas, my skill durst never undertake
To play the game, where hearts be set at stake;
Needs must the loss be great, when such have bin
Seldom observed to save themselves that win:
You crave my heart; My Lord, you crave withal,
Too great a mischiese; My poor heart's too small
To fill the concaue of so great a breast,
Whose thoughts can scorn the amorous request
Of love sick Queens, and can requite the vain,
And factious suits of Ladies with disdain:
Stoop not so low beneath your self (great Lord)
To love Parthenia: Shall so poor a word
Stain your fair lips? whose merits do proclaim
A more transcendent fortune, then that name
Can give: Call down Jove's winged Pursuiuant,
And give his tongue the power to enchant
Some easy Goddess, in your name, and treat
A marriage fitting so sublime, so great
A mind as yours, and fill the fruitful earth
With Heroes, sprung from so divine a birth:
Partheniaes heart could never yet aspire
So high: Her homebred thoughts durst never desire
So fond an honor, matched with so great pride,
To hope for that, which Queens have been denyde.
Be wise, my Lord; vouchsafe not to repeat
S'vnfit a suit; Be wise, as you are great:
Advance your noble thoughts: hazard no more
To wrack your fortunes on so fleet a shore,
That, to the wiser world, it may be known
The less you are mine, the more you are your own.
Like as a guilty prisner, upon whom
Offended Justice lately past her doom,
Stands trembling by, and, hopeless to prevail,
B^ules not for mercy, but to the loathed Iaile
D^agges his sad yrons, and from thence commends
A h^sty suite to his selected friends,
That by the virtue of a quick Reprie^e
The wretch might have some few days more to live.
Even so Demagoras, whose rewounded heart
Had newly felt the unexpected smart
And secret burden of a desperate doom,
Replies not, takes no leave, but quits the room,
And, in his discontented mind, reuolues
Ten thousand thoughts; and at the last resolves
What course to run, relying on no other,
But the assistance of Partheniaes mother.
Forthwith his fierce misguided passion drove
His wandering steps to the next neighboring grove.
A keen Steeletto in his trembling hand
He rudely gripped, upon his lips did stand
A milk white froth; his eyes like flames; sometimes
He curses heaven; himself; and then, the times;
Railes at the proud Parthenia; raues; despaires;
And from his head rends off his tangled hayres;
Curs. s the womb that bare him; bans the Fates;
And, drunk with spleen, he thus deliberates.
Why dyest thou not, Demagoras, when as death
Lends thee a weapon? Can the whining breath
Of discontent and passion send relief
To thy distraction, or assuage thy grief?
Why moou'st thou not the Gods? Or rather, why
Do not contemn, and scorn their power, and dye?
But stay! Of whom do thou complain? A woman.
To whom (fond man) do thou complain? A woman.
And shall a woman's frowns have power to grieve thee?
Or shall a woman's wanton smile relieve thee?
Fie, fie, Demago^as, shall a woman's eye
Pre^aile, to make the stout Demagor^s dye,
And leave to after times an entered name
(...) Callender of fools? Rouse up for shame
Thy wasted spirits: whet thy spleen and live
To be revenged: She, she that would not give
Admittance to thy proferd love must drink
The potion of thy hate: stir then the sink
Of all thy passion; where thou can not gain
By fairer lauguage, Tarquin-like constrain.
But hold thy band, Dem^goras, and advise;
Art gives ad^antage often, where force denies;
Suspend thy fury: Make Parthenia^s mother
Thy means: One Adamant will cut another:
Sweeten thy lips with amorous Oratorie;
Affect her tender heart, with the sad story
Of thy dear love; Extol Parth^niaes beauty;
But most of all, urge that deserved duty
Thou ow'st her virtue, and make that the ground
Of thy first love, that gave thy heart the wound:
Mingle thy words with sighs; and it is meet,
If thou can force a tear, to let her see it
Against thy will: Let thy false tongue forbear
No vows and though thou be forsworn, yet swear:
If ere thy barren lips shall chance to pause,
For want of words; Parthenia is the cause,
Who has benumbed thy heart; If e're they go
Beyond their lists, Parthenia made them so.
Withal; be sure, when ere thou shall advance
The daughters virtues, let the glory glance
Upon the prudent mother; Women care not
To hear too much of virtue, if they share not.
When thus thou have prepared her melting ear
To soft attention; closely, in the rear
Of thy discourse, prefer thy sad petition,
That she would please to favor the condition
Of a distressed lover, and afford
In thy behalf, a mothers timely word;
So shall thou wreck thy vengeance by a wild,
And make the mother bawd to her own child.
He paused not; but like a rash proiector
(Whose frantic passion was supreme director)
Fixed his first thoughts, impatient of the second
Which might bin betterd by advise, and reckoned
All time but lost, which he bestowed not
On the execution of his hopeful plot;
Forthwith his nimble paces he divided
Toward the Summer Palace, where resided
The fair Partheniaes mother, boldly enters,
And after mutu^ll complement, aduenters
To break the ice of his dissembled grief;
Thus he complains, and thus he begs relief.
Madam,
The hopeful thriuing of my suit depends
Upon your goodness, and it recommends
It self unto your savor, from whose hand
It must have sentence, or to fall, or stand;
Thirce three times has the Sovereign of the night,
Repaird her empty horns with borrowed light,
Since these sad eyes, these beauty blasted eyes
Were stricken by a light, that did arise
From your blessed womb, whose vnasswaged smart
Has pierced my soul, and wounded my poor heart;
It is the fair Parthenia, whose divine
And glorious virtue led these eyes of mine
To their own ruin; Like a wanton fly,
I dallied with the flames of her bright eye,
Till I have burned my wings: O, if to love
Be held a sin, the guilty gods above
(Being fellow-sinners with us, and commit
The self same crimes) may easily pardon it.
O thrice divine Partheni^, that have got
A sacred privilege which the gods have not,
If thou have doomed that I shall be bereauen
Of my loathed life, yet let me dye for given:
And welcome death, that with one happy blow
Gives me more ease, then life could ever do.
Madam, to whom should my sad words appeal
But you? Al^, to whom should I reveal
My dying thoughts, but unto you, that gave
Being to her, that has the power to save
My wasted life? The language of a mother
Moves more then tears, that trickle from another.
With that a well dissembled drop did slide
From his false eyes. The Lady thus replyde.
My Honorable Lord,
If my untimely answer has prevented
Some further words your passion would have vented,
Pardon my haste; which, in a ruder fashion
Sought only to divide you, from your passion:
The love you bear Parthenia must claim
The privilege of mine ear, and in her name,
(Though from an absent mind as yet unknown)
Return I thanks, with intrest of my own.
The little judgment, that the gods have lent
Her downy years (though in a small extent)
Does challenge the whole freedom of her choice,
In the resignement of a mothers voice:
The sprightly fancies of a virgins mind
Enter themselves, and hate to be confinde;
The hidden Embers of a lovers fire
Desire no bellows, but their own desire,
And like to Dedalus his forge, if blown
Burns dim and dies; blazes, if let alone;
Lovers affect, without aduisement, that
Which being most persuaded to, they hate.
My Lord, adiourne your passion, and refer
The fortune of your suite to time, and her.
Like to a Pinace is a lovers mind,
The Sail his fancy is; A storm of wind,
His uncontrolled passion; the Stea^'s
His reason; Rocks and Sinds, are doubts and fears;
Your storm being great, like a wise Pilot, bear
But little Sail, and stoutly ply the Steare.
Leave then the violence of your thoughts to me,
My Lord, too hasty Gamesters ouersee.
Go, move Parthenia, and let Juno's blessing
Attend your hopeful suite, in the suppressing
Loves common evils; and if her warm desire
Show but a spark, leave me to blow the fire.
Go, lose no time: Lovers must be laborious;
My Lord go prosperous, and return victorious.
With that Demagoras (prostrate on the ground,
As if his ears had heard that blessed sound,
Wherewith the Delphian oracle acquites
The accepted sacrifice) performs the rites
Of quick devotion, to that heavenly voice,
Which fed his soul with the malignant joys
Of vowed revenge; up, from the floor he starts,
Blesses the tongue that bles^ him; and departs.
By this time, had the heauen-surrounding Steeds
Quelled their proud courage, turned their fainting head
Into the lower Hemispheare, to cool
Their flaming nostrills in the Western poole,
When as the dainty and mollitious air
Had bid the Lady of the Palace, share
In her refined pleasures, and invited
Her gentle steps, fully to be delighted
In those sweet walks, where Flora's liberal hand
Had given more freely, then to all the land;
There walked she; and in her va^ious mind,
Proiects and casts about which way to find
The progress of the young Partheniaes heart;
Likes this way: then a second thought does thwart
The first; Likes that way; then a third, the second:
One while she likes the match, and then she reckoned
Demagoras virtues: now her fear entices
Her thoughts to alter; then she counts his vices:
Sometimes she calls his vows and oaths to mind:
Another while, thinks oaths and words but wind.
She likes, dislikes; Her doubtful thoughts do vary,
Resolves, and then resolves the quite contrary.
One while she fears, that his malign aspect
Will give the virgin cause to disaffect:
And then, propounds to her ambitious thoughts
His wealth, the golden cover of all faults:
And, from the Chaos of her doubt, digests
Her fears; creates a world of wealth, and rests.
With that, she straight vnfixt her fastened eyes
From off the ground; and, looking up, espyes
The fair Parthenia, in a lovely bower,
Spending the treasure of an evening hour:
There sat she, reading the sweet-sad discourses
Of Charicleas love: the entercourses
Of whose mixed fortunes taught her tender heart
To feel the self same joy, the self same smart:
She read, she wept; and, as she wept, she smiled,
As if her ^quall eyes had reconcilde
The extremes of joy and grief: she closde the book,
Then opened it, and with a milder look,
She piti^s lovers; musing then a while,
She teaches smiles to weep; and tears, to smile:
At length, her broken thoughts she thus discouers.
Unconstant state of poor distressed lovers!
Is all extreme in love? No mean at all?
No draughts indifferent? either honey or Gall?
Has Cupids Universe no temperate Zone,
Either a torrid or a frozen one?
Alas, alas, poor lovers. As she spoke
Those words, from her disclosed lips there brake
A gentle sigh; and after that, another:
With that steps in her unexpected mother.
Have ye beheld, when Titans lustful head
Has newly di^'d into the seagreene bed
Of Thet is, how the bashful Horizone
(Enfore'd to see what should be seen by none)
Looks red for shame; and blushes to discover
Th'incestuous pleasures of the heaven borne lover?
So looked Parthenia, when the sudden eye
Of her unwelcome mother did d^scry
Her secret passion: The mothers smile
Brought forth the daughters blush; and level coil
They smiled and blush; one smile begat another:
The daughter blushed, because the icalous mother
Smiled on her; and the silent mother smilde,
To see the conscious blushing of her child,
At length, grown great with words, she did awake
Her forced silence, and she thus bespake.
Blush not, my fairest daughter; It Is no shame
To pity lovers, or lament that flame,
Which worth and beauty kindles in the breast:
It Is charity to succor the distressed.
The disposition of a generous heart
Makes every griese her own, at least bears part.
What marble, ah what adamantine care
Ere heard the flames of Troy, without a tear?
Much more the scorching of a lovers fire,
(Whose desprate fuel is his own desire)
May boldly challenge every gentle heart
To be (...) in his secret smart:
Why do thou blush? why did those pearly tears
Slide down? Fear not: this Arbor has no cares;
Here Is none but we; speak then: It is no shame
To shed a tear; thy mother did the same:
Say; has the winged wanton, with his dart,
Sent ere a message to thy wounded heart?
Speak, in the name of Hymen I conjure thee;
If so, I have a (...) shall recure thee:
I fear, I fear, the young La (...) Lord
Has lately left some indigested word
In thy cold stomach: which, for want of Art
I doubt, I doubt, lies heavy at thy heart:
If that be all, reue^ling brings relief:
Silence in love but multiplies a grief:
Hid sorrow's desperate, not to be endured,
Which being but disclosed, is easly cured:
Perchance, thou (...) Demagoras; and would smother
Thy close (...) from thy angry mother,
And reap^ the da^nty fruits of love, unseen;
I did the like, or thou had never been;
Stolen goods are sweetest: If it be thy mind
To love in secret, I will be as blind
As he that wounded thee; or if thou dare
Acquaint thy mother, then a mothers care
Shall be redoubled, till thy thoughts acquire
The sweet fruition of thy choice desire:
Thou love D^magoras; If thy lips deny,
Thy conscious heart must give thy lips the lie:
And if thy liking countermand my will,
Thy punishment shall be to love him still:
Then love him still, and let his hopes inherit
The crown, belonging to so fair a merit,
His thoughts are noble, and his fame appears
To speak, at least, an age above his years.
The blood of his increasing honor springs
From the high stock of the Arcadian Kings:
The gods have blessed him with a liberal hand,
Enricht him with the prime of all the land:
Honor and wealth attend his gates, and what
Can he command, that he possesses not?
All which, and more, (if mothers can divine)
The fortune of thy beauty has made thine:
He is thy Captive, and thy conquering eyes
Have took him prisner: he submits, and lies
At thy dear mercy, hoping ne re to be
Ransomed from death, by any price, but thee.
Wrong not thy self in being too too nice,
And what (perchance) may not be proferd twice,
Accept at first: It is a foolish mind
To be too coy: Occasion's bald behind:
It Is not the common work of every day,
TO afford such offers: Take them while you may:
Times alter: youth and beauty are but blasts;
Use then thy time, whilst youth and beauty lasts:
For if that loathed and infamous reproach
Of a stale maid, but offer to incroach
Upon opinion; the art in estimation,
Like garments, kept till they be out of fashion:
Thy worth, thy wit, thy virtues all must stand
Like goods at outcries, prized at second hand.
Resolve thee then, to enlarge thy Virgin life,
With the onourable freedom of a wife,
And let the fruits of that blessed marriage be
A living pledge betwixt my Child and me.
So said; The fair Parthenia (in whose hear
Her own affections yet had got the start
Of her obedience) makes a sudden pause,
Strives with her thoughts, objects the binding laws
Of filial duty, to her best affection;
Sometimes submits unto her own election,
Sometimes unto her mothers: thus divided
In her distracted sancy, sometimes guided
By one desire, and sometimes by another,
She thus replide to her attentive mother.
Madam,
Think not Parthenia, under a pretense
Of silence, studies disobedience:
Or by the crafty slownesse of reply,
Borrowes a quick advantage to deny:
It lies not in your power, to command
Beyond my will: unto your tender hand,
I here surrender up that little All
You gave me, freely to dispose withal.
The gods forbid, Parthenia should resist
What you command, command you what you list:
But pardon me, the young Laconian Lord
Has made assault, but never yet could board
This heart of mine: I wept, I wept indeed,
But my misconsterd streams did never proceed
From Cupids spring: This blubbered book makes known,
Whose griefs I wept; I wept not for mine own;
My lowly thoughts durst never yet a spire
The least degree, toward the proud desire
Of so great honor, to be called his wife,
For whom, ambitious Queens have bin at strife;
He su'd for love, and strongly did importune
My heart, more pleased with a meaner fortune;
My breast was marble, and my heart forgot
All pity; for, indeed, I loved him not;
But Madam; you, to whose more wise directions
I bend the stoutest of my rash affections,
You have commanded, and your will shall be
The square to my vneauen desires, and me;
I Will practice duty, and my deeds shall show it;
I Will practice love, though Cupid never know it.
When great Basilius (he whose princ^ly hand
Nourisht long peace in the Arcadian land)
With triumph, brought to his renowned Court,
His new espoused Queen, was great resort
Of foreign States, and Princes, to behold
The truth, that vnbeleeu'd report had told
Of fair Gynecias worth: Thither repaired
The Cyprian Nobles, richly all (...)
In warlike furniture, and well addressed,
With solemn Iousts to glorify the feast
Of marriage royal, lately past between
The Arcadian King, and his thrice noble Queen,
The fair Gynecia; in whose face and breast
Nature, and curious Art had done their best,
To sum that rare perfection, which (in brief)
Transcends the power of a strong belief;
Her Syer was the Cyprian King, whose fame
Received more honor from her honored name,
Then, if he had, with his victorious hand,
Vnsceptred half the Princes in the land:
To tell the glory of this royal Feast;
The Bridegroomes state, and how the Bride was dressed;
The princely service, and the rare delights;
The several names and worth, of Lords and Knights;
Their quaint Impresa's, their deuisefull shows;
Their martial sports, their often redoubled blows;
The courage of this Lord, or that proud horse;
Who ran; who got the better, who, the worse,
Is not my task; nor lies it in my way,
To make relation of it: Heralds may:
Yet Fame and honor has selected one,
From that illustrious crew; and him alone
Have recommended to my careful quill,
Forbidding that his honor should lie still
Among the rest, whom fortune and his spirit,
That day, had crowned with a victors merit,
His name was Argalus; In Cyprus borne;
And (if what is not ours, may adorn
Our proper fortunes) his blood royal springs
From the ancient stock of the great Cyprian Kings:
His outside had enough to satisfy
The expectation of a curious eye:
Nature was too too prodigal of her beauty,
To make him half so fair, whom Fame, and duty
He ought to Honor, cal^'d so often forth,
T'approue the exc'lence of his manly worth:
His mind was richly furnished with the treasure
Of moral knowledge, in so liberal measure,
Not to be proud: So valiant, and so strong
Of noble courage, not to dare a wrong:
Friendly to all men, inward but with few;
Fast to his old friends, and unapt for new:
Lord of his word, and master of his passion,
Serious in buisnesse, choice in recreation:
Not too mistrustfull, and yet wisely wary;
Hard to resolve, and then as hard to vary:
And to conclude, the world could hardly find
So rare a body with so rare a mind.
Thrice had the bright surueyour of the heaven
Divided out the days and nights by even
And equal hours, since this child of fame
(Invited by the glory of her name,)
First viewed Partheniaes face, whose mutual eye
Shot equal flames, and with the secret tie
Of vndisclos'd affection, joined together
Their yielding hearts, their loves unknown to either,
Both dearly loved: the more they strove to hide
Their love, affection they the more descride.
It lies beyond the power of art to smother
Affection, where one virtue finds another:
One was their thoughts, and their desires one,
And yet both loved, unknown; beloved, unknown:
One was the Dart, that at the self same time
Was sent, that wounded her, that wounded him:
Both hoped, both feared alike, both joyed, both grieved;
Yet, where they both could help, was none relieved:
Two loved, and two beloved were; yet none
But two in all, and yet that all but one.
By this time had their barren lips betrayed
Their timorous silence; now they had displaid
Loves sanguine colors, whilst the winged Child
Sat in a tree, and clapped his hands, and smiled
To see the combat of two wounded friends:
He strikes and wounds himself, while she defends
That would be wounded, for her pain proceeds,
And flows from his, and from his wound, she bleeds;
She plays at him, and aiming at his breast,
Pierced her own heart: and when his hand addressed
The blow to her fair bosom, there it found
His own dear heart, and gave that heart the wound:
At length both conquered and yet both did yield,
Both lost the day, and yet both wan the field:
And as the warfare of their tongues did cease,
Their lips gave earnest of a joyful peace.
But o the hideous chances that attend
A lovers progress, to his iournies end!
How many desperate rubs, and dangers wait
Each minute, on his miserable state!
His hopes do build, what straight his fears destroy,
Sometimes, he surfeits with excess of joy:
Sometimes, despairing ere to find relief,
He roares beneath the tyranny of grief;
And when loves current runs with greatest force,
Some obuious mischief still disturbes the course:
For lo, no sooner the discouerd flame
Of these new parted lovers did proclaim
Loves sacred Iubile; but the Virgins Mother
(The posture of whose visage did discover
Some serious matter, harb'ring in her breast)
Enters the room: Half angry, half in jest,
She thus began: My dearest child, this night,
When as the silent darkness did inuit
Mine eyes to slumber, sundry thoughts possessed
My troubled mind, and robbed me of my rest;
I slept not, till the early bugle horn
Of Chaunti^lere had summoned in the Morn
To Attend the Light, and nurse the newborn Day;
At last, when Morpheus, with his leaden key,
Had locked my senses, and enlarged the power
Of my heaven guided fancy, for an hour
I slumbred; and before my slumbring eyes,
One, and the selfsame dream presented thrice;
I waked; and, being frighted at the vision,
Perceived the Gods had made an app^ition:
My dream was this: Me thought I saw thee sitting
Dressed like a princely Bride, with robes befitting
The state of Majesty; thy Nymph-like hair
Loosely dissheuel'd; and thy brows did bear
A Cypress wreath; and (thrice three months expired)
Thy pregnant womb grew heavy, and required
Lucina's aid: with that, me thought I saw
A teame of harnest Peacocks fiercely draw
A siery Chariot from the flitting sky,
Wherein there sat the glorious Majesty
Of great Saturnia, on whose train attended
An host of Goddesses; Juno descended
From out the flaming Chariot, and blessed
Thy painful womb: Thy pains a while encreast;
At length, she laid her gentle palms upon
Thy fruitful flank, and there was borne a son:
She made thee mother of a smiling boy,
And, after, blessed thee with a mothers joy;
She kissed the Babe, whose fortune she foresold,
For on his head she set a Crown of Gold;
Forthwith, as if the heavens had cloven in sunder,
Me thoughts I heard the horrid noise of thunder;
The rain poured down, and yet the sky was clear,
And every drop that lighted, did appear
As orient pearl, mixed with refined gold;
VVbereat, the goddess turned, and said, Behold,
Great I^ue has sent a gift: go forth, and take it,
Thus having spoke, she vanished, and I wak't:
I wak'^; and waking, trembled; for I knew
They were no idle passages, that grew
From my distemperd thoughts; it was not a vain
Delusion rouing from a troubled brain;
It was a vision; and the gods forespake
Parthenia's fortune: Gods cannot mistake.
I liked the dream; wherein the gods foretold
Thy joyful marriage; and the shower of gold
Betokened wealth; The Infants golden Crown,
Ensuing honor: Juno's coming down,
A safe deliverance; and the smiling Boy
Summed up the total of a mothers joy:
But what the wreath of Cypress (that was set
Upon thy nuptial brows) presaged, as yet
The gods keep from me: if that secret doc
Portend an evil, heaven keep it from thee too.
Advise Parthenia: Seek not to withstand
The plot, wherein the Gods vouchsafe a hand;
Submit thy will to theirs; what they enioy^e,
Must be; nor lies it in my power, or thine
To contradict: Endeavor to fulfill
What, else, must come to pass against thy will.
Now by the fil^all all duty thou do bear
The gods and me, or if ought else more dear
Can force obedience; as thou hop'st to speed
At the gods hands, in greatest time of need;
By heaven, by hell, by all the powers above,
I here conjure Parthenia to remove
All sond conceits, that labor to disioyne
What heaven has knit, Dem^goras's heart and (...);
The gods are faithful, and their wisdoms know
What Is better for us mortals, then we do;
Doubt not (my child) the gods cannot deceive;
What heaven does offer, fear not to receive,
With thankful hands: Pass not so slightly over
The dear affection of so true a lover;
Pity his flames; relieve his tortured breast,
That finds abroad, no joy; at home, no rest;
But, like a wounded Heart before the hounds,
That flies, with Cupids Iauelin in his wounds:
Stir up thy raked up embers of desire,
The gods will bring in fuel, and blow the fire;
Be gentle; let thy cordial smiles revive
His wasted spirits, that only cares to live
To do thee honor: It was Cupids will,
The dart he sent, should only wound; not kill;
Yield then; and let th'engaged gods power down
Their promised blessings on thy head; and crown
Thy youth with joys; and may thou after be
As blessed in thine, as I am blessed in thee.
So said: The fair Parthenia, to whose heart
Her fixed desires had taught th'^m willing Art
Of disobedience, calls her judgment in;
And, of two evils, determines it a sin
More venial, by a resolute denial,
To prove un (...), then be d^sloyall
To him, whose heart a sacred vow had tied
So fast to hers; and (weeping) thus reply^d:
Madam,
The angry gods have late conspired to show
The Utmost their enraged hands could doc,
And having laid aside all mercy, stretch
Their power, to make one miserable wretch,
Whose cursed and tortured soul must only be
The subject of their wrath; and I am she.
Hard is the case! my dear desires must fail;
My vows must crack; my plighted faith be frail;
Or else affection must be so exiled
A mothers heart, that she renounce her child.
And as she sp^ke that word, a flowing tide
Of tears gusht out, whose violence denied
Tn'intended passag^ of her doubling tongue:
She stopped a ^hile: Then on the floor she flung
Her prostrate body, whilst her hands did tear
(Not kn^owing what they did) her dainty hair.
Sometimes she struck the ground; sometimes, her breast:
Began some words, and then wept out the rest;
At last, her liuelesse hands did, by degrees,
Raise her cast body on her feeble knees,
And humbly rearing her sad eyes upon
Her mothers frowning visage, thus went on.
Upon these knees; these knees that never were bent
To you in vain; that never did present
Their unrewarded duty; never rose
Without a mothers blessing; upon those,
Upon those naked knees, I recommend
To your dear thoughts, those term^nis that attend
Your poor Parthenia, whose unknown distress
Craves rather death, then language to express.
What shall I do? D^magoras and Death
Sound both alike to these sad ears; that breath
That names the one, does nominate the other.
No, no, I cannot love him; my dear mother,
Command Parthenia now to undergo
What death you please, and these quick hands shall show
The seal of my obedience in my heart.
The gods themselves, that have a secret art
To force affection, cannot violate
The laws of Nature, stop the course of Fate.
Can earth forget her burden, and ascend?
Or can the aspiring flames be taught to tend
To the earth? If fire descend, and earth aspire,
Earth were no longer earth, nor fire, fire.
Even so, by nature, it is all one to me,
To love Demagoras, and not to be.
No, no, the heavens can do no act that is greater,
Then (having made so) to preserve their creature.
And think you that the righteous Gods would fill me
With such false joys, as (if enjoyed) would kill me?
I know that they are merciful: what they
Command, they give a power to obey.
The joyful vision that your slumbring eyes
Of late beheld did promise and comprise
A fayrer fortune, then the heavens can share
To poor Partheniaes merit; whom despair
Has swas^ow'd: Your prophetic dream discride
A royal^ marriage; pointed out the Bride;
Her safe Deliver ^ce and her smiling son;
Honor and (...); and after all was done,
Th^re wants a Bridegroom: him, the heavens have sealed
Within my breast; by me, to be revealed;
Which, if your patience shall vouchsafe to hear,
My lips shall recommend unto your ear.
When as Basilius (may whose royal hand
Long sway the scepter of the Arcadian land)
From Cyprus brought his more then princely Bride,
The fair Gynecia, (whom as Greece denied
An equal; so the world acknowledged none
As her superior in perfection:)
Upon this Ladies royal train, and state,
Agreat concourse of Nobles did awaite,
And Cyprian Princes, with their princely port,
To see her crowned in the Arcadion Court;
Illustrious Princes were they: but as far
As midnight Phebe outshines the twinkling Star,
So far, amongst this rout of Princes, one
Surpast the rest, in honor and renown;
Whose perfect virtue finds more admiration
In the Arcadian Court, then imitation:
In th'exc'lence of his outward parts, and feature,
The world conceiues, the curious hand of Nature
Outwent it self; which, being richly fraught
And furnished with transcendent worth, is thought
To be the chosen fortress for protection
Of all the Arts, and storehouse of perfection^
The Cyprus stock did never, till now, ^ring forth
So rare a Branch, whose undervalued worth
Brings greater glory to the Arcadian Land,
Then can the dull Arcadians understand;
His name is Argalus.
He (Madam) was that Cypress wreath, that crowned
My nuptial brows: And now the Bridegroom's found,
Clothed in the mystry of that Cypress wreath;
Which, since the better gods have pleased to breathe
Into my soul, O may I cease to be,
If ought, but death, part Argalus and me:
Yet does my safe obedience not withstand
What you desire, or what the gods command:
For what the gods command, is your desire
Parthenia should obey; and not respire
Against their sacred counsels, or withstand
The plot, wherein they have vouchsafed a hand:
We must submit our wills; what they en^oyne,
Must be; nor lies it in your power or mine,
To cross: we must endeavor to fulfill
What else must come to pass against our will;
My vows are past, and second heavens decree,
Nothing shall part my Arg^s and me.
So said; The Impatient mothers kindled eye
(Half closed with a murtherous frown) let fly
A scorching fireball, from whence was shed
Some drops of choler; sternly shakes her head;
With trembling hands unlocks the door, and flees,
Leaving Parthenia on her aching knees,
And as she fled, her fury thus began
To open, And is Argalus the man?
But there she stopped; when striving to express
What rage had prompted, could do nothing less.
All you, whose dear affections have been tossed
In Cupids blanket, and vniuftly crossed
By wilful Parents, whose extreme command
Have made you groan beneath their tyrannous hand,
That take a furious pleasure to divorce
Your soul^s from your best thoughts, nay (what is worse
Then torture) force your fancies to respect,
And dearly love, whom most you dis affect:
Draw near, and comfort the distressed heart
Of poor Parthenia; let your eyes impart
One drop at least: And whosoever thou be
That read'st these lines, may thy desiers see
The like success, if reading, thou fo^beare
To wet this very paper with a tear.
Behold (poor Lady) how an hours time
Has plucked her faded roses from their prime,
And like an unregarded ruin, lies,
With deaths untimely image in her eyes.
She, she, whom hopeful thoughts had newly crowned
With promised joys, lies groueling on the ground;
Her weary hand sustain her drooping head;
(Too soft a pillow for so hard a bed)
Her eyes swollen up, as loath to see the light,
That would discover so forlorn a sight:
The flaxen wealth of her neglected hairs
Stick'^ fast to her pale cheel^s with dried tears;
And at first blush, she seems, as if it were
Some curious statue on a Sepulcher:
Sometimes her brinie lips would whisper thus,
My Argalus, my dearest Argalus
And then they closed again, as if the one
Had kissed the other, for that service done
In naming Argalus: sometimes oppressed
With a deep sigh, she gave her panting breast
A sudden stroke; and after that another,
Crying, Hard fortune, O hard hearted mother!
And sick with her own thoughts, her passion strove
Betwixt the two extremes of grief, and love;
The more she grieved, the more her love abounded;
The more she loved, the more her heart was wounded
With desperate grief: at length, the tyrannous force
Of love and grief, sent forth this self d^scourse.
How art thou changed ( Parthenia?) how has passion
Put all thy thoughts, and senses out of fashion?
Exiled thy little judgment, and betrayed thee
To thine own self? How nothing has it made thee?
How is thy weather beaten soul oppressed
With storms and tempests blown from the Northeast
Of cold despair? which, long ere this, had found
Eternal rest; had bin orewhelm'd, and drowned
In the deep gulf of all my miseries,
Had I not pumpt this water from mine eyes;
My Argalus; o where, o where art thou?
Thou little think thy poor Parthenia, now
Is tortured for thy sake; alas, (dear heart!)
Thou know not the insufferable smart
I undergo for thee: Thou do not keep
A Register of those sad tears I weep,
No, no, thou do not.
Well, well; from henceforth, Fortune, do not spare
To do the worst (thy Agent) Mischief dare;
Devise new torments, or repeat the old,
Until thou burst, or I complain: Be bold,
As bitter; I disdain thy rage, thy power;
Who Is leuell'd with the earth, can fall no lower;
Do; spit thy venom forth, and temper all
Thy studied actions with the spirit of gall;
Thy practiced malice can no evil devise
Too hard, for Argalus to exercise;
His love shall sweeten death, and make a torture
My sportfull pastime, to make hours shorter;
His love shall fill my heart, and lea^e no room,
Wherein your rage may practice martyrdoome.
But ere that word could vsh^r out another,
The tender Vi^gins marble hearted mother
Enters the Chamber; with a changed aspect
Beholds Partheni^; with a new respect
Salutes her child, and (having closed the door)
Her helpful arm remoues her from the ^loore
Whereon she lay; and, being set together,
In gentle terms, she thus did commune with her.
Perverse Partheni^, Is thy heart so sworn
To A^galus his love, that it must s^orne
Demagoras? Are your souls conioyn'd so close,
That my ent^eaty may not enterpose?
If so, what help? yet let a mothers care
Be not conte^n'd, that bids her child beware.
The sickle that is too early, cannot reap
A fruitful Harvest: Look, before you leap:
Adiourne your thoughts, and make a wise delay,
You cannot measure virtue in a day;
Virtues appear, but vices baulke the light;
It Is hard to read a vice at the first sight.
False are those joys, that are not mixed with doubt,
Fire easily kindled, will not easily out:
Divide that love, which thou bestowst on one,
Twixt two: try both; then take the best, or none:
Consult with time: for time bewrayes, discouers
The faith, the love, the constancy of lovers.
Acts done in have, by leisure are repented,
And things, soon past, are often, too late lamented:
With tha^, Parthenia, rising from her place,
And bowing with incomparable grace,
M^de ^his reply; Madam, each several day
Since first you gave this body being, may
Write a large volume of your tender care,
Whose hourly goodness if it should compare
With my deserts, alas, the world would show
Too great a sum, for one poor heart to owe;
I must confess my heart is not so sworn
To Argalus his merit as to scorn
D^magoras; nor yet so loosely tied,
That I can slip the knot, and so divide
Entire affection, which must not be seuer'd,
Nor ever can be (but in vain) endeuour'd.
My heart is one, and by one power guided;
One is no number; cannot be divided.
And Cupids learned schoolmen have resolved
That love divided is but love dissolved;
But yet, what plighted faith, and honor may
Not now undo, your counsel shall delay.
Madam, Partheniaes hand is not so greedy,
To reap her corn, before her corn he ready:
Her unadvised sickle shall not thrust
Into her hopeful Har^est, ere needs must:
To yours P^rthenia shall submit her skill,
Whose season shall be seasoned by your will:
Her time of harvest shall admit no measure
But only what is proportioned by your pleasure.
S^ ended she; But till that darkness got
The mastry of the light, they parted not.
The mother pleads for the Laconian Lord;
The daughter (whose impatience had abhort'd
His very name, had not her mother spok't)
S^e pl^ads her vow, which cannot be reuokt.
Yet st^ll the mother pleads, and does omit
No way untried, that a hard hearted wit
Knows to devise; persuades, allures, entreats;
Mingles his words with smiles, with tears, with threats;
Commands, coni^es; tries one way, tryes another,
Does th^tmost that a marble brested mother
Can do; and yet the more she did apply,
The more she taught Parthenia to deny;
The more she did ass^ult, the more contend;
The more she taught the virgin to defend.
At last, despairing (for her words did find
More ease to move a mountain, then her mind)
She sp^ke no more; but from her chair she started,
And spit these words, Go, peevish Girl, and parted.
Away she flings, and finding no success
In her lost words, her fury did address
Her raging thoughts to a new studied plot;
Actions must now enforce, what words could not.
Treason is in her thoughts; Her furious breath
Can whisper now no language, under death;
Poor Argalus must dye; and his remove
Must make the passage to Demagoras love:
And till that bar be broken, or put by,
No hope to speed; Poor Argalus must dye.
Demagoras is called to counsel now,
Consults, consents; and, after mutual vow,
R^soluing on the act, they both conspire,
Which way to execute their close desire.
D^awing his keen Seeletto from his side,
Madam (said he) This medicine well applide,
To Arg^lus his bo^ome, will give rest
To him, and me; the sudden way is best.
My Lord ((...) she) your trembling hand may miss
The mark, and then your self in danger is
Of outcry; or perchance his own resistance.
Attempts are dangerous, at so small a distance.
A drugg's the better weapon; which does breathe
Deaths secret errand, carries sudden death
Closed up in sweetness: Come, a drugge strikes sure,
And works our ends, and yet we sleep secure.
My Lord, bethink no other; Set your rest
Upon these C^rds; The surest way is best:
Leave me to manage our successful plot,
And if these studious brows contriue it not
Too sure, for art of M^gicke to prevent,
Never trust a woman's wit, when fully bent
To take revenge: Begone, my Lord; repose
The trust in me: Only be wise, be close.
That night, when as the universal sh^de
Of the vnspangled heaven, and earth had made
An v^ter darkness; (darkness, apt to further
The horrid enterprise of rapes, and m^her)
She, she, that now lacks nothing to procu^e
A full revenge, she calls Athleia to her,
( Partheniaes handmaid) whom she thus ^espake.
Athleia, dare thy private thoughts partake
With mine? Can thou be secret? Has thy heart
A lock that none can pick by theevish art,
Or brake by force? Tell me, Can thou digest
A secret, trusted to thy faithful breast?
Madam, said she, Let me be never true
To my own thoughts, if ever false to you:
Speak what you please; Athleia shall conceal,
Torments may make me roar, but never re^eale.
Replyde the Lady then: Athleia knows
How much, how much my dear affection owes
Partheniaes heart whose welfare is the crown
Of all my joys, which now is overthrown
And deeply buried in forgotten dust,
If thou betray the secret of my trust.
It lies in thy power to remove
Approaching evils: Parthenia is in love:
Her wasted spirits languish in her breast,
And naught, but looked for death, can give her rest;
It Is Argalus she loves; who, with disdain,
Requites her love, not loving her again;
He sleights her tears: The more that he neglects,
The more entirely she (poor soul) affects:
She groans beneath the burden of despair,
And with her sighs she cloyes the idle air.
Thou art acquainted with her private tears;
And you, so often exchanging tongues and ears,
Must know too much, for one poor heart to endure;
But desperate's the wound admits no Cure:
It lies in thee to help: Athleia, say,
Will thou assist me, if I find the way?
Madam, my forced ignorance shall be
Sufficient earnest of my secrecy:
Your lips have vtter'd nothing that is new
To Athleias ears: Alas, it is too true.
Long, long ere this, your servant had revealed
The same to you, bad not my lips bi^ sealed:
But if my best endeavors may extend
To bring my Mistress sorrows to an end,
Let all the enraged D^ties a^ot
To me worse torment, if I do it not:
My life's too poor to hazard for her ease;
Madam, I Will do^; Command me what you please:
So said; The treacherous Lady steps aside,
In^o her serious close^; and applide
Her hasty, and perfidious hands, to frame
This fo^ged letter, in Partheniaes name.
Constant Parthenia to her faithful Argalus.
ALthough the malice of a mother
Does yet enforce my tongue to smother
What my desire is, should flame;
yet Parthenia is the same.
Although my fire be hid a while,
T is but fire slak'd with oil;
Before seven Suns shall rise and fall,
It shall burn, and blaze withal.
What I send thee, drink with speed,
Else let my Argalus take heed;
Unless thy providence withstand,
there is treason never at hand;
Drink as thou love me, and it shall secure thee
From future dangers; or from past, recure thee.
This done, and sealed, she opened her pri^te door,
Called in Athleia, and said; For every sore
The gods provide a salve. Force must prevail,
Where sighs and tears, and deep entreaties fail.
Forthwith from out her Cabinet she took
A little glass, and said, Athleia, look
Within these slender walls, these glazed lists,
Parthe^aes happiness, and life consists;
It is Nepenthe; which the factious gods
Do use to drink, when ere they be at ods,
Whose secret virtue (so infused by love)
Does turn deep hatred, into dearest love;
It makes the proudest lover whine and baule,
And such to dote, as never loved at all;
Here take this glass, and recommend the same
To A^galus in his P^theniaes name,
And to his hand, to his own hand commit
This letter; Between A^galus, and it
Let no eye come: Be sure thy spee^ prevent
The rising Sun: and so heavens crown the event.
By this the feathered Bellman of the night
Sent forth his midnight summons, to inui^e
All eyes to sl^mber, when they both addressed
Their thoughtfull minds, to take a doubtful rest.
O heavens! and you, O you celestial powers,
That never slumber, but employ all hours
In man's prorection; still preserving, keeping
Our souls from obuious dangers, waking, sleeping.
O, can your all-descerning eyes behold
Such impious actions prosper, vncontroll'd?
O can your hearts, your tender hearts endure
To see your servant (that now sleeps secure,
Unarmed, vnwarn'd, and having no defense,
But your protection, and his innocence)
Betrayed, and murdered, drawing at one breath
His own prepared destruction, his own death?
And will ye (...)? He that is the crown
Of prized virtue, honor and renown;
The flower of Arts; the Cyprian living story;
Arcadias Girland, and great Graeces glory;
The earths new wonder; and the worlds example,
Must dye betrayed; Treason and death must trample
Upon his life; and, in the dust, must lie
As much admit'd perfection, as can dye.
No, Argalus, the coward hand of death
Durst never assault thee, if not underneath
The Mask of love: Thou art above the reach
Of open wrongs; Man's force could never make breach
Into thy life: no, Death could never uncase
Thy soul, had she appeared face to face.
Dream, Argalus; and let thy thoughts be troubled
With murders, treasons; Let thy dreams be doubled
And what thy frighted fancy shall perceive,
Be wisely superstitious, and believe.
O, that my lines could wake thee now, and sever
Those eyelids, that ere long must sleep for ever.
Wake, now or never Argalus; and withstand
Thy danger; Wake, the murtheresse is at hand.
Parthenia, oh Parthenia, who shall weep
Thy world of tears? Can thou, O can thou sleep?
Will thy dull Genius give thee leave to slumber?
Does nothing trouble thee? no dream incumber
Thy frighted thoughts? and Argalus so near
His latest hour? Not one dreaming tear?
Sleep on: and when thy flattring slumber's past,
Perchance, thine eyes will learn to weep as fast.
His death is plotted; And this morning light
Must send him down, into eternal night.
Nay, what is worse then worst; His dying breath
Will censure thee, as Agent in his death.
By this the broadfac'd Quirister of night
Surceas'd her screeching note, and took her flight
To the next neighbring Ivy: Brids and beasts
Forsake the warm protection of their nests,
And nightly (...), whilst darkness did display
Her sable curtains, to let in the day,
When sad Athleia's dream had vnbenighted
Her slumbring eyes: her busy thoughts were frighted:
She rose, and trembled; and being half distraught,
With her prophetic fears; she thus bethought.
What ayle the Gods, thus to disturb my rest,
And make such earthquakes in my troubled breast?
Nothing but death, and murders? Graves and Bells?
Frighting my fancy, with their hourly knells?
It Was nothing but a dream; and dreams they say,
Expound themselves the clean contrary way.
The Riddle's read; and now I understand
My dreams intents: Some marriage is at hand:
For death interpreted, is nothing else
But marriage; And the melancholy Bells,
Is mirth and music: By the grave, is read
The ioyfullioy, full, joyful, marriage bed:
I, I it is plain: And now, me thinks, 'twas I,
That my prophetic dream foretold, should dye.
If this be death, Death exercise thy power,
And let Athleia dye within this hour.
Do, do thy worst; Athleia's faithful breath
Shall pray for nothing more then sudden death.
But stay, Athleia, the too forward day,
Begins to gild the East; away, away.
So having said; The nimble fingerd Less
Took the forged letter, and the amorous glass,
And, to her early progress, she applies her;
D parts, and toward; Argalus she hies her;
But every step she took, her mind enforced
New thoughts, and with her self, she thus discoursed.
How fraile's the nature of a woman's will!
How cross! The thing that is most forbidden, still
They more desire; and least inclinde, to do
What they are most of all persuaded too.
Had not (alas) my Lady bound these hands,
Athl^ia never had struggled with her bands.
I must not taste it! Had she not enioyn'd
My lips from tasting it, Athleia's mind
Had never thought on it; now, me thinkss I long;
Desires, if once confinde, become too strong
For woman's conquered reason to resist;
A woman's reason's measured by her list.
I long to taste: yet was there nothing did
Move my desires, but that I was forbid.
With that she stayed her weary steps, and hasted
T'vntye the Glass; lift up her arm and tasted;
That done (and having now attained, almost
Her iourneyes end) the little time she lost,
New speed regaines; The nimble ground she traces
With double have and quick redoubled paces.
All on a sudden, she begins to faint;
Her bowels gripe, her breath begins to taint;
Her blistred tongue grows hot, her liver glowes;
Her veins do boil, her color comes and goes:
She staggers; falls; and on the ground she lies;
Swells like a bladder; roares; and bursts; and dies.
Thus from her ruin, Argalus deriues
His longer life, and by her death, he lives;
Live Argalus, and let the gods allot
Such morning draughts to those that love thee not:
Live long; and let the righteous powers above,
That have preserved thee for Parthenia's love,
Crown all thy hopes, and fortunes, with event
Too sure, for second treasons to prevent.
By this time, did the lavish breath of Fame
Give language to her Trumpet, and proclaim
Athleias death, the current of which news
Truths warrant had forbidden to abuse
Deceived ears: which, when the Lady heard,
Whose treacherous heart was greedily prepared
To entertain a murder; she arose,
And with rude violence desperately throws
Her trembling body, on the naked floor,
But what she said, and did, I will deplore,
Not utter; but with forced silence smother,
Because she was the fair Parthenia's mother:
May it suffice, that the extremes of shame,
And unresisted sorrow overcame
Her disappointed malice; less lamenting
The treason, then success; and more repenting
Of what she failed to do, then what she did,
Her sullen soul dispaires; her thoughts forbid
What reason wants the power, to persuade;
Her griefs b^ing grown too deep for her to wade,
She sinks; and with a hollow sigh, she cried,
Welcome thou easer of all evils; and dyed.
Now tongues begin to walk; and every ear
Has got the Saturyasis to hear
This tragic scene: The breath of Fame grows bold
Fears no repulse, and scorns to be controlld,
Whilst loud report, (whose tender lips before,
Durst only whisper) now begins to roar;
The letter, found in dead Athleias breast,
Bewrayed the plot; and what (before) was guest,
Is now confirmed, and cleared: for all men knew
Whose hand it was, and whence the malice grew.
But have we lost Parthenia? In what Isle
Of endless sorrow lurks she all this while?
Sweet Reader, urge me not to tell, for fear
Thy heart dissolve, and melt into a tear.
Excuse my silence: If my lines should speak,
Such marble hearts, as could not melt, would break;
No, leave her to her self: It is not fit
To write, what being read, you would wish vnwrit:
I leave the task to those, that take delight,
To see poor Ladies tortured in despite
Of all remorse; whose hearts are still at strife
To p^int a torment to the very life.
I leave that task to such, as have the power
To weep, and smile again within an hour.
To those, whose flinty hearts are more content^d
To limme a grief, then pity the tormented.
Let it suffice, that had not heaven protected
Her Argalus; the joy whereof, corrected
That (...) grief, which passion recommended
To her sad thoughts, her story here had ended.
When Time (the enemy of Fame) had closed
Her babbling lips, and gently had composed
Partheniaes sorrows, raising from the ground
Her body, spent with grief, and almost drowned
In her own tears; a long expected Scene
Of better fortune enters in, to dreane
His marish eyes: Her stormy night of tears
Being past, a welcome day of joy appears;
The rocke's removed, and loves wide Ocean now
Gives room enough; looks with a milder brow.
Reader forget thy sorrows; Let thine ear
Welcome the tidings thou so longst to hear:
A lovers diet's sweet, commixt with sower;
His hell and heaven, oft-time, diuides an hour.
Now Argalus can find a fair access
To his Parthenia: now, fears nothing less
Then ears and eyes; and now Partheniaes heart
Can give her tongue the freedom, to impart
His louder welcome, whilst her greedy eye
Can look her fill, and fear no stander by.
She Is not Parthenia, he not present with her;
And he not Argalus, if not together.
Their cheeks are filled with smiles; their tongues with chat,
Now, this they make their subject, and now that.
One while they laugh; and laughing wrangle too,
And jar, as jealous lovers use to do.
And then a kiss, must make them friends again;
Faith, one's too little; Lovers must have twain;
Two brings in ten; ten multiplyes to twenty;
That, to a hundred: then because the plenty
Grows troublesome to count, and does incumber
Their lips; their lips gave ^isses without number.
Their thoughts run back to former times: they told
Of all loves passages, they had of old.
ARGALVS AND PARTHENIA.
The Second Book.
Sail gentle Pinace: Now the heavens are clear,
The winds blow fair: Behold the harbour's near.
Trydented Neptune has forgot to frown;
The rocks are past; The storm is ouerblowne;
Up wetherbeaten voyagers; and rouse ye,
Forsake your loathed Cabbi^s; up, and louze ye
Upon the open decks, and smell the land;
Cheer up; the welcome shore is nigh at hand:
Sail gentle Pinace, with a prosperous gale,
To th'Isle of peace: S^ile gentle Pinace, sail;
Fortune conduct thee; Let thy keele divide
The silver streams, that thou mast safely slide
Into the bosom of thy quiet Key,
And quite thee fairly of th'iniurious Sea.
Great Seaborne Queen, thy birthright gives thee power
T'assist poor suppliants; grant one happy hour.
O, let these wounded lovers be possessed,
At length, of their so long desired rest.
Now, now the joyful marriage day draws on;
The Bride is bu^ie, and the Bridegroome's gone
To call his fellow Princes to the feast;
The Girland's made; The bridal chamber's dressed;
The Muses have consulted with the Graces,
To crown the day, and honor their embraces
With shadowed Epithalmes: Their warbling tongues
Are perfect in their new made Lyrick songs;
Hymen begins to grumble at delay,
And Bacchus laughs to think upon the day;
The virgin tapors, and what other rights
Do appertain to Nuptial delights,
Are all prepared, whereby may be expressed
The joyful triumph of this marriage feast.
But stay! who lends me now an iron pen,
T'engraue within the marble hearts of men
A tragic scene; which whosoever shall read,
His eyes may spare to weep, and learn to bleed
Carnation tears: If time shall not allow
His death prevented eyes to weep enough,
Th^n let his dying language recommend
What Is left to his posterity to end.
Thou saddest of all Muses; come; afford
Thy studious help, that each confounding word
May rend a heart (at least;) that every line
May pickle up a kingdom in the brine
Of their own tears: O teach me to extract
The spirit of grief, whose virtue may distract
Those breasts, which sorrow knows not how to kill;
Inspier, (...) inspire my melting Quill,
And, like sad Niobe, let every one
That cannot melt, be turned into a stone:
Teach me to paint an oft-repeated sigh
So to the life, that whosoever be nigh
May hear it breathe, and learn to do the like
By imitation, till true passion strike
Their bleeding hearts: Let such as shall rehearse
This story, houle like Irish at a Hearse.
The Event st^ll crowns the act: Let no man say,
Before the euening's come; It Is a fair day:
When as the Kalends of this bridal feast
Were entered in, and every longing breast
(...) great with expectation, and all eyes
(Prepared for entertaining novelties)
Were grown impatient now, to be suffis'd
With that, which Art and Honor had devised
T'adorne the times withal, and to display
Their bounty, and the glory of that day,
The rare Parthenia taking sweet occasion
To bless her busy thoughts, with contemplation
Of absent Argalus, whose too long stay
Made minutes (...) days; and every day
A measured age; into her s^cret bower
Betook her weary steps, where every hour
Her greedy ears expect to hear the sum
Of all her hopes, that Argalus is come.
She hopes, she fears at once; and still she muses
What makes him stay so long; she chides; excuses;
She questions; answers; and she makes reply,
And talks, as if her Argalus were by;
Why come thou not? Can Argalus forget
His languishing Parthenia? what, not yet?
But as she spoke that word, she heard a noise,
Which seemed as if it were the whispering voice
Of close conspiracy: she began to fear
She knew not what, till her deceived ear,
Instructed by her hopes, had singled out
The voice of Argalus from all the rout,
Whose steps (as she supposed) did prepare
By stealth to sieze upon her unaware:
She gave advantage to the thriuing plot,
Hearing the noise, as if she heard it not.
Like as young Doves, which never had yet forsaken
The warm protection of their nests, or taken
Upon themselves a selfe-prouiding care,
To shift for food, but with paternall fare
Grow fat and plump; think every noise they hear,
Their full cropped parents are at hand, to cheer
Their craving stomachs, whilst th'impartiall fist
Of the false Cater, rifling where it list
In every hole, surprises them, and sheds
Their guiltless blood, and parts their gasping heads
From their vain struggling bodies; so; even so
Our poor deceived Parthenia, (that did owe
Too much to her own hopes) the whilst her eyes
Were set, to welcome the unvalued prize
Of all her joys, her dearest Argalus,
Steps in Demagoras, and salutes her thus:
Base Trull; Demagoras comes to let thee see,
How much he scorns thy painted face, and thee;
Foul Sorceresse! Could thy prosperous actions think
To escape revenge, because the gods did wink
At thy designs? Think thou thy mothers blood
Cries in a language, not to be'vnderstood?
Had thou no closer stratagem, to further
Thy pampered lust, but by the saluage murder
Of thine own aged parent, whose sad death
Must give a freedom to the whispering breath
Of thy enjoyed adult'rer? who (they say)
Will cloak thy whoredom, with a marriage day;
Nay struggle not; here is none that can reprieue
Such pounded beasts; It is in vain to strive,
Or roar for help: why do not rather weep,
That I may laugh? Perchance, if thou will creep
Upon thy wanton belly, and confess
Thy self a true repentant murtheresse,
My sinful Page may play the soole, and gather
Thy early fruit into his barn, and father
Thy new got Cyprian bastard, if that he
Be half so wis^, that got it, but to flee.
Hah! do thou weep? or do false mists but mock
Our cheated eyes? From so obdure a rock
Can water flow? weeping will make thee fair;
Weep till thy marriage day; that who repair
To grace thy feast, may fall a weeping too,
And, in a mirror, see what tears can do.
Vile strumpet! did thy flattering thoughts e're wrong
Thy judgment so; to think, D^magoras tongue
Could so abuse his honor, as to sue
For serious love? So base a thing as you
(Me thinks) should rather fix your wanton eyes
Upon some ea^e groom, that hopes to rise
Into his masters favor, for your sake;
I; this had been preferment, like to make
A hopeful fortune: thou presumptuous trash^
What was my courtship? but the minutes dash
Of youthful passion, to allay the dust
Of my desires, and exuberous lust?
I scorn thee to the soul, and here I stand
Bound for revenge, whereto I set my hand.
With that, he c^ught her rudely by the fair
And bounteous treasure of her Nymph-like hair;
And, by it, dragd her on the du^y floor:
He stopped her mouth, for fear she should implore
An aid from heaven, she swounding in the place,
His salvage hands besmeared her liuelesse face
With horrid poison, thinking she was dead,
He left her breathlesle, and away he fled.
Come, come ye Furies, you malignant spirits,
Infernal Harpies, or what, else, inherits
The land of darkness; you, that still converse
With damned souls; you, you that can rehearse
The horrid facts of villainies, and can tell
How every hell hound looks, that roares in hell;
Survey them all; and, then, inform my pen,
To draw in one, the monster of all men;
Teach me to limme a villain, and to paint
With dextrous art, the basest Sycophant,
That e're the mouth of insolent disdain
Vouchsas'd to spit upon; the ripened blaine
Of all diseased humors, fit for none
But dogs to lift their hasty legs upon:
So clear men's eyes, that whosoever shall see
The type of baseness, may cry, This is He;
Let his reproach be a perpetual blot
In Honors book: Let his remembrance rot
In all good minds: Let none but villains call
His bugbeare name to memory, wherewithal
To fright their bauling bastards: Let no spell
Be found more potent, to prevail in hell,
Then the nine letters of his charm like name;
Which, let our bashful Chriscrosse row disclaim
To the worlds end, not fitting to be set
As mutes, within the Jewish Alphabet.
But hark! Am I deceived, or do I hear
The voice of Arg'lus sounding in mine ear?
He calls Parthenia: No, that tongue can be
No counterfeit: He Is come: it is he, it is he.
Welcome too la^, that art now come too soon;
Had thou bin here, this deed had never bin done.
Alas! when lovers linger, and outgoe
Their promised date, they know not what they do:
Men fondly say, that women are too fond;
At parting, to require so strict a bond
For quick return: Poor souls! it is they endure
Often times the danger of the forfeiture;
I blame them not; for mischief still attends
Upon the too long absence of true friends.
Well; Argalus is come, and seeks about
In every room, to find Parthenia out;
He asks, enquiers; but all lips are sparing
To be the authors of ill news, not daring
To speak the truth; they all amazed stand;
And now, my Lord's as fearful to demand;
Dares not enquire her health, lest his sad ear
Should hear such words, as he is afraid to hear:
All lips are boulted with a linen bar,
And every eye does, like a bl^zing star,
Portend some evil; no language finds a leake;
The less they speak, the more he fears to speak.
Faces grow sad; and every private ear
Is turned a Closet for the whisperer;
He walks the room, and like an unknown stranger
They eye him; from each eye, he picks a danger;
At last, his lips not d^ting to importune
What none dare tell him, unexpected fortune
Leads his rash steps into a darkened room,
A place more black then night; No sooner come,
B^t he was welcomed with a sigh, as deep
As a spent heart could give; he heard one weep,
And by the noise of groans and sobs was led
(H^uing none other guide) to the sad bed.
Who is it (said he) that calls untimely night
To hide those griefs that thus abjure the light?
With that, as if her heart had rent in two,
She past a sigh, and said, O ask not who?
Urge not my tongue to make a forced reply
To your demand: Alas! it is not I:
Not I (said he?) what language do I hear;
Darkness may stop mine eye, but not mine ear.
It is my dear Parthenia's voice; ah me,
And can Parthenia, not Parthenia be?
What means this word, (Alas! it is not I)?
What sudden ill has taught thee to deny
Thy self? or what can Argalus then claim,
If his Parthenia be not the same,
She was; alas, it seems to me all one
To say, Thou art not hers, that is not her own.
Can hills forget their pondrous bulk, and fly,
Like wandering Atoms, in the empty sky?
Or can the heavens, (grown idle) not fulfill
Their certain reuolutions, but stand still,
And leave their constant motion, for the wind
T'inherit? Can Parthenia change her mind?
Heaven sooner shall stand still, and earth rem^e,
E're my Parthenia (...) her love:
Unfold thy Riddle then; and tell me, why
Those lips should say, (Alas it is not I.)
Whereto she thus replied; O do not thou
So wrong thy noble thoughts, as once t'allow
That cursed name a room, within thy breast,
Let not so foul a prodigy be blessed
With thy lost breath; Let it be held a sin
Too great for pardon, e're to name't again;
Let darkness hide it in eternal night;
May it be clad with horror, to affright
A desperate conscience; He that knows not ^ow
To mouth a curse, O let him practice now
Upon this name; Let him that would contract
The body of all mischief, or extract
The quint'ssence of all sorrows, only claim
A secret privilege to use that name:
Far be it from thy language, to commit
So soul a sin, as once to mention it:
Live happy Arg'lus; do not thou partake
In these my miseries: O forbear to make
My burden greater, by thy tender sorrow;
Alas, my heart is strong, and needs not borrow
Thy needless help: O be not thou so cruel
To feed my ^aming fires, with thy fuel;
Why do thou sigh? O wherefore should thy heart
Usurp my stage, and act Parthenia's part?
It is my proper task: what do thou mean,
Without my license, to intrude my Scene?
Alas! thy sorrows ease not my distress;
God knows, I weep not one pocre tear the less:
My patent's signed and past; whereby appears
That I have got the Monopoly of tears:
In me, let each man's torment find an end:
I am that Sea, to which all Rivers tend:
Let all spent mourners, that can weep no more,
Take tears on trust, and set them on my score.
And as she spoke that word, his heart not able
To bear a language so insufferable,
But being swollen so big, must either break
Or vent, his darkened reason grew too weak
TO oppose his quickened passion (like a man
Transported from himself) he thus began;
Accursed darkness! Thou sad type of death!
Infernal Hagge, whose dwelling is beneath!
What means thy boldness to usurp this room,
And force a night, before the night be come?
Get, get ^hee down, and keep within thy lifts;
Go revel there; and burle thy hideous mists
Before those cursed eyes, that take delight
In utter darkness, and abhor the light;
Return thee to thy dungeon, whence thou came
And hide those faces, whose infernal flame
C^ls for more darkness, and whose tortured souls
Crave the protection of the obscurest holes,
To escape some lashes, and avoid those strict
And horrid plagues, the furies do inflict:
But if thou needs must ramble here, about;
Go to some other Clymate, and remove
Thy ugly presence from our darkened eyes,
That hate thy Tyranny: Go exercise
Thy power in Groves, and solitary springs,
Where Bats are subjects, and where Owls are kings;
Go to the granes, and fill those empty voomes,
That such as slumber in their silent Toombs
May bless thy welcome shades, and lie possessed
Of vndi^rbed and eternal rest:
Or if thy more ambitious fogs desire
To haunt the living; have thee, and retire
Into some Cloister, and there stand b^ene
The light, and those that feign would sin, unseen;
Assist them there; and (...) thy ugly shapes
Count' nance close treasons, and incestuous rapes:
Benight those rooms; and aid all such, as fear
The eye of heaven; Go; close thy curtains there;
We need thee ^ot (foul witch,) away, away;
Thou hid'st more beauty then the noone of day
Can give; O thou, that have so rudely hurled
On this dark bed, the glory of the world.
So said; Abruptly he the room departs,
His cheeks look pale, his curled hair (...)
L^ke quills of Porcupines, and from his eye
Q^icke flashes like the flames of lightning fly;
He calls for light; the light no sooner come,
But his own hand connayes it to the room
From whence he came, and as he entered in
He blessed himself; he blessed himself agin;
Thrice did he bless himself, and after said,
Foul witch, begone; and let thy dismal shade
For sake this place; Let thy dark fogs obey
Great Vulcans charge; (...) Vulcans name, away;
Or if thy ^out rebellion shall disclaim
His sovereignty, in my Parthenia's name
I charm thee hence. And as that word flew out,
He steps to that sad bed, where round about,
Closed were the curtains, as if darkness did
Command that such a Jewel should be hid:
His left hand held the tapour, and his right
Enforced the curtains, to absolve the light;
Which done; appeared before his wondering eye
The truest pourtrait of deformity,
As e're the Sun beheld: That lovely face
That was, of late, the model of all grace
And (...) beauty, whose imperious eyes
(...) where e're they looked, and did ^urprise
The very souls of men; she, she of whom
Nature her self was proud, is now become
So loathed an object, so deformed, dis^z'd,
As darkness, for m^s sake, was well advised
To cloth in mists, lest any were incited
To see that face, and so depart affrighted.
All this when Argalus b^held, and found
It was no dream, he fell upon the ground;
And (...); and rose again; stood still; and gazed;
At first he startled, then he stood amazed;
Looks now upon the light; and now on her;
One while his tired fancy does refer
His th^ughts to silence; as his thoughts increase,
His p^ion strives for vent, and breaks that peace,
Which conquered reason had, of late, concluded,
And thus began; Are these false ^es deluded?
Or have enchanted mists stepped in between
My abused eyes, and what (...) eyes ^aue seen?
No; mischi^fe cannot act so fair a part,
Taffright in i^st; it goes beyond the art
Of all black books, to mask, with such disguise,
So sweet a face; I know, that these are eyes;
And this a light; False mists could never be
Betwixt my poor Parthenia, and me.
Accursed Tapour! what infernal spright
Breathed in thy face? what Fury gave thee light?
Thou impe of Phlegetor; who let thee in,
To force a day, before the day begin?
Who brought thee (...)? I? did I? From whom,
What lean chapt fury did I snatch thee from?
When as this cursed hand did go about
To bring thee in, why went not these eyes out?
Be all such Tapours cursed, for thy sake;
Never shine, but at some Vigill, or sad Wake;
Be never seen, but when as sorrow calls
Thy needful help to nightly ^unerals;
Be as a May Game for the amazed Bat
To sport about; and Owls, to wonder as:
Still h^nt the Chancels a: a midnight knell,
To fright the Sexton from his passing Bell:
Give light to none but treasons, and be hid
In their dark lanthorns: Let all mirth forbid
Thy treacherous flames the room: and if that none.
Shall deigne to put thee out, go out alone;
Attend some misers table, and then waste
Too soon, that he may curse thee for thy haste;
Bur^ dim for ever: Let that flat^'ring ligh^
Thou feed'st, consume thy stock: be ^isht quite
From Cupids Court: When lovers go about
Their stol^ pleasures, let your flames go out;
Henceforth be useful to no other end,
But only to burn day light, or attend
The midnight Cups of such as shall resign,
With usury, their indigested wine:
Why do thou burn so clear? Alas! these eyes
Discern too much; Thy wanton blaze does rise
Too high a pitch: Thou burnst too bright, for such
As see no comfort; O thou shin'st too much:
Why do thou vex me? Is thy flame so stout
Tendure my breath? This breath shall puff thee out.
Thus, thus my joys are quite extinguished, never
To be re^iu'd: Thus gone, thus gone sor ever.
With that, transported with a furious have,
He blew it out: but mark, that very blast
(As if it meant, on purpose, to disclaim
His desperate thoughts) revived th'extinguisht flame.
He stands amazed; and, having mused a while,
Beholds the Tapour, and begins to smile.
And can the gods themselves (said he) contriue
A way for hope? Can my past joys reuine,
Like this rekinaled fire? If they do,
I Will curse m^ lips (bright Lamp) for cursing you.
Eternal Fates! Deal fairly; dally not:
If your hid bounties have reserved a lot
Beyond my wained hopes, be it expressed
In open view; make haste; and do your best:
But if your Justice be determined so,
To exercise your vengeance on my woe,
Strengthen not what at length you mean^ to burst;
Strike home betimes; dispatch; and do your worst:
That burden is too great for him to bear,
That Is (...) poised betmixt hope and fear.
And there he stopped; as fearing to molest
The silent peace of her dissembled rest.
He gazed upon her; stood as in a trance;
Sometimes her liuelesse hand he would advance
To his sad lips; then steal it down again;
Sometimes, a tear would fall upon it; and then
A sigh must dry it; Every kiss did bear
A sigh; and every sigh begat a tear:
If I had loved thee, for thy heavenly eye,
I might have courted the bright majesty
Of Tiran: If thy curious lips had snared
My lick'rish thoughts, I might have soon prepared
A blushing Currall, or some full ripe Chery,
And pleased my lips, until my lips were weary;
Or if the smoothness of thy whiter brow
Had charmed mine eyes, and made my fancy bow
To outward objects, polishs Marble might
Have given as much content, as much delight;
In brief, had Argalus his flattered eye
Bin pleased with beauties bare Epitomy,
Thy curious picture might have then supplied
My wants, more full, then all the world beside;
No, no; 'Twas neither brow, nor lip, nor eye
Nor any outward exc'lence urged me, why
To love Parthenia: 'Twas thy better part,
Which mischief could not wrong, surprised my heart.
Thy beauty was but like a Crystal case,
Through which, the Jewel of admired grace
Transparent was, whose hidden worth did make
Me love the C^ket, for the Jewels sake;
No, no; my well-aduised eye pierced in
Beyond the filme; sunk deeper then the skin;
Else, had I now bin changed, and that firm duty
I owe my vows, had faded, with thy beauty;
Nay, weep not (my Parthenia;) let those tears
Never wail that loss, which a few after years
Had claimed as due; Cheer up; thou have forsaken
But that, which sickness would (perchance) have taken,
With greater disadvantage; or else age,
That common evil, which ^rt cannot assuage;
Beauty's but bare opinion: White and Red
Have no more privilege, but what is bred
By humane fancy; which was never confinde
To certain bounds, but varies like the wind;
What one man likes, another disrespects;
And what a third most hates; a fourth, affects;
The Negro's eye thinks black beyond compare,
And what would fright us most, they count most fair:
If then opinion be the Tutch, whereby
All beautie's tried; Parthenia, in my eye
Out shines fair Hellen; or who else she be,
That is more rich in beauties wealth, then she.
Cheer up: The sovereignty of thy worth, enfranches
Thy capti^e beaut^; and thy virtue blanches
These stains of fortune; Come; it matters not
What others think: a letter's but a blot
To such as cannot read; but, who have skill,
Can know the fair impression of a Quill
From gross and heedl^sse blurres; and such can think
No paper foul, that is fairly writ with ^nke:
What others hold a blemish in thy face,
My skillful eyes read Characters of grace;
What hinders then; but that without delay,
Triumph may celebrate our nuptial day?
She that has only virtue to her guide,
Though wanting beauty, is the fairest Bride.
A Bride? (said she) such Brides as I, can have
No fitter bridal Chamber, then a Gra^e;
Death is my bridegroom; and to welcome Death,
My loyal heart shall plight a second faith;
And when that day shall come, that ^oyfull day,
Wherein transcendent pleasures shall allay
The heat of all my sorrows, and conioyne
My palefac'd Bridegrooms lingering hand, with mine;
These Ceremonies, and these Triumphs shall
Attend the day, to grace that Day with all.
Time with his empty Howreglasse shall lead
The Triumph on; His winged hoofes shall tread
Slow paces; After him, there shall ensue
The chaste Diana, with her Virgin crew,
All crowned with Cypress girlands; After whom
In rank, th'impartiall Destinies shall come;
Then, in a sable Chariot faintly drawn
With harnast Virgins. veiled with purest lawne,
The Bride shall sit; Despair and Grief shall stand,
Like heartlesse bridem^ids, upon either hand.
Upon the Chariot top, there shall be placed
The little winged god, with arm vnbrac'd,
And bow unbent; his drooping wings must hide
His naked knees; his Q^iuer by his side
Must be unarmed, and either hand must hold
A bann^r; where, with Char^cters of gold
Shall be deciphered, (fit for every eye
To read, that runs; Faith Love, and Constancy,
Next after, Hope, in a discolored weed,
Shall sadly march alone? A slender reed
Shall guide her feeble steps; and, in her hand,
A broken Anchor, all besmeared with sand.
And after all, the Bridegroom shall appear
Like Jove's Lieu^enant, and bring up the Rear;
He shall be mounted on a Coa^e-black steed;
His hand shall hold a Dart; on which, shall bleed
A pierced heart; wherein, a former wound
Which Cupids lauelin entered shall be found.
When as these Triumphs shall adorn our feast,
Let Argalus be my invited guest,
And let him bid me nuptial Joy: from whom
I once expected all my joys should come.
With that; as if his countenance had thought good
To wear Death's colors; or as if his blood
Had been employed to condole the smart
And torm^nt of his poor afflicted heart,
He thus bespake: Unhappiest of all men,
Why do I live? Is Death my Rival then?
Unequal chance! Had it bin flesh and blood,
I could ^aue grapled, and (perchance) withstood
Some stout encounters: Had an armed host
Of mort all riualls ventured to have crossed
My blessed desires; my Partheniaes eye
Had given me power to make that army fly
Like frighted Lambs, before the Wolf; But thou
Before whose presence, all must stoop and bow
Their servile necks! what weapon shall I hold
Against thy hand, that will not be controlled?
Great enemy! whose kingdome's in the dust
And darkesome Caves; I know that thou art just;
Else had the gods never trusted to thy hand
So great a privilege, so large command
And jurisdiction over the lives of men,
To kill, or save even whom thou please, and when;
O, suffer not Partheniaes tempting tears
To move thy heart; Let thy hard hearted ears
Be deaf to all her suits: If she profess^
Affection to thee, believe nothing less;
She Is my betrothed spouse, and Hymen's bands
Have firmly joined our hearts, though not our hands.
Where plighted faith, and sacro-sanctius vow
Has given possession, dispossess not thou.
Be just; and though her briny lips bewail
Her griese with tears, let not those tears prevail.
Whom heavens have joined, thy hands may not disioyne,
I am (...); and Partheniaes mine.
Alas! we are but one; Then thou must either
Refuse us both; or, else, take both together.
My dear Parthenia, let no cloudy passion
Of dull despair molest thee, or vnfashion
Thy better thoughts, to make thy troubled mind
Either forgetful, or thy self unkind.
Starve not my pining hopes, with longer stay
My love has wings, and brooks no long delay.
It houers up and down, and cannot rest
Until it light, and perch upon thy breast.
Torment not him, within these lingering fires,
That Is rack^ already on his own desires.
Seal and deliver as thy deed, that band,
Whereto thy promised faith has set her hand;
And what our plighted hearts, and mutual view
Have so long since begun, O finish now;
That our imperfect and half pleasures may
Receive perfection, by a marriage day:
Wh^reto, she thus; Had the pleased God above,
Forgiven my faults, and made me fit for Jove
To bless at large; Had all the powers of heaven
(To boast the utmost of their bounty) given
As great addition to my slender fortune
As they could give, or covetous mind importune,
I vow to heaven and all those heavenly powers,
They should no sooner been made mine, but yours.
Nay, had my fortunes staid but at the rate
They were; had I remained in that state
I was (although, at best, unworthy far
Of such a pee^lesse less blessing as you are)
My dear acceptance should have filled my heart
As full of joys as now it is of smart;
But, as I am, let angry Jove then vent
On me his plagues, till all his plagues be spent.
And when I roar, let heaven my pains der^de,
When I match Argilus to such a Bride.
Live happy, A^galus, let thy soul receive
What blessings poor Parthenia cannot have;
Live happy: May thy joys be never done,
But let one blessing araw another on:
O may thy better Angel watch and ward
Thy soul, and pitch an everlasting guard
About the portals of thy tender heart,
And shower down blessings wheresoere thou art;
Let all thy joys be as the month of May,
And all thy days be as a marriage day.
Let sorrow, sickness, and a troubled mind
Be strangers to thee; Let them never find
Thy heart at home; Let Fortune still alot
Such lawless guests to those that love thee not:
And let those blessings, which shall wanting be
To such as merit none, alight on thee.
That mutual faith, betwixt us, that of late
Has past, I give thee freedom to translate
Upon the merits of some fitter spouse:
I give, thee leave, and freely quit thy vows.
I call the gods to witness, nothing shall
More bless my soul; no comfort can befall
More truly welcome to me, then to see
My Argalus, (what ere become of me)
So linckt in wedlock, as shall most augment
His greater honor, and his true content.
With that, a sudden and tempestuous tide
Of tears orewhelm'd her language, and denyde
A passage, but when passions flood was spent,
She thus proceeds: You gods, if you are bent
To act my Tragedy, why do you wrong
Our patience so, to make the play so long?
Your Scenes are tedious; Against the rules of Art,
You dwell too long; too long, upon one part.
Be brief, and take advantage of your odds;
One simple maid against so many gods?
And not be conquered yet? Conioyne your might,
And send her soul into eternal night,
That lives too long a day; I Will not resist,
Provided you strike home, strike where ye list.
Accursed be that Day, wherein these eyes
First saw the light; Let desperate souls devise
A curse sufficient for it; Let the Sun
Never shine upon it; and what ere's begun
Upon that fatal day, let heaven forbid it
Success; if not, to ensnare the hand, that did it.
Why was I borne? Or, being borne, O why
Did not my fonder nurses Lullaby
(Even whilst my lips were hanging on her breast)
Sing her poor Babe to everlasting rest?
O then my infant soul had never known
This world of grief, beneath whose weight Igroane.
No, no, it had not: He that dies in's prime,
Speeds a long business, in a little time.
But Argalus (whose more extreme desire,
Unapt to yield, like water-sprinkled fire,
Did blaze the more) impatient of denial,
Gave thus an onset to a further trial;
Life of my Soul; By whom, next heaven, I breath,
Excepting whom, I have no friend but Death,
How can thy wishes ease my grief, or stand
My misery in stead, when as thy hand,
And nothing but thy helping hand can give me
Relief, and yet refuses to relieve me?
Strange kind of Charity! when, being afflicted,
I find best wishes, yet am interdicted
Of those best wishes, and must be removed
From loves enioyment; why? Because beloved.
Alas! alas! How can thy wishes be
A blessing to me, if unblessed in thee?
Thy beauty's gone, (thou say;) why, let it go;
He loves but ill, that loves but for a show;
Thy beauty is supplied in my affection,
That never yet was slave to a complexion.
Shall every day, wherein the earth does lack
The Suns reflex, b'expell'd the Almanacke?
Or shall thy ouer-curious steps for bear
A garden, 'cause there be no Roses there?
Or shall the sunset of Parthenia's beauty
Enforce my i^dgement to neglect that duty,
The which my best advised affection owes
Her sacred virtue, and my solemn vows?
No, no; it lies not in the power of Fate,
To make Parthenia too unfortunate,
For Argalus to love.
It is as easy for Parthenia's heart
To prove less virtuous, as for me to start
From my firm faith: The flame that honors breath
Has blown, nothing has power to quench, but death.
Thou give me leave to choose a fitter spouse,
And freedom to recall, to quit those vows
I took: Who gave thee license to dispense
With such false tongues, as offer violence
To plighted faith? Alas, thou can not free
Thy self, much less have power to license me:
Vows can admit no change; They still persevere
Against all chance, they bind, they bind for ever:
A vow's a holy thing; no common breath;
The limits of a vow, is heaven, and death;
A vow that is past, is like a bird that is flowne
From out thy hand; can be recalled by none;
It dies not, like a time beguiling I^st,
As soon as vented; lives not in thy breast,
When vtterd once; but is a sacred word,
Straight enterd in the strict and close record
Of heaven; It is not like a Iuglers knot,
Or fast, or loose, as pleases us, or not.
since then thy vows can find no dispensation,
And may not be recalled, recall thy passion;
Perform, perform, what now it is too late
TO vnwish again; too soon to violate;
Seek not to quit, what heaven denies to free,
Perform thy vows to heaven; thy vows to me.
Thrice dearer then my soul, (she thus r^plide)
Mad my own pampered fancy been the guide
To my affection, I had condescended
Ere this to your request, which had befriended
My best desiers too; I loved not thee
For my own pleasure, in that base degree,
As gluttons do their diet, who dispense
With vnwash'd hands, (lest they should give offense
To their gripped stomachs, when a minutes stay
Will make them curse occasion all the day.)
I loved not so; My first desires did spring
From thy own worth; and, as a sacred thing,
I always viewed thee, whom my zeal commands
Me not profane with these desiled hands:
It Is true; Performance is a debt we owe
To Vows, and nothing's dearer then a Vow;
Yet when the gods do ravish from our hand
The means to keep it, '^is a countermand.
He that has vowed to sacrifice each day
At Juno's Altar's bound, and must obey.
But if (being under vow) the gods do please
To strike him with a leperous disease,
Or foul infection; which is better now,
Profane the Al^ar, or to break the vow?
The case is mine; where then the gods dispense,
We may be bold, yet tender no offense.
Admit it were an evil; it is our be^est
Of necessary ills to choose the least.
The gods are good: The strickt recognisance
Of vows, is only taken to advance
The good of man; Now if that good prove ill,
We may refuse, our vows entire still.
I vow a marriage; why? because I do
Entirely affect that man, my vows are to;
But if some foul disease should interpose
Betwixt our promised marriage, and our vows.
The strict performance of these vows must prove
I wrong; and therefore love not, whom I love.
Then urge no more: Let my deny all be
A pledge sufficient twixt my love and thee.
So ended sl^e: (...) vehement desire,
(That c^n be quenched with No; no more, then fire,
With oil; and can submit to no condition)
Lends him new breath: Love makes a Rethoritian.
He speaks: she answers: He, afresh, replies;
He stoutly sues; As stoutly she denies.
He begs in vain; and she denics in vain^;
For she denies agai^e; He begs again^;
At last, both weary, ^e his suite adiournes,
For lovers days are good, and bad by turns.
He bids farewell: As if the heart of either
Gave but one motion, they both sighed together.
She bids farewel'; and yet she bids it so,
As if her farewell ended, if he go;
He bids farewel'; bu^ so, as if delay
Had promised better farewells to his stay.
She bids farewell; but holds his hand so fast,
As if that farewell, should not be the last.
Both sighed, both wept, and both, being heavy hearted,
She bids farewell; He bids farewell; and parted.
So parted they: Now Argalus is gone;
And now Parthenia's weeping all alone;
And, like the widowed Turtle, she bewailes
The absence of her mate: Passion preuailes
Above her strength: Now her poor heart can tell,
What Is heaven, by wanting heaven; and what is hell
By her own torments: Sorrow now does play
The Tyrants part; Affection must obey;
And, like a weathercocke, her various mind
Is changed, and turned with every blast of wind.
In desperate language she deplores her state;
She feign would wish; but then, she knows not what;
Resolves of this; of that; and then of neither;
She feign would ^lee, but then she knows not whither;
At length (consulting with the heartlesse pair
Of ill aduisers, Sorrow, and Despair)
Resolves to take the advantage of that night,
To steal away; and seek for death, by flight;
A Pilgrims weed her liuelesse limbs addressed
From hand to foot: A thong of leather blessed
Her wasted loins; Her feeble feet were shod
With Sandalls; In her hand a Pilgrims rod.
When as the illustrious Sovereign of the Day
Had now begun his Circuit, to suruay
His lower kingdom, having newly lent
The upper world to Cynthiaes government,
Forth went Parthenia, and begins to attend
The progress now, which only Death can end.
Go hapless virgin! Fortune be thy guide,
And thine own virtues; and what else beside,
That may be prosperous: may thy merits find
More happiness, then thy distressed mind
Can hope; Live, and to after ages prove
The great example of true Faith and Love:
Gone, gone she is; but whither she is gone,
The gods, and fortune can resolve alone;
Pardon my Quill, that is enforced to stray
From a poor Lady, in an unknown way.
To number forth her weary steps, or tell
Those obvious dangers, that so often befell
Our poor Parthenia, in her pilgrimage,
Or bring her miseries on the open st^ge;
Her broken slumbers; her distracted care;
Her hourly fears, and srights; her hungry fare;
Her daily pe^ils; and her nightly scapes
From ravenous beasts, and from a^tempted rap^s,
Is not my task; who care not to incite
My R^aders p^ssion to an appetite.
We leave Parthenia now; and our discourse
Must cast an ^ye, and bend a settled course
To Argalus. When Argalus (returni^g
To v^sit his Parthenia, the n^xt morning)
P^rceiued she was fled, not knowing whither;
He makes no stay; Consults not with the weather;
Stays not to think, but claps his hasty knees
To his fleet Courser; and away he flees;
His haste enquires no way; (he needs not fear
To lose the road, that goes he knows not where;)
One w^ile he pricks vp^ the fruitful plains;
And now, he gently s^ks his prouder reins,
And climbes the barren hills: with fresh C^reers
He tryes the right hand way; and then he ver^s
His course upon the left: One while he likes
This path; when, by and by, his fancy strikes
Upon another tract. Sometimes, he rou^s
Among the Springs, and solitary Groves;
Where, on the tender barks of sundry trees,
H'engraues Parthenia's name, with his: then flees
To the wild Champian: his proud Ste^d remoures
The hopeful fallowes, with his horned (...);
He baulkes no way; rides over rock, and mountain;
When led by fortune to Diana's Fountaite,
He straight dismounts his steed; begins to quench
His thirsty lips; and after that, to drench
His fainting limbs, in that sweet stream, wherein
Parthenia's dainty fingers of^ had bin.
The Fountain was upon a steep descent,
Whose gliding current nature gave a vent
Through a firm rock; which Art (to make it known
To after ages) walled, and roof'd with stone;
Above the Crystal fountains head, was placed
Diana's Image (though of late defaced:)
Beneath, a rocky Cysterne did retain
The water, s^ding through the Cocks of Cane;
Whose curious Current, the worlds greater eye
Never viewed, but in his midday M^jestie:
It was that Fountain; where, in elder times
Poor Corydon composed his rural rimes,
And left them closely hid, for his unkind
And marble hearted Phyllida to find.
All rites performed; he re-amounts his Steed,
Redeemes his loss of time with a new speed:
And with a fresh supply, his strength renewes
His progress, God knows whither; He pursues
His vowed adventure, brooking no delay,
And (with a mind as doubtful as the way)
He iournies on; he left no course, unthought;
No traveler, vnask'd; no place, unsought.
To make a Iournall of each Circumstance;
His change of fortunes, or each obuious chance
Befell his tedious travel: to relate
The brave attempt of this exploit, or that;
His rare atchieuements, and their fair success;
His noble courage, in extreme distress;
His desperate dangers; his deliverance:
His high esteem with men, which did enhanse
His meanest actions to the throne of I^ue:
And what he sufferd, for Partheniaes love,
Would make our volume endless, apt to try
The utmost patience of a studious eye;
All which, the bounty of a free conceit
May sooner reach too, then my pen relate.
But till bright Cynthiaes head had three times thrice
Repayr'd her empty horns, and filled the eyes
Of gazing mortals, with her globe of light,
This re^lesse lover ceased not, day and night,
To wander, in a sollitarie Quest
For her, whose love had taught him to digest
The dregs of sorrow, and to count all joys
But follyes (weighed with her) at least, but toys.
It happened now that twice six months had run,
Since wandering Argalus had first begun
His toylesome progress; who, in vain, had spent
A year of hours, and yet no event,
When fortune brought him to a goodly Seat
(Walled round about with Hills) yet not so great
As pleasant; and less curious to the fight,
Then strong; yet yielding even as much delight,
As strength; whose only outside did declare
The masters Judgment, and the builders care.
Arround the Castle, nature had laid out
The bounty of her treasure; round about,
Well fenced meadows (filled with summers pride)
Promised provision for the winter tide,
Near which the neighboring hills (well stockt and stored
With milk white flocks) did severally afford
Their fruitful blessings, and deserved increase
To painful husbandry, the child of peace;
It was Kalanders seat, who was the brother
Of lost Parthenia's late deceased mother.
He was a Gentleman, whom vain ambition
Nere taught to undervalue the condition
Of private Gentry, who preferred the love
Of his respected neighbors, far above
The apish congies of th'vnconstant Court;
Ambitious of a good, not great report.
Beloved of his Prince, yet not depending
Upon his savors so, as to be tending
Upon his person: and, in brief, too strong
Within himself, for fortunes hand to wrong:
Thither came wandering Argalus; and received
As great content, as one that was bereaved
Of all his joys, could take, or who would strive
To Express a welcome to the life, could give:
His richly furnished table more expressed
A common bounty, then a curious feast;
Wherea^, the choice of precious wines were profer'd
In liberal sort; not urged, but freely offered;
The careful servants did attend the room,
No need to bid them either go or come:
Each knew his place, his office, and could spy
His masters pleasure, in his masters eye.
But what can relish pleasing to a taste
That is distempered? Can a sweet repast
Please a sick palate? no, there is no content
Can enter Argalus, whose soul is bent
To tire on his own thoughts: Kalanders love,
(That other times would ravish) cannot move
That fixed heart, which passion now incites
T'abiure all pleasures, and forswear delights.
It fortuned; on a day, that dinner ending,
Kalander and his noble guests, intending
T'exchange their pleasures in the open air,
A messenger came in; and did repair
Unto Kalander; told him, That the end
Of his employment, was to recommend
A noble Lady to him (near allyde
To fair Queen Hellen) whose unskillful guide
Had so misled, that she does make request,
This night, to be his bold, and unknown guest;
And by his help, to be informed the way
To find to morrow, what she lost to day.
Kalander (the extent of whose ambition
Was to express the bountious disposition
Of a free heart, as glad of such occasion
To entertain) returned the salutation
Of an unknown servant; and withal professed,
A promised welcome to so fair a guest.
Forthwith Kalander, and his noble friends
(All but poor Argalus, who recommends
His thoughts to private uses, and confines
His secret fancy to his own designs)
Mounted their praunsing Steeds, to give a meeting
To his fair guest, they met, but at first meeting
Kalander stood amazed; (for he supposed
It was Parthenia) and thus his thoughts disclosed;
Maddam (said he) If these mine aged eyes
Retain that wo^ted strength, which age denies
To many of my years. I should be bold
(In viewing you) to say, I do behold.
My niece Parthenia's, face: Nor can I be
Persuaded (by your leave) but you are she?
Thrice noble Sir (she thus replide) your tongue
(Perchance) has done the fair Parthenia wrong,
In your mistake, and too much honored me,
That (in my judgment) was more fit to be
Her foil, then picture; yet has many an eye
Given the like sentence, she not being by;
Nay, more; I have bin told; that my own mother
Failed often to distinguish the one from the other.
Said then Kalander: If my rash conceit
Has made a fault, mine error shall await
Upon your gracious pardon; I alone
Was not deceived; for never any one
That viewed Parthenia's visage, but would make
As great an error, by as great mistake.
But (Madd^m) for her sake, and for your own,
(Whose worth may challenge to it self alone,
More service then Kalander can express)
You Are truly welcome. Enter, and possess
This Castle as your own; which can be blessed
In nothing, more, then in so fair a guest.
Whereto, the Lady (entering) thus replide.
Let everlasting joys be multiplide
Within these gentle gates; and let them stand
As lasting monuments in the Arcadian la^d,
Of rare and bounteous hospitality
To aftertimes. Let strangers passing by
Bless their succeeding heirs as shall descend
From such a Lord, from such a noble Friend.
When as a little (...) had repai^'d
Her weary limbs, which travel had impaired,
The freeness of occasion did present
New subjects to discourse; wherein they spent
No little time; among the rest, befell
Kalander (often stopped with tears) to tell
Of Argalus, and lost Parthenia's love,
Whose undissembled passion did move
A general grief; the more that they attended
To his sad tale, the more they wished it ended.
Maddam (said he) although your visage be
Like hers; yet may your fortunes disagree;
Poor girl! and as he ^pake that word, his eyes
Let fall a tear. The Lady thus replies;
My soul does suffer for Parthenia's sake;
But tell me, Sir, did Argalus for sake
His poor (...) whom he loved so dear?
How has he spent his days e're since? and where?
Maddam (said he) when as their marriage day
Drew near; mischief, that now was bent to play
Upon the Stage, her studied master prize,
With ougly leprosy did so disguise
Her beauteous face, that she b^came a terroar
To her own self: But Arg^lus the mirror
Of truest constancy, (whose loyal heart,
Not guided by his eye, (...) to start
From his past v^wes) did, in despite of fortune,
Pursue his fixed desires, and importune
The intended marriage (...): But she,
Whom reason now had taught to disagree
With her distracted thoughts stands deaf and mute,
And at the last, to avoid his further suit,
Not making any prinie to her flight,
She quits the house, and steals away by night;
But Maddam, when as Argalus perceived
That she was fled; and being quite bereaved
Of his last hope poor lover, he assayes
By toil some pilgrimage to end his days,
Or find her out: Now twice six months have run
Their tedious courses, since he first begun
His fruitless journey, ranging far and near,
Suffering as many sorrows as a year
Could send; and made by the extremes of weather
Vna^t for travel, fortune brought him thither;
Where he as yet remains, till time shall make
His wasted body fit to undertake
His discontented progress, and renew
His great enquest for her, who at first view,
Maddam, you seemed to be.
So said; The Lady from whose tender eyes
Some drops did slide, whose heart did sympathize
With both their sorrows, said; And is their then
Such unexpected constancy in men?
Most noble Sir;
If the too rash desires of a stranger
May be dispensed withal without the danger
Of too great boldness, I should make request
To see this noble Lord, in whose rare breast
(By your report) more honor does reside,
Then in all Greece; nay, all the world beside;
I have a message to him, and am loath
To do it, were I not engaged by ^ath.
Whereat, Kalander, not in breath, but action
Applies himself to give a satisfaction
To her propounded wish: protraction wastes
No time; but up to Arg^s he hasts:
Argalus comes down; and after s^lutation
G^uen, and re^iu'd, she accosts him on this fashion
My noble Lord,
Whereas the loud resounding trump of fame
Has noised your worth, and gloriside your name
Above all others, let your goodness now
Make good that fair report; that I may know
By true experience, what my joyful ear
^ad but, as yet, the happiness to hear.
And if the frailty of a woman's wit
May chancet' o^end; ^e noble, and r^mit.
Then know (most noble Lord) my native place,
Is Co^inth; of the self same biood and race,
With fair Queen H^llen, in whose princely Court
I had my birth, my breeding: To be short;
Thither not many days ago^, there came,
Disguised and changed in all things but her name,
The rare Par^a, so in shape transformed,
In feature altered, and in face d^form'd.
That (in my judgment) all this region could
Not show a thing, more ugly to b^hold.
Long was it, ere her often repeated vows
And solemn protestations could rouse
My over dull belief; till, and the last,
Some passages, that heretofore had past
In secret, twixt Parthenia and me,
Gave full assurance't could be none but she;
Abundant welcome, (as a soul so sad
As mine, and hers, could give or take) she had
So like we were in face, in speech, in growth,
That whosoever saw the one, saw both:
Yet were we not alike in our complexions
So much as in our lones, in our affections
One sorrow served us both; and one relief
Could ease us both, both partners in one grief
Much private time we jointly spent; and neither
Could find a true content, if not together.
The strange occurrents of her dire misfortune
She often discourst, which strongly did importune
A world of tears from these suffused eyes,
The true partakers of her miseries.
And as she spoke, the accent of her story
Would always point upon the eternal glory
Of your rare constancy, which whosoere
In after-ages shall presume to hear
And not admire let him be proclaimed
Arebell to all virtue, and (defamed
In his best actions) let his leprous name
Or die d^shonour'd, or survive with shame.
But ah! what simples can the hand of art
Find out to stanch a lovers bleeding heart?
Or what (alas) can humane skill apply
To turn the course of loves Phlebotomie?
Love is a secret sire, inspired and blown
By fate; which wanting hopes, to feed upon
Works on (...) very soul, and does torment
The universe of man: which being spent
And wasted in the Conflict, often shrinkes
Beneath the burden; and, soconquerd sinkes;
All which, your poor Parthenia knew too well,
Whose bed rid hopes, not having power to quell
The Imperious fury of extreme despair,
She languisht, and not able to contraire
The will of her victorious passion; cried,
My dearest Argalus, farewell, and dyed:
My Lord, not long before her latest breath
Had freely paid the full arrears to death,
She called me to her; In her dying hand
She strained mine, whilst in her eyes did stand
A shower of tears, vnwept; and in mine ear
She whisperd so, as all the room might hear.
Sister (said she) (That title past between us
Not undeserved; for, all that ere had scene us,
Mistook us so, at least) The lat^st sand
Of my spent (...) is now at hand.
Those joys, which heaven appointed out for me,
I here bequeath to be possessed by thee.
And when sweet death shall clarify my thoughts,
And draine them from the dregs of all my faults,
Enjoy them thou, wherewith (being so refinde
From all their dross) ^ull fraught thy constant mind
And let thy prosperous voyage be addressed
To the fair port of Argalus his breast,
As whom the eye of noone did never discover
So loyal, so renownd, so rare a lover:
Cast anchor there, for by this dying breath
Nothing can please my soul more, after death,
And make my joys more perfect, them to see
A marriage twixt my Argalus and thee;
This Ring the pledge betwixt his heart and mine,
A^ freely as he gave me, I make thine:
With it, unto thy faithful heart I tender
My sacred vows: with it, I here surrender
All right and title, that I had, or have
In such a blessing, as I now must leave;
Go to him, and conjure him in my name
What love he bare to me, the very same
That he transfer on thee: take no denial.
Which granted, live thou happy, constant, loy all.
And as she spoke that word, her voice did alter;
Her breath grew cold, her specch began to faulter;
Feign would she utter more, but her spent tongue
(Not able to gos further) faild, and clung
To ber dry roof. A while, as in a trance,
She lay; and, on a sudden, did advance
Her forced language to the height, and cried,
Farewell my dearest Argalus: and died.
And now, my Lord, although this office be
Unsuitable to my sex, and disagree
T^o much perchance, with the too mean condition
Of my estate, more like to find dirision,
Then satisfaction; yet, my gracious Lord,
Extr'ordinary merits do afford
Extr'ordinary means, and can excuse
The breach of custom, or the common use;
Wherefore, incite^ (...) the dear directions
Of dead Parther^, (...) mine own affections,
And by the exc'lence of your high desert,
I here present you with a faithful heart,
A heart, to you devoted; which assures
It self no happiness, but in being yours.
Pardon my boldness. They that shall reprove
This, as a fault, reprove a fault in love.
And why should custom do our sex that wrong,
To take away the privilege of our tongue?
If nature give us freedom, to affect,
Why then should custom bar us to d^tect
The gifts of nature? She that is in pain
Has a sufficient warrant to complain.
Then give me leave (my Lord) to reinforce
A virgins suit, (thinking never the worse
Of proferd love) let my desiers thrive,
And freely 'accept what I so freely give.
So ending; silence did enla^ge her ear,
(Prepared with q^icke attention) to hear
His gracious words: But Argalus whose passion
Had put his amorous Courtship out of fashion,
Returned no answer, till his trickling eyes
Had given an earnest of such obsequies,
As his adiourned sorrow had intended
To do at full, and therefore recommended
To priuacy; True grief abhorres the light,
Who grieves without a witness, grieves aright.
His passion thus suspended for a while,
(And yet not so, but that it did recoyle
Strong sighs) he wiped his teare-bedewed ey^s,
And turning to the Lady, thus replies.
Madam,
Your no less rare, then noble favors show
How much you merit, and how much I owe
Your great desert, which claims more thankfulness,
Then such a dearth of language can express.
But most of all, I stand for ever bound
To that your goodness, my Parthenia found
In her distress, for which respect (in duty
As I am tied) poor Argalus shall repute ye
The flower of noble courtesy, and proclaim
Your high deseruings. Lady; as I am,
A poor unhappy wretch, the very scorn
Of all prosperity, distressed, forlorn,
Unworthy the least favor you can give;
I am your flaue, your Beadsman will I live:
But for this weighty matter you propound,
Although I see how much it would redound
To my great happiness, yet heaven knows
(Most exc'llent Lady) I cannot dispose
Of my own thoughts; nor have I power to do
What, else, you needed not persuade me to;
For trust me, were this heart of mine, mine own,
To carue according to my pleasure, none
But you should challenge it; but while I live
It is Parthenia's, and not mine to give.
Whereto she thus replies: Most noble Sir,
Death, that has made divorce 'twixt you, and her,
Has now returned you your heart again,
Dissolved your vows, dislink'd that sacred chain,
Which tide your souls; nay more, her dying breath
Bequeathed your heart to me; which by her death
Is grown a debt, that you are bound to pay;
Then know (my Lord) the longer you delay,
The longer time her soul is dispossessed
(And by your means) of her desired rest.
Whereto the poor distressed Argalus
Pausing a while returned his answer thus;
Incomparable Lady,
When first of all, by heavens divine directions,
We loved, we liked, we linkt our dear affections,
And with the solemn power of an oath,
In presence of the better gods, we both
Exchanged our hearts: in witness of which thing,
I gave, and she received this dear Ring,
Which now you wear; by which she did resign
Her heart to me; for which, I gave her mine.
Now, Maddam, by a mutual commerce,
My exchanged heart is not my own, but hers;
Which if it had the power to survive,
She being dead, what heart have I to give?
Or if that heart expired in her death,
What heart had she (poor Lady!) to bequeath?
Maddam, in her began my dear affection;
In her, it lived; in her, it had perfection;
In her, it joyed, although but ill befriended
By Fate; in her begun, in her, it ended.
If I had loved, if I had only loved
Parthenia's beauty, I had soon been moved
To moderate my sorrows, and to place
That love on you, that have Parthenia's face;
But 'twas Parthenia's self I loved, and love;
Which as no time has power to remove
From my sixth heart, so nothing can diminish,
No fortune can dissolve; no death can finish.
With mingled frowns and smiles, she thus replide,
H^lfe in a rage, And must I be denide?
Are those the noble favors I expected?
To find disgrade? and go away rejected?
Most noble Lady, if my words (said he)
Suit not your expectation, let them be
Imputed to the misery of my state,
Which makes my lips to speak they know not what;
Mistake not him, that only studies how,
With most advantage still to honor you.
Alas! what joys I ever did receive
From fortune's buried in Parthenia's grave,
With whom, ere long (nor are my hopes in vain)
I hope to meet, and never part again.
So said; with more then Eagle winged have,
She flew into his bosom and embraced,
And her closed arms, his sorrow-wasted wast;
Surcharged with joy, she wept, not having power
To speak. Have you beheld an April shower
Send down her hasty bubbles, and then stops,
Then storms afresh, through whose transparent drops
The vnobscur^d lamp^ of heaven conuaies
The brigh^er glory o^'s refulgent rays:
Even so, within her blushing checks resided
A mixed a^pect, 'twixt smiles and tears divided,
So even divided; no man could say, whether
She wept, or (...), she smiled, and wept together,
She held him fast, and like a fainting lover,
Whose passion now had license to discover
Some words; Since then thy heart is not for me,
Take, take thy own Parthenia ( said she)
Cheer up, my Argalus; these words of mine
Ate thy Parthenia's, as Parthenia's thine;
Believe it (Love) these are no false alarmes;
Thou have thine own Parthenia in thine arms.
Like as a man, whose hourly wants implore
Each meals relief, trudging from door to door,
That hears no dialect from churlish lips,
But news of Beadles, and their tor^uring whips,
Takes up (perchance) some unexpected treasure,
New lost; departs; and, joyful beyond measure,
I^ so transported, that he scarce beleeu^s
So great a truth; and what his eye perceiues
Not daring trust, but fears it is some vision,
Or (...) dre^me, deserving but derision.
So Argalus ^mazed at the news,
F^ine wo^ld believe, but da^ing not abuse
His easy says too soon, for fear his heart
Should s^rfeit on conc^it, he did impart
The truth unto his fancy by degrees,
Where stopped by passion, falling on his knees,
He thus began; O ^ou eternal powers
That have the guidance of these souls of ours,
Who by your just prerogati^e can do
What is a sin for man to diue into;
Whose vndiscouer'd actions are too high
For thought; too deep for man ^'enquier, why?
Delude not these mine eyes with the false show
Of such a joy, as I must never know
But in a dream: Or if a dream it be,
O let me never wake again, to see
My self deceived, that am ordained to enjoy
A real grief, and but a dreaming joy.
Much more he spoke to this ^ffect, which ended;
He blessed himself, and (with a sigh) vnbended
His aching knees; and rising from the ground,
H^ c^st his rolling eyes about, and found
The room avoided, and himself alone;
The door half closed, and his Parthenia gone,
His new distempered passion grew extreme;
I knew, I knew, (said he) 'twas but a dream;
A minutes joy; a flash; a flattering bubble
Blown by the fancy, full of pleasing trouble;
Which waking breaks; and empties into air,
And breathes into my soul a fresh despair.
I knew 'twas nothing but a golden dream,
Which (waking) makes my wants the more extreme;
I knew 'twas nothing but a dreaming joy,
A bliss, which (waking) I should never enjoy.
My dear Parth^nia tell me, where, O where
Art thou that so (...)'st mine ^ye, mine ear?
O that my wak'ned fancy had the might
To represent unto my real sight
What my deceived eyes beheld, that I
Might surfeit with excess of joy, and die.
With that the fair Parthenia ( whose desire
Was all this while, by fire, to draw out fir^;
And by a well advised course to smother
The s^ry of one passion with another)
Stepped in, and said; Then Argalus take thou
Thy true Parthenia: Thou dream'st not now;
Behold this Ring, whose Motto does impart
The constancy of our divided heart:
Behold these eyes, that for thy sake have vented
A world of tears, vnpittied, unlamented:
Behold the face, that had of late the power
To curse all beauty; yet it self, secure:
Witness that Tapour, whose prophetic snuff
Was outed and re^iued with one puff:
And that my words may whet thy dull belief^,
'Twas I, that roard beneath the scourge of grief,
When thou did curse the Darkness, for concealing
My face; and then the T^pour, ^or revealing
So ^oule a face; 'Twas I, that, overcome
With violent despair, stood deaf and dumb
To all thy urged persuasions. It was I,
That, in thy absence, did resolve to die
A wandering pilgrim, trusting to be led
By fortune, to my death; and therefore fled:
But see; the powers above can work their ends,
In spite of mortals: and what man intends,
The heavens dispose, and order the event:
For when my thoughts were desperately bent
To mine own ruin, I was led by fate
(Through dangers, now too tedious to relate)
To fair Queen Hellens court, not knowing whither
My unadvised steps were guided. Thither
My Genius brought me; where, unknown to any,
I mournd in silence; though observed by many,
Relieved by none. At length, they did acquaint
The fair Queen H^llen with my strange complaint,
Whose noble heart did truly sympathize
With mine, partaking in my miseries:
Who, filled with pity, strongly did importune
The woeful cause of my disastrous fortune,
And never rested, till she did enforce
These lips t'acquaint her with the whole discourse.
Which done, her gracious pleasure did command
Her own Physician, to whose skillful hand
She left my foul disease; who in the space
Of twice ten days, restored me to this face:
The cure perfected, straight she sent about
(Without my knowledge) to enquier out
That party, for whose sake I was contented
To Endure such grief with patience, unrepented.
Hoping (since by her means, and help of Art)
My face was cured) even so to cure my heart.
But when the welcome messenger returned
Thy place of boad, o how my spirits burnd
To k^sse her hands, and so to leave the Court;
But she (whose favors did transcend report
As much, as they exceeded my desert)
Detained me for a while, as loath to part
With her poor handmaid; till at last, perpending
A lovers haste, and freely apprehending
So just a cause of speed, she soon befriended
My best desiers, and sent me thus attended,
Where (under a false mask) I laid this plot,
To see how soon my Argalus had forgot
His dead Parthenia, but my blessed ear
Has heard, what few or none must hope to hear:
Now farewell sorrow, and let old despair
Go seek new breasts: let mischief never dare
Attempt our hearts: let Argalus enjoy
His true Parthenia; let Parthenia's joy
Revive in him: let each be blessed in either,
And blessed be heaven, that brought us both together.
With that, the well-nig^ broken hearted lover,
Ravished with over joy, did thus discover
His long pent words: And do these eyes once more
Behold what their extreme despair gave over
To hope for? Do these wretched eyes attain
The happiness, to see this face again?
And is there so much happiness yet left
For a broke heart, a heart that was bereft
Of power to enjoy, what heaven had power to give?
Breathes my P^rthenia? Does Partheni^ live?
Who ever saw the Septentrionall stone,
By hidden power, (a power as ye^ unknown
To our confinde and darkened reason) draw
The neighboring steel; which, by the mutual law
Of natures secret working, strives as much
To be attracted, till they join and touch;
Even so these greedy Lovers meet, and charms
Each other strongly in each others arms;
Even so they meet; and with unbounded measure
Os true content, and time beguiling pleasure,
Enjoy each other with a world of kisses,
Sealing the patent of true worldly blisses;
Where for a while I leave them to receive,
What pleasures new met lovers use to have.
Readers forbear; and let no wanton eye
Abuse our Scene: Let not the stander by
Corrupt our lines, or make an obsceane gloss
Upon our sober Text, and mix his dross
With our refined gold, extracting sower
From sweet, and poison from so fair a flower.
Correct your wandering thoughts, and do not fear
To think the best: Here is no Tarquine here;
No lustful, no insatiate Messaline,
Who thought it gain sufficient to resign
An age of honor, for a night of pleasure;
Whose strength to endure lust, was the just measure
Of her adust desire: Ye need not fear
Our private Lovers, who esteem less dear
Their lives then honors, daring not to do,
But what vnsham'd the Sun may pry into.
If any itching ears desire to know,
What seret conf'rence past betwixt these two;
To them my Muse thus answers; When your case
Shall prove the like, she wills you to embrace
True honor, as these n^ble lovers did,
And you shall know; Till then you are forbid
To enquire further: Only this she pleases
To let you understand, that loves diseas^s
Being thoroughly cured, by their meeting, they
Have once again (...) a Marriage day;
Which that it might succeed with fairer fortune,
Readers, she moves your pleasures, to importune
The better gods, that they would please t'appay
Their griefs with joy, and smile upon that Day.
The end of the second Book.
ARGALVS AND PARTHENIA.
The third Book.
When sturdy Marches storms are ouerblowne
And April, gentle showers are slidden down
To close the windchapt earth, succeeding May
Enters her month, whose early breaking day
Calls Ladies from their hasty beds to view
Sweet Maias pride, and the discolored hiew
Of dewy-brested Flora, in her bower
Where every hand has leave to pick the flower
Her fancy likes, wherewith to be possessed,
Until it fade, and wither in her breast.
Now smooth-faced Neptune, with his gladder smiles
Visits the banks of his beloved Isles;
Eolus calls in the winds, and bids them hold
Their full-mouthed blasts, that breathles are controlld;
Each one ^tyres and shrinks into his seat
And seagreene Triton sounds a shrill retreat:
And thus at length, our Pinace is past over
The bar; and rides before the Maiden-Towre.
Up, now in earnest (voyagers) and stand ye
On your faint legs; O^r long boat straight shall land ye.
Forget your travels now, and lead your eyes
From your past dangers to your present prize.
You traffick'd not for toys; The gods have set
No other price to things of price, but sweat.
Cheer up; call home your hearts, and be advised,
Goods easily purchased, are as easily prized.
You traffick'd not for trifles; and your travel
Was not to compass the almighty gravel
Of the Indian Mines, to ballace your estates;
It Was not for blasts of Honor; whose poor dates
Depend on regal smiles, and have no measures,
But Monarchs wills, expiring with their pleasures.
It Was not to conquer Kingdoms, or obtain
The dangerous title of a Sovereign;
These are poor things: It is but false discretion
To toil, where hopes are sweeter then possession.
No, we are bound upon more brave adventures;
True Honor, Virtue, beauty, are the Centers
To which we point, whereto our thoughts do tend,
And heaven has brought our voyage to an end.
Hail noble Argalus; now the Cock boat stands
Secure: step forth, and reach thy widened hands,
And take thy fairest Bride into thine arms;
Strike up (brave spirit) Cupids fresh alarmes
Upon her melting lips: Take Toll, before
Thou set her dainty foot upon the shore;
So let her slide upon thy gentle breast,
And feel the ground: then lead her to her rest.
Go Imps of honor; let the morning Sun
Gild your delights, and spend his beams upon
Your marriage triumphs; let his western light
Decline apace, and make a early Night.
Go^, Turtles, go; let trebble joys betide
The faithful Bridegroom, and his fairest Bride.
Let your own^ ve^tues light you to your rest;
Tomorrow come we to your n^ptiall feast.
By this the curld pate VVaggoner of heaven
H^ (...) his diurnall course, and drinen
Hi, pan^ing S^eds adowne the W^sterne hill,
When silu^r Cynthia, rising to fulfill
He^n g^tly course, lets fall an evening tear,
To see her bro^her lea^e the Hemisphere,
Which, by the air disper^d, is early found
(And called a pearlly dew) upon the ground:
Still was the night, no language did molest
The waking ear; All mortals were at res^;
No (...) of wind had power to provoke
The Aspine lea^e, or quell the aspiring smoke;
Sweet was the air, and clear^; no S^arre was hi^;
No enu^ous cloud was stirring, to forbid
The (...) Astronomer, to gaze, and look
Into the secrets of his spangled book;
Whilst round about, in each resounding grove,
(As if the (...) of night had strove
(...) the warbling Philomele compares,
And (...) by turn^s her Polyphonian airs.
And now the horn-mouth'd Belman of the night
Had sent his midnight summons, to inuit
Nights (...) rebuls, from their secret holds
To (...) and visit the securer folds,
Whilst drouzie Morpheus, with his leaden keys,
Locks up the Shepherds eyelids, and betrays
The sc^ttered flocks, which lie (...),
Expecting fire when the (...)-(...).
By ^his the p^lefac'd Empress of the night
H^d (...) up her borrowed light,
And to the lower world she now retites,
Attended with her train of lesser (...),
And early Hesper shoots his (...),
To usher Titan from his purple bed.
The gray eyed lanitor does now begin
To open his Eastern portals, and let in
The newborn Day; who having lately hu^ld
The shades of night into the lower world,
The dewy cheek'd Aurora does unfold
Her purple Curtains, all be^ng'd with gol^;
And from the pillow of his Crocian bed,
Don Phoebus rouzes his resulg^t head;
That with his all d^^scerning eye suruayes,
And gilds the mountains with his morning rays.
Now, now the wakefull Bride groom (whose last night
Had made her shades too long) salutes the ligh^;
Salutes the welcom^ light, which now a^length,
Shall crown his heart with joys, beyond the (...)
Of mortal language, whose religious (...)
Shall light these lou^ to their (...)
Up Argalus, and (...) thy (...)
T'enioy that joy, from whence all joy proc^ds:
(...) joys, from whence all joy (...)
Up (...); and (...) thy (...).
And thou f^ite B^ide, (...) the day,
Thy Day is come, and (...) (...)
Awake, and rouse (...) ^om thy (...);
Thy Day is come: and may thy joy (...) number
Thy minutes that are (...) and (...);
Arise, and bid thy maid (...)
Put on thy nuptial robes, Time (...)
O may thy after days be like this (...).
By this, bright Phoebus with redoubled glory
Had half way mounted to the highest story
Of his Olympicke Palace: there to see
This long expected Days solemnity:
When all on sudden, there was heard around
From every quarter) the Maiestick sound
Of many Trampets: all in consort running
One point of war, transcending far the cunning
Of mortal blasts; and what did seem more strange,
The shrill mouthed music did as sudden change
To Dorick strains, to sweet mollitious airs,
To Lyrick songs, and voices, like to theirs
That charmed Ulysses: whilst the amazed ear
Stood ravished at these changes, it might hear
Those voices, (by degrees) transform to Lutes,
To Shaulms, deep throated Sackbuts, and to Flutes,
And Eccho-forcing Cornets; which surpast
The Art of man: this Harmony did last
Until the Bridegroom came: But all men wondered
To hear the noise: some thought the heavens had thundered
To a new tun^; and some more wiser ears
Conceived, it was the Music of the Spheres:
All wonderd, all men gazed; and all could hear,
But none knew whence the Music was, or where.
Forthwith, as if a second Sun had rose,
And strove with greater brightness, to depose
The glory of the first, the Bridegroom came,
Vsher'd along with Eagle-winged Fame,
Whose twice five hundred mouths did at one blast
Inspire a thousand Tr^mpets, as he past.
His nuptial ves^re was of Scarlet Dye
So deep, as it would dazzle a weak eye
To gaze upon it; to which, the curious Art
Of the laborious needle did impare
So great a glory, that you might behold
A rising Sun, imbost with purest gold,
From whence ten thousand trailes of gold came down
In waued points, like Sunbeames from that Sun:
Thus from his Chamber, amidst the vulgar Crowd
(Like Titan breaking through a gloomy cloud)
The long expected Bridegroom came, and past
The amazed multitude, till at the last,
His Herald brought him to the Hall of State,
When all the Arcadian Nobles did awaite
To welcome his approach, and to discharge
The louder volley of their joys at large.
The Hall was spacious, lightsome, and bestrow'd
With Flora's wealth (a bounty that she owed
This glorious feast) The walls were richly clad
With curious Tap'strie; (such as Greece never had
Before this day) wherein you might behold,
Wrought to the life, in colored silks, and gold,
This present Story of these peerless Lovers,
Which, like a silent Chronicle, discouers
The several passages, that d^d be fall
'Twixt their first meeting, and their nuptial;
Devised and wrought by Virgins borne in Greece,
Presented to this Triumph, as a piece
Devoted to the memory and fame
Of Argalus, and his Parthenia's name.
No sooner was the Ceremony ended,
(Wherein each noble spirit more contended
To Express affection, then affect th'expession
Of courtly (...) a ba^e profession
Of ayrie friendship) but a sudden shout
Of rudely mingled ^yees flew th^oughout
The spacious Castle, which confusedly cried
Joy to Parth^nia, to the fairest Bride.
For (...) (as (...) had broken loose,
And Dei^ies had meant to enter pose
Their heavenly bodies, with the mortal tribe
Of men; or, else, intending to ascribe
Their pers'nall honor to this nuptial)
In more then prin^ly st^te, enters the Hall
A gloriou^ Show of Ladies, all aray'd
In rare and costly robes, and richly laid
With Iems unvalued; and each Lady wore
A Scarf upon her arm, embroidered over
With gold and pearl; Thus hand in hand they part
Into the Hall, but often their eyes did ^ast
A backward look, as if their thoughts did mind
Some greater glory, coming on b^hinde:
Next after them, came in the virgin crew
In milk white robes (virgins that never knew
The sacred mysteries of the marriage bed,
Nor, finding trouble in a Maidenhead,
Erelent a thought to nuptial joys, till now)
Thus past these buds of nature; two, by two,
Their long dis^heueld treffes d^angled down
With car^sse Art, and on each head a crown
Of golden Laurel stood: Their ^aces (...)
Beneath a veil, seemed (...) the Stars were clouded.
Have ye beheld in fros^y winters Even,
When all the lesser twin^ng lamps of heaven
Are fully ^indled, how the ^uddy face
Of rising Cynthi^ (...) with what a grace
She views the Throne of darkness, and aspires
The Olympic brow, amidst the smaller fires?
So after all these sparks of beauty, came
(They were but sparks to such a glorious flame)
The fair Parthenia, thus the rose-cheek'd Bride
Enters the room; A milk white veil did hide
Her blushing face; which, ne'erthelesse discloses
Some glymps of red, like Lawne over spreading roses;
Thus entered she; The garments, that she wore,
Were made of Purple silk, bespangled over
With Stars of purest gold, and round about
Each several S^arre went, winding in, and out,
A trayle of orient pearl, so rarely wrought,
That as the garments moved, you would have thought,
The Stars had twinckled; Her dissheueld hair
Hung down behind, as if the only care
Had bin to reconcile neglect and Art,
H^ng loosely down, and vayl'd the backer part
Of those her sky-resembling robes; but so,
That every breath would wave it too and fro,
Like flying clouds; through which, you might discover
Sometimes one glim'ring Star, sometimes another:
Thus on she went; her ample train supported
By thrice three virgins, euenly sized and sorted
In purple robes: forthwith, the Bridegroom rises
From off his chair; bows down; and sacrifices
The peaceful offering of a morning kiss,
Upon her lips: To such a Saint as this,
O, what rebellious heart could chose but bow,
And offer freely the perpetual vow
Of choice obedience?
With that, each Noble moves him from his place,
And with a posture, full of Princely grace,
Salutes the lovely Bride, with words, expressing
The ioy^ull model of a kingdoms blessing.
But hark^! The Hymenean trumpet sends
Her latest summons forth: Hymen attends
The noble pair, and is prepared to y^ke
Their promised hands; the sacred Altars smoke
With Mirr^ and Frankincense, Thewayes are strowd
With Flora's prid^; and the expecting crowd
Have thronged the streets, and ^uery greedy eye
Attends, to see the Triumph passing by:
At length, the gates flew open. And on this fashion
Began the Triumph; first a Proclamation
Was made, with a loud voice: If any be,
Or Lord, or Knight, or whatsoere degree,
Professing arms, or honor in the land,
That at this time, can challenge, or pretend
A ti^le to Parthenia's heart, or claim
A right, or interest in her love, or name;
Let him come forth in person; or, appear
By noble Proxy, if not present here;
And by the exc^lent honor of a Knight,
He shall receive such honorable right
As the just sword can give; Let him now come,
And speak; or, else, for evermore be dumme.
Thrice was it read; which done; forthwith there came
True honors Eaglewinged Herald, Fame,
Sounding a silver Trump; and as she past,
She shook the earths foundation, with her blast.
Next after whom in vndissembl^d state
The Bridegroom came; on his right hand did wait
The god of War, in (...) robes of green,
All stained with bleeding hearts, as they had ^eene
But newly wounded, and from every wound,
Fresh blood due seem to trickle on the ground;
And as the garments moo^'d, each dying heart
Would seem to pant a while, and then depart.
Upon the Bridegroomes left hand there attended
Heavens Pursu^uant, whose brawny arm extended
A winged Caduce; He had scarce the might
To curb his feet; his feet were winged for flight.
Above his head their hands did jointly hold
A crimzon Canopie embost with gold.
Next them, twice twenty famous Nobles followed,
Brave men at arms, whose names the world had hallowed
For rare exploits, and twice as many Knights,
Whose bloods have ^ansom'd, and redeemed the rights
Of wronged Ladies: These were all aray'd
In robes of Needle work, so rarely made,
That he which sees them, thinks he does behold
Armours of steel, saire filletted with gold:
And as they marched, their Squires did advance
Before each Knight his warlike Shield and Lance.
And after these, the Princely virgin Bride,
On whom all eyes were fastened, did divide
Her gentle paces, being led between
Two Goddesses, the one arai'd in green,
On which the curious needle undertook
To make a forest: here a bubling brook
Diuides two thickets: through the which does fly
The singled Dear, before the deepe-mouth'd Cry,
That closely follows: There the affrighted Herd
Stands trembling at the music, and afeard
Of every shadow, gazes to and f^o,
Not knowing where to stay, or where to go;
Where, in a Launskip, you may see the Faunes,
Following their crying mothers over the Lawnes;
The other was in robes, the purer dye
Whereof, did represent the midday sky,
Full of black clouds; through which, the glorius beams
Of the obscured Sun appears, and seems
As '^were to scatter; and at length, to shed
His brighter glory, on a fruitful bed
Of noisome weeds; from whence, you might discern
A thousand painful Bees extract and earne
Their sweet provision; and, with laden thighs,
To bear their waxy burdens: On this wise
The princely Bride was led betwixt these two,
The first, was she, that on Act^ons brow
Revenged her naked Chastity; the other
Was she, to whom loves pregnant brain was mother
Through Vulcans help; and these did jointly hold
Upon her head, a Coronet of gold;
Whose train Dianas virgin crew, all crowned
With golden wreathes, supported from the ground.
Next after her, upon the triumph waited
An order, by Diana new created,
And styled the Ladies of the Maidenhead,
In white, wrought here and there with spots of red,
And every spot appeared as a stain
Of lovers blood, whom their hard hearts had slain:
Ranckt three, and three; and on each h^ad a crown
Of Primeroses, and Roses not yet blown.
Next whom, the beauties of the A^dian Court
Marched two and two, whose glory came not short
Of what th'vnlimited, and studied art
Of glory-vying Ladies could impart
To such solemnities; where every one
Strove to excel, and to b'excell'd of none.
Thus came they to the Temple; where attended
The sacred Priests, whose voices recommended
The days success to heaven, and did divide
A blessing '^wixt the Bridegroom, and the Bride:
Which done; and after low obeisance made,
The first (whilst all the rest kept silence) said:
Welcome to Juno's sacred Courts; Draw near:
Unspotted Lovers, welcome: Do not fear
To touch this holy ground; Pass on secure;
Our gates stand open to such guests, as you are;
Our gracious Goddess grants you your desires,
And has accepted of those holy fires,
We offered in your name, and takes a pleasure
To smell your Incense in so great a measure
Of true delight, that we are bold to say,
She crowns your vows, and smiles upon this Day.
So said; they bowed to the ground, and blessed
Themselves; that done, they singled from the rest
The noble Bridegroom, and his princely Bride,
And said; Our gracious goddess be our guide,
As we are yours; and as they spoke that word,
Their well-tuned voices sweetly did accord
With Music from the Altar: As along
They past, they jointly warbled out this song:
THus in Pomp, and Priestly pride,
To glorious Juno's Altar go we;
Thus to Juno's Altar show we
The noble Bridegroom and his Bride:
Let Juno's hourly blessing send ye
As much joy as can attend ye.
May these lovers never want
True iores, nor ever beg in vain
Their choice desiers; but obtain
What they can wish, or she can grant.
Let Juno's hourly blessings send ye
As much joy as can attend ye.
From sacietie, from strife,
Iealousies, domesticke iars,
From those blows, that leave no scars,
Juno protect your marriage life.
Juno's hourly blessings send ye
As much joy as can attend ye.
Thus to Hymen's sacred bands
We commend your chaste deserts,
That as Juno linked your hearts,
He would please to join your ^ands.
And let both their blessings send ye
As much joy as can attend ye.
No sooner was this Nuptial Caroll ended,
But bowing to the ground, they recommended
This princely pair (both prostrate on the floor)
And with their hands presented them before
The sacred Altar, whereunto they brought
Two milk white Turtles; and with prayers be sought
That Juno's lasting favors would descend,
And make their pleasures, pleasures without end.
With that, a horrid crack of dreadful thunder
Possessed each fainting heart, with fear and wonder:
The rafters of the holy Temple shook,
As if accu^sed Archimagoes book
(That cursed Legion) had been newly rea^
The ground did tremble, and a mist ore-spread
The da^kned Altar.
At length, deep silence did possess and fill
The spacious Temple, all was whist and still;
When, from the clouded Altar, brake the sound
Of heavenly Music; such, as would confound
With death, or rauishment the earth bred ear,
H^d not the Goddess given it strength, to bear
So strong a rapture. As the Music ended,
The Mist on sudden vanished, and ascended
from whence it came. The Altar did appear,
And ashes lying, where the Turtles were:
Near which, great Hymen stood, not seen before:
His purple Mantle was embroidred over
With Crowns of Thorn; among which, you might behold
Some, here and there (but very few) of gold;
Upon each little space, that did divide
The several Crowns, a Gordian knot was tied:
And, turning to the Priest, he thus began;
What mean these sumes? Say, what has mortal man
To do with us? What great request, what suite
Does now attend us, that they thus salute
Our nostrills, with such acceptable savors?
Tell us, wherein do they implore the savors
Of the pleased gods; sor by the eternal throne,
And M^iesty of heaven, it shall be done.
Whereto, with b^nded kne^s, they thus ^eplide;
Great God, this noble Bridegroom, and his Bride
Whom we, most humbly here, present before
Great Juno's sacred altar, do implore
Your gracious aid: that with your nuptial bands,
Your Grace would please to tie their promised bands.
With that, he straight descends the holy stayres,
And with his widened arms diuides and shares
An equal blessing twixt them both, and said,
NOble Youth, and lovely Maid,
Heaven accepts your ple^sing fires,
And has granted your desires:
By the mystry of our power,
First, we consecrate this hour
To Juno's name, that she would bless
Our prosperous actions with success.
With this Oil (which we appoint
For holy uses) we anxoint
Your temples, and with nuptial^ bands
Thus we firmly join your hands:
Be joined for ever: and let none
Presume t'vndoe, what we have done.
Be joined till lawless Death shall sever
Both hands and hearts: be joined for ever:
Eternal curses we alot
To those, till then, shall loose this knot.
So said, he blessed them both in Juno's name,
And from their sight he vanished in a flame.
That done, they rose, and with new fumes saluted
The smoking altar. Thrice they prostituted
Their bended bodies on the holy ground,
Where sending forth the well accepted sound
Of thanks and vows, from their divided heart,
They kiss the sacred Altar and depart;
And with the self same Triumph as the came,
Returned; whilst the louder Trumpe of Fame
With a full blast, sends forth a shrill retreat,
And reconducts them to the Hall of State;
Whose richly furnished table would inuit
A bed rid stomach to an Appetite,
And make the wastfull Glutton, that does eat
His vnearn'd di^t with his daily sweat,
B^hold his heaven in a more ample measure,
Then he had hopes to purchase, with the treasure
Of his b^st fait^; such were the dainties: such
The vyands, that I dare not think too much
To term it Paradise, where all things did
Offer themselves, and nothing was forbid.
Soon as the Martial of this Princely feast,
Had in his rightful seat, placed every guest,
A soft harmonious rapture did confine
All tongues with wonder, as a thing divine.
Forthwith; with joined hands, and smiling faces,
With habits more unequal then their paces,
A ^olly pair drew near the table; the one
In green; His pampered body had outgrowne
His seame-ript garments, all embroidered over
With spreading Vines, whose fruitful leaves did cover
Her swelling Clusters, his outstrutting eyes
(...)'d in his head: his dropsy swollen thighs
Quagg'd as he went; his purple colored snout
Was freely furnished, and enricht about
With Carbuncles; around his brows did twine
Full laden Clusters, ravished from the Vine:
The other was a Lady, whom the Sun
With his bright rays had too much gazed upon:
The color of her silken Mantle was
Twixt green and yellow, like the saded grass;
On which were wrought enclosed fields of Corn,
Some reaped, some bound in sheaues, and some unshorn
Well f^uour'd was her countenance; plump and round;
Her golden Tresses dangled to the ground;
Her temples bound with full ripe ears of wheat,
Made like a Girland: frequent drops of sweat
Down from her sw^rty brows did (...) trickle,
And in her Sun-^urnt hand she bare a sickle.
Thus vsherd, wi^h a Bag-pipe, to the Table,
They both stood mute: Bacchus as yet unable
To challenge language from his breathless tongue,
Till smiling Ceres thus began the Song.
Ceres. WElcome, fairest virgin B^ide;
Welcome to our i^lly seast;
Taste what Ceres did provide
For so fair, so fair a guest.

Bacch. Taste what Ceres did provide
For so fair so fair a guest:
Welcome fairest Virgin B^ide;
VVelcome to our jolly feast.

Chor. Our conjoined bounties do
Make M^rs smile, and Venus to.

Ceres. VVelcome noble Bridegroom hither;
Worlds of bliss and joys attend ye:
Freely welcome both together;
See what Ceres bounty sends ye.

Bacch. Freely welcome both together;
See what Bacchus bounty ^ends ye:
VVelcome noble B^idegroome hither;
Worlds of bliss, and joys attend ye.

Chor. Our conjoined bounties do
Make Mars smile, and Venus to.

Ceres. Here is that whose sweet variety
Gives you pleasure and delight;
Makes you full, without s^cietie;
Wastes the day, and hasts the night.

Bacch. This will (...) the man of war,
When the drum shall beat in vain;
When his spirits drooping are,
This will make them rise again.

Chor. You that jointly do inherit
Venus beauty, Mars his spirit,
Freely taste our bounty; so
Mars shall smile, and Venus to.

The song thus ended; joining hands together,
They bowed; and vanish^, none knew how, nor whither.
To make relation of each quaint Devise,
That Art presented their unwearied eyes;
The nature of their mirth, of their discourse;
The dainties of the first, the second course;
The secret glances of the Bridegroomes eye
On his fair Bride; how often she blushed, and why;
Were but to rob the Bridegroom of his right,
Who counts each hour a Summers day, till night.
Me think it grieves me, that my pen should wrong
Poor Lovers disappointed hopes so long;
And it repents me so, that oftentimes,
Me thinks, I could be angry with my Rimes,
And for the cruel sins, that they commit,
In being tedious; some I wish vnwrit.
Let it suff^e, what glory, what delight,
What state; or, what to please the appetite,
The eye, the ear, the fancy. In a word,
What joy so short a season could afford
To well prepared hearts, was here expressed
In this our Nuptial, this our princely feast.
Thus when the board was voided, and the Sewer
Had now resignd his office with the Ewer,
The curious linen gone, and all the rights
Performed, that ^ong to festival delights;
The light foot Hermes ent^rs in the Hall,
Holds forth his C^duce, and adiures them all
To depth of silence; Tells them; '^is his task;
To let them know, the Gods intend a Mask,
To grace these nuptials; and, with that, he spread
His ayre-diuiding pinions, and fl^d:
When silence (...) had charmed every ear
With wonder, and attention; they might hear The Masque of the Gods.

The winged (...) of night, about
In every corner, sweetly wa^bling out
Their Philomelian airs, and wilder note
Which nature taught them to divide, by rote;
So that the Hall did seem a shady grove,
Wherein b^ turns, the ambitious (...) strove
T'xcell themselves.
While thus their ears were seeding with delight
Upon these strains; the Goddess of the night
Enters her Scene; Her body was confind
Within a coal black Mantle through linde
With sable Furs; Her tresses were, of hiew,
Like Ebonie; on which, a Pearely dew
Hung, like a spiders Webb; Her face did shroud
A swarth Complexion, underneath a Cloud
Of black curld Cypress: On her head, she wore
A crown of burnisht Gold, be shaded over
With Foggs and ^ory mists; Her hand did bear
A Scepter, and a sable Hemispheare;
She sternely shook her dewly locks, and brake
A melancholy smile, and thus bespake,
Drive on, drive on, (dull Waggoner) Let slip
Your louser reins, and use thine idle whippe;
Thy pamperd Steeds are pursie; Drive away;
The lower world thinks long to see the day;
Darkness befits us best; and our delight
Will relish far more sweeter, in the night;
Approach (ye blessed shadows) and extend
Your early Jurisdiction, to befriend
Our nightly sports; Approach; make no delay;
It is your (...), your Sovereign calls away.
With that a sudden darkness filled the Hall:
The light was ba^sht, and the windows all
So nearly closed their eye lids, round about
That day could not get in; nor darkness, out;
Thus while the death resembling shades of night
Had drawn their misty Curtains twixt the light
And every darkened eye, which was denide
To see, but that, which darkness could not hide;
The jealous God, fearing he knows not whom
(Indeed, whom fears he not?) enters the room,
And, with his clubfoot, groping in the shade Vulcan^ speech.

Of night, he muttered forth these words and said.
Where is this wanton Harlot now become?
Is light so odious to her? or is home
So homely in her wandering eyes, that she
Must still be rambling, where unknown to me?
Can nothing be concluded, nothing done,
But intermedling Venus must be one?
Is It not enough that Phoebus does applaud
Her lust, but must nights Goddess be her baud?
Darkness, be gone, Thou patroness to Lust;
If fair m^anes may not rid ^hee, fouler must:
Away; my power shall outcharme thy charms,
And find her, painting, in her lovers arms,
Enter you Lamplets of terrestrial fire,
And let your golden heads (at least) conspire
To counterfeit a day, and on the night
Revenge the wrongs of Phoebus, with your light.
So said; The darkened Hall was garnisht round
With lighted Tapors: Every object found
An eye to own it, and each eye was f^li'd
With pleasure, in the object it beheld.
As these deuisefull changes did incite
Their quickened fancies, with a fresh delight,
Morpheus came in; His dreaming pace was so,
That none could say, he moved; he moved so slow;
His folded arms, athwart his breast, did knit
A sluggards knot; His nodding chinne did hit
Against his panting bosom, as he past;
And often times his eyes were closed fast;
He wore a Crown of Poppy on his head;
And, in his hand, he bore a Mace of lead:
He yauned thrice, and, after Ho^age done
To nights black sovereign, he thus begun:
Great Empress of the world; to whom, I owe Morphe^ speech.

My self, my service, by perpetual vow;
Before the footstool of whose dreadful Throne,
The Princes of this lower world, lay down
Their Crowns, their Scepters; whose victorious hand,
In twice twelve hours did conquer and command
This Globe of earth; your servant (whose dependence
Quickens his power) comes, to give attendance
Upon thy early shadows, and to seize
Upon these wearied mortals, when you please
T'appoint; till then, your servant is at hand,
To put in execution your Command.
To whom the smiling Goddess thus replide;
Morpheus; Our pleasure is to set aside The Goddesle of the nights speech

This night to mirth, and time-beguiling sports;
Our sleep restrayning buisnesse much imports
Your welcome absence, whilst our ears shall number
The flying hours: our mirth admits no slumber.
That word scarce ended; but the Queen of Love
Descended from her unseen seat above;
In her fair hand she led her winged Son,
And like a full mouthed tempest, thus begun;
D^sloyall Sic^phant; deaths bastard brother; Venus speech to Morpheus

Accursed spaune, cast from a cursed Mother;
That with thy base impostures, ri^est man
Of half his dai^s, of half that little spanne,
Nature has lent his life; that with thy wiles,
Hugg'st him to death; betray'st him with thy smiles;
What make thou here, and to usurp my right,
Perfideous Caitife? Venu^ day is night.
Go to the frozen world; where man's desire
Is made of Ice, and melts before the fire,
Yet never the warmer: Go, and visit ^ooles,
Or P^legmatick old age, whose spirit cooles
As quickly as their breath: Go; what have we
To do (dull Morpheus) with thy Mace, or thee
As leaden as thy Mace? Thou Art made for naught,
Bu^ to still Children, or to ease the thought
Or brainsick Phranticks; or with joys to ^ter
Po^re slumbring souls; which waked, find no such matter.
Go succor those, that vent by quick retaile
Their wits, upon dear penny-worths of Al^;
Or marrow'd Eunuchs, whose adust desire
Wants means to slake the fury' of their false fire.
O that I were a Basiliske, that I
Might dart my venom; or else venomed, die.
Boy, bend thy Bow; and with thy forked dart,
Drawn to the head, thrill, thrill him to the heart:
Let fly Deaths arrow; or if thou had none,
In deaths name send an arrow of thine own;
We are both wronged, and in the same degr^e;
Shoot then; at once, revenge thy self and me.
With that the little angry god did bend
His steelen Bow, and in deaths name did send
His winged messenger, whose faithful have
Dispatched his irefull errand and stuck fast
Within his pierced liver, and did hide
His singing feathers, in his wounded side.
Morpheus fell down as dead; and on the ground
Lay for a little season in a sound,
Gasping for breath; And Lovers dreams they say,
Have evermore been wanton since that day.
Venus was pleased; The Goddess of the night
Grew angry; she would needs resign her right
Of government; and in a spleen threw down
Her H^mispheare, her Scepter, and her Crown;
And with a duskie fogge, she did besmeare
The face of Venus; soyld her golden hair,
With her black shades; and, with foul terms reuil'd
Both her, her cuckold mate, and bastard child;
Where at the God of War, being much offended,
Forsook both seat and patience, and descended;
And, to the world, he proffered to make good
Fair Venus honor, with his dearest blood.
To whom poor Vulcan (puffing in a rage,
To hear his well known fortune on the stage)
Scraped many a thank; and, with his crouching knee
Professed true love, to such true friends, as he.
And ever since, experience lets us know,
Cuckolds are kind, to such as m^s them so.
By this, god Morpheus, waking from his swound,
Began to groan; and, from his aching wound
Drew forth the buried shaft: but Mars (whose word
Admits no other Organ, but his sword)
Vnsheath'd his furious brondyron, and let fly
A blow at Morpheus head, which had wellnye
Cloven him in twain, had not the Queen of night
Hurled hasty mists, before his darkened sight;
So that the sword, by a false guided aim,
Struck Vulcans foot, which ever since, was lame.
At last, the gods came down, and thought it good,
To n^ppe this early quarrel in the bud.
Who fearing vprores, with a friendly cup
Of blessed (...), took the quarrel up;
And, for the offense committed, did proclaim
This sentence, in offended Juno's name.
Morpheus, from hence is banished, for this night, The sentence.

And not to approach before the morning light;
Mars is exilde for ever, as a guest,
Adiudg'd unfitting for a marriage feast.
Cupid is doomed to rome and ro^ about
To the worlds end, and both his eyes put out.
Venus is (...) to (...) night,
And not (unless by stealth) to see the light:
Her chiefest joy to be bu^ pleasing folly,
P^rm'd with madness, dogged with melancholy.
And there the Music did inuit their paces
To measure time; and, by exchange of places,
To lead the curious beholders eye,
A willing captive to variety.
Thus, with the sweet vicissitude of mirth
They spent the time, as if that heaven and earth
Had studied to please man, in such a measure,
That Art could not do more, ^augment their pleasure;
And so they vanished.
Now Ceres evening bounty reinuites
Her noble guests, to her renewed delights;
And frolic Bacchus, to refresh their souls,
With a full hand, presents his swelling Bowls.
Wine came vnwish'd like water from a sourse,
And delicates were mingled with discourse.
What Art could do, to make a welcome guest,
Was liberally presented at that feast.
It was no sooner ended, but appears
An old gray pilgrim, deeply struck i^ years,
In tatterd garments; In his wrinkled hand
An houreglasse, l^bouring with her latest sand.
Beneath his arm, a buffen knapsacke hung,
Stuffed full of writings, in an unknown tongue;
Chronologies, outdated Almanacks,
And Patents, that had long suruiu'd their wax.
Unto his shoulders, Eagles wings were joined;
His head ill thatched before, but bal'd behind:
And leaning on his crooked Sithe he made
A little pause, and after that, he said,
Mortals, It Is out: My glass is run,
And with it, the day is done.
Dark shadows have expelled the light,
And my glass is turned for night.
The Queen of darkness bids me say,
Mirth is fitter for the day.
Upon the day, such joys attend;
With the day such joys must end.
Think not, Darkness goes about,
Like death, to puff your pleasures out.
No, no, she will lend you new delights;
She has pleasures for the nights.
When as her shadows shall benight ye,
She has what shall still delight ye.
Aged Time shall make it known,
She has dainties of her own.
It Is very late; Away, away,
Let day sports expire with Day.
For this time, we adiourne your feast;
The Bridegroom feign would be at rest.
And if night pastimes shall displease ye,
Day will quickly come, and ease ye.
With that, a sweet vermillian tincture stayn'd
The Brides fair cheeks; The more that she restrayn'd
Her blush, the more her disobedient blood
Did ouerflow; as if a second flood
Had meant to rise, and, for a little space,
To drown that world of beauty in her face
S^e blushed; (but knew not why) And like the Moon
S^e looked most red, upon her going down.
But see: the smiling Ladi^s do^ begin
To join their whispring heads, as there had been
A plot of treason; till at length, vnspide,
They stole away, the vnwilling-willing Bride;
Their busi^ hands disrobed her, and so led
The timorous virgin to her Nuptial b^d.
By this, the Nobles having recommended
Their tongues to silence, their discourse being ended,
They looked about, and thinking to have done
Their service to the Bride; the B^ide was gone.
And now, the Bridegroom (unto whom delay
Seemed worse then death) could brook no longer st^y:
Attended by his noble guests, he enters
That room, where th'enterchangeable Indenters
Of dearest love, lay ready to be sealed
With mutual pleasures, not to be reueald.
His garments grow too tedious, and their weight
(Not able to be borne) do over freight
His weary shoulders; Atlas never stoopt
Beneath a greater burden, and not droopt;
No help was wanting; for he did receive
What sudden aid he could expect, or have
From speedy hands, from hands that did not wast
The time, unless (perchance) by over have;
Mean while, a dainty warbling breast, not strong,
As sweet, presents this Epithalamion song.
Man of war, march bravely on,
The field's not easy to be won;
There Is no danger in that war,
Where lips both swords and bucklers are.
Here Is no cold to chill thee;
A bed of downe's thy field:
Here Is no sword to kill thee,
Unless thou please to yield;
Here is nothing will incumber,
Here will be no scars to number.
These are wars of Cupids making,
These be wars will keep ye waking,
Till the early breaking Day
Call your forces hence, away.
These are wars that make no spoil,
Death shoots his shafts in vain;
Though the soldier get a foil,
He will rouse, and fight again.
These be wars that never cease,
But conclude a mutual peace.
Let benign and prosperous stars
Breathe success upon these wars,
And when thrice three months be run,
Be thou father of a son;
A son, that may derive from thee
The honor of true merit,
And may to ages, yet to be,
Convey thy blood thy spirit;
Making the glory of his fame
Perpetuate, and crown thy name,
And give it life in spite of death,
When fame shall want both trump and breath.
Have you beheld in a fair summers even,
The golden-headed Charioter of heaven,
With what a speed, his prouder reins do bend
His panting horses, to their iourneyes end?
How red he looks; with what a swift careire
Her hurries to the lower Hemisphere;
And in a moment, shootes his golden head
Upon the pillow of blushing Thetis bed.
Even so the bridegroom (whose defire had wings
More swift then Time, switcht on with pleasure) springs
Into his nuptial bed; and look how fast
The stooping Faulkon clips; and, with what have,
Her tallons seize upon the timorous prey,
Even so, his arms (impatient of delay)
His circling arms embraced his blushing Bride,
While she (poor soul) lay trembling by his side.
The Bridegroom now grows weary of his guests:
What mirth of late was pleafing, now molests
His tired patience: Too much sweet offends;
Sometime, to be forsaken of our friends,
In Cupids moralls, is observed to be
The fruits of friendship, in the best degree.
And thus, at last, the Curtains being closed,
They left them, each, in others arms reposed.
And here my Muse bids, draw our Curtains too,
It Is unfit to see, what private lovers do.
Reader, let not thy thoughts grow over rank;
But veil thy understanding, with a Blancke.
Think not on what thou think; and, if thou can,
Yet understand not, what thou vnderstandst.
Sow not thy fruitful heart with so poor seeds;
Or if, perchance, (unsown) they spring like weeds,
Use them like weeds, thou know not how to kill;
Slight them; and let them thrive against thy will.
View them like evils, which Art cannot prevent,
But see, thou take no pleasure in their sent.
And one thing more; When as the morrow light
Shall bring the bash full Bride into thy sight;
Be not too cruel; Let no wanton eye
Disturb, and wrong her conscious modesty;
And if she blush, examine not for what;
Nay, though thou see it (Reader) see it not.
And shall our story discontinue here?
Or want a period, till another year?
Shall we befriend these lovers, with the night,
And leave them buried in their own delight?
And so conclude? No, it shall never be sed,
That marriage joys end in the marriage bed.
Fond, and adulterate is that love, which founds
Her happiness on such unstable grounds:
And, like a sudden blaze, it never lasts,
But as the pleasure waxes cold, it wastes.
Now Argalus awakes; and now the light
Is even as welcome to him, as the night:
His eyes are fixed upon his lovely Bride,
While she la^s sweetly slumbring by his side.
She sle^pes; He views her; Thrice, his mind was bent,
To call Parthenia, and thrice it did repent.
Sometimes, his lips, with a stolen kiss would greet
Her gu^ltlesse lips; ( They say stolen goods are sweet)
At length, she wakes; and hides her blushing cheeks
In his warm bosom; where, she safely seeks
For Sanctuary, whereunto should ^ly
The guil^ of her protected modesty.
He smiles, and whispers in her deafned ear;
(Women can understand, and yet not hear)
He sp^akes, but she (even whilst his lips wa^ b^eaking
Their words) with hers, did stop his lips from speaking
When thrice three Suns had now almost, out-worne
The rare solemnities, that did adorn
These princely nuptials, and had made report
Grow something sparing in the Arcadian Court,
Argalus, whose endeavors were addressed,
To practice what might please Parthenia best,
Resolved to leave Kalanders house, and crown
Parthenia sole Commandresse of her own.
Long was it, ere Kalanders liberal ear
Could be unlocked; It had no power to hear
The word, Farewell; S^ill Argalus entreated,
And framed excuses; which, he soon defeated;
But as the stout Alcides did casheire
One rising head, another would appear,
Even so, whilst his ingenious love did smother
One cause of parting, he would find another.
Kalander thus at last, (being ouerwrought
With words, which importunity had taught
Inexorable Argalus) was feign
To yield, what he so long gainsaid, in vain;
It Is now concluded, Argalus must go,
But yet Kalander must not leave them so;
There is no parting, till the aged sire
Shall warm his fingers, by Partheniaes fire;
Parthenia sues; Kalander must not rest,
Till he become Partheniaes promised guest.
The morrow next, when Titans early ray
Had given fair earnest of a fairer Day;
And, with his trembling beams, had repossest
The eyes of mortals, newly roused from rest,
They left Kalanders Castle, and that night,
Arrived they at the Palace of delight,
(For so 'twas called) it was a goodly seat,
Well chosen; not capatious, as neat;
Yet was it large enough, to entertain
A potent Prince with all his Princely train;
It seemed a Center to a Park, welstor'd
With Dear; whose well thriuen bounty did afford
Continual pleasure, and delight; nay what,
That earth calls good, this Seat afforded not?
The impatient Falkner here may learn to say
Forgotten prayers, and bless him every day.
The patient Angler, here may tire his wish;
And (if he please) may swear, and yet catch fish.
The sneaking Fouler, may go boldly on,
And never want sport until his powder's done.
And to conclude, there was no stint, no measure
To the old man's profit, or the young man's pleasure:
Thither this night the nuptial troop is gone;
And now Parthenia's welcome to her own:
But would ye hear what entertainment past?
Conceive it rather; for my quill would wast
The vnthriuing stock of my bespoken time,
While such free bounty cannot stand with rhyme:
But that, which most did season, and imbellish
Their choice delights, and gave the truest relish
To their b^st mirth, and pleasures; was to see
With what a sweet conjugiall harmony
All things were carried: Every word did prove
To add some acquisition to their love;
So one they were, that none couldiusty say,
Which of them ruled, or whether did obey;
He ruled; because she would obey, and she
In thus obeying, ruled as well as he:
What pleased him, would need no other cause,
To please her to, but only his applaus^;
A happy pair! whose double life, but one,
Made one life double; and the single, none.
Thus when the unconstant Lady of the night
Had changed her sharpened horns, for an orb of light,
Kalander (whose occasions grew too strong,
And may not be dispensed withal too long)
Takes leave, and (being equal heavy hearted
With sad Parthenia for his have) departed.
But Argalus (who never yet could own
Himself with more advantage then alone)
And fair Parthenia (whose well pleased desire
Hopes nothing else, if Argalus be by her)
Need not the help of any, to augment
The better joys of their retired content:
Sometimes the curious garden would inuire
Their gentle paces, to her proud deligh;
Sometimes the welstor'd Park would change their pleasure,
And tender to her view, her light ^oot treasure;
Where th'vnmolested Herd would seem to (...),
And crave a death at fair Parthenia's hand.
Sometimes their steps would clime the ambit^us Tower,
From whose aspiring top they might discover
A little commonwealth of land, which none
But Argalus durst challenge as his own.
Sometimes (for change of pleasure) he would read
Selected stories, whilst her (...) would seed
Upon his lips, and now and then a kiss
Would interpose, like a parenthesis
Between their semicircled arms, enclosed;
( O what dull spirit could be indisposed
To read such lines!) and whilst upon the book
His eyes were fixed her pleased eyes would look
Upon the graceful Reader, and epsy
A story far more pleasing in his eye.
Upon a day, as they were closely seated;
Her cares a trending, whilst his lips repeated
A story, treating the renowned adventures
And famous a^s of great Alcides; enters
A Messenger, whose countenance did bewray
A have too serious, to admit delay;
His hand presents him letters, which did bring
Their sealed errand from the Arcadian King;
Whereat Parthenia rose, and stepped aside;
Her thoughts were troubled; ever as she eyed
The Messenger, her color comes and goes;
Parthenia fears; and yet Parthenia knows
Not what to fear; Her jealous heart knows how
To fear an Evil, because it fears to know;
And as he read the lines her eye was fixed
Upon his eye, which seemed to strive betwixt
A thousand thwarting passions: Once he cast
His eye on hers; and finding hers so fast
On his, he blushed; she blushed; both blushed together,
Because they blushed for what, unknown to either.
The letter being read (and having kissed
Basilius name) he speedily dismissed
The messenger; with promise to obey
Basilius just commands, without delay.
That done; he took Pathenia by the hand,
His dear Parthenia, by the trembling hand;
And to her greedy eye he straight presents
The Paper, ballac'd with it is sad contents:
Parthenia, with a fearful slownesse took it;
And with a fearful have did ouerlooke it:
Her face being blanched with the pallide signs
Of what she feared too soon, she read these lines.
Basilius Rex.
Whereas the famous and victorious name
Of great Amphialus, makes the trumpe of Fame
Breathe nothing but his conquests and renown;
Whose lawless actions fortune strives to crown
(In spite of Justice) with a Victors merit,
Respecting more the greatness of his spirit,
Then justness of his cause, to the dishonor
Of virtue, and all such as wa^te upon her.
And furthermore; whereas his power is known
T'oppugne the welfare of our State and Crown,
With strong rebell^on, to the high advancement
Of his disloyal glory, and inhancement
Of his perfidious name, the great increase
Of factions, and disturbance of our peace.
Likewise, where as his high prevailing hand
(Against the force whereof no flesh can stand)
Could never he equaled yei, much less overcome,
But with loud triumph, still does carry home
The spoils of our lost honor, to the fame
Of his rebellious glory, and our shame.
We therefore in our Princely care, perpending
The serious premises, and much depending,
On your known courage, have selected you
To stand our Champion royal, and renew
Our wasted honor, with your sword and lance,
In equal Duel; Thus you shall advance
The glorious pitch of your renowned name,
With the brave purchase of eternal fame:
In this you shall revive our dying glory,
And live the subject of this ages story,
(Which shall be read tili time shall have an end)
And tie Basilius your perpetual friend.
To our right trusty and noble kinsman Argalus.
But as she read, a tear did trickle down
Upon the lines, as if it meant to drown
Th'vnwelcome message, and at length she said;
Ah me! my Argalus was it this you made
Such have to answer? did that answer need
To be returned with so great a speed?
Can you, oh can you be so quickly won,
To leave your poor Parthenia, and be gone?
To whom resolved Argalus ( whose eye
Was fixed upon his honor) made reply;
My dear Parthenia; were it to obtain
The vnsumm'd wealth of Pluto; or to gain
The sovereignty of the earth, without the expense
Of blood or sweat, without the least pretense
Of danger, my ambition would despise
The easy conquest of so great a prize,
If purchased by thy discontent, or by
The poorest tear that trickles from thine eye;
But to recall my promise, or forsake
That resolution honor bid me make
In this behalf; or to betray that trust
Reposed in me, the gods would be unjust,
(And not themselves) if they should but command
Or urge me, with an ouerswaying hand.
My dear Parthenia; Let no false suggestion
Abuse thy passion, or presume to question
My dearest love; Though honor bids us part,
Yet honor can not rob thee, of my heart:
Honor, that calls me with her loud alarmes,
Will bring me back, with Triumph, to thine arms;
So said; the sad Parthenia, (whose tears
Are turned Lieutenants to her tongue) forbeares
To tempt her language: Griefs, that are but sm^ll,
Can speak, when great ones cannot vent at all:
But tender hearted Argalus (to whom
Such silence speaks too loud) forsook the room;
And, with a breast, as full of pensive care,
As honor, gave directions to prepare
His warlike Steed, his Martial attire
And all things, such employment does require.
And here O thou, thou great supreme protectresse
Of bolder spirits, and the sole directresse
Of lofty flying quills, which shall derive
To after times, what glorious swords acchiue;
And make the actions of heroic spirits
Perpetuate, and crown their names their merits;
Illustrious Clio: Aid me, and inspire
My ragged rimes, with thy diviner fire;
Teach me to raise my style, and to attain
A pitch, that may transcend the vulgars strain;
Reach me a quill, rent from an Eagles wing;
And let my Incke be blood; that I may sing
Death to the life: let him; that reads, expound
Each dash, a sword; and every word, a wound,
By this, the Champion royal had put on
His martial weeds; and hasting to be gone,
The poor Parthenia, whose cold (...), past:
(Like those in Agues) now does burn as fast:
She leaves the lonely room; and coming out,
She finds her Argulus, enclosed about
With glittering walls of steel, apparelled round
In his bright arms, (whom she had ^ather found
Locked up in here is) and wanting nothing now,
But what her lips could not (poor soul) allow,
Without sea of tears, her last farewell;
She ran unto him; and wept; and, weeping fell
Upon her knees; she claspt him by the arm,
And looking up, she thus began to charm;
My Argalus; my Argalus: my dear,
And will thou go, and leave Parthenia here?
VVilt thou forsake me then? And can these tears
Not intercede betwixt thy deafned ^ares,
And my sad suit? Can thou, o can thou go,
And leave thy poor distressed Parthenia so?
Parthenia sues; Parthenia does implore;
Parthenia begges, that never begged before;
Remember, O remember you are, now,
Under the power of a sacred vow:
Honor must stoop to vows, which once being cracked,
You cannot do an honorable act:
I have a Right unto you; you are mine;
I have that Interest, which I Will never resign,
Till death: I Will never hazard to forgo
My whole estate of happiness, at one throw,
No, no, I will not: I will hold thee fast
In spite of Honor and her nine days blast;
Your former acts have given sufficient proof
To the wide world; your valor's known enough
Without a further trial: There Is enough
To lose their lives (less worthy) besides you;
'Twas then a time for arms, when you had none,
None other life to venture, but your own;
Excuse me then, that only do endeavor
To hold mine own; which now I must, or never;
Mine, mine you are, and you can undertake
No danger, but (...) must partake;
Shall your Parthenia be endangered then?
Parthenia shall be present, even when
The strokes fall thickest; and Parthenia shall
Suffer what ere to Argalus may befall;
Parthenia, in your greatest pains, shall smart;
Your blood shall trickle from Parthenia's heart:
Can prayers obtain no place? By this dear hand,
The sacred pledge of our coniugiall band;
By all the pleasures of our dearest love;
By heaven, and all the heavenly powers above;
Or if those motives cannot find a room,
Yet by the tender fruit, that in my womb
Begins to budde, or if ought else appear
To thy best thoughts more precious or more dear,
By that, forsake me not, although the rest
Prevail not. Grant this first, this last request:
To whom the broken hearted Argalus,
VVearied, but not overcome, made answer thus;
My dear Parthenia; Thy desires never
Gainesaid my will, till now: Do not persevere
To crave that boon, I cannot grant: forbear
To urge me: Resolution has no ear:
Weep not ( my Joy:) Let not those drops of thine,
That trickle from so fair an eye, divine
A foul success; Cheer up; A smile, or two
Would make me half a Conqueror, ere I go:
Shine forth; and let no (...) benight
The glorious luster of so fair a light;
Doubt not my life: The justness of my cause,
That brings me on, will quite me with applause;
Fear not, that such a blessing, such a wife
Was e're intended for so short a life.
Expect my safe return; as quick, as glorious;
My Genius tells me, I shall (...), victorious.
So said, as if that passion had forgot
Her mother tongue, her tongue replied not:
But, like to one, new stricken with the thunder,
She stood betwixt (...), fear, and wonder:
His lips took leave, and as his arms surrounded
Her feeble wast, she straight fell down, and swounded;
But Argalus, transported with the tide
And tyranny of honor, could abide
No longer stay; He (...) her to the guard
Of her own women; left her, and repaired
Unto the Camp; wherein, he spent some days,
In parley, with Amphialus; and assayes,
By all perswasine means, to make him yield
To just demands, and not to stain the field
With needless blood; But finding him unapt
For peaceful counsel (being strongly rapt
With his own fame) and scorning to afford
His ear to any language, but the sword,
He ceased t'aduise him; and (enforced to try
A rougher Dialect) wrote him this defy.
Renowned Amphialus,
If strong persuasions, backed with reasons could
Bin honored with your ear; your wisdom would,
In yielding to so fair a peace, have won
As ample glory, (...) your sword has done.
You should have conquered souls where now, at most,
You can subdue but bodies, that have lost
The power to resist: But since my suit,
Sown on so barren (...), can find no fruit;
Receive a mortal challenge, from a hand,
Whose justice takes a glory to withstand
So foul a cause, and labors to subdue
Your heedlesse errors, whilst it honors you.
Compose you then, to make a preparation,
According to your noble wonted fashion;
And think not slight, of never so weak an arm,
That strikes, when Justice strikes up her alarm.
Argalus.
No sooner had he read it, but his pen,
With noble speed, returned these lines again.
Much more renowned Argalus,
Your faithful servant, whose victorlous brow
Was never daunted yet, is daunted now,
By your brave courtesy, being stricken dumb
With your rare worth, and fairly overcome;
Yet doubting not the justness of my Cause
(That Is over ruled by the sacred laws
Of dearest love) will give my sword the power,
Even to maintain it, to the latest hour.
I shall expect your coming in the (...),
Where, with a heart, (not poisoned with the (...)
Or gall of (...)) with my dearest blood,
Your servant shall be ready to make good
His just designs; assured of no less
Then treble same, if crowned with (...);
If not, There Is no dishonor can accrue,
In being conquered, and overcome by you,
(...):
Soon after; Argalus, (whose blood did boil
To be in action) comes into the Isle;
Clad in white (...), (...), and strangely dressed
With knots of woman's hair, which from his crest
Hung dangling down; (...), with their bountious treasure,
Orespred his Corslet in a liberal measure;
His curious furniture was fashioned out,
Like to a flying Eagle, round about
Beset with plumes; whose crooked beak (being cast
Into a costly (...)) was made fast
To th'saddle bow: Her spredden train did cover
His crooper, whilst the trappers seemed to houer
Like wings; that, to the fixed (...) eye,
As the Horse pranc'd, the Eagle seemed to fly;
Upon his arm, (his threatening arm) he wore
A sleeue, all curiously embroydred ore
With bleeding (...), which fair Parthenia made,
(In those cross times, when fortune so betrayed
Their secret love, and with a smiling frown
(...) their false hopes) as copies of her own;
Upon his shield (for his device) he set
Two neighbring Palms whose budding branches met
And twined together; the obscure Imprese
Imported this, Thus (...), as these:
His Horse was of a fiery Sorrel: Black
His maine, his feet, his tail; on his proud back,
A coaleblacke List: His nostrells, open wide,
Breathed war, before his sparkling eye descryde
An enemy to encounter; up by turns,
He lifts his hasty hoofes, as if he scorns
The earth, or if his tabring feet had found
Away, to go, and yet never change the ground.
By this Amphialus (who all this while
Thought minutes years) was landed in the Isle,
In all respects provided, to afford
As bountious intertainment, as the sword
And Lance could give: And at the Trumpets sound,
Their Steeds, (that needed not a (...) to wound
Their bleeding flanks) both start, and with smooth running
Their (...) declining with unshaken cunning
Performed their masters will, with angry speed;
But Argalus his well instructed Steed
Being hot, and full of courage (fiercely led
By his own pride) pressed in his prouder head,
The which when stout Amphialus espide,
(Well knowing it unsafe to give his side)
Pressed likewise in; so that both men, and horse
Shouldring each (...), with a double force
Fell to the ground. But by accustomed skill,
And help of Fortunes hand, that succors still
Bold spirits, shunned the danger of the fall,
And had (less feared then hurt) no harm at.
They rose, drew forth their swords; which now begun
To do what their left staves had lest undone.
Have ye beheld a Leaguer? In what sort
The deep mouthed Cannon plays upon the Fort,
And how by peecemeales it does batter down
The yielding walls of the besieged town?
Even so their swords (whose often repeated blows
Could find no patience yet to interpose
A breathing respite) with redoubled strength
So hewed their proofelesse armours, that at length
Their failing trust began to prove unsound,
And piece by piece, they dropped upon the ground,
Trusting their bodies to the bare defense
Of virtue, and unarmed innocence.
Such deadly blows were dealt, and such (...),
That Mars himself stood ravished and affrighted
To see the cruel Combat: Every blow
Did act two parts; both (...) and guarded too
At selfsame (...). So incomparable
Their skillful quickness was, that none was able
To say (although their watchful eyes attended
The strokes) who made the blow, or who defended.
Long was it ere their equal skill and force
Of arms could show a better, or a worse.
Neither prevailed as yet; yet both excelled
In not prevailing. Never eye beheld
More equal ods: No wound as yet could show
A drop of wasted blood, yet every blow
Was full of death. When skillful Gamesters play,
The Christmas box gains often more then they.
At length the sword of Argalus (that never
Thirsted so long in vain till now; nor ever
(...) victory doubtful for so long a space)
Fastened a wound on the disarmed face
Of stout Amphialus, who now does feel
The equal temper of his enemies steel,
Yet was not daunted, by the blow received,
Nor of his wonted courage so breau'd,
As by the saucy daring of one thrust
To faint or yield: rather a brave distrust
Of his old worth, called a new anger on,
And fired him to a sudden talion:
When as directed by some fate-blest charm
He made a second stroke that pierced the arm
Of haughty Argalus, and made him know
Amphialus would rather dye then owe.
Argalus blush't for want of blood. Expecting
A quick revenge, which was not long effecting;
For whilst Amphialus (whose hopes inflamed
His tyrannous thoughts with conquest, and proclaimed
Undoubted victory) heapt his strokes so fast,
As if each blow had scorned to be the last.
The watchful Argalus (whose nimble eye
Disposed his time, in only putting by)
Put home a thrust, (his right foot coming in)
And pierced his Navel; that the wound had bin
No less then death, if Fortune, (that can turn
A mischief to advantage) had for borne
To show a miracle; for with that blow,
Amphialus last made, his arm had so
O, estrucke it self; that sideward to the ground
He fell; and falling, he received that wound
Which (had he stood) had entered in, point blancke,
But, falling, only grazed upon his flancke.
Being down, brave Argalus his threatening sword
Bids yield; Amphialus answering not a word,
(As one, whose mighty spirit did disdain
A life of alms) but striving to regaine
His legs, and honor, Argalus let drive,
With all the strength, a wounded arm could give,
Upon his head; but his hurt arm (not able
To do him present service, answerable
To his desires) let his weapon fall;
With that, Amphialus (though daz'd withal)
Arose; but Argalus ran in, and graspt
((...) closed together) with him; where, both claspt
And gripped each in th'unfriendly arms of either;
A while they grappled; grappling, fell together,
And on the ground, with equal fortune strove;
Some time (...) was got above,
And sometimes Argalus; Both jointly vowed
(...); Both wallowed in their mingled blood,
Both bleeding fresh: Now, Argalus bids yield.
And now, Amphialus: Both would win the field,
Yet neither could; At last, by free consent,
They rose; and to their breathed swords they went;
The Combat's now renewed, both laying on,
As if the fight had been but new begone.
New wounds assuage the smarting of the old,
And warm blood entermingles with the cold.
But Argalus (whose wounded arm had lost
More blood, then all his body could almost
Supply; and like an (...), that expends
So long as he has either stock, or friends)
Bled more then his spent Fountains could make good
His spirit could give courage, but not blood.
As when two wealthy Clyents, that wax old
In suit, (whose learned council can uphold
And glaze the cause alike, on either side)
During the time their tearmly golden tide
Shall flow alike, from both, it is hard to say
Who prospers best, or who shall get the Day.
(...) he, whose water first shall cease to flow,
And ebb so long, till it shall ebb too low.
His cause, (though richly laden to the brincke,
With right) shall strike upon the bar and sincke,
And then (...) easy Council may unfold
The doubt; The question's ended, with the gold.
Even so our Combatants, the (...) their blood
Was equal (...); the Cause seemed equal good,
The Victory equal; equal was their arms;
Their Hopes were equal: (...) was their harms.
But when poor Argalus his wasting blood
Ebbed in his veins, (although it made a flood
A (...) flood, in the ungrateful field)
His cause, his strength, (but not his heart) must yield:
Thus wounded Argalus the more he failed,
The more, the proud Amphialus prevailed:
With that, Amphialus (whose noble strife
Was but to purchase honor, and not life)
Perceiving what advantage, in the fight,
He gained, and the valor of the Knight,
Became his suitor, that himself would please
To pity himself, and let the Combat cease;
Which noble Argalus (that never used
In honor to part stakes) with thanks, refused:
(Like to a lucklesse gamester; who, the more
He loses, is (...) willing to give of(...))
And filling up his empty veins, with spite,
Begins to sum his forces, and unite
His broken strength, and (like a Lamp that makes
The greatest blaze at going out) he takes
His sword in both his hands; and, at a blow,
Cleft armor, shield, and arm, (...), in two;
But now enraged Amphialus forgets
All pity; and, trusting to his Cards, he sets
That stock of courage, treasured in his breast,
Making his whole estate of (...), his Rest;
And vies such blows, as Arg'lus could not see
Without his loss of life: so thundered he
Upon his wounded body, that each wound
Seemed like an open Sluice of blood, that found
No hand to stop it, till the doleful cry.
Of a most beauteous Lady (who well nie
Had run her self to death) restrained his arm
(Perchance too late) from doing further harm.
It was the fair Parthenia, who that night
Had dreamed, she saw her husband in that plight
She now had found him: Fear and love together,
Gave her no rest, till they had brought her hither:
The nature of her fear did now begin
T'expell the fear of Nature; stepping in,
Between their pointing swords, she prostrate lay
Before their blood-bed abbled feet, to say
She knew not what; for as her lips would strive
To be delivered, a deep sigh would drive
The abortiue issue of her language forth;
Which, borne untimely, perished in the birth;
And if her sighs would give her (...) to vent it,
O then a tear would trickle, and prevent it;
But (...) the wind of her loud sighs had laid
The (...) of her tears, she sobb'd, and said:
O wretched eyes of mine! O wailfull sight!
O day of darkness! O eternal night!
And there (...) stopped; her eyes being fixed upon
Amphialus; she sighed, and thus went on:
My Lord,
It Is said you love: Then, by that sacred power
Of love, as you would (...) mercy in the hour
Of greatest misery, leave off; and sheathe
Your bloody sword: or else if naught but death
May slake your anger, O let mine, let mine
Be a sufficient offering at the Shrine
Of your appeased thoughts; or, if you thirst
For Argalus (...) life, then take mine first:
Or, if for noble blood you seek, if so
Accept of mine; my blood is noble too,
And worth the spilling: Even for her dear sake,
Your tender soul affects, awake, awake,
Your noble mercy: Grant, I care not whether;
Let me dye first; or, kill us both together.
With that Amphialus was about (...) speak,
(...) Argalus (whose heart (...) almost (...)
To hear Partheniaes words) (...) this (...).
(...), ah Parthenia; Then must I
(...) bought and sold for tears? Is my condition
So poor, I cannot (...), but by petition?
So said; He (...) aside (for fear, by chance,
The fury of some misguided blow may (...)
And touch Parthenia) and, filled with high (...),
Would have (...) the Combat fresh again.
But now, Amphialus was charmed; his hand
(...) no sufficient warrant to withstand
Parthenia's suit, from whose fair eyes there came
Such precious tears, in so beloved a name;
His eyes grew tender, and his melting heart
Was overcome; his very soul did smart;
He (...) not, but kept him at a distance,
And (putting by some blows) made no resistance.
But what can long endure? Lamps wanting oil,
Must out at last, although they blaze a while;
Trees wanting Sap, must wither; strength and beauty
Can claim no privilege to quit that duty
They owe to Time and Change; but like a Vine
(The unsound supporters failing) must decline:
Poor Argalus grows (...), and must give over
To strike; his feeble arm can strike no more;
And natures (...)'d Bailey now destraines
His blood, for that small debt that yet remains
(...); His arm that cannot use the point,
Now (...) upon the pomell; every joint
Disclaimes their idle sinews; and his eye
Begins to double every object by;
Nothing appears the same it was; the ground,
And all thereon does seem to dance the round.
His legs grow faint; and thinking to sit down,
He mist his Chair, and (...) into a swoune.
With that Amphialus and Parthenia ran,
Ran in with have, Amphialus (...)
To loose his Helmet, whilst her busy palm
Chafed his cold Temples, and (distilling Balm
Into his wounds) her hasty fingers tore
Her linen sleeves, and Partlet that she wore,
No wipe the tear mixed blood away, and wrap
His wounds withal; upon her panting lap
She laid his liuelesse head, and (wanting bands
To bind the bloody clothes) her nimble hands
(As if it were ordained for that end,
And therefore made so long) did freely rend
Her dainty hair, by handfuls from her head;
But as she wrapped the wounds, her eyes would shed
And wet the rags so much, that she was feign
(...) sighs and sobs to dry it up again.
Thus half distracted with her griefs and fears,
These words she enter mingles with her tears;
Distressed Parthenia! Into what estate
Has fortune, and the direful hand of Fate
Driven thy perplexed soul? O thou, O thou,
That were the president of all joys, but now;
Now turned the example of all misery,
For torments worse then death to practice by!
How less then nothing art thou? and how more
Then miserable! Thou that were before
All Ladies of the earth for happiness
But very now; (ah me) now, nothing less!
O angry heavens; what has Parthenia done,
To be thus plagued, or why not plagued alone
If guilty? what shall poor Parthenia do?
To whom shall she complain? alas! or who
Shall give relief? nay who can give relief
To her, that hopes for succor from her grief?
O death! Must we be parted then? for ever?
And never meet again? what, never? never?
Or shall Parthenia now be so unkind,
Te leave her Argalus, and stay behind?
No, no, my dearest Argalus, make room,
(There Is room enough in heaven) I come, I come.
Who ever saw a dying coal of fire,
Lurk in warm embers (till some breath inspire
A forced reuiuall) how obscure it lies;
And being blown, glimmers a while, and dies?
So Argalus, to whom Parthenia's breath
Giving new life, (a life in spite of death)
Recalled him from his death-resembling trance;
Who from his panting Pillow did advance
His feeble head; and looking up, he made
Hard shift to sorce a language, and thus said;
My dear Parthenia: Now my glass is run; Argalus last speech.

The Tapours tell me that the Play is done;
My days are summed; Death seizes on my heart;
Alas! the time is come, and we must part:
Yet by my better hopes; grimme death does bring
No grief to Argalus, no other sting
But this, that I must leave thee, even before
My grateful actions can cross the score
Of thy dear merits:
But since it pleases him, whose wisdom still
Disposes all things by his better will,
Depend upon his goodness, and rely
Upon his pleasure, not inquiring why:
And trust that one day we shall meet, and then
Enjoy each other, never to part again:
Mean while live happy: Let Parthenia make
No doubt, but bessed Argalus shall partake
In all her joys on earth, which shall increase
His joys in heaven, and souls eternal Peace.
Love well the dear remembrance of thy true
And faithful Argalus; let no thought renew
My last disgrace; think not the hand of Fate
Made me unworthy, though unfortunate.
And as he spoke that word, his lips did vent
A sigh, whose vio'lence h^d well nigh rent
His heart in twain; and when a pa^ting kiss
H^d given him earnest of appoaching bliss,
He snatch his sword into his hand and cried;
O death! thou art the Conqueror; and dyed.
With that; Parthenia, whose liuelihood was founded
Upon his life, bowed down her head and swounded;
But grief, that (like a Lion) loves to play
Before it kills, gave death a longer day;
Else had Parthenia died, since death deprived
Him of his life, in whose dear life she lived.
But ah! Parthenia's sorrow was too deep,
Too too unruly, to be lulled asleep
By ought but Death: She startles from her swound;
And nimbly rising from the loathed ground,
Kneeles down; and lays her trembling hand upon
His lukewarm lips, but finding his breath gone,
Grief plays the Tyrant; fierce destruction drives her
She knows not where; unbounded (...) depriucs her
Of sense and language; here and there she goes,
Not knowing what to do; nor what she does;
Sometimes her fair misguided hand would tear
Her beauteous face; sometimes, her bountious hair,
As if their use could stand her in no stead,
Since her beloved Argalus was dead.
But now Amphialus (that all this space
Stood like an Idol, fastened to his place;
Where with a world of tears, he did bemoane
The deed, that his unlucky hands had done)
Well knowing; that his words would aggrauate,
Not ease the misery of her woeful state,
Spoke not, but caused her women that came with her
To urge her to the Ferrie; where together
With her dead Argalus, she' embrackt; from whom
She would not part: no sooner was she come
To the other shore, but all the funeral state
Of military discipline did wait
Upon the Corpse, whilst troops of trickling eyes
Fore-ran the well performed solemnities:
The Martial Trumpet breathed her doleful sound,
Whilst others traild their Ensigns on the ground;
Thus was the most lamented Corpse conuaid,
Upon a Chariot, lined, and ouerlaid
With Sables, to his house; a house, then night
More black, no more the Palace of Delight;
Where now we leave him to receive the Crown
Prepared for virtue, and deserved renown;
Where now we leave him to be full possessed
Of endless peace, and everlasting Rest.
But who shall comfort poor Parthenia now?
What Oratory can prevail? or how
Can counsel choose but blush to undergo
So vain task, and be contemned too?
May Counsel move a heart, whose best (...)
Consists in desperate yielding to a grief?
O: what advice can relish in her ears,
That weeps, and takes a pleasure in her tears?
Readers, forbear: sorrows that are lamented,
Are but exulcerated, but augmented;
Forbear attempt, where there is no preuayling;
A desperate grief grows stronger by bewaying.
Leave her to time and fortune: let your eyes
No longer prye into her miseries;
True mourners love to be beheld of none;
Who truly grieves, desire to grieve alone.
But now our bloodhound Muse must draw, and track
Amphialus, and bring the Murderer back
To a new Combat: Where if fortune please
To crown our Tragic Scene, and to appease
The crying blood of Argalus, with blood;
Our better rellisht story (making good
Your hopeful expectations) shall besriend
The tears of our Parthenia, and end.
Soon as the stout Amphialus had out worn
The danger of his wounds, and made return
Into the Martial Camp; there, to maintainc
His new got honor, and to entertain
Aggrieued challengers, that shall demand,
O^ seek for satisfaction from his hand;
An armed Knight came praunsing over the plain,
D^nouncing watre, and breathing forth disdain.
Four dam' sells vsherd him, in sable weeds;
And four came after, all on mourning Steedes;
His curious Armor was so painted over
With lively sh^dowes, that you might discover
The image of a gaping Sepulcher;
About the which, were scattered here and there
Some dead men's bones: His horse was black as let;
His furniture was round about beset
With branches, slipped from the sad Cypress tree;
His Bases (reaching far below the knee)
Embroydred were with worms: upon his shield,
For his lmprese, he had a beauteous child,
Whose body had two heads; whereof the the one
Appeared quite dead; the the other (drawing on)
Did seem to gasp for breath; and underneath,
This Motto was subscribed, From death, by death.
Thus armed to point, he sent his bold defy.
TO Amphialus, who sent as quick replye.
Forthwith, being summoned by the Trumpets found,
They start; but brave Amphialus, that sound,
The Knight had mist his Rest, (as yet not met)
Scorning to take advantage, would not let
His Lance descend, nor (bravely passing by)
Encounter his befriended enemy.
Whereat the angry Knight (not apt to brook
Such unsupportable mishappe forsook
His white mouthed Steed; throwing his L^nce aside,
(Which too too partial fortune had denide
A fair success) drew forth his glittering sword;
Whereat Amphialus lighted (who abhorred
A conquest merely by advantage gained,
Esteeming it but robbed, and not obtained)
Drew forth his sword; and, for a little space,
Their strokes contended with an equal pace,
And fierceness: He did more discover
A bravery, then anger; whilst the other
Bewrayed more spleen, then either skill, or strength,
To manage it: (...), at length,
With more then wonted ease, did b^tter so
His ill defended armor, that each blow,
Opened a door^, for death to enter in;
And now the noble Conqueror does begin
To hate so poor a conquest, and disdained
To take a life, so easily obtained.
And moved with pity, (stepping back) he staid
His unresisted violence, and said,
Sir Knight, contest no more; but take the peace
Of your own passion; Let the Combat cease,
Seek not your causlesse ruin; Turn your arm
(Better imployd) against such, as wish you harm.
Husband your life, before it be too late,
Fall not by him, that never deserved your hate.
To whom, the Knight returned these words again,
Thou lie, false Traitor; and I here disdain
Both words and mercy, with a base defy,
And to thy throat, my sword shall turn the lie.
To whom Amphialus: uncivil Knight,
Courageous in nothing, but in spite,
And base discourtesie; thou soon shall know,
Whether thy tongue betrays thy heart or no.
And as he spoke, he gave him such a wound
Upon the neck, as struck him to the ground.
And, with the fall, his sword (that now de^y de
All mercy) deeply pierced into his side;
That done; he loosed his Helmet, with intent,
To make his ouerlauish tongue repent
Of those base words, he had so basely said,
Or ^lse, to crop him shor^er, by the head.
Who ^uer s^w the illustrious eye of no^e
(New broken from a gloomy cloud) and down
His earth rejoicing glory, and d^play
His golden beams upon the sons of Day:
Even so, the Helmet being gone, a fair
And costly treasure of vnbraided hair
O'respred the shoulders of the vanquished Knight,
Whose, now discovered visage (in despite
Of neighboring death) did witness and proclaim
A sovereign beauty in Parthenia's name,
And she it was indeed; see how she lies
Smiling on death, as it her blessed eyes
(Blessed in their best desire^) had espied
His fice already, for whose fake she died.
The Lillies, and the Roses (that while (...)
Strove in her Cheeks, till they compounded there)
Have broke their truce, and freshly fallen to blows;
Behold; the Lilly has overcome the Rose.
Her Alablaster neck (that did ou^goe
The Doves in whi^ ness^; or the new fallen snow)
Was stained with blood, as if the red did se^ke
Pro^tion there, being banished from her che^ke:
So full of ^weetnesse was her dying face,
That death had not the power to displace
Her native beauti^; only by translation,
Molded, and clothed it in a newer fashion.
But now Amphialus (in whom grief and shame
Of this unlucky victory, did claim
An eq^ll interest) prostrate on the earth,
Accursed his swo^d, his arm, his hour of birth;
Casting his Helmet, and his gauntlet by,
H^s undissembled tears did testify,
What words could not: But finding her estate
More apt for help, then grief, (though both too late)
Crept on his knees, and begging pardon of her,
His hands (his often cursed hands) did proffer
Their needless help, and with his life to show
What honor a devoted heart could do.
Whereto Parthenia (whose expiring breath
G^ue speedy signs of a desired death)
Turning her fixed (but often recalled eyes)
Upon Amphialus, faintly thus replies:
Sir you have done enough; and I require Parthenia's last speech.

No more; Your hands have done, what I desire;
What I expect; and if against your will,
The better; So (...) wish your favors still;
Yet one thing more, (if enemies may sue)
I crave, which is, To be untouched by you;
And as for Honor, all that I demand
Is not to (...) honor from your hand.
No, no; 'twas no such bargain made; That he
Whose hands had killed my Argalus, should help me;
Your hands have done enough; I crave no more;
And for the deed sake, I forgive the Doer;
What then remains? but that I go to rest
With Argalus, and to be repossest
Of him; with him for ever to abide,
E're since whose death, I have so often died.
And there she fainted (even as if the Clock
Of death had given a warning, e're it struck)
But foone returning to her self again;
Welcome sweet death, said she, whose minutes pain,
Shall crown this soul with everlasting pleasure;
Come, come, and welcome; I attend thy leisure:
Delay me not; O do me not that wrong,
My A^galus will chide, I stay so long;
O now I fe^le the Gordian-knotted bands,
Of life untied; O heavens! into your hands,
I recommend my better part with trust,
To find you much more merciful, then just;
(Yet truly just withal) O life, O death,
I call you both to witness, that this breath
Never drew a dram of comfort, since that hour
My A^galus dyed: O thou eternal power,
Shroud all my faul^s beneath the milkewhite veil
Of thy dear mercy; and when this tongue shall fail
To speak, O then:
And as she spoke (O then) O then she left
To spe^ke; ^d, being suddenly bereft
Of words, the fatal S^ster did divide
Her slender twine of life, and so she dyed.
So dyed Parthenia; in whose closed ey^s
The world of beauty and perfection ly^s
Locked up by Angels (as a thing diuin^)
From mortal ey^s, the whilst her vert^es shine
In perfect glory, in the throne of glory,
Leaving the world no Relic, but the story
Of earths perfection, for the mouth of Fame
To confecrate to her eternal (...):
Which shall survive, (if (...) a^ d^uine)
(Though not in these poor monuments of mine)
To the end of days; and, by th^se looser ^imes,
Shall be d^liuer'd to succeeding times:
So long as beauty shall but find a friend,
Partheni^es lasting f^me shall neu^r end.
Till, to be truly virtuous, to be chaste,
Be held a sin, Partheniaes name shall last.
Thus when Amphialus had put out this Lamp,
This Lamp of hono^r, he forsook the Camp;
And, like a willing prisoner, was confinde
To the strict limits of a troubled mind;
No Jury need b'impanell'd, or agreed
Upon the verdict; none, to att^st the deed;
None to gi^e sentence, in the Judgment hall;
Himself was witness, Jury, Judge, and all;
Where now we leave him, whilst we turn our eyes
Upon Partheniaes women, whose fierce cries
Enforce a helpl^sse audience. It is said,
When Troy was taken, such a cry was made.
One snatched Partheniaes sword, resolved to dye
Partheniaes death: another, rauing by,
Strove for the weapon; through which eager strife,
They both were hindered; and each lau'd a life:
Others, whom wis^r passion had taught how
To grieve at e^sier rates, did rudely throw
Their careless bodies on the purple floor;
Where, sprinkling dust upon their heads, they tore
Their tangled hair, and garments, drencht in tears:
And cried, as i^ Partheniaes blessed ears
Could hear the (...) of grief; such griefs as would
Return her from her glory, if they could;
(...) heart was turned a wardrobe of true passion,
Where griefs were cloa^hed in a several fashion;
Sometimes their sorrow would recall to view
Her virtue, chastnesse, sweetn^sse, and renew
Their wast^d p^ssions; and, oft-times, they bann'd
Themselves, for obeying her v^iust command.
And now by this, the mourn^ll Trumpe of Fame
(Grow e horse with very sorrow) did proclaim
And spr^d her doleful tidings, whilst all ears
And ey^s were filled with death, and sliding tears;
Pity and Sorrow, mixed with Admiration,
Becam^ the threefold subject of all passion;
Gri^ w^ther progress through all he^rts; and none
From the poor Cottage, to the princely Throne,
Could own a thought, whose best advice could borrow
The smallest respite from th'extreames of sorrow.
But all this while, Basilius princely breast,
As it commanded, so outgrieu'd the rest;
His share was treble: hearts of Kings are deep
And close; what once they entertain, they ke^pe
With violence: The violence of his passion
Admits no mean, as yet, no moderation;
But soon as grief had done her private rights
And dues to Honor; Honor (that delights
In public service, and can make the breath
Of sighs and sobs to triumph over death)
Called in solemnity, with all her train,
And military pomp, to entertain
Our welcome Mourners, whose slow paces tread
The paths of death; and, with sad triumph lead
The slumbring body, to that bed of rest,
Where nothing can disquiet, or molest
Her sacred ashes: There, intombed, lay
The valiant Argalus; and there, they say,
Ere since that time, the Arcadians, once a year,
Visit the ruins of their Sepulcher;
And, in memorial of their faithful loves,
There, built an Altar; where, two milk white D^ues
They yearly offer to the hallowed Fame
Of Argalus, and his Partheniaes name.
FINIS.
Hos ego versiculos.
LIke to the damask Rose you see,
Or like the blossom on the tree,
Or like the dainty flower of May,
Or like the Morning to the day,
Or like the Sun, or like the shade,
Or like the Gourd which Jonas had,
Even such is man whose thread is spunne,
Drawn out and cut, and so is done.
The Rose withers, the blossom blasteth;
The flower fades, the morning hastes;
The Sun sets; the shadow flies,
The Gourd consumes, and man he dies.
Like to the blaze of fond delight;
Or like a morning clear and bright;
Or like a frost, or like a shower,
Or like the pride of Babels Tower,
Or like the hour that guides the time,
Or like to beauty in her prime;
Even such is man, whose glory lends
His life a blaze or two, and ends.
Delights vanish; the morn over casts,
The frost breaks, the shower basteth,
The Tower falls, the flower spends,
The beauty fades, and man's life ends.
Finis.
Fr. Qu.
The Authors Dream.
MY sins are like the hairs upon my head,
And raise their Audit to as high a score:
In this they differ: these do daily shed;
But ah! my sins grow daily more and more.
If by my hairs thou number out my sins,
Heaven make me bald before the day begins.
2
My sins are like the sands upon the Shore,
Which every ebb lays open to the eye:
In this they differ: These are covered over
With every tide: My sins still open lie.
If thou will make my head a sea of tears,
O they will hide the sins of all my years.
3
My sins are like the Stars within the skies
In view, in number, even as bright as great;
In this they differ; These do set and rise;
But ah! my sins do rise but never set.
Shine Sun of glory, and my sins are gone
Like twinkling Stars before the rising Sun.
Finis.
Fr. Qu.

