VISIONS, OR, HELS KINGDOM, And the Worlds Follies and Abuses,

Strangely displaied by R. C. of the Inner Temple Gent.

Being the first fruits of a reformed life.

Long vadit, qui nunquam redit.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for Simon Burton at his Shop next the Mitre Tavern,
within Algate, 1640.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sr. Thomas Metham, OF Metham in the County of York
Knight.

Richard Croshawe dedicates these his first Fruits, as the real intentions of
a reformed life.

To the Students Of the Innes of Court.
GEentlemen, Matter is better than words. If you be noble, worthy, and
ingenuous, these many precipitations I here discover, need no other effect than
honest pity: but if these endowments of the mind be excluded, either by the
rashness of Youth (an ill Tutour); or by violent prodigality and
licentiousness, (a worse Disciple); My desire is, that my serious lightness,
may arrow-like pierce your Consciences, to an unfeigned repentance. The more you
are contristate, the less will be your sorrow; for to lament, is here to
rejoice: and such joy I wish may be accumulated on you, and on all those, that
either love goodness, or are estranged from it. The reason why I present this
Book in chief to you (after the interessed Dedication) is, because being my
self, of one of your Societies, my observation and experiment has made me
conjecture, that these two should never be unwelcome, Advice and Delight. The
first whereof, if my Book do not instruct, yet mine own deviation (still
known to many) may, seeing there is no stability in bubbling pleasure, nor no
true content without a religious return; so you have both precept and example.
And as for the latter, it is better wished than described. Read and judge.

The Honourer of your virtues, Richard Croshaw.

To the Reader.
REader, I am no Libeller, what is here written, is written for thy
instruction, and not to detract from any man's worth. For I ingenuously protest,
there is not any one in particular living, that I intend either by this or
that: what I have done was for mine own recreation, and had not been now
published, but by entreaty. Excuse therefore the errors in it, since they
proceed from him that is full of error; and if thou meanest to live
contentedly, learn to live well; so shall thou find, that Hell is here only
described, that thou may avoid it; and the way set down of the Damned, to
show thee the path of Paradise.

Richard Croshawe.

The several Visions.
1. The Possessed Sergeant. 2. Death and her Dominion. 3. The last Judgment.
4. The Fool Amorous. 5. The World in its Interior. 6. Hell.
Errata.
page lin. error correct. 2 7 fomer former 16 2 shirts skirts 21 8 parching
patching 47 17 entered suited 102 6 not

VISIONS.
The first Vision: OR, The Possessed Sergeant.
VArious and inconstant is the life of Man: sometimes lifted up with the height
of prosperity, where he not only sees, but enjoyes all the pleasures of the
world. And by and by cast down into the gulf of misery, where he finds such
bitter fruits in the punishment of his ill governed ways, that there remains
not so much as a taste or relish of his fomer felicity. Thus has God weighed
out these two conditions, that none should presume there is any real
happiness but in him only, nor any obscure adversity, but by repentance may
bring us unto him. Such Meditations as these, was I mastered by, in a remote
and far Country: when I could not choose but fall into a serious
contemplation of mine own vanity; heartily desiring, that I might find out
some way, whereby I might lessen those calamities, which by custom were almost
grown hereditary. Night grew on, and sleep seeing me utterly destitute,
became herself a Friend; and in slumber made me conceive I was an Actor in
this Vision.

Methought.
Curiosity that stirs up all men to things rare and new, invited me one
Morning to behold the several imbellishments of a famous Monastery; whither I
was no sooner come, but I found the door shut, and began in my self to
censure the peoples devotion, who to that hour of day had neglected pious
duties. Yet least opinion might deceive me, I enquired of one that stood at the
Porch, what the reason might be, of that unaccustomed privacy? who telling me
that the religious men had excluded all others, that they themselves might
better endeavor to expel the spirit out of one possessed, increased my desire
to gain admission: which I had no sooner ruminated on, but I espied one of the
same Covent, with whom I had formerly gained some acquaintance, and to whom
with some earnestness I manifested the obligements I should owe him, if he
would admit me a sight so unfrequent. As Courtesy generally exceeds in all of
that Brotherhood, so in him it found a seat of eminency, who staying not to
dispute, or by feigned complements to declare the difficulty, made signs with
a pleasing gesture, that I should follow him; and with a Key, which he took
from his Girdle, opening a private Door, granted my request before he
promised it. But when I was got in, I could not tell whether with more safety,
I should postulate a dismission back, or resolve to stay, so full of horror
was the Object. In the Chancell on the floor lay a man of a most hideous
aspect, his apparel torn, hands bound, eyes staring, mouth extended, and feet
chained to the Rail about the Altar: sometimes starting up, and again
voluntarily flinging himself to the ground, yelling, shriking, and howling, as
if the universal doom of punishment for sin had been laid on him only. This
and the fear I was stricken in, made me partaker of his unexpressible
torture, and to cry out, O Lord! what is this? The Exorcist a holy Father, that
was diligent about him, made answer, It was a man possessed with an evil spirit,
and had hardly spoke, but the Tormentour took the word. The Conjurer, said
he, lies; this is not a Man possessed by a Devil, but a Devil possessed by a
Man. Discoursers take heed what you speak, for in questions and answers, you
rather bewray your ignorance, than knowledge. Understand that we Devils are
not (as I am now) in the Bodies of Sergeants, but by constraint, and against
our wills; and therefore if you will name me as you ought, you must say that I
am a Devil Sergeantiz'd, and not a Sergeant Diaboliz'd: which you may easily
credit by this, because all men speed better with us than with them, since we
fly the Cross, (fixed on the top of the Mace,) but they make use of it as an
instrument whereby to do mischief. And though I must confess there is a
great correspondency between their Offices and ours, in that they procure
other men's hurt, as well as we; and as we desire there may be none but
wicked and guilty men in the World, so do they also: Yet theirs is with a most
eager greediness, pricked forward through an hellish disposition, and an
avaritious desire of gain; but ours only for company sake. And in this also
they are more to be blamed than we, because their evil turns to the
destruction of their own sex and kind, which we abhor. For we are Angels
though deprived of Grace, and had never been converted into Devils, had we
not stroven to be equal with God. But Sergeants turn Sergeants to be the
vilest of men, and greatly delight in the miserable confusion of others; so
that you all strive in vain to present comfort to this Wretch, since there is
no man so godly, that stays not in his tallons if he once can catch him, and
they and we may well be both of an Order, were it not that they are Devils
clothed and shod, but we naked and barefooted, (as you are,) leading an hard
life in Hell.

Though we were all transported with wonder to hear these Diabolical
speeches, yet did they not at all hinder the Friar from continuing his
Exorcismes; who hoping to still the Spirit, cast holy Water on him: but that
was rather a motive to further tattle. Think not, said he, your blessing of
Water can make it available, I tell you it rather hurts than benefits, there
being nothing that Sergeants hate more than it. For men have so often revenged
themselves in this kind, in heat flinging them into Rivers, to cool their
appetite: in cold, into Privy bathes, to warm their malice, that it is grown
abominable to them: who cannot any way be accounted good Christians, because
both their Office and Name is derived from Moors and Barbarians, Nations that
never made a Conscience of any thing.

Wound not your selves by belief, (said the religious man to the assembly) the
Devil was ever a liar, and if we suffer him, will rail and murmur against
Justice her self; because by correcting the world, and chastising vice, she
snatches away many Souls from him, which otherwise would have been ensnared.
Dotard (said the inmate) dispute not with me, for I know more than thou do;
but if thou will do me a pleasure indeed, banish me this Sergeants body: for
I am a Devil of quality, and when I return to Hell shall be soundly swaggerd
at, for haunting so bad a Companion. Through the compassion I have of those
bitter torments thou make him suffer, by Gods grace, (said the Divine) I will
do it, and not for the foolish words thou speak. Wherefore do thou so
much afflict him? Can I do less? (answered he) when at this very instant, his
spirit is contending with mine, who should be the greater Devil, he or I.

The Fraternity regarded not his malicious answers, but I whose fear, began
to be less, and inquisitivenesse more, took great delight to hear him
prattle. And turning to the reverend man, desired, that (if possible so much
license might be given to a stranger) he would partly hinder the poor man's
endurement, and permit me to demand some few questions of the intruder; which
it might be would not only benefit my self, but accrue to the good of some
of mine own Countrymen, if at any time I should make them familiar with the
passages. This was no sooner spoke, and condiscended to, but the Spirit forcing
the Body to look upon me, and laughing at me, began. We have Kindred and
friends (said he) both in Court and City; when there are Poets, they do us
many good offices, by the Trade of Venery and Macquerellage. And though their
wits can clothe their fancies in a higher strain than you do, yet you all,
tending to the same center, and embracing the same science, are bound to give
your attendance to maintain the honor of those of your Profession, whom we
suffer in Hell. Are there any Poets in Hell, said I? Yes many, (replied he,)
the way is so easy, and they do so swarm, that we must be feign to enlarge
their abode, and there is nothing in the world so delightful as to see a Poet
in the first year of his freshmanship there, who most commonly brings letters
of favor, directed to our superior Magistrates, thinking to find Charon,
Cerberus, Rhadamant, Eacus, and Minos.

But what pains do they suffer (said I, feeling my self galled?) Many
(replied he) and those such as are proper to the Trade. Some are tormented in
hearing the works of others rehearsed, (the punishment also of Musicians)
which they envy, yet cannot mend. There are some of a thousand years
continuance in Hell, and yet have not made an end of reading the stanza's they
composed of incontinency. Others that rub the palms of their hands, scratch
their foreheads, beat their brows, and tear their hair, and yet cannot
resolve whether is most proper, disaffected or unaffected, depainted or
unpainted, because the word comes from painting. There are others, that seeking
out a consonancy, as it were blindfolded, walk raving to and fro, biting their
nails and eating their band-strings, till they fall into holes and pits, from
whence we have a great deal of trouble to pluck them out. But those that
endure most, and are worst entreated are Comicke Poets, justly punished for
making a rape upon the honor of so many Queens, Princesses, and great persons
in England, by their unequal matches of them; and in their Plays for
displaying so many invectives against men of esteem. With these of the land,
water Poets are not planted, but because they have used so many inventions,
fictions, and lies, to coozen the World, and get money, are put among Proctours
and Solicitours, as amongst people that live by that exercise: for you must
understand, that as there is great convenience, so there is very good order
kept in Hell. The other day there came thronging to us of all sorts; he that
first enterd, was a conceited fellow, a Drawer, one that by devising patterns
for wastcoates, etc. got no small favor; whom when we thought to quarter with
Projectours, we remember that he said, besides his draught he could
counterfeit to the life, therefore he was settled with Scriveners and
Attournyes, as among them that can draw and counterfeit upon all occasions.
Another called himself a Cutter; he was asked whether of Stone or Marble? but
saying he was of their kind who cut off men's purses, and at Masks Ladies
shirts, we put him with detractours and evil speakers, as amongst those that
rend the garments of another good fame. Blind men that thought to shroud
themselves among Poets, were thrust among Lovers, because of the sympathy. And
Vintners with Waterbearers, because of the mixture. Fools were chamberd up
with Astrologers and Alchymists. Murderers with Physicians. Ill dealing
Tradesmen with Judas. Evil Magistrates and Ministers with the bad Thief.
Citizens with Shufflers. And Brokers with Jews. And to conclude, there is not
any Commonwealth so well ordered as Hell, where every one has a retirement
according to his quality.

I think you spoke of Lovers, (said I) and because I am as well sensible of
that infirmity as of Poetry, I would willingly know if there be many? Love
being a great spot of Oil which spreads all abroad, (added he) thou need
not doubt but Hell is well throngd with the amorous. There are of diverse sorts.
Some that are Lovers of themselves, others of their money, others of their
speeches, others of their works, and some of their wives, and of that kind
there are very few, because women are of such malignant natures, that by their
disloyalty, imperfections, and searching wits, they give every day new subject
to their Husbands to repent of their conjunction and alliance with them. All
Lovers are delightful to see, and full of mirth, if there may be said to be
any in Hell. Some you would take for a Millaners shop, they are so decked with
points, knots, and ribbens, of all sorts, which they call favors. Others for a
periwigge makers stall, they are so hung with bracelets, amulets, and locks of
all hairs and all colors. You would take some for Messengers to a great City,
laden with packets and Epistles to and from their Mistresses; which they call
Love Letters, but we Inflamers, because they serve to inflame and burn the
bearers. And others for Jesters, the posture of their wooing is so ridiculous,
who once loved, but never obtained. These are condemned for short shooting, yet
won the game; and those for kisses that never betrayed. Under them, in a
dirty and stifling hole, carpeted with beasts horns, were those that you call
Cuckolds; Creatures that at the first began to bustle with us, objecting a
double injury, if they should now again be punished, that in the world had
already received disgrace sufficient: the Horn grafted upon their forehead,
being first taken from the Devils own brow, who in the shape of a man made the
first Cuckold. But when we told them that the Devil never wore Horns, but
that they were derived from the Goat and Ram, emblems of man's
libidinousnesse, and the name of Cuckold from the Cuckoe, a bird that having
plundered the issue of an innocent, makes her hatch her viperous brood, or
else from men's own indulgence and women's impudence; they became the most
peaceable of all our pensionaries, and are armed with incomparable patience:
for having been heretofore strengthened and fortified in the unfaithful
dealings of their wicked wives, they are never angry at any thing that is done
unto them. In which respect, and our own pity, we have advanced them into one
of our fairest upper lodgings: and in their Dungeon have placed such as are
lovers of age and old women, who are strongly chained; for Devils themselves
do not hold their honor safe, amongst people whose taste is so depraved.

But having satisfied your curiosity, I must tell you that we Devils are much
offended, in that you mortals so slovenly besmeare and disfigure us. Sometimes
painting us with claws and tallons, yet are we neither. Eagles nor Griffins.
Then gluing tails to our posteriours, as if we needed flie-flappes, or the
world should mistake us for Hernes. And then parching on our chinnes, wenny,
and welky beards, to metamorphose us into Turky-cocks and Cocks combs; yet
there be Devils amongst us that may well be taken for Scholars and
Philosophers. But you had best mend this, if you covet a good fire when you
come to visit us. We asked the other day that Painter whom you call Michael
Angelo (though improperly) why he presented us in his judgment with so many
beasts hooves, deformed bodies, wry necks, and crabbed faces? His answer was,
That having never seen any of our Tribe, and not crediting there were any, he
had made that piece after his own fancy, and not out of any ends of malice.
But ignorance did not excuse his sin, for he now finds the reality of that,
he would not before believe. We complain also, that in your familiar
discourse one with another, you give us unnecessary presents. Behold (says
one) how this Devil Tailor has abused me, How he makes me wait, How he
has stolen from me; Would he were in Hell! You do us a great deal of wrong
to wish them there, or to make such comparisons; For we never suffer them to
come nigh us but with a great deal of entreaty: because they do already
allege the name of inheritance, in that Custom is a second Law. And having
taken possession of Theft, oftener keeping Stuffes demanded of them, than
Sabbaths commanded; they enter grumbling and muttering when we do not open the
backedoore, and thereby acknowledge them legitimate Children. The Devil take
it and thee, says another to him and those things that displease him; keep
your gifts at home, for of this kind there come more than we fetch, neither
do we take all that are given; for we make a conscience of some things: and
would not accept of the forward Letcher when he says, I would I might be
damned to lie with such a Beauty, but that he does enforce us. You bestow
likewise on the Devil every roguish Page and Footboy; but he will have none
of them, for know (that for the most part) they are more wicked than Devils
themselves. Also you give to the Devil an Italian, but the Devil thanks you
with all his heart, yet loves not to be undermined. An Englishman, but he
will have none of their new fashions. A Spaniard, but he that knows the
tyranny they use in making themselves masters of Towns, when once they are
permitted entrance; detests their cruelty. And a Frenchman, but the Devils
stomach will not serve him, because they are already parboyld; and therefore
entreats you to send them to the Great T^rk^ to season, and make Eunuchs.

Here the Spirit became silent; when hearing a noise behind me, made by one
who had crept in, and was thrusting to get foremost, I turned about to see who
durst be so uncivil in a place so sacred. And perceived it to be a certain
Informer, that had been the cause of the undoing of one of my dear associates.
Therefore that I might a little vindicate my Friend, I again questioned the
possessour. Seeing so many men of diverse conditions inhabit your clime, Are
there none there of those Horse-leeches, those plagues to Kingdoms,
Projectours, etc? You are cunning, (said he) Know you not that these Vermin
are the natural heirs to damnation, and have their patrimony assigned in
perpetual darkness; yet know also that we are upon the point to discard
them, for they are grown unthankful, begin to scuffle with us* and would
willingly lay a Tribute upon the ways to Hell, but because the charge
increases daily, and we believe that in process of time the tax will mount
so high, that our Agents on Earth will be constrained to forsake their
Commerce, (a thing very prejudicial to our Commonwealth) we will from
henceforth shut our Gates and utterly exclude them. In doing so you may be
injurious, (said I) for then they will aim at Heaven. Never fear that,
(proceeded he) for that is a traffic they never delighted in. But, I pray
you, on whom will they raise these new impositions? If you labor to know all
the circumstances, (answered he) bid that fellow draw nigh that stands there
(pointing to my Gentleman) for he is of the occupation. At this the Company
presently cast their eyes upon him, whereat he was so ashamed, that turning
his back, and plucking his hat over his eyes, he slunke away, leaving the
bystanders astonished, and me revenged. And when the tumult was appeased, the
Devil continuing said, Is my Champion absent? I care not greatly, if I supply
his place. Understand then, that the Monopolies they would now find out, and
the Imposts they would impose and set forward are upon jewels, rings, plate,
and precious stones, upon lace, handkerchers, dressings, gorgets, and the nice
attire of women, upon coaches that serve for no other purpose but to hurry men
to Tavernes, Theaters, and the assignations of love. Upon excess of apparel,
feasts, and stately movables. Upon Play Houses, the schools of blasphemy and
obscenesse. And generally upon all other things whatsoever, that serve to
enhance the pride of the world, and increase our Empire; which will become
utterly desolate, unless some good Magistrate, and our Friend, oppose himself
against them. Not so, (I persisted by way of interruption) In this me thinks
they are very reasonable, seeing that the toleration of such things serve only
to pervert good manners, corrupt chastity, stir up riot and prodigality, and
utterly ruinate modesty and virtue. But concerning Magistrates of whom thou
beginnest to speak, Can it be possible that there are any Judges in Hell? A
fine question (replied the Devil) Friend, a wicked Judge is the seed that
fructifies most for us: it is a Grain from which we every year receive a
thousand Doctors, ten thousand Proctours. Advocates, and Lawyers; and more
than twenty thousand Marshals and Pettifoggers; so that many times when the
years are fruitful in cheating and deceit, we have not Garners enough to
contain the fruit that comes unto us by the means of corrupt Judges.

Will thou then infer that there is no Justice upon Earth? Yes, (said he) if
the story of Astrea be true, did thou ever hear it? No, Hearken then, (said
the Fiend) and I will tell it. Truth and Justice on a time came together to
inhabit the Earth, but found none to entertain them; because one (which was
Truth) was naked, and the other severe. In the end after they had wandered up
and down, like vagabonds without shelter, Truth was enforced to dwell with one
that was dumb, and Justice seeing her self unregarded, and that her name was
usurped by Tyrants, resolved to return: yet that she might leave no way
unessayed, she retired from Courts, Palaces, and Cities, and traveled into
the Country, where in Cottages and Villages she rested a while under the
simplicity and integrity of the poor inhabitants; from whence Envy (that never
left to persecute her) removed her also. Then went she to Gentlemen's houses;
but being never bred up to lie, when they demanded who she was, answering, I
am Justice; they drove her from them too, saying, we know not what that is. So
that being generally refused, she fled or rather flew up to Heaven, scarce
leaving behind so much as the trace of her footsteps. Since when, men
remembering her name, attribute that kind of Scepter or Mace unto her, which
has a cross at the top; which although it have got the title, yet sometimes
burns the Basis, because that many times through the abuse of it, it helps
better to steal, than the hooks, false keys, and ladders of Thieves. For
humane covetousness is grown to that height, that all have converted the
faculties of their minds and senses, into instruments to commit theft. The
Lover, does he not steal a Virgins honor, with her own consent? The Lawyer,
does he not steal his Clients goods, with his knowledge, when he perverts the
sense of the Law? The Comedian, does he not steal his Spectators heart, when
harkening unto the Verses he has conn'd, he looses time. The Amorous, does
he not steal with his eyes? The Eloquent with his tongue? The powerful with
his arms? The valiant, with his hands? The Musician, with his voice and
fingers? The Dancer, with his feet? The Physician, with death? The Apothecary,
with health and sickness? The Surgeon, with blood? The Astrologer with
Heaven? and there is no man but steals one way or other, but most of all the
Sergeant; who contrary to all these, steals away both his Soul and body by
wilful relinquishment; for he forsakes them with his eyes, flies from them
with his feet, and disavowes them with his tongue. And they are most of them so
wicked, that we say of them, as you of the Pestilence, Good Lord deliver us.

I wonder (said I to the Intruder) that thou have not reckoned Women among
Thieves, knowing they are of the same mystery? Alas! Speak not of Women, let
them alone, I pray you, (said he) for we are so pestered, weary, and troubled
with them, that we desire not their remembrance, but to speak truth, if there
were not so many in Hell, that would be none of the worst habitation,
especially for Winter. Oh, how much they would give to be Widows! Since the
death of that Witch M^dusa, they do nothing but invent snares, labyrinths,
ambuscadoes, and I doubt not but in time will wage war with us for supremacy
of knowledge. All the good that is in them, is, that in our conversations they
ask no toys and new fangles (as they do of you) for they know we deal not
in small wares.

Of what sort have you most, of beautiful or deformed? We have ten times
more of foul, (said he) For though the fair meet easily with Gallants that
satisfy their burning desires, yet it sometimes happens, that by continuance
of sin they become sated and repent: but the foul wanting this libidinous
felicity, (unless they can purchase it) and maligning others, enter so lanke
and dried up, that they affright us: for the most part of them are all old, and
die grunting like Sowes, mad that the young ones survive them. I became
packehorse the other day to one of threescore and ten, that I took doing a
certain exercise against obstructions, whom when I had unloden, she began
to complain of the toothach, to infuse conjecture there were some yet left,
that she might appear less odious.

All my demands are untwisted, but this; I pray you tell me if there be any
poor in Hell? What do you mean by poor said the Devil? I call him poor
that possesses nothing. How understandest thou that, said he? How? Would
thou have him condemned that holds nothing of the World, when none are damned
but such as covet and enjoy it? Those men that thou speak of, are not
enrolled in our books. And wonder not at it, for all things are wanting to
them, yea the Devils themselves. You are rather Devils one toward another,
than Devils are Devils to you. For can there be a more notorious Devil than a
Flatterer? an envious man? a false friend? a bad Companion? an unmercifull
Creditour? or a son, brother, or kinsman, that wishes you dead to get your
wealth? that seems to weep and bemoane you when you are sick, and yet cares
not if the Devil had you? All this is wanting to the poor man, he is not
flatterd, envied, has no friend, no companion, nor no credit, neither are his
children, brethren, or alliance de irous of his dissolution, for any obscure
ends, but he is one that lives well, and dies better. And there are some so
contented with this manner of life, that they will not change their condition
with Kings; because they have liberty to go every where, whither they will, in
peace and war, free from all charges, impositions, and public services,
exempt from all judgments, civil censures, process of Law, and jurisdiction,
and in their Consciences are wholly uncorrupted. Moreover, they take no care
for the morrow, observing in that the commandment of God. They husband their
time well, and can justly value the days of their pilgrimage, in setting
before their eyes that death holds in his power all that is past, governes all
that is present, and pretends a right to all that is to come. But there is a
proverb, that When the Devil preaches, the World draws to an end.

We may truly say that Gods hand is in this, said the religious Conjurer. Thou
art the Father of lies, yet declarest truths, able to mollify an heart of
stone. You men, said the Devil, do not imagine that this that I have spoken
is for your salvation, deceive not your selves, it is that your pains may be
increased, when the time com^ that you shall suffer: and that you may not
pretend ignorance, and excuse, saying, No body has told us. You are all
Hypocrites. The greatest part of tears you shed, proceed only out of grief
to forsake the world, and not out of any repentance for your sins. And though
sin be sometimes displeasing to you, because of your declining into years, or
of your corporal indispositions, yet your will has much a do to be
overcome, because it is wicked. Thou art an Impostour, said the reverend man.
There are at this day many holy Souls, whose tears have issue from another
fountain; but I see thou seek to delude us, and it may be it is not the
will of God, that thou should be expelled this miserable body;
nevertheless I conjure thee by his Almighty Power, not to torment him any
more, but to depart.

The Spirit obeyed, and the devout man addressing his speech to us, Gentlemen
(said he) although it was the Devil that spoke by the organs of this unhappy
man, yet there is some pro it in this discourse to be made by him, that will
meditate upon it. Therefore I pray you not to regard from whence these things
proceed, but to remember that we often receive health from the hands of our
enemies, and from tho^ that most hate us. With draw your selves in the Name of
God, to whom I will pray, that this sad and prodigious spectacle may serve to
amend your lives, and convert you unto him. And here my Slumber left me.

VISIONS.
The second Vision: OR, Death and her Dominion.
SAad thoughts are natural to abject men, and gather together in multitudes to
assault one unhappy. Certain Enemies they are, uncertain Friends, not much to
be blamed, since they do not derogate from the strain of the world, fickle,
and unstable; now rising, now declining, and set, before they attain the
Meridian. Cogitations of this mold made me lament mine own depression, and
turn over the leaves of some few books, that by no Rhetoric could maintain
any more than one way to be borne, but without study could find a thousand
ways to die. Here I found the ambition of the proud, and the covetousness of
the rich, satisfied with so little, that I began to hate all indirect dealings,
and mind the advice was given me. Mortal (said one) Why do thou afflict
thy self, and labor for uncertain riches? Is not Death the end of all
things? which many times comes upon thee before they are obtained, or at best
well disposed: embrace that, by dying well, and thou can not wish for those
blessings shall be denied. Wherefore do thou so much fear Death, (said
another)? What now remains of the pleasures of thy passed life, and of thy
first years, which were so sweet and delightful? See thou not that all is
vanished, and lost in times swiftness? Prepare thy self therefore, and take
heart, put on alacrity of spirit, and settle thy Soul in peace and
tranquillity. Remember (says the Scripture) Man that is borne of a Woman is of
short days, and full of trouble, he comes forth like a flower, and is cut
down, he flees also as a shadow, and continues not.

Dizzied with these Contemplations, I fell asleep over my Instructours and do
verily believe, it was rather caused by some supernatural predominancy, than
natural disposition; because my faculties, were free and at liberty from
outward molestations, and busied in beholding this following Comedy, to which
my fancy served as a Stage for unusual Actours.

I saw diverse Physicians enter, riding on large foot-clothes, ominous in this,
that they resembled Hearses for the dead. Their train was broken and
disordered, for some went a foot-pace, and others on the spur. Their faces
were contracted, got more by custom than age, in often frowning on their
Patients urine, which prognosticated to the Sick, more terror than redress.
And these were followed by young Practitients, who by their frequent
conversation with the Horses, more than with the Doctors became easily
graduated.

Apothecaries came next, armed with morters, pestles, and doses, whose outside
bore the ascribed cures, and inside poisons. Their Shops were the Physicians
Storehouse, and the afflicteds Purgatory. Their Recipes began with receive, but
included to take, an ounce for themselves, and a scruple for the dying man. And
all their compositions were disguised with such strange nominations, as if they
had been Sorcery: cursed inquisitours against life, done in policy, that their
mistake of one thing for another, might not be discerned.

Chirurgions with some unwillingnesse followed, because they conceited
precedence; the Etymology of their name signifying, a Physician that works by
hand. Their pockets were filled with pincers, cauters, files, sawes, knives*
and lancets; and their cries of, cut, tear, dismember, burn, infused such
fear, that my bones were consulting how they might serve as sheathes to hide
one another.

Then Mountebankes (whose papers speak better than they) who with more
impudence and less skill, would cure all Diseases with one Antidote, upon
which there was no great disspute. Nor of the Barbers Surgery, (who came next)
because it either killes or heales. These were more finicall than their
forerunners, yet at proudest are but shavers of Excrements. Their greatest
Artillery were Cizzers, Razers, and basins, and some sharp lotions, the which
were allayed, by the delicious music of their Fiddles and Citternes.

Seeing them followed by men wearing chains cross their breasts, and admiring
what state they usherd; I easily lost that conjecture, when I beheld the linkes
to be teeth, and the bearers Tooth-drawers; mouth-devasters, and drawers on of
old age: not shaming to wish all men's teeth upon their thread, rather than in
the place of their birth.

After these came men of diverse habits, not unfitly entered, because all great
talkers. Some were called Swimmers, by reason that in speaking they spread
their arms to and fro, as if they were swimming. Others imitatours, in that
they counterfeited the looks and gestures of those they spoke of. And others
sowers of dissension, because they moved their eyes this way and that way (not
stirring the head) to mark by stealth the actions of those they meant to
betray.

And last of all Dissemblers, a presumptuous Generation, the worlds true
plague; who thrust into all assemblies, and either by craft, flattery, or base
submission, having got the secrets of men, convert them to the Relaters
prejudice, and their own mercenary profit. These were called the extract of
all the importunate, and because the poison of Serpents lies in the tail, came
in the reere as most poisonous.

Upon this, I began to consider, to what use, this great troop and confusion
might tend: when behold a certain Apparition drew near, that seemed to be of
the Feminine kind, of light gate and loose proportion. She was laden with
crowns, garlands, scepters, sikles, sheephookes, buskins, wooden shoes,
tires, miters, bonnets, embroidery, silk, skins, wool* gold, lead,
diamonds, shells, pearl, and flint. One of her eyes was shut, and the other
open. She was clothed in all colors, on one side appearing young, and on the
other old. Now going apace, and anon slowly, at one time seeming afar off,
and by and by at hand And at all times so inconstant, that I could not have
leisure to fancy who she might be. Yet was I not frighted, but rather incited
to laughter, remembering an Italian Comedy I had lately seen, in which Halequin
faining to come from the other World, had a baggage not much dissonant; and
therefore, after I had stood a great while musing, I stepped to her, and demanded
who she was? I am Death, said she. Death! (replied I, my heart failing me)
and whither go you Mistress Death? I come to fetch thee (said she). Alas!
Must I then die? No, but thou must go alive with me, and make a journey into
the kingdom of the dead; for since many departed have rose to see the living,
it is no injustice that one living should descend to visit them, and that the
dead be heard. Have thou not heard that I have power to execute my sovereign
decrees? Disrobe and follow me. Ha, sighed I, in a cold sweat, Will you not
let me wear my Clothes? There is no need, (said she) apparel will but hinder
you, besides I ease all men of their luggage, that they may walk with more
agility. There was no contending, therefore I went after her; but to tell you
through what by-ways she led me is impossible, for I was transported beyond
apprehension. As we were going, I do not, (said I) for all this, see by any
outward appearance that you are Death, because she is painted without flesh,
consisting of nothing but dry bones. Those Image-makers are fools, answered
she, and want invention; for bones are not Death, but the remainder of the
Living. You Mortals know her not, or else she would appear in the visages of
every one of you, and in every several member lie depicted. To die, is to
finish life, and to be borne, is to begin to die; and the truest Image of
Death is a man's own self, and not a breathless trunk or bare anatomy.

But I pray you, Why do you place Detractours, and Tell-tales, in the Van next
to your own person? because (said she) there are more that die by the
importunity of great speakers, than by diseases, and more that are hastened to
ruin by the conversation of flatterers and intermedlers, than by Physicians
practice: though in the general these are my greatest friends, and best
servants, and to this purpose thou must understand, that most in the world grow
sick through excess and superfluity of humors; but die, by the means and
diligence of him that administers. So that when you are asked of what Disease
such an one is dead, you must not answer, Of a Fever, Plurisie, Purple, or
Pestilence, but he is dead by the hand of such a Physician that has been well
paid, for it is requisite that every Trade should live.

As we grew thus familiar, we entered into a Vault, where the days reflexe was
betwixt light and obscurity. In the entry whereof, upon one side I saw three
Statues armed and stirring, of humane shape, yet hard to be distinguished, and
on the other an hideous Monster, that continually fought with them, one against
three, and three to one. Know thou, said Death, what these are? Oh no! said
I, and I trust in God I never shall. And yet so it is, said she, that since
thy Nativity thou have never kept other Company. These are the three capital
Enemies to the Soul, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil: look if they do
not resemble one another so near, that they are scarcely discerned asunder; so
that if thou entertain but one of them, thou may be assured thou have them
all three. An aspiring man, thinks he has all the World, and has got the
Devil; a lascivious man believes he has the Flesh, but finds it the Devil;
and so do the rest. But what is she (said I) with so many several faces,
that fights against them? Answer was made, The Devil Money; who has bred a
controversy, upholding, that the rest have nothing to do where she is, and
that she alone is all the three. First, she grounds her dispute with the
World, upon those Proverbes men ordinarily use, that There is no other World
but Money, that He that has no Money had better be out of the World, that We
banish him the World from whom we take Money, and that All things give place
to Money. Against the second Enemy, she says, Money is the Flesh, witness
Whores and Curtezans. And against the third, she makes use of your speeches
also, that Nothing can be done without that Devil Money, that Love does much,
but Money does all, and that, That which Money cannot do the Devil cannot
effect. Whatsoever the claim is, said I, The Devil Money needs no
coadjutours, seeing she defends her Cause so well.

We went forward to a place where on one hand I perceived Hell, and on the
other Judgment, and did heedfully consider Hell, because it was a thing very
strange. What look thou on, said Death? On Hell, said I, and methinkes by
the aspect, I have seen it elsewhere. Where, (said she)? I have seen it in
the emulation of great ones, in the consciences of them that withhold another
man's goods, in wicked undertakings, in revenges, in the desires of the
luxurious, and in the pride of corporations. But as for Justice, I am glad to
see it in its purity, and had rather have Death with Judgment, than Life
without it.

At last we descended into a spacious Cave, circled in on all sides with very
high Rampires, and filled with much people: and here Death bad me stay, for
this was the place of her Tribunal. The hangings that adorned the walls were
words of Woe, alas, grief, sighs, ill tidings, and lamentations, as
certainly, believed, as unregarded. Here Women's tears were deceitful to
themselves, and unprevalent with others. There sorrow was excluded from
comfort, and cares were only vigilant, being converted into Vermin to gnaw
Kings and Princes, whose usurped honors made them to suspect all men. He ere
Envy had put on a mourning habit, and kept a continued fast, it being not in
her power to hurt. And there Ingratitude was kneading a kind of Dough, mixed of
Pride and Ambition, of which now she framed Men, now Devils. All quivered with
curses and imprecations, of which demanding the reason? one that was by
answered, O Destiny! would you not have curses here, where there are so many
match-makers, Lawyers, and imprecatours? Do you not know that there is nothing
more frequently spoken of in your Region, than Cursed be he that married us,
Cursed the hour I first beheld thee, and Ill h^p betide him that first brought
us together. Cursed be the Lawyer who counseled me to follow this Cause that
has undone me. And in other matters, Cursed that I am, I would I might never
come into Heaven, if I said this or that; and The Devil take me, if ever he
spoke to me of any such thing. But what is all this to the purpose, said I?
and what have these to do with Deaths Judgment Hall? Ignorant man! said the
other, If there were not so many contrivers of weddings, would there be so
many dead and desperate men? Is there any thing destroys so quickly, as the
cavils and circumventions of entangling Lawyers? And does there any d^ sooner,
than he that precipitates himself? No certainly, therefore thou must conclude
that these are the principal Pillars of this Dominion, and of the imperial
throne thou see there.

At this, I lift up mine eyes, and saw Death sit in a chair, environed with
many little Deaths, as The Death of Love, the Death of Hunger, the Death of
Fear, and the Death of Laughter, each bearing a several Ensign and device
The Death of Love had very little brains, and for Attendants had Pyramus and
Thisbe, Hero and Leander, with diverse other Lovers, ready to expire under her
Sickle, but by the rare miracles of the interessed rose again. About The Death
of Hunger were many Usurers, who having accumulated great wealth, deprive
themselves of necessary means; letting their bodies famish and their souls
die, which they had long before converted into Gold and Silver. The Death of
Fear was richest, and most stately, hemmed in with Tyrants and mighty men;
such as fly from all, thought none pursues, and afford the world no good, but
this, that by their sudden self destruction through fear, suspicion, and
distrust, they revenge themselves the innocent, whom they had before condemned
and slain. The Death of Laughter was the last, rounded with people of quick
apprehension, but late repentance, that live, as if there were no Justice to
fear, and die, as if there were no mercy to be hoped. And these are they,
that when it is said, Restore what you have taken, answer, You make me die of
Laughter. Consider that you are old, that sin finds not any thing more to
consume in you; forsake this Woman that you unlawfully embrace. Regard how the
Devil mockes you, who are now no more unto him but an improfitable booty. You
make me die of Laughter. Ask God forgiveness, and turn unto him, for you
have already one foot in the grave. You make me die of Laughter, I was never
more jocond, never more lusty. And these are they that being sick, when they
are exhorted to rely upon God, and order their estate by a religious will,
answer, that they have been many times in the same case: but find themselves
in the other World, before they can be persuaded they are going thither. Here
I could not contain my self, from this use, Lord! thou have given but one
life and are there so many Deaths? Grant, I beseech thee, that if I return
again, I may change my condition, and begin to live well, that I may die
lamented.

I had scarce uttered these words, but I heard the voice crying, The Dead, the
Dead, the Dead; and instantly saw the Earth begin to open, and the bodies of
men and women, half buried in their winding-sheets, to arise; who ranked
themselves in order, observing a silent taciturnity. Take each his turn, said
Death, when behold one of them came near me with such fury, that I began to
fear the bastinado. Hellish worldlings, said he, What would you with me? Why
let you me not alone, dead, and at rest? What have I done unto you? I that
without offending in part, am defamed in all, and made guilty of those things I
am altogether ignorant of? And what are you, said I, whom I neither know nor
understand? I am, said he, the unhappy Abraham Ninny, that have bin here many
years, and yet you do nothing but mock and deride me. When any folly or
extravagancy is committed, Oh! it is an Abraham, say you presently, Did you ever
hear the like? What a Ninny-hammer he is grown? Why, a very fool would not
have done it? But know, that in acting and speaking follies, you your selves
are all Abraham's, worse than you suppose me to have been. And for proof,
Tell me, Have I made any ridiculous wills as you men, by which you command
others to do those things, which you would never do your selves? Have I
rebelled against the potent, or hoped to renew my youth? Have I strived to
reform Nature, and contested with her in coloring and poudering my hair?
Have I sworn untruths? Am I faithless in those things which I have promised,
as you are daily? Have I been a slave to my money? or played away my estate?
Have I consumed it in banquets? or given it to Curtezans? Did I suffer my self
to be masterd by my Wife? or believe that I might rely on that man, who at my
persuasion betrayed his friend that trusted in him? Did I marry my self to be
revenged of an inconstant Mistress? or credit that there might be built any
sure foundation on the slippery Wheel of Fortune? Have I esteemed them happy
that consume their days in Princes Courts, for the vanity of a momentary
look? or taken delight in Heretical Controversies, to be accounted witty?
Have I boasted unto people that are below me? or believed in Witches and
framers of Nativities? If Abraham have done no such foppery, of what folly can
you accuse him? Poor Ninny! rash and insolent that you are, wherefore do you
impute your disorders unto me, that never learnt any thing but patience; and
was of so innocent and natural a life, that it added an impossibility to wrong
any man.

As we were thus discoursing, another that walked very gravely, came to me,
and with a commanding eye, said, Look this way. What is your Ladyship, said I,
you that speak so imperiously, and presume to be respected, in a place where
all are equal? I am (said she) Queen Richard, whom if thou know not, yet
thou have often heard of; for you that live are so devilish, that the dead
cannot be excepted from your malice. If you see an old wall, an old hat, a
threadbare cloak, ragged coat, or a woman that has a treasury of years upon
her, you say instantly, that they are as old as Queen Richard. But you are
mad, my time was better than yours: and to justify what I say, hear but your
selves talk. Now if a Mother thinks to instruct her Daughter in modesty, and
say, Daughter, it is fitting that a Virgin that will conserve her honor,
should always keep herself within the bounds of shamefastness, and look
downward: her Daughter will arrogantly answer, Mother, that was a custom in
Queen Richards time. It Is for men to look upon the Earth, as upon the matter
from which they were formed; and for women to look upon men, as being
extracted from them. If a Father say to his Son, Son, fear God, keep his
Commandments, pray unto him when you rise, and when you go to bed; eat not
without blessing, and rise not without giving thanks* play not, swear not:
he will allege the same author, Father, that was the fashion in Queen
Richards days. So that, he is derided that rules himself according to holy
instructions, and men are sooner known by their oaths than beards.

But leaving this, that you may understand the dead are not all so locked up in
eternal quiet, but that their desires have freedom of enquiry, Is there any
news stirring? How stands the state of Europe? The Spanish Fleets go well
enough, said I* but of late years the Hollanders begin to take rude tribute
from them. And the Genoes have by way of bancke encroached so far on his
Principalities, that (like Leeches) they not only stop the veins, but draw
the mines dry. Son, said she, as long as the King of Spain shall have the
Hollanders for Enemies, the way to the Indies will never be free. And as for
the Genoes, they are likely to become a stately Senate, (like their City) If
the Canker enter not their magazin of store, and immoderate lust, convert all
in Bordello. But, how goes the credit of the world? There is much to be said
thereupon, said I, you have touched a string that makes a noise indeed: every
man has his credit in himself, every one is esteemed, and every one does all
things in point of honor.

There is credit in all estates, yet she shifts places every day, and is by
this time seven stages under ground. Those that steal, say it is to maintain
their credit, and that they had rather rob than beg. Those that beg, say it
is to keep their credit, and that they had rather beg than steal. Those
that bear false witness and those that murder say the same thing. And all men
call credit that which tends most to their profit, and (presuming on their own
worth and estimation) undervalew and defame the rest. All is now perverted.
Lying is counted virtue, wiles and fetches are the chiefest qualities of a
Cavalier, and insolency and impudency are the badges of gentility. Heretofore
the Ilanders were men of credit, and kept themselves in a moderation of all
things; but now there are ill tongues abroad, that say, Savages may instruct
them, and that their abstinence is more for covetousness than sobriety.

Counselors and Lawyers, How do they thrive? As nests of Ants, that from one
breed a million. Justice that in ancient days went naked, as representing
sincerity, is now so swadled with paper, as if she were a nest of Spices. And
whereas heretofore we had but one book of Laws, there are now a thousand, the
cause of so many squablings and divisions, being every ones private exposition.
If you go to some Lawyers, let your cause be what it will, they will assure
you good proceeding, and tell you, it is a fair quaere, and wants nothing but
study, but that at that instant they are something busy, about a case between
John Ash and John Oaks, so that they cannot mind it. Yet if you will call some
other time, they will revise it better. And after you have well paid them, (for
money is the spirit of the work, and the true light of their understanding)
you shall reap nothing but protraction, and may without difficulty instruct
your self the event. Happy are we (said the Queen) that are free from such
disturbances! but I believe there are many good and honest men amongst them,
that may be Antipodes to those thou describest.

Does Venice stand yet? How? Stand? Yes (said I) it stands with a vengeance:
for that is a Commonwealth that maintains it self, beyond all conscience.
But if they should restore what they unjustly detain from others, none need to
suspect their poverty. I must needs say it is a pleasant State, a City
founded in the Water, a Treasury and Freedom in the Air, and a Dukedom whom
many dread. But it is withal, the channel and sink of Monarchies, by which
they purge the filth of Peace and War. The Turk suffers them to molest
Christians, and Christians permit them to injure the Turk, and they tolerate
one another, to mischief both the one and the other; so that by others
dissension, they maintain their own vastness, which will swell them up, till
their great ambition burst them.

But methinkes thou speak not of England, (said the Interrogatresse) Can
thou be unmindfull of thine own Soil? It Is not for want of duty, replied I,
but because it is too full of splendor for me to comment on without
admiration. Piety in the Prince, Justice in the Magistrate, Religion in the
Minister, and Obedience in the Subject, having so absolute glory, that not
only her bordering Nations congratulate her Peace, but all the World stands
gazing at her opulency, who is the sparkling Diamond in the universal Ring. I
am glad (answered Queen Richard) that goodness and fidelity have so strong a
Tower, and hope Justice will hereafter restrain those calumnies, are
undeservedly thrown upon me. This said, she withdrew.

The next that appeared was a gray-haird man, with a large beard hanging down
to his girdle; whom I took to be one of those wild ones, that we see in the
kingdom of painting. And he seeing me stare, said, My art tells me that you
are desirous of my knowledge, it is Erra-pater that speaks to you, Is it
possible (said I) that that Gallimaufry of Prophesies, which run up and down
under your name, should be your work? Bold-face! (answered he) Dare thou so
rashly offend the secrets of the gods, and the Fates interpreter? Inhumane
Worldlings! who despise that learning that is above your reach: Find you any
Gallimaufries in my Predictions? Can you be so brutish, that you cannot
understand the sense of these words?

On things to come revolving often;
I find that Earth, nor Water soft,
Shall ought produce, or fructify;
But what shall please Divinity.
Animals! benumbed and hardened in vice. If this Prophecy should be
fulfilled, Could there be a greater good desired? If that which pleases God,
and that, that he would have, were done; Justice would rule the World,
Innocence and Sanctity would dwell with us, and we should no more obey the
Devil, nor love those things which most please him; as vain delights,
oppression, and money in its excellency, but a vagabond of the nature of women
that love to be gadding. But to my presages.

If Parties be arightly sped,
The married shall be married.
I could not abstain from laughter, which he seeing, Mastive (said he) that
barkest at all, I find that thou have not teeth hard enough, to break the
bone, and find out the marrow of this Prophecy: therefore listen, or I shall
make you, since you were brought hither to that end. Think you that all that
are wedded are married? You deceive your selves by the just half; know there
be many married that live as in single life, and many of a single life that
live as if they were married. And there be many men that marry and die
Batchelours from their Wives, and many Women that die Virgins from their
Husbands: because it is the fashion of the time.

I do protest (said I) that we have done ill to wrong those enthusiasmes of
spirit, by our misinterpretation, but you must pardon it, because we wanted
you to unriddle them; they being truer than we took them for, and of more
efficacy expounded by your mouth. Command therefore (said he) that henceforth
a more reverend esteem be made of my oraculous writings; whereof I will
unfold one more: Many Women shall become Mothers;
And the Children that they do bear
Shall be the Children of their Fathers.


Can you except against this? I tell you there are many married men, that if
they either would or could make an exact search, would find those Children to
be none of theirs, that call them Father. A Woman's belly is very subject to
caution; and Children being got in obscurity, it is very hard to find out the
Laborers: we must believe the deposition of the Wife, and many times the
supposition. How many people do you think there will be at the latter day,
who hold now great ranks in the world, that will be constrained to
acknowledge for their Fathers, Pages of their households, followers, Physicians,
Gentlemen Ushers, and may be Coachmen that have been well lasht fort? How
many Fathers will then find themselves without Posterity, and true Successors
beyond credulity. You shall see all this when you come thither, for in that
place Truth will appear more clear than the Sun.

Having spoken, Erra Pater left me, with an answer hanging on my tongue, and
vanished. When looking back, I perceived a lean, pale, lanke, melancholy
body, apparelled all in white. Take pity upon me, (said he) and if thou art
a Christian, be charitable; deliver me from the injuries of impudent and
ignorant men, who ever molest me, and put me where they please themselves.
Here he cast himself at my feet, and tearing his hair, wept like a Child.
Unhappy Creature, said I, What art thou? I am one, ancient and respected, (said
he) whose name and fame the world abuses, by many false allegations. My name
is Alter, or Another. You must needs have heard of me, for there is nothing
that Another speaks not. Those that cannot allege a reason themselves, say
always, as says Another, and yet I never speak nor open my lips. The Latins
call me Quidam, and make use of me to fill up the lines and periods in books.
I entreat you therefore to do me the favor when you go back, to relate
that you have seen Alter, clothed in white, who writes nothing, says
nothing, nor has ever done any thing; and that all that cite and quote me
lie: to the end that henceforth by your mediation, I may no more be the Idiots
Author, and the Fools proof. In brawles and quarrels they call me Some body,
in difficulties, I know not well who, in the seats of Orators A certain
Author, and in Citizens houses No body, and all to disguise the name of poor
Alter, and accuse him of their impertinencies, who is your suppliant for
redress. This I promised, and he departed, and gave place to Another.

A man (he was) of aspect good enough, if he had not had a pair of horns
upon his head, and made signs as if he would have beat me; at which being
nothing daunted, Who brought hither (said I) this Signior Cornuto? which words
were hardly uttered, but behold us both together by the ears, till the dead
parted us. I do not disallow of the quality, said he, because there are
greater men than my self that wear the horn, but yet methinkes the world
might speak something of them, and not all of me. What have I done, that many
others have not done a thousand times more? The horn, has it found its end in
me? or have I rebelled against my superiors with it? Have I enhaunc'd the
price of lanthornes, inkehornes, or posthornes? and is there not enough to make
knifehandles, and shooing-hornes? Wherefore then do your scoundrell Poets
afflict me? And of what do you condemn me, when there was never beast of my
condition more peaceable? They shall not leave thee yet, said I, but torment
thee more, such a scope of matter I will deliver when I return. But I will
hinder thee, said he, and thereupon we fell again to buffets. In this
agitation of spirit I awaked, and found my self in a trembling sweat, as weary
as if the combat had been real. Then calling to mind all that I had seen, I
converted it to my particular benefit; judging, that there is no jesting among
the dead, and that those people, that are out of all partiality and abuse of
the World, are more fit to give wholesome Counsel than ridiculous advice.

VISIONS.
The third Vision: OR, The Last Judgment.
MAny are the opinions of men concerning Dreams, and many do conclude a faith
to be given them, in these days; which I will neither contradict, nor approve;
yet I count it not unlawful to regulate a transitory life by them, especially
if they be of the nature of my last, which thus happened unto me.

One Evening, after I had long examined my self, by that glass of Solomon,
Ecclesiastes, Sleep laid his leaden mace upon me at the end, and this Verse,
God will bring every work into Judgment, with every secret thing, whether it
be good or evil. When,

Methought,
I saw a most beautiful Youth fly in the Air, and blow a Trumpet; the
forcing of his breath much lessening the sweetness of his natural complexion:
yet did the sound thereof find obedience in Marble, and in the dormitories of
the dead: for instantly all the Earth began to move, and give place to bones,
which sought one another. Those which had been Generals, Captains,
Lieutenants, and Soldiers, came first out of their Sepulchers, provoked with
courage, as if the Trumpe had been a signal to war. Covetous men issued
amazed, believing that it was for pillage. And they that had given themselves
over to wantonness, conceived it a summons to some Masque or Interlude. These
things I knew by their several gestures, but saw not one amongst them all,
that thought it was to Judgment. Some Souls drew near with horror and
disdain of their own Bodies, and others would not approach at all, seeing
them so deformed. Some wanted an arm, others a thigh, and others their heads,
yet did they not long seek them, giving me therein a subject whereby to
admire the Power of God, in that being mixed together, none took the legs or
arms of their Neighbors.

When all the congregated understood that it was the great Day of Judgment, it
was a notable thing to see, how that the Luxurious would not find their eyes,
to the end that they might not bear witness against them. Detractours would
not acknowledge their tongues, for the same cause; and Thieves made use of
their feet, to fly from their hands. Here I heard a Miser ask another (who
because he was embalmed, staid for his entrals, which were coffined far off
from that place) if all that were buried should rise again, and if the bags
that he had interred should rise with him? And there I saw a troop of
Cutpurses, whofled from their ears (which were offered them) fearing they
should hear what they desired not.

These things I might well behold, being mounted on a bank of earth; but
hearing a cry at my feet which bad me descend, I obeyed, and many handsome
women put forth their heads, calling me ill bred, and unmannerd, for not giving
more respect unto them: (for in Hell also they have this folly to believe that
men ought to respect them) They appeared very jocond to see themselves of such
exquisite frame, and were not ashamed of their nakedness. But when they knew
it was the Day of Wrath, and their beauty began to accuse them within, they
put themselves in the way of the valley, with a slow and lingering pace. One
that had been thrice wedded, went inventing excuses for all her Husbands, to
whom severally she had deeply sworn, never to remarry: and another said, that
she had forgot her night-cloathes, thinking that they would stay for her at
some place of meeting. In this place Physicians were thrust forward, by
Patients whom they had dispatched, by anticipation of time. And in that a Judge
stood washing his hands, from the innocent blood, that by bribery lay upon him.
Diverse Devils driving before them Vintners and Tailours, a Lawyer peeping out
of his Tomb, asked whither they went? and being told, to the righteous
Judgment of God, to which they were all called; he strove to sink himself
deeper into his Grave, saying, there is so much way already made, if I must
descend lower. A Taverner sweating extremely, a Devil told him, that he did
well to sweat out his water, for he would burn the better: and this was one
of those, that kept a Tavern outwardly, but a Stews within. A bow-legged
Tailour went insulting, I have neither wine nor water to answer for, for I ever
eat more than I drink, but why do they say I steal? which another hearing
told him, that he did a great deal of wrong so to despise the Trade. In their
walk they met with highway robbers, whom the Devils caught and put amongst
them, saying, that they might well bear them company, because they were ( a la
mode) wild Tailours. And after these went Folly compassed on all sides with
Poets, Musicians, and Lovers and with all kinds of people besides, that were
ignorant of that Day, who in troops came to the Vale, where silence was
imposed on all.

The Throne was decked by the hand of the Almighty, and by the same Miracle,
God was adorned with himself, with mercy for the Elect, and wrath for the
Reprobate. The Sun, Moon, and Stars were his Footstool; the wind was
hushed, the waters calm, the Earth still, and timorous, ready to be entranced
for the love she bore her Children; and all things in general very pensive
and heavy. The Just were busied in giving thanks to God, and praising his
Goodness, and the Sinful were inventing stratagems, to moderate their
chastisements. Angels witnessed both by their gate and phisnomy, the care they
had to comfort and welcome the Godly. And Devils were ready to unfold their
accusations; and least that any should overslip them, they had set the ten
Commandments to keep the Door, which was of that straightness, that the
leanest and most mortified bodies were feign to leave some part of their flesh
behind them, the entrance was so narrow.

The Examination began at Adam, who was required to give account for an
Apple; which Judas minding, and the astonishment he was in, cried out, Woe is
me, what account shall I make, that have sold the Lord of Life, and the Lamb
of God? Then passed the first Fathers, and after the New Testament, the
Apostles, who were all seated near the Chair of Majesty. And it was a thing
worthy of note to see, that there was no respect of persons, but that Beggars
and Kings were mixed together, when they went nigh the Divine Presence. Herod
and Pilate appeared, and perceiving the wrath of God (though encompassed with
Glory) Pilate said, He that will comply with the times, deserves no less; and
Herod, I cannot go into Paradise, for there those Innocents I slew will cry
out against me, but why do I chaffer? Hell is a common Inn. A man of a fiery
look started up, and stretching out his arm, said, See there my attestation
of mastership! Every one wondering, asked the Porter who he was? but he
overhearing, answered, I am an approved Master of Defense, and these papers are
Certificates of my tried valor. Letting them fall, a Devil stooped to gather
them up, but the Fencer was more nimble than he, who leaped backward, and
drawing his rapier, said, This Steel cannot be^ equalled, and if you either
budge or speak, I will quickly show that I am my Arts master. All the Company
began to smile, and he was commanded, seeing that he had but instructed an
art, which was one of the principal causes of so many Duels and slaughters,
that he should go into Hell by a perpendicular line: but he answering, that
he was no Mathematician, a Devil gave him a by-blow and cast him into the
pit. Then came Treasurers and Stewards, who demanding an Advocate, a Devil
answered, behold Judas, a discarded and outcast Apostle, let him speak, for
he has exercised both professions; which they hearing, went to the other
side, and saw another Devil, that had not hands enough to turn over the leaves,
were written against them.

Leave all these informations, said the stoutest of them, and let us compound;
Ha, ha, said he, that read the indictment, Do you demand composition? Then
it is a sign your game is naught. This they understanding, and that no offers
would be accepted, took the way of the Fencer, because they had been as good
men of their hands as he, and better. They being gone, Lo an unfortunate
pastry Cook, whose adverse party began to accuse him; which he seeing, and
finding by proof, that he had put more kinds of meat into his pies and
pasties, than there were beasts in Noah's Arc (there being neither Rats, Mice,
nor Flies) turned his back, and leaving the word in the Devils mouth, went to
see if the place were hot. Then came Philosophers, who made syllogismes against
their salvation. And Poets, who would have persuaded the omnipotent, that he
was that Jupiter whom they had so often nominated in their works. Virgil
alleged his Sicelides Musae, saying, that it was the figure of the Nativity:
and Orpheus as the most ancient Poet, stood up to speak for all; but a Devil
accusing him, for having instructed the way of making love to mankind, he was
commanded to enter once more into Hell, to try if he could get out again; and
obeying served as a Guide to his Companions. A rich Usurer knocked, and being
asked what he would have, was told that the ten Commandments kept the Door,
and that he had never kept them. In that which concerns keeping, said he, it
is impossible, I have swerved; the first Commandment says, Thou shall have
none other gods but me* and I think I have observed it, for I have kept Gold
(the worldlings god) so secret, that neither others nor my self might make it
the object of their veneration. The second, Thou shall not make to thy self
any graven Image, and I have kept ingots and wedges these many years, that
there might neither stamp nor image come upon them. The third, Thou shall not
take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, and I have never sworn in vain,
but always for some great interest. The fourth, Remember that thou keep holy
the Sabbath day, and I have all the week long provided hiding places for my
treasure, that on that day it might not molest my rest. Honor thy Father and
thy Mother, I have always greatly reverenced them, in that I have given them
the pre-eminence, especially in all bad actions. Thou shall do no murder, and
I did never scarce eat, because that to feed is to kill hunger. Thou shall not
commit adultery* I never did it, for women in that way are not tractable
without money; but if you will let me come in (said he, who began to be
weary with so many interrogatories) let us not loose time, for he was so great
an enemy to loss, that he would husband time it self; but saying this, he
was led where he deserved. Diverse Thieves followed, some of them so active,
that they saved themselves in leaping from the ladder. Lawyers coveted the like
good fortune, but they were set to go through the eye of a needle. Scriveners
denied their name, saying, they were Secretaries, but Proctours stood to it,
saying, they were the procurers of others good; but there was no defense for
either of them. One Devil seeing a Physician, an Apothecary, a Surgeon, and a
Barber coming, gave them thanks for most of the Company, sen^ thither by
their means; and commanded some of his vassals to usher them down, that they
might assay if they could cure the burning Fever. Another perceiving one to
peer out of an hole where he had hid himself, asked what he was? who
replied, an Empericke. What! Saltinbanke, Mountebanke, and my Friend, said the
Devil! It were better for thee to be upon some scaffold at some corner of a
Street, to pass away the time with idler persons; but since thou art come,
thou shall not want preferment: go thy ways into that quarter, and see if thy
balsame be efficacious against scalding; so he went on his Friends word. The
plea of Taverne-keepers was, that they had quenched the thirst of many poor
persons; and of Tailours, that they had clothed many; but this hindered their
dispatch. Then Bankers demanded treaty, but their Sentence was pronounced, and
bills of exchange were given them, to be paid out of Pluto's Coffers, where
there is no bottom. And afterward place was given to Women, who approached
with pleasing and smiling countenances, endeavoring by those means to
prevail: but as soon as they saw the horrid aspects of Devils, they began
to shrike out, and antedate their condemnation. Bailiffes, Sergeants, Marshals,
and many more were yet to be judged, who being called, said they would
willingly suffer, without any further trial.

The last was an Astrologer, crying out, that they were mistaken in the
calculation of years, and that it yet could not be the Day of Judgment;
because the Heaven of Saturn, and the moving Heaven had not finished their
course: but the Devil rebuking him, said, I wonder that among so many Heavens
which you have made in your lifetime, you were never so provident as to erect
one for your self! for which default, you must now be transported into Hell,
which was accordingly executed.

Upon this the Judgment ended, the Throne was taken up, the shadows fled to
their place, the Air was filled with mild Zephirs, the Earth was enamelled
with flowers, and the Heavens were clear and translucent; and I was in my bed,
more joyful than sorrowful, that I was not yet dead: therefore that I might
make use of my Dream, I undertook a constant resolve, to keep a strict watch
over my Conscience; that I may have a defensive armor, when there are no more
delays to hope for, and the sovereign Judge shall call me before himself.

VISIONS.
The fourth Vision: OR, The Fool Amorous.
Upon a Winter-January morning, about for a clock, when cold and sloth kept
me buried under my rugge, better at ease than on a biere, consulting with my
pillow upon an amorous fancy that came in my mind. I found my self quite
strayed from my former meditations, and beheld the spirit of Fallacy, which
presented to my imagination Loves inconstancy; verily thinking I heard this
Verse.

Ala^! Coridon, what folly possesses thee? Afterward not knowing which way I
was led, I came into a meddow a thousand times more pleasant than those which
are ordinarily mentioned in the inventions of Poets; where looking about, I
espied two delightful Rivers, that in their labyrinthian Meanders watered it.
The waters of the one were bitter, of the other sweet, yet they mingled
together with so peaceable a purling murmur, that they charmed the ears of
those that heard them, and qualified affections anxiety. These in their
sportive motion directed me to a goodly fair Palace, of admirable structure,
seated in the midst of the Field. The portals were of Dorian work, richly
inlaid, and on the pedestall, bases, pillars, cornishes, chapters, architraves,
frizes, and other adjuncts, there were engraved all the trophies and triumphs
of that great (yet little) God: which with many other devices added radiancy of
luster to the work. Over the chapter there was this inscription in letters of
Gold, cut upon black Marble.

Blessed and most happy is this place,
In ever youthful Love;
Who crowns the noble and the base,
As their demerits move.
The diversity of stones and colors delighted admirably the sight: the portall
was spacious, and the door perpetually open, to let those freely enter whom
singularity brought; and the place of Porter was allotted to a woman, who
seemed to be of the nymphall race; her visage was celestial, lineaments
amiable, and body perfectly straight, she was clothed in cloth of Gold and
Silver, glittering with pearls and stones of price, and was an enchantment to
all that beheld her, leading captive their iron hearts in chains of Adma^^t:
and though she was in all things like her name Beauty, yet did she not insult
nor deny entrance to any, if they paid for their passage a good look; of whose
favors I made use of and went into the first Court, where I found abundance of
all Sexes, but so changed from their pristine grace that the very memory of it
was forgotten; instead whereof they had put on Loves livery, dejected eyes,
yellow resemblance, and mournful representations.

Their talk reflected not upon the faith that is to be kept with friends,
loyalty to masters, nor respect to blood; but their kindred were mediators to
their own alliance. Servants became mistresses, and mistresses servants. Women
contracted amity with their Husbands acquaintance, and Husbands grew intimate
with their Wives companions.

On this medly of affections did I stare, when I perceived a creature not
perfectly man, nor rightly woman, but partaking of both; who went and came
through the multitude, having on a loose garment, spotted over with eyes and
ears; which marking, and the authority she exercised, I demanded her condition,
and what she did? to which two questions she thus answered me. I am
Jealousy, the greatest cause of the increase of these sick and mad persons,
which thou see; nevertheless I am not engaged to heal, but to chastise
them. Question not me of any other particulars, for it is a miracle when I
speak truth; because I lessen from my self in the delivery, being nothing but
sleights and devices: but go to that aged man that walks there, for he is
the overseer of the Palace, and (may be) will instruct you (though slowly) in
all that you require.

I did so, and found him to be Time, of whom I entreated a sight of the rooms
and chambers, and that I might visit some fools of my acquaintance, whom I
conjectured were there. He told me he was busy in curing the diseased, yet
notwithstanding showed me all things, in giving me liberty to walk about.
Passing the first Court, I entered into the Maidens chamber, (for the women were
separated) and these were kept in the strongest hold, where the walls were
thickest, because of their vehement and violent passions: here I took notice
of one that lamented, being jealous of a married woman; and of another that was
carried with burning affection to a yongster, yet durst not declare it. How one
writ letters full of ambiguities, where there were more lines dashed out than
good words; and another studied with her glass how to smile and simper, and
act the fictive humors, she meant to play her Lover: that eat oatmeale,
plaster, jeat, and small coal, to obtain a pale color: and this entreated
her servant, that in the mornings he would give her a Serenade of Music at
her chamber window, which implied, that he should publish to all the
neighbors that he was her enamored; this held love letters which she let fly
through windows, and thrust under doors: and that protested to her friend her
heart was his, desiring him not to require any thing more; which he promised,
and the fool believed. Some would marry, to love with more liber^y: and others
desired to be with men already married, and these were ranked in the number of
incurable.

Having considered all, I durst not stay any longer, knowing by experience that
a man runs great hazard among such allurers: and that he that gettes
clearest off, is often condemned to slavery in the bonds of marriage, which is
an engagement to repentance all his life long, without other hope of redemption
than by Death: for there is no order to redeem those that are captives in the
chains of wedlock, as there is for them that are under the hands of the
Turk. I went therefore to the Married Women: and saw many of them whom their
Husbands kept tied and cloistered up, to hinder the execution of their
designs, that broke both Prison and chains, and became m^dder than before.
Some fawned on and flattered their Husbands, when they had most mind to abuse
them: and some stole their money to pay their confederates, yet never took
heed to the account till the estate was ended: others went to hear Sermons,
and on pilgrimages of Devotion, but it was to get the grace and mercy of their
holy brethren, by sacrificing to Venus: and others went to Baths, sooner to
pollute than cleanse themselves. Such an one recompensed her Husbands sins in
the same kind, verifying the adage, that None take greater delight to be
revenged, than a woman when she avenges her self on her Husband with
advantage. Such another went to see a Play, that she might be spoken with
between the Acts. And this last affected her Coach so well, that she was
scarce ever out of it; of which desiring a reason, it is because (said she) I
love to be shaken. Among this honorable conventicle those were not seen,
whose Husbands were employed in War, Embassages, Merchandise, or foreign
Affairs; because that they depending upon none other in that time, did
contain themselves within the bounds of chastity, and as people exorcis'd,
were not reputed members of this Commonwealth.

The next partition was of Widows, armed with experience and knowledge, who
counterfeited modesty and piety, yet adhered to their desires. One with her
right eye wept for her dead Husband, and with her left laughed to her living
Friend; another was more muffled and veiled with passion than mourning,
receiving joyfully the present, and forgetting the absent. And others laid
wagers, whose vailes and hukes became them best, endeavoring to convert that
sad attire into allurement. Those that were old, imitated the actions of youth:
and those that were more young, made use of the time, that they might not
repent in their age. There were some adored, and some adorers, who being
devout, were loves penitents, and in that respect condemned to fast from meats
they most longed after, for the carnal have also their Lent. Many outwardly
laid on modest colors, though inwardly impudent enough: and many were very
insolent, and having heretofore been Masters, would now make use of that
imperious power; so that the Physician had much ado with them.

All these infirmities proceed only through idleness, for where that is, lust
finds easy access. There were some Women who accepted more letters of
disburse, than a Banquer of Genoa or a German Hoorder, upon credit of their
insatiable desires. Some would not be seen by him that was the visitour, but
by the unexpected: and those that were most subtle, made use of their
Physicians. One spoke to an Astrologer, to cast a figure for her future life;
and another desired of a Magitian secrets whereby she might be beloved. And
how many did I see, that would have seemed as ridiculous as Esops Crow, if
their periwigs and frontlets of hair had been plucked off! but, at last I got
from them, shaking my head, and went to the men's quarter, on the other side of
the building.

At my arrival I observed, that the Batchelours greatest folly was obstinacy,
for every one knew his errors, hut would not amend. O, that I saw many
Gallants brave in apparel, that had not so much as one penny! Many Roarers
that had heretofore boasted and bragged of Ladies favors, that would have
been very glad, if I had invited them to dinner! And how many were there that
had no bread, and yet felt the temptations of the flesh? Some counterfeited the
amiable, wearing perfumes and long locks not remembering that women take
always the superiority of beauty upon themselves; and others, by their vaunts
of war would pass for Duellists, yet forgot that women are ever fearful,
and quake at the sight of a weapon; others at midnight walked the round about
their Mistresses lodgings; and others became amorous through infection,
conversing with them that were so. This man on Sundays went from Church to
Church, to feed his eye with variety, and that went from house to house to
exercise his wit. Some complained of more than they suffered, and others
endured without opening their mouths. Those whose vanity despised things
beneath them, pretended to Subjects so high, that they lost their desire; and
those that were distrustful of their own worth (though otherwise people of
judgment and understanding) applied themselves only to mean objects.
Husbands were enchained, yet not less mad; for some forsook their Wives, and
followed their neighbors; and others took for friends their Wives friends,
and for Gossips the Mothers of their Children.

Widowers practiced in torments past, searched rest where it was to be found,
loving as short a while, and as long as they pleased; here being amorous, there
jealous; and that which I found admirable in them all, was that they confessed
themselves Fools, yet left not to be so. Men that were most discreet, related
their good fortune to those that published their disgraces; whilst shallow
Dolts were commended for secrecy. Some flattered the Chambermaid, to get
access to the Mistress, and others suborned the Mistress to overcome her.
These had their pockets stuffed with amorous lines, sealed with silk, and
endorsed with gold; and had likewise bracelets, hat bands, knots, and favors,
whereof they made survey: and these were the Husbands friends, and voluntarily
employed themselves to ease his cares, lending him Horses, Coach, and money;
whilst they hurried his Wife abroad to Gardens, Plays, and Banquets. There
were diverse Woers of Widows, some that were beloved, and some not; some that
let themselves easily be taken, and some that caught others. And there were
many, that made their conquests with love and money, and these carried often
the victory, because they fought with double arms; yet sometimes they got the
foil, and had not whereby to resist poverty.

Having at leisure surveyed all, I went back into the first Court; where* Time
thrust amongst the Company that increased daily, and by his industry recovered
some. Jealousy punished those, who were most confident in the subject they
loved. Memory rubbed over old sores, Understanding was hid in a dark hole, and
Reason had her eyes plucked out. And having contemplated the diversity of
Dissimulation, I saw a little wicket open, where Ingratitude and Infidelity gave
liberty of escape to some few: therefore to enjoy the present occasion, I
doubled my pace, to get out with the first. When my Boy came and drew the
Curtain, telling me that it was broad day; hereupon I awaked, somewhat dulled
at my long stay, yet comforted in this, that I have found it by others, and
mine own experience, that Love is nothing but mere and natural folly.

VISIONS.
The fifth Vision: OR, The World in its Interior.
DEsire the Pilgrim of the Mind, that hates Rest, and delights in nothing but
Motion, agitated my Spirit from one passion to another; till it made me
admire, how so much good, such abundance of evil, should proceed out of one
Heart! and gave way to mine eyes to shut up my senses, and open my fancy to
apprehend the consequent.

As in a Glass, so the World appeared unto me, populated only with one City
of exceeding vastness; in which as I wandered, I marked the uniformity of the
Building, and the neatness of the Streets; but exposed my self withal to the
derision of the Inhabiters, and as if it had been a Maze, could not find the
way out. Now I got into the Lane of Choler, and followed Quarrels through
Scarres and Blood; and anon into the Street of Gluttony, gourmandizing and
drinking; and not long after into the Marketplace, where all Vices were
compact.

In this distraction I was called unto by an Old man, of mean and tatterd
attire, but of awful port, and judicious respect. What are you, Good man, said
I? Do you envy my content? Let me alone; you Old men are always troubling
the mirth of Young people, yet would not willingly leave pleasures your selves.
You are going out of the World, and I am but newly come into it, give me
(therefore) leave to rejoice and be merry; the venerable man (dissembling his
grief) began to smile; Son, said he, it is not to hinder nor malign thy
desires, but through pity that I strive to with hold thee. Know thou what
the value of an hour is? or the price of a day? and have thou examined the
worth of time? I believe not, seeing thou employest it so ill; that fugitive
hours steal away, and rob thee of so precious a Jewel. What have the days
that are already past said unto thee? Have they promised thee to come again,
when thou have need of them? No certainly. Alas! they go and return no more!
and passing, look backewards with smiles and jeeres on those that let them
slip sounprofitably. Therefore make use of time while thou have it, least when
thou wishest most for it, time will be no more.

I must acknowledge, grave Father, said I, that your advice is excellent: but,
what are you? and what do you here? If my torn Garments, and Poverty
(answered he) tell you not that I am an honest man, I must speak my self, a
Lover of Truth; my name is The Worlds Disabuser; these rents come from such as
make show to help me, and these blows and bruises are presents from many, to
whom I have given no greater offense than a visit. What madness! the greatest
part of the World say, that they desire and love me, yet when I discover the
abuse of it, some despair, others curse, and all despise me. Now Child, if
thou will see the World, come with me, I will carry thee into the chief
Street, where all things are beheld in open view, and show thee how it is in
its Interior parts; for thou see nothing here, but the shell and appearance.
What is that principal Streets name (said I) whither you will carry me? It is
called (said he) Hypocrisy, it is the Street where the World both begins and
ends, and very great, for there is not any one whatsoever, but has either an
house, or chamber at least in it. Some being constant dwellers, and others
termers, there being diverse kinds of Hypocrites. See you that Fellow that
stands there, he was a ploughmans Son, now a Gentleman. Would you take that
man for a Tailour? yet he is one, though clothed like a Knight: and
Hypocrisy is so general an infirmity that it is found amongst all trades. The
Cobbler will be a Translator, the Cooper calls himself Bacchus Tailour, because
he makes clothing for Wine, and the Horse-coursers style is, Squire of the
Field; the Alehouse is called an Academy; the Hangman a member of Justice; a
Mountebancke an able man; the Dicernimble; a Tavern, a Bank; the Vintner, a
Banker, or Master of Accounts; Stews, houses of Commerce; Whores, Curtezans,
Bawdes, devout Women; Cuckolds, patient men; lust, friendship; Usury, Economy;
Deceit, Gallantery; lying, dexterity; and malice, gentleness of spirit;
cowardice, peace; rashness, valor; a Page, a Child of Honor; a Lacky, a
Gentleman on foot; a Pickethanke, a Courtier; black, brown; and an Ass is
called a Doctor. But there is nothing here that appears in its own form, or
that has the proper name; but all the World is full of lies, in what part
soever you examine it. And if you note it well, you shall see that wrath,
gluttony, pride, covetousness, luxury, sloth, murder, and a thousand others
sins, proceed only out of simulation: and that of all sinners, there is none
so presumptuous as the Hypocrite; in as much as other bad livers sin only
against God, but he sins against God, and with God also, since he makes him
an instrument of his sin; and for this cause our Savior, willing to show how
amongst all others they were hateful to him, after he had given many
affirmative precepts to his Disciples, he gave them one negative, saying, Be
not sad like Hypocrites: and as he taught them by many Parables, and
Comparisons, what they should be, now lights, now salt, sometimes like Guests,
sometimes as the talent; so also he instructs them what they should not be,
Be not like unto Hypocrites; to certify unto them, that not being Hypocrites,
they should not be wicked, for the Hypocrite is wicked in all things.

Upon this discourse we came into the great Street, where we took an eminent
place, to register all that passed. The first remarkable thing was a funeral
Convoy, composed of a large retinue of Kindred and Friends, that followed the
grief and heavines of a Widower in close mourning, whose head hung down, and
gate was of that slownesse, as if he had not had strength sufficient to carry
him to Church without a supporter: which compassionating, O happy Woman! (said
I) that have found a husband, whose love and faithfulness, went hand in hand
with thee in thy life time, and now follows thee to thy Grave! And happy man,
who have found so many Friends, that accompany not only thy sadness, but
seem to exceed it. Good Sir, consider a little their anguish. O, that there is
nothing but vanity! answered he, all that thou see is not done but by
constraint, though those exterior outsides seem to gainsay it. See thou
those wax lights, torches, and the rest of the hearse, who would not say but
that they light and accompany something? and that it is for something that all
this funeral pomp is made? but know, that that which is within the coffin is
nothing, for the body was nothing in its life time, Death has lessened that
nothing, and all the honors that are given unto it serve for nothing; but this
is done, because the dead have their vanities and State, as well as the living.
There is nothing within but Earth, not able so much as to produce fruit, and
more filthy to look on, than the dirt on which thou treadest, that deserves no
honor, and on which the share and plough have no predominance: and that
dolefulness, which thou think to have noted in these Friends, is nothing
but anger and madness, that they are not ranked according to their degree and
ambition. The Widower also is not so afflicted for his Wives death as thou
imaginest, but it is the expense that vexes him, seeing he might have performed
the ceremony with more ease, and less cost. He mutters within himself that
she has wronged him, in that seeing she was to die, she did not die
suddenly; without putting him to such charge in Physicians, Chirurgians, and
Apothecaries, who by their bills dispose his goods into parts: he has buried
two with this, and takes such delight in being a Widower, that he is upon a
treaty already with one, whom he was a wel-willer unto during his old Wives
sickness. Thou shall see him shortly risen, from those deadly habiliments
which interre him.

I was wonder-strooke at these speeches. Ah! that the things of this World
(said I) are far different from what we see them! hereafter I will be more
reserved in spending my judgment, and those things I shall clearest behold,
will most doubt of. This burial vanished so soon from our eyes, as if we had
not seen it, or been likely to have made the same journey; and as if the
deceased had not showed us the way, speaking in a silent language; I go before
to stay for you, whilst you keep the rest company, as I have heretofore done,
with as much neglect, and less devotion.

We were hindered from thinking on this, by a noise which we heard in an house
behind us; where we were no sooner entered but the assembled began a loud
cry, accompanying the sobs and groans of a woman, newly become a Widow.

Their sorrows were very lively, (yet availed not the dead) every minute they
wrung their hands, and sent forth sighs that seemed to proceed from the center
of their hearts. The chambers of the house were disrobed of their ordinary
furniture, and the poor afflicted was laid on a bed, in a room hung with
black. One of he^ Comforters said, Alas! all your tears are to no end, and I
am unable to comfort you, being more grieved at your sorrow, than if it were
mine own: another, you ought not so much to macerate your self, because your
husbands good life assures you that he is in bliss: and another, that she
must be patient, and conform her self to the will of Heaven; which words
made her double her complaints, and with greater vehemence to afflict her
self; saying, O God! Why do I live after the loss of so dear and loving a
Companion? O! that I am unhappy in being borne! Woe is me! Whither shall I go?
Who is there now that will take into his protection a poor woman? a desolate
Widow? and help her in distress?

At this pause, all the rest of the Quire, with isntrumental discord of their
noses and handkerchers, deafened the house; and then I found, that in such
occasions women purge by their eyes and noses, some part of their bad humors:
notwithstanding I could not bridle my self from participating some part of
their grief, and to turn toward my Conductour with these words. Pity, said
I, is very well bestowed on a Widow, because she is forsaken of the world; the
holy Scripture calls them mutes and tonguelesse, for so the Hebrew word
signifies; there is none that speaks for her, and though she take so much
courage as to speak for her self, yet none will hear her, so that that
imports as much also as if she were dumb. Give me leave therefore I pray you
to commiserate the like misfortune, and to mix my tears with these women's;
and wherefore, said he? To what purpose is it that thou know many things,
if thou do not make a right use of them? Observe a little and thou shall see,
how this Widow, that seems externally to have her body made of Hosanna's, and
her soul of Allelujahs; has a sable shroud, but green heart. See thou the
obscurity of this Chamber, and those vailes that cover their faces; these are
to disguise their tears, which are naught but dissembling. Will thou comfort
them? let them alone: they will revell as soon as they see no body by them,
that may serve as a subject to exercise their hypocrisy. And then will the
Gossips begin their game; Come, come, will one say, be comforted, you have
an advantage, you dream not of; your husband has left you young, and there
are brave men enough, who will seek after and make very much of you. You know
partly already the intentions of such a Gentleman, I am confident that if he
once obtain you, he will be so kind, that you will quickly forget the dead.
Faith, if I were in your place, says another, I would not be long pleasing my
self; for one lost, there is ten found: I would practice the counsel my
partner gives you. But I think you are much obliged to him, that visited you
yesterday. What say you? Is he not an handsome man? yes truly, and loves you
extremely. Alack, alack, will the Widow then answer, winking with her eyes,
and drawing her lips together. It Is not time yet to speak of that, all depends
on Gods providence, and he will ordain it so, if he find it necessary; yet
your counsel is not to be neglected. Do thou mark what extreme grief
she suffers? her husband is but newly dead, and she already wel-nigh married.
Consider therefore with thy self, how vain and unprofitable these
exclamations are, which thou have made.

He had hardly ended, when we heard in the Street a great hurly burly of
people; and going forth saw a Sergeant bleeding and out of breath, crying out,
Assist the Kings Officers, and running after a Debtour that fled from him. The
Commonwealth is much beholding to this Fellow, and ought very well to reward
him, said I, seeing he thrusts his body into so great hazard, to save their
lives and goods. See how he is torn and bloody, in having employed his
strength and power for the good and rest of it.

Soft and fair, said the aged man, if I stop not your course you will never
leave; Son, assure thy self that he that is fled is one of the Sergeants
friends, with whom he often carrous'd; who for not having made him partaker of
a late booty he had taken, the Marshall in spite would arrest, and cast into
prison; but after he had broke from him, and soundly beat him, he is escaped
as you see; and had need to have good legs, seeing he runs against those,
that are swifter than race-horses, where they think to be well paid. But
note, that it is not the least thought of the Weal public that puts him on
this action, but his private particular and malice in being made a Novice. For
I assure you, that if his own interest had not excited him to it, and that he
had not sought after him in way of revenge, the Thief is too much his Friend,
and their combination is too great for the Law to take place. And though such
as are decayed and in debt are their chiefest gain, yet their revenues proceed
from whips, the rope, and the gibbet. Therefore I wonder why the World that
hates them so much, does not resolve to forsake vice and practice virtue,
(though but for a year or two) to be avenged and starve them. It Is a cursed
office since their wages are paid by Beelzebub.

He had spoken more, if he had not been deterred, by the great noise and
ratteling of a Coach, in which was a Courtier, so swelled with pride, that he
seemed to be heavier than the four horses which drew him: he sat as upright
as if he had been a statue, and was very greedy in his looks, but so
disdainful that every one offended him: his attendants on foot were many
Lackies, and in the Coach a Jeaster and a Flatterer, who in obscene jeasts, and
itching talk, past away the time. Happy art thou, said I, as soon as I saw
him! without doubt the World is not made but for thee, seeing thou live in
pleasure and greatness! Surely thy riches are well employed, seeing thou
maintainest so great a train^! All that thou think and speak (said my
Moderatour) is nothing but surmise, yet have thou truly said, that the World
was made for him, since it is naught but vanity and folly, with which he is
puffed up. I believe if thou dive into his retinue, thou will see more
Creditours than Servants; for his food and livelihood proceed only from loan,
credit, hope, and fair promises: and if the secrets of his Conscience were
ripped, the inventions, that he uses to maintain life, would be found more
irksome, than if he got his bread by delving. See thou that Buffoone and
Sycophant? they are subtler than himself, for they deride, yet live upon him.
Can there then be a more miserable man, than such an one, who buys flattery
at so dear a rate, and thrusts himself into engagements to get nothing but
false reports? Foolish Lord* he is ravished with the adulation of these two,
who perhaps have told him, that there is no Courtier his equal, that the
Ladies have no object more pleasing, nor conversation more enticesive; when
they do it only to soothe and impoverish him.

Last of all, a Lady passed by us, whose gesture and behavior was so
graceful, that she attracted all the beholders. She went with an artfull
carelessness, hiding her face from those that had already beheld her, and
showing it to such as took no notice of it: her visage was snow and roses,
which contrary to the order of nature united themselves: her lips vilified
Coral; her teeth Pearl; and her hands Jessamine; and in brief she was the
Epitome of earthly beatitude: and I my self was more inflamed with a desire to
follow her, than any other object I had seen; but at the very first step my
Guide stayed me, yet not without my expression of discontent in these terms:
he must be infinitely barbarous, that is insensible of the delicacy of so
excellent a beauty, as this is: how fortunate is he who meets with so
favorable an opportunity! and how worthy that shall enjoy her! what unknown
pleasures is he master of, that in all liberty possesses a fair wife, who had
not been made but for the love of man? what lightenings and thunder shot from
her eyes? what enchantments and fetters for a free Soul? was ever Ebony so
black as her eyebrows? Crystal cannot brag of so much clearness as her
front. Certainly, this is the masterpiece of nature, and the haven of all
desired wishes. Till this present, said my aged Friend, I thought thee only
blind, but I see thou art both blind and foolish. Did I not tell thee that
the eyes were made to see, but that it is for the understa^ding to make
election? Know, that this woman, who seems so really perfect, slept
yester-night very ugly, and now is nothing but prime and plaster; the hair
she wears came from the Tire-women, for her own was blown away with an ill
wind that came from France, and if any remains, she dares not show it, least
it should accuse her of the time past: her eyes have no other brows than those
which a pensill makes, nor her hair any other color; neither does her
pulchritude proceed from any other nature, than Alembicke waters, essences and
painting. Kiss her, and she is oil; embrace her, pastboord; and bed her, an
Anatomy. Upon what then is thy judgment founded, that thou think her so
accomplished? Thine eyes, have they not betrayed thee? Admire then thine
ignorance, and understand (not to trouble my self with this woman's
imperfections) that most of the Sex are Hypocrites, and that the wise man's
saying can never be contradicted, One man among a thousand have I found, but a
woman among all those have I not found. So I awaked.

To the REader.
Reader, I here present thee with a Vision of Hell, as a proviso whereby to
amend thy life. Therefore if thou intendest from this hour to begin, be not
culpable of thine own vice, in calling me Detractor, or evil speaker, seeing
that none can calumniate the Damned. If Hell seem to be too great, take what
portion thou will, and be silent: Is it not a courtesy when thou have as much
or as little pain given thee as thou please? And be not amazed if thou find
nothing but horror and obscurity, for thou may well think that neither the
Sun nor joy inhabit there. I need not beg any ingenuous man's approbation,
nor fear any envious man's censure. If my Book please thee, thou may drive
away thy idleness with it; or otherwise, bring it to light upon thy chimny
hearth. At which I will not be offended, since I have given thee counsel so
to do; nor the Bookseller neither, if thou have paid him for it.

VISIONS.
The sixth Vision: OR, Hell.
It Was Autumn, a time that invited many to their country houses, to receive
the fruits of the Earth, and participate the second Spring: a Season of
retirement that called me also, though to no mansion of mine own, yet to a
receptacle of my Friends where I found the; refreshment as healthy, and the
artlesse Groves to yield as pleasant a solitude, as the artificial
Wildernesses of the great. In so much, as it quite altered my wonted study,
from the dangerous shelves that many are split on, to the harmless Mountains
of Innocence and Labor: and from corrupted riches, and delicious fare, to low
feeding and elated Souls. On which dreaming under my mean Canopy, I was
transported through the neighbor Wood, into a place far from home, of no
more night; and to one of the most delicate prospects that could be presented,
where the serenity and temperature of the Air, did in their gentleness fan
the heat, and ravish the Senses. On one side the Rivers of liquid Crystal
prattled with the gravel and flinty borders, on another the Trees conversed
with their Aspin murmur, and in the midst of these the Birds sung; I know not
whether in emulation of Plants and Fountains, or by way of parallel to give
them music for music: but for as much as our desires are vagabond, and
dulled with the much enjoyment of any one thing, solitude began now to be
troblesome, and I was impatient for association: when at the same instant (a
marvelous thing) I saw two ways whose birth came from one place, which
separated themselves by little and little, till they were past a separable
distance. That on the right hand was so narrow, that comparison can hardly be
made, and for being but little frequented was so full of brambles, thorns,
stones, and ruggedness, that it was a mighty toil to enter or go upon it:
yet were there some signs of diverse persons that had passed, though with
infinite discommodity; for they were feign to leave both their money and their
flesh behind them. And of some passing, but their faces were wanne and meager,
and they walked without ever looking back: to say that one might ride upon it,
is a Fable, for having asked that question, a Traveller told me, that Saint
Paul was feign to alight; and indeed I saw not any tracke or footing of Beasts,
rut of Coach or Cart-wheele, nor print of Litter or Sedan, nor was it ever
remembered that there had been any.

At which wondering, I applied my self to a poor man, that rested to take
breath, and asked if there were no Innes nor places of retreat to lodge in. No,
you must always go, (said he) there is no staying, neither Inn nor Tavern;
for this is the way of virtue, and but few pass through it. Know you not that
in the race of life, to be borne is to set forth, to live to pilgrim it; that
the Inn is the world, and in going out of it there are not many steps, to
enter either into pain or glory. Saying this he went on, God be with you,
(said he) he that goes in the path of Virtue, looses time when he stays;
and besides there is danger in answering those, that inform themselves only
through conceitednesse, and not to be instructed.

He proceeded, stumbling often against the stones, and breathing at every step,
and the tears which distilled from his eyes (in mine apprehension) were able
to have softened Flints, to be more pliable to his feet. Upon what spleen was
this way made (said I)? It is very rude and laborious, and to make it more
distasteful, the parties that go in it are untractable and uncivil. This
agrees not with mine humor; therefore I left it, and turning on the left hand
got into the other; where I saw much Company, many Gallants, and many Coaches
full of humane Beauties, whose eyes seemed to contend with the Sun; some
singing, others laughing, and others eating, so that I took it to be some
great Festival. And then remembering this sentence, Tell me with whom thou
conversest, and I will tell thee what thou art? that I might not be reproved
for frequenting bad Company. I endeavored to follow this that seemed to be so
good; and hardly had set forward, but like to him that glides upon ice, I found
my self in the midst of the rout, amongst Ladies, Masks, Comedies, Plays,
Banquets, very consonant to mine inclination.

This was not like the other tracke, where for want of Tailours, people went
naked: there were to spare here as well as of Merchants, Skinners, Millaners,
Upholsters, and all Trades besides, that serve to advance humane pride, as
Embroiderers, Perfumers, Sadlers, Shoomakers, Sempsters, Periwig-makers,
Haberdashers, etc. And for Innekeepers and ^Vintners there wanted not
abundance: with whom I had not long been, when I perceived some of both ways
to change, and shift from one to the other, by very strait by-pathes: at whom
we all jeasted, but chiefly at those that went from us, calling them
Dissemblers, precise, wretched, and the refuse of the world; at which some of
them stopped their ears and passed by, some staid to hear us, others were
deafened with our cries, and others flattered with our persuasions revived.

I saw also another middle way, where many went, afar off seeming to be
virtuous, but nearer hand were of our side. One told me they were
Church-hypocrites, and were but only veiled and disguised to us, for they had
no Maskes, nor false Visards for the Eyes eternal. They went alone, and were
held to be less subtle than Moors, and more brute than lawless Barbarians:
because that they are contented to enjoy the happiness of the present life, not
knowing any other: but these that can tell what temporal and eternal life is,
are so accursed, that they neither freely enjoy the present, nor hope for that
to come. So that the saying is to good purpose, that They gain Hell with a
great deal of desert, that is, with much pains taking. Here the Rich followed
riches, and the obstinate went apart, for they would not be governed by the
more advised, but ran with all their might, and got always to be first.
Magistrates drew after them all litigious Negociators. Passion and Covetousnes
allured bad Judges. And Kings trained whole Commonwealths; neither wanted
there Ecclesiastical men of all sorts, and whole Regiments of Soldiers, who
had been truly glorious if they had set forth the Name of God in fighting, as
they had done in swearing. Some generous Spirits of the number of those who
were on the right hand, seeing these wretches carrying yet pasports, and
petitions for reward of their service, cried unto them moved with charity* and
as if they had gone to some battle, To me Soldiers, to me. What mean you? Is
it an action of valor to forsake this way, for fear of the dangers that are
in it? Come on boldly, for we are assured that those that fight lawfully,
shall be crowned: let not vain hopes of reward entice you: a worthy man ought
to seek for naught but virtue, and she is the reward of her self, if you
rely upon her: turn therefore and take part with us, and you shall be happy.
The Soldiers heard very attentively all these persuasions, and ashamed of
reproof and cowardice forsook their Station, and hanging down their heads
cast themselves into a Tavern.

After this I saw a great Lady, without either Coach or Litter, on foot and
alone, and sought out a Scrivener to record it, being no ordinary accident, but
finding none, I verily believed that I was not mistaken; yet calling to mind
that I had heard that the way to Paradise was full of crosses, austerity and
repentance, and considering that I saw not any about me, but such as
discoursed of wantonness and delight, I began to question and misdoubt; but
I was drawn from this incertainty, by a multitude of married men, who led
their wives by their hands, that people might take notice of their affection;
nevertheles some of them were their husbands fast, since he dicted himself
that she might feed on dainties; and others his nakedness, since he grudged
his own apparel to maintain her in her Coach, and to buy toys, gowns, and
superfluous trifles for her: by which I learnt, that a man ill married, may
boast that he possesses in the person of his wife, all necessary qualities to
be put in the list of Martyrs: and seeing their troublesome life, confirmed my
first faith, that I was in the good way: but that opinion had no long durance,
because I heard a voice behind me crying, Make way there for Apparatours; O
God! said I, Are there Apparitours here? Without doubt we are going to Hell;
and it was true, for at the same instant we were got in by a little Door made
like a Mousetrap, easy to enter, but impossible to get out.

I was greatly astonished, in that in all the way no man remembered whither he
was going, and yet when we were entered, every one aghast began to look upon
his Companion, saying, it is infallible, we are in Hell. At which mine heart
began to quiver, and with tears in mine eyes, I began to bewail those I
had left behind me in the World, as my Kindred, Friends, and acquaintance:
but turning my face toward the way by which we came, I saw most of them
coming, whose arrival did a little comfort me, believing that they would be
some consolation in so sad an abode, if perhaps I should stay there long.

Notwithstanding I pursued my journey, and noted the Gate to be guarded by
seven Devils, who kept account of all that entered. They asked my name and
quality, and knowing my design, let me pass; but demanding of the throng
behind me the same question, and being informed Tailours, one of the Devils
answered, What a strange thing is this? I think that all the Tailours in the
World believe, that Hell is made for none but them, they come in such clusters.
How many are there, said another Devil? There are an hundred, said the former:
Deceive not your self, said his Companion, It is impossible if they be
Tailours there should be so few, for the least band that comes daily of them,
is not less than a thousand or twelve hundred, and we have already so many,
that we know not where to pile them, neither know I whether we ought to receive
them or no: the poor Smell-feasts were much frighted at these words, believing
they would thrust them out; but at last they found favor and got in. I may
well say (thought I then) that these people are very wicked, since the refusal
of entrance into Hell is so rigorous a threatening to them. Hereupon behold a
Devil of the Black Guard, who stackt them up in a place of stowage, they
being by reason of their dry seeding accounted the wood of Hell.

From the Gate going through a dark entry, one called me by my name; at which
horror struck I turned, and perceived it to be a man, yet very hardly
because of the darkness which was very thick, and the flames that environed
him. Ah, Sir! said he, Do you not know me? I am such an one, a Bookeseller; Is
it possible, said I? Yes, answered he, it is I; Who would ever have thought it?
He believed that I would have pitied him; but when I had seen his face, I
began to admire the righteous judgment of God in his just punishment, for
his Shop was a very Storehouse of Sedition; and it was he that sold and vented
all those wicked, scandalous, and schismatic Pamphlets, against Church and
State Government, which at this day run up and down under the hands of
malevolent, disaffected persons: and somewhat near him, I also espied another,
whose Shop had been no other than a Stews of licentionsnesse, and a Magazine
of heresies, fraught with nothing more than obscene, scurrilous, profane,
railing, and popish Pamphlets, tending to the subversion of all good manners,
and to the increase of superstitious vanities. After that I had a while beheld
them, I made show of administering redres unto them, but they perceiving that I
counterfeited, said, What would you? it is the cursednes of our condition, that
we are not condemned for our own works only, as other men are, but endure
and suffer for the works of others; yet herein we receive some solace, in that
we are not alone, but have Printers our coequals, who for their own lucre,
have been as forward as our selves in these things; and for ought we see,
suffer more extremely than our selves, and that for nothing more than for their
unjust and unconscionable dealings toward us, in often printing such great
numbers of overplus books to their own abundant benefit, and our great loss
and detriment. More they would have said, but that a Devil with the smoke of
his loose paper, stopped their breath; to avoid which fume I went on, saying in
my self, Alas! If there are men condemned for selling and printing the evil
works of others, what shall become of the Writers, and those that practice
them?

I passed on, and went into a Cave, where I saw many burning in immortal Fire.
One of them said I, I never oversold, I never sold but that which was just, why
am I thus afflicted? When I heard him say he had sold that which was just, I
thought it had been Judas, and went nearer to see if he were red haird, as
we commonly imagine: but I found it to be a Mercer, dead not long before. How,
World-thrive (said I) are you here? he scorned to answer, because I gave him no
better Title: but one of their Torturers (to augment their pain) These
Drapers, Mercers, Goldsmiths, and Silkemen (said he) would always shape their
false lights and waights according to their fancy, and make their measures of
what length and shortness they pleased, and now they find the gain on it. But
if the World would be wise, they would quickly banquerupt all these kind of
men; for then they would understand, that Stuffes of Gold and Silver, and Silk
that Plate, Diamonds, and Pearl, that Lace, Silk, and Cloth, and all other
things upon which they set unmercifull rates, are things rather superfluous
than necessary, and that these are they that feed all your disordinate and
foolish expenses, to which they allure and flatter you with a Lover called
Credit, by means whereof they invisibly ruin you.

The Devil would have spoke more if I had not left him, to see from whence
proceeded those peales of laughter, which I heard. They were Spirits deriding
one, who would not submit because he was a Gentleman, showing his Pedigree
taken from the Heralds Office; but a Devil told him, Gentleman (said he) let
your descent be what it will, you have not done in your life time any other,
than the works of an infamous man, in swearing, blaspheming, and haunting of
Brothell-houses, and Tavernes; in which respect, your Arms are discarded by
the Court of Hell. He that is virtuous, is the truly Noble: yet though a man
were an upstart, (as you are) if his actions were worthy imitation, we dare no
more touch him than a thing sacred. Your billetting would not have been made
here, if you had bin better than others: but since you esteem your self so
noble, you shall be burnt that we may preserve your ashes: this said, he cast
him into a furnace.

Taking the left hand, I saw a number of old men, tearing their flesh, and
lamenting bitterly, and inquiring what they were? This is the Enclosure, said
one, of those Fathers, who damn themselves that their Posterity may be rich,
and who otherwise are called the ill-advised. Miserable that I am! (said one of
them) I never had in all my life time so much as one minutes rest, I did not
eat, slept not, and went almost naked, tormenting both my body and mind to
gather substance, that I might richly marry my Children, and with great sums
purchase them Offices and honors: which done I died without being sick, that
I might diminish nothing of those golden heaps, I had gathered together; and
yet the breath was scarce out of my body, but they quite forgot me; no tears,
no monrning, and as if they had had certain intelligence of my damnation, they
neither charitably wish me a joyful resurrection, nor accomplish that which I
commanded them; nay more, to aggravate my torments, God suffers that I see them
from hence consume and spend in dissoluteness, those goods for which I have so
impoverished the World. It Is no time now to complain, said a Devil, Have you
not heard being on Earth this Proverb, Happy is the Child's whose Father goes
to the Devil? At this the poor men multiplied their cries, which object moved
me to so great compassion, that I could no more behold them.

But a little farther espying an obscure Dungeon, in which was heard a great
jangling and clattering of chains; I asked what place that was? and was
answered, it was the bounds of O that I had! I understand you not, said I, what
are they? These are (said one) the Idiots of the World, who gave themselves
over to vice, to their insensible damnation* and now remembering what they
should have done, and did not; to defend themselves from the pains they
suffer, they continually cry, O that I had confessed my sins to the Lord! O
that I had repented! O that I had gone to Church! O that I had served God! O
that I had releeved the poor! O that I had refrained my tongue, and many other
exclamations like unto these.

After these late Repentants, I met others far worse, who were in a baseCourt
full of much nastinesse; and wondered to hear the title that belonged to them,
which was as a Devil told me, God is merciful, and will forgive. How can
that be, said I, that mercy should condemn, since that condemnation is an
action of Justice? You talk like a Devil. And you said the Devil, like a
Fool, since you know not that half of those that are here are adjudged by
Gods mercy. But, to make you understand the Riddle* Consider how many Sinners
there are, who when they are admonished of their evil doings, leave not for
all that to continue and increase them more and more, in answering to their
Reprovers, God is merciful, he regards not so small a thing, his mercy is so
great: and thus whilst they hope in God, persevering in their wicked ways,
we never distrust them. After your reckoning, (said I) none may rely on the
Mercy of God. You are dull, said he, you must trust in it, it is that that
helps forward good desires, and rewards good actions, but it is denied to
those that are obstinate in their wicked ways, for it is to play with Grace,
to believe that it serves to cover guilt, and to think that a man may receive
it just when he has need of it without ever endeavoring to get it. Gods mercy
is infinite for his Saints and repentant Sinners, who struggle to become
worthy; and those that have the greatest share, are such as are most fearful;
but he that knows how great it is, makes himself unworthy the effects, when
he turns it into the liberty of evil doing, and not into spiritual profit.

Can it be (said I overwhelmed with marvel) that so good a lesson should
proceed from the mouth of so mischievous a Doctor? Which spoken* the Devil
showed me a flaming partition, wherein (as one of the Tortured told me) were
those that were afflicted with sudden deaths. You lie, (in reverence be it
spoken to the Gentleman that hears me) said the Fiend, no man dies suddenly.
Death uses no surprise. There wants never warning. How is it that you complain
of dying suddenly, when since your very birth, since you began the course of
your life, Death was always with you? What is more ordinarily seen in the
World than dying and burial? What is spoken of more in the Pulpit? or read of
more in good Books, than the frailty of life, and certainty of Death? First of
all the body, grows it not every day nearer and nearer to its Tomb? Clothes,
wear they not? Houses, decay they not? Your own Diseases, and those of
others, knock they not at all hours at the Gates of your Souls, remembering
them that they must dislodge? Sleep, represents it not to the life the death
of living man? and life, is it not maintained by the death of beasts? And for
all this, you are so impudent, as to say that you dyed suddenly. No, no, change
language, say hereafter that you are unbeleevers, dead, without ever thinking
that you should dye; and learn besides, that Death takes as soon the youngest
stripling, as the agedst decrepite; and according to what they have done, be it
good or ill, she proves either a Mother or a Stepdame.

He showed me also a vast Cauldron, savouring of many oily sents, wherein were
preserved Apothecaries, Comfit-makers, Chirurgions, Distillers, Barbers, and
Mountebankes, with many more, for fear of rottenness, saying, these are the
true Alchimists, and not Geber, Ruspicella, with the rest; because they only
writ of what metals Gold might be made, but made it not; or if they did, none
ever since could penetrate into the depth of their secrets. But these, out of
puddle water, sticks, Flies, dung, Vipers, Toads, simples, sugar and
excrements, can make Gold, of better substance than all those could, that ever
meddled in the art, because that theirs is ready coined for use. In which
respect we are careful to preserve them, least our treasure should decrease.

Hereupon another Devil made signs that I should come unto him without noise;
which having done, he set me against an open casement, saying, look in
there, and see the ordinary exercise of foul Women. I did as I was commanded,
and beheld a very great number, some whereof were putting black patches on
their faces; others plucked up the hair on their eyebrowes, and others that*
had none made use of black Lead, some put on foretops of counterfeit hair,
some placed Ivory teeth in their gummes, in stead of those of Ebony which were
fallen out. This eat Ambergreece Comfits to purify her breath, and those held
boxes of painting, with which they daubed their faces, and by this means
became infinitely shining, without being either Stars or Suns. Well, said
the Devil, would you have believed that Women had been so inventive and
ingenious to perdition? I knew not what to answer, but turned away, and saw a
man sitting on a Chair all alone, without either fire, ice, Devil, or rack
about him; who nevertheless cried out with the fearfullest cries that ever I
yet heard; his heart t^ickled drop by drop from his eyes, and he tore his
bre^st, and gnawed his arms, in so furious a manner, that I thought he had
been mad; O Lord! said I, with what despair is this poor man transported? no
body to my thinking does him any harm; Friend, my Friend, What Fury bewitches
you? For what do you complain being here alone, free from all manner of
Torture. Alas! said he, with a terrible voice, I feel in my self all the
pangs of Hell together. You see not the Hangmen that are linkt to my Soul; you
see them not (said he, reiterating his cry, and turning about as distracted)
but he sees them, whose severe and implacable Justice can measure offenses,
with torments without measure. O Memory! thou art to me a cruel Devil!
memory of the good I might have done, memory of those wholesome counsels I have
despised, and the evils I have committed, Ah! that thou do afflict me! And to
heap up my misfortunes, when thou leavest me, my Reason begins her course,
and the imagination of that glory I might have had, and that others possess,
without having bought it so dear, as I have done the pains I suffer! O
understanding! What cruelty do tho^ use toward me, in setting before me
Heaven and Paradise, so full of beauty, joy, content, and delight, and yet
drownest me more and more in despair! Some release I pray thee. And thou my
Will, Is it possible that thou resusest to make a truce for one poor moment?
You that are a Pilgrim of the other World, who ask what torments me? Know
they are the three powers of my Soul, converted into invisible flames, and
into three Executioners, who without hand or Element, burn and tear my
Entrals. And if by chance they cease to wrack me, the Worm of Conscience
gnawes my Soul, as the perpetual food of insatiable hunger. Ending this word,
he cast forth a deep groan, and turning from me; Mortail, said he, Consider
that those of the World, who were illuminated with the Gospel, and endowed
with celestial Graces, and have not employed them to their own Salvation,
carry their Hell in themselves, and are tormented with the like misery as I am.
This said, he began his first work: and I departed very pensive,
apprehending in my self, that that man must needs have heavy crimes upon his
Conscience. But the Devil seeing me sad, whispered in mine ear that it was
an Atheist, who neither believed in God nor the Devil. O that an understanding
man is really accursed (replied I) when he cannot tell how to make profit of
that Talent, which God has given him!

Not far off, I saw abundance of People, drawing a fiery Cheriot through a
burning Lake, with rings thrust through their tongues, to which the harness
was fastened; and a Devil going before them with this Proclamation, This is
the punishment of swearers, slanderers, and liars. In the Wagon were easy
believers; and in a room whose prospect looked upon them were beautiful
Women, tormented in quality of Witches; at which mine heart melted, but a
Devil came to comfort me, saying, Do you not remember the evil they have
done you? Have you not often found by experience, that they use a certain
kind of Magic that destroys; therefore their pain is agreeable to it.

I followed my devilish Conductour, and saw Judas* accompanied with false
Stewards. T^^tours, and such O^ficers as himself, some whereof had no
^^^^heads, and others no face. ^ seemed to be well pleased with them, who
related the exploits they had done in his imitation. Going nearer, I saw that
their torment was like that of Titius, on whose entrals a Vultur still gnawed,
for their Consciences were their greatest Tormentours. I could not suppress
the desire I had to speak, perjured, disloyal, traitor, villain above all
example (said I) how durst thou be so vile, as to sell thy Master, thy Lord,
and thy God? Why, answered Judas, do you complain of that? You should rather
commend than condemn me, since you receive so great a benefit thereby. It Is
for me to bewail that am excluded from the possession of so great a good, as
I have put into your hands. But think not that I am Judas alone, Know that
since the Lords Death there have been and are worse than I, more wicked, and
more unthankful, witness Heretics, and Schismatickes. For if I did once
sell my Master, I was in part cause of the Redemption of Mankind; but they in
selling him, you, and themselves, have lost all the World. And others, who are
not content to sell him only, but they scourge, and crucify him, more
ignominiously than the Jews, in their wicked lives. And though I know that
repentance now availes me not, yet I would have you on earth to look into
yourselves before you censure me; since I was the first Steward condemned for
sale, and not for bargain, as is the use and practice of all my fellows.

I would hear no more, but making way, saw a great bulk of building which
seemed like some enchanted Castle; in which were many Venereous Devils tossing
Whores and Thieves from scalding oil into frozen ice, to heat and cool their
appetite. One of the Females stepping to the threshold, where I and my Guide
stood, Gentlemen (said she) I pray you tell us whether this be justice to
condemn People both for giving and taking? A Thief is condemned because he
takes from another, and an Whore because she gives. For my part, I maintain
that there is no injustice in us; for if it be justice for every one to give of
his own, and that we do no other, wherefore are we damned? We found her
question too difficult to be derided, and therefore sent her to Lawyers and
Counselors, who were not far from her: but remembering that I had heard her
speak of Thieves, I asked where Seriveners were, because as I came, I overtook
none by the way: I believe, said my Devil, that you met not any. Why? Are they
then allsaved? No, said he, but they come neither on foot nor horseback, but
flying on wings a million in a flock; in respect of which lightness, they are
tormented in an upper Chamber.

I past by, and not far from thence went unto a place, in which many Souls
were shut up, some whereof were very silent, and others clamorous. One told me
it was the empalement of Lovers, at which I was something grieved, seeing that
Death does not kill the sighs with the body. Some talked of their passions,
and endured a torment of loving distrust, and others attributed their loss to
their desires and imaginations, whereof the force of the one, and, the colors
of the other, did present pictures to be a thousand times fairer than persons
and substances. The most part-of them were disquieted and molested with a
torture called I thought. (as a Devil ^old me) and asking what that was? He
smiling replied, it is a torment agreeable to their offense* for when Lovers see
themselves deceived in their hopes, either in the pursuit or possession of
their Mistresses, they say always, I thought that she did love me, I thought
she would have been the raising of my fortune, I thought that she would have
been faithful to me; so that the cause of their (...) proceeds not from any
other thing but I thought.

Next to Lovers were Poets, who endured the same punishment, because their
passions were not much different. These men are of very jeasting humors, (said
the Devil) for whilst that others mourn and bewail their sins, they sing
theirs, and publish them every where. For if they have but once lain with a
Cloris, Phillis, Silviae, or Melita, by the means of one song they will walk
her through a kingdom dockt like a Chimisticall Goddess. They will give her
golden hair, a Crystal forehead, eyes of Emralds or Diamonds, teeth of
Pearl, lips of Purple and Rubies, with words of Musk and Amber: and yet for
all these riches of which they are so prodigal, they cannot get credit for a
mean suit among Brokers, a course shirt among Sempsters, nor a cracked beaver
at the second hand.

Fearing too long a stay, I went on to see the devout Impertinents, who make
prayers and requests to God full of absurd extravagancies. O that they gave
testimony of much grief! Their tongues were chained in everlasting silence,
and their bodies made crooked and bending to the Earth, condemned to hear for
ever the fearful cries of a wheazing Devil, who thus reproved them. You
brazen-fac't abusers of Prayer, and the long sufferance of GOD, presumptuous,
who dare treat with the Divine Majesty, with less respect than you would do
with a Merchant with whom you traffic: how many times have you made these
execrable petitions? Lord, take my Father out of this World, that I may enjoy
his goods. Let my Brother die within few days that I may succeed him in
dignity. Grant that I may find a Mine of Gold at my feet. That I may be
fortunate in play. That my Son and Daughter may be richly married. That the
King may cast his favor upon me. And add unto these rash demands; Do this
Lord, and I promise to give money toward the marriage of Orphants, to build
Almeshouses, and relieve Hospitals. What blindness! to promise gifts to him,
from whom you desire riches, and to whom all things belong? What arrogance! to
require of God in quality of favors those things, which he gives ordinarily for
punishments and chastisements; and although you do obtain, yet you never
perform your promises. How many protestations have you made to God, his
members, and his service, when you were in the abyss of raging and tempestuous
necessity, on land, at sea, in sickness, in despair, of which you have held
no reckoning when you have obtained your wishes. But you were never other than
Hypocrites and deceivers. Your oaths and vows were never made through
devotion, but necessity. Did you ever ask of God your Souls rest? the
increase of Grace, his favors, and inspirations? No verily, and I believe you
were altogether ignorant of the worth of these spiritual riches, thinking too
much on temporal; and knew not that the most pleasing sacrifices and oblations
to GOD, were purity of Conscience, humility of spirit, and servent love and
charity. He takes delight that men should be mindful of him, that he may
multiply his benefits, but they never remember him, but when they feel
affliction, and that is the reason God sends them calamities, to maintain
their zeal. Unjust demanders! Consider now how little those things you have
desired, and God given, have staid with you: and how unthankful they have bin,
(though you have ever cherisht them) since they have not accompanied you to
your last end. Consider that your Children and Kindred do so little remember
what goods you have left them, that they employ not one penny to pious uses,
yet they are excusable, in that seeing that you did none in your life time,
they know you cannot take pleasure in them though performed after your death:
and besides that you are in a place which they trust never to deserve. Some of
these miserable men would have answered, but the muzzles that locked up their
speech would not permit them.

Thence I went into a great Hall, smelling abundantly of Sulphur; wherein were
Alchimists, whom Devils examined with much trouble, for they could not
understand their gibbridge: their talk was altogether of metallicke
Substances, which they named after the seven Planets, as Gold the Sun, Silver
the Moon, Brass Jupiter, Tin Venus, etc. They were all charged with
furnaces, crusibles, coals, bellows, argall, minerals, dungs, man's blood, and
alembicke powders; some calcined, others washed ^here they purified, there
separated, made firm that which was volatile, rarefied and converted into
fume, that which was firm: in another place they transmuted forms, and fixed
Mercury; then having resolved the viscous matter, exiled the subtle part, and
fire corruptible, when they came to the coppell all exhaled in vapor: some
disputed whether the fire was to be made of Beech or Maple? whether or no the
fire of Raimundus Lullius was to be understood of lime, or of the effective
light of heat, and not the effective heat of fire? Others with Hermes ensign,
gave the principle to the great work. Others looked upon the black become
white, hoping to see it red. And whilst that the proportion of nature with
nature, did contend and aid it self; whilst that the rest of their blind
Oracles did wait the reduction of the first matter; in lieu of converting dung
into hair, and humane blood, ingots, and wedges of Gold; they turned fine Gold
into fine ordure, became fools, beggars, and false Coiners: how often did I
hear them say, The Dead Father is risen, kill him once more! How many did I
see busied to explain these words, so often repeated by all Chimist authors,
God be praised, who suffers that out of the vilest thing in the world, so
excellent and rich a matter should be made! Some said they had found the
sense, and that if the Philosophers Stone was to be made of the vilest thing in
the World, it was to be made of public Strumpets, because there is nothing so
infamous in Nature, as to prostitute ones body to all comers; upon this
opinion they went to boil and distill them; but a Devil came, saying,
Gentlemen Philosophers, will you know assuredly, what is the vilest thing in
the World? It is Alchimists, therefore desiring to make the Philosophers Stone,
following the method we heard you talk on; we will put you into the fire to
make an experimental proof. As he said, so it was done, and the poor mad
Chimists burned almost with their own wills, so great a desire they had to see
the Elixir:

Not far off from these, I saw a great society of Astrologers, and
superstitious men. One of them who was a Fortune Tellers, looked upon the hands
of all the condemned, saying, it is very easy to know by the Mount of Saturn,
that you were to be damned; and as easily to be distinguished by this girdle
of Venus, that you are all lechers. Another who was encompast with Spheres,
contemplating the Stars, rising up cried out, O God! What misfortune* If my
Mother had but been delivered of me one half hour sooner, I had been saved;
for at that instant Saturn changed aspect, and Mars lodged in the house of
life. Another said to the Devils that tormented him, that they were best to be
assured that he was dead, for his part he would not believe it, because he had
Jupiter for ascendant, and Venus in the house of life, not having any evil
aspect; which signified that he should live, an hundred and one years, two
months, six days, four hours, and three minutes. And another reduced his
Science into certain heads, to divine of things to come, and know things past;
yet could not guess at the time that was now present, nor of his own and his
Companies damnation. Besides these there were many Magicians, Negromancers,
Sorceresses, and Inchanters in the same station; and many places of expectation
void, which were said to be kept for certain great men, who added faith to
these devilish. Disciples.

At last I began to be very weary, and looked about to see if I could find
any place to get out; which striving to do, I was (before I was aware) in a
long Gallery, in which was Lucifer Prince of Hell, environed with his whole
Court composed of he and she Devils; for there are Females as well as Males:
but fearing to fail in respect and civility, his horrible countenance also
frighting me, I staid at the entry thereof; when the Usher of the Chamber came
and told me, that being a Stranger, his Prince had commanded him to bring me
in, and show me all the rarities. I thanked him for the honor his Master did
me and for the pains he took himself; and complementing, began to
consider how the place was better adorned, than those are of our greatest Lords
and Potentates, though the most curious in the World: for they have naught but
dead Statues, or painted pictures, dumb, insensible, immovable; but here all
the persons were animated with breathing and life: and which was most rare,
were of no base condition. None but Emperors and Kings, some Ottoman, some
Roman, some Christian, besides many Queens, Princes, and Princesses, who would
bind me to too long a description in nomination. But for as much as I was not
able any longer to endure the air of this hot Climate, I entreated the Fiend
to show me which way I might get out. Yes, said he, follow me. And then he
showed me a passage, through which I got into the same Vale I mentioned at the
beginning of this wonderful discourse; trembling and rejoicing both together,
and meditating on the diverse punishments many were tormented with, who perhaps
had less deserved them than I my self; which made me undertake a constant
purpose, to live for the time to come in such sort, that I may avoid feeling
the reality and truth of those torments, which I beheld now only in vision. I
entreat thee Reader to make thy profit hereby, by mine imitation, that thou
may need no further experiment.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

SAM. BAKER.


