AN ANSWER TO A SERMON PREACHED THE 17 OF APRIL ANNO D. 1608, BY GEORGE
DOWNAME DOCTOVR OF DIVINITY AND INTITVLED, A sermon defendinge the honorable
function of Bishops; wherein, All his reasons, brought to prove the honorable
function of our L. Bishops, to be of divine institution; are answered and
refuted.

Prove. 8.6.7. Give ear, for I will speak of excellent things; and the
openinge of my lips, shall teach things that be right.

For my mouth shall speak the truth; and my lips abhor wickedness.

Imprinted anno 1609.

To the Christian reader
CHRISTIAN reader, when I had perused this sermon made by M. Downame, in
defense of the honorable function of Bbs, as he says, and saw that it tended
directly to prove, that the Caling of our L. Bbs. (as they now exercise it in
the Church of England) is not only lavvfull and good; but also to be holden,
jure diuino; not as an humane ordinance, their ancient and wonted tenure, but
by devine right, as the very and ymediate ordinance of Christ: I deemed it as
needful to be answered, as any book our Opposites have at any time set forth.
For how ever M. D. affirms the doctrine therein contained, to be not only
true, but a profitable and necessary truth, and that in the judgment of all
men, which are not partial and full of prejudice: it is evident, that it is a
doctrine utterly false, very hurtful and obnoxious, necessary in deed, to be
confuted, at no hand to be believed: doctrine, repugnant to the truth, the word
of the truth, scripture of truth, contrary to the judgment and practyce, of
the prime Churches next after Christ and his Apostles; and of all reformed
Churches, since the restablishinge of the gospel by the worthyes in these
later Wickliff, Husse, Luther, Zuinglius, etc.
times: Against the doctrine of our ymediate forefathers, (some of whom were
worthy Martyrs,) Latimer, Cramner etc
who in their submission to K. H. the 8. at the abolishing of the Popes
authority out of England, acknowledge with subscription, See the whole story
in the acts and monuments and in the book called the Bbs. kook,
that the disparitie of Ministers and Lordly premacie of Bbs, was but a politik
device of the Fathers, not any ordinance of Christ Jesus: and Reformat legum
Ecclesiasticarum, tit. de divi nis officijs. ca. 10. 11.
and that the government of the Church by the Minister and certain Seniours
or Eldes in every parish, was the ancient discipline: a doctrine, I say,
clean contrary to the professed judgment of all our worthy writers, Whitakers,
Fulk, etc.
who in their answers to the papists, that plead for their hierarchy, with
the same reasons that M. D. does for his, do determine, that the government
our Bbs. exercise over other Ministers, is iure humano, by the positive law of
man only: the which, if M. D. says true, is false: and so the Papists are
left unanswered: yea a doctrine contrariant to the laws of our land, S Edw.
Cook de jure Regis ecclesiastico. fol. 8.
which make it one part of the Kings jurisdiction, to grant to our Bbs. that
ecclesiastical power they now exercise over us: and also to tak it from them
at his pleasure: the which his Highness takes to himself, and gives to all
Kings, where he professes, in his premonitio^ before one of his last books.
that God has left it to the liberty, and freewill of princes, to alter the
Church-gouerment at their pleasure. Lastly, it is a doctrine contrarying, the
doctrine of the Church of England, professed even by the Bbs. themselves Bb,
Jewel in his Apolog. defense. Arch. Bb. whitegifte ag: M. Cart.
till of late days: when as men weary to hold any longer in Capite and of
the King: they began to change their tenure into soccage, and desired to be
free even from Knights service. The newnes and strangnes of which doctrine
notwithstanding, (to use the words of Socrates Plato in Apolog. Socratis.
against his accusers) M. D. has told his tale so handsomely, and carried the
matter so smothely, likely and confidently; that every word he speaks, has
an appearance and promis of truth, though in truth, he has scarce uttered one
word of truth. By reason whereof, I saw much hurt was lik to come to the
Church of God. The papists would be much advantaged, seeing that Antichristian
doctrine (even after the renewing and revivinge of their ceremonies amongst us)
so freely preached and published, tending to the upholding of their
hyerarchie, from the Pope to the Apparitor, as well as ours: his reasons being
in deed the very same with theirs, as in the answer to them, it shall
appear. Others would be much scandalized; those that were in love with their
own ease, would easily crouch down lik Isachars Ass, and seeing that rest
is good, would readily and without examination, embrace his doctrine so
pleasing to the flesh: as for others, it would remoras obijcere ardentioribus,
cast blocks in their way whose hearts were upright with God, and ran well, and
so make themst and at the gaze like the Corpses of Asael and Amasa: or
retardare zelum, make the^ slack their pace: at least sanctorum spiritus in
quietare disquiet the minds of all the saints, to see a sermon of that
consequence, preached and published, by a man of that nam and note in the
Church. These things considered, my hearts desire and prayer to God was, that
he would raise up some man, like Moses to stand in the gapp, and by some short
and sound answer, to make up the breach he had made, and waytinge for the
performance of it, the news was: that work was undertaken and in hand; but
answer, and press, and printer, and concealer of the author, were taken and
imprissonned, as dealers against the state. Thus was my soul cast down
within me, to see a truth, so profitable and necessary a truth suppressed. I
thought with my self, but shall the cause lie there? has no man that courage
for the truth, as to set upon that work a fresh? I saw by experience, that
nothing but bands and afflictions abode, him especially, who after this
forewarninge should tak up the gant let M. D. had thrown down: but knowing
of none that was resolved of it: I cast my counts and summed up my reckonings,
and found that my life was not dear to me in this case: and nothing dismayed,
I set down my rest, not to be bound only, but to die also for the name of
the Lord, and the giving testimoney to this part of the word of his grace.
With this resolution I set upon this answer, and through the blessing of God
(who will maintain his own cause against all opposition of man whatsoever)
have here brought it to thy vievve: in much weakness and with many wants I
confess: (my self being the least able of thousands in this land to manage
this busynes) yet with evidence sufficient, to make it manifest, I doubt not,
that M. D. doctrine in this sermon is nothing less, then true, profitable and
necessary, as he affirms. That his praeface is full of witty caluminations
to make our cause odious, and our selves hateful to the wourld: and that
(notwithstanding his great boastinge) his sermon has in it no one sound
syllable of argument to prove his cause and disprove ours. I have made no large
discourses to teach over a nevve the discipline of Christ: besides that it
belongs not to me to do it at this time, professing to answer so far
only as he opposes: it has bin already laid down sufficiently and at large
with proofs pregnant and demonstratiue those fevve of them which M. D. in
his sermon indeavoureth to infringe, I have defended and upheild in this
answer only, except that sometimes I give him and the reader to wit, and
as it were a taste, what might further be said therein. According to his
desire and my abintie I have distinctly applied my answers to his arguments
in order. Weigh them both well, good reader, compare the one with the other,
beleve nether, further then evidence truly produced, leads the: every such
Pythagoras as would be beleved upon his own word without authority and
good reason, was long since condemned Ierom epist. 152.
famae nemo credit nisiinconsideratus, quia sapiens non credit incerto, Tertull
in Apolog. c. 7.
he is not wise but inconsiderate that believes flying and uncertain
speeches, look well therefore to thy evidence, before thou give thy verdict. If
thou fyndest no sufficiency in his reasons to enforce thee to acknowledge his
doctrine for true, justly think with thy self, it is not else where to be had,
all men know him to be a scholar; he professes he has read the cheef
treatisses on bothsydes, thou have here the pith and substance of all that all
of them can say for themselves and against us. The Lord open our eyes to see
his truth and sanctifye our hearts unto the love of it. And the same God, the
Lord himself of peace, grant us his peace, alwaise, by all means. To him be
praise for ever Amen.

The answer to his preface.
AS the dead fly, Eccles. 10.1.
by falling into the ointment of the Apoticarie, takes away the sweet smell
thereof, and causes it to putrify and stink: so does a man, gracious and
glorious for many good parts, by some his follies; loose the sweet savor of
that precious ointement of his good name, and makes himself to stink in their
nostrels, who have most delighted in him. What shall we say then to M.
Downame, and what smell is he lik to give, who in this his preface, has as
many dead flies almost as sentences. It is directed to the Christian reader,
the matter concerns Christianity, the author a much respected Christian; and
yet scarce one sentence theirof, but so unchristianly written, that had not G.
D. subscribed it, we could never have deemed M. D. the Penman of it. It was
expected of all that know him, that though he writ of the same subject, which
other his predecessors have done; yet, as lead by another spirit, he would
have taken another course; and by his myld and moderate dealing, condemned them
for sharpening their toungs, to make their words cut as the rasor, and pearse
unto the heart lik the prickings of the sword: but he surpasses, at least does
parallel, and so does justify the^ all. In deed, he covers with another
coveringe, and makes another show, then they have done: but when his plaites
shall be unfolded and he uncovered, I doubt not (Christian reader) but thou will
readily and ex animo subscribe my sentence. Let us therefore come to it. All
that he says in this his preface may well be referred to four heads. The
first is his persuasion grounded upon reason, that whosoever read his sermon
without prejudice, cannot but believe and embrace the doctrine therein taught,
as a truth profitable and necessary contained from the begininge to the
midst of page 4. The second, is a description of the singular god, that will
immediately follow upon the beleevinge and embracing thereof, from thence to
midst of page 8. The third is a double exhortation drawn from the premises,
from thence to the last sentence. The fourth is, his conclusion with a
protestation.

His persuasion he lays down in the beginning where he tells us, that he
is not ignorant how unpleasing his sermon will be to some, who are forestalled
with preiudicate opinions, (whom he could wish he were as sure to persuade, as
he hops by evidence of truth to co^vince;) and that if he may entreat us,
to read it without prejudice, and to judge of it without partiallitie, he
doubts not, but that we will acknowledge with him, that the doctrine therein
contained is not only true, but also a profit able and necessary truth. The
which in effect he repeateth again in the latter end of this first head. For
answer whereunto, (not to examine him what might be the reason of this
complaint, whether the corrupt measuring of other men's minds by his own
affections, as they now stand toward them and their writings that differ from
him; or the remembrance of his former passions, what time he himself was
displeased with them that spoke against him, when he walked in another may
then now he does; or his fear (being privy to the weakness of his cause) that
some will too narrowly sifte and try his sermon, if they be not frighted from
it by some such prefaces; not to examine him I say hereof but leaving it to
himself, not to his pen but to his conscience to decid) I must tell him; first
that if the prejudice he charge upon others, had not blinded his own eyes,
he might well have seen, how much he mistaketh the matter, when he says, he
is not ignorant how unpleasing his sermon willbe to some etc. He cannot be
ignorant, that if he has done the deed he boasts of, and proved that which
he intended therein, none in this kingdom will more applaud this sermon, and
gratulate him with his labors, then those some, whom, he says, it will be most
unpleasing unto: considering how dear a price they have paid, and stand yet
indebted to pay for not being of his mind. A far greater (I suppose) then can
be imagined he or any of his syd will ever disburse for it. Purt case, the case
should alter, shall we think he or they will abid suspension, deprivation,
degradation, excomunication and imprissonment for this doctrine contained in
his sermon; as some of us have done for the truth we hold? Secondly, that he
deals not very charitablie, in chargeing all those that are not of his mind,
to be so forestalled with preiudicate opinions, that though, by evidence of
truth they be convinced, yet they will not be persuaded. What is this else, but
to proclaim them to be men, 1 These. 5.21.
without conscience and care to try all things and keep that which is good? yea
to be such, as against light and cheke of heart, are resolved to go on in
evil, even sold to the defense of error and obstinacy? we are often thus
charged in this preface, but if he be not able to instance, upon his own
knowledge in some of us, thaz we have showed our selves obstinate in some
errors, whereof we have bin convicted; himself is the man that is forestalled
with prejudice: and in deed so sick of this disease, that it may well be said
to him, medite cura teipsum, hypocrite, first cast the beam out of thine own
eye. For were he as sound thereof as he would seem to be, he could never have
charged (as he does in the next words) all those that read his sermon, and do
not assent thereto without contradiction, straitewaies acknowledging the
doctrine therein contained to be true, yea a profitable and necessary truth:
to read it with prejudice, and judge of it with partiallity. A very hard
condition laid upon the reader, and an uncharitable tax of thowsands in this
land. Thirdly, he boasts as vainly of himself, as he speaks uncharitably
of others, for whereunto tend his words but to tell us, that he is the man,
that has dryven the nail to the head and stroke all dead; so far excelling
all that writ or spak before him, in bringing light out of darkness, that all
those who wilfully shutt not their cies, must needs, acknowledge with him that
for true which is in deed utterly false. Shall we think M. D. writes as he
thinks? And that if the Discipline we stand for, were not (but the government
by our Bbs. in stead thereof) under the cross, and he should be (as others are)
deprived of all he has for holding the same: shall we think he would then
make such a sermon, and print it with such boasting, that all must needs
acknowledge it for truth, yea for a profitable and necessary truth; or else
they read it with prejudice, and judge of it with partiality? M. D. must give
us leave to doubt of it; he cannot be ignorant that there are many amongst us,
who savor the Bbs. calings so far as to allow them a place in the Church,
and therefore cannot be charged with the prejudice and partiallity he speaks
of, who yet nether do (nor are likely ever to) acknowledge this his doctrine to
be as he says, a profitable and necessary truth. His reason therefore, whereon
he groundeth his persuasion, had need to be pregnant, or else it is but a vain
presumption. Let us hear it, I the rather conceyve this hope (says he)
because the time has bin, when mine affection inclined by the reverent opinion
I had worthily conceyved not only of M. Calvin, the author, but also of M.
Beza, and many other godly and learned men, patrones and fautors of the
pretended discipline, made me suspend my judgment, till I had seriously entered
into the study thereof. The which for a long time I did forbear etc. Lo
here his reason; would one think that so skillfull a workman could build so
strong hope (as not to doubt of it) upon so weak a ground; that because
himself (prejudiced by the reverent opinion he had of those worthy men) once
doubted till he had seriously entered into the study thereof; therefore all
others that read his sermo without prejudice, will forthwith and without
doubt acknovvledge the doctrine therein contained to be true, yea a profitable
and necessary truth? Can a man low in his own eyes, so highely esteem of
his own learning, as to think more to preveile by one little sermon; then all
his Predecessors of all degrees, Arch. Bbs. Bbs. Deanes and Doctors, by their
large, most accurate and learned treatisses, have bin able to do? to buyld
such castles in the air, had more become such a light head as M. G. P. then so
grave advivine as M. G. D. has seemed to be. And did the reverent opinion of
those godly and learned men, make him to suspend his judgment herein? so he
says; so also did the creditt of the first devysers somewhat amaze Bb. Bilson
himself as he tells us; in his preface to his perpet: gou:
may we beleve them? did the reverence and credit of those worthies, so far
preveile with such great men as these, as to amaze the one, and occasion the
other, of long time to suspend his judgment? what merveile then, if the
authority, of the same men, and all soundly reformed Churches in the world,
do incline us, (whom M. D. thinks many ways inferior to himself) to be of
their judgment, or as lestewyse to suspende it, till we can see more pregnant
proofs then have yet bin produced to the contrary? And surely, did the Bbs.
in their proceedings, or M. D. in his writings, use that moderation which their
places and profession require; they should deal much more favourablie with us,
then they do: seeing if we err, are we alone? have we not those godly and
learned men of our syd, by the reverence of whom our Adversaries themselves
have stood at a stay for a time? And if M. D. proofs be not (as he affirms)
pregnant and plentiful in deed; shall we not do well, to be well advysed,
before we forsake that cause, which has so many godly and learned patrones
and fautors, as are sound, admirably sound, and orthodoxall in the substanciall
points of religion as himself afterward confesses? verily we cannot be so
partial as to reverence and admire them in all other points of doctrine: and
yet despise them in this of the discipline as M. D. and the men of his syd do.

But in this sentence of his, I charge him with slauder on the one syd, and
suspect him of untruth on the other. He makes M. Calvin the author of the
discipline, (as Saravia, Bb. Bilson, D. King and others have done before him)
how slandereth he the cause of God, so making it the divice of man? that
Calvin should devise it and thrust it upon the Church for Gods ordinance; what
a notorious evil charge he upon that man, whom he would seem to reverence?
Oh that M. D. him self were not guilty of that sin in this sermon teaching the
government by our L. Bbs. to be Gods ordinance, which is in deed of man's
devysinge. M. Calvin was so far from being the devyser of the discipline we
stand for, that he was not so much as the first preacher and publisher of it,
no not in these later ages. Wicliff, Hus, Luther, Zuinglius, and others before
him, brought the same to light, though not so clearly and fully in all the
parts thereof, as shall in the answer appear. That he suspended his
judgment for along time, may justly be suspected of untruth. They that have
known him in times past, (from the time of his entrance into the Ministry
till he became Doctor especially) conceyved otherwise of him, then of one that
suspended his judgment in his cause; and that not without cause, if his
vvritings and note books were seen, and he would but tell us, whether he
never supplicated to any for the furtherane thereof. But be it true that he did
as he says, may we not justly charge upon him the neglect of his duty; in
that he entered into the Ministry, and took one lyving after another and that
with subscription (for ought is known to the contrary) and yet held the
matter in suspense a long time, and resolved not to be (as he afrervvard
says) a meddler on either syd? But to proced; he gives us two reasons (such
as they be) for his excuse; The first is, he rightly supposed (as he says) his
pains might be better bestowed in other parts of divinity. And why so? does
he not affirm this part to be a profitable and necessary truth? And has not
God commanded to his Ministers especially the study, as of every part of his
will: so of this so profitable and necessary a truth, as concerns the
government of his Church, the Ministers and Officers thereof? Yea can the
Ministers more profitably bestow their pains and study, then in these
points of divinity, that are most doubted of, and controverted in the
Church, vvherof they are members? Yea, are they not bound to it, when the cause
so stands that they must subscribe to the one, and that the most suspected
side, even such as the most and best learned in the world approve not?
Whether this suppositio^ of his be right (as he says) or no, let the world
judge. But to give it the more credit, he tells us, how he heard M. Greenham
a zealous Preacher reprove young divines in a sermon at Cambridge etc, for
setting up the roof, before they had laid the foundation. Al as poor man,
what succor is there under this ma^s shadovv? If M. Greenham so censured all
young divines for studying the Discipline, vvhereto can it be imputed, but to
some distempered passion, or zeal without judgment in him? not to any sound
reason surely, if we consider the matter well. Was there not greater reason
for him, to reprove the Prelates, for urginge young divines to subscribe, to
the Discipline in controversy, and seeking resolution in it? Have not young
divines just cause to study it, when seeing it controverted amongst many and
great divines old and nevve, they must notvvithstanding beforced to subscribe,
and thereby to approve that part, which they know to be contrary to the
judgment of the greatest lights, that these later ages have affoarded the
Churches of God? Is it not strange, they can be contented men should, (naie
will they not condemn them if they do not) subscribe to that as true; and yet
blame them, if they study the same and examine whether it be true or no? what
is it else, but with the blind Papists, to make ignorance the Mother of
Devotion, even to believe as the Church believes, and good enough? yea what
else is it, but to control the courses of our own, and all universities in
the world, who require of young divines, the public defense of controversies
of religion, in open schools, and assemblies of learned men, and yet deny
them the study, of these controversies that trouble our own Church, though
they be deemed not to befoe deep and profound, as other controversies are; but
such as easynes it self (if we may believe M. Hooker) has only made hard?
But the truth is, that young divines endure no such censure, in case they so
study these matters of discipline, that they can learn to preach and dispute
and rail against them in pulpitts and schools: naie, they are the only men,
that are judged to lay the best foundation, and pave the readiest way for
their own preferment. They only which so study the same, that they cannot
but like and approve the truth of them; they, they, I say, are the vuhappie
me^, that are ouerbusye in matters of discipline, and set up the roof before
they have laid the foundation. In his second reason he tells us, he could not
see what good would come either to himself or to the Church of God, by his
pains taken in that controversy, For he conceyved the issue of his study
would be, either the disgrace of his Ministry among the forwarder sort, if
he resolved as no when has done: or the overthrow of his Ministry, if he
should stand for that discipline. Wherein, besides his uncharitableness renewed,
mark how he discovers one shame whilst he assaieth to cover another. What
else can it argue, but that he walked not in the execution of his function with
so right a foot and sincere affection as he ought to have done; had he made
straight stepps to his paths, he would have respected, not so much the grace
of men, how holy and forward in show soever; as the discharge of that office,
which God imposed on him, and is to be parformed without respect of parsons.
And is it any other but a vain and ambitious mind, so to fear the
displeasing of some, and the disgrace of his Ministry with them, as in that
regard, to forbear of alonge time, the scarching out of that divine truth,
which himself affirms to be both profitable and necessary? Of as ill note is
it, that he refused so to do, for sear lest in seeing the truth and
professing it, it would be the overthrow of his Ministert: can this be any
better then Symonie and intrusion? had not G. D. subscribed this sentence, I
could not have thought he had looked so far a squinte, and sought himself so
much. But observe we surther, how he vvrongeth those whom he calls in a
kind of disdeine, the forwarder sort as though the Ministry of those only
that dislik the present government, were in grace with them: and the
ministry of all others were contemned and despised of them; so his words
importe, though uncharitably. For hovvever, the forvvarder sort, (that is,
such as go before others in vvelldoing) would lik the better of those
Ministers that approve of the present government, if they were of judgment for
the discipline of Christ: yet so long as they shevve themselves faithful and
painful in all other duties of their Ministry, and do not sin of malice
in railing against it; all the world sees, how they yield due reverence unto
them, and their Ministry. M. D. having thus laid down the causes of his
suspense, shows us the ground of his resolution to study it, where he
says, that when of late years the cause was so altered with the time, that a
necessity was imposed on him to resolve and profess on the one part: he
entered on the study thereof parhaps with another mind then some others did, and
therefore with other success. Whereof I can make no other construction but
this, an I leave his conscience to be examined by the searcher of hearts,
whether it be not the meaning of these cloudy speeches, that when of late
his conceited desires and other hopes of reformation in the begininge of his
Magisties reign did fail him, and that he parceyved the case to be so
altered, that except men would approve the government established, and the
Corruptions theirin, by subscribing and conforming to them; they must be turned
out of their livings: he then began to think himself of the best and clenliest
way to tak his leave of that cause, and to be enterteined of the contrary.
What that other mind should be, which brought other success, I know not. If
he means that discontented needynes set him a work, and plunged him with a
desire of yelding, no merveil though God answered him after the immagination of
his heart, and gave him leave to go, that would needs be gone: but let that
other mind be far from us to study with. If he means, that single and
sincere affection which setting a part all wourldlie respects, unfeignedly
desires to be informed in the truth; see we not how uncharitably he charge
all his brethren that have in their studies resolved against the hierarchy,
that they studied not the cause, with that single and sincere heart that he
did? But let us hear him speak again, and tell us what mind it was; to wit,
that he considered with himself, first that it was schismatic and damnable
presumption to make separation from our Church which holds and professes all
substanciall points of divinity as foundly as any Church in the world, the
primitive Churches not excepted etc. and wherein the means of salvation are
ordinarily and plentifully to be had. Secondly, that he being in the
Ministry, necessity was laid upon him, and woe unto him if preached not the
gospel. And therefore studied these controversies, as one who meant if he were
not convicted with evidence of truth to be respondent or defendant, resolving
not to leave his place, unless by force of argument he were removed whereas
others being out of love with our Church discipline, and in affection wholly
alienated from our Church-gouerners, studied these things as opponents and
plaintiffs. Wherein first, he speaks ydlely, seeing it is not material
touching the truth, whether he came as a respondent or opponent to the study of
these controversies. Every respondent does not defend the truth, nether does
every opponent oppugn it: some that defend, daube with untempered mortar,
plead for Baal, and buyld up Babel. others that oppone, do vvorthily in
castinge down by the word of God, their wales and Castles. Secondly, seeing
that other mind where with he studied, was not to leave his standing etc. What
do the he again, but charge others to be such fools and sottes, as to forsake
their standings, though by force of argument they be not convinced; But what
standing does he mean? was it the pastoral charge of that flock, that now
depends on him? it seems no; for he that left Lotheburie for it; and would
have left it for Wiggen, in all likelihood will leave it for greater
preferment. What then, is it the office of the Ministry? verily whatsoever he
says concerning his purpose, this his sermon shows, he studied these
controversies as one, who never mente to loose his standing for the truth of
the discipline, so long as by any color, he could clude the arguments
brought for it. As for his first reason, that he held it schismatic and
damnable presumption to separate from our Church etc. Not to insist upon his
high and peremptory comparison, which will hardly be made good by him, if we
consider who they are that arrogate the title of the Church of England; the
uncertainty of the doctrine they hold, altering and varyinge as it is expound
dand interpreted at their pleasure, especicially that sit in the sea of
Canterbury, and the impugninge of diverse parts of the truth by preaching and
printinge, the chief prelates winckinge, if not approving, and in a sort
provyding it may be done impune. Nor yet to stand upon it, that however in
many places, the word is soundly and plentifully preached; yet partly through
the great eclipse lately made, by the silencing of so many preachers, and
putting out so worthy lights, which lies heavy upon many a soul; and partly
through the daily letting and holding in, of many dombe idols and blind
guides, together with the pride, ambition, covetousnes, and voluptuousnes of
others; if M. D. look about the feilds well, he shall find the harvest great
and the laborers few, no springes of living water in many places to refresh
thirsty souls: many little ones asking bread, but have no Fathers to give it
the^; others in stead their of, giving stones, serpent, scorpions to eat of,
and stinking puddles to drink on: in which respects there cannot but be great
cause of sorrovv and grife to a godly heart; Not to stand upon these things I
say, but granting it, to be even as he would have it (the times of the
primitive Church excepted) what will follovv thereon, either for his own
defense or our hurt? nothing I trow: unless he be of mind and can maintain
it, that it is schismatic and damnable presumption for a minister, in his
judgment to differ from those Churches whereof he is a member, in any point:
or that to refuse subscription and conformity to them in every thing,
(provided they hold and profess all substanciall points of divinity) be, to
make separation from it. M. D. I doubt not, is parsvvaded the Churches of
Scotland, France and the low cuntries hold and profess all substanciall
points of religion: and that in the^ the means of salvation is ordinarily and
plentifully to be had; what if he were a member of any one of those Churches,
and required by them to subscribe for truth, that the government of the Church,
co^muni praesbyteroru^ consilio, by the presbytery is jure divino: and the
government by our L. Bbs. is not divine, but humane and iure positiuo, may it
be thought, he would count it schismatic and damnable presumption, to be of
another mind? And if for refusing to subscribe in that manner, (which if his
sermon be true were a great fault) he should be putt from his Ministry, and
out of the Church: might it be said, he made separation from it? verily, if a
man must go against his own judgment and mind therein; because the Church
vvherof he is a member, professes all the substanciall points of divinity;
and having in it the means of salvation, holds so; what do we else, but
make, the Church, or rather the governors thereof, Popes and Gods, yea lift
the^ up above all that is called God? But further, if it be schismatic and
damnable presumption, to suffer our selves to be cut of from the execution of
our Ministry, in the Church vvherof we are members, rather then against
Consience to yield to every thing it requires of us; what is it in our
Prelates, by suspencion, deprivation and degradatio^ to cut of from the
Ministry, such as hold and profess all the substanciall points of divinity
as soundly, and practyce them as carefully, as the best of them all (none
dispraised) because they cannot, nor will not force their consciences, to
yield to some other smaller matters as themselves count them? yea by
excomunication, proceeding against the^ as heathens and publicanes, to cut
them of from the Church? is this no presumption in them? well, whether they
or we be guilty of schism let Councels and Fathers judge. Schismaticus est,
qui a comunione seipsum suspendit etc. he is a schismatik, says the council
of Calcedon decret. pr. 2 Cause. 23. q. 5. cap. 42.
which separateth himself from the comunion etc. Schisma ab ecclesia separat,
schism separateth from the Church, says Ierom. Schismatici sunt ijsdem
vtentes sacramentis, at dissentientes opinionibus seorsum celebrant conventus.
They are schismatikes, says Austin, de ve ra religs oneca. 5.
who though they use the same sacraments still that the Church does: yet
varying in opinions, doeseparate from it, and hold meetings a part by
themselves: the which I hope M. D. will not charge upon us: It were well.
he could clear our opposites asvvell as we can our selves of this crime, they
are the men, if we may believe Austin, that run within that censure.
Quicunque invident bonis ve querant occasiones excludendieos, aut degradandi,
vel crimina sua sic defendere parati sunt, si abiecta velprodita fuerunt, ut
etia^ conventiculoru^ segregationes vel ecclesiae perturbationes cogitant
excitare, iam schismatici sunt etc. Whosoever (says he) Hipe rius de sacr:
stud: non descrend. p. 76.
envye those that are good, and seek occasions to exclud and degrad the^, and
are so ready to defend their faults, that rather then they will leave the^,
they will devyse how to raise up troubles in the Church, and dryve men from it
into cunventicles and corners, they are the schismatikes, though they be not
divided from the Church etc.

In his second reason he tells us, how he considered that being in the
ministry, necessity was laid upon him, and a woe if he preached not the
gospel. Which consideration I vvishe more familiar to him, and others that
seem little to regard it: but does he think it proper to him? know he, that
others who have labored in the ministry as faithfully and painfully as he;
and have that testimony of loving and lyving with their flocks depending upon
the^ (though now deprived Ad Titum Ca. 3.
of them) which he has not; have seriously considered the necessity laid upon
them, and notvvithstanding that woe, know no such necessity as to redeem the
liberty of preaching with the bondage of conscience, and the doing of those
things which God forbids. But how can that necessity he upon us? Does not
the Apostle there speak, of them only to whom the dispensation is committed,
but do it not at all, or not willingly through their sloth and negligence?
We for our parts, desire nothing more willingly, then to have again that
liberty of preaching which once we had, wherein we shevved not our selves
so unvvillinge and negligent as many of our opposites do; and from which,
because some of us will not be bound, we are bound in prisson, as the
Gatehouse at this day can testify. And (to ask M. D. a question) if he were
enjoined (to speak nothing of subscription which will never be justified
whilst the world stands) to wear, with his surplice and doctorall robes,
habit, hood, tippet, priests gown and cloak, the graie Amice, and the rest of
the induments and ornaments of the popish preisthood, to tak upon him a shaven
crown that honorable mark of preisthood, (which his good L. to whom he
dedicateth his sermon, as it is said, would not refuse (to cross often, to
duck etc. in the administration of the supper, to kiss the pax, to give holy
bread and sprinckle with holy water, and to swallow many such gnattes, all
which are no worse then the things required of us (as we are ready to
maintain, if we may have such an indifferent trial as the modest offer
mencioneth) if these things I say, were enjoined him, would he think that such
a necessity is laid upon him to preach, that he must yield to the doing of
them, rather then suffer himself to be putt from his standinge? Many in deed
do ingenuously confess, that in such a cause they would swallow many such
guatts; yea admit and devour all popish rites and ceremonies how filthy and
abominable soever) being washed with english water, such a woe heth upon them
if they preach not the gospel, though in deed they preach very seldom. Is M.
D. of their mind too? we for our paries have not so learned Christ, but think
rather, that a necessity is laid upon all men in such cases not to preach; and
a woe not far from them that will preach with such conditions, and admit none
thereunto but with such provisoes, especially when such a necessity is laid
upon us. Is not that man blind of his right eye, think ye, that can see a woe
against them, that suffer (that which they cannot hinder) themselves to be
deprived of their ministry, rather then they will yield to matters unlawful:
but no woe to them that who deprive us for such matters and forbidd us to
preach to the gentiles that they may be saved? To proceed, M. D. having showed
with what mind he studied the controversy, tells us, in the next words, that
others studied it (being out of love with our government and governors) as
opponents and plaintiffs, that is, with purpos to oppose, not yield to the
truth, how clear soever it should appear to them: where was his Christian
Charity, trow we, when he wrote this? Although we see no great cause in the
government by our L. Bbs. why we should be in love with it, considering it is
neither the best nor any plant at all of the Lords setting in his vynearde,
and therefore in due time to be supplanted by him: And albeit we cannot much
abound in hearty affection toward the governors themselves who, having gotten
an inche of his Magistie, do take an elue, and not only reign as Lords over
their brethren: but against all law deprive, degrade, suspend and excomunicate
them, many of whom are not much inferior in many graces to the best of them;
yet have we not bin so far out of love with the one, nor our affectione so
far estranged from the other, as to study these controversies with no other
mind but to oppose to the truth as M. D. calumniously suggesteth; however by
the study of them, we find just cause to be so far out of love with them
both, as not to subscribe to the lawfullnes of the one, or give allowance to
the oppressions of the other. In the next place, M. D. lays down the
success that followed upon our so studying of it, as that we have sought knots
in rushes streyned at every gnatt, picked so many quarrels against our Church
and ministry, that we have suffered our selves to be deprived, the land to
swarm (even in our own opinion) with Papists and Atheists, our own places to
be destitute, or occupied with such as we account unprofitable Ministers, and
all this, rather then we will so much as without prejudice and partiallity read
what is truly said for the defense of our Church. I hope he has the grace to
blushe at least, when he considers what he here charge upon us. Is it a
seeking of knottes in rushes, a streining at gnattes and picking of quarrels
with our Church; to contend for the truth, and labor to purge out the
corruptions of the Church? what shall we say then to Elias, who endeavored
the clensing of Israel from the alters of Baal? to the Angel, who troubled the
water to cure the sick? what else do we but seek to cure the sicknesses and
diseases in the Church, if we trouble it? do we pick quarrels who desire a
plaisture for health? quid agunt qui resultant, what do they which keep it
from the soar? if we; because we would preserve the worship and service of
God undefiled? what do they, who will not abide the purging of it from the
unclean things of Antichrist? Let Cassander an Adiaphorist be Judge who they
be that pick quarrels, he tells us, G. Cassander Consulta: act. 7.
that though the protestants in their Godly zeal did at the first sharply
reprove certain manifest abuses; yet the chief cause of the Churches
distraction at that time, (illis assignan dam esse, qui inani quodam fastu
ecclesiasticae potestatis inflati, recte and modeste admonentes, superbe
contempserunt and repulerunt) is to be ascribed to them, who puffed up with
that arrogant pride of the ecclesiastical power, scornfully contemned and
despised those that rightfully and modestly admonished them. The which, to
whom it now apperteineth, who sees not? who are they that still cross us,
even so much the more that in all humility, we sue and seek for reformation of
things amysse, as if the Taskmasters of Egypt were making Isreal's burthe^s,
the more heavy, the more they sought for liberty? vbi spiritus contentionis
veraciter pugnat, veritas ipsa indicat, I will accuse none, let the truth it
self shevve, who be they that pick quarrels. But to proced; Is it our opinion
only that the land svvarmeth with Atheists and Papists? is it not the
judgment of all, that have any judgment at all? has M. D. the face to deny it?
That many of our places are supplied by such as are unprofitable Ministers,
men fruitful in nothing but in the unfruitful works of darkness, that preach
not at all; or if they do; their tongues were better cleave to the roofs of
their mouths; is too true. And howsoever M. D. here to save his head from
breaking salveth the matter, by saying such as we account unprofitable, as if
it were not so in deed; Yet Gods people see and feel the contrary, and M.
D. himself also has published it to all the world in his sermon of the
dignity and duties of the Ministers. But where and in whom is the fault?
that is the question in deed: M. D. casts it up on us, for we must bear the
blame for all: but let the matter be carefully inquired into, and the lot
cast, that the transgressor may be found out; I dout not, but we shall pass
by, and some others be taken. Who are they that dominere at their pleasure,
that scourge their brethren (even faithful and painful preachets) with
scorpions, but have not, or at lest use not so much as the less rodd against
Atheists and Papists ignorant asses, doumb Ministers, abominable nonreside^ts,
scandalous and profane lyvers? nay, are there not more such yearly made in
Ember vveeks, as if the bottomeless pit were opened to send forth Locustes?
what rodd I say do our Bbs. bear them with? naie do they not, make and
ordeine the^, admit and receyve the^, continue and countenance the^, yea
succor and defend the^? While contrary to law and conscience, we are thrust
out of our places, in which we labored faithfully and painfully for many
years? deprived of our freeholds, denied the benefitt of law, the common right
of all subjects, shutt out from the common refuge and sanctuary of the
oppressed, denied the prosecution of our appeals, and offering to pursue them,
and to preach for the hindering of the increase of those vermin he speak of? are
we not clapped up in prisso^, and there kept without bayl or maineprize, till
we take an oath, or give sufficient caucio^, to meddle no more in any
ministerial action, no nor so much as to teach or catechize our own families,
any other parso^ occasion being present? this is our very cause, and this do
the prissons vvittnes at this day: how then does M. D. lay all the blame
upon us, as the heathen were wont to do upon the Christians? and how does
the D. play the sophister, in setting down a false cause for a true, and
making us the cause why Atheists, and Papists increase? might he not asvvell
charge us with suffering the powder plott and ditchers? But it passes above
all, that he charge us to do all this, rather then we will so much as read
without prejudice and partiallity, what is truly said for defense of our
Church; then which, what can be spoken more uncharitably and vainly; as if all
that embrace not conformity, read allwaise with partiallity and prejudice;
and as if whatsoever is written by our opposites, were sufficient to satisfy
every one, that is not forestalled with prejudice, and none had laid it by
when he read, but M. D. himself. But whether that which he or others have said,
be truly said for the defense of the Church, or rather of the corruptions in
our Church, and how we have read the same, does in part appear by that we
have already written, and would do, if fredome were permitted to the press,
and we might without peril and extreme charge publish our answers, as others
vente and broach their oppositions; they may speak and write what please them,
and call for our answers; but we must keep silence or kiss the prissons and
abid the censures, while they triumph and say we read with prejudice. Well
let us now go on with him, having dealt thus Christianly with others he
returns to his tale again concerning himself, and tells us what he found
when he had studied some the cheef treatisses on both sides, to wit, on the
one side, certain places of scripture, drawn as it were by the neck to that
side, a few straggling sentences quoted out of the Fathers, and as it were
with oars wherried by these men (looking as one would think the other way)
against the full straeme of antiquities, some pretty speeches and witty
proofs, which yet were but mere colors rather then sound arguments; On the
other syd, full and plentiful proofs, especially in the treatisse of the
perpetual government, from which he receyved good satisfaction, and as he after
says, would satisfy others also, if they would set prejudice a syd, what a
floorish is here? as if Dioscorus were alive again, lifting up his voice in
the Calcedon Council. Ego defendo dogmatasanctorum patrum, ego illorum habeo
testimonia, nec obiter in transcursu, sed in ipsorum libris posita: ego cum
patribus eijcior etc. That which I maintain is the doctrine of the holy
Fathers, I have there vvittnesses at larg, not straggling here and their and
gathred up by chance, but taken out of their own books, I am cast out with
the Fathers etc. A flourish in deed; as if all learning sound and honest dealing
had bin in himself and non in the Council; when in truth he had nether truth
nor antiquity on his side, no more then there is in these vain glorious
speeches of M. D. The answer follovving shall make it manifest, that he
himself and the me^ that gave him so good satisfaction, (with the rest of
their syd) are they who wrest scriptures even worse then papists, alleadg
Counterfeits in stead of Fathers, vvherrie in others as it were with oars,
against the full stream of their own meanings, and that there best and
soundest grounds, are carnal policies, fleshly persuasions, bitter reproaches,
sharp censures, suspencions, excommunications, deprivations and imprisonments,
by all which they dispute and conclude, almost all their matters. The
scriptures and Fathers we allege, are rightly understood, according to the
Circumstances of the places themselves, and the judgment of the best and most
learned vvriters in the vvourld. For the evincing whereof, our opposites are
driven to such shifts as is strange to see, even to devyse diue se strange
sense of one and the same place, some extending, some restreyninge, every one
dryving to a diverse sense, either manifestly absurd, or so obscure, as if the
true meaning could not be atteyned to. One instance vvher of, to pass by the
rest, let the Reader veivve well, in their handling of 1 timothy 5.17. and
Ambrose upon 1 timothy 5.1. But to go on; the cheefbook from which M. D.
receyved good satisfaction, was as he says, the learned treatisse etc. to
wit Bb. Bil sons: we will believe him, for he has little or nothing in all
hisermon which is not in that treatise; but seeing he that will part with
his friend, as the vvyseman says, will find an occasion to do it, and when
good causes want. pretenses shall serve the turn; I vvish him to look to it,
that other inducements best known to himself, were not more persvvasyve and
forcible with him, then these he here set down. And where he presumes so
far upon other men's judgments and affections, that they must needs turn
round by the same svvaie or poyze, and stand and fall as it were by the same
staff with him, if they set prejudice a syd; (for he says, he knows
nothing to the contrary but the same arguments that persuaded him, will
preveile with others) what does he else but follow the presumption of error,
whose property is, as Austin says, de gene: cout: Mauich:
ut quod cuique displicet id alijsquoque oportere existimet disi licere, to
think that that which pleases or displeases it self, must needsplease or
displease others also: but as Tertullian to the Valentinians, so may I say
to M. D. artificium habent quo prius persuadent, quam doceant, veritas autem
docendo suadet, non suadendo docet, M. D. has great skill to persvvad before
he teach, but the truth persvvadeth by teaching, teaches not by persvvadinge,
the judicious reader I doubt not will hearken to his reasons, and let go
such persuasions. Thus much for his first head, let us now enter upon his
second wherein he show eth us what exceeding good he hops to see and that
quickly, in case me^ would be persuaded with him: namely an end of this
pernicious division against us; and why so? because, though some other
particulars be controuerted, yet this of the Church-gouerment is the chief,
and the rest, as he has sometimes thought, are but controversies in pretense,
to avoyde the envy of this. For he doubts not, but if men syncerely affected
were right ly persuaded of the government, either they would not so stand upon
matters of ceremony and such like of small importance etc. or if any out of
ten dernes of conscience should make scruple, that they would favorably be
respected. Here first I charge upon him the vvronging, and that very
unchristianly, of many godly Ministers in thus judging of them: can it enter
into a Christian heart so to think, that they have opposed to the ceremonies,
yea and suffered for them, not in synceritie as being persuaded of their
vnlavvefullnes, according to their profession, but only in pretense and
hypocrisy, and to avoid the envy of this of the hierarchy? what is this else
but to calumniate? can he be ignorant, that as the ceremonies have bin oppugned
by the Godly before now, in our neighbor Churches, who could not make this
controversy their pretense: so there be diverse among our selves, of judgment
for the lavvfullnes of the hierarchy jure positiuo, who yet suffer and are
ready to suffer more then has yet bin inflicted on them, rather then they will
conform to the allowance or practy ce of the ceremonies? no, no, it cannot be
hidd from him, that diverse of the Ministers, at the time of their deprivation,
were of this judgment, what ever they now are or will be herafter, when they
further consider the matter. Secondly, let it be observed, how he counts
all mattersnovv in question for which so many Ministers have suffered, but
tristes and (this of the Church government only excepted) matters of small
importance, and as he said before, even knotts in rushes and seely gnatts: as
light accounet do all the rest of that syd make of them, and even so did
Harding tell Iuell, the things were small, where with he charged their Church.
Wherefore their plea being the same, with his: well may that worthy ruells
answer to Harding then, serve M. D. turn now. How great or small these
matters are, says he, desence of artic ag: Hardings preface.
it forces not. In deed they are avouched with very small proofs: as small
as you would have them, it appears you keep no small seriue about them:
nothing ought to be counted small, where with so many of Gods people are
deceived and scandatized etc. Robbery is no less in a small matter then in a
great, says Plato. A little leaven so wreth the whole lump, says the A
postle. Alia sunt frivola and innoxia, alia frivola and noxia says Gregory;
though these matters be small, yet the evils that rise of them, are not small;
if they be small, there is the less hurt in leaving them, and the more
wilfullnes in defending them. Christ says, qui in modico iniquus, and in
maiori iniquus, he that is unfaithful in a little, will be unfaithful in much
verily the greatest part of the land is weary of them. Thus far that
blessed Iuell; if M. D. will not hear him, let him give ear to Austin, Tom
10. Hom 42.
de minutis guttis flumina implentur, per augustasrivulas in sidat aqua,
impletursentina, mergitur navis, small dropps make great fludes, through small
riftes the water soaketh in, fills the deck and drownes the shipp. Could
Hamans money recompense the Kings loss of the Jews? no more can these their
ceremonies of small importance for which our Bbs. stand so stifflie, ever
reco^pen ce the Churches loss of so many worthy preachers as are deprived
for them: had it not bin more vvisdome in our reverend Fathers, to have
forborne their brethren in those things, themselves count trifles? yea to cast
those trifles, (I will not say their honors too) into the sea? the wise and
skillful Pilote, tempestate urgente, quaedam exenerat, ut caetera salva
permaneant, when the tempest inforceth it, emptieth the shipp of some things
to save the rest, yea though the wares be precious, he spares them not: do
our Bbs. well the^, to cast out the Pilots of the ships themselves, and all
to save those romish wares, those base and vile trifles; Herman. Hamelman de
tradit. part 1. l. 4. Col. 377.
Itance propter consuetudines (was it once said to Cassander) audes iubere ut
pij viriqui alias sincere docent, eijciantur? and may not the same be now
said in english to our Prelates? Is it even so, are these matters of small
importance, trifeling customs; how dare you then for them, cast out of the
Church, Godly men who otherwise teach well and syncerely? But to proced,
observe we secondly, how he fails utterly in the maine drifte and purpos of
his sermon, which is, by bringing men to the imbraceing of his doctrine
concerning the hierarchy, to compound all other the controversies amongst us,
so his words show and both his reasons, that either the sincerely affected
would not stand upon them, or if they did, they should be respected: does he
not utterly mistake the matter? sees he not the clean contrary before his
eyes? how manic do approve of the Bbs. calings and yet oppose to the
ceremonies? unless therefore he will again charge them not to be syncerely
affected; that first reason of his, is without reason. How long will M. D.
give us cause to suspecte he writes not as he thinks? we cannot imagine him
to be ignorant, how in all ages many profitable Ministers howeuer agreeing in
matters co^cerninge the hierarchy have yet varied about matters of ceremony:
remembers he not how Austin In his answer ad inquisitiones I an uarij lib. 1.
Cap. 2.
in his time complains, that (tantae fuerunt certationes in ecclesia, de
traditionibus humanis, and rebus indifferentibus, ut secuta sit inde
miserabilis vastitas in ecclesia) there were so great contentions in the
Church about men's traditions and things indifferent, that the Church was
almost laid wast therewith? has he forgotten that controversy about Easter,
Eu seb. hist. lib. 5. Cap. 23.
when, Neque Anicetus Policarpo persuadere poterat, neo Policarpus Aniceto
suasit, the contentions of Anicetus and Policarpe, being as Sa lomon says like
the bars of a palace, the one could nor perswad with the other? nay, to
come lovver, are the late troubles of our neighbors Churches in Germany about
things indifferent (so called) clean out of his mind; and how many ministers
suffered the^. selves to be deprived of all for them? yet were there no
controversies about the hierarchy. His first reason then has nether truth nor
likelihood; no more has his second, if the expersence of times past and
present, can teach us to guess of the times to come? many are deprived and
suspended for the ceremonies notvvithstanding they have bin of judgment for the
hierarchy, that partly out of their own sense and feeling, and partly being
warned by other men's harms, they have learned to make it a part of their
Letanie, to be kept from the Bbs. blessing. M. D. we see has laid a slender
foundation vvhereon to build his success and great good that would come upon
the imbraceing of his doctrine, and yet he reareth up many glorious things
thereon, and amplifieth the matter by a number of rhetorications from the
consequentes of yolding in this point, as compounding of differences, healing
of breaches, reuniting of divided minds, glorifying of God in the edification
of his Church, propagation of his gospel, confusion of poperi and atheism
etc. in steed of many evils growing by opposing in this point, as dishonor of
God and his true religion, advantageing popery and atheism, scandalizing whom
we ought to edify, both backwarder and for warder sort. All which, what are
they but vain smoakes easily blovvne away; and serve for no other use in
deed, but to make his own way, to come the more handsomely, to have his
full strok at them whom he calls the forvvarder sort. For who knovveth not,
that before this vnjuste Claim of the Bbs. and division about this point, that
there callings areiure diuino: and before the tendering and exacting of
conformity and subscription so contrary to law: and before this vvoefull
breach made: not by us, but by them that will needs surgere in altum, dommeire
and have their forth vijs and modis; who knovveth not say, that before this,
there was no such care and zeal in the Bbs. (many of them especially) or
other their Chapleines for the edification of the Church, propagation of the
gospel, confounding of popery and atheism? does not their carelessnes
therein, testify to their faces? does not all the vvourld see, how seldom the
most of them preach, even now that atheism and popery grows so fast
through their silencinge of so many preachers? do they not for all that,
count it the least or no part of their L. function? do not their Chancelors,
Archdeacons, Deanes, Doctors and Chapleins (many of them) heap living upon
lyving? defend they not nonresidencie and other corruptions in the
universities? place they not daily in benefices, idle idols, dumb dogs that
cannot bark? or else such dogs or Doegs rather, as love all words that may
do hurt, ventinge much corrupt popish and atheistical doctrine, like the
dogs in Capitolio, that Tully speaks of, that barked against true men,
instead of thieves? tolerate they not many in the ministry, who
notwithstanding their gifts, pull down more by their scandalous life, then
others can build up, like the sinner Solomon speaks of, that destroieth much
good? suppress they not faithful and painful preachers? yea snubb they not
and curb they not (so much as lies in them) every one Minister or other, of
what gifts, piety and godliness soever, in case they conform not to their
orders and canons universally? and in the mean time let they not Papists and
Atheists go away unpunished? are not these and many such like the things
that dishonor God and his true religion? hinder the proceeding of the gospel?
advantage popery and atheism; scandalize such as we ought to edifye? would
none of these ihings be done any more, if the poor deprived Ministers would
now subscribe that the caling of our Bb. is jure divino? would all this good be
done, if this one cotroversy were at an end? why then do our Bbs. themselves
begin and uphold, yea reinforce the controversy? why stand they so much for
their honors, as not to content themselves to hold their soveregneties of the
Civil Magistrate, as their predecessors before them have done, but must needs
enjoye it now by a new found pattent even jure divino? at least why leave they
not this claim, till such great matters be effected; but press both it, and
their beggarly ceremonies more then the laws of Christ, and that to the
depriving of so many worthy preachers, by whose ministry M. D. himself
confesses so much good might be done? fynaly, why occosion they so many of
all sorts backward and forward, to be scandalized, in seeing how they deal for
the mselues so zealously; for Christ so carelesty? But let us follow him to
the end of this race, where he falls foul upon the forwarder sort: (as he
calls them) of whom he makes two sorts, to wit, all such Christians in
general as endeavor to go before others in weldoinge, and those that
published that book, called the modest offer of disputation etc. upon both
whose backs he ploweth and makes long furrovves, and leads them with
heavy imputations. The creimes charged upon the former he comprizeth in 5
heads, some of them having diverse horns vvherevvith he pusheth hard to gore
them; one would think, althings considered, he should have inveighed against
the former evils, with their authors and Fautors; but as if he himself were
one of the Doegs before spoken of, he spends himself wholy upon the true
men and letts the robbers go. His first charge is, that they despise the
solemn worship and service of God, and whatsoever good thing else is set
forth by authority; A mere calumniation not much differing from Hamans, Hest.
3.6.8.
who thought it too little to laic hands on Mordechaij, and therefore
slandered the Jews, to be a people diverse from others, which kept not the
Kings laws: except that his mouth runs more over, when he says, they
dispisethe solemn worship and service of God, and whatsoever good thing else
etc. And the slander is so much the greater, because we dare boldly and in
the presence of God affirm, that we are see far of from the gilte of this
crime, that the accuser of the brethren himself, can nor justly charge upon us
the contempt of any good thing set forth by authority, which either we are
persuaded is good, or he able to make good. Obedientiam infringit, says the
old Lindvood rule, quisine causi id facit, he is to be charged with contempt
or disobedi ence, that can gine no good reason of his doing; the world sees
the reasons of our doings (good as we are persuaded) or else let them be
confuted; with reverence and patience we suffer for that we cannot do, does
M. D. call that a despysing? is it not rather a fullfilling of the law, so
far as it is intended it should be kept? is it not as sure a sign of
subjection, and does it not free as much from despising as obebience it self?
ask Bb. Bilson and he will tell you: Conz. Apol: Seem part 2. page 349.
why then does M. D. thus traduce us? It were well for the Bbs. themselves
and their adherents, (M. D. not excepted). If this burshen lay not heavye upon
the^ then upon us: how they regard authority, may easily appear, if we
consider there notorious and vvilfull transgression of many good and
profitable Canons and constitutions; as Injunct art. 3.4.
that which requires 12 sermons yeatly in every parish art 44 and rub: bofore
confirm:
that which enjoyneth them to catechize their parishioners every fabboth Can
episc pa. 41 16.
that which wills them to examine their people before they come to the
communion In^^ act art. 23 rub. before the Com.
that which de barreth from the communion all notorious offenders Injunct art.
20.
that which commands to keep holy the sabbath by visiting the sick, and
reconciling of enemies between and after the publik exercises Can: episcop.
pa. 79.
that which requires private admonition to be used before public
presentiments Injunct art. 14.
that which allotteth to the poor, the 40 part of non residents livings
Injunct art. 12.
that which appoints 4. l. yearly to be paid out of every livinge worth per
annum 100, l. for the keeping of a scholar, at the university Can: Ep: p 51.
that which sorbiddeth the granting of advousions Can epis. p. 25.
that which affirms pluralities and non residences to be res in se soeda, in
vulgus odiosa, and ecclesiae Dei pernitiosa Injunct art. u. 34.34
that which injoyneth the abolishing out of Churches and houses all
superstitious pictures and paintings in walls or glassewindowes etc. are not
these Canons and constitutions with many more, good and profitable and well
set forth by authority? are they well or ill observed by our opposites? let
M.D. therefore take back again this imputation to himself and the men of his
syd, only I confess, that if by solemn service, he means that of the
organes in Paul's and such like places; then in deed we do not so highely
esteem thereof, as they. His second charge is, that they not only vilify and
disgrace the ministry of those that are conformable, though not inferior, but
in many graces by many degrees superior to many of those whom they admire;
but also encourage by all means their admired Ministers to stand out as though
they had rather want the food of their souls, then not to enjoy their fancies
etc. In deed M. D. did well to notify what Ministers he meant; namely not the
ignorant and blind guides, the idle and scandalous parsons, such as have no
conscience to execute their ministry, though with titles and degrees they
grow so fast, that a new world must be made, or many of them will fail of
their hopes, and want their desired dignities: all who carry in themselves
the cause of contempt; and are so marked out by M. D. in his former sermon of
the dignity and duty of the Ministers that it is no merveil they be in
disgrace. He means not such I say, but those who according to their places
and graces take pains among their people, though otherwise conformable.
Well, if so, and they be despised in deed, let it be examined whether they
have not brought the contempt upon their own heads? are not some of them
reeds shaken with the vvind; and like vvethercocks turned round? have they not
in one day preached earnestly for reformation, and in another against it? in
one day practiced contrary to the ceremonies, and in another persecuted their
people for not joining with them in use of them? have not others of them
subscribed (as themselves confess) they know not to what? and in deed have
many of them so much as read, much less considered those fyve books to
which they have subscribed? profess not many of the^, they will not read
these books, because they will not be troubled with it? have not diverse
others, with as little wit as honesty given out, they will not loose their
cocks of barley, there pease ricks, their rye and wheat sheaves for such
trifles? and what ever their gifts be, when they preach; stuff they not
their sermons full of gt. and latin, Fathers and Fables, outcries and
exclamations ag: Calvin, Beza, Cartvvrite, Puritans etc. calling for the svvord
of the Mag: and crying crucifige; so making the heart of the rightuous sadd,
and strengthninge the hand of the wicked? all which considered, no great
merveile, is it, though they have not such place in the hearts of the forwarder
sort, and reverence from them as they expecte, nether in deed ought they if M.
D. say true in his former sermon. But if he mean it of such Ministers as
being of good gifts (though conformable) do in Godly pureness and simplicity
according to the grace receyved, execute their ministry; (of which sort we
know and acknowledge many among us) I will be so bold as tell him that the
first part of this second imputation is a well known slan der and the
frequentinge of their ministry by the best Christians in city and cuntrie,
and that with traveyle thereto 2.3.4.5.6.8.10. miles at a time, and
contributing to their maintenance, does prove it so to be. As for their
encouraging of their admired Ministers to stand out, therein, what do they
but their duties? ought they not to deal so with the^, that they may
co^tynue and perseyer in their good cause; and not for love of meede, and fear
of need, go back, sell the truth and vvreck their consciences shall it not be
their sin to discourage them, and by neglecting them to occasion or drive them
to Apostacy? and must it needs argue, that therefore they esteem not the
Ministeries false word their chife treasure, but had rather want the foood of
their souls, then not to enjoye their fancies etc. as he says? verily, how
false this is, many places wittnes, where the people yiedling and paying their
tithes, to their Parsons and Curates who are little better thon thieves and
robbers; do notwithstanding to their great charge maintain preachers that
conform, and otherwise to their great trouble, charge and peril, traveil many
milles to hear them: In his third Charge as out of a murdering piece, he
shoots all kinds of shot, knyves, daggers, bullet, hayleshott and all, as if
he would kill all before him: but in truth in the discharge of it, it recoyleth
yea reboundeth upon himself and his. First, says he, they place the height of
religion in disconformitie, how much more truly may we say it of him and the
Bbs. (diverse of them) who place it in conformity, the substance in ceremony,
the form and that which gives the very being to it, in formalitie. Do we
forsake the assemblies where the ceremonies are used? refuse we to comunicate
with the Ministers that use them? do not they withhold the ministers from
preaching and administering the sacraments that subscribe not, and conform not?
and which is more, do they not suspend, excom: and cut of from the Church for
want of it? does not their Canon decree suspension, for Minister and people
both, that conform not to that one gesture, of kneeling to receyve the supper?
Secondly he tells us, they turn zeal into faction, combine themselves into
a divided brotherhood etc. Cruelly, disdeynefully and spite fully speaks he
against the rightuous, and the accusers heart knows how innocent they are
herein, let him name us the man that has his hand in this trespass, as not
to esteem them brethren that conform, or to refuse society with them for it:
do we not as Policarp and Anicetus, Policrates and Victor, communicate one
with another, though we dissent one of us from another in some ceremonies as
they did in other? But as he and others write, so they speak and preach, and
seek by such calumniations to estrang from us, yea to inflame his Magisties
heart, and the hearts of his Nobles, Judges, Justices and people against us.
Let him remember what Julian once said, si accusasse sufficiat, quis crit
innocens? if it be enough to accuse, who shall be innocent? not Moses, not Ezra,
not Nehemy, not the prophets, not Christ himself, nor his Apostles, upon all
whom this very slander lay. And whereas through these and such lik slanders
our Opposites have so preveyled against us with our Sovereign, (as others by
the like did against Chrisostom Bilson cont. Apol: Sem. part 2. p. 210.
with Arcadius,) that they which have petitioned for us, (as others did for
him) are now, as then, reproached as troublers of the state; and the more we
are sued for, the hardlyer both we and our friends are used; I wish the
accusers, M. D. especially, to withdraw their hands out of this trespass,
lest they dravve much blood upon them, and the Lord look upon it and require
it. Thirdly, they turn, says he. Godly conferences into bitter invectives ag:
Bbs. and odious censures of such as they call formalists etc. If we confer
and dispute of the discipline and use of the ceremonies so urged, what merveil?
would not any one gladly see whether Christ and his Apostles ever ordained such
yokes to be laid upon the necks of his disciples, by such Taskmasters as plague
their purses by excessive fees and exactions, weary their bodies with long
journeyes to and sro their courts 500 miles in a year; tyrannize over their
souls with Canons and Constitutions, set thick and threefold as snares and
trapps to ketch in, and to that end talk and confer about them, that if at be
the yoke of Christ, they may willingly bear it, if not, as it is not, gladly
and by good means be ridd of it? but that they turn all their study of the
scriptures in such disputaitons etc. is also untrue: and if there be a fault
committed, it is in studying and conferring of these matters to little, rather
then too much. The accusation in deed lies upon the men of his own side,
who for Godly conferences, orderly disputations, and grave sermons, be (many
of them) nothing else, for the most part, but make odious invectiues, give
forth unjust censures, slanderous reproaches, filling pulpitts, benches,
consistories, and fornishing printers presses with little other stoffe, but
such and such false imputations of combination, faction, sedition, puritanime,
and odious terms of schismatikes, humorists, refractaries etc. and what else
can we look for, at other men's hands, when M. D. pen is full of them? Fourthly
he blames them for being ignorant in the Catechism, and yet to stand upon
these things. A fault in deed: and if those whom he counts the forvvarder
sort be ignorant of the Catechism, what are the backvvardder? but where is
the fault? is it not in such as should instruct them better; but disdeine to
teach the Catechism, it is so base a service; or if they teach it, do it but
for fashion, even to pronounce a few words without understanding more like
parrats and popingaies then otherwise? But let us hear his last slander in
this 3. charge, where he says, they confine their charity to their divided
brotherhood, as if they ministered to the necessity of no other, but those that
are as forward as themselves. The which is so notoriously false in the
knowledge of all men, that all men may vvonder, how it slipped from his pen.
If men, who by the labors of the Ministers are brought to the knowledge of
the truth, converted to God, and confirmed in good, have shevved mercy and
compassion to those Ministers, their vvyves and children, vvrongefully deprived
of their lyvings, and exposed to poverrie, or vvreck of conscience: have they
done otherwise then the Lord requires of them and the Saints have practiced?
1 these. 5.12.13. Gal. 4.13.14 (...) 6 6.
what means M. D. eye then, to be evil because others are good? is he
greeved that we live, that there are yet some fevve left to seek the wealth
of Israel? wishes he with Caligula, that we had all but one neck, and in
his hands a svvord to cut it of at one strok; that he cannot pass by in
silence, or speak with charity of that benevolence that is ministered to us?
or does his mouth crave it of his pen, have we too much and he to little,
would he have part with us? if so, we will speak for him. But the truth
is, this imputation must go home from whence it came; even to himself and
others of his syd, whose charity, if it were not confyned to their divided
brotherhood of conformitans, why cry they out upon those that succor us, and
speak evil upon the lyving and the dead both, for giving to us; condemninge it
as given to impious uses? yea what else means the taking of that from us,
which is given to us, and bestovving it upon formalists? Lord lay not this sin
to their charge.

Thus much to the particulars in his 3. head, the fourth follovveth, wherein
he charge the^ to be danger ously unthankful to God for the contynuanc of
his gospel, our peace and prosperity, and to take on, even no we that we have
almost we can desyer, as if we had nothing, and like wayward children, having
that which is fit for us, to cast it a way, because we have not what we
fancy besides. Let him that thinks he stands, take heed least he fall;
and being down, full and fall he knovveth not vvhither; men that have known
M. D. mind in the days that are past: would hardly have thought, he could
have fallen thus far, as to say that we have almost whatsoever we can
desire, yea that which is fit for us: we will pray for him: and to this
charge of unthankfulness more bitter then gall, and burninge then the coals of
Juniper, (not pleading with God, before whom we must fall down and like
the dust and confess that we are in finitely guilty) I answer, and vvish
him, first to remember how he charge us with all evil, ingra tum. qui
dixerit, omnia mala dixerit.
in charging us to be unthankful and pray him to call to mind what he has
read in the holy scriptures, ancient Fathers and heathen vvriters in
condemnation of unthankfulness, and then secondly I safe to him, as the Orator
said to Erucius, accusing, Sextus Roscius for the death of his Father. In hoc
tanto tam atroci, tam singulari maleficio, quibus tandem M. D. argumentis,
accusatorem vti censes oportere. Oh M. D. you that thus accuse us, think with
your self, what good arguments you had need have, to co^vince us of so vile an
evil. Give me leave to plead the case a little with you I pray, if we be
unthankful because we are not content with all things as they now stand, but
wish a further reformation, and desire that God may be more glorified, his
gospel further propagated, his people better edifyed, the walls of Sion
builded, and Babel, how golden and glorious soever, ruinated and razed to the
ground, till no one stone their of be left upon another; we are not ashamed,
but will carry this note and mark as a diamand upon our fortheads: 2 Samuel 6
22.
yea as David said to Michol, I will yet be more vile; so say we to M. D. if
this be vnthank fullnes, we will yet be more unthankful. we acknowledge the
wonderful patience and long suffering of our good and gracious God, in
bearing with us hitherto; we magnify the exceeding riches of his mercy, in
visitinge us, with so many and merveilous deliverances: we joie and rejoice
with joy unspeakable in the glorious light of the gospel, which
(notwithstanding the great eclipse so lately made) shines yet in many
places as clear as the su^ at noone day, the confortable light whereof, we
esteem as the life of our life. Nether are we unmindful of Gods goodness
toward us in that outward peace and prosperity which we injoye under the
government of our dread sovereigne, the breath of our nostrels, under the
shadow of whose wings next under God, we aknowledge our lives preserved
among the heathen: we bless God for him, and shall never cease to say God
save the King; what then? are we notwithstanding unthankful, because we
desire to drink more plentifully, even our fill of the svveet cupp of these
mercies and that God would fulfill all the good pleasure of his goodness upon us
and oue posterity? I trow not: est ingenui and liberalis animi, cui-multum
debeas, ei plus veldebere: it is no unthankfulness to desire to be more
indebted to him, to whom we owe much already. But see, how M. D. taxes all
the servants of God, high and low, from the beginning of the vvourld almost,
to this day, with unthankfulness; if this be unthankfulness: would David
let the ark alone where Saul his predecessor left it? did Solomon let it
rest, where David his Father left it? did not Ichosaphat lift up his heart to
the ways of the Lord? took he not a way the high places and groves from out
of Judah, and reformed he not more then his predecessors, yea more then Asa
his Father had done before him? did not Hezekiah throvv down the high places,
which Iehosaphat left standing? did not Josias over turn many things, which
Hezekiah threvv not down? what meant the chief Fathers and Ancients, Priests
and Levites after their return from captivity when they savve the foundation
of the temple laid, because it was not answerable to the former; to vveep, I
say to weep when others laughed for joy? why did Nehemia buyld the
wales of Jerusalem, perfect that which Ezra began, and reformed the feast of
Tabernacles better then all his predecessors how Godly and zealous so ever?
wherefore did the Lords prophets press a further reformation upon the Kings
follovving, whatsoever reformation their predecessors had made before them?
what meant they? were they all unthankful? Let us come down lovver; An non
perfecit Constantinus quod Philippus iam ceperat, Caesar Baraicus annal. An 227.
did not Constantine perfect what Philipp began; did not Theodosius Theod ore
Hist. lib. 5. Ca. 20
go forwards with the reformation where Constantine lefie? see the stories.
To come lovver yet, what will M. D. say to those vvorthey lights and
glorious Martyrs? to Father Latimer? who rested not with the reformation in
K. Henry the S. days but parsvvaded K. Edward to a further; to Hooper and
Bucer? Bucer in censura Ca. 12
how not content with the first purging of the leiturgie by K. Edward, gave
him not over till he had purifyed it the second time, as the second edition
thereof shows: to our late sovereigne Lady now blessed? who reformed diverse
things left by her worthy brother; to Bb. Jewel, Bentham, Pilkinton and
others? who never presented omnia been to her Magistie, as M. D. here does to
all the world, where he says, we have what is fit for us, almost what we can
desire. Conclud, if we be vnthanfull, are not all these? if dangerously
unthankful; what is M. D. himself? who in his sermon before named, (which I
vvish were read every morning to our Bbs. next their hearts) contenteth not
himself with the ministry among us as it now slandeth, but censureth
sharply and rightly, that ignorant idle and scandalous Ministry, which
possesses agreat part of the land, and we dsyre may possess no part of
it. The truth is, that this crime of unthankfulness here cast upon us,
belongs properly to others who are at ease in Sion, abondantly provided for,
gorgiously clothed, fare deliciously, invent to themselves instruments of
delight, row in their barges, rid in their coches from house to house at
pleasure, think it time to repair and buyld their own houses, to seele
their chambers etc. more princelik then preistlik: and yet say it is not time
to buyld the Lors house, or repair ought that is amiss therein, naie condemn
them of dangerous unthankfulness, that will bring one stone toward it, or
so much as vvishe well to it: do you so revvard the L. ye house of Israel?.

Thus as length are we come to the end of his fourth charge: in his fyfte, he
accuses us, to grow wanton in religion, through spiritual pride, not caring
for the heavenly food of our souls, unless we may have our own sauce,
preferring the ceremony and circumstance of religion before the substance:
upon whose shoulders this tax lies heaviest, theirs or ours, let the world
judge: we for our parts desire no sauce of our own, but we utterly dislike
the popish Cooks, that have devysed sauces to make our religion savor and
have a taste with carnal appetites; and we take no pleasure in those popish
patchers, who mar our religious sober and chaste attire, and assaie to make
her of a grave and sober matrone, like a masking minion; and this we count and
that most justly, spiritual pride and vvantonnes in religion. But to prove it,
he charge 3. particulars upon us concerning the word, publik prayer, and the
sacraments. In the first, he blames us: first, for that we will not hear as
he says, a sermon made at a funeral, be it never so prositable; secondly,
that by our good will we would hear none that is conformable, or if we do, it
is with prejudice, and making the word ineffectuall to us, we say his gifts
are decayed, his preaching is without power etc. both which are mere
slanders. Concerning the former, the truth is, that many both Godly and
learned, considering the original of funeral sermons from whence they came;
the end for which for the most part they are now observed, to wit, the
honor of the dead, and enriching of the preacher; and then how partially and
with what respect of parsons they are now performed, for the rich not for
the poor; and lastly, how the preacher for his hire, as M. Dearing says, in
his sermons on the hebrews.
with a black mouth and a headlong tongue, blesses the dead, calls the
niggard liberal; the eruell Nymrods and mighty hunters of the rightuous, myld
and gentle parsonages, whoremongers and Adulterers, chaste Joseph's: popish
supersticious and profane parsons, true and religious gospellers; and all this
in their eats, who know they lie for advantage, and to please the frinds and
kindred of the dead, whereby much offense often comes to the hearers. Godly
and learned men I saic considering these things, it is no mervell they have no
great affection to such sermons but to say, they utterly refuse to hear any
be they never so profitable is a flatt untruth. His second is also a very
slander, as in part has already bin showed, where the first breach thereof
was handled; secondly where he charge us, to hear those that we do hear
with prejudice, he shows himself again as often before, to be an in truder
of himself into another man's conscience; thirdly whether we or others make
the word more ineffectual to us: let the effects shevve; fourthly if any
charge such as have co^formed, with decaie of gifts, and loss of the power of
their minislery unjustly, I will not justifye the^ in it: but they that have
eyes to see, may see it is too true, in too many at this day, and if they
see it not themselves, it is their own blindness. But to pass by the like
sla^ders in the rest of those words, let us come to his 2 charge which
concerns prayer; where he says, that if law did not compel us, we had
rather be at no public prayers, then at those seett forth by authority, or if
we be present, we join not with the congregation. In deed, where public
prayers are read by such seely Curates, as can do nothing but read, and then
also slubbred and posted over, that they may post to some other place for the
like service: Hesra. 46.
such parsons being no priests to the Lord, nor performinge any service in him
and for him; it is not much to be condemned in the forwarder sort, that they
are greived thereat, and join no further then law compels them. Nay I
vvonder they can come to them at all; seeing many of the vulgar sort, that have
little savor of grace in them, distaste both the Sayers and their service, and
would not join with them, were they not compelled thereunto. But where
public prayer is read by any Minister of God, I persvvad my self, M. D.
cannot make good this charge upon any one of them. Let us therefore hear his
3 censure which concerns the sacraments where he says, we had rather, if we
might choose, not have our child baptized, then that the cross in baptism
should be used; and not receyve the communion, then receyve kneeling etc. For
answer whereunto, in general, let it be observed how again he sits in
the conscience of his brother and judges him to desire the sacraments as they
are now administered, not of conscience to Gods ordinance; but only to aveyd
punishment; Secondly, concerning baptism, let him tell us, whether he
himself that now yeldeth so willing to the cross in baptism; would yield as
readily to oil, cream, salt, spittle and the setting on of the cross on the
lips, cies, care and as well as on the forhead? if not? let him not blame us
then, if we would not willingly have our children crossed, none of the other
are more evil then this, as that learned treatisse of the ceremo^ies, shows
Scholasticall discourseagainst symbolizing with Antich. etc.
. But that any would rather their children should not be baptized at all, then
crossed, is untrue, we have learned, that however the Minister sins in
making it, the parent that protests against it, sins not in desyring the
sacrament, and for his credit sake, let him name us some few that keep their
children unbaptized because of it. As for kneeling at the instant of receyving
the bread and wine in the L. supper: seeing it is so sufficiently proved to be
unlawful both be fore and since this sermon, by a certain Dispute of that
subject. M. D. might have forborne, and I hope will hereafter forbear the
raxing of us for refusing it, especially till that Dispute be soundly an
svvered and confuted. Thus much for the imputations laid upon al Christians in
general, of the forwarder sort as he calls them. Now it follows in
particular of them that set forth the book in titled the Modest Ofer etc. whom
he challenges, to have published diverse assertions which he calls
schismatic novelties, new found affections, vndigesled fancies, the
principal whereof were never heard of in the Church of God above 1600 years
after Christ, the which, if they were established, would breed horrible
confusions, and yet so vehe mently urged by them, that separation is to be made
from all those Churches which admit them not; and if they be not granted, they
see not how our s^paration from the Church of Rome can be justified, and do
offer that if the Priests and Jesuits can satisfye them concerning their
propositions, they will be reconciled to the sea of Rome etc. These and such
like speeches charge he upon them, and in the last page challenges all Godly
and learned Minist, that protest not against them and dissavow them, but suffer
the people to receyve them. For answer whereunto, first this I may say, that
the publishers of those assertions have hitherto (as appears by that their
modest offer not yet accepted) bin more ready to prove them to be no such
schismatic novelties, new found assertions, new undigested fancies, as he
calls them, then he or any of his side are, to make good this charge.
Secondly, how confidently soever they avouch them; yet in the conscience of M.
D. himself and the rest of his side, (such as are indifferent at least) they
are as far (if not further) from joining with the Papists as some Prelates
and their Proctors, utterly abhorring their abominable idolatries, detestable
heresies, vain devices and inventions, superstitions, rites and ceremonies
stolen from Jews or Gentiles, unfeynedly hateing that whore of Babylon, that
sea of Antichrist, that mother of fornication, died read with the blood of the
Saints; yea detesting head and tail, root and branch of popery, being in
deed of the number, of those (whom Bb. Bilson Cont. Apol. Sem. pa. 22.
commends,) who are so far from admitting the full doze of Popish
haeresies, that by no means they can diieste one dram of their ceremonies; and
of those, who (as D. Fulk Retent. against Bristow pa. 98.
says) abhor whatsoever has but a show of popery. Now they being such
men in deed, and that in the consciences of our adversaries, though they in the
conscience of the truth of those assertions, resolutelie deliver, that if our
Prelates can maintain their dignities, pre-eminence and majorite of rule,
which now they exercise over us, to be jure divino, and that there be
Churches Diocesan, Provincial and national, founded in the word: it will
then follovv by as good reason, that there is a Church universal, and so one
universal Pastor to be set over all; which being the ordinance and
institution of God, is not to be rejected for the faults of men: M. D. might
have spared these reproaches, and spent his speech and pen much better, in
shevving how the consequence is not good, and that the one ought to be
receyved, the other in no sort to be admitted; so had he done God and his
Reader good service, and his brethren the less vvro^ge, which is so much the
greater, for that diverse of these imputations were removed by their own
answer in that modest offer In their answer to the 11 oppositio^ page 38
and the rest ansvvered by word of mouth before the high Commission at
Lambith, before M. D. either preached or printed this Sermon, yea the
assertions themselves proved in a former book of M. H. I. for any answer and
proof they have yet made to the contrary.

As for his challenging of all them who dissavovve not those assertions, and
protest not against them, I will only ask him, what he means to beat
himself and the rest of his side so soundly. It is well known what
corrupt and unsound doctrines have bin lately preached and printed here in
England, as that the scriptures co^teine not all things necessary to be
known to salvation; that they are not the only rule of all good and evil in
the actions of men; that it is not to be inquired whether Christ be in the
Sacrament by Consubstantiation or Transubstantiation, and that it can no ways
hinder or further us however it stand. Whereof see M. Hooker lib. 1. pa 88.
lib. 2. pa 122. lib. 5 pa. 176.
. That the keeping of one day in seven is ceremonial, and observed now de
iure humano only, see D. Hovvsons sermon. upon Ps. 118, page 20. That Divorces
are a thoro only and not a vinculo, and that the innocent party after
divorce, may not marry again. These. Edit. Oxon. Anno 1602. The which (with
many more concerning Christ's dessention into hell; the state of Infants that
die unbaptized, and such like) are not approved for Canonical truths; why
then does MASTER DOCTOR, yea and the Prelates and the rest of their Chapleins,
protest against them, dissavowe them? Why are the people suffered to receyve
them as oracles? Thus much for his second head and the several branches of
it; let us now examine the third, and both the exhortations in it. The first
is to unity and peace, laid down in many words, the breife whereof is, that
we would find arguments to reunite our selves, and if the proofs he has
brought in his sermon overweye our reasons, we would ingeniously acknowledge the
truth. And because he thinks, that fear of discredit may hinder it, he takes
it away by three reasons; first, from the remembrance of ma^s common frailty,
which is subject to over sight: Secondly from the revere^d opinion worthily
conceyved of M. Calvin, Beza and other Divines. Thirdly, from the conceit of
the good effects of the Discipline desired, and evil of the established; In
this first exhortation I most willing join with him, and do earnestly pray
him, and charge him in the L. as he will answer it at that last and dreadful
day; that he would in deed seek the peace of Sion, and be as desirous to use
means to reunite himself and the rest to us, and the reformed Churches; as he
has bin in this Sermon overbusy in seeking reasons to disjoine himself and
others from us, and them; and that he would weigh in the balance of an
unpartiall judgment the answers brought to his proofs, and if he find them
to overweigh his reasons, he would give glory to God, by acknowledging
ingenuously so profitable, and as these times are, so necessary a truth. And
that according to his own doctrine in his former Sermon, of the great
necessity of the sound and sincere preaching of the Gospel, he would by all
means labor, that it may have free passage, that the people which perish for
want of knowledge, may be taught the way of salvation, that all true
laborers in the word and doctrine, may have the double honot he speaks of,
and be cheerished as bees in the hyve; and that all Loy terers may be chased
from it as drones; that vain titles may not answer for painful offices and
duties: that garments, compleme^ts and shadows may not be pressed and
preferred before substances, that the hearts of the rightuous may be made no
longer sadd for vvelldoinge, nor the hands of the wicked confermed and
strenghtned in evil. This is the ready way to true peace and unity, by this
means we shall meet together in one, united and reunited one to another:
godliness will flourish, athism and papisme will be putt to flight, the popish
hope and expectation of a change will be crushed, the mouths that speak proud
things will be stopped, God will be our God, our Shield, our Buckler, our Castle
and Defense, we shall be his people, and shall not need to fear any malice of
the adversaryes how many, how mighty, how cruelly and malliciously, set and
bent against us soever they be: much less the fear of discre ditt he speaks
of. Where because as it seems, he judges of our estate, by the feeling he
has of his own pulst, it shall not be amiss to return him home his own
reasons with exchange of a fevv words: and therefore do tell him, first he
shall not need to fear discreditt, by making open acknovvledgment of his
errors, discovered in this answer and the hurt he has done thereby: For the
best may err, and it is a work of grace from God and creditt with men to
confess them. If it were a discreditt: yet it shall be good for him with
Ierom plus conscienciae, quam nomini defer, to respect his conscience more
then his creditt. The reverent opinion we have vvorthily conceyved of those
worthy divines, has moved us in deed the rather to embrace the discipline we
stand for: and we had good reason for it seeing God has blessed them so
exceeding abundantly, in all spiritual knowledge and understanding, that
(their and our adversaries being Judges) they are found admirably sound and
orthodoxall in the substanciall points of religion. Yett have we not so
relied upon their creditts, as not to search into, and examine upon what
grounds they and we stand as too many of the other syd, who in their
simplicity (presuminge upon the vvisdo^e and synceritie of the Bbs. whom they
supposed would require nothing, but what they might safely yield unto) have
relied on their creditts and putt to their hands and names, they knew not to
what; that fault therefore which in this second reason he extenuareth in us, is
greater in them and had the more need be confessed by the^. As for the effects
of both which in his 3. reason he speaks of, we must needs acknowledge they
have had their effects with us.

The unspeakable good, which that discipline, that he calls new and we
old and ancient, has yielded to the Churches imbraceing it, the which also,
we are persuaded, it will affoard us vvhenever we receyve it, cannot but
work effectually in us an earnest desyer and longing after it; as the manifold
corruptions in doctrine and manners, taxes, troubles and vexations for well
doing, whether arising from the personal defaults of the governors, or
nature of the government it self; (not here to be disputed of) but cleaving so
inseperablie to it, that so long as the one remeineth we cannot expecte any
freedom from the other; has made the Israel of God to groan unto him for ease
and deliverance from it.

As for the horrible confusions, which would inevitably follow if the
discipline (as he sarcastically calls it) of the ne west edition were
established, whereby he would lessen the corruptions of our times; as he
speaks of that he knovveth not: so when he tells us what they are, he
shall receyve his answer. Thus much for his first exhortation, his second
follovveth, to wit, that in cause his arguments in this sermon, through our
prejudice and partiallity seem light to us, and we yield not to them; that
then our answers may be distinctly applied to every argument in order, with
pregnant and demonstrative proofs, and then he will acknowledge his error,
only he desires Christian and modeste dealinge, not such as is in that book
called, the Christian and modest offer. Wherein, (to pass by the repeating of
some things before spoken of, here again mentioned, and namely the slander of
Christ discipline, in saying it was never heard of till now of late, and that
our government by Bbs. has bin perpetually observed in the Church ever since
the Apostles times, the falsehood of both which points has bin and shall be at
large discovered) we have 3 things to be observed: first a disyre of an
answer; 2. the conditions required; 3. a promise. If we turn not with him,
his desire is, we would return him an answer, a distinct answer to all
his arguments in order. So do the Doctors of Oxford in their answer to the
petition of the 1000 Ministers; so does G. P. in his last book, where he
undertakes the answering of all that can be said in these causes. And M.
Hooker in his preface before his first book of politikes, yea Bb. Barlovve
himself preaching upon Acts 20 28 for the government established, much of the
same that M. D. does in this sermon, in his epistle before it, professes that
if there shall an answer be made thereunto with modesty and learning, nothing
shall be more welcome, and that, to avouch and make it good; that the said
episcopal calling is unlawful, were a labor worthy the traveil and much
desired of the Bbs. All which is done, if not by the appointment and
commandment of the Bbs. themselves; yet by their consent and with their good
allowance, their books being seen and allowed, and some of them commended
and commanded to be published, as they printe themselves in their first pages.
Wherein let it be considered how injuriously we are dealt with: first they
deny us all means to publish our answers, taking from us the liberty of the
press, and punishing printer and those whom they suspect for authors, not
sparing the^ that will not bettaie the^: whosoever considers these dealings
may justly suspect, the Bbs and their Chapleines are combyned together, the
one to set snares and draw us into them, the other to catch and crushe us:
may I not say to them as Ierom Hieron. August. Tom. 2.
once said, why are we blamed for writing, is the fault in us or in your
selves that provoke us, are we not compelled to defend our selves in our just
proceedings? you have brought us to a fair pass, if we hold our peace, you
hold us guilty; if we answer, we are judged enemies, as Ierom was, and
punished for answering as Ieto^ was not. A hard condition of each syd, but of
the two, we will choose the easyer, rather then by silence to betraye the
truth, by just apology, what ever it cost us, to maintain it, if you will
have us to desiste from answeringe; do not you propound against us, lay you
aside your swords, we will soon lay by our targetts: otherwise if though you
first provok us to speak and then punish us; know you it is not the fear of
punishment that shall fright us, the truth, which is the life of our life, is
more dear unto us. Thus much for his desire or challenge, his conditions
follow and they are two. In the first he requires that we distinctly apply
our answers to every of his arguments in order, with proofs pregnant and
demonstratyve. Which I acknowledge but reason; and had he dealt so with us in
his sermon, we should have given him no answer: but his carrying away the
matter in tryvmph, with discourses, guesses, fancies, counterfeit writers,
witnesses borne out of oue time, not old enough by 2 or 3 hundred years (some
of them) to give wittnes to his cause, his forced interpretations of scriptures
and Fathers devysed of purpos, and with great streme of wit, to putt by the
truth, his equivocations, frivolous and loose collections, vvherof we have
good store in his sermon, (as their answer shall shevve) none of which will
bear a syllogism, nor abyd the hammering upon the right anvyle: these courses
I say can we not allow for proofs pregnant and demonstratyve. As for this
answer, I refer it to the Reader to judge whether the demonstrations
therein, be not sound, the proofs pregnant, and the arguments strongely
grounded upon the scripture, with plain interpretations, and such as have
consent, not of some fevve old and nevve vvriters only: but almost of all
divines sound and orthodoxall in all substanciall points of religion: yea
admirable for their vvritings in questions tvvixt us and the papists. Diverse
of whose answers are applied to M. D reasons (which he borrowed of the
papists) and therefore not easily to be replied to by him, nor departed from by
us. In his second Condition, he requires more Christian and modest dealing,
the^ in that book called the Christian and modest offer, which faith he,
notwithstanding that title is full of odious Censures, proud and scornful
speeches, vnchristia^ and immodest provocations great bitterness and gall etc.
If it should be so, which nether has he showed, nor can I acknowledge, yet
let the Christian reader compare that their book, with this his preface, and I
dout not but he will say turpe est doctori etc. it is a foul fault in a
teacher, to be deeplier guilty of the fault him self, then the party he
blames. I for my part, when I read it, thought of the Philosophers Diog.
Laert: in Diogene
censuring and checking of such as offered sacrifyce for health, and at their
very sacrifycing did banquet riotously against health: and of our regrators who
have double waits and balances, some for buying and some for selling. The Lord
give us more charity in our hearts then only to upbrayd others with the want
of it, and not feel our own want in the practyce. Thus are we come to his
promise, that he will acknowledge his error, the which if it be as well
performed as promised, we may say to him as Cyprian to Cornelius, though he
missed of the first degree of happiness, which is, not to offend; yet it shall be
well with him that he has met with the second, vz. having donamisse to
acknowledge it. And shall be gladd to acknowledge him for none of those, who
convinced of error, blush not to say, haud scio an ista verasunt, fortassis
non multum absunt a veris, sed tamen libet ire contra. It may be it is not
untrue that you say: but yet I lik not to follovv it. I must go against it.
And to take M. D. by the hand, if this answer satisfy him not, but shall seem
too light in comparison of his sermon, let him lay open the vanity and bring
the insufficiency thereof to light, I dare promis in the name of the rest, we
will (as Ierom said to Ctesiphon) rather revoak our errors, then persiste in a
wrong sentence. And thus are we come to his 4. and last head: to wit, the
conclusion with protestation: which is, that what he has delivered either in
his preface or sermon, is that which in his conscience he is verily persuaded
to be the truth. Whereunto what shall I say? I would rather have thought, he
had this once done that, which many others have often done before him; and from
the doing whereof the Fathers (as Ierom Jero^: Apol: pro lib. contra Iovin;
Cap: 4.
notes) themselves in the heat of their contentions, were not alwaise free,
non quod sentiunt, sed quod necesse est dicunt, aduersus ea quae dicunt
gentiles, that he had spoken, not what in his conscience he thought to be the
truth, but, quod necesse est dicere contra fratres, that which the cause he
undertook necessarily drew him; to speak against his brethren: but seeing in
charity which believes all things, I must herein credit him, I have no more
to say, but that his conscience is blind, or was a sleep when he wrote this
sermon, wherein are contradictories, both which cannot be true. And so with
the lik protestation, and commendation of him to the grace of God, I end with
the words of Cypria^ to Florentius: lib. 4 epist. 9.
habes tu literas meas and ego tuas, in die judicij ante tribunal Christi
vtraeque recitabuntur. I have your vvritings both sermon and preface, you have
my answers, (both according to the persuasion of our consciences) and both to
be recited before the tribunal of Christ. The Lord grant, that knowing that
terror of the Lord, we so perswad men, as we may approve our selves to God
and the consciences of his Children Amen.

FINIS
Errata in the Preface.
p. 3. l. 19 read, a doctrine. p 4. in marg. book. p. 11. l. 29. good, that
ibid. l. 30. the midst. p. 12. l. 17. way then. p 13 l. 15 that we p. 17. l.
22. after controversy, add then young Divines for studieng that controversy, p.
20. l. 19 if he p: 28. l 10. upon any other occasion ibid. l. 14. very case. p.
29. l. 26. man p. 30. l. 2. deprivations, degradations. p. 31. l. 10. amongst
us. p. 32 l. 22. angustas rimulas p. 36. l. 20 loadeth p. 37. l. 9 put Lindwood
in marg. ibid. l. 20. heavier p. 39 l. 6. knew not p. 43. l. 20 fall and p 45.
l. 2, velle ibid. l in marg. Baronius p. 46. l. 26. at p. 48. l. 4. first
branch, p 49. l 28. assertions p. 50. l. 28 confidence p. 51. l. ult. not M D.
p. 52. l. ult. Drones p. 54. l. 25. in case.

In the rest of the book.
p. 3 l. 16 great p. 20 l. 19 because p. 35 l 12 presbyters ibid. 29 Elders p
65 l. 20 here cited p. 66 l 4.4.5.6 or ibid. 10 great cities p. 67 l. 7
testimony of writers ibid. l. 33 Thirdly D Fulck, p 68 l. 1; Heron. ibid, l. 20
of the M p 69 l 23 5 Sections ibid. 27 draining it p. 70 l. 1 holds ibid. l. 4
overweening p. 71 l. 22 could the p ibid. l. 32 I mistake ibid. l 34 in the end
p. 72 l 32 I say ibid 34 I confess ib l. 35 I say p 75 l. 12 M. D. gives p. 76
l 13 over Cities and D. p. 78 l. 3 if I ibid. l. 9 I trouble ib. l. 23 Apostles
p. 79 l. 1 I may ib. l. 19 policy ib l. 24 primitive p. 80 l. 3 toward ib. l.
33 therefore which p, 86 10 but to p, 88 16 strongly p, 97 l. 32 are 2 l nes to
much p. 106 l, 2 being lost p, 111 l, 27 diocesan p, 115 l. 22 not to the ib.
l. 28 so ordered p, 117 l, 7 93 p, 119 l, 12 95 p, 124 l, 1 Sedulius ib, l, 2
Episcopus ib, l, 5 Medina ib, l, 9 presbyters p, 125 l, ult. in all the p, 133
l, 19 more cleanly p, 135 l, 13 this to the p, 146 19 we heard p. 14 8 l, 27
that word p, 149 l, 2 in office p, 153 l, 5 so it was p, 15 ^ l, 29 concluded
p, 160 l, 21 consecration p 161 l, 29 Basil, where he was p. 16 21, 23 she
ever.


