A LETTER of Dr. REINOLDS to his friend, concerning his advice for the study
of Divinity.



LONDON Printed by John Beale, for Jonas Man. 1613.

A Letter of Doctor Reinolds to his friend concerning his advice for the study
of Divinity. etc.
I Must request you to impute to my businesses, which have diverse ways
troubled me, not to lack of good will, my slacknesse is not hitherto answering
your letters. Which assure your self, if I had been able, I would have sooner
answered, so much the more willingly, the better I liked of them, as being sure
witnesses of your good will to me ward, and desire of godliness: whereof for
the one I have heartily to thank you; for the other greatly to rejoice with
you. Then to show my judgment concerning the order which you may best follow
in the study of divinity, I can tell you nothing but that you have already
better read in others and do know your self. Howbeit to satisfy your loving
request, I will briefly mention the chiefest points in my judgment, which are
to be regarded: which if you well consider, and earnestly do follow, as I
trust you will, and God grant you may, your labor shall be taken to the
advancement of Gods glory, the profit of his Church, and your own comfort

The chiefest point of all, to begin withis, since that divinity, the knowledge
of God, is the water of life; the vessel must be clean that shall receive so
precious a liquor: the house must be cleansed that shall have Gods holy spirit,
not only a guest, but also a continual dweller in it. God forbid you should
think divinity consists of words, as wood does of trees, divinity without
godliness does but condemn consciences against the day of vengeance, and
provoke the wrath of the mighty Lord, and make more inexcusable before the seat
of judgment. I will not ad, that true divinity cannot be learned, unless we
frame our hearts and minds wholly to it. But I will desire you to consider
that, only, that as the Poet says, Symcrum est nisi vas, quodcunque infundis
acesssit: so it is written in the book of Wisdom, Wisdom cannot enter into
the heart of a wicked man, nor dwell in a body that is subject unto sin. I
hope there is no great cause of standing upon this point, when I write unto
you, who are, as I trust, the chosen of God, and therefore appointed also to be
sanctified. Yet since your self have mentioned unto me your own remiss kind
of living (as you do term it;) as you love me, take heed that this
remissness be not the same in a man's mind, which a (...) is in the body. And
in this, to conclude, consider with your self, that if the heathens at their
sacrifices were wont to cry out, Procul o procul este profani: what study of
holiness ought there to be in us, whom God has adopted, Christ has redeemed,
the holy Ghost has sanctified to be a peculiar people unto God, zealous of
good works: which if it be required at the hands of all christians, what shall
be asked at theirs, who studying divinity to instruct others, should shine
themselves as lights in the midst of a lewd generation? Shall he ever
persuade others to embrace godliness, that has not persuaded himself that it
is a pearl to be redeemed with all treasures?

For the study it self, which is next to be considered, the knowledge of God
must be learned of God, if ever it be learned. Of whom that we may learn it,
we have to use two means, prayers and reading of holy scripture. Prayers, our
selves to talk with God; reading, to hear God talk with us. For, because
without the grace of the holy spirit, all study, especially in divinity, is
vain: therefore we must earnestly desire of God that he will enlighten our
minds, and soften our hearts, both to know and follow his will revealed to us.
Now because the holy spirit does teach the same doctrine which our Savior did,
which is set forth unto us in the Law, and the Prophets, and the Evangelists:
therefore we must diligently give our selves to reading and meditating of the
holy scriptures in tongues in which they were written by the holy Spirit. Which
how much more forcible it is then to be doubtful among translations, if S.
Austin did not show, who instructs a christian preacher that the knowledge of
the Hebrew and Greek tongues is very necessary to understand the old and new
testastament: yet Themistocles might show, who having to speak to the king of
Persia, was afraid that his mind would not be perceived by interpreters, and
therefore requested the king to grant him first a years space to learn the
Persian tongue. Wherefore I wish that you also join Hebrew to your Greek,
though peradventure you have once began it, and given it over. For in that you
may follow me, since you propose my example, so much the better, who my self,
when I was first Master of Arts, began the study of it, and being weary, left
it: the next year perceiving the necessary use of it, I set again upon it, and
I thank God, since continued a student in it. Wherefore the word of God, and
that, if it may be, out of the very welspring, not out of the brooks of
translations (if I may so term them) must be diligently read, and by often
reading made familiar unto us, though it be not in all places thoroughly
understood as the same Austin has very well noted. As for the parts of
scripture (besides this continual reading of the whole) to be read first over
with more diligence then the rest, I will give you the same counsel which I
heard of Doctor Villerius given to young students, that first you take your
greatest travail with the help of some learned interpreter, in understanding
S. John's Gospel and the Epistle to the Romans, the sum of the new Testament:
Esaias the Prophet, and the Psalms of David, the sum of the old* Howbeit in
the rest, you shall do well also if in harder places you use the judgment of
some godly writer, as Calvin and Peter Martyr, who have written best on the
most part of the old Testament. And because it is expedient to join the
reading of some compend of scriptures and sum of all divinity, together with
the scriptures, I would wish you to travail painfully in Caluins Institution
of Christian Religion, whereby you shall be greatly profited not only to the
understanding of the scriptures, whereof it is a brief and learned commentary:
but also to the perceiving of points of doctrine, whither all things do
pertain, and may of us be applied. Of farther reading of Doctors and histories
and other treatises of religion, I will not add at this present: we may
hereafter (if God will) at greater leisure, when these things are done which
must be laid for the foundation, more conuenie^tly talk. Howbeit, if sometimes
to recreate your self, you intermingle with grauer studies the reading over of
the history Ecclesiastical, especially as it is written more for our country
by good M. Fox, you shall receive of it, together with great profit, great
delectatio^.

I had almost forgotten your two last points, Quae ratio annotandi, Quae
exercitatio adhibenda, I have so little to say of them. For touching noting,
you know I do not like the common custom of common places. The best in my
judgment, is to note in the marge^t or in some paper book for that purpose,
the sum and method of that which you read. As for examples sake, M. Bunnie
has done very well in Caluins Institutions, showing all his method and sum of
every sectio^, in his Compe^dio etc. which book you may well ioyn with the
reading of Calvin, to understand his order and method the better. For the
other, which is exercising, it will be good sometimes to occupy your pen either
at large or briefly, as you list, of such godly meditations as the reading of
the scriptures shall offer unto you; prayers unto God, reproving of sin,
commending of godliness, exhorting to righteousness, dehorting from iniquity,
consolation in miseries, confirming of the truth, refuting of heresies, and
taking an occasion of doing these things some tims to other of your friends (a
lively and godly exercise,) whereby you may perfect them, or your self at the
least. If you cannot find such occasions to others, I pray write to me
sometime of doubts that you may find, or whatsoever you list, and I will
acknowledge my self in that respect as in others, beholding to you.

Now if God give you grace, as earnestly to follow these things, as you have
been desirous that I should prescribe them: you see the learning of the Hebrew
tongue, the reading of the scripturs, of learned interpreters, of the sum of
religion, of noting what you read, and your exercise therein, these things
require much time, and a mind attent; to speak nothing of prayers, and the
study of godliness, which will also require some meditation. Laborandum, mi
Johannes, non luxuriandum. You know what Tullie says for Caelius, that to the
bare attaining of eloquence omittendae sunt omnes voluptates, relinque^da
studia delectationis iocus, ludus, conuiuium, sermo pene familiarium
deserendus. You know what Plato says of his Philosopher, what a great (...)
and (...) he would have him, if ever he shall be admitted a man worthy to
govern his city. If eloquence, if philosophy require such travail for civil
and base things (in this comparison:) what shall we think that the knowledge of
God, the study of divinity, desires for the greatness, and for the worthiness
deserves. Whether you will take such pains or no, or whether you will fly al
entiseme^ts from it, I do not know; I pray God you may. Surely hitherto, which
I write with grief, (your writing, and your friendship does embolden me to
write freely that which I trust you will take in good part) you have bin too
much carried away by means of company, from earnest travail to your study, to
sweet inticeme^ts of the flesh, seeing of vain spectacles, over much eating and
drinking, banqueting, freque^ting of the town, deliting in vanity, resorting to
tauernes, forgetting the word of God. Be not filled with wine wherein is exces
but be filled with the spirit. Will you pardon my love for desiring to heal
you, or shall I become your enemy for speaking of the truth?) they have made
you to neglect your profit in study, they have hurt your wit, weakened your
memory, corrupted your good desire, stained your manners, enfeebled your body,
touched your good name, grieved your friends, and indeed almost quenched, but
yet I tha^k God they have not put out the lively sparks of Gods spirit in you.
A great well willer of yours, though not greatly acquainted with you, did ask me
a day or two before the act, since I received your letters, what I thought of
you, as one that did heartily desire your profit in learning and godliness. When
I had answered him, for that good opinion which I had always conceived of you,
both alwais for your towardliness, and especially for your letters, so
friendly that I will not now report: he said that he was very glad to hear it,
and that he asked the question in some doubt, because in few days that here he
had staid, he had seen you somewhat often in the town But it might be that by
reason of strangers you had some occasion, the Judges being here, to be the
oftener abroad. Howbeit about and since the same time, to absent your self from
prayers, an exercise so necessary for christians, that indeed desire ye grace
of God, and know it coms from him only, to absent your self from sundry
exercises of divinity, wherein peradventure some good might have bin done to
the furthering of your study: me think these things did not so well as I wished,
agree with the profession and as it were protestation, whichin your letters, so
shortly before you writ to me. I may seem ouerbold, and perhaps am to sharp in
this my dealing with you, agreeing as some may think, rather to one that were a
superior, then fit for a friend, whose degree and state is equal. But I know
not how, the good will which I did bear, first being reader to you being
scholar, and ever since continued with my free advise in all things wherein ever
you have asked my counsel (as, I thank you, you have done in many) does
constrain me to pour forth my inward affection to you, so much the more
willingly, because I know you have learned of Solomon, that the wounds of a
friend are beter then the kissings of an enemy. Even these things that hinder
your study, and therefore at your request I was constrained to touch, I have
touched the more boldly, because I do not doubt but your self do mislike them:
and I see in your letters the strife betwixt the flesh and the spirit, which S.
Paul sets down as a mark of Gods children, that you do not the good which
you would but the evil which you would not, that you do. God give you grace to
stir up your heart and strive as a faithful servant to fly from the lusts of
youth, as S. Paul exhorts Timothy, that you may set your mind to prayers and
the reading of holy scripture. It will be convenient that you have your
appointed times for the one and for the other. Which to prescribe as your self
knowing your own business, may most conuenie^tly; so co^sta^tly to follow your
order prescribed, I hope the grace of God, which earnestly you shall pray for,
will not be failing to you. July 4. 1577

FINIS.

