THE NECESSITY OF RIGHTEOUSNESS.

OR A PROFITABLE AND FRVITFVLL SERMON Upon the fifth Chapter of the Gospel of
S. Matthew. verse. 20. Preached and Penned by that famous, learned, judicious,
Orthodoxall, holy, wise, and skillful Preacher and servant of God, now
deceased, and with his God triumphing in Heaven, JOHN RANDALL, Ba^^elour of
Divinity, Pastor of St Andrews Hubbart in little East-cheape LONDON,
Sometimes Fellow of Lincoln College in OXFORD.

And now published, to the glory of God, the edification of his Church, and the
honorable Memorial of the Author, by WILLIAM HOLBROOKE, Preacher of the Word
of God in the Church aforesaid.

LONDON Printed by I. D. for Nathaniel Newbery and William Sheffard, and are to
be sold at their Shops in Pope's Head Alley. 1622.

TO THE RELIGIOVSLY AFFECTED LADY THE LADY BENNET, Wife to Sir John Bennet, all
happiness here, and hereafter be multiplied.
MADAM;
AS you were a great looser by the death of that servant of God, master
Randall, who was to you (whilst he lived) a faithful and able counselor, both
spiritually and bodily, and from whom you received great satisfaction,
direction, and comfort in all distresses, whenever you resorted to him, as
you have often confessed, to the glory of God. And as your love was great to him,
manifested many ways, whilst he lived, and in his sickness, and since his
death, by your much lamenting, and weeping for the death of him, that a man may
say of you, and your love to this man departed, as the Jews did of our
Savior, concerning his love to Lazarus, when he wept over him, Behold, how he
loved him, Ioh. 11.36. So I know your Ladyship will be ready to receive, and
yield your best countenance to whatsoever was his; whereupon I have made bold,
in testimony of my thankfulness to your Ladyship, for your readiness (lately)
to do me good, here to Dedicate unto you a Sermon of his, Preached and penned
by his own hand, as it comes to your view: I need not persuade your Ladyship
to accept it, I know the child shall be welcome, both for it own and Fathers
sake, especially, considering, that it will (in some sort) supply, the loss
and absence of a profitable and dear friend, whom though you cannot hear, nor
see any more speaking unto you, and counselling viva voce, yet you may hear
and see counselling you by this and other of his writings; for friends absent,
whether living or dead, speak by writing, when they cannot be personally
present, and viva voce speak. Consider then (good Madam) when you read this,
and other of this man's writings, you hear him speaking unto you, and
counselling you, and this will be motive enough, to persuade your Ladyship to
entertayne what is here presented unto you. The Lord Jesus, that Counselor of
his Church and People, by his Spirit counsel, direct, and comfort you, and so
supply the lack of this, and other friends: he being in stead of all; To him I
do and will commend your Ladyship for every good blessing by Prayer:

And in Him I rest, and acknowledge my self, your Ladyships much bounden
friend, WILLIAM HOLBROOKE.

TO THE RELIGIOUS GENTLEVVOMAN, Mris THOMASIN OVVEFIELD, All happiness in this
life, and that which is to come be multiplied.
GOod Mris Owefield;
Considering your case to be the same with the Lady Bennets aforesaid, both in
respect of your loss in Mr Randall, who was, as to her, so to you, a faithful
Counselor every way, as you have often confessed, and also in respect of your
love to him, both in life, sickness, death, and since, only the odds is on your
side, in that you have not only in your own particular, sustained a loss,
but your Family also, by the death of that worthy servant of God, who often
instructed them in the way of the Lord: considering, I say, your case to be
like unto the foresaid Ladies, in the foresaid respects, I have made bold, as
a testimony of my thankefulnes, for your love diverse times showed unto me, to
Dedicate this Work also to you, that your loss may (in some sort) be
supplied, by seeing and hearing him speaking to, and counselling you, in Print,
whom you so rejoiced to see and hear speak, when he was living by word of
mouth, I make no question of your acceptance of what was his, as this was both
penned and Preached by him, as here it comes to your View: My desire shall be
to God for you, to bless this and all the labors of his, which you have
inioyed, any way, to the furthering, edifying, and confirming of you and yours
immovably in your present faith, which God grant for his Christ's sake, in whom
I am,

And rest your much bounden Friend WILLIAM HOLBROOKE.

THE NECESSITY OF RIGHTEOUSNESS.
MATTHEW 5.20. For I say unto you, Except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall not enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven.


AS soon as our SAVIOVR had won certain Disciples and followers to
himself, some, by his Word and express commandment, as Peter, Andrew, James,
and John, whom he called from their Nets to follow him, that he might make
them fishers of men, as it is in the fourth Chapter of this Gospel, verse 22.
and some, by his Doctrine, teaching in their Synagogues, and Preaching the
Gospel of the Kingdom, verse 23. and other some, by his Miracles, healing the
Lunaticke, curing the Palsy, dispossessing the Devils, and helping every
sickness, and every disease among the people, as it is verse. 24. so that there
followed him great multitudes out of Galilee, and Decapolis, and Jerusalem, and
Judea, and from beyond Jordan, as it is in the 25. verse of that Chapter: As
soon (I say) as he had so done, he went up into a Mountain; and his Disciples
thither resorting to him, he opened his mouth, and made a Sermon to them, as it
is in the beginning of this Chapter.

In which his Sermon, having first proposed unto them whole troops and
multitudes of blessings, and withal, showed them how to attain thereunto, he
gives them certain necessary instructions for their vocation, and that
especially they should be careful in doing good works: that, whereas they
were the Salt of the earth, they must not be unsavory, but by their good
example season the hearts of the people; and whereas they were the light of the
world, they should so shine before men, that they seeing their good works,
might glorify their Father which is in heaven, as it is verse. 16. And because
the Law and the Prophets of God, are the only rule of good works, therefore
verse. 17. he puts them in mind of them both, showing, that he is not come to
destroy them, but to fulfill them; and therefore howsoever he preaches faith,
and the free remission of sins, and the glad tidings of the Gospel, yet he is
so far from abrogating the Law, from disanulling good works, that
contrariwise, the chief end of his coming was to establish good works, and
to fulfill the Law. For as a Painter, that has first cast his ground, of white
or black, or any such color, when afterward he stains it again in sundry
places with sundry other colors, to fashion his work, cannot be said to
destroy or quite deface his ground, but rather to garnish it, and fill it up,
and make it perfect: even so our Savior, coming to teach us the right sense
and use, and end of the Law, cannot be said to destroy the Law, but rather
garnishes, as it were, the ground of the Law with his true Interpretations, and
right uses, supplying all the imperfections thereof, and filling it up in every
point, so that, as it is in the 18. verse, not one jot or title thereof should
escape unfulfilled. And whereas the Law was, before, depraved, and so the
people seduced and deluded by the Scribes and Pharisees, therefore in this his
Sermon he examines their false glosses from point to point, and reformes all
their depravation of the Law, laying this Verse, which I have read unto you, as
the ground of that which follows: wherein he disswades, and brings his
Disciples out of conceit with their former Teachers; he seeks to purge them of
the old leaven of the Pharisees, and would not have them retain the least
smatch or relish thereof; the very righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees
must become odious to Christ's Disciples; Text.
Your righteousness, says he, must exceed the righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees. Neither was this only a counsel or exhortation, as though it
only were a thing meet and convenient for his Disciples to be better then the
Pharisees, and he would feign have them so to be; but this is an absolute
Precept, of great weight and importance, it is as much as their souls are
worth; Text.
for, except this be so, they shall never enter into the Kingdom of heaven.
And that they might consider the better of it, and believe it more certainly,
he tells them, that this Doctrine is not from earth but from heaven, it comes
not from man but from God, Text.
I say unto you, says our Savior, that it is so indeed. For I say unto you,
except your righteousness, etc. So then this Scripture is a kind of
Intermination or Threatening, which our Savior makes to his Disciples. Wherein
we may observe; First, the Asseverant manner of speech here used; Christ says,
I say unto you. Why, all this Chapter is spoken by Christ, for it is a Sermon
that he Preached to his Disciples; but he would have this Doctrine stick more
closely to their hearts, and thoroughly considered above all other points,
therefore he lays it before them, nay, he fastens it upon them with special
terms of Asseveration, I say unto you. Secondly, the Duty which here is
required of them and in them of us, their righteousness must exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees. Thirdly, the Penalty here
threatened them upon default of the performance of that Duty, even the loss of
Heaven it self, you shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

I say unto you. As if our Savior should thus have spoken to his Disciples; 1.
I.
The Scribes and Pharisees have seduced you, and taught you all this while
erroneous Doctrine; they were blind Leaders of the blind, but I that am the
light of the World, I teach you better Doctrine; I say unto you otherwise then
they did. The Scribes and Pharisees taught you, that external and outward
righteousness was sufficient to salvation; they are liars: but I that am the
Truth, I say unto you otherwise. The Scribes and Pharisees taught you, that the
Law goes no farther then to the outward man, it speaks nothing to the inward
motions and affections of the heart; they are destroyers and corrupters of the
Law: but I that came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it, I that was
present at the making of the Law, I that was an agent in the publishing of the
Law, I that came out of the bosom of my Father, to teach the right sense, and
the true use of the Law, I say unto you otherwise, that except your
righteousness exceed, etc. Or, as if our Savior should thus have spoken to
his Disciples: See that you make no doubt of the truth of this Doctrine, for it
is I that speak it, therefore believe it certainly; I say. You need not
suspect any danger in it, for it is I that speak it, therefore receive it
joyfully; I say. Let it not slip you without due meditation, for it is I that
speak it, therefore remember it carefully; I say. See that you fail not to
yield present obedience to this Doctrine, for it is I that speak it, therefore
practice it dutifully, I say unto you.

I say. Very fitly does this word, Say, agree with Say.
I say, who is indeed properly (...) verbum, the Substantial Word himself.
This is peculiar to Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the second person in the
ever-blessed Trinity, to reveal unto us the secrecies of God, and by the
words of his mouth, to teach us the way of our salvation. At sundry times and
in diverse manners, says the Apostle, God spoke in old time to our Fathers by
the Prophets, but in these days he has spoken unto us by his own Son, Heb.
cap. I. ver. 1, 2. He has spoken, says the Text, not only by his Messengers,
but even mouth to mouth, and face to face, as we see in this place, I say unto
you.

Many things our Savior knew within himself, which were not meet to be
imparted to his Disciples; but this was a matter that concerned them very
near, and therefore he tells them of it, I say unto you. Many things our
Savior was to tell his Disciples, but they must first be grown to some better
perfection, according to that, Ioh. 16.12. I have many things to say unto you,
but you cannot bear them as yet: but this was a principal groundworke of that
holy Religion which he was afterward to build up in his Disciples hearts, and
therefore it is one of the first lessons he teaches them, one of the first
things that he says unto them. Many things our Savior would have his
Disciples acquainted withal, even whilst they were novices in the Faith,
whereof he gives them but only as it were an inkling, to whet on their wits
by some Parables and dark speeches, leaving it to be found out by their own
industry: but this was a main point of their salvation, and therefore without
any Parable, without any circumlocution, without any trope or figure at all, he
tells them of it openly and plainly, in very express terms, I say unto you.

Unto you. I speak not to the Scribes and Pharisees; You.
and let them be ignorant still; but it is you that I desire to instruct, and
therefore I say unto you. You, that look for a portion in my Kingdom, this is
a lesson for you. You, that I have made special choice of to preach my
Gospel, this is a lesson for you. I say it to you, first, that you might
learn it and practice it your selves; and I say it to you, that afterward,
you may teach it to others. For as it was in that miraculous banquet, when five
thousand people were fed with five Barley loaves and two fishes, our Savior
took the victuals, and gave first to his Disciples, and the Disciples gave to
them that were set down, as it is Ioh. 6.11. even so in this spiritual
banquet of feeding souls, our Savior first gives this heavenly food to his
Disciples, I say unto you, says he, that his Disciples might afterward deliver
and impart the same unto others, Briefly understand him thus; I say unto you;
as if he should familiarly confer with them on this manner; I am your Master,
and you are my Disciples, and I would feign have you to be saved, howsoever all
the world speedes besides, therefore I say unto you; young beginners and petie
Scholars are taught by those that are of a higher form, and of longer
standing then themselves are, but the greatest and best Scholars are taught by
the Master himself: and therefore, howsoever your predecessors being but (as
it were) young Scholars, have been taught by Moses or Elias, or some one of
the Prophets and Priests, yet you, as being the highest Scholars in the
School of my Gospel, you I teach in my own person, I say unto you, that
except your righteousness, etc. And so much for the opening of the true
meaning of the Asleveration. Now let us see what profitable Observations may
hence be gathered for our Instruction.

I say. Behold here, Beloved, the wonderful love of God toward mankind: He
had used the Ministry of the Patriarchs to instruct their Families; but that
did not satisfy him. He had used the Ministry of Moses in the Law, to
instruct his people; but that did not satisfy him. He had used the Ministry
of the Prophets to instruct them; but that did not satisfy him. He had used
the Ministry of the Priests and Levites to instruct them, but that did not
satisfy him: yea, he had used the Ministry of John Baptist, one that was
greater then a Prophet, and yet that did not satisfy him. And therefore after
all those, he sent down his own Son into the world, to speak unto men,
face to face, and to instruct them in the matters of their salvation. And this
his love will appear yet to be the greater, if we consider the desperate
estate which the world in those times was come unto; all the foundations of the
earth being out of course, Psalm. 82.5.
as the Psalmist speaks, 1 Ioh. 5.9.
and the whole world then, lying down in wickedness, as the Apostle speaks:
and there is as much here insinuated by our Savior, when he withdrawes his
Disciples from the Scribes and Pharisees, as being corrupted themselves and
corrupting others. They sat in the chair of Moses, and from their mouths the
people were to require the Law, and the whole substance of salvation both for
life and doctrine: they were the very light and the eye of the body, of the
Church that then was. Now the eye being wicked, and the light being darkened,
oh, how great was the darkness of the whole body? In the midst of this
darkness came the true light of the world, to clear the Law, to clear the
Doctrine of salvation, to loose the works of the Devil, as himself speaks;
1 Ioh. 3.8.
that whereas the Scribes and Pharisees, Satan's instruments, had taught the
people hypocrisy, he might convert them from being hypocrites, and teach them
true righteousness; and whereas they had seduced the world into the paths of
destruction, he might rectify their course, and show and lead them the ready
way to everlasting life.

Heb. 2. cap. the three first verses, where he compares the Gospel with the
word of Angels, that is, with the Law, which was given by the hands of Angels:
If it were such great danger to neglect the word whereof the Angels were the
Messengers, how shall we escape if we neglect the great salvation, even the
Gospel whereof Christ himself was a Messenger, who is much more excellent then
all the Angels are, as he had showed in the 4. ver. of the former chapter? So,
likewise he compares it in the same terms of amplification with the word of
Moses, Heb. 10.28.29. He that despises the law of Moses, he dies without
mercy; of how much sorer punishment shall he be worthy, which treads under
foot the Son of God, and the Gospel whereof he is a Messenger? For as he had
showed before, cap. 3. ver. 3. Christ was far greater then Moses. Were this
imprinted thoroughly in our hearts, as it ought to be, that it is the word of
Christ, we would be more eager and desirous of it then now a days we are.
Consider, who is the Author of it, and what great danger there is in refusing
and neglecting it. We should flock to Christ, as to our prey, if we were true
Eagles, and resort to him in great abundance; as we read in the Gospel, that
the people still preased upon him, and ran after him, and thronged him, for the
earnest desire they had to hear him: but now, if Christ come to us, so it is,
but we will scarce so much as step out of our doors to hear him; or if we
do, it is but scatteringly, and sparingly, as if a man should gather Grapes
after the Vintage. Is this the fruit of so many happy years of the preaching
of the Gospel amongst us? And as this warnes us to thirst after the word more
earnestly, so also to embrace it more reverently; as being not the word of any
mortal man, but (as it is indeed) the word of the true and ever-living God.
Think not, when you hear the word Preached, that it is the Minister only
which speaks it; for it is the Lord that speaks it; and it is he that faith as
here to his Disciples, I say unto you. Christ himself, by whom the Disciples
are here reclaimed; for he is our only shepherd, that must bring us home
again, when we like lost sheep are gone astray. He is our only Master, as he
is called Mat. 23.8. who must correct all our errors. And whenever we feel
any ignorance or blindness to possess our hearts, Psalm. 119.1^.
he alone it is to whom we must pray with David, O Lord, open thou mine eyes,
that I may see the wondrous things of thy Law. says it. Wherein he gives unto
all the Ministers of God, a notable pattern of that duty which is laid upon
them; they must not be tongue-tied, nor dumb, but they must Preach and deliver
the Lords Message unto his people. 1 Cor. 9.16.
A necessity is laid upon us, and woe unto us if we do not Preach the
Gospel. It is the lively voice of the Minister which God has ordained as an
effectual instrument, wherewith to fasten his word upon the hearts of those
that shall be saved; Isaiah 42.1.
and therefore for Sions sake we must not hold our peace, nor be either
afraid, or unready to speak. Our Savior here by his example in speaking to
his Disciples, does show us our duty, that we ought to Preach, and withal,
that he cannot away with a dumb Ministry. you, that is, his disciples.
Wherein we are to observe; disciples, that whereas they were separated to such
an excellent office, as to Preach the Gospel; and retayning to such an
excellent Master as he was; therefore he would have them to be more excellently
instructed, both for life and doctrine, then others were. He had placed them in
the world, as a City upon the top of an hill; they were in open view, and
every man's eye would be fastened upon them; and if any gross imperfection
could be espied in them, it would be a scandal to the Word, a reproach to their
Master, a discredit to their calling, and their evil example would spread it
self like a running sore to the infection of many others; and therefore he
would have them to be better then ordinary, their righteousness to exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees. Now as our Savior said, Mark.
13.37. Those things that I say unto you, I say unto all men: so, the same which
is here spoken to his Disciples, he says it also unto you, beloved Brethren,
and to as many of us as succeed them in the work of the Ministry. Let us
carry a watchful eye over all our ways, that we above all others may be good
examples. And as the Lord exhorts his people, Hos. 4.15. Though Israel play the
Harlot, yet let not Judah; so, let us beware that (howsoever the Scribes and
Pharisees do walk amiss, howsoever the common people be negligent in their
ways) yet we that are of the Ministry be careful to live without giving any
just occasion of reproof. We are, or should be, the lights of the world; let
not our misdemeanour blemish that light of God that is within us. We are, or
should be, the Salt of the earth; let us not be unsavory, least we be cast out
upon the dunghill, among the filth and trash of the world; let us duly
consider, that the Lords own credit does in some sort rest upon our
shoulders; and that many other men's souls do hang upon our necks; and that
the Lord having given more unto us then unto others, will require much more of
us then of others; therefore, for the good example of others; or, if that do
not move us, yet for the saving of our own souls; or, if we regard not that,
yet at the least for the glorifying of Gods most blessed name, in whose stead
we are, I beseech you, let us every one look unto our selves, as the Apostle
counsels us, and strive to a greater measure of righteousness then ordinary,
as our Savior here wills his Disciples to do.

as he knew, would be fitter to receive, readier to believe, and forwarder to
practice his wholesome Instructions; he speaks it to his Disciples. Neither is
our Savior unlike himself in this course, for it was the ordinary tenor of
his proceedings; he was always very wise and wary in disposing of the
mysteries of God. We read of the high Priest, Mar. 14. 60. that he questioned
with our Savior about the destroying of the Temple, and building it again in
three days: but our Savior would answer him nothing: he knew that the high
Priest was not a fit man to hear of such a matter. Likewise, of Herod Luke
23.9. that he questioned with our Savior about many things, but our Savior
answered him nothing: he knew that Herod was not a fit Auditor for such
matters. Likewise of Pilate, Ioh. 8.38. that he asked our Savior, what was
Truth? But our Savior, though he never was wont to smoother or suppress the
truth, gives him no answer: he knew that Pilate was not a fit Scholar to
learn the truth. But above all other, he makes himself most nice to the woman
of Canaan, Mar. 15.26. Where he gives the reason of that action, and of all
other of the same kind, because it was not meet to take the childrens bread and
to give it unto dogs. In the fourth of Luke, ver. 23. there we may see, that
our Savior had done many things in Capernaum of his own accord, which he
refused to do in his own Country, though they requested him earnestly. What
was the reason hereof? Chrysostom tells you; it was incredulitas populi sui,
the unbelief of the people. Nay, Christ himself tells you, verse. 24. that it
was the way wardnesse and perverseness of his own Nation, who would not
accept of a Prophet in his own Country. You see therefore that our Savior in
great wisdom does here separate and take his disciples apart from the
multitude into a mountain, as it is in the first verse of this Chapter, and
there by themselves alone, does communicate these heavenly mysteries unto them,
as being fittest for each other; they fittest for those mysteries, and those
mysteries fittest for them.

This Doctrine does afford us a twofold Use. Mat. 10.11. Into whatsoever
City or Town you enter, enquire who is worthy in it: As if he should say, As
many as you find to be unworthy, and unfit to hear your words, have no dealing
with such persons, but depart from them, and shake off the very dust of your
feet, for a witness against them. For as the Israelites when they were
amongst the Babylonians, did hang up their Harpes upon the Willow trees, and
would not sing the songs of Sion in a strange land, as it is, Psalm. 137.2, 3.
Even so, the mysteries of God are very sparingly to be handled in the presence
of those that are profane and wilful, who will be ready to scoff at such
holy things, and to open their blasphemous mouths against them. And as
Ezechias should not have showed the King of Babylon his golden Vestments;
Isaiah 39.2.3.
So, neither ought the precious mysteries of God to be committed to wilful
unbelievers. I seek not hereby to enforce an absolute necessity of this
practice, as to be always observed, as though every one of us should be bound
to make special choice of our Auditors for every thing we speak, for this is
a thing impossible; and, if it could be always performed, yet there is no
absolute necessity in it: for, Moses must speak to Pharaoh, though he know
before hand, and be certified from the Lords own mouth, Exodus 3.19. Exodus
7.2.3.4.
that Pharaohs heart is hardened, and he will not hear him: And Ezechiel must
speak the words of the Lord unto the Jews, Ezech. 2.4.5.7.
though the Lord have certainly forewarned him, that they are a stiff-necked,
and rebellious people, and such as will not hear him. But this is that which I
would show you, what an excellent and necessary a thing discretion is in the
Ministers of God, and how chary we ought to be in delivering the mysteries of
God, that we do not give such holy things unto dogs, nor cast his precious
pearls before swine. And seeing it is not in our power, still to make choice
of such Auditors as shall be fit for our instructions, therefore we must be
wise in making choice of such instructions as shall be fit for our Auditors. If
thou do light upon those that are profane and wilful, to them, if thou
speak any thing, thou must speak of the judgments of God; but when thou
meetest with more towardly and tractable spirits, such as these Disciples were,
these thou must entertain with such a kindly lesson, as this is which our
Savior here uses to his Disciples.

Item for the people, that if they do not feel the message of salvation in
themselves, nor their hearts inwardly admonished in some measure to true
obedience, they are to take a strong prejudice against themselves, that surely
the Lord does as yet esteem them to be utterly unworthy and unfit for all
goodness, that (like dogs and swine) they are not admitted to such holy
Pearls. If the Gospel be hid, says the Apostle, it is hid to them that are
lost, 2 Cor. 4.3. And they whom the Lord has not made acquainted with the
matters of their own salvation, they are as yet in a very hard and damnable
estate. It is a fearful thing to be debarred of the means of our salvation,
as these Scribes and Pharisees in some sort were debarred; in that the Lord
does not utter the course of salvation within their hearing. On the other side,
it is a very joyful and comfortable blessing, that the Lord should teach us
how we may be saved, as here he teaches his Disciples, acquainting them in
private, and very familiarly with the ready way to the kingdom of Heaven. Let
therefore every man thoroughly sift and examine himself, whether, by all the
hearing that ever he has had benefit of, he finds this fruit within himself,
that he is inwardly admonished, and inclined in his own soul, to leave the
common and ordinary way of the world, and betake himself to a more strict and
severe course of life, such as is peculiar but to few, and yet to all Gods
children. For this indeed is the very present case of these Disciples; whom our
Savior would weane from the ordinary course of the Scribes and Pharisees, and
advise them a Peculiar course of his own direction. And when thou have thus
examined thy self, if thou do find any such effect within thy soul, then
thou must record and magnify the infinite mercies of Almighty God, to thy
own endless comfort: but if thou do not feel this fruit within thy self,
then must thou know that as yet thou art in the fearful estate of
condemnation, and that God has left thee to take the ordinary courses that the
world is wont to take, that so thou may be condemned together with the world.
And this consideration will make thee, if thou have any sparkles of grace in
thee at all, to rowse up thy self, and continually to strive with Almighty
God in hearty Prayer, that for his own glory sake, he will vouchsafe at the
length to reveal and open unto thee the mystery of thy salvation, and withal,
to open thy heart, that thou may understand the same, and believe it, and
yield ready obedience thereunto. And thus much concerning the first principal
point that I propounded to your godly consideration, out of this Scripture,
namely, the manner of his speech, or the terms of Asseveration, whereby our
Savior would fasten this lesson upon his Disciples. I have stood upon it the
longer, because (as you see) it has ministered unto me good store of such
matter as is fit and very pertinent to this present Assembly. Now proceed we to
that which follows, so far forth as the time shall permit.

Except your righteousness, etc.] Text.
their righteousness must exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees. Wherein we are to observe, first, the matter of that Duty, it is
righteousness: secondly, the quality of that righteousness, which is here
expressed, partly, by way of Negation, not such a righteousness as is that of
the Scribes and Pharisees; and partly, by way of Affirmation, Text.
but such as beseemes the Disciples of Christ, the true Children of God, your
righteousness; Text.
and thirdly, the measure of that righteousness so qualified, it must not be
scant, but abound, and exceed, your righteousness must exceed. Or else, Text.
that we may draw it into a narrower Division; The thing required, is
righteousness; which our Savior describes by way of comparison, with the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees: In whose righteousness he seems
to tax a double defect, and requires in the righteousness of his Disciples,
the supplying of both those defects. First, their righteousness, it was but
counterfeit, it was not good enough, and therefore the righteousness of
Christ's Disciples must be a better righteousness: and secondly, their
righteousness was very scarce and sparing, and therefore the righteousness of
Christ's Disciples must be more; there must be greater store of righteousness
in them then was in the Scribes and Pharisees, so that it must exceed, both in
goodness and in greatness.

righteousness: whereby we are to understand the whole obedience which a man
does owe unto God, both in respect of his faith, and in respect of his life,
both for doctrine, and also for manners. For indeed, so much is enforced
exactly by the Antithesis, or Opposition here specified, whereas exception is
made both against the Scribes, and the Pharisees too. For, as it shall
afterward (God willing) more plainly appear, the Scribes, they were skillful
in the knowledge of the Law; and the Pharisees, they were precise and formal
in the practice of the Law: the Scribes were the men of greatest learning; and
the Pharisees, the men of exactest living, that these times did afford.
Therefore exception being taken against them both, it is very plain that our
Savior would have his Disciples, both to know the Law better then the Scribes,
and to practice the Law better then the Pharisees; Your righteousness, says
he, must exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees both. God, as
he has appointed and prepared a Kingdom in heaven, so, because that is the
holy of holies, there is no way for any profane or unclean thing to enter
into it: and therefore the Lord requires that every one that would enter
therein, should be righteous and holy; according to that Psalm. 118.20. This is
the gate of the Lord, the righteous shall enter into it. It is the wedding
garment which every one of us must be covered withal, if we would be fit
ghosts for that wedding feast which the Lord has prepared in Heaven. The
Scripture makes mention of a twofold righteousness, Righteousness inherent,
and righteousness imputed. First, there is a righteousness that is within us,
our obedience to the will of God; or, at least, our endeavor to perform it as
near as we can: and secondly, there is a righteousness that is without us,
which being inherent in Christ, is apprehended of us by a true and a lively
faith, and so is imputed unto us, and accounted ours, as really, as if it were
within us. For true righteousness is nothing else but the fulfilling of the
Law; as contrariwise, Sin is nothing else but the transgression of the Law;
and if we do perform the Law of God our selves, here is inherent
righteousness, here is our sanctity and holiness of life. Nay, if we do not
perform it to the full (for this never any mortal man could reach unto, but
the Son of God alone) yet if we endeavor and strive to it the best we can, God,
that accepts of the will as of the deed, as the Apostle speaks, does in great
mercy esteem it for righteousness. But because this our righteousness is
defective, and too light to be waighed in the balance of Gods justice,
therefore we must go out of our selves to seek for a better righteousness,
such as may stand before God without controlment, and be admitted without any
exception; and this is to be found in Christ alone, who only has fulfilled
the Law in every point: which if we faithfully lay hold upon, persuading our
selves assuredly, that whatsoever Christ has done, he has done it for us,
then we make it become our righteousness. The inherent righteousness is the
matter of our sanctification, and the imputed righteousness is the matter of our
justification. Now our Savior requires here of his Disciples, that they should
be furnished with both these sorts of righteousness. Howbeit, he aymeth
principally at our inherent righteousness, that is, our holiness of life,
wherein we must exceed the Scribes and Pharisees. So then you see, that this is
an exhortation to good works. For howsoever our Savior came down from Heaven
to Preach the Gospel, and the free remission of our sins through faith in his
blood, yet he would not have men to think, that faith were enough to save them
without good works, but as many as look to be partakers of his merits, they
must be careful to avoid sin, and zealous of good works, and with all their
power endeavor themselves to fulfill the Law of God. It is a controversy
betwixt us and the Church of Rome, concerning the necessity of good works;
they charge us, that we teach the doctrine of faith alone, and trample the
doctrine of good works under our feet, and that we proclaim a Gospel of
liberty and security. But this is a manifest slander against us; for we do
teach the doctrine of good works, and exhort men to be careful in seeking to
please God by holiness of life, as earnestly as they do. True indeed, that we
deny good works to be necessary in the work of our justification; for it is
faith alone that does justify us in the sight of God: but we hold them to be
absolutely necessary to our salvation: so that our adversaries do very
deceitfully change the state of the question that is betwixt us, bearing the
world in hand that we deny all good works, thereby to discredit and reproach our
religion. No beloved we for our parts do very constantly hold against all the
Libertines in the world, that there never was any man, nor ever can any man
ordinarily be saved without good works. We do indeed magnify the doctrine of
faith; but do we thereby disanull the doctrine of good works? God forbid,
says the Apostle: Nay, rather we establish the law of works, by establishing
the law of faith. For when we preach unto men the singular love of Jesus
Christ, wherewith he has loved them, even above his own life, and his own
precious blood, which is the matter of our faith: presently we make use hereof,
as being a very forcible motive to persuade men, that they should endeavor
themselves by all means possible to requite this love of Christ, with loving
him again, which is the matter of our good works. But to leave our
adversaries, and to come to the present matter it self, which we have in hand.
Our Savior here exhorting his Disciples to righteousness, shows us plainly,
what an odious thing it is in his sight, for a man to be a professed Christian,
and Scholar of his, when he has no care to glorify the name of God, and to
grace his own profession, by living righteously in this present world: nay, he
shows further, that all that ever he has done for us, he has done it to this
end, that we might still be conversant in the exercises of righteousness. A
thing which the Apostle has set down in more plain and express terms, Tit.
2.11. where he says, the grace of God which brings salvation to all men,
has appeared; and to what end? that we should live in security, that we should
turn it in wantonness? No; but to this end, that we should deny all ungodliness,
and worldly lusts; and that we should live soberly, and righteously, and godly
in this present world. And as this duty is laid upon all those that profess
the name of Jesus Christ, so it concerns us of the Ministry more then any
other; let us not content our selves with a vain shadow of Faith, and let not
us think, that it is our knowledge that can save us; for unless we have
righteousness, (...)


