A Consort of the Creatures, with the Creator, and with themselves.

By R. R. of Lincolnes Inn Student in the Common Laws.

It is not good in all things and at all times to be ashamed.

Ecclesiast. 41. printer's or publisher's device T O
BY WISDOM PEACE BY PEACE PLENTY.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Orwin, for William Young and Raph Iac-son. 1591.

depiction of Adam and Eve with the Tree, serpent, and other animals in the
garden CHRISTVS (...)
1 Iah, or Jehovah, God. 2. Christ. A 3 Angelus, vel Homo. An Angel or a Man. I
4 Intelligentia, vel Ratio, Intelligence or Reason. B 5 Brutum, a Brute thing.
S 6 Se^sus, Sense. V 7 Vegetans, A living thing. V 8 Vita, Life. H 9 Homo, Man.
10 Ratio, Reason.




A Consort of the Creatures, with the Creator, and with themselves.
BECAUSE that I am to speak of a Word, which is conceived by a sound: and
because that (...) a Word in Greek, signifies as well Reason as Speech, because
Speech is but a sign or note of those things, which he that speaks,
conceaueth in his mind, or Reason: and because that Reason is occupied either
about the Creature, or the will of the Creator, according to their beings,
their agreements, and ends. First therefore, I think it good to speak somewhat
of Sound, then next of a Word, then of this word Jehovah, then of God, after
what manner he is said to be, then of Nature, or the Creation, or the
Creatures, their beings, agreements, and ends: and lastly, how God is said to
be agreed with us, and to be our end, according as may be gathered from this
word and figure.

Sound.
FIrst therefore, as the word is received into the care by Sound: so do the
Creatures present themselves unto the mind, by the eye, or Observation, as in
a continual Harmony, of their beings, and mouings: for, the Creatures have
(as in Music) iarred, and oftentimes altered their courses, for the benefit
of the Children of God, as says the Prophet Esaias, If thou go through the
water, I will be with thee, the strong floods shall not ouerwhelme thee, and if
thou walk through the fire, it shall not burn thee, and the flame shall not
kindle upon thee. So the Sun and the Moon stood still, at the beheast of
Iosuah, the Red Sea parted to make passage for the Children of Israel, Lots
Wife was turned into a pillar of Salt, for a warning to us, to fly too much
care of worldly things, Angles have been conversant with men, Balaams Ass
reproved him riding to curse Gods people, the Viper did Paul no harm, the
swift stream of Iordane has gone back, and the earth has shaken; which
caused the Prophet David with admiration to say, Judah was his Sanctuary, and
Israel his dominion: The Sea saw that, and fled: Iordane was driven back: The
Mountains skipped like Rams, and the little hills like young Sheep: what
ayled thee O thou Sea, that thou fleddest, and thou Jordan that thou wast
driven back? Ye Mountains that ye skipped like Rams, and ye little hills
like young sheep? Tremble thou Earth at the presence of the Lord, at the
presence of the God of Iaacob: which turned the hard Rock into a standing
water, and the flint stone into a springing well. The consideration hereof,
moved the Wiseman to say, The Elements turned into them selves, like as when
one tune is changed upon an instrument of Music, and yet all the residue keep
their melody.

And as an Harmony to the Ear, is nothing but an agreement of perfect Sound,
pleasing the Sense: so the Harmony of the Creation, is a concurrence of
continued Causes; than the consideration whereof, no earthly thing can be by
the eye more harmonious to the mind.

And as inarticulate Harmony much delights the mind by Sense: so words
Harmonious, which are converted with reasonable consideration, by the Sense do
delight the mind of the Hearer.

Word.
AS by our Reason, thorough the help of Sense, we may know much; but yet to
be wise to our selves only, and to our only uses; but by words we
communicate our knowledge and will to others: so does God communicate his will,
and the knowledge of himself unto us in Christ; who is called, The Word, as
being the cause of the word of God, whereby he is apprehended.

Jehovah.
THis is the great name of GOD, which he chose after the Creation of things:
whereas, during the Creation, he used Elohym; afterward, he uses this name
eleven times in one chapter.

This name was pronounced by the Sacrificer, in the blessing at the departure
of the people from the Temple; and otherwise was amongst the Jews signified by
the name of 42. letters.

If God gave such singular wit to Adam, to name every beast so properly, let us
then somewhat consider how greatly he will be glorified in his own name.

Of Being. How God will be said to be, according to this word.
FIrst therefore, notwithstanding that from this word may be drawn, the
beings of Angels, of Men, of Beasts, of Living things, and so by sound
entendment of whatsoever, that belongs unto them, according to the end and
order of the Creation, yet besides, in this name are the signs of the time
present, of the time past, and of the time to come; signifying, that, inasmuch
as that through him, every thing has being, yet, he only will be said to
be: for, Man, though he is, yet is the best man, but Abel, vanity. Al is but
most vain vanity (says the Preacher) and all is most vanie (I say) and but
plain vanity. The end, and best of man, is to fear God, and to keep his
Commandments.

How Man is said to be in this word.
BY the five vowells, which are in this word, is the being of Man inferred,
because that no word is without a vowell, no Proposition or Speech without
words, and Speech is converted with Reason, Reason being the essential
difference of a man.

How Christ is said to be, according to this word.
INasmuch as in this word are signified GOD and Man, is Christ both God and Man
signified.

How the Angels are said to be in this word.
ANd for that that the Angels do partake with us in understanding, from the
being of Man may also the being of the Angels be inferred: for we are said to
be the most inferior for understanding: that is, inferior to the Angels in
understanding.

How a true Christian is in this Figure.
NOw, having here found the being of a Man; let us also endeavor to find the
beings of a true Christian, of a bare Professor, and of an Heathen man.

First therefore, that that that Reason has taught many me^ to know much of the
Creation, but not the knowledge and acknowledgeme^t of Christ, in so great
light as we behold him: therefore in this Figure have we signified man below,
according to his Reason, as in that place being the end of the Creation: but
here in this figure we have signified him next unto Christ, according to the
pure part of his mind, whereof himself can give no reason, according to his
pure understanding: whereby we are persuaded, That neither death, neither
life, neither Angels, nor rule, neither power, neither things present, neither
things to come, neither height, nor depth, neither any other creature shall
separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Which
acknowledgme^t belongs to the whole Church, who notwithstanding her
blemishes, which in reason might make her ugly and loathsome, yet with comfort
acknowlegeth her beauty in the love and grace of Christ, as notes Solomon in
that figurative speech of the Church: I am black, (O ye daughters of
Jerusalem) but yet fair and well favored, like as the tents of the Cedarenes,
and as the hangings of Solomon.

How a bare Professor is in this Figure.
INasmuch as Reason is an Intelligence upon a former Intelligence: and is the
essence indifferently of al men good and bad: therefore may the wicked as well
as the godly, understand the written word, according to the letter.

But though the knowledge of Salvation, which is of Reason, may be learned
indifferently, as well by the reprobate as the elect, out of the word of God,
which is one subject of Reason, and may be bought for fee: yet this other
acknowledgement, which is of pure understanding, is the immediate work of God
to the elect, which is not to be bought Sorcerer Simon Magus.

How a Heathen man is in this Figure.
FOrasmuch as from the bottom of this Figure, it seems that from Reason
upwards by the Creature, lies a way to the knowledge of the Creator, Reason
being common as well to the Heathen, as the false and true Christian, let us
thereof a little consider.

Concerning the Heathen, we read, that the very Creature shall make the^
inexcusable before God. Forasmuch as that which may be known of God, is
manifest in the^: God having showed it unto them; for the invisible things of
him, that is, his eternal power and Godhead are seen by the Creation of the
world, being considered in his works, to the intent that they should be
without excuse, because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as
God, neither were thankful, but became vain in their imaginations, and their
foolish heart was full of darkness. And inasmuch as a light seems to be given
unto the Heathen man out of this figure unto Christ, let us thereof soberly
consider. For, GOD in the whole course of the Creature, has combined things of
different quality by somewhat of a mean Nature: as in the combination of the
Elements, of the bodies of Trees, of Beasts, of Men: about whose brain are two
skins, that one called Pia Matter, Tender mother, for softnes of the brain;
that other, Dura Matter, hard mother, for hardness of the skull. Again, between
Sense, and Reason are means, Common sense, Imagination, and Memory, of which
again Imagination is the mean, as wax holding that, which for slipperines,
the Common sense cannot, and putting over to Memory the things so received.
Again, he seeing Plants to agree with beasts in life, beasts with men in
sense, should now the natural man, having thus far followed the conduct of
Nature, here cease and find no mean between God and Man? (for they aimed at
the knowledge of God by those terms of Causa causans, the cause causing, and of
Finis vltimus, the last end, as says Aristotle, according to this Figure,
Finis vltimus est, propter quem reli-reliqua desiderantur, The last end is
that, for which all other things are desired.) Or rather seeking an Union to
God, would not Reason lead him to the highest Creature in his knowledge, which
was Man. Now, inasmuch as the Philosopher himself says, Omnia fiunt ad finem,
All things are done for the end: What end more probable for him, who should
thus unite the Godhead to the Manhood, than to agree Man with God? (as says
Amos the Prophet) Two cannot walk together, except they be agreed: And that
they knew sin and gessed at a punishment for the same, after this life to
be infliected, appears out of that of Tully, called Somnium Scipionis,
Scipio his dream. The philosopher is said to have cried out, o ens entiu^,
miserere mei: o being of beings have mercy upon me: which words, if a Christian
should translate, might he not say, O God in Christ look upon me: for that is
to have mercy? The three Wise men following the star, came from the East to
worship Christ: and it is said, that a Philosopher at the suffering of our
Savior, seeing the Sun darkened, and the earth to quake, by observation of
Nature, cried out, Aut Deus naturam patitur, aut totius orbis machina
destruetur, Either God suffers violence in nature, or else the frame of the
whole world shall be destroyed.

How Angels are said to differ from Men.
Having thus spoken somewhat of the agreement of Angels with Men, and of the
agreement and difference of the pretending and true christian, and likewise of
the knowledge of the Heathen man: it seems good now in a word to speak of the
difference of men from Angels, which is this: that they by pure Intelligence
do exercise their functions; but Man by Reason, which we have termed, An
Intelligence upon Intelligence, because that in Man, Understanding is hindered,
by reason of the corruption of our first parents; by the vanity of our minds,
by reason of the affinity which our imagination has with the Senses; for the
excess of affections, for the excess of touch, taste, and exercise; for the
abundance of humors, and for the temptations of evil Spirits: for the relief
of which infirmities, our knowledge is helped by Reason, which is helped by
Art, either in particular questions, or else in the whole body of a Science,
and Art is the way to Argumentation, of which the first part proceeds of
Intelligentia, Intelligence, and of Philosophers is called (...), of
Longitia^s, Mayor. The second part is that which is inferred of the first, and
is of Reason, of Philosophers called Conscientia, Conscience, of Longitians
Minior, which being well inferred, the Mayor must so cohere with it self, as
they both may go for granted by the alowance of the Answerer. The third part
of Argumentation, or of a Sillogisme, is of Intellectus, or of Understanding
now ascertained by Reason, whereby we know, that we know the truth, and is
called Dictamen, of Logitians, Conclusion. Now Art in the whole body of a
Science, is nothing else but a prudent collecting, and ordering of all such
Places, from which places, concerning any question in the whole body of that
Science, may be used Argumentation: In every which Science, the Parts and
Reasons are finite, though of the several mixtures of the parts, may proceed
Questions infinite.

How Beasts and Vegetant or living things, have their being, according to this
Word.
IN this word, are two Aspirates, by which may be inferred the beings of two
sensible or breathing Creatures, that is, of Men, and of Beasts. And, for that
nothing can breathe but living, from a life, may be inferred the being of
living things, Minerals, Herbs, and Plants: So as, hither may be applied that
of S. Paul, brought up at the feet of the learned Hebrewe Gamaliel, which he
spoke to the Philosophers of Athens, God himself gives life and breath to al,
every where, for in him we live and move, and have our being, as certain of
your own Poets have said. For we are also his offspring; as that of the Poet,
Chara Deum soboles, magnum Iouis incrementu^. Gods dearest offspring, mighty
loves increase.

And that of the Christian Poet, who (as himself affirms) wrote this, and
much more after the manner of the Heathen: Vita est duplex, (ne tu sis
nescius:) vna
Corporis, hanc sequitur stultoru^ maxima turba,
Vulgus iners, Plebs insipiens, quae nil sapit altum,
Egregiumque, ignaua, colens pro Numine ventre^:
Haec pecudum propria est, propria est haec vita ferarum.
Altera vero Animi, Dijs conuenit, atque Deorum
Nobilibus pueris, qui ob facta ingentia possunt
Vere homines, and semidei, heroesque vocari.
I would not, but thou should know
That living is twofold,
One, men of flesh, a flock of fools
In greatest price done hold,
The lazy scumme, and idiot sort,
Which savor no-thing hie,
No-thing of worth, but do their paunch
Adore as Deity:
This life belongs to the tame
And to the savage beast.
That other life (yet) of the mind,
The Gods have in request,
And all their noble progeny,
Who for their great deserts
Are termed men indeed, halfe-gods.
And men of mounting hearts.


Now, inasmuch as in this word are the five vowels, which make all words; we
may note, that we ought to speak no word, but to have in remembrance our God.

Likewise, from the two Aspirates, we may note; that we ought not so much as to
breathe, but also to think of God, in whom we have our life and breathing.

Of the agreements of the Creatures with themselves, and with the Creator.
AS a man cannot Speak, but Breathing: nor breathe, but Living; nor live, but
Being: Man, Angel: Man, Beast, Homo, Angelus: Homo, Brutum. Man, Beast, Living
thing. Homo, Brutum, Vegetans. Creator, Creature. Creator, Creatura.
so can the Creature, nor Speak, Breathe, Live, nor Be, but in God; in whose
name, are the life of Speech, Breathing, Life, and Being.

So then, Vegetant things agree with things Brute in life; Vegetant and Brute
things agree with man in Life and Sense: Man agrees with Angels in
Understanding, with an Heathen in Reason, with a bare Professor in the
knowledge of the word, with a true Christian in faith, which is of the word,
which teaches Christ, Immanuel, with us GOD: who is Michael, one with God.

Of the Ends of the Creatures severally to themselves, and how God is said to
be our End.
BEcause that the End of a Beasts life is to provide for life: So, or one Beast
is for food to another, or else Herbs are for food to some Beasts: So says
the Poet: Torua Leaena Lupu^, sequitur Lupus ipse capella^,
Florentem citasum sequitur lascina capella.
The cruel Lioness lays wait
To take the Wolf for pray:
The Wolf he seeks the tender Kid,
The Kid in wanton play
Does crop the flowring three-leau'd grass.


But both Beasts and Herbs have their Ends, or to give food or pleasure to
Man, of whom the Angels have their end in their Ministry, and God is the End
of all.

Again, after another manner, according to this Figure, Man is both ways,
upward and downward, not only the End of the other creatures, but also his own
End, as to whose use, not only are the other creatures, but also Man himself
is the End of Man, according to a twofold diversity of use in sense and in
Reason. Under the first, which belongs unto Sense, are contained all duties
of Mutual love, and the understanding of natural things. From the second use,
which is of Reason, whereby we know that we do know so much as we know, and
for to get the knowledge of our selves and our Powers, we do exercise our
study, as well as to the knowledge of other Creatures, by such painful
experience getting knowledge, how to communicate to common use the fruits of
our knowledge, for common ease in things doubtful or questionable by Art,
which is made of Acts chiefly, because that To do, is the end of Man, and the
end of the whole Creature. Now, from the End are considered the other Causes,
of the Efficient, and of the matter, of the Person and Thing, and of the Form,
about which are al other places of Logique: wherefore Master Ramus said well,
Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas. O happy man, who can discern the
causes of

But with a further entendment may it be said: Foelix qui potuit rerum
cognoscere fines. O happy man, who can discern the special ends of things.

Art is the mother of Science, which is had in a threefold diversity,
according to the foresaid knowledge, or of Nature, or of Sense, or of Reason,
and is therefore called or Natural, or Rational, or Moral.

With some cause therefore, was that Speech (...), know thy self, said among
the Heathen, to have come from Heaven. For, a Man cannot fully know himself,
but he shall be drawn to consider the whole Nature: by which word of Nature, I
understand, not only the powers and naked properties of Man, and other
Creatures, but also what Acts soever are by Man invented by force of Reason.
For well says the learned Scot, Nunquam aliud Natura, aliud Sapientia dicit.
Nature and Art never speak diverse things. And another learned man, Naturam
inuestigantibus, inuestiganda sunt, tam, quae quoquo modo comitantur, quam quae
suo sunt robore. They, who seek for an exquisite knowledge of Nature, must
as well regard what effects do accompany it, as what natural faculties it has.

In Conclusion, Man is the End of the Creation; and to do is the End of Man
upon himself, and other Creatures. Christ is the End of Man, whom we learn
out of the word of GOD, unto which he is Yea, and Amen: as says the Apostle
Paul, GOD has opened unto us the mystery of his will, according to his good
pleasure, which he had purposed in himself, That in the dispensation of the
fulness of the times, he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both
which are in heaven, and which are in earth in him. God is the highest, and in
respect only Cause, or End of al, who works all things after the good
council of his own will.

FINIS.

