A REPORT OF THE TRVTH OF the fight about the Isles of Acores, this last Summer.

BETWIXT THE Revenge, one of her Majesty's Ships,

And an Armada of the King of Spain.

LONDON

Printed for william Ponsonbie.

1591.

A report of the truth of the fight about the Isles of Acores, this last
summer, betwixt the Revenge, one of her Majesty's Ships, and an Armada of the
king of Spain.
BEcause the rumors are diversely spread, as well in England as in the low
countries and else where, of this late encounter between her majesty's ships and
the Armada of Spain; and that the Spaniardes according to their usual manner,
fill the world with their vain glorious vaunts, making great appearance of
victories: when on the contrary, themselves are most commonly and shamefully
beaten and dishonored; thereby hoping to possess the ignorant multitude by
anticipating and forerunning false reports: It is agreeable with all good
reason, for manifestation of the truth to overcome falsehood and untruth; that
the beginning, continuance and success of this late honorable encounter of
Sir Richard Grinuile, and other her majesty's Captains, with the Armada of
Spain; should be truly set down and published without parcialitie or false
imaginations. And it is no marvel that the Spaniard should seek by false and
slandrous Pamphlets, aduisoes and Letters, to cover their own loss, and to
derogate from others their due honors, especially in this fight being
performed far of: seeing they were not ashamed in the year 1588. when they
purposed the invasion of this land, to publish in sundry languages in print,
great victories in words, which they pleaded to have obtained against this
Realm; and spredde the same in a most false sort over all parts of France,
Italy, and elsewhere. When shortly after it was happily manifested in very
deed to all Nations, how their Navy which they termed invincible, consisting of
240. sail of ships, not only of their own kingdom, but strengthened with the
greatest Argosies, Portugal Caractes, Florentines and huge Hulkes of other
countries: were by thirty of her Majesty's own ships of war, and a few of
our own Merchants, by the wise, valiant, and most aduantagious conduction of
the L. Charles Howard, high Admiral of England, beaten and shuffeled together;
even from the Lizard in Cornwall: first to Portland, where they shamefully left
Don Pedro de Valdes, with his mighty ship: from Portland to Cales, where
they lost Hugo de Moncado, with the Gallias of which he was Captain, and from
Cales, driven with squibs from their anchors: were chased out of the sight of
England, round about Scotland and Ireland. Where for the sympathy of their
barbarous religion, hoping to find succor and assistance: a great part of
them were crushed against the rocks, and those other that landed, being very
many in number, were notwithstanding broken, slain, and taken, and so sent
from village to village coupled in halters to be shipped into England. Where
her Majesty of her Princely and invincible disposition, disdaining to put them
to death, and scorning either to retain or entertain them: were all sent
back again to their countries, to witness and recount the worthy
achieuements of their invincible and dreadful Navy. Of which the number of
soldiers, the fearful burden of their ships, the commanders names of
every squadron, with all other their magasines of provisions, were put in
print, as an Army and Navy irresistable, and disdaining prevention. With all
which so great and terrible an ostentation, they did not in all their sailing
round about England, so much as sink or take one ship, Bark, Pinnes, or
Cockbote of ours: or ever burnt so much as one sheepcote of this land. When as
on the contrary, Sir Francis Drake, with only 800. soldiers not long before,
landed in their Indies, and forced Santiago, Santo Domingo, Cartagena, and the
Fortes of Florida.

And after that, Sir John Norris marched from Peniche in Portugal, with a
handful of soldiers, to the gates of Lisbone, being above 40. English miles.
Where the Earl of Essex himself and other valiant Gentlemen, braued the
Cittic of Lisbone, encamped at the very gates; from whence after many days
abode, finding neither promised party, nor provision to batter; made retrait
by la^d, in despite of all their Garrisons, both of Horse and foot. In this
sort I have a little digressed from my first purpose, only by the necessary
comparison of theirs and our actions: the one covetous of honor without vaunt
or ostentation; the other so greedy to purchase the opinion of their own
affairs, and by false rumors to resist the blasts of their own dishonors, as
they will not only not blush to spread all manner of untruths: but even for
the least advantage, be it but for the taking of one poor aduenturer of the
English, will celebrate the victory with bonefiers in every town, always
spending more in faggots, then the purchase was worth they obtained. When as we
never yet thought it worth the consumption of two billets, when we have taken
eight or ten of their Indian ships at one time, and twenty of the Brasill
fleet. Such is the difference between true valor, and ostentation: and
between honorable actions, and frivolous vaineglorious uaunts. But now to
return to my first purpose.

The L. Thomas Howard, with six of her Majesty's ships, six victualers of
London, the bark Ralegh, and two or three Pinnases riding at anchor nere unto
Flores, one of the Westerlie Islands of the Azores, the last of August in the
after noone, had intelligence by one Captain Midleton, of the approach of the
Spanish Armada. Which Midleton being in a very good Sailer, had kept them
eompanie three days before, of good purpose, both to discover their forces the
more, as also to give advice to my L. Thomas of their approach. He had no sooner
delivered the news but the Fleet was in sight: many of our ships companies
were on shore in the Island; some providing balast for their ships; others
filling of water and refreshing themselves from the land with such things as
they could either for money, or by force recover. By reason whereof our ships
being all pestered and romaging every thing out of order, very light for want
of balast. And that which was most to our disadvantage, the one half part of
the men of every ship sick, and utterly unserviceable. For in the Revenge
there were nintie diseased: in the Bonauenture, not so many in health as could
handle her maine sail. For had not twenty men been taken out of a Bark of
Sir George Caryes, his being commanded to be sunk, and those appointed to her,
she had hardly ever recovered England. The rest for the most part, were in
little better state. The names of her Majesty's ships were these as follows
the Defiaunce, which was Admiral, the Revenge Viceadmirall, the Bonauenture
commanded by Captain Cross, the Lion by George Fenner, the Foresight by M.
Thomas Vauisour, and the Crane by Duffeild. The Foresight and the Crane being
but small ships; only the other were of the middle size; the rest, besides the
Bark Ralegh, commanded by Captain Thin, were victualers, and of small force
or none. The Spanish fleet having shrouded their approach by reason of the
Island; were now so soon at hand, as our ships had scarce time to way their
anchors, but some of them were driven to let slip their Cables and set sail.
Sir Richard Grinuile was the last waied, to recover the men that were upon the
Island, which otherwise had been lost. The L. Thomas with the rest very hardly
recovered the wind, which Sir Richard Grinuile not being able to do, was
persuaded by the master and others to cut his maine sail, and cast about, and
to trust to the sailing of the ship: for the squadron of Siuil were on his
wether bow. But Sir Richard utterly refused to turn from the enemy, alleging
that he would rather chose to dye, then to dishonor him self, his country,
and her Maisties ship, persuading his company that he would pass through
the two Squadrons, in despite of them: and enforce those of Civil to give him
way. Which he performed upon diverse of the foremost, who as the Mariners term
it, sprang their luffe, and fell under the lee of the Revenge. But the other
course had been the better, and might right well have been answered in so
great an impossibility of prevailing. Notwithstanding out of the greatness of
his mind, he could not be persuaded. In the mean while as he attended those
which were nearest him, the great San Philip being in the wind of him and,
coming toward him, becalmed his sails in such sort, as the ship could
neither make way nor feel the helm: so huge and high carged was the Spanish
ship, being of a thousand and five hundrcth tuns. Who afterlaid the Revenge
aboard. When he was thus bereft of his sails, the ships that were under his lee
luffing up, also laid him aborde: of which the next was the Admiral of the
Biscaines, a very mighty and puysant ship commanded by Brittan Dona. The
said Philip carried three tire of ordinance on a side, and eleven pieces in
every tire. She shot eight forth right out of her chase, besides those of her
Stern ports.

After the Revenge was entangled with this Philip, four other boorded her; two
on her larboord, and two on her starboord. The fight thus beginning at three of
the clock in the after noone, continued very terrible all that evening. But
the great San Philip having received the lower tire of the Revenge, charged
with crossebarshot, shifted her self with all diligence from her sides,
utterly misliking her first entertainment. Some say that the ship foundred,
but we cannot report it for truth, unless we were assured. The Spanish ships
were filled with companies of soldiers, in some two hundred besides the
Mariners; in some five, in others eight hundredth. In ours there were none at
all, beside the Mariners, but the servants of the commanders and some few
voluntary Gentlemen only. After many enterchanged voleies of great ordinance
and small shot, the Spaniards deliberated to enter the Revenge, and made diverse
attempts, hoping to force her by the multitudes of their armed soldiers and
Musketeers, but were still repulsed again and again, and at all times beaten
back, into their own ships, or into the seas. In the beginning of the fight,
the George Noble of London, having received some shot through her by the
Armados, fell under the Lee of the Revenge, and asked Sir Richard what he would
command him, being but one of the victulers and of small force: Sir Richard
bid him save save himself, and leave him to his fortune. After the fight had
thus without intermission, continued while the day lasted and some hours of
the night, many of our men were slain and hurt, and one of the great Gallions
of the Armada, and the Admiral of the Hulkes both sunk, and in many other of
the Spanish ships great slaughter was made. Some write that sir Richard was
very dangerously hurt almost in the beginning of the fight, and lay
speechless for a time ere he recovered. But two of the Reuenges own company,
brought home in a ship of Lime from the Islands, examined by some of the
Lords, and others: affirmed that he was never so wounded as that he forsook
the upper deck, til an hour before midnight; and the^ being shot into the
body with a Musket as he was a dressing, was again shot into the head, and
withal his Surgeon wounded to death. This agrees also with an examination
taken by Sir Frances Godolphin, of 4. other Mariners of the same ship being
returned, which examination, the said Sir Frances sent unto master William
Killigrue, of her Majesty's privy Chamber.

But to return to the fight, the Spanish ships which attempted to board the
Revenge, as they were wounded and beaten of, so always others came in their
places, she having never less the^ two mighty Gallions by her sides, and
aboard her. So that ere the morning, from three of the clock the day before,
there had fifteen several Armados assailed her; and all so ill approved their
entertainment, as they were by the break of day, far more willing to harken to
a composition, then hastily to make any more assaults or entries. But as the
day increased, so our men decreased: and as the light grew more and more, by so
much more grew our discomforts. For none appeared in sight but enemies, saving
one small ship called the Pilgrim, commanded by Jacob Whiddon, who houered all
night to see the success: but in the morning bearing with the Revenge, was
hunted like a hare amongst many ravenous hounds, but escaped.

All the powder of the Revenge to the last barrel was now spent, all her pikes
broken, forty of her best men slain, and the most part of the rest hurt. In
the beginning of the fight she had but one hundredth free from sickness, and
fourscore and ten sick, laid in hold upon the Ballast. A small troop to man
such a ship, and a weak Garrison to resist so mighty an Army. By those hundred
all was sustained, the voleis, bourdings, and entrings of fifteen ships of
war, besides those which beat her at large. On the contrary, the Spanish
were always supplied with soldiers brought from every squadron: all manner of
Arms and powder at will. Unto ours there remained no comfort at all, no hope,
no supply either of ships, men, or weapons; the mastes all beaten over board,
all her tackle cut a sunder, her upper work altogether rased, and in effect
euened she was with the water, but the very foundation or bottom of a ship,
nothing being left over head either for flight or defense. Sir Richard finding
himself in this distress, and unable any longer to make resistance, having
endured in this fifteen hours fight, the assault of fifteen several
Armadoes, all by tornnes aboorde him, and by estimation eight hundred shot of
great artillery, besides many assaults and entries. And that himself and the
ship must needs be possessed by the enemy, who were now all cast in a ring
round about him; The Revenge not able to move one way or other, but as she was
moved with the waves and billow of the sea: commanded the master Gunner, whom
he knew to be a most resolute man, to split and sink the ship; that thereby
nothing might remain of glory or victory to the Spaniards: seeing in so
many hours fight, and with so great a Navy they were not able to take her,
having had fifteen hours time, fifteen thousand men, and fifty and three
sail of men of war to perform it withal. And persuaded the company, or as
many as he could induce, to yield them selves unto God, and to the mercy of
noneels; but as they had like valiant resolute men, repulsed so many enemies,
they should not now shorten the honor of their nation, by prolonging their
own lives for a few hours, or a few days. The master Gunner readilic
condescended and diverse others; but the Captain and the Master were of an
other opinion, and besought Sir Richard to have care of them: alleging that
the Spaniard would be as ready to entertain a composition, as they were
willing to offer the same: and that there being diuerle sufficient and
valiantmen yet living, and whose wounds were not mortal, they might do their
country and prince acceptable service hereafter. And (that where Sir Richard
had alleged that the Spadiards should never glory to have taken one ship of
her Majesty's, seeing they had so long and so notably defended them selves)
they answered, that the ship had six foot water in hold, three shot under
water which were so weakly stopped, as with the first working of the sea, she
must needs sink, and was besides so crushed and bruised, as she could never be
removed out of the place.

And as the matter was thus in dispute, and Sir Richard refusing to hearken to
any of those reasons; the master of the Revenge (while the Captain wan unto
him the greater party) was conuoyde aborde the General Don Alfonso Bassan. Who
finding none over hasty to enter the Revenge again, doubting least S. Richard
would have blown them up and himself, and perceiving by the report of the
master of the Revenge his dangerous disposition: yielded that all their lives
should be saved, the company sent for England, and the better sort to pay
such reasonable ransom as their estate would bear, and in the mean season to
be free from Gally or imprisonment. To this he so much the rather condescended
as well as I have said, for fear of further loss and mischief to them
selves, as also for the desire he had to recover Sir Richard Grinuile; whom
for his notable valor he seemed greatly to honor and admire.

When this answer was returned, and that safety of life was promised, the
common sort being now at the end of their peril, the most drew back from Sir
Richard and the master Gunner, being no hard matter to diswade men from death
to life. The master Gunner finding him self and Sir Richard thus prevented
and maistered by the greater number, would have slain himself with a sword,
had he not been by force withheld and locked into his Cabben. Then the
General sent many boats abord the Revenge, and diverse of our men fearing
Sir Richards disposition, stole away aboard the General and other ships. Sir
Richard thus ouermatched, was sent unto by Alfonso Bassan to remove out of the
Revenge, the ship being marvelous unsavory, filled with blood and bodies of
dead, and wounded men like a slaughter house. Sir Richard answered that he
might do with his body what he list, for he esteemed it not, and as he was
carried out of the ship he swounded, and reviving again desired the company
to pray for him. The General used Sir Richard with all humanity, and left
nothing unattempted that tended to his recovery, highly commending his valor
and worthiness, and greatly bewailed the danger wherein he was, being unto
them a rare spectacle, and a resolution sildome approved, to see one ship turn
toward so many enemies, to endure the charge and boording of so many huge
Armados, and to resist and repel the assaults and entries of so many
soldiers. All which and more, is confirmed by a Spanish Captain of the same
Armada, and a present actor in the fight, who being severed from the rest in a
storm, was by the Lion of London a small ship taken, and is now prisoner in
Lo^ndon.

The general commander of the Armada, was Don Alphonso Bassan, brother to the
Marquess of Santa Cruce. The Admiral of the Biscaine squadron, was Britan
Dona. Of the squadron of Civil, Marquis of Arumburch. The Hulkes and Flybotes
were commanded by Luis Cutino. There were slain and drowned in this fight,
well near two thousand of the enemies, and two especial commanders Don Luis
de sant John, and Don George de Prunaria de Mallaga, as the Spanish Captain
confesses, besides diverse others of special account, whereof as yet report is
not made.

The Admiral of the Hulkes and the Ascension of Civil, were both suncke by
the side of the Revenge; one other recovered the rode of Saint Michels, and
suncke also there; a fourth ran her self with the shore to save her men. Sir
Richard died as it is said, the second or third day aboard the General, and
was by them greatly bewailed. What became of his body, whether it were buried
in the sea or on the land we know not: the comfort that remains to his
friends is, that he has ended his life honorably in respect of the
reputation won to his nation and country, and of the same to his posterity,
and that being dead, he has not outliued his own honor.

For the rest of her Majesty's ships that entered not so far into the fight as
the Revenge, the reasons and causes were these. There were of them but six in
all, whereof two but small ships; the Revenge engaged past recovery: The Island
of Flores was on the one side, 53. sail of the Spanish, divided into squadrons
on the other, all as full filled with soldiers as they could contain. Almost
the one half of our men sick and not able to serve: the ships grown foul,
vnroomaged, and scarcely able to bear any sail for want of balast, having
been six months at the sea before. If all the rest had entered, all had been
lost. For the very hugenes of the Spanish fleet, if no other violence had been
offered, would have crushed them between them into shiuers. Of which the
dishonor and loss to the Queen had been far greater then the spoil or harm
that the enemy could any way have received. Notwithstanding it is very true,
that the Lord Thomas would have entered between the squadrons, but the rest would
not condescend; and the master of his own ship offered to leap into the sea,
rather then to conduct that her Majesty's ship and the rest to be a pray to
the enemy, where there was no hope nor possibility either of defense or
victory. Which also in my opinion had il sorted or answered the discretion and
trust of a General, to commit himself and his charge to an assured
destruction, without hope or any likelihood of prevailing: thereby to diminish
the strength of her Majesty's Navy, and to enrich the pride and glory of the
enemy. The Foresight of the Queens commanded by M. Th. Vauisor, performed a
very great fight, and stayed two hours as near the Revenge as the wether would
permit him, not forsaking the fight, till he was like to be encompassed by the
squadro^s, and with great difficulty cleared himself. The rest gave diverse
voleies of shot, and entered as far as the place permitted and their own
necessities, to keep the weather gage of the enemy, until they were parted by
night. A few days after the fight was ended, and the English prisoners
dispersed into the Spanish and Indy ships, there arose so great a storm from
the West and Northwest, that all the fleet was dispersed, as well the Indian
fleet which were then come unto them, as the rest of the Armada that attended
their arrival, of which 14. sail together with the Revenge, and in her 200.
Spaniards, were cast away upon the Isle of S. Michaels. So it pleased them to
honor the burial of that renowned ship the Revenge, not suffering her to perish
alone, for the great honor she achieued in her life time. On the rest of the
Islands there were cast away in this storm, 15. or 16. more of the ships of
war; and of a hundred and odd sail of the Indie fleet, expected this year in
Spain, what in this tempest, and what before in the bay of Mexico, and about
the Bermudas there were 70. and odd consumed and lost, with those taken by our
ships of London, besides one very rich Indian ship, which set her self on
fire, being boorded by the Pilgrim, and five other taken by Master Wats his
ships of London, between the Hauana and Cape S. Antonio. The 4. of this month
of Noue^ber, we received letters from the Tercera, affirming yt there are 3000.
bodies of me^ remaining in that Island, saved out of the perished ships: and
that by the Spaniards own Confession, there are 10000. cast away in this storm,
besides those that are perished between the Islands and the maine. Thus it has
pleased God to fight for us, and to defend the justice of our cause, against
the ambicious and bloody pretenses of the Spaniard, who seeking to deuourall
nations, are themselves devoured. A manifest testimony how iniust and
displeasing, their attempts are in the sight of God, who has pleased to witness
by the success of their affairs, his mislike of their bloody and injurious
designs, purposed and practiced against all Christian Princes, over whom they
secke unlawful and ungodly rule and Empery.

One day or two before this wrack happened to the spanish fleet, when as some of
our prisoners desired to be set on shore upon the Islands, hoping to be from
thence tra^sported into England, which liberty was formerly by the General
promised: One Morice Fitz John, son of old John of Desmond a notable traitor,
cosen german to the late Earl of Desmond, was sent to the English from ship
to ship, to persuade them to serve the King of Spain. The arguments he used to
induce them, were these. The increase of pay which he promised to be trebled:
advancement to the better sort: and the exercise of the true Catholic
religion, and safety of their souls to all. For the first, even the beggarly
and unnatural behavior of those English and Irish rebels, that served the
King in that presentaction, was sufficient to answer that first argument of
rich pay. For so poor and beggarly they were, as for want of apparel they
stripped their poor country men prisoners out of their ragged garments, worn
to nothing by six months service, and spared not to despoile them even of their
bloody shirts, from their wounded bodies, and the very shoes from their
feet; A notable testimony of their rich entertainment and great wages. The
second reason was hope of advancement if they served well, and would continue
faithful to the King. But what man can be so blockishly ignorant ever to
expect place or honor from a foreign king, having no other argument or
persuasion then his own disloyalty; to be unnatural to his own country
that bredde him; to his parents that begat him, and rebellious to his true
prince, to whose obedience he is bound by oath, by nature, and by religion. No,
they are only assured to be employed in all desperate enterprises, to be held
in scorn and disdain ever among those whom they serve. And that ever traitor
was either trusted or advanced I could never yet read, neither can I at this
time remember any example. And no man could have less becommed the place of an
Orator for such a purpose, then this Morice of Desmond. For the Earl his cosen
being one of the greatest subjects in that kingdom of Ireland, having almost
whole contries in his possession; so many goodly manners, Castles, and
Lordships; the Count Palatine of Kerry, five hundred gentlemen of his own name
and family to follow him, besides others. All which he possessed in peace for
three or four hundred years: was in less then three years after his
adhering to the Spaniards and rebellion, beaten from all his holds, not so
many as ten gentlemen of his name left living, him self taken and beheaded by
a soldier of his own nation, and his land given by a Parliament to her
Maestie, and possessed by the English. His other cosen Sir John of Desmond
taken by M. John Zouch, and his body hanged over the gates of his native city
to be devoured by Ravens: the third brother Sir James hanged, drawn, and
quartered in the same place. If he had withal vaunted of this success of his
own house, no doubt the argument would have moved much, and wrought great
effect; which because he for that present forgot, I thought it good to remember
in his behalf. For matter of religion it would require a particular volume, if
I should set down how irreligiously they cover their greedy and ambicious
pretenses, with that veil of piety. But sure I am, that there is no kingdom
or common wealth in all Europe, but if they be reformed, they then invade it
for religion sake: if it be, as they term Catholic, they pretend title; as
if the Kings of Castile were the natural heirs of all the world: and so
between both, no kingdom is unsought. where they dare not with their own
forces to invade, they basely entertain the traitors and vacabondes of all
nations; seeking by those and by their runnagate Jesuits to win parts, and
have by that mean ruined many Noble houses and others in this land, and have
extinguished both their lives and families. What good, honor, or fortune ever
man yet by them achiued, is yet unheard of, or unwritten. And if our English
Papists do but look into Portugal, against whom they have no pretense of
religion, how the Nobility are put death, imprisoned, their rich men made a
pray, and all sorts of people captiued; they shall find that the obedience
even of the Turk is easy and a liberty, in respect of the slavery and
tyranny of Spain. What they have done in Sicill, in Naples, Millayne, and in
the low countries; who has there been spared for religion at all? And it
comes to my remembrance of a certain Burger of Antwerpe, whose house being
entered by a company of Spanish soldiers, when they first sacked the City,
he besought them to spare him and his goods, being a good Catholic, and one
of their own party and faction. The Spaniardes answered, that they knew him to
be of a good conscience for him self, but his money, plate, jewels, and
goods, were all heretical, and therefore good prize. So they abused and
tormented the foolish Flemming, who hoped that an Agnus Dei had been a
sufficient Target against all force of that holy and charitable nation.
Neither have they at any time as they protest invaded the kingdoms of the
Indies and Peru, and else where, but only led thereunto, rather to reduce the
people to Christianity, then for either gold or emperie. When as in one only
Island called Hispaniola, they have wasted thirty hundred thousand of the
natural people, besides many millions else in other places of the Indies: a
poor and harmless people created of God, and might have been won to his
knowledge, as many of them were, and almost as many as ever were persuaded
thereunto. The Story whereof is at large written by a Bishop of their own
nation call Bartholome de las Casa, and translated into English and many other
languages, entitled The Spanish cruelties. Who would therefore repose trust in
such a nation of rauinous strangers, and especially in those Spaniardes which
more greedily thirst after English blood, then after the lives of any other
people of Europe; for the many overthrows and dishonours they have received
at our hands, whose weakness we have discovered to the world, and whose
forces at home, abroad, in Europe, in India, by sea and land; we have even with
handfulles of men and ships, overthrown and dishonored. Let not therefore
any English man of what religion soever, have other opinion of the Spaniards,
but that those whom he seeks to win of our nation, he esteems base and
traitorous, unworthy persons, or unconstant fools: and that he uses his
pretense of religion, for no other purpose, but to bewitch us from the
obedience of our natural prince; thereby hoping in time to bring us to
slavery and subjection, and then none shall be unto them so odious, and
disdained as the traitors themselves, who have sold their country to a
stranger, and forsaken their faith and obedience contrary to nature or
religion; and contrary to that humane and general honor, not only of
Christians, but of heathen and irreligious nations, who have always sustained
what labor soever, and embraced even death it self, for their country,
prince or commonwealth. To conclude, it has ever to this day pleased God, to
prosper and defend her Majesty, to break the purposes of malicious enemies,
of foresworne traitors, and of iniust practices and invasions. She has ever
been honored of the worthiest Kings, seruedby faithful subjects, and shall
by the favor of God, resist, repel, and confound all whatsoever attempts
against her sacred Person or kingdom. In the meanetime, let the Spaniard and
traitor vaunt of their success; and we her true and obedient vassalles guided
by the shining light of her virtues, shall always love her, serve her, and
obey her to the end of our lives.

FINIS.
A particular note of the Indian fleet, expected to have come into Spain this
present year of 1591. with the number of ships that are perished of the same:
according to the examination of certain Spaniards, lately taken and brought
into England by the ships of London.
THe fleet of Noua Hispania, at their first gathering together and setting
forth, were 52. sails. The Admiral was of 600. tuns, and the Vice Admiral of
the same burden. Four or five of the ships were of 900. and 1000. tons a
piece, some 500. and 400. and the least of 200. tons. Of this fleet 19. were
cast away, and in them 2600. men by estimation, which was done along the coast
of Noua Hispania, so that of the same fleet, there came to the Hauana, but
three and thirty sails.

The fleet of Terra Firma, were at their first departure from Spain, 50.
sails, which were bound for Nombre de Dios, where they did discharge their
lading, and thence returned to Cartagena, for their healths sake, until the
time the treasure was ready they should take in, at the said Nombre de Dios.
But before this fleet departed, some were gone by one or two at a time, so that
only 23. sails of this fleet arrived in the Hauana.

At the Hauana there met 33. sails of Noua Hispania. 23. sails of Terra
Firma. 12. sails of San Domingo. 9. sails of Hunduras.

In the whole 77. ships, which joined and set sails together, at the Hauana,
the 17. of July, according to our account, and kept together until they came
into the height of 35. degrees, which was about the tenth of August, where they
found the wind at Southwest, changed suddenly to the North, so that the sea
coming out of the Southwest, and the wind very violent at North, they were
put all into great extremity, and then first lost the General of their fleet,
with 500. men in her; and within three or four days after an other storm
rising, there were five or six other of the biggest ships cast away with all
their men, together with their vice Admiral.

And in the height of 48. degrees about the end of August, grew an other great
storm, in which all the fleet saving 48. sails were cast away: which 48.
sails kept together, until they came in sight of the Islands of Coruo and
Flores, about the 5. or 6. of September, at which time a great storm separated
them; of which number 15. or 16. were after seen by these Spaniards to ride at
anchor under the Tercera; and twelve or fourteen more to bear with the

Island of S. Michaels; what became of them after that these Spaniards were
taken, cannot yet be certified; their opinion is, that very few of the fleet
are escaped, but are either drowned or taken. And it is otherways of late
certified, that of this whole fleet that should have come into Spain this
year, being 123. sail, there are as yet arrived but 25. This note was taken
out of the examination of certain Spaniards, that were brought into England by
six of the ships of London, which took seven of the above named Indian fleet,
near the Islands of Acores.

FINIS.
LONDON

Printed for William Ponsonbie.

1591.


