AN EXCELLENT Oration of that late famously learned John Rainolds, D. D. and
Lecturer of the Greek tongue in Oxford.

Very useful for all such as affect the studies of Logic and Philosophy, and
admire profane Learning.

Translated out of Latin into English by I. L. Schoolmaster.

Thy wisdoms and thy knowledge have caused thee to rebel. Isa. 47. 10. LONDON,
Printed by Tho. Harper for Thomas Slater and William Aderton, and are to be
sold at their shops in Duck-lane, 1638.

To the well affected Christian Reader.
ANatomists do write, that in the brain of man, there is a Rete mirabile, an
admirable Net, that is, an heap and conjugation of Arteries, that for the many
windings, turnings, and intricate foldings cannot be anatomized; and so indeed,
as if that of the body were to signify that of the mind; in the wit and
wisdom of man there is a Rete mirabile, an admirable net, a heap and a
co^jugatio^ of manifold infolded Subtilties, which for the Maeandrian windings
and turnings, and intricate devices cannot be be anatomized; with this
admirable net the pernicious perverters of Learning* do catch the poor fish and
foul they deal withal. But if ever this net was discovered; and that monstrous
Sphynx of corrupted knowledge e^ploded to the World, this our English Oedipus
that Atlas of Learning (as Sir (...)
one styles him) Reveren^ Rainolds has (as I think) in this most exquisite and
pathetical Oration sufficiently and perspicuously effected, insomuch that (in
my opinion) that In Technomatrian A^es^.
Eulogie may very well suit to this Oration, Huc usque turpi nubilo pressum
caput,

Inter que cunas artium pect us rude vincti tenemus.

Nunc illa rerum monstra ridemus, Chaos Cacumque pondus, sole perfusi novo.



Englished thus.

Till now an ugly cloud our heads and hearts

Oppressed, and in the Cradles of the Arts Were tied fast.

But with a new Sun beam^ our eyes made open,

Now see that Chaos, which we late did grope,

And laugh at it at last.

But notable is that testimony of a grave and learned Divine, H^n. I^ckson in
his Epistle prefixed to this Oration.
which may very well excite thee (Courteous Reader) to the reading, as it did
partly induce me to the version of this Oration. Vt enim Academicis and nobis,
qui egregia ipsius sanctitatis and pietatis certamina admirati sumus difficile
fuit judicare, an vir melior, vel doctior ille fuerit; ita illi qui Orationes
hasces^ri^ legerint, haerebunt, (opinor) aliquandiu, an ipsi ex earum lectione
doctiores vel meliores evaserint. For as it was an hard matter both for the
University and us, who have admired the Conflicts of his rare holiness and piety
to determine, whether he excelled in learning or in goodness; so they who
shall seriously read these Orations will be in some doubt awhile (I think)
whether they are become better men, or better Scholars by reading them.

Then pity it were surely, that the Cabinet of the Latin tongue should lock
up so rich a Treasure, or that the shel of one Language should exclude many
(though not expert in the Latin tongue, yet judicious to apprehend) from
participating of this delectable kernel of sound Learning and pious affection.
I have therefore according to my poor skill turned this one into English, hoping
that I shall be found fidus Interpres, in rendering the genuine sense and true
meaning thereof, though my style be not equivalent either to the we^ght of the
argument, or to the Ciceronian sweetness, and eleganc^e of the Original As
for the usual Cavils against Translations of profitable things, let that most
learned Andraeas Hyperius answer for me, * In his Book (...) concion.
An exact Translation makes things so perspicuous, that it deserves to be
esteemed instead of a Commentary.

But howsoever I expect not to escape the stings of Censure especially of the
common adversaries of the Truth (the vindicating whereof is the very Center of
this Oration) yet this is my Comfort, that I have in this point kept within the
Circle of my calling, and employed my small Talent for the public good. So
farewell.

Thine in the common faith, John Leycester.
April 30. 1638.
THE ORATION.
IF any here present in this Assembly, (honored Auditors) seeing he has not
heard what I have formerly expounded in Aristotle's Rhetori^ques, may perhaps
mervaile what moved me, who have taken upon me the Lectureship of the Greek
tongue* to discourse of Aristotle's Summum Bonum, when the same party hears the
Blessedness spoken of by Aristotle to be now explaned by me, and that it ought
of necessity be taught, that ye may both know how to persuade aright, and
what the proper end of good things is, let him not dislike the reason that
moved me, but let him attend to the matter now in handling. After he
perceives, that it is the drift of my discourse to show Aristotle's e^roneous
opinion concerning Su^mum Bonum, he will (I fear me) in his thoughts condemn
my drift and purpose, that I, but a young man, should so transgress against
the fashion of the University, as to cry down Aristotle's credit. But when he
shall understand, that I am enjoined, as I am a public Teacher, to deliver
sound and true opinions, not errors in the expounding of Authors, I hope he
will not censure me too hardly. Will he demand what reasons induced me to be
of a contrary opinion to most of Aristotle's Interpreters now a days? Truly, if
I have any judgment at all, the vulgar and trivial Expositors of Aristotle do
always, as much as they can, and sometimes more then they ought, adhere unto
him in their expositions. And even as the Romans did highly extol all Neroes
actions, yea his Villainies, as sacred; in like manner they, as it were
approving al Aristotle's sayings, though never so false, do greatly applaud
him. I being therefore very inquisitive after the truth, when I had perused such
writers as were not so much inclined to Aristotle, I was upon sundry good
grounds induced to believe, that Aristotle was greatly deceived. For I did not
only rest upon the opinions of Ludovicus Vives, and Peter Martyr (as some
malicious persons do object) whose authority notwithstanding, I do, (as I
ought) much esteem of; but omitting others, who have handled this point before
Vives and Martyr, both Talaus and Fox have of set purpose lately confuted this
Blessedness of Aristotle's. And those ancient, and excellent men have long ago
so condemned it, that Gregory Nazi^nze^ calls it contemptible and base*
Eusebius unreasonable and false* Ambrose, Augustine, Origin, Lactantius,
Gregory Nyssen call it very fooli^^ in part, and all of them do fl^tly affi^me
it to be contrary to truth and piet^e. Whose authority when it is confirmed by
Christ himself, who alone, without any other* ought to be embraced (...) all
authorities in the World let no man think it strange, that I had rather
concuire in opinion with such and so great Clerks, then to hold an error with
Aristotle. I heartily wish, that this opinion were well settled in your minds,
^s both reason and Religion do require; that so, I might have less trouble in
speaking, and you less irkesomnesse in heating those things, which should be
as well pleasing, as they are wont to be distasteful unto you. But because this
conceit is so deeply rooted in you, namely, that Aristotle's opinion, which has
been approved and defended with the great labor and pains of so many learned
Interpreters cannot be shaken; I wish you not suddenly to lay aside this
conceit of yours, although you see it so strongly opposed by so many, and so
great authorities; only I crave, that you would not obstinately prejudicate
those things which I shall speak against it. I suppose, that such, as are not
obstinately bent in defending Aristotle, will grant, that so great authorities
have some weight, but yet they will deny, that Aristotle's opinion can be
confuted with any Arguments drawn from his own Principles. I will not
complain, that I am hardly dealt withal by them, who will have the question
decided by those Principles, which being falsely framed have caused this false
opinion, which I so dislike, especially when Aristotle himself uses first of
all to shake the opinions of those Philosophers he contradicts in the
fundamental points, before he confutes them; as we may observe in Plato's
Idea. But yet I will accept of this condition, to prove Aristotle to be in a
manifest error by his own Principles. But because there are some other things,
which for the present do more concern us* I entreat your patience, that the
handling of this point may be deferred till another time; for as the
husbandman, when he intends to til his ground, that is overrunne with briats
and thorns, does first rid the ground of them, that he may the more
conveniently proceed in his tillage, and sow his seed; even so, before your
minds can be settled in the true opinion of Summum Bonum, some distinctions,
which, (like thorns and briars) have encumbred them, must be removed; that so
the see^ of truth may take deeper root, and spring up more fruitfully.

For there is risen up in this last age of the world, a sort of men unknown to
the Ancients, and hated of the Learned, who, not out of any desire to si^t out
the truth, but to confirm their own perverse opinions, would be thought of
ignorant people, in their rufflin^ disputes, to defend gross absurdities with
their no less absurd, and foolish distinctions; in very deed they do expose
them to the judgment of all wise men to be laughed at. There was one Callico
(as Eustathius reports) none of the wisest, when he went to sleep, used to
lay a brass pot under his head for a pillow; an hard ^olster sure, but very
fit for his doltish pate; at the last awaking, and not very well pleased with
his hard pillow, he filled the pot with straw, to make it softer; the pot
certainly was not softer, but it was enough for Callico, all the while the fool
persuaded himself that it was softer. After the same manner, when we seek for
case and rest to our perplexed minds; certain pa^try Philosophers do put
under them this leaden Blessedness of Aristotle's, and when they c^mplain it is
very hard, t^^y fill it with the Chafe ^f Distinctions, and perhap^ they
persuade themselves, that it is sof^er, when nevertheless, it is a leaden
lumpish Blessedness still. Whose blockisnesse is so much the more worthy
blame, because that out of an obstinate wilfulness of upholding Aristotle,
they do so labor to reconcile the opinions of other Philosophers dissenting in
the very judgment of Aristotle himself, that even as Proteus, sometime a
stone, by and by a stock, anon fire, then again water.

Omnia transformant sese in m^racula rerum. They change themselves to
wo^derments of things. So these men are sometimes Stoics, by and by
Epicureans, anon Platonicks, then again Aristippians, and yet wholly
Peripateticks, and so it seems they would be all things and nothing. Cicero
laughs at L. Gellius, who, when he came Proconsul into Greece, called together
all the Philosophers in Athens, and exhorted them earnestly to leave off all
wranglings, and to spend no more time in contentions, which if they would
promise to do, he promised likewise to hold with them in opinion. But are not
Distinguishers like unto this Gellius? They see well enough, that Philosophers
do dissent in opinion? and what then? they, like pitiful men, go about to
reduce them to an unity on equal conditions. But, because an unskilful person
does undertake the business, it is the more ridiculous; And must the business
be quite done and finished, because they make Aristotle the Judge? Whereas, if
those ancient Philosophers Plato, Aristotle, and Tully did but hear after what
manner their own repugnant opinions, are accorded now adays, it is to be
doubted whether they would laugh or chafe at it. But if you please let us
produce some one of these Distinguishers, which can defend the matter to their
faces. Whom will ye have then, Buridanus, or Bricottus? I know ye cannot
understand them, if they spoke. Whom therefore will ye have? whom? Donatus
Acci^iolus the Florentine, both more eloquent, then the rest, and better
acquainted with you; who, if he should appear in place, and behold these
Philosophers standing here with Cicero, he would perhaps thus accoast them. Why
are ye thus in an uprore, and perplexity, O ye Philosophers? why are ye thus
distracted with several opinions about Summum Bonum? What, do ye not know,
how that all your jar^ing, and differing opinions may easily be reconciled by
distinguishing? Have any of you wrote any thing concerning felicity or Summum
Bonum, which (although it be clean contrary to all other opinions) yet may not
be accounted true in his kind? I less indeed wonder, that thou O Cicero,
do not understand the Philosophers, for thou had no distinctions; Be not
ostended with me, I say thou want distinctions. Otherwise why do thou
teach in thy Books de Finibus, is in thy first Book, that Epicurus placed
Su^mum Bonum in v^luptuousnes, in the third Book; that Zeno assigned it to
moral honesty; and in thy fifth Book, that Aristotle placed Summum Bonum in the
comprehension and composition of all good things internal, and external; Why
else did thou refute the first opinion in the second Book, and the second
opinion in thy fourth Book? Do thou not understand Distinctions, how, and in
what manner all these opinions may be true in their kind? For whereas Epicurus
resolves Voluptuousnes to be Summum Bonum, he means carnal Felicity; Zeno
Virtue; he means Felicity simply; And whereas Aristotle ascribes Summum Bonum
to united, and compacted good things, he means added, or associated Felicity.
Why did thou Cicero waste so much labor about confuting Zeno's, and Epicurus
their opinions, when with one only distinction, they may easily be accorded?
But (O Aristotle!) (whom I admire as the Philosophers God) what reason had
thou ^o to calumniate Plato's Idaea, and to wrest his meaning, that even thy
most favorable Interpreters do leave thee there? Thou will perhaps acknowledge
this one fault of thine. But where is thy sharp judgment become? Think
thou, that thine opinion cannot be true, unless Plato be con^ute^? Thou (...)
wide all the World over For I in my life time taught, and thy Zuing^rus after
my death wrote, that thou and Plato were both in (...) truth; for his
Blessedness was divine, and thine humane, his was after this life, and thine
in this life. What, it by distinguishing I do so reconcile their opinions, that
differ from thine, and thine, which s^ems to contradict it sell that there
shall appear no d^fference at al^? Eusebius teaches, that Chr^stians do (...)
then B^esse^nesse in the knowledge and worship of God; If we should deny this,
we should be accounted impious; Therefore in thy behalf I thus distinguish.
That is an heavenly ^lessednesse, and thine a civil Blessedness, that is true
in Divinity, and thine is true in Philosophy. He^^l^us the Philosopher pla^ed
his Summum Bonum in knowledge; this felicity of man consists in the mind
only; thy feli^city, so far forth, as it consists of body and mind. The
Stoics assigned felicity to virtue, and honesty; this also is an active
felicity; but thine is both active and civil. Now forsooth thou may
perceive, that external good things are sometimes the necessary parts,
sometimes not the parts, but the appurtenances of felicity. Here we make a
medicine of simple felicity, and compacted felicity; Priamus is not happy with
an associated happiness; again Priamus is happy in misery with a single
happiness. One rub is yet behind; whereas in the first Book of thine Ethics,
thou ascribest an happy li^e to men in action; and again in thy tenth Book,
thou ascribest it to men in contemplation; We will decide the controversy, we
love not contentions; We allow those active blessedness, and these
contemplative blessedness. And thus, Aristotle, thou see the sundry opinions
of other Philosophers, and thine own to be all true in their kind. If Donatus
should speak thus, what answer do you think those Ancients would make him?
If Horace, Zeno, Epicurus and Plato were present, they and all things else
would rejoice over him, and give Donatus hearty thanks in the like Verses
almost, as he gave Damasippus. Horat lib. 2. Satyr. 3.

-- Dii te Donate Deaque
Rectum ob judictum doment tonsore;
Sed unde tam been distinguis?
For thy right judgment Donatus,
The sexes both divine
Give thee a Barbers blessing but
Where had thou such fine distinctions?
Philosophers would much wonder, that a foolish fellow understa^ds not, that
these distinctions are frivolous by the very definition of Summum Bonum; which
is termed of all Philosophers the upshot of all things, as that, whereon all
other good things depend, but Blessedness it self is no where subsisting
only in GOD. Cicero would exclaim against the words and manners of these
doltish monsters, and tell them, that they had disgraced all Philosophy with
their baseness. Thus would Cicero speak. Truly I do not (Donatus) account
thee unlearned, as I have often done, nor brutish, as I have always done; but a
witless mad man by thy distinctions. For certain it is (although the
Dunscotists do repine at it) that long ago I wrote upon the like subject, and
I do here again recite it; that it may very well be, that not one of so many
several opinions of Philosophers is true; for how is it possible that so many
opinions, so much differing, and disagreeing be all true? Fire and water may
sooner be reconciled together, than those opinions, which thou so strivest to
compose. But o the times we live in! O the manners of men now adays!

O fortunatam natam me Consule Romam! O daughter Rome most fortunate, when I
was Consul there!

I searched out the true Art of reasoning, and did apply it to the practice of
Eloquence; but ye obtrude upon young Scholars, I know not what, monstrous
Distinctions, and Demonstrations in stead of true Logic, I searched out
Philosophy by the light of Nature, living creatures, plants, and the probable
conjectures of God; ye for the most part search after nothing but certain
trifling conceits, of motion, time, infinite, empty matter, and privation;
which you apply to no practice, but pull in pieces (as it were) with your
disputations. I have declared the several opinions of Philosophers concerning
Summum Bonum; I have confuted them that were false; I approved the most
probable; but you have so transformed their Opinions with your Medusaean
^orceries of distinctions, that if you had pleaded with me at the bar, you
might have maintained by your distinctions, that Clodius was at one and the
same hour both at Rome, and ^erano. But what do I mean? Let us set aside
Cicero and other Philosophers; for what do they here? If they should come into
our Schools, they would be so troubled with distinctions, that they would
suppose themselves to be in Epicurus middle Worlds, and not in the Schools of
the ancient Arts. Do but observe these distinctions, they will serve the turn
very well in the Schools in Lent. Blessedness, divine, humane, civil,
heavenly, simple, associated, active, contemplative, carnal spiritual, in
this life, after this life, according to man consisting of soul and body, and
according to man subsisting of soul only; (of soul only? who is that? what?
do ye ask? The Scholar must believe his Master.) So far forth as man is
of a simple substance, and a compound substance, in ^ Philosophical truth, and
^n a Theological truth, and in his kind; fifteen distinctions a very
complete number of even, and odd; mark them well: But first of all let in his
kind be well noted; for when all fails, in suo genere, will never fail. Varro
reports, that a man may collect 288 several opinions, concerning Summum Bonum.
It is very strange, if they be not all true in their kind. Rhetoricians
contend, whether Rhetoriques proper end be to persuade soundly, or to speak
elegantly and neatly; what need they trouble themselves? each end is good in
his kind. Why do we make any difference between Arts and Sciences in their
conclusions, for, to speak finely, to pronounce well, or to speak rudely, to
persuade and not to persuade, are all Rhetorical ends in their kind. For,
what is it to be in action, or contemplation, virtue, or voluptuousness, the
narrow path, or the broad path, do they not all tend to life in their kind?
The Canonists are hardly censured, because they called the Romish Bishop God,
as the Romans of yore called the Emperor Domitian so. If they had had any
brains, they might have distinguished him to be a God in his kind: A
murdering God as Mars, or God of the Romans, as Romulus, or God of this World,
as ^athan is. Do ye not think, that the Physician does comfort his sick
Patient well enough, if he tell him, that he is a sound man in his kind?
Surely these fellows are sharp-witted Logicians in their kind, but simply
they are wrangling prattling Sophisters, who like A^tolycus, Candida de nigris,
and de candentibus atra.

The black to white, and white to black they turn. They make miserable men of
happy, and happy men of miserable. I would they had been appointed Judges
betwixt us, and the Council of Trent; I suppose they would have affirmed each
Religion to be true in his kind, that to a carnal man, and ours to a
spiritual man. But lest some jesting companion may sya, that I am fowly fallen
out with distinctions, I must therefore distinguish distinctions, that I may
resolve what distinctions are true, and learned, and what are false and
foolish. I embrace learned and true distinctions, which are used in disputes;
but I scorn, and reject those distinctions as false, and absurd, which are
propounded either simply, or in his kind. But here I would not have the
authority of Distinguishers objected unto me. For there are some, who, if you
deny this unhappy Blessedness to be true in his kind, do presently betake
themselves to this th^ed-bare Maxim, ^he Scholar must be ^^ve the Master.
Truly I do not conceive to what purpose they produce th^s, unless perhaps they
will thus argue; therefore these felicities are true in their kind. O wondrous
witty! You have hit the nail on the head* Is this a demonstration, because it
is? Ar^^totle himself could not more strongly demonstrate.

-- Si Pergama dextra,
Defendi possent ^na hac defensa fuissent.
If Fates to Troy had granted a defense,
This hand of mine had beat the Greeks from thence.
If demonstrations make such thunderclaps, I have done.

Hostis habet mu^os, ruit alto a culmine Troia. The Enemy has won the walls,
and Troy comes tumbling down. But certainly the Scholar must believe the
Master, for so says Aristotle; And surely, he that teaches must not lie, for
so says Aristotle also. If you will observe Aristotle's law in teaching,
unless I keep the same also in learning, I shall transgress. But if you teach
false doctrines, which I ought not to believe; it is an absurd part in you to
compel me to believe them. If you would have men believe what you teach, you
must teach those things, which you ought to teach; if you will not discharge
your duty in teaching, I will not discharge mine in the hearing; for oftentimes
the Teachers authority is very prejudicial to the Scholars profit. Thus said
Cicero, I like not that Pythagorean ipse dixit in men's resolutio^s. But they
that are bound must obey; what must, if thy commands be unjust? A Scholar must
be credulous; if you teach false doctrine? He that has twice suffered
shipwreck is but a fool to trust Neptune. Wherefore if they will be ruled by
me; let them leave these poor shifts, and stick fast to their surest refuge,
as men use to do in dangerous cases; namely, that they, which speak against
Aristotle, do not understand Aristotle's meaning. They think, perhaps, that
Aristotle was a jugler, which casts a mist ^^ore his Readers eyes. Do not we
understa^d Aristotle's meaning? O poor shift! So Cicero reports of Torquatus,
who, when Epicurus opinions were called in question, said, that Philosophers
did not understand Epicurus meaning. Certain Pythagoreans said, that when the
Heavens are turned about, they make an admirable harmony, but men cannot hear
it. In like manner Democritus said, that his subtle moates were dispersed
thr^ugh the frame of the whole universe, but all men did not perceive them.
What were Aristotle's slaves able to understand him, and shall not we be able?
Dio reports, that there is a certain cave at Hierap^lis in Asia, whose vapors
no living creatures, saving only gelded men, are able to endure. Is not
Aristotle's style like unto this Cave, whose savo^r, none but Eunne^es, that is,
such as want the masculine liberty of judgment, and are Aristotle's slaves can
abide? it is even so. But perhaps they are like to that frantic fellow
Horatia^us, who, the day after the public plays were ended, would clap his
hands in the Theater, and when his friends came running, and demanded the
reason of his acclamations, seeing that no body acted; he answered, that he
saw Actours, though they could not. These men surely see some strange things in
Aristotle's Theater, and do applaud them, which we cannot discern. But what if
I can show, that they themselves do not understand him but being blinded with a
self-conceit of Aristotle's worth, as men distempered with some malady, do with
that frantic fellow imagine, that they see that, which they do not. And what
if I prove unto you that Cicero, Diogenes, Laertius, and Alexander
Aphrodisaeus himself do interpret Aristotle, as I do? What if I show those
notable Champions and Lights of the Christian Church both the Greek and Latin
Doctors, do not only so expound, but also confute Aristotle? What refuge have
they then? I know not what answer they will make to Cicero, Laertius, and
Alexander; unless perhaps they will say that credit is not to be given to
examples; at least wise, that the places cited, are but probable, not true. And
me thinks I smell what they will say of Christian Writers. They will not
(except I be much mistaken) deny, that those things, which so worthy men have
wrote against Aristotle are true, and yet they will deny that Aristotle cried.
How then can it be possible, that in this very point they write truly that
Aristotle erred, and yet (say they) Aristotle erred not? You shall hear: there
is a twofold Truth; a Philosophical Truth, and a Theological Truth. Aristotle
was in an error according to a Theological Truth, and in that sense he is
blame worthy; but Aristotle erred not in a Philosophical Truth, for in that
sense he could not be mistaken without doubt, for he is a miracle of Nature.
What is this I hear? A Philosophical Truth? and a Theological Truth? This is
pulling in pieces, not distinguishing. Now indeed, I nothing marvel at those
men, who use to scoff and deride the simple Truth, when (...) can hatch two
Truths for one; as drunken men use to see two Lanthorns for one; and Plautinus
found two Masters for one Messeinus, and mad Pentheus beheld two Suns for one.
They have so well profited in the Art of wrangling, that they have quite
forgotten how to dispute. For what is Truth? The Learned in the Greek Tongue
do call Verum (...) of the Verb (...), i^ esse to be, because it is the same,
which it is said to be. Therefore as Philosophers teach, that Contraries cannot
stand together at one, and the same time in the same subject; so the same
Philosophers teach, that contradictories cannot both be true of one and the
same thing. Is it not then a shame for our Logicians to disable, and enervate
the very first Principles of Logic? For whereas Aristotle does teach, that to
affirm and deny the same thing not only in the general, but also in the
particular must needs be co^tradictorious; these men do in very deed deny this
truth; albeit they oppose a frivolous distinction (like a Cloud against the
Sun, to obscure the truth. Aristotle's felicity is not true felicity, this
they grant to be true in Divinity; again Aristotle's felicity is true felicity;
this they will have to be true in Philosophy. O silly Epiphanius, who did
reck on the errors of Philosophers amongst Heresies! O simple Justin Martyr,
to confute Aristotle's opinions in so great a Volume! D^d not they (silly men)
know how to argue ma^ers in a phil^sophicall truth, when they embrace a divine
truth? But o thou Apostle, Paul I am sorry for thee! why do thou dispute
with the Stoics and Epicureans at Athens, of the resurrection of the dead, and
the life to come? It needs no controversy at all. For although all
Philosophers do flatly deny the resurrection of the body, yet it is in a
philosophical truth; but thou Paul do affirm it in a Theological truth, as
thou had learned of Christ. But why do thou dissent from all Philosophers
to no purpose? Why do thou not permit the Athenians to believe Philosophers?
Do thou think they will the more hardly become Christians for that? It is
not reasonable to allow Eusebius the benefit of this distinction; For he was in
an error. He knew not this twofold truth. He says Aristotle does impugn, and
gainsay the Scriptures, in that he did ascribe felicity to the external
welfare of the body in that he said that Gods Providence extended not to every
sublunary thing; in that he said the World was eternal, not created, and that
the soul of man was not eternal but mortal. Eusebius affirms, that in all
these points Aristotle's opinions are flat against the Scriptures. Thou art
mistaken Eusebius! Aristotle does not thwart the Scriptures. Thou must learn
to distinguish between a Philosophical Truth, and a Theological Truth. Come
hither Ambrose, come Augustine, come all the rest of Doctors, and learn of our
Philosophers, that there is one Truth in Divinity, and another Truth in
Philosophy. They do Philosophers much wrong. Plutarch reports, how that one bid
a Painters boy who had painted a Cock ^l-favouredly to chase away all right
Cocks from his picture. Those men that do alienate divine Truth, do the very
same thing. Yet if these men had bin Painters, I doubt not, but they would have
distinguished, that they had painted well according to the truth of the
Picture, though not according to the truth of the Cocks nature. But as
Tiridates King of Armenia called that wicked Wretch Nero his God; So Aristotle's
Patrons, do ascribe the name of Truth to the vain Opinion of Philosophy. Which
if it be once granted, what can be so absurd, but it may be defended, or what
so false, but it may be proved, either with an Epicurean, Platonicall,
Stoicall, or Turkish Truth; or with a Papisticall, or Heretical Truth; to
conclude, which way not? And in this manner, as Democritus not satisfied with
the opinion of one World, dreamed of infinite Worlds; so we not contented with
one truth, shall conceive innumerable truths of our own brain. But this will
be the issue of all at last in despite of Philosophers, that as Varro reckons
up 30000 Gods amongst the Gentiles, when indeed there was but one only; even
so, when they have forged 30000 Truths, they shall find but one only, and that
is the simple Truth, which they so deride. Here before I proceed any further,
lest these things perhaps examined, which I have alleged (and I very gladly
desire they may be) are not to be found in Eusebius, which I have cited out of
Eusebius; ye shall understand, that they are not to be found in the Latin
Eusebius. Trapezuntius, who was Aristotle's great friend, translated Eusebius
his Books de Euangelica praeparatione into the Latin tongue. Fourteen of his
Books, which contain a consutation of Heathens and Philosophers, Trapezuntius
translated into Latin, but as for his fifteenth Book, which Eusebius wrote
almost altogether against Aristotle's errors, as concerning man's Felicity, the
Worlds Fternity, the Providence of God, and the Souls Mortality, Trapezuntius
never meddled with that. Therefore lest any man, being deceived with the Table
of the Book, do traduce me, ye shall know that Latin Eusebius de Evangelica
praeparatione wants the fifteenth Book, in which are contained the things by me
alleged If any will look for it, he may find it in the Greek Copy. Study
therefore the Greek tongue, that ye may be able to discern the craftiness of
Interpreters, which is too frequent in profane writings, but chiefly in the
Scriptures. What Eusebius thought fit to write for the advantage of the
Christian faith, Trapezuntius thought not fit to be expounded, because it
weakened Aristotle's credit. How much worse then he, are our men in these days,
who, fearing lest they should savor too much of Christianity, desire to hear
young Striplings speak finely, and to defend by arguments, points repugnant to
godliness; but are loath to hear those things, which are consonant to godliness.
And yet they love Piety, they love Religion, So, I think, as the Ape loves her
puppies, or as Juno loved Hercules; They love exceedingly; they kill with
loving; They love, as Thais loved Phaedria.

Misera prae amore exclusit hunc for as, She poor soul for very love has shut
him out of doors. Let us speak like Philosophers (say they) when we dispute,
when we declayme. I had thought ye had rather have spoken like Christians.
Are you to be saved, redeemed and judged of a Philosopher? were yo^ initiated
in the Mysteries of Philosophers? But what does this concern us say they? We
may speak as Philosophers, we are not Divines yet. Divines? It is a woman's
privilege to say what she list; for without doubt they will never be Divines,
unless perhaps they be Popes, as (some say) Ioane was of yore; and albeit they
may be such, they may not be Divines for all that. But why do they separate
the bounds of Divinity and Philosophy, like the Borders of England and
Scotland? I think this was the Deputies doing. But yet we may speak as
Philosophers. What? as Diagoras, when he denied there was a God? as
Protagoras, when he doubted whether there was a God or no? as Aristotle, when
he takes away* Providence from God? These are the words of Atheists. What
then? as Plato, when he sets up a Purgatory? or Porphyrius, who says that
Angels are to be worshipped? or as Aristotle, when he teaches Free Will? Let
Papists pick out such stuff for themselves. What then? shall we say with
Epicurus that the soul is mortal? with Aristippus, that Pleasure is Summum
Bonum? or with Plato that a mutual Participation of Wives is to be tolerated?
No, we allow none of these? But we would have Declamations, not Sermons. What
is a Declamation? Is it to deny that to be a Poem, which wants fabulous
matter? or shall not that be called a Declamation, which is not stuffed with
impiety? If such are no better, than base Strumpets, which esteem nothing
wittily spoken, but that which is obscene; what kind of Philosophers are they
which account nothing spoken Orator-like, but that which is profane? But we
would hear Philosophical points. If they be true and good they dissent not
from holy things. If they be naught and untrue, what are they to be esteemed?
The Persia^s thought it a great fault in a child, either to lie, or speak
corruptly; Do ye make our Christian Youth worse then the Heathen? would you
not have us speak as Philosophers? I would have you speak like wisemen, not
like the ignorant and unlearned. I call them wise men, who propound true
matters, and them ignorant, who teach untruths* For Philosophy is the study of
Wisdom; Wisdom comprehends the knowledge of Divine and Human things; moreover
knowledge is of true things; and thereupon those things only, which are said to
be true, deserve the name of Philosophy. For Philosophers are not Philosophers,
when they digress from the truth. But because the name of Philosophy is
commonly ascribed to the opinions of Philosophers, whether true or false, and
not to true wisdom; ye ought to remember what the Apostle warnes you to take
heed of, Lest any m^n spoil you through Philosophy. Coloss. 2. 8. For there
are some amongst us now adays, who maintaining most pernicious errors
contrary both to reason and religion, call it Philosophy.

Nesci^ furtivo: Dido meditatur am^res.
C^njug^um vocat h^c prae texit nomi^e culpam.
On amorous th^^^s runs Dido's b^^nded mind*
To hide her fault she W^dlocks c^oak does find.
She called it marriage, but she comm tred adultery; They call it Philosophy,
but they do defend impiety. You must not imitate Caracalla Caesar, who was so
in love with the very name of Alexander, that he was much offended, that a base
Ruffian (whose name was Alexander) was arraigned before him. Do thou accuse
Alexander (said he) hold thy peace, or else woe be to thee. Take ye heed, lest
by loving the name of Philosophy, ye entertain Philosophers errors. He accused
Alexander, but yet a Ruffian; I reject Philosophy, yet that which is erroneous.
But some (like Caracalla) will say to me; What do thou condemn Philosophy?
ho^d thy tongue of Philosophy, or e^^e thou shall hear ill news. I care not
for bad dealing from b^^ men: I account not (...) to be Summ^m (...). I do
admonish you again, and aga^ne* to t^ke (...) of Philosoph^. What admonitions
the Ap^st^e, and ancient Fathers have given, what the learned of la^^^ times
have continually admonished you of, both by precepts and examples, that do I
likewise. Thus does Lactantsus often press, and repeat, that Philosophy is
false, and frivolous; The Philosophers could speak well like learned men, but
they could not speak truly, because they were not instructed by him who was
Puiss^nt in Truth. So said Eusebius, that Philosophers erred from the truth,
that Philosophy was stuffed full of vain conjectures, diverse errors, and
trifling toys. Thus Tertullian said, that Heresies were suborned and supported
by the Philosophy of Plato, the Stoics, Epicurus, Heracl^tus, Zeno, and
Aristotle; and that Heresies did spring, and spread from Secular Learning. What
shall I recite Iustine Martyr, Saint Ambrose, Saint Augustine, and the rest,
who do frequently, and vehemently urge the same opinion? What shall I say of
later Writers, as Ludovicus Vives, Picus Mirandula, Hieronymus Savanorol^?
which three most learned men do tell us with one consent, that they must be
very warily perused; who are they? I say not Philosophers, but Aristotle and
Plato the Princes of Philosophers. Why so? because Aristotle makes men ungodly,
and Plato superstitious. Do ye desire examples? Pomponatius became a wretched
man by listening too much to Aristotle; and Ficinus became superstitious from
the Platonicall dreams of Spirits. Many pestilent errors, first entered into
the Churches of Christians, and continued there a long fime, (yea, and at this
day do spoil them) from the errors of Plato's and Aristotle's Philosophy. And
is the world bewitched still, with the delusions of Satan, that Christians will
defend Philosophers errors in public Assemblies with idle and rotten
distinctions? They little think, that by this abominable custom, it is come
to pass, that the Christian Faith has not residence in the hearts, but in the
Temples of Christians, and not there sometimes. O what a difference is betwixt
even the Heathens, and us Christians? Aristotle forsook his Master Plato to
uphold his own errors, and we will not forsake Aristotle, that we may defend
Gods Truth. Virgill gathered gold out of the dunghill of E^^ius; and shall we
scrape together stinking filth out of the Philosophers Storehouse? Isocrates
calls speech the image of the mind; Democritus calls it the shadow of
workmanship; shall we imagine that our thoughts and actions are agreeable to
Christianity, if we speak as Heathens? Wickedly and falsely spoke those filthy
Poets.

Vita verecunda est; Mus^ jocosa mea est;
Lasciva est nobis pagina, vita proba.
Demure my life, though merry be my Muse,
An honest life lascivious lines may use.
C^stum esse decet pium P^ctam ipsum,
Versu^^os nihil necesse est.
A Poet himself devout and chaste must be,
That his Verse be so, there is no necessity.
Well said Socrates; such as the mind is, such is thy speech. Speech is the
badge of the mind. Is thy speech corrupt? thy thoughts are impure. A profane
tongue, and a true Christian will never agree. What pains Christians bestow in
the Church, Philosophers destroy in the Hall. Beat down the affections as
much as you can, and lop off the sprouts, yet they will spring again, quench
the firebrands, yet they will kindle again. Ye should inure your selves from
tender age to the best things; Children ought to be instructed in sound, and
true opinions even from their infancy. There is no time, place, or occasion
allotted for naughtiness. There is no doubt, but Julian the Apostate, (who had
his education from the Emperor Constantine) heard many Sermons in the CHURCH,
but those private Conferences at home with that declayming Li^an^us instilled
into his mind more naughtiness, than all the Sermons he heard could expel.
Nero heard many notable precepts of his Master Seneca; but those flattering
words, All things are lawful for a Prince, marred all those Precepts. Deceive
not your selves, One spark of fire is able to kindle more Gunpowder, than all
the Ocean can quench. Concupiscence is so deeply rooted in us, that as it is
easily kindled like Gunpowder, so it more contagiously rages. Take heed of the
flame, yea, the sparks of this fire. What do our Philosophers answer to this?
Surely they laugh at my simplicity, who require Godliness, and Christianity
in their Studies. What have we to do (say they) with this over-busie
godliness and Holiness? We leave that to Divines, let them preach CHRIST
devoutly, What have we Philosophers to do with Divinity? It is not our
profession. Let us speak like Aristotle, like Philosophers. For whereas the
Apostle commands the COLOSSIANS to beware, lest they be deceived through
Philosophy, that (say they) belongs not to all Christians, but only to
Divines. It is written indeed unto the COLOSSIANS, and Geographers say, that
COLOSSUS was a City, but COLOSSAE (without doubt) was a Divinity School; or
at leastwise because it is written unto Christians, it is an advice, not a
precept; of which sort there are some things in the Gospel, which are not
prescribed to all, but to complete Christians; as the Expositors of Aristotle's
Moralls do teach. shall we leave off the old want of defending Aristotle, whom
the most learned of the Universities have so long time highly esteemed? nay, we
will rather with the Augustinians maintain all Aristotle's sayings even against
the superstitious Stoickes, according to a Philosophical truth, not according
to a Divine Truth, not by the light of Faith, but of Reason, so far forth as
we are Philosophers, not as we are Christians. Thus do these men in their cups
brag, and brave it out, though not perhaps in these very same words, yet in
the same sense. But I wo^ld advise these men to consider, that since they will
live like Philosophers, let them take heed, that they die not Pagans. A certain
plain Country fellow seeing a noble man of Germany cla^ in armor in the
morning, like a General of the field, and with his Mitre like a Prelate in the
Church at evening, asked one of his servants, why his Lord and Master did
sometimes wear an Helmet, and sometimes a Mitre; he answered, because he was
both a Prince, and Bishop of a City. A Prince, and a Bishop said the Country
man? I pray you (Sir) tell me, if the Prince go to Hell, whither shall the
BISHOP go? If I had so much authority as the Countryman, I would ask these
Philosophers, and these Centaure Christians, both men and monsters, these
Hermaphrodites both men and women, or rather neither, who speak impiously as
Philosophers in the Schools, and holily in the Church like Christians, what
think you will become of the Christian, if the Philosopher be thrust down to
Hell? Let no body wrest my words otherwise, than I mean; I know not how it may
fall out, that I may hereafter lay the fault upon your tongues, seeing that
those things, which I have spoken true, through your misreporting them, may be
accounted false. I have at the last bid farewell to obscene Poets, such as (for
the most part) are not to be taught to children. I have fetched this out of
Saint Augustine in his Confessions who averreth Terence expressly not worthy to
be read, and blame such Grammarians as expound him. If this seems absurd to
them, why do they find fault with me? let them find fault with S^int
Augustine. But let no man so mistake my meaning, as though I condemned the
reading of all Poets; as though I should say, because children must be fed with
milk, not with flesh, some Butcher, or other should infer, that I spoke
against eating of flesh absolutely. Now if it be reported again to Butchers
that my demand was, what will become of the Christian, when the Philosopher is
thrust down to Hell; My answer is this to Butchers, that I speak of
Philosophers in the same sense, that Tertullian did; What likeness is there
between a Philosopher and a Chri^^ian? What has Athens to do with Jerusalem?
an University with the Church? or what have Heretics to do with Christians?
He calls Philosophers Heretics. He was never acquainted with this absurd
distinction of a P^ilosophicall truth, and a divine truth; but he calls
Philosophers Heretics. He complains, that Philosophy has bin many sundry ways
distributed into Heresies, by the industry and labor of Philosophizing
Fellows, which have corrupted the truth in the Church. What has Athens to do
with Jerusalem? an University with the Church, or Heretics with Christians?
And yet shall any man marvel, why I am of opinion, that it is dangerous to
speak like Philosophers? Men speaking as Philosophers have long ago infected
the Greek Church, and almost all Europe with diverse errors. Men speaking as
Philosophers have in our days polluted all Italy (would to God it were but
Italy only) with most noisome opinions. Those two most vild and graceless men
(if they may be called men) Cornelius Agrippa, and Nicholas Machiavell speak as
Philosophers, of whom, the one in his natural, the other in his Moral
Philosophy have disgorged such Lessons.

Qualia cred^^^^le est rictu ru^^^sse (...).
^^^be^on, and Stygii m^n stratremenda lacus.
As if the Stygian Lake, or three chopped Cerberus,
Had spued their monstrous ugly fil^h on us.
Pomponatius, and Cardanus spoke as Philosophers, whereof the one wrote that
cursed Treat^se of the Souls mortality, the other broached many impious errors
in his subtilties. I deny not, but they are both confuted, Pomponatius
slightly by Contarenus, and Cardane soundly and thoroughly by Scaliger. But
how many in the mean time have they spoiled with their philosophical
sentences? Poison hurts more, then the Medicine helps; neither are all
cured, that are poisoned. And is any man so foolish to seek to be wounded,
that he may be cured? What then will some say, do you forbid the reading of
profane matters, l^st men be corrupted thereby? Shall we not read Aristotle,
Plato, Cicero, De^^osthenes? shall we not attain to the knowledge of
History, Philosophy, Eloquence? And hereupon Philosophers w^ll ampli^ie, that
a thing is not to be rejected for the abuse of it. F^e^ds are drowned with
waters; Houses are consumed with fire, the earth is scorched with the Sun, men
are spoiled by buildings, and yet for all this water, fire, the Sun, houses and
buildings are necessary. I would not have the thing it self, but the abuse
thereof abolished, and the proper use thereof restored again. I do not say,
that he offends that reads profane Authors, so that he do but lightly
pass them over; but this I take to be sin^ull, when profane things are
believed; for then art thou foiled, when thou give credit to them. And in
that case. I hold it dangerous to defend them; for thereby perhaps thou hurtest
others, or else art hurt thy self. Thou must also take heed not only what thou
defendest, but also what, and in what manner thou read; For although thou
do but touch those things, that thou read, yet be not so careless; for
many things, but touched do hurt, and sometimes kill. Saint Augustine makes
mention of a little Fly called a Cynips, which is of so small a substance,
that, unless you be very sharp-sighted, you cannot discern her, yet when she
fastens on you, she will sting soundly, so that she, that you could not
perceive coming to sting, you shall too late repent her stinging. But if your
judgments be not so sharp-sighted, to discern those, which I call the stings
of philosophy, yet know, that Philosophy is ^ Cynips, which uses to sting
heedlesse men; feel it not after it is too late. The veriest fool that is
learnes wit after a shrewd turn. The biting of an Aspe procures a most sweet
sleep, insomuch that one cannot be sensible of death approaching, but it is a
deadly sleep at last. Enjoy thy sweet sleep Cleopatra, I envy thee not, for
thine Aspes biting: I will propose to you Ieromes opinion set down in his
Epistle to D^m^sus concerning the Prodigal^ son; it is indeed rejected of the
pertinacious, but embraced of the wiser sort, and is very necess^^r^ ^or al
sorts of men. Ieromes words are these, Even as it was lawful for the Jews, if
they had gotten a beautiful woman captive, to take her to wife upon this
condition, that first her head should be shaved, her nails pared, and her
captive garments cast away; In like manner, it may be lawful for Christians to
use Philosophers, and ^ooks of Secular Learning, but with this condition, that
whatsoever they find in them, that is profitable and useful, they convert it
to Christian doctrine, and do, as it were, shave off, and pare away all
superfluous stuff concerning Idols, love and carnal cares of the world. And
lest any should cavil and say, that those things, which we ought to believe,
appertain to faith, and yet men are not for all that forbidden to talk as
Heathens; Jerome proceeds, (His meaning is not of such as speak profanely, but
of such ^s read profane matters.) Neither let us flatter our selves (says he)
although we do not believe those things which are written, when others
consciences are wounded; and we may be thought to approove those things we
read, when we do not reprove them. If any will further object, that these
things are written to the Bishop, or else they are to be understood of deeds,
and actions; let him know that Jerome speaks also of words; yea, of all
Christians in general. For he annexeth, Far be it from ^ Christians mouth
to utter omnipotent love, so help Hercules, so help me Castor, and such like
rather bug-beares, than divine powers. Therefore ^hosoever shall at any time
utter such idle ^ords, he is not to be allowed in that. Mark that Jerome
says, far (...) it from a Christians ^^uth to utter Omnipotent Jove, so help
me Hercules, or Castor, and such ^ike rather bug-bears, than leities. What shall
we not ^ame the immortal gods, not Jupiter? What, not in verse? not in our
talk? not when we declayme, or dispute? Why do ye ask me? Augustine
reproves it, Jerome abhors it. Far be it from a Christian to speak thus. And if
the most excellent men have been so strict about trifling words, let our wit
less youngsters at length leave off their railing in every place where they
come, that there are some upstarts of a new opinion, who would neither have
others to defend Aristotle in all points, nor yet will defend him themselves. O
heinous fact! My neighbor Q. ^uber^ does advertise thee C. Caesar of a crime
never heard of before, Q. Ligarius is gone into Africa. That which all the
Ancients both sacred and profane, Greeks, Latins, Christians, and Heathens
have freely done, that which the most learned amongst later Writers of Logic,
Rhetoric, and Philosophy both natural and moral, have not only done
themselves, but taught others to do so, (because men by nature, Philosophers
by truth, discreet men by reason, wise men by piety, and Christians by religion
are not persuaded, but commanded; not entreated, but compelled) some factious
fellows, who accuse Aristotle of many gross errors (although he alone of
all men the the Pope excepted could not err) have appeached us of a new crime
never before heard of till now. What shall we do therefore? Whither shall we
turn our selves? shall we ^all to reasoning? But it cannot be possibly that
ever Aristotle should be refu^ed by arguments; no, although he should speak
Contradictories Shall we fly to authority? You object modern Writers, Vives,
Ramus, Talaeus, Martyr; these are either unlearned, or proud. If you press us
with ancient Fathers, as Eusebius, Augustine, Tertullian, Jerome, they do not
condemn us, but the Heathens. If you allege the Schools of Germany, and
Switzerland (who have reformed the manner of teaching Philosophy with
Religion,) they will be thought of some to have dealt superstitiously in this
point; although I doubt not, that learned judgments are nothing at all moved
with these petty cavils, yet to give al men satisfaction, if I can) not
insisting upon these arguments, which they are wont to jest at) I will produce
certain witnesses, so fresh in memory, that have observed this manner of
teaching, men so well practiced in Letters, that doubtless they have been well
versed in it. They are by place, and authority Bishops at least, for number
almost two hundred; namely the whole general Council of Lateran held at Rome
within less, then these sixty years. Mark I pray you diligently what I
allege, for it is a place most worthy your observation, and it is extant in
the third Volume of Councels in the Lateran Council under Leo the tenth, the
eighth Session; if any be desirous, he may see this more at large, which I do
but point at. About that time, when the Professors of Aristotle in the
Universities had prevailed thus far, that they defended by Aristotle the
soul to be mortal, at least wise in a philosophical sense (otherwise
perhups, then Aristotle himself meant) because that Commentator Averroes
thought, that Aristotle meant so; it was declared by the Lateran Council, That
certain pernicious errors, always abhorred of the faithful, were sowed in
the Lords field by that contagious Contriver of all mischief, and amongst the
rest, that the soul of man is mortal; which whosoever shall affirm, to be
true, are taxed by that Council for rash and ^nadvised Philosophers. And no
more but so? yea, they are all condemned, that do affirm, or once question
it. True may some say according to Divinity; nay, but they are condemned,
whosoever do ^ouch it to be true even in Philosophy; I say Philosophy; for it
is expressly named in the Decree. Hear the general Decree annexed. Forasmuch
as truth can in (...) wise be opposite to truth, we do resolve, that every
assertion contrary to the Christian faith is altogether false; and we do
straightly forbid all others to conclude otherwise. And we do decree, that
all persons, who do pertin^ciously mayntaine this error, are to be taken heed
of, and punished as breeders and dispensers of damnable heresies, and to be
hated and abhorred in all points, as Heretics and Infidels, who go about to
extinguish the Catholic faith. You hear, that our rash^heady Philosophers are
pronounced by a general Council to be hated and abhorred as Heretics and
Infidels. But now (lest they might seem only to make a de^cree against the
defenc^ of Aristotle's errors) they enjoin further, that they be not only not
defended, but also, that they be ^^ongly opposed, and rejected. Which, let them
^ell consider, who have ^he charge of Philosophi^all disputations; for thus
(...) follows in the Decree. We straightly charge and command all Professors
of Philosophy in Universities and public Readers elsewhere, that when they
read, or expound to their hearers the points of Philosophy, which are contrary
to the true faith, as of the souls mortality, the worlds eternity or such like
opinions, that to their uttermost power, they vindicate the truth of Christian
Religion from such errors, and explain it to their hearers, and (as much as
they can) both by doctrine and exhortation ^root out, and confute these
arguments of Philosophers, seeing they may be easily confuted. Thus ye have the
Decree, the curse is denounced against all the violaters thereof. And this
Decree was not ratified by a few, but by the whole Council in general; saving
only worshipful Master Thomas Superintendent of the Preachers Order did not
approve it. He, as it seems, more favoring Aristotle, then Piety, said that
the second part of the Decree did not please him, wherein it was enjoined that
Philosophers should openly teach, and instruct their Auditories in the true
Faith. Now then let it seem doubtful (if it be possible) whether the conceit
of one only Master Thomas a younger Brother of the Preachers Order, or the
Decree of the general L^teran Counsel ratified with an exec^ation annexed, is
to be preferred. Moreover, if the Latera^ Counsel, if the R^mish Bishop, if the
Cardinals themselves of the Romish Church (many chief points of whose Religion
rather agrees with Aristotle, and the Philosophers, than with Christ, and his
Apostles) do denounce a Curse against all such, as shall affirm Aristotle's
opinion^ dissenting from Christ to be true, though in a philosophical sense,
what will become of us think you, who have taken upon us the profession of
pure Religion purged from Superstition, freed from the rotten devices of men,
and cleansed from the dross and dregs of all errors? I omit the pressing of
this point in the Nycene Assembly of Cardinals appointed for that purpose; They
held it a great abuse, and a matter of dangerous consequence for Philosophers
to broach impieties in public Schools, and not to discover how weak the
light of nature is to discourse of God, the world, and such like arguments, and
in all their disputations not to make piety their chiefest aim. I press no^
the opinion of sworn Witnesses those Cardinals, Sadole^, Contare^^^, Poole; I
stick to the Laterane Councels Decree. Whosoever therefore affirms it to be
true but in a philosophical sense, that the soul i^ mortal, or that the
world is eternal, if he fear God, let him know, that he grievously prophanes
Gods Name, when the authority of his Word is disabled, either in jest, or in
earnest. If he be a Papist, let him know, that he is pronounced an execrable
Heretic, and Infidel, liable to a Curse, and delivered up to Satan, by the
Romish Bishop, and the Lateran Council: if he be an Atheist, let him take his
liberty of philosophizing, defend his distinctions, and what he list; I forbid
him not. To all others, whether they are godly, or seem to be so, what I say
of the Worlds Eternity, or the Souls Mortality, I say the same of all other
questions, which dissent from Christian godliness (amongst which is Aristotle's
opinion of Blessedness, condemned by the judgment of Eusebius, Lactantius,
Augustine, Ambrose, Gregory Nyssen, naz^anzene, and many other most learned
men:) Let them look to it, which de^fend it. Let Philosophers distinguish the
Sorbonists bark, Epicureans rage, Machiavili^ns scoff, the Truth is
conqueror; They themselves totter, and shake, fall and rot, but the Truth will
triumph Truth (like the Palm Tree) the more it is kept down, the more it
flourishes, and by how much the more forcibly it is bended down-wards, by so
much the more vigoriously it reflecteth upwards. The Sun ofttimes is darkened,
but that darkness is discussed. Proserpines golden branches are broke off, but
they spring again; Truth may be pressed, but it cannot be oppressed. But if any
Novice in Philosophy be offended at these things, which are truly uttered
(neither can it be expected but some will take offense at them) let him not
like a Momu^ backbite in a corner, or maliciously traduce this, or that thing,
which I have spoken, but let him refute mine Oration. He shall not need to go
to the Augustinian Monks, let him writewithin his own walls; Words are but
wind, writings will stick by it, let the learned judge. I will most willingly
give him a copy of mine Oration. And so I do heartily again, and again
entreat the Aristotelians, if they have any confidence in their cause, if they
bear any true affection either to Aristotle, or Philosophy, or the Truth, that
they will confute mine opinions. If they cannot do it (for I doubt not of
their good will to do it) let them leave their wonted obstinacy, and yield to
the truth. Let them not object, they are not suffered to speak their minds
openly, they have place enough to write their minds, and that they may do more
freely, and upon better deliberation. I acknowledge mine own weakness, no man
more, but strong is the Truth. I do not so much distrust my self, as I trust
to my Cause. A very child may mayntain a good cause; but Cicero himsefe is not
a sufficient Patron for a bad cause But I would wish them to provide new
distinctions; for these, which I have handled, have been oftener boiled, than
the Colewo^t in the Proverb, not twice, but a thousand times, which the
stomach of Polyphemus himself is not able to digest, so that it is no mervaile
our Scholars are sick so often, when they are crammed with such distinctions.
If any more sober minded has either not understood, or not approoved what
according to mine ability I rather pointed at, than explained, by reason of
the shortness of the time, I entreat him to come to me; he shall find me
most ready to teach what I know, or to learn what I know not: We do not all
know all things, I may err, I am willing to be instructed. This only I crave,
that no man do rashly carpe at what is done; I neither contemn nor condemn
the study of Philosophy. But I see a deeper wound concealed. There are some in
whose hearts impious profanenes is so fast rooted, that they make piety not
only to seem harsh and unsavory to others, but to be rejected and vilified
by themselves. Truly as Saint Augustine wrote long ago ( that the enemies of
grace lay con^chedunder the name of nature) so it may be as truly said in our
times, that the enemies of the Faith lie couched under the name of Philosophy.
I know indeed there are many that err through lack of knowledge, but I mean
the obstinate, and pertinacious Patrons of Philosophy; of whom would to God
that were untruly spoken, which I here speak again with grief, The enemies of
the faith lie couched under the name* of Philosophy. I shall be thought of some
to be their enemy, now I have rubbed their soars: So mad Orestes in Euripides
called his sister Electra a Fury of Hell, because she tied him fast in his bed,
lest he should run mad; But her brothers outrageous words nothing daunted
Electra, neither shall these men's prejudicate censures disquiet me, when they
are whole, they will give me thanks. The Physician must bear with the
frowardness of his patient; For I am not ignorant how many and how bitter
grudgings I shall meet with all, which did I know to be spent upon these
trifles of mine, I should be very stupid, if I should not esteem them as
matters of great importance, both for your benefit, true pieties sake, and Gods
glory, which (the Lord is my witness) I only aim at. These may seem light
matters, but the trees vigor consists in the root. The Scriptures and profane
writings are like Hippocrates twins, laughing together, weeping together, sick
together, and sound together. In those Universities where the Gospel does
flourish, the ^ooleries of Duns Scotists are banished thence, witness Geneva,
Leiden, Ba^ill, Germany is witness. In those places, where Aristotle bears
sway, there all impiety rules and reigns; Witness Paris, Padua, Italy is
witness. But yet let all impediments to Pretty do their worst, we may defend
Philosophy even to death, we may study profane Arts, but so, as they be
referred to pious things. This was the mind of that good old man Master
Richard Fox, whose Image is every day before our eyes; This only was his
chiefest care. And howsoever he fell into the error of the times, yet all his
care was, that Religion, Piety, and godly Exercises should flourish and
increase daily amongst us. Who, seeing he has left behind the expression of
this his good desire rather in the Statutes of the house, than in our behavior
(which is to be lamented) therefore he seems to speak to us all continually,
as a father to his children in this manner.

Whereas I did heartily desire you young men, my sons by adoption, and
brethren in Christ, to be brought up in the knowledge of God, which is true
blessedness; lest the thorny cares of the world should choke the springing
seeds of godliness in you, I built an house for you, that so you being freed
from carking cares, might wholly apply your studies. I provided nourishment for
your bodies, and souls. I admonished you to be mindful, that your place
assigned you on earth was not permanent, but transitory, and that you have here
no abiding City, but must look after one in Heaven. I have ordained for you
Professors of the tongues, and Arts, that so you attaining to the knowledge of
them in your younger years, might be enabled to underrgoe weighty affairs
hereafter. I besee^ched you in the bowels of Jesus Christ, that you would
devote all your studies to Gods glory. I have declared to the World, that this
College of mine was founded for Divinity sake. I have enjoined the other
Lecturers to design all their labors, and studies to accommodate the Divine.
I have earnestly exhorted, and enjoined you all to strive, and contend with all
possible diligence for the knowledge of Divinity. I had good hope, that this
College would have sent forth many both excellently learned men, and sound
Christians, who being well seasoned themselves with heavenly wisdom, would make
the unsavory minds of others to relish piety, bring the light of the Gospel
to them that sit in darkness, restore the sick to health, refresh the poor,
strengthen the weak, direct them that go astray, and raise up the dead by the
Gospel. But alas my hopes are frustrate; my labors are all in vain; yea,
so short of arriving at the desired haven, that they are overwhelmed with a
tempest in the very midway. That Origin, when he^ taught profane learning to
the Heathens at Alexandri^, had such good success in teaching of Rhetorique,
by sometimes interlacing Examples and Sentences of Godliness, that many of
them were converted to Christiani^ty. I trust, Christians are not made impious
by your Expositions of Moral Philosophy in Oxford; but I am sure you corrupt
weak Scholars with your Epicurean licentiousness of life. Thus the streams,
which should refresh the dry souls of poor wretches, that the plants of piety
might spring apace, are quite dried up in the very fountain; so the fruit is
perished in the blossom, the Corn is crushed in the blade, before it can come
to a true ripeness, and be fit for food. For what other thing, did that
graceless Apostate Julian practice, when he labored to extirpate Christian
Religion out of the World, th^n command, that such opinions as opposed
Christian piety should be publicly taught, and defended in Schools, that so
the younger sort might loathe and distaste Christianity quite. Impious
likewise was the practice of that Heathenish Tyrant Maximinus, who caused such
points, as were contrary to sincere godliness, to be expounded to the
hearers, and to be learned without book, ye that profess the Name of Christ,
do ye think, ye have done very well, when ye have by your Declamations
opposed the blasphemous errors of the Gentiles, (which Basil ab^orreth once to
mention) and yet you still uphold the base opinions (as Chrysostom calls them)
of Aristotle.

O c^rva in terris animae, and coelestium inanes. You grovelling Souls on earth
that take delight,
Of heavenly matter void, and empty quite.
What madness has so infatuated your senses, that ye suck poison out of the
Philosophers, convert helps into hindrances, em^race vanity for verity, take
the dregs, when you may have the finer stuff? Do ye profess Christ in the
Church in words, and Aristotle in the Schools in good earnest, and Epicurus
your lives and actions? What a shame is it, that may be verified of you, which
Ambrose said of the Arrians, They have forsaken an Apostle, and followed
Aristotle. Why do ye waste good hours about trifles, divine wits about
noxious things, and consume that precious time, which should be spent in
History, Oratory, and Philosophy (but especially in sacred matters, whereby
Truth and Godliness might be promoted) and lie ^aking in the filthy puddles of
doting silly men? Do ye think I was ever so sottish, as to forbid ye the
imitation of Lyranus, and Hugo (patterns for Divines) in interpreting the
Scriptures, or did the same I ever propose such Scums, as Stannihursts Logic,
Paulus Venetus his Analyticks, Niphus his Topics or Donatus his Ethics to be
once meddled withal of young Students? Does not my Picture put ye in mind to
what end ye were chosen Scholars of this house, what ye ought to aim at,
and to what purpose ye should design all your endeavors? Are ye not d^ily
stirred and incited (like so many Be^^) to dispose all your honey extracted out
of the flowers of Truth to Gods glory? Are ye not convinced in the judgments
of those holy men EUSEBIUS, Saint Augustine, Lactantius, Iustine Martyr, and
the rest of the Fathers, who have with so great industry, and exquisite
knowledge plucked up by the roots, and trodden under foot the false opinions of
Philosophers, and Aristotle? Are ye not satisfied with the authority of the
Later^n Council, of so many Bishops, so many learned men, and choice
Cardinals, who, (to the end, that Christians might in their tender years be
informed in true opinions) have most straightly charged, that the weakness of
the light of Nature should be made known, laid open, and often pressed in
Auditories? What is in you or any of you (young men) unlearned in comparison of
so many aged men, and so many Fathers renowned both for Learning and Piety,
that ye should account your selves wiser than they, either in training up such
as ye* instruct, or sharper-witted in understanding what ye read, and that
those points, which they condemned in Aristotle concerning Nature and Manners,
as false and foolish, ye should censure to be unjustly condemned, and approve
them by your absurd Distinctions? Have I therefore erected Corpus Christ's
College for Divines that Aristotle might have more followers, and my Savior no
pious servants? Have I therefore con^erred so large benefits upon you* that ye
should in your speeches pre^erre ungodly and unprofitable before good and
wholesome matters, man's glory before Gods glory, the infernal gods before the
most mighty God? Have I therefore ordained that famous man Ludovicu^ Vives to
be your Lectu^er, who taught you in his life time by admonitions, and after his
death by his writings, how the corrupted Arts might be thoroughly purged and
cleansed? And are ye now so silly (young men) as to leave Viands for Acorns,
Trees for Chips, and with the Dog return to his vomit, and with the Swine to
wallowing in the mire? It was my desire, and I enjoined you to observe it, that
such as were sound should not be corrupted, but the bad should be directed, the
ignorant should be instructed, and not the capable made fools, nor to regard
what doting Philosophers dreamed of, but what true things were comprised in the
Arts. Is not the flesh of it self raging enough, forward enough to defection,
prone to naughtines, and flexible to every kind of vice, unless ye ^oment,
and feed it with ^uell ^etched from Philosophers, to inflame the sparks of
impiety, and so add fire to fire? ye think your selves not able enough to
hear Aristotle, but ye are to hear Christ. Shake off this drowsines, trample
upon profane things, be wise in heavenly things, search out the truth,
reverence godliness; and that not lazily, but earnestly, with all your
industry, and with your whole heart, night and day, at home and abroad,
privately, and publicly. The violent ^ay hold of the kingdom of Heaven. Not
the slothful, but the runners get the Crown. He that knows not Christ knows
nothing. True Religion is true Blessedness. Let no man deceive himself;
learning without godliness is poison. Whom it posssesseth, it puffs up, who^
it puffs up it kills. The most glorious God enlighten your minds with the
brightness of his grace; that ye may always be mindful of that account ye
are to give to the severe Judge not only of wicked works, but of idle words;
and let go the trifling curiosities of worthless men, the glittering
s^btilties of Philosophers, the apish toys of Sophisters, and ^ooleries of
Dunsists; but lay hold on true and proficient Learning, wherewith ye being
exquisitely furnished, and with Piety adorned may at length bring honor to
God, salvation to your selves, and be helpful to others. These things surely
that pious old man (most respected young men) does daily speak unto us,
though not in words, yet to the same effect in his desires* Which if you
carefully consider, I beseech you all in the presence of the Lord (before whose
dreadful Majesty, their consciences that reject saving knowledge shall one
day tremble and quake) that ye abuse not your own, and others excellent wits.
Ye that teach, and ye that are taught, be diligent, the one in delivering, the
other in receiving convenient, not impertinent; necessary, not frivolous;
profitable, not trivial things. ^ime posteth away; the arts are difficult;
life is short; error is dangerous; trifles are hurtful, truth is precious.
Christ is the Mark. Let them, that know not true wisdom, enquire after it;
and let them that know it, express it in their speeches; lest others contemn
wisdom before they know it; and they themselves never attain to a true, but a
false wisdom to no purpose.

Dixi.
FINIS.
Ian. 9. 163^.
Imprimatur

Thomas Wykes.


