A short Discourse of man's fatal end with an vnfaygned, Commendation of the
worthiness of Sir Nicholas Bacon, Knight, Lord Keeper of the great Seal of
England: Who disceased the xx. day of February. 1578.
All flesh is grass, 1. Peter. 1
and all the glory of man is as the flower of grass, James. 1.
the grass wythereth, and the flower falls away, but the word of the Lord
endures for ever. Sira. 14.
Christ is to us life, Philip. 1.
and death to us advantage.
SInce God has fyxt our days and years, Sira. 17.
to live and eke to dye,
And takes his choice of us his sheep, Ephe. 1.
what wight shall him deny?
But that he may without reiagge his creatures take and save, Romans 8.

Yea heave them up, Mat. 25.
yea throw the^ down, from life unto the grave:
Rejoice we then among the route, Ioh. 5.
which does this thing confess,
And pray that God may have his will, Romans 8.
he teaches us no less.
And thank him to, Sam. 12.
for all his gifts, and seem not for to mourn,
For that which he has in himself, Phil. 4.
set down ere we were borne.
All times with him is not one hour, Math. 6.
to age no subject is:
All shall decay, Sam. 12.
yea heaven and earth, such power and glory is his,
Borne all to dye, Eccle. 7.
and dye we must, all flesh shall yield to death,
The promise made welcome the time, Ephe. 1.
with faith let go this breath.
As now of late a worthy man, 2. Pet. 3.
by God from hence is calde,
Who does not dye, Mat. 24
but live for aye, and in the heavens is stalde:
Whose life on earth so well was known, Iame. 1.
to those of thankful mind,
That which he did that justice had, Romans 9.
that few like him I find.
A subject true, Cor. 15.
in Council grave, in sentence brief and sure,
A mind bedect with equity, whose fame shall aye endure.
To rich and poor indifferent, respecting justice cause,
To mitigate extremities, he sought and had the laws:
The patron of persuasions and enemy to all vice,
He feared God, Pro. 1.
he loud his prince, which shrwde him very wise:
No patch of popish mind in him was ever found, Romans 13

But favored those and helped them to, Ioh. 3.
which did the truth expound.
Lo this I think of duty right, of him thus to report,
To give that thanks which I do owe, to all such worthy sort:
I not deny but greater Clerks, may pen and paynte his praise,
With lofty verse heroical, as was in Ouids days.
But tell the troth, and flatter not, but speak as heart does think
A rarer man not in our days, nor less at wrong would wink:
Then would this worthy Bacon Knight, and Lord by Princes will,
Whose body's dead, Colos. 3
whose soul does live, and fame continewes still:
And shall at last rise up again, Romans 12
in shape and perfect bliss,
To take reward with the elect, Mat. 25.
which God does count as his.
Unto which hap God bring us all, Romans 13
when hence that we shall wend,
For Gods good fear, Deu. 28. 29. 30
and honest life, does bring a joyful end.
L. Ramsey.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London for Timothy Ryder.


