The Mothers Counsel OR, Live within Compass. Being the last Will and
Testament to her dearest Daughter.

Modesty
In Chastity. Chastity of body is the key to Relig. Wantonness. In Temperance.
Temperance is the mother o^ (...) Ma^ne^ In Beauty. ^ry is a woman's golden
Crown. Odio^ness^ In Humility. Humility is a woman's best Armor. Pride.




Printed at London for John Wright, and are to be sold at his Shop in spur
street without Newgate, at the sign of the Bible. 16^

Good Counsel to the Christian Reader.
1 THat you keep a narrow watch over your heart, words, and deeds
continually. 2 That with all care the time be redeemed that has been idly,
carelessly, and unprofitably spent. 3 That once in the day at least, private
prayer, and meditation be made. 4 That care be had to do, and receive good in
company. 5 That your family be with all diligence and regard, instructed,
watched over, and Christianly governed. 6 That no more care be spent in
matters of this world, then must needs. 7 That you stir up your selue to
liberality to Gods Saints. 8 That you prepare your selves to bear the Cross,
by what means soever it shall please God to exercise you. 9 That you give not
the least bridle to wandering thoughts. 10 That you bestow some time in
mourning, not only for your own sins, but for the time and age wherein you
live. 11 That you look daily for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, for
your full deliverance out of this world. 12 That you acquaint your selves with
some godly person, with whom you may confer of your Christian estate, and
open your doubts, to the quickening of Gods graces in you.
M. R.

The Mothers counsel, OR, Live within Compass. Being the last Will and
Testament to her dearest Daughter, which may serve for a worthy Legacy to all
the Women in the World, which desire good report from men in this world, and
grace from Christ Jesus in the last day.
Live within Compass: In Chastity.
FIrst my Daughter understand, that Chastity is the beauty of the soul and
purity of life, which refuses the corrupt p^sures of the flesh: (...) only
possessed of those who ke^ (...) bodies clean and undefiled; and it consists
either in sincere virginity, or in faithful Matrimony.

The chaste soul is a rich chamber, only fit for Christ.

The most bountiful God is a chaste and pure Spirit, and therefore above all
things thou ought to call upon him with chaste prayers.

If the body be not kept pure and unspotted from whoredom, the Soul can
hardly be fervent in devout prayer.

Pure chastity is beauty to the Soul, grace to the body, and peace to all
worthy desires.

Beauty is like the flowers of the Spring, but chastity like the stars in
heaven.

So must the flesh be nourished, that it may serve thee; so must it be tamed,
that it be not proud.

As nothing is more vile than to be ouercommed of the flesh, so nothing is more
glorious, than to overcome the flesh.

Frugalitie is the sign of chastity.

Chastity is a virtue of the soul, whose companion is fortitude.

Chastity is the Seal of Grace, the staff of devotion, the mark of the Just,
the crown of virginity, the glory of life, and a comfort in Martyrdom.

Idleness is the enemy to chastity.

Chastity without charity, is (...) without oil.

Chastity and modesty are suff^ to enrich the poor: And (...) age, rather make
choice o^ (...) manners, than looseness o^ (...) our with great Lands and rich
possessions.

If chastity be once lost, there is nothing left prayse-worthy in a woman.

The first step to chastity, is to know the fault, the next, to avoid it.

Where necessity is joined unto chastity, thence Authority is given to
uncleanness; for neither is she chaste which by fear is compelled, neither is
she honest which with need is obtained.

Do not say thou haste a chaste mind, if thine eye be wanton: for a
lascivious look is a sign of an inconstant heart.

Amongst all the conflicts of a Christian soul, none is more hard than the
wars of a chaste mind, for the sight is continual, and the victory rare.

Chastity with the raines of Reason bridleth the rage of lust.

A chaste ear cannot abide to hear that which is dishonest.

True felicity though hid from mortal eyes, yet is it the object of a chaste
spirit.

The first felicity that a chaste woman shall have after this life, is the
rest of her Soul in Christ: the second shall be the immortality and glory of
her body.

That chaste woman has got to the height of felicity, whom no fear
troubles, no pensiveness consumes, no carnal concupiscence tormenteth, no
desire of worldly wealth afflicts, nor any foolishness moves unto mirth.

A chaste woman is to be measured not by her beauties, but by her virtues.

A woman is the wonder of Nature if she wrong not Nature.

A chaste woman is an admirable Angel, till she be drawn by angels to
become a Devil.

Women that are chaste when they are trusted, prove often wantons when they are
causeless suspected.

A virgins heart is like the Cotton tree, whose fruit is so hard in the Bud,
that it sounds like steel, and being ripe puts forth nothing but wool.

Chastity is a veil which Innocents adorn,
the vngatherd rose defended with the thorn.
O Chastity the gift of blessed soul^,
comfort in death, a crown unto the life,
which all the passions of the mind controls,
adorn the mind, and beautifies the wife;
that grace, the which nor death, nor time attaints,
Of earthly Creatures, making heavenly Saints.
Penelope in spending chaste her days,
as worthy as Ulysses was of praise.
Beleee't, a woman cannot take upon her
with Beauty, Riches, nor with hie nobility,
to claim the true deserved praise of honor,
if chastity do fail by her fragilitie;
for that is the virtue which defends her honor.
Chastity is strong, when all that woo
it does resist, and turns them virtuous too.
Unchaste words vtter'd to a virtuous dame,
turn and defile the speaker with red shame.
A Wife is like a garment used and torn,
A Maid like one made up, but never worn.
Gold is not known by sight, but by the test:
Thought makes not chaste, but trial proves them best.
Misfortune still such proiects does pursue,
He makes a false Wife that suspects a true.
Their carriage, not their Chastity alone,
Must keep their name chaste from suspicion.
Out of Compass in Chastity, Is Wantonness.
Wantonness when it turns to lust, in a woman's bosom, is a desire against
reason, a furious and unbridled appetite, which kills all good motions in her
mind, and leaves no place for virtue.

Shame and infamy waits at the heels of unbridled wantons.

Wantonness is an enemy to the purse, a foe to the person, a canker to the
mind, a corrosiue to the conscience, a weakner of the wit, a befotter of the
senses, and lastly, a mortal bane to all the body; so that thou shall find
pleasure is the pathway to perdition, and wantonness the lodestone to ruth
and ruin.

Wantonness makes a woman covet beyond her power, to act beyond her nature,
and to die before her time.

Sensual and wanton vice has ever these three companions. First, blindness
of understanding; secondly, hardness of heart; and lastly, want of Grace and
perfection.

Wantonness is inseparably accompanied with the troubling of order, with
impudency, sloth, and dissoluteness.

Adultery desires not procreation, but only pleasure.

Wantonness is a strong tower of mischief, and has in it many keepers and
many defenders, as Needinesse, Anger, Palenesse, Discord, Love, and Longing.

Every good woman makes not for every man a good wife, no more than one dish of
meat can please all stomachs; but every evil woman makes an absolute ill
wife, as a drop of Coloquintida marres the whole pot of pottage.

Wanton dwarf women, or foolish ones, are the worst to make wives of; for the
first brings forth but a race of P^ies, and for the latter, there is nothing so
fulsome as a she-foole.

Wantonness is attended on by riot, and they two impair health, consume
wealth, and transform a woman to a beast.

Wantonness is a sin of no single rank: No ordinary station, that never walks
vnattended with a train of misdemeanors at the heels.

Corrupt company is more infections than corrupt air; therefore let women be
advised in their choice; for that text of thy self that could never be
expounded, thy companion shall as thy commentary, lay open to the world: for
it is seen by experience, that if those which are neither good nor evil
accompany with those that are good, they are transformed into their virtue. If
those that are neither good nor evil consort with those that are evil, they
are incorporated to their vice. If the good company with the good, both are
made the better; if the evil with the evil, both the worse; for such as the
company is, such is the condition.

There be four vices a wanton woman is ever most troubled with,
sloathfulnesse, carelesnes, vain curiosity, and niceness.

Hate and Disdain shines in a wantons eyes;
Deceit and Treason in their bosom lies.
The are mad that think by any means to stay
^ a wantons mind that is disposd to stray.
Such is the cruelty of women kind,
when they have shaken off the shamefac'st band,
with which wise nature did them strongly bind.
to obey the hests of man's well ruling hand,
that then all rule and reason they withstand,
to purchase a licentious liberty.
But virtuous women wisely understand
that they were borne to Humility,
unless the Heavens them lift to lawful Sovereignty.
It Is certain that the wanton woman never
Loves Beauty in her sex, but Envy ever.
There cannot be a greater clog to man,
than to be troubled with a wanton woman.
It Is evermore observed amongst men,
that be she Base or Hie:
A wanton eye does guide her wit,
and not her wit her Eye.
Loose women do repine their sins to hear,
and folly flings, if counsel touch the^ near.
The foolish and the wanton women use
To Obey them most, who does them most abuse.
A witless fool and wanton we may guess,
that leaves the more, and takes her to the less.
When wantons finely sooth their own desires,
their best co^ceits do prove the greatest liers.
Live within Compass: in Temperance.
ABuse not thy body in thy youth by Surfeit, Riot, or any other distemper
through an ouer-weening ability of strength; for youth and Nature pass over
many Infirmities that are growing till their age.

Live temperately and virtuously, that thou may dye patiently; for who lives
most honestly, will dye most willingly: and for thy long days and better
health on earth, afflict not thy body with too much unnecessary Physic, but
furnish thy mind in time of plenty to lay up for it self and others in the
time of want; for surely her end shall be easy and happy that death find
with a weak body, but a strong Soul.

Grieve not to groan under the hand of sickness; for as sometimes it purges
the body from intemperate humors, so does it oftentimes the Soul from more
dangerous security, and the rather, since there is no perfect health in this
world, but a newtralitie between sickness and health.

The eyes are the instruments of lust, therefore make a covenant with them,
that they betray not thy heart to vanity.

Suffer with those that suffer, be crucified with those that are crucified: so
shall thou be glorified with those that are glorified.

True grace and Temperance do not lift up, but humble a good woman; therefore
she is not yet partaker of true grace which does not walk in humility of
heart. The streams of Gods grace do flow downwards, not upwards.

God creates of nothing, and he repaires of nothing; that therefore thou may
be partaker of the Regeneration and Reparation, be nothing in thine own eyes,
that is, attribute nothing to thy self, arrogate nothing to thy self. Women
are weak and frail; but judge none frailer than thy self: to be inferior to
all, hurts none, to be above any, offends many.

Temperance is an enemy to lust, and last is an euer-waiting servant to the
pleasures of high bloods.

Temperance calls a womun back from all gross affects and carnal
appetites, and lets her neither exceed in foolish rejoicing, nor in ungodly
sorrowing.

She is firmly to be accounted temperate, which from the ground of reason can
govern and bridle the vice of sensuality, and all other gross affections of
the mind, and passions.

Temperance is the true Peacemaker in all the tumults between reason and
passion.

When the untamed passions of a woman have their full careere, and are neither
ouer-ruled with Temperance nor discretion; then is the soul lost and forsaken,
or at least, deformed and miserable; and the more delicately the body is
handled, the more stubbornly it wrastleth against the mind; for the heavy
burden of the body is only the oppresson of the soul.

She cannot commend Temperance that imagines the best felicity to consist in
pleasure.

O it is Temperance, with his golden squire
Between our passions, measures out a mean,
Neither to melt in pleasures hot desire,
Nor fry in heartlesse grief and doleful teen:
Thrice happy she that stays them both between.
O in what safety Temperance does rest,
When it finds harbor in a modest breast.
Of all Gods works which do this world adorn,
There Is none more fair, more sweet or excellent
Then woman's body, both for power and form,
Whilst it is kept in temperate government.
It Is harder for to learn fair continence
In joyous pleasure than in grievous pain,
For sweetness does allure the weaker sense
So strongly, that uneath it can refrain
From that which feeble nature couers fain;
But grief and wrath that be her enemies
And foes of life, she better can restrain,
Yet virtue vaunts in both their victories.
Let Wolves and Beasts be cruel in their kinds,
But women meek, and of fair temperate minds.
Though men minds can cover with bold stern looks,
Pale women's faces are their own faults books.
Those virtues that in women praise do win,
Are sober shows without, chaste thoughts within;
True faith and due obedience to their make,
And of their children honest care to take.
They melt with words as wax against the Sun,
So weak in many women's modesty,
For what sometimes they most would seem to shield,
Another time vnaskt, poor souls they yield.
Out of Compass in Temperance. Madness.
A Mad woman is like a rough stirring Horse, and as he must have a sharp bit,
so must she have a sharp restraint.

As a block though it be decked with gold, pearls, gems, and precious
ornaments, is not to be regarded except it represent the shape of some thing:
even so a woman be she never so rich and glorious, yet if she want obedience,
she is of no account or estimation.

Such wives as would rather have foolish Husbands whom they might rule, than to
be ruled by sober wise men, are like them that would rather lead a blind man in
an unknown path, than follow one that can both see and knows the way
directly.

She that forsakes her husband because she dislikes his manners, is like her
that forsakes the Honey least the Be might sting her.

They which sacrificed to Juno the goddess of married women, took ever the
galls from the beasts which they sacrificed; signifying thereby, that all
anger, madness, and displeasure should ever be far from married couples.

In three points women and fools hold small difference; they are full of vain
affections, they are curious and peevish to please, and ever wilful to disobay.

There is no creature that more desires honor, and worse keeps it than a
mad woman.

The intemperate woman with her lightness, and children with their small
knowledge, occupy their minds in things present: but virtuous wise women do
think on that is past, they ordain for that which is present, and with great
study and care provide for the time to come.

There are in outrageous women's eyes two several sorts of tears, the one of
grief, the other of deceit.

Beauty in women's faces, and outrage in their hearts, are two worms which
fret life, and waste goods.

Mad women for a little goodness look for a great recompense, but for much
evil no chastisement.

A fierce beast and a dangerous for is an outrageous woman to a Commonwealth:
for she has much power to do much harm, and is not apt to follow any
goodness.

A mad woman once defamed believes after in no woman virtue, but defameth all
to make her own vice worthy of a companion.

The tongue of a mad woman is a slipperie instrument, nimble to do mischief;
for commonly by it friendship is decayed, worldly riches diminished, the life
most miserably wasted, and infamy and immortal pain purchased.

Such a mischievous evil is the sin of detraction in the heart of a proud
and unruly woman, that there is neither long familiarilie, accustomed
fellowship, nor causes of approved friendship, neither yet any estate or degree
that can once bridle them, or stay them from doing infinite mischief.

She that is given to the vice of detraction, is worthily subject to the common
hatred of men, and to be eschewed of all as a most pestilent infection; and at
her entrance into any place among good women, every mouth to be either stopped
against her, or otherwise opened to hiss her out of doors, as a thing
altogether void of delight, and filled up but with danger only.

Amongst temperate women, mad women are made bright; but amongst mad women,
temperate women are made glorious.

It is a great madness in any woman to amuse upon those things which are far
beyond her understanding.

A fair woman without discretion, is like a fair house and an ^uill host
harbored therein.

Many times of wise maids becomes foolish wantons, and of foolish wantons,
wise maids.

Let every woman behold her self in a Looking-glass, and if she appear
beautiful, let her do such things as become her beauty; but if she seem
foul, then let her make good with good manners the beauty which her face
lacks.

As the body being always oppressed with labor loses his strength, and so
perishes; so does the mind of a woman oppressed with passions and pleasures
of this world, lose the force, lust, and desire which she had to the rest of
eternal life to come.

Excess of passions may ever hurt, they can never profit.

When sensuality reigns, (especially amongst women) there reason takes no
place.

A mad Woman knows things done, but a discreet woman considers things
long before they come to pass.

Praise and indiscretion can never be coupled together.

From idle wit there springs a brainsick will,
Which wise men lust, which foolish make a god;
This in the shape of virtue reigns still,
But it is the only vice, one worst and odd.
Will puts in practice what the wit deuiseth;
Will ever acts, and wit contemplates still,
And as from wit the power of wisdom rises,
All other virtues daughters are of will.
The heedlesse will true judgment does ensnare,
Who Is ruled by it does never want her care.
Where women's actions measure no regard,
There lawless will is made his own regard.
Such is the cruelty of women kind,
When they have maken off the shame-fac't band,
With which wise nature did them strongly bind
To Obey the hests of man's well-ruling hand,
That then all rule and reason they withstand,
To purchase a licentious liberty:
But virtuous women wisely understand,
That they were borne to base humility,
Unless the Heavens them lift to lawful souereigntie.
What iron band, or what sharp mouthed bit,
What chain of Diamond; if such might be,
^an bridle women's wrath, or conquer it,
and keep them in their bounds, and true degree?
Craft makes a woman often appear in show,
Merry and sad, when she is never so.
The lovely looks, the sighs that storm so sore,
The due of deep dissembling doubtfulnesse,
These may attempt, but are of power no more,
When beauty leanes to wit and soothfastnes.
Live within Compass: in Beauty.
THere is nothing harder for a woman than to know her self; for blinded with
beauty and self-love, they flatter themselves in all things.

There is in every woman two powers, which draw and conduct her; a desire of
pleasure bred in the beauty of the body, and a good opinion coveting only
good things* between these two there is continual strife in women, and when
the opinion has the maistry, it makes a woman sober, chaste, discreet, and
quiet: but when desire gets ye upper hand, it makes her lustful, riotous,
covetous, and unquiet.

Three things a woman ought to hold remarkable, her soul, her body, the
substance of this world: The soul first, because it is a thing beautiful, and
immortal, made after the shape of God himself: The body next because it is
fair, and is the case and sepulcher of the soul, and the nearest servant to
the secret spirit: lastly the substance of this world being necessary, and the
principal instruments and tools of the body. Let then the eyes of every woman's
inward mind first respect the beauty of her soul, then the comeliness of
her body, and lastly, the necessity of riches.

She that loves beauty more than virtue, shall either lack that she coueteth,
or else lose what she has got with great pain.

She that is in love with her own beauty is like one that trauelleth on the
Seas; if she escape the dangers (which are scandals) she is fortunate, but if
she perish, she is wilfully deceived.

Trust not beauty, for it never pays what it promises.

Beauty in this world is the delight of ^n hour, and the sorrow of many
days; ^ut in the world to come, eternal rest and ^ong joy.

Beauty is of two sorts, as of the body, which is a seemly compositio^ of all
ye members, wherein all the parts with a certain grace agree together; and the
other of the wind, which is a conueniency meet for the excellency of man or
woman, and that wherein their nature does differ from other living creatures;
and as the outward beauty moves and reioiceth the eyes, so this shining in
their lives by order and moderation, both in deeds and words, draws unto them
the hearts of them amongst whom they live.

Beauty is such a fading good, that it can be scarce possessed, before it be
vanished.

The greatest gift that ever heaven bestowed on a woman, is beauty; for it
both delights the eye, contenteth the mind, and wins good favor of all
men.

The beauty of the body withers with age, and is impaired by sickness, but
the beauty of the soul, which is innocence and humility, can never be
consumed.

A beautiful countenance is a silent commendations.

The fairest creature that ever Go^ created was the world.

Beauty, honor, and wealth, are thre^ deep persuasions to make love frollick^
and men miserable.

In all things diuisible there is something more, something less, somethin^
equal more or less: what can be more equal than beauty or wit?

The Scorpion if he touch never s^ lightly, inuenometh the whole body; the
least spark of wildfire sets the whol^ house on a flame, the Cockatrice kills
me^ with his sight, the sting of love and beauti^ wounds deadly, the flame of
fancy set^ all the thoughts on fire, and the eyes of ^ lover wounded with
beauty, are accounted incurable.

She that is an enemy to beauty is a for to nature, and she that doats on
beauti^ is a high traitor to nature.

Beauties that should be concealed, too grossly discovered, are fair signs
hung out to entice to an vnhospitable Inn.

Beauty without honesty is poison preserved in a box of gold.

Let not a woman's beauty, but her virtue be her dower, for her good deeds will
remain when age has taken her beauty from her.

Let no woman strive to excel in beauty, but hold the golden mean, which is
the true mediocritie and best part of any action, and must be used in all
things: it contains the full effects of prudence touching government, and
tranquillity concerning the soul.

Curiosity and extremity banished woman from the first modesty of her nature.

To live on the mountains, and have too much heat, is to be Sunne-burnt; to
live in the valley and have too little, is barren; to hold the mean is ever
most fruitful.

It Is sacred Beauty is the fruit of sight,
The courtesy that speaks before the tongue,
The feast of souls, the glory of the lights,
Envy of age, and everlasting young,
Pitties commander, Cupids richest throne,
Music entranced, never dully sung:
The sum and court of all proportion.
And that I may dull speeches least afford,
All Rhetorickes flowers in less than a word.
It Is beauty that is a woman's golden crown,
Man's conqueresse, and feminine renown,
Not joined with love, who dear yet ever sold it?
For Beauty's cheap, except loves eye behold it.
Beauty is still an Adamant to all,
And Natures bush that passengers does call.
Beauty it self does of it self persuade
The eyes of men without an Orator:
What needs then Apologies be made,
To set forth that which is so singular?
O how can Beauty master the most strong,
And simple Truth subdue aue^ging wrong?
O what is he whose youth can say he loves not,
Or who so old that women's beauty moves not?
Never were cheeks of roses, locks of amber
Ordaind to live imprisoned in a chamber.
Heaven made Beauty like it self to view,
Not to be locked up in a smokie mew:
A rosy virtuous cheek is heavens gold,
Which all men joy to touch, all to behold.
The ripest corn dies if it be not reapt,
Beauty alone is lost too char'ly kept.
Out of Compass in Beauty, Odiousness.
TO exceed Nature or thy condition, is a ryotous excess in lust, apparel, or
other ornament, it is also a part of pride, and contrary to decency and
comeliness.

Excess of bravery brings a woman of wealth quickly to poverty, and excess
of beauty to hate and odiousness.

They that rather delight to deck their bodies than their souls, seem women
rather created for their bodies than their souls.

As the weed cannot be esteemed precious for the fair flower which it bears,
so ought no woman to be accounted virtuous for the gay garment she wears, or
the beauty she borrows.

Beauty may be overthrown with age, and apparel consumed with moaths: what
folly is it then for women to delight in that which an hour can waste, or a
very little worm destroy?

Rain can never cause the Corn to bring forth any fruit which is sown upon
hard stones, nor speech cannot persuade a proud woman to become an enemy to
brave apparel.

Gorgeous garments are marks of pride, and nests of riotousnesse.

As a man would judge one to be ill at ease which wears a plaster upon his
face, or one that has been scourged to be punished by the Law; so does
painting betoken in a woman, a diseased soul marked with adultery.

As it is no wisdom in admiring the scabard to despise the blade, so is it
mere folly to praise a woman for her bravery, and discommend her for her
modesty.

Odious is that beauty which sleeps not with the face.

If by the civil Law the child may have an action of the case against him
which shall deface the portraiture of his father, we may well imagine what
action God will have against those women which by artificial painting, seek
to correct his workmanship.

Painting hastens wrinkles before old age come.

All kind of painting, artificial garnishing, and coloring of hair, was
forbidden among the Spartans, despised of wise men, and loathed of good men.

There are three things which cost dearly, and consume quickly; a fair woman
that is unchaste, a rich garment that has many cuts, and a wealthy stock in
the hands of an ill husband.

The tongue of a bitter woman pierces deeper than her eyes.

A painted woman's sorrows, howsoever extreme, ought not to be redressed: for
being trimmed up with dissimulation, she should not be believed.

A painted woman's eyes have two sorts of tears, the one of sorrow, the other
of dissimulation.

False beauty in the faces of women, and folly in their heads, are two worms
that fretteth life, and wastes goods.

Ill women for little goodness look for great praise, but for much evil no
chastisement.

A fierce beast and a dangerous enemy to the commonwealth is a wicked woman,
for she is of much power to do much harm.

An ill woman's heart is full of holes, apt to receive, but not to retain.

He that can endure a cursed wife, needs not fear the Devil for his companion.

The closet of a bad woman's thought is ever open, and the depth of her heart
has a string that stretches to her tongues end.

A painted woman's face is a liver smeared with carrion, her beauty baits of
dead worms, her looks nets, and her words enticing charms.

An unconstant fair woman may be likened to Prasiteles Picture which he made
of Flora, before which if one stood directly, it seemed to weep; if on the
left side, it seemed to laugh; if on the right side, to sleep.

A spark of beauty burns a world of creatures,
When it is of sophisticated features.
O beauty, still thine Empire swims in blood
And in thy peace war stores himself of food.
Beauty a beggar, fie it is too bad,
When in it self sufficiency is had:
It was not made to please the wandering eye,
But an attire t'adorne sweet modesty.
If modesty and women once do sever,
Farewell all fame, farewell all name for ever.
O beauty that betrays thy self to every amorous eye,
To trap thy proud professors, what is it but wantons try?
Where through it seldom haps, the fair from mean deceits to fly.
Truce, war, and woe, do wait at beauties gate,
Time lost, laments, reports, and privy grudge,
And last fierce love is but a partial judge,
Who yields for service shame, for friendship hate.
The Bees of Hybla have besides sweet honey, smarting stings;
And Beauty does not want a bait that to repentance brings.
The fairest cheek has oftentimes a soul
Leprous as sin it self, than hell more foul.
Live within Compass: in Humility.
She that gathers virtues without Humility, casts dust against the wind,
and loses her labor.

Happy is that woman whose calling is great, and her spirit humble.

Humility is a twinne to Chastity and Nobility, and as necessary in a woman
as her virginity.

Nothing can repair a decayed Chastity but true Humility.

Since the Country which a woman desires to dwell in, is high and heavenly,
and the way thither Lowliness and Humility, why then desiring this Country,
should they refuse the way?

There are three degrees of Humility: the first, of Repentance; the second, a
desire of Righteousness; and the third, the works of mercy.

She that cannot have what she would, must be humbly content with what she
can get.

Sufferance makes women Angels, but pride makes them Devils.

Let not thanks wax old, when gifts are in thy possession.

She that refuses to buy good counsel cheap, shall buy repentance dear.

Mock not at any in misery, but by it avoid the like misfortune.

Give no vain and unnecessary gifts, as is Armor to thy maids, Books to thy
plow-swaine, or Nets to a Student.

Let thy best apparel be Justice, and thy uppermost garment Chastity; so
shall thou be happy, and thy days prosper.

Let Virtue be thy life, Humility thy love, Honor thy fame, and Heaven thy
felicity.

Let not thy bounty exceed thy means, nor thy free mind thy modesty, keep
thine eye in equal pace with thine ear, and thy tongue short of thy feet.

Rather live wal'd up with an Anchorite, than housed with an evil woman.

Be not secure, lest want of care procure thy calamity; nor too careful, lest
pensive thoughts oppress thee with misery.

Behold thy self in a Looking-glass, and if thou appear beautiful, do such
things as becomes thy beauty; but if thou seem foul, then perform with good
manners the duty which thy face wants.

If thy Parents wax poor, supply their want with thy wealth; if froward with
age, bear patiently with their imperfections.

Live and hope as if thou were not to live a moment.

Never wish impossible wishes, for it expresses but a wanton passion, or a
most greedy covetousness, both grounded on folly.

To frivolous questions silence is ever the best answer.

Beware what thou grantest in any sort, for inconveniences follow one in the
neck of the other.

If thou doubt in any thing, ask counsel of the wise, and be not angry at
their reproof, least (as Martial the Poet said) it be truth that thou love,
not truth.

She that talks much to little purpose, is like him that sails with a
side-winde, and is borne to a wrong shore.

As a woman without humility is unpleasant, so humility without severity
draws near to prostitution.

She only may properly be called a woman that in her behavior governs her
self like a woman, that is to say, conformable to such things as reason
wills, and not as the motions of sensuality requires.

Where any demand is a jest, the fittest answer is a scoff.

Rather labor to be delivered from contempt, than practice to be revenged.

The eye can never offend if the mind would rule the eye, but where there is
division, there is ever confusion.

Solitariness is the only sly enemy that separateth both woman and man from
doing well.

Liking is not always the child of beauty, but jealousy is ever the busy
harbenger to disdain.

She that will needs stir affections in others, must first show the same
passion in her self.

She that blames another, must first be blameless her self, especially in
the matter she blames another for.

Forbearance of speech is most dangerous when necessity requires to speak.

Humility is aged, hoary, gray,
With look full lowly cast, and gate full slow:
Who on a staff his steps does stay,
To whom who comes must ever stoop most low;
For strait and narrow is the way that he does show.
Humility to heaven is step and staire,
Both for devotion, sacrifice, and prayer.
The bending knee in safety still does go,
when others stumble, as too stiff to bow.
Ah, God shield maid, that any one
should learn to look aloft:
This reed is rife, that oftentimes
great climbers fall vnsoft.
In humble dales is footing fast,
the troad is not so tickle:
And though one fall through heedles have,
yet is his miss not mickle.
As on th'vnsauory stock the Lilly's borne,
And as the Rose grows on the pricking thorn:
So modest life, with sobs of glorious smart,
And cries devout, comes from an humble heart.
More honor's in humility,
than safety is in walls:
Ill livers prove not monuments,
save only in their falls.
Meekness this noble virtue and divine,
Does make a woman still so rare and od,
As in that one she most resembles God.
Ever as rage kindles the fire of wrath,
Meeknes to quench it store of water has.
Out of Compass in Humility, Pride.
PRide perceiving Humility to be honorable, desires oftentimes to be covered
with her garment, for fear least appearing always in her own likeness, she
should be little regarded.

Immoderate wealth causes pride, pride brings hatred, hatred works
rebellion, rebellion makes an alteration and changes Kingdoms, even in
women's dissentions.

That kind of fantastic contemplation which tends to solitariness, is but a
glorious title to proud idleness.

The proud conceit of young women, is, that they can speak wisely, when they
cannot understand themselves.

When Dogs fall on snarling, Serpents on hissing, and Women on weeping, the
first means to bite, the second to sting, and the last to deceive.

As rewards are necessary for well-doers, so chastisements are meet for proud
offenders.

Pride is always accompanied with Folly, Audacitie, Rashness, Impudency, and
Solitariness: as if one would say that the proud woman is abandoned of all the
world, ever attributing that to her self which is not, having much more boast
than matter of worth.

Pride did first spring in men from too much abundance of wealth, in women from
too much trust in beauty, and the flattery of men.

Pride is the mother of Envy; strangle her, and her daughter dies.

She that knows her self best, will ever esteem her self least.

It is hard for a fair woman not to be proud.

A proud woman is like Theocritus his fisherman; she only feeds the vanity
of her fancy with dreams of gold.

If a man's folly make a woman once his equal, her pride will soon make her
self his superior.

Women be of so tender condition, that they will complain for a small cause,
and for a less will rise up into infinite pride.

There is no creature that more desires honor, worse keeps it, and sooner
loses it, than a proud woman.

Proud women in mischief are ever wiser than men.

It is natural to a proud woman, to despise that which is offered her; and
death to her to be denied any thing she demands.

Sophocles being asked, why, when he brought in the persons of women, he made
them always good, whereas Euripides made them all bad: Because (quoth he) I
present women as they should be, and Euripides presented them such as they are.

A proud woman's will is like a Sheffild knife, sometimes so sharp it will cut
a hair, and otherwhiles so blunt it must needs go to the grindstone.

If women be beautiful, they are to be won with praises; if coy, with prayers;
if proud, with gifts; if wonton, with promises; but if good, with providence
and virtue.

Those women which esteem themselves most wise, are evermore the soonest
tickled with self-love.

A proud woman's mind is ever uncertain: it has as many new devices as a tree
has leaves, for she is always desirous of change, and seldom loves him
heartily with whom she has been long conversant.

Trust not a proud woman when she weepeth, for it is her nature to shed tears
when she wants her will.

A proud woman in her wit is pregnable, in her smile deceiuable, in her frown
reuengeable, and lastly in her death acceptable.

Of grisly Pluto, Pride the daughter was,
And sad Proserpina the Queen of hell,
Yet does she think her pearls worthy to pass,
That pare^tage with pride so does she swell;
And thundering Jove that hie in heaven does dwell,
And wield the world, she claimed for her fire;
Or if that any else does Jove excel,
For to the highest she does still aspire;
Or if ought higher were, then that does she desire.
O pride the shelf close shrouded in the port
Of this life's Ocean, drowning all resort.
Pride makes her rounds, for she has never end,
And Soners, for she never leaves her noise:
She makes her dumps, if any thing offend,
And to her idol self, with warbling voice,
Sings Hyms and Anthems of especial choice:
And yet prides quire's put to silence clean,
Wanting a Base, a Tenor, and a Mean,
Pride is the scourge of sin, the Devils fee,
The head of hell, the bough, the branch, the tree.
From which do spring and sprout such fleshly seeds,
As nothing else but moan and mischief breeds.
Such is the nature still of haughty pride,
Can nothing less than others praise abide.
A proud maid may her own musician be,
Her heads device makes pauens to her heart
This heart with lips and pleasures da^ceth free,
All but the measures framing every part;
Like Organs worthy of so sweet an Art,
Her thoughts plays marches on her vaulting mind,
And Memory her Recorder stands behind.
FINIS.

