DISCOVERY OF THE LARGE, RICH, AND BEVVTIFVL EMPIRE OF GVIANA, WITH a relation
of the great and Golden City of Manoa (which the spaniards call El Dorado) And
the Provinces of Emeria, Arromaia, Amapaia, and other Countries, with their
rivers, adjoining.

Performed in the year 1595. by Sir W. Ralegh Knight, Captain of her
Majesty's Guard, Lo. Warden of the Sannerries, and her Highness Lieutenant
general of the County of Cornwall.

Imprinted at London by Robert Robinson. 1596.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MY singular good Lord and kinsman, Charles Howard,
knight of the Garter, Barron, and Counceller, and of the Admiralls of England
the most renowned: And to the Right Honorable Sr Robert Cecyll Knight,
Counceller in her Highness privy Councels.
FOR your Honors many Honorable and friendly parts, I have hitherto only
returned promises, and now for answer of both your adventures, I have sent
you a bundle of papers which I have divided between your Lo.and Sr Robert Cecyl
in these two respects chiefly: First for that it is reason, that wastful
factors, when they have consumed such stocks as they had in trust, do yield
some cullor for the same in their account, secondly for that I am assured, that
whatsoever shall be done, or written by me, shall need a double protection and
defense. The trial that I had of both your loves, when I was left of all, but
of malice and revenge, makes me still prejume that you will be pleased (knowing
what little power I had to perform ought, and the great advantage of for
warnedenemies) to answer that out of knowledge, which others shall but object
out of malice. In my more happy times as I did especially honor you both, so I
found that your loves sought me out in the darkest shadow of adversity, and
the same affection which accompanied my better fortune, sored not away from me
in my many miseries: all which though I cannot requite, yet I shall ever
acknowledge: and the great debt which I have no power to pay, I can do no more
for a time but confess to be due. It is true that as my errors were great, so
they have yielded very grievous effects, and if ought might have been
deferued in fomer times to have counterpoysed any part of offenses, the fruit
thereof (as it seems) was long before fallen from the tree, and the dead
stock only remained. I did therefore even in deadstocke only remained. I did
therefore even in the winter of my life, undertake these travels, fitter for
bodies less blasted with misfortunes, for men of greater ability, and for
minds of better encouragement, that thereby if it were possible I might
recover but the moderation of excess, and the least taste of the greatest
plenty formerly possessed. If I had known other way to win, if I had imagined
how greater adventures might have regained, if I could conceive what farther
means I might yet use, but even to appease so powerefull displeasure, I would
not doubt but for one year more to hold fast my soul in my teeth, til it were
performed. Of that little remain I had, I have wasted in effect all herein, I
have undergone many constructions, I have been accompanied with many sorrows,
with labor, hunger, heat, sickness, and peril: It appears notwithstand that
I made no other brauado of going to the sea, then was meant, and that I was
neither hidden in cornwell, or else where, as was supposed. They have grossly
belied me, that foreiudged that I would rather become a servant to the Spanish
king, the^ return, and the rest were much mistaken, who would have persuaded,
that I was too easeful and sensual to undertake a journey of so great travel.
But, if what I have done receive the gracious construction of a painful
pilgrimage, and purchase the least remission, I shall think all too little, and
that there were wanting to the rest, many miseries: But if both the times past,
the present, and what may be in the future, do all by one grain of gall
continue in an eternal distaste, I do not then know whether I should bewail
my self either for my too much travel and expense, or condemn my self for
doing less then that, which can deserve nothing. From my self I have deserved
no thanks, for I am returned a beggar, and withered, but that I might have
bettred my poor estate, it shall appear by the following discourse, if I had
not only respected her Majesty's future Honor, and riches. It became not the
former fortune in which I once lived, to go iourneys of picorie, and it had
sorted ill with the offices of Honor, which by her majesty's grace, I hold this
day in England, to run from Cape to Cape, and from place to place, for the
pillage of ordinary prizes. Many years since, I had knowledge by relation, of
that mighty, rich, and beawtifull Empier of Guiana, and of that great and
Golden City, which the spaniards call El Dorado, and the naturals Manoa, which
City was conquered, reedified, and enlarged by a gonger son of Guainacapa
Emperor of Peru, at such time as Francisco Pazaro and others conquered the
said Empire, from his two elder brethren Guascar, and Atabalipa, both then
contending for the same, the one being favored by the Oreiones of Cuzco, the
other by the people of Caximalca. I sent my servant Jacob VVhiddon the year
before, to get knowledge of the passages, and I had some light from Captain
Parker sometime my servant, and now attending on your Lo. that such a place
there was to the southward of the great bay of Charuas, or Guanipa: but I found
that it was 600. miles farther off, then they supposed, and many other
impediments to them unknown and unheard. After I had displanted Don Anthonio
de Berreo, who was upon the same enterprise, leaving my ships at Trinedado, at
the port called Curiapan, I wandered 400. miles, into the said country by land
and river: the particulers I will leave to the following discourse. The
country has more quantity of Gold by manifold, then the best parts of the
Indies, or Peru: All the most of the kings of the borders are already become
her Majesty's vassals: and seem to desire nothing more then her Majesty's
protection and the return of the English nation. It has another ground and
assurance of riches and glory, then the voiages of the west Indies, and an
easier way to invade the best parts thereof, then by the common course. The king
of Spain is not so impouerished by taking 3 or 4 port towns in America as we
suppose, neither are the riches of Peru, or Nueua Espania so left by the
seaside, as it can be easily washed away, with a great flood, or springtide, or
left dry upon the sands on a low ebb. The port towns are few and poor in
respect of the rest within the land, and are of little defense, and are only
rich When the fleets are to receive the treasure for spain: And we might
think the spaniards very simple, haueing so many horses and slaves, that if
they could not upon two days warning, carry all the Gold they have into the
land, and far enough from the reach of our footmen, especially the Indies
being (as it for the most part) so mountainous, so full of woods, rivers, and
marshes. In the port towns of the province of Vensuello, as Cumana, Coro, and
S. Iago (where of Coro and S. Iago were taken by Captain Preston and Cumana
and S. Josephus by us) we found not the value of one riall of plate in either:
but the Cities of Barquasimeta, Valentia, S. Sebastian, Cororo, S. Lucia,
Alleguna, Marecabo, and Truxillo, are not so easily invaded: neither does the
burning of those on the coast impouerish the king of spain any one Ducket,
and if we sack the river of Hache, S. Marta, and Cartagena, which are the
ports of Nueuo reyno and Popayan. There are besides within the land which are
indeed rich and populus, the towns and Cities of Merida, Lagrita, S.
Christofero, the great Cities of Pampelone, S. Feed Bogota, Tunia and Mozo
where the Esmeralds are found, the towns and Cities of Morequito, velis, la
villa de Leua, Palma, vnda a^ Angustura, the great City of Timana, Tocaima,
S. Aguila, Pasto, Iuago, the great city of Popaian it self, Los Remedios, and
the rest. If we take the ports and villages within the bay Vraba in the kingdom
or rivers of Dariena, and Caribana, the cities and towns of S. Iuan de Roydas,
of Cassaris, of Antiocha, Carramanta, Cali, and Auserma have gold enough to pay
the King part, and are not easily invaded by the way of the Ocean, or if Nombre
de Dios and Panama be taken in the province of Castillo de oro, and the
villages upon the rivers of Cenu and Chagre peru has besides those and besides
the magnificent cities of Quito and Lima so many Islands, ports, Cities, and
mines, as if I should name the^ with the rest it would seem incredible to the
reader: of all which because I have written a particular treatise of the west
Indies, I will omit their repetition at this time, seeing that in the said
treatise I have anatomized the rest of the sea towns as well of Nicaragna,
Iucata, Nueua Espanna, and the Islands, as those of the Inland, and by what
means thy maybe best invaded, as far as any mean Judgment can comprehend.
But I hope it shall appear that there is a way found to answer every man's
longing, a better Indies for her majesty then the King of Spain has any,
which if it shall please her highness to undertake, I shall most willingly end
the rest of my days in following the same: If it be left to the spoil and
sackage of common persons, if the love and service of so many nations be
despised, so great riches, and so mighty an Empire refused, I hope^ her
Majesty will yet take my humble desire and my labor therein in gracious part,
which if it had not been in respect of her highness future honor and riches, I
could have laid hands and ransomed many of the kings and Cassiqui of the
Country, and have had a reasonable proportion of gold for their redemption: But
I have chosen rather to bear the burden of poverty, then reproach, and rather
to endure a second travel and the chances thereof, the^ to have defaced an
enterprise of so great assurance, until I knew whether it pleased God to put a
disposition in her princely and royal heart either to follow or foreflow the
same: I will therefore leave it to his ordinance that has only power in all
things, and do humbly pray that your honors will excuse such errors, as without
the defense of art, over run in every part, the following discourse, in which I
have neither studied phrase, form, nor fashion, and that you will be pleased
to estceme me as your own (thought over dearly bought) and I shall ever
remained ready to do you all honor and service.

W: R.
To the Reader.
BEcause there have been diverse opinions conceived of the gold oar brought
from Guiana, and for that an Alderman of London and an officer of her majesty's
minte, has given out that the same is of no price, I have thought good by the
addition of these lines to give answer as well to the said malicious flaunder,
as to other obiectio^s. It is true that while we abode at the Island of
Trinedado, I was in formed by an Iudian, that not far from the Port, where we
ancored, there were found certain mineral stones which they esteemed to be
gold, and were the reunto persuaded the rather for that they had seen both
English, and French mengather, and imbarque some quantities thereof: upon this
liklyhoode I sent 40. men and gave order that each one should bring a stone of
that mync, to make trial of the goodness, which being performed, I assured
them at their return that the same was Marcasite, and of no riches or value:
Notwithstanding diverse trusting more to their own sense, then to my opinion.
kept of the said Marcasite, and have tried thereof, since my return, in
diucrs places. In Guiana it self I never saw Marcasite, but all the rocks,
mountains, all stones in the plains, in woods, and by the rivers side are in
effect through shining, and appear marvelous rich, which being tried to be no
Marcasite, are the true signs of rich minerals, but are no other then El madre
del oro (as the Spaniards term them) which is the mother of gold, or as it is
said by others the scum of Gold: of diverse sorts of these many of my
company brought also into England, every one taking the fairest for the best,
which is not general, For mine own part, I did not countermand any man's
desire, or opinion, and I could have a forded them little if I should have
denied them the pleasing of their own fancies therein: But I was resolved that
gold must be found either in grains separate from the stone (as it is in most
of the rivers in Guiana) or else in a kind of hard stone, which we call the
white Sparre, of which I saw diverse hills, and in sundry places, but had
neither time, nor men, nor instruments fit to labor. Near unto one of the
rivers I found of the said white Sparre or flint a very greatledge orbanke,
which I endeavored to break by all the means I could, because there appeared
on the out side some small grains of gold, but finding no mean to work the
same upon the upper part, seeking the sides and circuit of the said rock, I
found a clift in the same from whence with daggers, and with the head of an
axe, we got out some small quantity thereof, of which kind of white stone
(wherein gold in gendered) we fawe diverse hills and rocks in every part of
Guiana, wherein we traveled. Of this there has been made many trialls, and
in London, it was first assaide by Master Westwood a refiner dwelling in
woodstreet, and it held after the rate of 12000 or 13000 pounds a tun.
Another sort was afterward tried by Master Bulmar and Master Dimocke assay
master, and it held after the rate of 23000 pounds a tun. There was some of
it again tried by Master Palmer comptrollor of the minte, and Master Dimocke
in gold smiths hall, and it held after 26900 pounds a tun. There was also at
the same time, and by the same persons a trial made of the dust of the said
mine which held 8. pound 6. ounces weight of gold, in the hundred: there was
likewise at the same time a trial made of an Image of Copper made in Guiana,
which held a third part gold, besides diverse trialls made in the country, and
by others in London. But because there came of ill with the good; and belike
the said Alderman was not presented with the best, it has pleased him
therefore to scandal all the rest, and to deface the enterprise as much as in
him lies. It has also been concluded by diverse, that if there had been any
such oar in Guiana, and the same discovered, that I would have brought home a
greater quantity there of: first I was not bound to satisfy any man of the
quantity, but such only as aduenured, if any store had been returned
thereof: but it is very true that had all their mountains been of massy
Gold, is was impossible for us to have made any longer sfay to have wrought
the same: and whosoever has seen with what strength of stone, the best gold
oar is environed, he will not think it easy to be had out in heaps, and
especially by us who had neither men, instruments, nor time (as it is said
before) to perform the same: There were on this discovery. no less then 100
performs, who can all witness, that when we past any branch of the river to
yewe the land within, and stayed from our boats but six hours, we were
driven to wade to the eyes, at our return: and if we attempted the same the
day following, it was impossible either to forde it, or to swim it, both by
reason of the swiftness, and also for that the borders were so prestred with
fast woods, as neither bote nor man could find place, either to land or to
imbarque: for in June, July, August and september, it is impossible to nauigate
any of those rivers, for such is the fury of the Current, and there are so
many trees and woods overflowed, as if any boat but touch upon any tree or
stake, it is impossible to save any one person therein: and ere we departed
the land it ran with that swiftnes, as we drove down most commonly against the
wind, little less then one hundred miles a day: Besides our vessels were no
other then wherries, one little barge, a small cockboate, and a bad Galiota,
which we framed in have for that purpose at Trinedado, and those little boats
had nine or ten men apeece, with all their victuals, and arms. It is further
true, that we were about 400. miles from our ships, and had been a month from
them, which also we left weakly mande in an open road, and had promised our
return in 15 days. Others have devised that the same oar was had from
barbery, and that we carried it with us into Guiana: surely the singularity of
that device, I do not well comprehend, for mine own part, I am not so much in
love with these long voiages, as to devise, thereby to cozen my self, to lie
hard, to fare worse, to be subjected to perils, to diseases, to ill savors, to
be parched and withered, and withal to sustain the care and labor of such an
enterprise, except the same had more comfort, then the fetching of Marcasite
in Guiana, or bying of gold oar in Barbery. But I hope the better sort will
judge me by themselves, and that the way of deceit, is not the way of honor or
good opinion: I have herein consumed much time, and, many crowns, and I had no
other respect or desire the^ to serve her majesty and my Country thereby. If
the spanish nation had been of like belief to these detractors, we should
little have feared or doubted their attempts, wherewith we now are daily
threatened. But if we now consider of the actions both of Charles the fist, who
had the Maydenhead of Peru and the abundant treasures or Atabalipa, together
with the affairs of the Spanish king now living, what territories he has
purchased, what he has added to the acts of his predecessors, how many
kingdoms he has indaungered, how many armies, garrisons, and nauies, he has
and does maintain, the great losses which he has repaired, as in 88 above
100 sail of great ships with their attillery, and that no year is less
unfortunate but that many vessels, treasures, and people are devoured, and yet
notwithstanding he begins again like a storm to threaten shipwreck to us
all, we shall find that these abilities rise not from the trades of sackes,
and Civil Orenges, nor from ought else that either Spain, Portugal, or any of
his other provinces produce: It is his Indian Gold that indaungereth and
disturbeth all the nations of Europe, it purchases intelligence, creeps into
Councels, and sets bound loyalty at liberty, in the greatst Monarchies of
Europe. If the spanish king can keep us from foreign enterprises, and from
the impeachment of his trades, either by offer ofinuasion, or by beseiging us
in Britayne, Ireland, or else where, he has then brought the work of our
peril in great forwardnes. Those princes which a bound in treasure have great
advantages over the rest, if they once constrain them to a defensive war,
where they are driven once a year or oftener to cast lots for their own
garments, and from such shall al trades, and intercourse, be taken away to the
general loss and impoucrithmet of the kingdom, and common weal to reduced
besides when men are constrained to fight, it has not the same hope as who^
they are pressed and encouraged by the desire offpoyle and riches. Farther it is
to be doubted how those that in time of victory seem to affect their neighbor
nations, will remain after the first view of misfortunes, or ill success; to
trust also to the doubtfulnes of a battle, is but a fearful and uncertain
adventure, seeing therein fortune is as likely to prevail, as virtue. It shall
not be necessary to allege all that might be said, and therefore I will thus
conclude, that what soever kingdom shall be enforced to defend it self, may be
compared to a body dangerously diseased, which for a season may be preserved
with vulgar medicines, but in a short time, and by little and little, the same
must needs fall to the ground, and be dissolved. I have therefore labored al
my life, both according to my small power, and persuasion, to advance al those
attempts, that might either promise return of profit to our selves, or at last
be a let and impeachment to the quiet course, and plentiful trades of the
Spanish nation, who in my weak judgment by such a war were as easily
indaungered and brought from his powerfulnes, as any prince in Europe, if it be
considered from how many kingdoms and nations his reuenews are gathered, and
those so weak in their own beings, and so far severed from mutual succor.
But because such a preparation and resolution is not to be hoped for in have,
and that the time which our enemies embrace, can not be had again to
advantage, I will hope that these provinces, and that Empire now by me
discovered shall suffice to enable her Majesty, and the whole kingdom, with no
less quantities of treasure, then the king of Spain has in all the Indies,
east and west, which he possesses, which if the same be considered and
followed, ere the Spaniards, enforce the same, and if her Majesty will
undertake it, I will be contented to lose her highness faueur and good opinion
for ever, and my life withal, if the same be not found rather to exceed, then
to equal what soever is in this discourse promised or declared. I will now
refer the reader to the following discourse with the hope that the perilous
and chargeable labors and endeavors of such as thereby seek the profit and
honor of her Majesty, and the English nation, shall by men of quallitie and
virtue receive such construction, and good acceptance, as themselves would
look to be rewarded withal in the like.

W: R.
THE DISCOVERY OF GVIANA.
ON Thursday the 6. of February in the year 1595. we departed England, and
the sunday following had sight of the North cape of Spain, the wind for the
most part continuing prosperous: we passed in sight of the Burlings, and the
rock and so onwardes for the Canaries, and fell with Fuerte ventura the 17. of
the same month, where we spent two or three days, and relieved our companies
with some fresh meat. From thence we coasted by the Gran Canaria, and so to
Tenerife, and stayed there for the Lions whelp your Lordships ship, and for
captain Amys Preston and the rest: But when after 7. or 8 days we found thcm
not, we departed and directed our course for Trinedado with mine own ship,
and a small bark of Captain Crosses only (for we had before lost sight of a
small Gallego on the coast of Spain, which came with us from Plymmouth:) we
arrived at Trinedado the 22. of March, casting ancour at point Curiapan, which
the Spaniards call punto de Gallo, which is situate in 8. degrees or there
abouts: we abode there 4. or 5. days, and in all that time we came not to the
speech of any Indian or Spaniard: on the coast we saw a fire, as we sailed from
the point Carao toward Curiapan, but for fear of the Spaniards, none durst
come to speak with us. I my self coasted it in my barge close abord the shore
and landed in every Coue, the better to know the Island, while the ships kept
the channel. From Curiapan after a few days we turned up Northeast to recover
that place which the Spaniards call Puerto de los Hispanioles, and the
inhabitants Conquerabia, and as before (reuictualing my barge) I left the
ships and kept by the shore, the better to come to speech with some of the
inhabitants, and also to understand the rivers, watring places and ports of
the Island which (as it is rudely done) my purpose is to send your Lordship
after a few days. From Curiapan I came to a port and seat of Indians called
Parico where we found a fresh water river, but saw no people. From thence I
rowed to another port, called by the naturals Piche, and by the Spaniardes
Tierra de Brea: In the way between both were diverse little brooks of fresh
water and one salt river that had store of oisters upon the branches of the
trees, and were very salt and well tasted. Al their oisters grow upon those
boughs and spraies, and not on the ground: the like is commonly seen in the
West Indies and else where. This tree is described by Andrewe Theuet in his
french Antartique, and the form figured in the book as a plant very
strange, and by Pliny in his XII. book of his natural history. But in this
Island, as also in Guiana there are very many of them.

At this point called Tierra de Brea or Piche there is that abundance of stone
pich, that all the ships of the world may be therewith Ioden from thence, and
we made trial of it in trimming our ships to be most excellent good, and
melts not with the sun as the pitch of Norway, and therefore for ships
trading the south parts very profitable. From thence we went to the mountain
foot called Annaperima, and so pasing the river Carone on which the Spanish
City was seated, we met with our ships at puerto de los Hispanioles or
Conquerabia.

This Island of Trinedado has the form of a sheephooke, and is but narrow, the
north part is very mounteynous, the soil is very excellent and will bear
sugar, ginger, or any other commodity that the Indies yield. It has store of
dear, wild porks, fruits, fish and foul: It has also for bread sufficient
Mais, Cassani, and of those roots and fruits which are common euerywhere in the
west Indies. It has diverse beasts, which the Indies have not the spainards
confessed that they found grains of gold in some of the rivers, but they having
a purpose to enter Guiana (the Magazin of all rich metetls) cared not to spend
time in the search thereof any farther.This Island is called by the people
thereof Catri, and in it are diverse nations: those about Parico are called
Iaio, those at Punto Carao are of the Arwacas, and between Carao and Curiadan
they are called Saluaios, between Carao and punto Gallera are the Nepoios, and
those about the Spanish City term themselves Carinepagotes: Of the rest of
the nations, and of other ports and rivers I leave to speak here, being
impertinent to my purpose, and mean to describe them as they are situate in
the particular plot and description of the Island, three parts whereof I
coasted with my barge, that I might the better describe it.

Meeting with the ships at puerto de los Hispanioles, we found at the landing
place a company of Spaniards who kept a guard at the descente, and they offering
a sign of peace I sent Captain Whiddon to speak with them, whom afterward
to my great grief I left buried in the said Island after my return from
Guiana, being a man most honest and valiant. The Spaniards seemed to be
desirous to trade with us, and to enter into terms of peace, more for doubt of
their own strength then for ought else, and in the end upon pledge, some of
them came abord: the same evening there stale also abord us in a final Canoa
two Indians, the one of them being a Casique or Lord of the people called
Cantyman, who had the year before been with Captain Whiddon, and was of his
acquaintance. By this Cantyman, we understood what strength the Spanyardes
had, how far it was to their City, and of Don Anthonio de Berreo the
governor, who was said to be slain in his second attempt of Guiana, but was
nor.

While we remained at puerto de los Hispanioles some Spanyardes came abord us
to buy lynnen of the company, and such other things as they wanted, and also
to view our ships and company, all which I entertained kindly and feasted
after our manner: by means whereof I learned of one and another as much of the
estate of Guiana as I could, or as they knew, for those poor soldiers having
been many years without wine, a few draughtes made them merry, in which mood
they vaunted of Guiana and of the riches thereof, and all what they knew of the
ways and passages, my self seeming to purpose nothing less then the
entrance or discovery thereof, but bred in them an opinion that I was bound
only for the relief of those english, which I had plainted in Virginia,
whereof the brute was come among them, which I had performed in my return if
extremity of weather had not forced me from the said coast.

I found occasions of staying in this place for two causes: the one was to be
revenged of Berreo, who the year before betrayed 8. of Captain Whiddons met,
and took them while he departed from them to seek the E. Bonauenture, which
arrived at Trinedado the day before from the East Indies: in whose absence
Barreo sent a Canoa abord the pinnace only with Indians and dogs inuiting the
company to go with them into the wods to kill a dear, who like wise men in the
absence of their Captain followed the Indians but were no sooner one
harquebush shot from the shore, but Berreos soldiers lying in ambush had them
al, notwithstanding that he had given his word to Captain Whiddon that they
should take water and wood safely: the other cause of my stay was, for that by
discourse with the Spaniards I daily learned more and more of Guiana, of the
rivers and passages, and of the enterprise of Berreo, by what means or fault
he failed, and how he meant to prosecute the same.

While we thus spent the time I was assured by another Casique of the north
side of the Island, that Berreo had sent to Marguerita and to Cumana for
soldiers meaning to have given me a Cassado at parting, if it had bin
possible. For although he had given order through all the Island that no Indian
should come aborde to trade with me upon pain of hanging and quartering,
(having executed two of them for the same which I afterward found) yet
every night there came some with most lamentable complaints of his cruelty,
how he had divided the Island and given to every soldier a part, that he made
the ancient Cassiqui which were Lords of the country to be their slaves, that
he kept them in chains, and dropped their naked bodies with burning bacon, and
such other torments, which I found afterward to be true: for in the city
after I entered the same, there were 5. of the Lords or little kings (which they
call Casiqui in the west Indies) in one chain almost dead of famine, and
wasted with torments: these are called in their own langauge Acarewana, and now
of late since English, French, and Spanish are come among them, they call
themselves Capitaines, because they perceive that the chiefest of every ship is
called by that name. Those five Capitaines in the chain were called
Wannawanare, Carroaori, Maquarima; Tarroopanama, and Aterima. So as both to be
revenged of the former wrong, as also considering that to enter Guiana by small
boats, to depart 400. or 500. miles from my ships, and to leave a garrison in my
back interressed in the same enterprise, who also daily expected supplies out
of Spain, I should have sauoured very much of the Ass: and therefore taking a
time of most advantage, I set upon the Corp duguard in the evening, and haueing
put them to the sword, sent Captain Calfield onwards with 60. soldiers, and my
self followed with 40. more and so took their new city which they called S.
Joseph, by break of day: they abode not any fight after a few shot, and al
being dismissed but only Berreo and his companion, I brought them with meabord,
and at the instance of the Indians, I set their now City of S. Joseph's on fire.

The same day arrived Captain George Gifford with your Lord ships ship, and
Captain Keymis whom I lost on the coast of Spain, with the Gallego, and in
them diverse Gent. and others, which to our little army was a great comfort and
supply.

We then hastened away toward our purposed discovery, and first I called all
the Captains of the Island together that were enemies to the Spaniards, for
there were some which Berreo had brought out of other countries, and planted
there to eat out and wast those that were natural of the place, and by my
Indian interpreter, which I carried out of England, I made them understand that
I was the servant of a Queen, who was the great Casique of the north, and a
virgin, and had more Casique under her then there were trees in that Island:
that she was an enemy to the Castelani in respect of their tyranny and
oppression, and that the delivered all such nations about her, as were by them
oppressed, and having freed all the coast of the northren world from their
feruitude had sent me to free them also, and with all to defend the country of
Guiana from their invasion and conquest. I showed them her majesty's picture
which they so admired and honored, as it had been easy to have brought them
Idolatrous thereof.

The like and a more large discourse I made to the rest of the nations both in
my passing to Guiana, and to those of the borders, so as in that part of the
world her majesty is very famous and admirable, whom they now call Ezrabeta
Cassipuna Aquerewana, which is as much as Elizabeth, the great princess or
greatest commander. This done we left puerto de los Hispanioles, and returned
to Curiapan, and having Berreo my prisonour I gathered from him as much of
Guiana as he knew.

This Berreo is a gent. well descended, and had long served the Spanish king
in Millain, Naples, the low Countries and else where, very valiant and
liberal, and a Gent. of great assurednes, and of a great heart: I vfed him
according to his estate and vvorth in all things I could, according to the
small means I had.

I sent Captain VVhiddon the year before to get what knowledge he could of
Guiana, and the end of my journey at this time was to discover and enter the
same, but my intelligence was far from truth, for the country is situate
above 600. English miles further from the sea, then I was made believe it had
been, which afterward understanding to be true by Berreo, I kept it from the
knowledge of my company, who else would never have been brought to attempt
the same: of which 600. miles I passed 400. leaving my ships so far from me
at ancor in the sea, which was more of desire to perform that discovery, then
of reason, especially having such poor and weak vessels to transport our
selves in; for in the bottom of an old Gallego which I caused to be fashioned
like a Galley, and in one barge, two wherries, and a ship bote of the Lions
whelpe, we carried too persons and their victuals for a month in the same,
being al driven to lie in the rain and weather, in the open air, in the
burning sun, and upon the hard bords, and to dress our meat, and to carry al
manner of furniture in them, wherewith they were so pestred and unsavory, that
what with victuals being most fish, with the weet clothes of so many men thrust
together and the heat of the sun, I will undertake there was never any
prison in England, that could be found more unsavory and loathsome, especially
to my self, who had for many years before been dieted and cared for in a
sort far more differing.

If Captain Preston had not been persuaded that he should have come too late
to Trinedado to have found us there (for the month was expired which I
promised to tarry for him there ere he could recover the coast of Spain) but
that it had pleased God he might have joined with us, and that we had entered
the country but some ten days sooner ere the rivers were ouerflow en, we had
adventured either to have gone to the great City of Manoa, or at least taken so
many of the other Cities and towns nearer at hand, as would have made a royal
return: but it pleased not God so much to favor me at this time: if it shall be
my lot to prosecute the same, I shall willingly spend my life therein, and if
any else shall be enabled thereunto, and conquer the same, I assure him thus
much, he shall perform more then ever was done in Mexico by Cortez, or in Peru
by Pacaro, whereof the one conquered the Empire of Mutezuma, the other of
Guascar, and Atabalipa, and whatsoever Prince shall possesseit, that Prince
shall be Lord of more Gold, and of a more beautiful Empire, and of more
Cities and people, then either the king of Spain, or the great Turk.

But because there may arise many doubts, and how this Empire of Guiana is
become so populous, and adorned with so many great Cities, Towns, Temples,
and treasures, I thought good to make it known, that the Emperor now reigning
is descended from those magnificent Princes of Peru of whose large territories,
of whose policies, conquests, edifices, and riches Pedro de Cieza, Francisco
Lopez, and others have written large discourses: for when Francisco Pacaro,
Diego Almagro and others conquered the said Empire of Peru, and had put to
death Atabalipa son to Cuaynacapa, which Atabalipa had formerly caused his
eldest brother Guascar to be slain, one of the younger sons of Guaynacapa
fled out of Peru, and took with him many thousands of those soldiers of the
Empire called Oreiones, and with those and many others which followed him, he
vanquished all that tract and valley of America which is situate between the
great river of Amazones, and Baraquan, otherwise called Orenoke and Maranion.

The Empire of Guiana is directly east from Peru toward the sea, and lies
under the Equinoctial line, and it has more abundance of Gold then any part
of Peru, and as many or more great Cities then ever Peru had when it flourished
most: it is governed by the same laws, and the Emperor and people observe the
same religion, and the same form and policies in government as was used in
Peru, not differing in any part: and as I have been assured by such of the
Spanyardes as have seen Manoa the imperial City of Guiana, which the
Spaniards call El Dorado, that for the greatness, for the riches, and for the
excellent seat, it far exceeds any of the world, at least of so much of
the world as is known to the Spanish nation:it is founded upon a lake of salt
water of 200.leagues long like unto mare caspin^. And if we compare it to that
of Peru, and but read the reiport of Francisco Lopez and others, it will seem
more then credible, and because we may judge of the one by the other, I thought
good to insert part of the 120, chapter of Lopez in his general history of
the Indies, wherein he discribeth the court and magnificence of Guynacapa,
auncestor to the Emperor of Guiana, whose very words are these. Todo el
seruicio de su casa, mesa, y cozina era de oro, y de plata, y quando menos de
plata, y cobre per mas rezio. Tenia ensurecamara estatuas huecas de oro que
parecian gigantes, y las figuras alpropio, y tamano de quantos animales, aues,
arboles, y yeruas produze la tierra, y de quantos pieces cria la mary aguas de
sus reynos. Tenia assi mesmo sogas, costales, celtas, y troxes de oro y plata,
rimeros de palos de oro, que pareciessen lenna raiada para quemar. En fin no
auia cosa en su tierra, que no la tuuiesse de oro contrahecha: y aun dizen, que
tenian los Ingas un vergal en vna Islacerca de la Puna, donde se yuan a hol
gar, quando querian mar, que tenia la ortaliza, las flores, yarboles de oro y
plata, inuencion y grandeza hasta entonces nunca vista. Allende de todo esto
tenia infinitissmia cantidad de plata, y oro por labrar en el Cuzco, que se
perdio po la muerte de Guascar, ca los Indios lo escondieron, viendo que los
espanioles se lo tomauan, y embiauan a Espania. That is, All the vessels of his
house, table and kitchen were of Gould and Silver, and the meanest of silver
and copper for strength and hardness of metal. He had in his wardroppe hollow
statues of gold which seemed giants, and the figures in proportion and bigness
of all the beasts, birds, trees and herbs, that the earth brings forth:
and of all the fishes that the sea or waters of his kingdom breeds. He had
also ropes, budgets, chestes and troughs of gold and silver, heaps of billets
of gold that seemed wood, marked out to burn. Finally there was nothing in
his country, whereof he had not the counterfeat in gold: Yea and they say, The
Ingas had a garden of pleasure in an Island near Puna, where they went to
recreate themselves, when they would take the air of the sea, which had all
kind of garden herbs, flowers and trees of Gold and Silver, an invention, and
magnificence til then never seen. Besides all this, he had an infinite
quantity of silver and gold unwrought in Cuzco which was lost by the death of
Guascar, for the Indians hid it, seeing that the Spaniards took it, and sent
it into Spain.

And in the 117. Chapter Francisco Picarro caused the Goulde, and Silver of
Atabalipa to be weyed, after he had taken it, which Lopez sets down in
these words following.

Hallaron cinquenta y dos mill marcos de buena plata, y vu millon y trezientos
y veinte y seys mil, y quinientos pesos de oro, which is: They found fifty and
two thousand marks of good silver, and one million, and three hundred twenty
and six thousand and five hundred pesoes of gold.

Now although these reports may seem strange, yet if we consider the many
millions which are daily brought out of Peru into spain, we may easily
believe the same, for we find that by the abundant treasure of that country,
the Spanish King vexes all the Princes of Europe, and is become in a few
years from a poor king of Castile the greatest monarke of this part of the
world, and likely every day to increase, if other Princes forsloe the good
occasions offered, and suffer him to add this Empire to the rest, which by
far exceeds all the rest: if his gold now endanger us, he will then be
irresistable. Such of the Spanyardes as afterward endeavored the conquest
thereof (whereof there have been many as shall be declared hereafter)
thought that this Inga, (of who me this Emperor now living is descended) took
his way by the river Amazones, by that branch which is callen Papamene, for by
that way followed Oreliano (by the commandment of the Marquis Pacarro in the
year 1542.) whose name the river also bears this day, which is also by
others called Maragnon, although Andrew Theuet does affirm that between Maragnon
and Amazones there are 120. leagues: but sure it is that those rivers have one
head and beginning, and the Maragnon which Theuet describes is but a branch
of Amazones, or Oreliano, of which I will speak more in another place. It was
also attempted by Diego Ordace, but whether before Oreliano or after I know
not: but it is now little less then 70. years since that Ordace a knight of
the order of Saint Iago attempted the same: and it was in the year 1542. that
Oreliano discovered the river of Amazones; but the first that euersawe Manoa
was Johannes Martines master of the munition to Ordace, At a port called
Morequito in Guiana there lies at this day a great ancor of Ordaces ship,
and this port is some 300. miles within the land, upon the great river of
Orenoque.

I rested at this port sour days: twenty days after I left the ships at
Curiapan. The relation of this Martines (who was the first that discovered
Manoa (his success and end is to be seen in the Chauncery of Saint Iuan de
puerto rico, whereof Berreo had a copy, which appeared to be the greatest
incoragement as well to Berreo as to others that formerly attemped the
discovery and conquest, Oreliano after he failed of the discovery of Guiana, by
the said river of Amazones, passed into Spain, and there obtained a patten of
the king for the invasion and conquest, but died by sea about the Islands, and
his fleet severed by tempest, the action for that time proceeded not. Diego
Ordace followed the enterprise, and departed Spain with 600. soldiers and 30.
horse, who ariuing on the coast of Guiana, was slain in a mutiny with the most
part of such as favored him, as also of the rebellious part, in so much as his
ships perished, and few or none returned, neither was it certainly known what
became of the said Ordace, until Berreo found the ancor of his ship in the
river of Orenoque; but it was supposed, and so it is written by Lopez that he
perished on the seas, and of other writers diuerfly conceived and reported. And
hereof it came that Martines entered so far within the Land and arrived at
that City of Inga the Emperor, for it chanced that while Ordace with his army
rested at the port of Morequito (who was either the first or second that
attempted Guiana,) by some negligence, the whole store of powder provided for the
service, was set on fire, and Martines having the chief charg was condemned by
the general Ordace to be executed forthwith: Martines being much favored by
the soldiers had all the mean possible procured for his life, but it could not
be obtained in other sort then this. That he should be set into a Canoa alone
without any victual, only with his arms, and so turned loose into the great
river: but it pleased God that the Canoa was carried down the stream, and that
certain of the Guianians met it the same evening, and having not at any time
seen any Christian, nor any man of that color, the carried Martynes into the
land to be wondered at, and so from town to town, until he came to the great
City of Manoa, the seat and residence of Inga the Emperor. The Emperor after
he had beheld him, knew him to be a Christian (for it was not long before that
his brethren Guascar and Atabalipa were vanquished by the Spaniards in Peru)
and caused him to be lodged in his palace, and well entertained: he lived 7.
months in Manoa, but not suffered to wander into the country any where: he
was also brought thither all the way blindfield, led by the Indians until he
came to the entrance of Manoa it self, and was 14. or 15. days in the
passage: he auowed at his death that he entered the City at Noon, and then they
uncovered his face, and that he traveled all that day til night through the
City, and the next day from sun rising to sun setting, ere he came to the
palace of Inga. After that Martynes had lived 7 months in Manoa, and began to
understand the language of the country, Inga asked him whether he desired to
return into his own country, or would wilingly abide with him: but Martynes
not desirous to stay, abtained the favor of Inga to depart, with whom he sent
diverse Guianians to conduct him to the river of Orenoque al laden with as much
gold as they could carry, which he gave to Martynes at his departure: but when
he was arrived near the rivers side, the borderers which are called
Orenoqueponi robbed him and his Guianians of all the treasure (the borderers
being at that time at wars which Inga, had not conquered) save only of two
great bottels of gords, which were filled with beads of gold curiously
wrought, which those Orenoqueponi thought had bin no other thing then his drink
or meat or grain for food with which Martynes had liberty to pass, and so in
Canoas he fell down from the river of Orenoque to Trinedado, and from thence to
Marguerita, and so to Saint Iuan de puerto rico, where remaining a long time
for passage into Spain he died. In the time of his extreme sickness, and
when he was without hope of life, receiving the Sacrament at the hands of his
Confessor, he delivered these things, with the relation of his travels, and
also called for his Culabaza or gords of the gold beads which he gave to the
Church and friars to be praid for. This Martynes was he that christened the
city of Manoa, by the name of El Dorado, and as Berreo informed me upon this
occasion. Those Guianians and also the borderers, and all other in that tract
which I have seen are marvelous great drunkards, in which vice I think no
nation can compare with them and at the times of their solemn feasts when the
Emperor carowseth with his Captayns, tributaries, and governors, the manner is
thus. All those that pledge him are first stripped naked, and their bodies
anointed al over with a kind of white Balsamum: by them called Curcai of which
there is great plenty and yet very dear amongst them, and it is of all other
the most precious, whereof we have had good experience: when they are anointed
all over, certain servants of the Emperor having prepared gold made into fine
powder blow it through holow canesvpo^ their naked bodies, until they be al
shining from the foot to the head, and in this sort they sit drinking by
twenties and hundreds and continue in drunkenness sometimes six or seven days
together: the same is also confirmed by a letter written into Spain which was
intercepted, which master Robert Dudley told me he had seen. Upon this sight,
and for the abundance of Gold which he saw in the city, the Images of gold in
their Temples, the plates armors and shields of gold which they use in the
wars, he called it El Dorado. After Oreliano who was employed by Pacaro
afterward Marquis Pacaro conqueror and governor of Peru, and the death of
Ordace and Martynes, one Pedro de Osua, a knight of Navarre attempted Guiana,
taking his way from Peru, and built his brigandines upon a river called Oia,
which rises to the southward of Quinto, and is very great: this river falls
into Amazones, by which Osua with his companies descended, and came out of that
Province which is called Mutylones: and it seems to me that this Empire is
reserved for her Majesty and the English nation, by reason of the hard
success which all these and other Spaniards found in attempting the same,
whereof I will speak briefly, though impertinent in some sort to my purpose.
This Pedro de Osua had among his troops a Bescayn called Agiri, a man meanly
borne, and bare no other office than a Surgeant or Alferez: but after certain
months, when the soldiers were grieved with travels and consumed with famine,
and that no entrance could be found by the branches or body of Amazones, this
Agiri raised a muteny, of which he made himself the head, and so prevailed as
he put Osua to the sword and all his followers, taking on him the whole charge
and commandment, with a purpose not only to make himself Emperor of
Guiana, but also of Peru and of all that side of the West Indies: he had of his
party seven hundred soldiers, and of those many promised to draw in other
captains and companies to deliver up towns and sorts in Peru, but neither
finding by the said river any passage into Guiana, nor any possibility to
return toward Peru by the same Amazones, by reason that the descent of the
river made so great a current, he was enforced to desemboque at the mouth of
the said Amazones, which cannot be less than a thousand leagues from the place
where they imbarqued: from thence he coasted the land till he arrived at
Marguerita to the North of Mompatar, which is at this day called puerto de
Tyranno, for that he there slew Don Iuan de villa Andreda, governor of
Marguerita who was father to Don Iuan Sermiento governor of Marguerita when
Sir John Burgh landed there, and attempted the Island. Agiri put to the sword
all other in the Island that refused to be of his party, and took with him
certane Cemerones, and other desperate companions: From thence he went to
Cumana, and there flew the Governor, and dealt in all as at Marguerita: he
spoiled all the coast of Caracas, and the province of Vesuello, and of Rio de
hache, and as I remember it was the same year that Sir John Hawkins failed to
Saint Iuan de Lua in the Jesus of Lubeck, for himself told me that he met with
such a one upon the coast that rebelled, and had failed down all the river of
Amazones. Agiri from thence landed about Sancta Marta, and sacked it also,
putting to death so many as refused to be his followers, purposing to invade
Nueuo reygno de Granada, and to sack Pampelone, Merida, Lagrita, Tunia, and the
rest of the cities of Nueuo reygno, and from thence again to enter Peru: but
in a fight in the said Nueuo reygno he was overthrown, and finding no way to
escape, he first put to the sword his own children, foretelling them that they
should not live to be defamed or opbraid by the Spaniards after his death, who
would have termed them the children of a Traitor or Tyrant, and that sithence
he could not make them Princes, he would yet deliver them from shame and
reproach: These were the ends and tragedies of Oreliano, Ordace, Osua, Martines,
and Agiri.

After these followed Ieronimo Ortal de Saragosa with 130. soldiers, who
failing his entrance by sea was cast with the current on the coast of Paria,
and peopled about S. Miguell de Neueri. It was then attempted by Don Pedro de
Silua a Portugues of the family of Rigomes de Sylua, and by the favor which
Rigomes had with the king, he was set out, but he also shot wide of the mark,
for being departed from Spain with his fleet, he entered by Maragnon and
Amazones, whereby the nations of the river, and by the Amazones he was utterly
overthrown, and himself and all his army defeated, only seven escaped, and
of those but two returned.

After him came Pedro Harnandez de Serpa, and landed at Camana in the West
Indies, taking his journey by land toward Orenoque; which may be some 120.
leagues, but ere he came to the boarders of the said river, he was set upon by
a nation of Indians called Wikiri, and overthrown in sort, that of 300.
soldiers, horsemen, many Indians, and Negros, there returned but 18: others
affirm that he was defeated in the very entrance of Guiana, at the first
civil town of the Empire called Macureguarai. Captain Preston in taking S
Iago de Leon (which was by him and his companies very resolutly performed,
being a great town, and far within the land) held a gentleman prisoner who
died in his ship, that was one of the company of Hernandes de Serpa, and faued
among those that escaped, who witnessed what opinion is held among the
Spaniards thereabouts of the great riches of Guiana, and El dorado the city
of Inga. Another Spaniard was brought aboard me by Captain Preston, who told
me in the hearing of himself and diverse other gentlemen, that he met with
Berreos Campmaister at Carasas, when he came from the borders of Guiana, and
that he saw with him forty of most pure plates of goulde curiously wrought,
and swords of Guiana decked and inlaid with gold, feathers garnished with
gold, and diverse rarities which he carried to the Spanish king.

After Hernandez de Serpa it was undertaken by the Adelantado, Don Gonzales
Cemenes de Casada, who was one of the chiefest in the conquest of Nueuo reigno,
whose daughter and heir Don Anthonio de Berreo married: Gonzales sought the
passage also by the river called Papamene, which rises by Quito in Peru, and
runs southeast 100. leagues, and then falls into Amazones, but he also
failing the entrance, returned with the loss of much labor and cost: I took
one captain George a Spaniard that followed Gonzales in this enterprise.
Gonzales gave his daughter to Berreo taking his oath and honor, to follow the
enterprise to the last of his substance and life, who since as he has sworn
to me has spent 300000. ducates in the same, and yet never could enter so far
into the land as my self with that poor troop or rather a handful of men,
being in all about 100 gentlemen, soldiers, rowers, bote-keepers, boys, and of
all sorts: neither could any of the forpassed undertakers, nor Berreo himself
discover the country, till now lately by conference with an ancient king
called Carapana he got the true light thereof: for Berreo came about 1500.
miles, ere he understood ought, or could find any passage or entrance into
any part thereof, yet he had experience of all these forenamed, and diverse
others, and was persuaded of their errors and mistakings. Berreo sought it by
the river Cassamar, which falls into a great river called Pato, Pato falls
into Meta, and Meta into Baraquan, which is also called Orenoque.

He took his journey from Nueuo reygno de granada where he dwelt, having the
inheritance of Gonzales Cemenes in those parts: he was followed with 700.
horse, he drove with him 1000. head of cattle, he had also many women,
Indians, and slaves. How all these rivers cross and encounter, how the country
lies and is bordred, the passage of Cemenes, and Berreo, mine own discovery,
and the way that I entered, with all the rest of the nations and rivers, your
Lordship shall receive in a large Chart or Map, which I have not yet finished,
and which I shall most humbly pray your Lo. to secret, and not to suffer it to
pass your own hands, for by a draught thereof all may be prevented by other
nations. For I know it is this very year sought by the French, although by the
way that they now take, I fear it not much. It was also told me ere I
departed England, that Villiers the Admiral was in preparation for the
planting of Amazones, to which river the French have made diverse voyages, and
returned much gold and other rarities, I spoke with a captain of a French ship
that came from thence, his ship riding in Falmuth, the same year that my ships
came first from Virginia.

There was another this year in Helford that also came from thence, and had
been 14 months at an ancor in Amazones, which were both very rich. Although as
I am persuaded; Guiana cannot be entered that way, yet no doubt the trade of
gold from thence passes by branches of rivers into the river of Amazones and
so it does on every hand far from the country it self, for those Indians of
Trinedado have plates of gold from Guiana, and those Canibals of Dominica which
dwell in the Islands by which our ships pass yearly to the West Indies, also
the Indians of Paria, those Indians called Tucaris, Chochi, Apotomios,
Cumanagotos, and all those other nations inhabiting nere about the mountains
that run from Paria through the Province of Vensuello, and in Maracapana, and
the Canibals of Guanipa, the Indians called Assawai, Coaca, Aiai, and the rest
(all which shall be described in my description as they are fituate) have
plates of gold of Guiana. And upon the river of Amazones Theuet writes that
the people wear Croissants of gold, for of that form the Guianinians most
commonly make the^: So as from Dominica to Amazones which is above 250.
leagues, all the chief Indians in all parts wear of those plates of Guiana.
Undoubtedly those that trade Amazones return much gold, which (asis
aforesaid) comes by trade from Guiana, by some branch of a river that
falls from the country into Amazones, and either it is by the river which
passes by the nations called Tisnados, or by Carepuna. I made inquiry amongst
the most ancient and best traueled of the Orenoqueponi, and I had knowledge of
all the rivers between Orenoque and Amazones, and was very desirous to
understand the truth of those warlike women, because of some it is believed,
of others not: And though I digress from my purpose, yet I will set down that
has been delivered me for truth of those women, and I spoke with a Casique or
Lord of people that told me he had been in the river, and beyond it also. The
nations of these women are on the south side of the river in the Priuinces of
Topago, and their chiefest strengths, and retracts are in the Islands situate
on the south side of the entrance, some 60, leagues within the mouth of the
said river. The memories of the like women are very ancient as well in Africa
as in Asia: In Africa those that had Medusa for Queen: others in Scithia near
the rivers of Tanais and Thermadon: we find also that Lampedo and Marthesia
were Queens of the Amazones: in many histories they are verified to have been,
and in diverse ages and Provinces: But they which are not far from Guiana do
accompany with men but once in a year, and for the time of one month, which
I gather by their relation to be in April. And that time all Kings of the
borders assemble, and Queens of the Amazones, and after the Queens have
chosen, the rest cast lots for their Valentines. This one month, they feast,
dance, and drink of their wines in abundance, and the Moon being done, they
all depart to their own Provinces. If they conceive, and be delivered of a
son, they return him to the father, if of a daughter they nourish it, and
retain it, and as many as have daughters send unto the begetters a Present,
all being desirous to increase their own fex and kind, but that they cut of
the right dug of the breast I do not find to be true. It was farther told me,
that if in these warsthey took any prisoners that they used to accompany with
those also at what time soever, but in the end for certain they put them to
death: for they are said to be very cruel and bloodthirsty, especially to such
as offer to invade their territories. These Amazones have likewise great store
of these plates of gold, which they recover by exchange chiefly for a kind of
green stones, which the Spaniards call Piedras Hijadas, and we use for spleen
stones, and for the disease of the stone we also esteem them: of these I saw
diverse in Guiana, and commonly every king or Casique has one, which their
wives for the most part wear, and they esteem them as great jewels.

But to return to the enterprise of Berreo, who (as I have said) departed from
Nueuo reygno with 700. horse besides the provisions above rehearsed; he
descended by the river called Cassanar, which rises in Nueno reygno out of the
mountains by the city of Tuuia, from which mountain also springs Pato,
both which fall into the great river of Meta, and Meta rises from a mountain
joining to Pampelone in the same Nueuo reygno de Granada: these as also
Guaiare, which issues out of the mountains by Timana fall all into Baraquan,
and are but of his heads, for at their coming together they loose their names,
and Baraquan farther down is also rebaptized by the name of Orenoque. On the
other side of the city and hills of Timana rises rio grande, which falls
into the sea by Sancta Marta. By Cassonar first, and so into Meta Berreo
passed, keeping his horsemen on the banks, where the country served them for
to march, and where otherwise he was driven to embarque them in boats which he
builded for the purpose, and so came with the current down the river of Meta,
and so into Baraquan. After he entered that great and mighty river, he began
daily to loose of his companies both men and horse, for it is in many places
violently swift, and has forcible eddies, many sands, and diverse Islands
sharp pointed with rocks: But after one whole year, iourneying for the most
part by river, and the rest by land he grew daily to fewer numbers, for both by
sickness, and by encountering with the people of those regions, through which he
traveled, his companies were much wasted, especially by diverse incounters with
the Amapaiens: And in all this time he never could learn of any passage into
Guiana, nor any news or same thereof, until he came to a farther border of
the said Amapaia, eight days journey from the river Caroli, which was the
farthest river that he entered. Among those of Amapaia, Guiana was famous, but
few of these people accosted Berreo, or would trade with him the first three
months of the six which he foiourned there. This Amapaia is also marvelous
rich in gold (as both Berreo confessed and those of Guiana with whom I had
most conference) and is situate upon Orenoke also. In his country Berreo lost
60. of his best soldiers, and most of all his horse that remained in his former
years travel: but in the end after diverse encounters with those nations they
grew to peace, and they presented Berreo with 10. Images of fine gold among
diverse other plates and Croissants, which as he swear to me and diverse other
gentlemen were so curiously wrought, as he had not seen the like either in
Italy, Spain, or the Low Countries: and he was resolved that when they came
to the hands of the Spanish king, to whom he had sent them by his Campmaster,
they would appear very admirable, especially being wrought by such a nation as
had no Iron instruments at all, nor any of those helps which our gold smiths
have to work with all. The particular name of the people in Amapaia which gave
him these pieces are called Anebas, and the river of Orenoque at that place is
above 12. English miles broad, which may be from his out fall into the sea 700.
or 800. miles.

This Province of Amapaia is a very low and a marish ground near the river,
and by reason of the red water which issues out in small branches through the
fenny and boggie ground there breed diverse poysonfull worms and serpents, and
the Spaniards not suspecting; nor in any fort foreknowing the danger were
infected with a grievous kind of flux by drinking thereof, and even the very
horses poisoned therewith: In so much as at the end of the six months, that
they abode there, of all their troops, there were not left above 120. soldiers,
and neither horse nor cattle. For Berreo hoped to have found Guiana by 1000.
miles nearer than it fell out to be in the end, by means whereof they sustained
much want and much hunger, oppressed with grievous diseases, and all the
miseries that could be imagined. I demanded of those in Guiana that had
traveled Amapaia how they lived with that tawny or red water when they
traveled thither, and they told me that after the Sun was near the middle of
the sky, they used to fill their pots and pitchers with that water, but either
before that time, or toward the setting of the Sun it was dangerous to drink
of, and in the night strong poison. I learned also of diverse other rivers of
that nature among them which were also (while the Sun was in the Meridian) very
safe to drink, and in the morning, evening, and night, wonderful dangerous
and infectiue. From this prouiuce Berreo hasted away as foone as the Spring and
beginning of Summer appeered, and sought his entrance on the borders of
Orenoque on the south side, but there ran a ledge of so high and impassable
mountains as he was not able by any means to march over the^, continuing from
the east sea into which Orenoque falls, even to Quito in Peru: neither had he
means to carry victual or munition over those craggie, high, and fast hills,
being all woody, and those so thick and spiny, and so full of prickles,
thorns, and briers, as it is impossible to creep through them: he had also
neither friendship among the people, nor any interpreter to persuade or treat
with them, and more, to his disadvantage, the Cassiqui and kings of Amapaia had
given knowledge of his purpose to the Guianians, and that he sought to sack
and conquer the Empire, for the hope of their so great abundance and
quantities of gold he passed by the mouths of many great rivers, which fell
into Orenoque both from the north and south, which I forbear to name for
tediousnes, and because they are more pleasing in describing than reading.

Ilstreo affirmed that there fell an hundred rivers into Orenoque from the
north and south, whereof the left was as big as Ria grande, that passed between
Popayan, and Nueuo reyno de granada ( Ria grande being esteemed one of the
renowned rivers in all the west Indies, and numbered among the great rivers of
the world:) But he knew not the names of any of these, but Caroli only, neither
from what nations they descended, neither to what Provinces they led, for he
had no means to discourse with the inhibatants at any time: neither was he
curious in these things, being utterly unlearned, and not knowing the east from
the west. But of all these I got some knowlegde, and of many more, partly by
mine own travel, and the rest by conference; of fom one I learned one of others
the rest, having with me an Indian that spoke many languages, and that of
Guiana naturally. I sought out all the aged men, and such as were greatest
trauelers, and by the one and the other I came to understand the situations,
the rivers, the kingdoms from the east sea to the borders of Peru, and from
Orenoque southward as far as Amazones or Maragnon, and the religions of Maria
Tamball, and of all the kings of Provinces and captains of towns and villages,
how they stood in terms of peace or war, and which were friends or enemies the
one with the other, without which there can be neither entrance nor conquest in
those parts, nor else where: For by the dissension between Guascar and
Atabalipa, Pacaro conquered Peru, and by the hatred that the Tra(...)calliani
bare to Mutezuma, Cortez was victorious over Mexico; without which both the one
and the other had failed of their enterprise, and of the great honor and
riches, which they attained unto.

Now Berreo began to grow into despair, and looked for no other success than
his predecessor in this enterprise, until such time as he arrived at the
Province of Emeria toward the east sea and mouth of the river, where he found
a nation of people very favorable, and the country full of all manner of
victual. The king of this land is called Carapana, a man very wise, subtle,
and of great experience, being little less than 100. years old: In his youth
he was sent by his father into the Island of Trinedado, by reason of civil
war among themselves, and was bred at a village, in that Island, called
Parico: at that place in his youth he had seen many Christians both French and
Spanish, and went diverse times with the Indians of Trinedado to Marguerita and
Cumana in the west Indies, (for both those places have ever been relieved with
victual from Trinedado) by reason whereof he grew of more understanding, and
noted the difference of the nations, comparing the strength and arms of his
country with those of the Christians, and ever after temporized so, as
whosoever else did amiss, or was wasted by contention, Carapana kept himself
and his country in quiet and plenty: he also held peace with Caribas or
Canibals his neighbor, and had free trade with all nations whosoever else had
war.

Berreo soiourned and rested his weak troop in the town of Carapana six
weeks, and from him learned the way and passage to Guiana, and the riches and
magnificence thereof: but being then utterly disable to proceed, he determined
to try his fortune another year, when he had renewed his provisions, and
regathered more force, which he hoped for as well out of Spain, as from Nueuo
reyno, where he had left his son Don Anthonio Xemenes to second him upon the
first notice given of his entrance, and so for the present imbarqued himself
in Canoas, and by the branches of Orenoque arrived at Trinedado, having from
Carapana sufficient Pilots to conduct him. From Trinedado he coasted Paria, and
so recovered Marguerita: and having made relation to Don Iuan Sermiento the
governor of his proceeding, and persuaded him of the riches of Guiana, he
obtained from thence 50. soldiers, promising presently to return to Carapana,
and so into Guiana. But Berreo meant nothing less at that time, for he wanted
many provisions necessary for such an enterprise, and therefore departed from
Marguerita, seated himself in Trinedado, and from thence sent his Campmaister,
and his Sargeant mayor back to the borders to discover the nearest passage,
into the Empire, as also to treat with the borderers, and to draw them to his
party and love, without which, he knew he could neither pass safely, nor in
any sort be relieved with victual or ought else. Carapana directed this
company to a king called Morequito, assuring them that no man could deliver
so much of Guiana, as Morequito could, and that his dwelling was but five days
journey from Macureguarai, the first civil town of Guiana.

Now your Lordship shall understand that this Morequito, one of the greatest
Lords or Kings of the borders of Guiana, had two or three years before been
at Cumana and at Marguerita, in the west Indies, with great store of plates of
gold, which he carried to exchange for such other things as he wanted in his
own country, and was daily feasted, and presented by the governors of those
places, and held amongst them some two months, in which time one Vides
governor of Cumana wan him to be his conductor into Guiana, being allured by
those Croissants and Images of gold which he brought with him to trade, as also
by the ancient fame and magnificence of El Dorado: whereupon Vides sent into
Spain for a Patent to discover and conquer Guiana, not knowing of the
precedence of Berreos patent, which as Berreo affirms was signed before that
of Vides: so as when Vides understood of Berreo, and that he had made entrance
into that territory, and foregone his desire and hope, it was verily thought
that Vides practiced with Morequito hinder and disturb Berreo in all he could
and not to suffer him to enter through his Seignorie, nor any of his companies,
neither to victual, nor guide them in any sort; for Vides gouenor of Camana,
and Berreo were become mortal enemies, as well for that Berreo had gotten
Trinedado into his Patent with Guiana, as also in that he was by Berreo
prevented in the journey of Guiana it self: howsoever it was I know not, but
Morequito for a time dissembled his disposition, suffered Spaniards, and a
Friar (which Berreo had sent to discover Manoa) to travel through his country,
gave them a guide for Macureguaray the first town of civil and apparrelled
people, from whence they had other guides to bring them to Manoa the great
city of Inga: and being furnished with those things, which they had learned
of Carapana, were of most price in Guiana, went onward, and in eleven days
arrived at Manoa, as Berreo affirms for certain: although I could not be
assured thereof by the Lord which now governs the Province of Morequito, for
he told me that they got all the gold they had, in other towns on this side
Manoa, there being many very great and rich, and (as he said) built like the
towns of Christians, with many rooms.

When these ten Spaniards were returned, and ready to put out of the border of
Arromaia, the people of Morequito set upon them, and flew them all but one that
swam the river, and took from them to the value of 40000. pesoes of gold, and
as it is written in the story of Job, one only lived to bring the news to
Berreo, that both his nine soldiers and holy father were benighted in the
said Province. I my self spoke with the Captains of Morequito that flewe
them, and was at the place where it was executed. Berreo enraged heerewithall
sent all the strength he could make into Arromaia, to be revenged of him, his
people, and country: but Morequito suspecting the fame fled over Orenoque, and
through the territories of the Saima, and Wikiri, recovered Cumana, where he
thought himself every safe with Vides the governor: But Berreo sending for him
in the kings name, and his messengers finding him in the house of one Fashardo
on the sudden ere he was suspected, so as he could not then be coueyed away,
Vides durst not deny him, as well to avoid the suspicion of the practice, as
also for that an holy father was slain by him and his people, Morequito offered
Fashardo the weight of three quintals in gold, to let him escape, but the poor
Guianian betraide of all sides was delivered to the Campmaster of Berreo, and
was presently executed.

After the death of this Morequito, the soldiers of Berreo spoiled his
territory, and took diverse prisoners, among others they took the uncle of
Morequito called Toptawari, who is now king of Arromaia) whose son I brought
with me into England) and is a man of great understanding and policy: he is
above 100. years old, and yet of a very able body: the Spanyardes led him in
a chain 17. days, and made him their guide from place to place between his
country and Emeria the province of Carapana aforesaid, and was at last
redeemed for 100. plates of gold, and diverse stones called Piedras Hijadas, or
Spleen stones. Now Berreo for executing of Morequito and other cruelties,
spoils, and slaughters done in Arromaia has lost the love of the
Orenoqueponi, and of all the borderers, and dare not send any of his soldiers
any farther into the land than to Carapana which he called the port of Guiana:
but from thence by the help of Carapana he had trade farther into the country,
and always appointed 10, Spaniardes to reside in Carapanas town, by whose
favor and by being conducted by his people, those ten searched the country
thereabouts as well for mines, as for other trades and commodities.

They also have gotten a nephew of Morequito, whom they have Christened and
named Don Iuan, of whom they have great hope, endeavoring by all means to
establish him in the said province. Amang many other trades those Spaniards
used Cansas to pass to the rivers of Barema, Pawroma, and Dissequebe, which
are on the south side of the mouth of Orenoque, and the re buie women and
children from the Canibals, which are of that barbarous nature, as they will
for 3. or 4. hatchers sell the sons and daughters of their own brethren and
sisters, and for somewhat, more even their own daughters here of the Spaniards
make great profit, for buying a maid of 12. or 13. years for three or four
hatchets, they sell them again at Marguerita in the west Indies for 50. and
100. pesoes which is so many crowns.

The master of my ship Io. Douglas took one of the Canoas which came laden
from thence with people to be sold, and the most of them escaped, yet of those
he brought, there was one as well favored, and as well shaped as ever I saw
any in England, and afterward I saw many of them, which but for their tawnie
color may be compared to any of Europe. They also trade in those rivers for
bread of Cassaui, of which they buy an hundred pound weight for a knife, and
sell it at Marguerita for ten pesoes. They also recover great store of cotton,
brasill wood, and those beds which they call Hamacas or brasill beds, wherein
in hot countries all the Spaniards use to lie commonly, and in no other,
neither did we ourselves while we were there: By means of which trades, for
ransom of diverse of the Guianians, and for exchange of hatchets and knives,
Berreo recovered some store of gold plates, eagles of gold and Images of men
and diverse birds, and dispatched his Campmaster for Spain with all that he had
gathered, therewith to leuy soldiers, and by the show thereof to draw others to
the love of the enterprise: and having sent diverse Images as well of men as
beasts, birds and fishes so curiously wrought in gold, doubted not but to
persuade the king to yield to him some further help, especially for that this
land has never been sacked, the mines never wrought, and in the Indies their
works were well spent, and the gold drawn out with great labor and charge: he
also dispacrhed messengers to his son in Nueuo reyno to leuy all the forces
he could, and to come down the river Orenoque to Emeria, the province of
Carapana, to meet him: he had also sent to Saint Iago de Leon on the coast of
the Caracas to buy horses and mules.

After I had thus learned of his proceedings past and purposed: I told him that
I had resolved to see Guiana, and that it was the end of my journey, and the
cause of my coming to Trinedado, as it was indeed, (and for that purpose I
sent Ia. Whiddon the year before to get intelligence, with whom Berreo
himself had speech at that time, and remembered how inquisitiue Ia. Whiddon was
of his proceedings, and of the country of Guiana,) Berreo was stricken into a
great melancho lie and sadness and used all the arguments he could to diswade
me, and also assured the gentlemen of my company that it would be labor lost,
and that they should suffer many miseries if they proceeded: And first he
delivered that I could not enter any of the rivers with any bark or pinace,
nor hardly with any ships bore, it was so low, sandy, and full of flats, and
that his companies were daily grounded in their Cansas which drew but twelve
inches water: he further said that none of the country would come to speak
with us, but would all fly, and if we followed them to their dwellings, they
would burn their own towns, and besides that the way was long, the winter at
hand, and that the rivers beginning once to swel, it was impossible to stem the
current, and that we could not in those small bots by any means carry victual
for half the time, and that (which indeed most discoraged my company) the
Kings and Lords of all the borders and of Guiana had decreed, that none of them
should trade with any Christians for gold, because the same would be their own
overthrow, and that for the love of gold the Christians meant to conquer and
dispossess them of all together.

Many and the most of these I found to be true, but yet I resolving to make
trial of all whatsoever happened directed Captain George Gifford my
Vice Admiral to take the Lions whelpe, and Captain Calfield his bark to
turn to the eastward, against the mouth of a river called Capuri, whose
entrance I had before sent Captain Whiddon and Io. Douglas the master, to
discover, who found some nine foot water or better upon the flood, and five
at low water, to whom I had given instructions that they should ancor at the
edge of the should, and upon the best of the floode to thrust over, which should
John Douglas boyde and bekonned for them before: but they labored in vain, for
neither could they turn it up altogether so far to the east, neither did the
flood continue so long, but the water fell ere they could have passed the
sands, as we after found by a second experience: so as now we must either
give over our enterprise, or leaving our ships at adventure 400. mile behind
us, to run up in our ships botes, one barge, and two where ries, but being
doubtful how to carry victuals for so long a time in such bables, or any
strength of men, especially for that Berreo assured us that his son must be
by that time come down with many soldiers, I sent away one King master of the
Lions whelpe with his ship bote to try an other branch of a river in the
bottom of the bay of Guanipa, which was called Amana, to prove if there were
water to be found for either of the small ships to enter: But when he came to
the mouth of Amana, he found it as the rest, but stayed not to discover it
thoroughly, because he was assured by an Indian his guide that the Canibales of
Guanipa would assail them with many Canoas, and that they shot poisonned
arrows, so as if he hasted not back they should all be lost.

In the mean time fearing the worst I caused all the Carpenters we had to cut
down a Gallego bote, which we meant to cast off, and to fit her with banks to
row on, and in all things to prepare her the best they could, so as she might
be brought to draw but five foot, for so much we had on the bar of Capuri at
low water. And doubting of Kings return I sent Io. Douglas again in my long
barge, as well to relieve him as also to make a perfect search in the bottom of
that baie. For it has been held for infallable that whatsoever ship or bote
shall fall therein, can never dissemboque again, by reason of the violent
current which sets into the said bay, as also for that the rbize and
easterly wind blows directly into the same, of which opinion I have heard
John Hampton of Plimmouth one of the greatest experience of England, and diverse
others besides that have traded Trinedado.

I sent with John Douglas and old Cassique of Trinedado for a Pilot, who told
us that we could not return again by the bay or gulf, but that he knew a by
branch which ran within the land to the Eastward, and that he thought by it we
might fall into Capuri, and so return in four days: John Douglas searched
those rivers, and found four goodly entrances, whereof the least was as big
as the Thames, at Wolwich, but in the baie thitherward it was shole and but six
foot water, so as we were now without hope of any ship or bark to pass over,
and therefore resolved to go on with the botes, and the bottom of the Gallego,
in which we thrust 60. men: In the Lions whelps bote and wherie we carried 20.
Captain Calfield in his wherrie carried ten more, and in my barge other ten,
which made up a hundred: we had no other means but to carry victual for a
month in the same, and also to lodge therein as we could, and to boil and
dress our meat. Captain Gifford had with him Master Edw. Porter, captain
Eyn(...)s, and eight more in his wherrie with all their victual, weapons, and
provisions: Captain Calfield had with him my cosen But shead Gorges and eight
more. In the galley, of gent. and officers my self had captain Thin, my
chosen John Greenuile, my nephew John Gilbert, captain Whiddon, captain
Keymis, Edw. Handcoke, captain Clarke, lieutenant Hewes, Thg. vpton captain
Facy, Ierom Ferrar, Antho. Wells, Will. Connock and above 50. more. We could
not learn of Berreo any other way to enter but in branches, so far to the
windeward as it was impossible for us to recover: for we had as much sea to
cross over in our wherries as between Dover and Callis and in a great billow,
the wind and current being both very strong, so as we were driven to go in
those small botes directly before the wind into the bottom of the baie of
Guanipa, and from thence to enter the mouth of some one of those rivers, which
Io. Douglas had last discovered, and had with us for Pilote an Indian of
Barema, a river to the south of Orenoque, between that and Amazones, whose
Canoas we had formerly taken as he was going from the said Barema, laden with
Cassaui bread to fell at Marguerita: this Arwacan promised to bring me into the
great river of Orenoque, but indeed of that which he entered he was utterly
ignorant, for he had not seen it in twelve years before, at which time he was
very young, and of no judgment, and if God had not sent us another help, we
might have wandered a whole year in that laborinth of rivers, ere we had found
any way, either out or in, especially after we were past ebbing and flowing,
which was in four days: for I know all the earth does not yield the like
confluence of streams and branches, the one crossing the other so many times,
and all so fair and large, and so like one to another, as no man can tell
which to take: and if we went by the Sun or compass hoping thereby to go
directly one way or other, yet that way we were also carried in a circle amongst
multitudes of Islands, and every Island so bordered with high trees, as no man
could see any further than the breadth of the river, or length of the breach:
But this it chanced that entering into a river, (which because it had no name we
called the river of the Red cross, our selves being the first Christians that
ever came therein:) the 22. of May as we were rowing up the same, we espied a
small Canoa with three Indians, which (by the swiftnes of my barge, rowing with
eight oars) I ouertooke ere they could cross the river, the rest of the
people on the banks shadowed under the thickewood gazed on with a doubtful
conceit what might befall those three which we had taken: But when they
perceived that we offered them no violence neither entered their Canoa with any
of ours, nor took out of the Canoa any of their, they then began to show
themselves on the banks side, and offered to traffic with us for such things
as they had, and as we drew near they all staide, and we came with our barge
to the mouth of a little creek which came from their town into the great
river.

As we abode there a while, our Indian Pilot called Ferdinando would needs go
ashore to their village to fetch some fruits, and to drink of their
artificial wines, and also to see the place, and know the Lord of it against
another time, and took with him a brother of his which he had with him in the
journey: when they came, to the village of these people, the Lord of the Island
offered to lay hands of them purposing to have slain them both, yielding for
reason that this Indian of ours had brought a strange nation into their
territory to spoil and destroy them: But the Pilot being quick and of a
disposed body slipped their fingers and ran into the woods, and his brother being
the better footman of the two, recovered the creekes mouth, where we stayed in
our barge, crying out that his brother was slain, with that we set hands on
one of them that was next us, a very old man, and brought him into the barge,
assuring him that if we had not our Pilot again, we would presently cut off
his head. This old man being resolved that he should pay the loss of the
other, cried out to those in the woods to save Ferdinando our Pilot, but they
followed him notwithstanding, and hunted after him upon the foot with their
Dear dogs, and with so maine a cry that all the woods eckoed with the shoute
they made, but at last this poor chased Indian recovered the river side, and
got upon a tree, and as we were coasting, leaped down and swam to the barge
half dead with fear; but out good hap was, that we kept the other old
Indian, which we handfasted to redeem our Pilot withal, for being natural of
those rivers, we assured our selves he knew the way better than any stranger
could, and indeed, but for this chance I think we had never found the way
either to Guiana, or back to our ships: for Ferdinando after a few days knew
nothing at al, nor which way to turn, yea and many times the old man himself
was in great doubt which river to take. Those people which dwell in these broken
Islands and drowned lands are generally called Tiuitiuas, there are of them two
sorts, the one called Ciawani, and the other Waraweete.

The great river of Orenoque or Baraquan has nine branches which fall out on
the north side of his own maine mouth: on the south side it has seven other
fallings into the sea, so it desemboketh by 16. arms in all, between Islands
and broken ground, but the Islands are very great, many of them as big as the
Isle of VVigh: and bigger, and many less: from the first branch on the north
to the last of the south it is at least 100. leagues, so as the rivers mouth is
no less than 300. miles wide at his entrance into the sea, which I take to be
far bigger than that of Amazones: al those that inhabit in the mouth of this
river upon the several north branches are these Tiuitiuas, of which there are
two chief Lords which have continual wars one with the other: the Islands
which lie on the right hand are called Pallamos, and the land on the left
Hororotomaka, and the river by which John Douglas returned within the land from
Amana to Capuri, they call Macuri.

These Tiuitiuas are a very goodly people and very valiant, and have the
most manly speech and most deliberate that ever I heard of what nation soever.
In the summer they have houses on the ground as in other places: in the winter
they dwell upon the trees, where they build very artificial towns and
villages, as it is written in the Spanish story of the West Indies, that those
people do in the low lands near the gulf of Vraba: for between May and
September the river of Orenoke rises thirty foot upright, and then are those
Islands overflowed twenty foot high above the level of the ground, saving some
few raised grounds in the middle of them: and for this cause they are enforced
to live in this manner. They never eat of any thing that is set or sown and
as at home they use neither planting nor other manurance, so when they com
abroad they refuse to feed of ought, but of that which nature without labor
brings forth, They use the tops of Palmitos for bread, and kill Dear, fish
and porks for the rest of their lustenance, they have also many sorts of
fruits that grow in the woods, and great variety of birds and foul.

And if to speak of them were not tedious, and vulgar, surely we saw in those
passages of very rare colors and forms, not elsewhere to be found, for as much
as I have either seen or read. Of these people those that dwell upon the
branches of Orenoque called Capuri and Macureo, are for the most part
Carpenters of Canoas for they make the most and fairest houses, and sell them
into Guiana for gould, and into Trinedado for Tobacco, in the excessive taking
whereof, they exceed all nations, and notwithstanding the moistnes of the air
in which they live, the hardness of their diet, and the great labors they
suffer to hunt, fish and foul for their liunig in all my life either in the
Indies or in Europe did I never behold a more goodly or better favored
people, or a more manly. They were wont to make war upon all nations, and
especially on the Canibals, so as none durst without a good strength trade by
those rivers, but of late they are at peace with their neighbors, all holding
the Spaniards for a common enemy. When their commanders die, they use great
lamentation, and when they think the flesh of their bodies is putrified, and
fallen from the bones, then they take up the carcass again, and hang it in the
Casiquies house that died, and deck his scull with feathers of all colors, and
hang all his gold plates a boute the bones of his arms, thighs, and legs.
Those nations which are called Arwacas which dwell on the south of Orenoque,
(of which place and nation our Indian, Pilot was) are dispersed in many other
places, and do use to beat the bones of their Lords into powder, and their
wives and friends drink it all in their several sorts of drinks.

After we departed from the port of these Ciawani, we passed up the river
with the flood, and ancored the ebb, and in this fort we went onvvard. The
third day that we entered the river our Galley came on ground and stuck so fast,
as we thought that even there our discovery had ended, and that we must have
left 90. of our men to have inhabited like rooks upon trees with those nations:
but the next morning, after we had cast out all her ballast, with tugging and
hawling to and fro, we got her aflote, and went on: At four days end we
fell into as goodly a river as ever I beheld, which was called the great Amana,
which ran more directly without windings and turnings than the other. But soon
after the flood of the sea left us, and we enforced either by maine strength to
row against a violent current, or to return as wise as we went out, we had
then no shift but to persuade the companies that it was but two or three days
work, and therefore desired them to take pains, every gentleman and others
taking their turns to row, and to spell one the other at the hours end. Every
day we passed by goodly branches of rivers, some falling from the west, others
from the east into Amana, but those I leave to the description in the Chart of
discovery, where every one shall be named with his rising and descente. When
three days more were ouergone, our companies began to despair, the weather
being extreme hot, the river bordered with very high trees that kept away the
air, and the current against us every day stronger than other: But we
evermore commanded our Pilots to promise an end the next day, and used it so
long as we were driven to assure them from four reaches of the river to three,
and so to two, and so to the next reach: but so long we labored as many days
were spent, and so driven to draw ourselves to harder allowance, our bread
even at the last, and no drink at all: and our men and our selves so wearied
and scorched, and doubfull withal whether we should ever perform it or no,
the heat increasing as we drew toward the line, for we were now in five
degrees.

The farther we went on (our victual decreasing and the air breeding great
faintnes) we grew weaker and weaker when we had most need of strength and
ability, for howerlie the river ran more violently than other against us, and
the barge, wheries: and ships bote of Captain Gifford, and Captain Calfield,
had spent all their provisions, so as we were brought into despair and
discomfort, had we not persuaded all the company that it was but only one
days work more to attain the land where we should be relieved of all we
wanted, and if we returned that we were sure to starve by the way, and that the
world would also laugh us to scorn. On the banks of these rivers were diverse
sorts of fruits good to eat, flowers and trees of that variety as were
sufficient to make ten volumes of herbals, we relieved our selves many times
with the fruits of the country, and sometimes with foul and fish: we saw birds
of all colors, some carnation, some crimson, 'orenge tawny, purple', watchet,
and of all other sorts both simple and mixed, as it was unto us a great good
passing of the time to behold them, besides the relief we found by killing
some store of them with our fouling pieces, without which, having little or no
bread and less drink, but only the thick and troubled water of the river, we
had been in a very hard case. Our old Pilot of the Ciawani (whom, as I said
before we took to redeem Ferdinando,) told us, that if we would enter a
branch of a river on the right hand with our barge and wherries, and leave the
Galley at ancor the while in the great river, he would bring us to a town of
the Arwacas where we should find store of bread, hens, fish, and of the
country wine, and persuaded us that departing from the Galley at noone, we
might return ere night: I was very glad to hear this speech, and presently
took my bark, with eight musketeers, Captain Giffords wherrie, with himself
and four musketeers, and Captain Calfield with his wherry and as many, and so
we entered the mouth of this river, and because we were persuaded that it was so
near, we took no victual with us at all: when we had rowed three hours, we
maruailed we saw noe sign of any dwelling, and asked the Pilot where the
town was, he told us a little farther: after three hours more the Sun being
almost set, we began to suspect that he led us that way to betray us, for he
confessed that those Spaniardes which fled from Trinedado, and also those that
remained with Carapana in Emeria, were joined together in some village upon
that river. But when it grew toward night, and we demanding where the place
was, he told us but four reaches more: when we had rowed four and four, we
saw no sign, and our poor watermen even heart broken, and tired, were ready
to give up the ghost; for we had now come from the Galley near forty miles.

At the last we determined to hang the Pilot, and if we had well known the way
back again by night, he had surely gone, but our own necessities pleaded
sufficiently for his safety: for it was as dark as pitch, and the river began
so to narrow it self, and the trees to hang over from side to side, as we
were driven with arming swords to cut a passage through those branches that
covered the water. We were very desirous to find this town hoping of a
feast, because we made but a short breakfast aboorde the Galley in the morning,
and it was now eight a clock at night, and our stomachs began to gnawe
apace: but whether it was best to return or go on, we began to doubt
suspecting treason in the Pilot more and more: but the poor old Indian ever
assured us that it was but a little farther, but this one turning and that
turning, and at last about one a clock after midnight we saw a light, and
rowing toward it, we heard the dogs of the village. When we landed we found
few people, for the Lord of that place was gone with diverse Canoas above 400.
miles of, upon a journey toward the head of Orenoque to trade for gold, and
to buy women of the Canibals, who afterward unfortunately passed by us as we
rode at an ancor in the port of Morequito in the dark of night and yet came so
near us, as his Canoas grated against our barges: he left one of his company at
the port of Morequito, by whom we understood that he had brought thirty
young vvoomen, diverse plates of gold, and had great store of fine pieces of
cotton cloth, and cotton beds. In his house we had good store of bread, fish,
hens, and Indian drink, and so rested that night, and in the morning after we
had traded with such of his people as came down, we retuned toward our Galley,
and brought with us some quantity of bread, fish, and hens.

On both sides of this river, we passed the most beautiful country that ever
mine eyes beheld: and whereas all that we had seen before was nothing but
woods, prickles, bushes, and thorns, here we beheld plains of twenty miles
in length, the grass short and green, and in diverse parts groves of trees by
themselves, as if they had been by all the art and labor in the world so made
of purpose: and still as we rowed, the Dear came down feeding by the waters
side, as if they had been used to a keepers call. Upon this river there were
great store of foul, and of many sorts: we saw in it diverse sorts of strange
fishes, and of marvelous bigness, but for Lagartos it exceeded, for there were
thousands of those ugly serpents, and the people call it for the abundance of
them the river of Lagartos, in their language. I had a Negro a very proper
young fellow, that leaping out of the Galley to swim in the mouth of this
river, was in all our sights taken and devoured with one of those Lagartos. In
the mean while our companies in the Galley thought we had been all lost, (for
we promised to return before night) and sent the Lions Whelps ships bote with
Captain VVhiddon to follow us up the river, but the next day after we had
rowed up and down some four score miles, we returned, and went on our way, up
the great river, and when we were even at the last cast for want of victuals,
Captain Gifford being before the Galley, and the rest of the botes, seeking
out some place to land upon the banks to make fire espied four Canoas coming
down the liver, and with no small joy caused his men to try the uttermost of
their strengths, and after a while two of the 4. gave over, and ran themselves
ashore, every man betaking himself to the fastnes of the woods, the two other
lesser got away, while he landed to lay hold on these, and so turned into some
by-creeke, we knew not whither: those Canoas that were taken were laden with
bread, and were bound for Marguerita in the west Indies, which those Indians
(called Arwacas) purposed to carry thither for exchange: But in the lesser,
there were three Spaniards, who having heard of the defeat of their governor
in Trinedado, and that we purposed to enter Guiana, came away in those Canoas:
one of them was a Cauallero, as the Captain of the Arwacas after told us,
another a soldier, and the third a refiner.

In the mean time, nothing on the earth could have been more welcome to us
next unto gold, then the great store of very excellent bread which we found in
these Canoas, for now our men cried, let us go on, we care not how far. After
that Captain Gifford had brought the two Canoas to the Galley, I took my
barge, and went to the banks side with a dozen shot, where the Canoas first ran
themselves ashore, and landed there, sending out Captain Gifford and Captain
Thyn on one hand, and Captain Calfield on the other, to follow those that were
fled into the woods, and as I was creeping through the bushes, I saw an Indian
basket hidden, which was the refiners basket, for I found in it, his
quicksiluer, saltpeter, and diverse things for the trial of mettels, and also
the dust of such ore as he had refined, but in those Canoas which escaped there
was a good quantity of ore and gold. I then landed more men, and offered 500.
pound to what soldier soever could take one of those 3. Spaniards that we
thought were landed. But our labors were in vain in that behalf, for they
put themselves into one of the small Canoas: and so while the greater Canoas
were in taking, they escaped: but seeking after the Spaniardes, we found the
Arwacas hidden in the woods which were pilots for the Spaniardes, and rowed
their Canoas: of which I kept the chiefest for a Pilot, and carried him with me
to Guiana, by whom I understood, where and in what countries the Spaniards had
labored for gold, though I made not the same known to all: for when the
springs began to break, and the rivers to raise themselves so suddenly as by
no means we could abide the digging of any mine, especially for that the
richest are defended with rocks of hard stones, which we call the White spar,
and that it required both time, men, and instruments fit for such a work, I
thought it best not to houer thereabouts, least if the same had been perceived
by the company, there would have bin by this time many barks and ships set out,
and perchance other nations would also have gotten of ours for Pilots, so as
both our selves might have been prevented, and al our care taken for good usage
of the people bin utterly lost, by those that only respect present profit, and
such violence or insolence offered, as the nations which are borderers would
have changed their desire of our love and defense, into hatred and violence.
And for any longer stay to have brought a more quantity (which I hear has bin
often objected) whosoever had seen or proved the fury of that river after it
began to arise, and had been a month and od days as we were from hearing
ought from our ships, leaving them meanly mand, 400. miles off, would
perchance have turned somewhat sooner than we did, if all the mountains had
been gold, or rich stones: And to say the truth all the branches and small
rivers which fell into Orenoque were raised with such speed, as if we waded
them over the shoes in the morning outward, we were covered to the shoulders
homewarde the very same day: and to stay to dig out gold with our nails, had
been Opus laboris but nor Ingeny: such a quantity as would have served our
turns we could not have had, but a discovery of the mines to our infinite
disadvantage we had made, and that could have been the best profit of farther
search or stay, for those mines are not easily broken, nor opened in have, and
I could have returned a good quantity of gold ready cast, if I had not shot
at another mark, than present profit.

This Arwacan Pilot with the rest, fearing that we would have eaten them, or
otherwise have put the^ to some cruel death, for the Spaniards to the end that
none of the people in the passage toward Guiana or in Guiana it self might
come to speech with us, persuaded all the nations, that we were men eaters, and
Canibals: but when the poor men and women had seen us, and that we gave them
meat, and to every one something or other, which was rare and strange to them,
they began to conceive the deceit and purpose of the Spaniards, who indeed (as
they confessed) took from them both their wives, and daughters daily, and used
them for the satisfying of their own lusts, especially such as they took in
this manner by strength. But I protest before the majesty of the living God,
that I neither know nor believe, that any of our company one or other, by
violence or otherwise, even knew any of their women, and yet we saw many
hundreds, and had many in our power, and of those very young, and excellently
favored which came among us without deceit, stark naked.

Nothing got us more love amongst them then this usage, for I suffered not any
man to take from any of the nations so much as a Pina, or a Potato root,
without giving them contentment, nor any man so much as to offer to touch any
of their wives or daughters: which course so contrary to the Spaniards (who
tyrannixe over them in all things) drew them to admire her Majesty, whose
commandment I told the^ it was, and also wonderfully to honor our nation.

But I confess it was a very impatient work to keep the meaner sort from
spoil and stealing, when we came to their houses, which by cause in all I
could not prevent, I caused my Indian interpreter at every place when we
departed, to know of the loss or wrong don, and if ought were stolen or taken
by violence, either the same was restored, and the party punished in their
sight, or else was paid for to their uttermost demand. They also much woondred
at us, after they heard that we had slain the Spaniards at Trinedado, for they
were before resolved, that no nation of Christians durst abide their presence,
and they woondred more when I had made them know of the great overthrow that
her Majesty's army and fleet had given them of late years in their own
countries.

After we had taken in this supply of bread, with diverse baskets of roots
which were excellent meat, I gave one of the Canoas to the Arwacas, which
belonged to the Spaniards that were escaped, and when I had dismissed all but
the Captain (who by the Spaniards was christined Martin) I sent back in the
same Canoa the old Ciawan, and Ferdinando my first Pilot, and gave them both
such things as they desired, with sufficient victual to carry them back, and
by them wrote a letter to the ships, which they promised to deliver, and
performed it, and then I went on, with my new hired Pilot Martin the Arwacan:
but the next or second day after, we came aground again with our galley, and
were like to cast her away, with all our victual and provision, and so lay on
the sand one whole night and were far more in despair at this time to free
her then before, because we had no tide of flood to help us, and therefore
feared that all our hopes would have ended in mishaps: but we fastened an ancor
upon the land, and with maine strength drew her off: and so the 15.day we
discovered a far off the mountains of Guiana to our great joy, and toward
the evening had a slent of a northerly wind that blew very strong, which
brought us in sight of the great river of Orenoque; out of which this river
descended wherein we were: we discried a far off three other Canoas as far as
we could descerne them, after whom we hastened with our barge and wherries,
but two of them passed out of sight, and the third entered up the great river,
on the right hand to the westward, and there stayed out of sight, thinking that
we meant to take the way eastward toward the province of Carapana, for that
way the Spaniards keep, not daring to go vpwardes to Guiana, the people in
those parts being all their enemies, and those in the Canoas thought us to
have been those Spaniards that were fled from Trinedado, and had escaped
killing: and when we came so far down as the opening of that branch into
which they slipped, being near them with our barge and wherries, we made after
them, and ere they could land, came within call, and by our interpreter told
them what we were, wherewith they came back willingly aboard us: and of such
fish and Tortugas eggs as they had gathered, they gave us, and promised in the
morning to bring the Lord of that part with them, and to do us all other
services they could.

That night we came to an ankor at the parting of three goodly rivers (the one
was the river of Amana by which we came from the north, and ran athwart toward
the south, the other two were of Orenoque which crossed from the west and ran
to the sea toward the east) and landed upon a fair sand, where we found
thousands of Tortugas eggs, which are very wholesome meat, and greatly
restoring, so as our men were now well filled and highly contented both with
the fare, and neerenes of the land of Guiana which appeared in sight. In the
morning there came down according to promise the Lord of that border called
Toparimaca, with some thirty or fortte followers, and brought us diverse sorts
of fruits, and of his wine, bread, fish, and flesh, whom we also feasted as we
could, at least he drank good Spanish wine (whereof we had a small quantity
in bottles) which above al things they love. I conferred with this Toparimaca
of the next way to Guiana, who conducted our galley and botes to his own port,
and carried us from thence some mile and a half to his town, where some of
our captains garoused of his wine till they were reasonable pleasant, for it
is very strong with pepper, and the juice of diverse herbs, and fruits digested
and purged, they keep it in great earthen pots of ten or twelve gallons very
clean and sweet, and are themselves at their meetings and feasts the greatest
garousers and drunkards of the world: when we came to his town we found two
Cassiques, whereof one of them was a stranger that had been up the river in
trade, and his boats, people, and wife encamped at the port where we ankored,
and the other was of that country a follower of Toparimaca: they lay each of
them in a cotton Hamaca, which we call brasill beds, and two women attending
them with six cups and a little ladle to fill them, out of an earthen pitcher of
wine, and so they drank each of them three of those cups at a time one to the
other, and in this sort they drink drunk at their feasts and meetings.

That Cassique that was a stranger had his wife staying at the port where we
ancored, and in all my life I have seldom seen a better favored woman: She
was of good stature, with black eyes, fat of body, of an excellent
countenance, her hair almost as long as her self, tied up again in pretty
knots, and it seemed she stood not in that aw of her husband, as the rest, for
she spoke and discourst, and drank among the gentlemen and captains, and was
very pleasant, knowing her own comelines, and taking great pride therein. I
have seen a Lady in England so like to her, as but for the difference of
color I would have sworn might have been the same.

The seat of this town of Toparimaca was very pleasant, standing on a little
hill, in an excellent prospect, with goodly gardens a mile compass round
about it, and two very fair and large ponds of excellent fish adjoining. This
town is called Arowocai: the people are of the nation called Nepoios, and are
followers of Carapana. In that place I saw very aged people, that we might
perceive all their sinews and veins without any flesh, and but even as a case
covered only with skin. The Lord of this place gave me an old man for Pilot,
who was of great experience and travel, and knew the river most perfectly both
by day and night, and it shall be requisite for any man that passes it to have
such a Pilot, for it is four, five, and six miles over in many places, and
twenty miles in other places, with wonderful eddies, and strong currants,
many great Islands and diverse sholds, and many dangerous rocks, and besides upon
any iucrease of wind so great a bilbow, as we were sometimes in great peril
of drowning in the galley, for the small botes durst not come from the shore,
but when it was very fair.

The next day we hasted thence, and having an easterly wind to help us, we
spared our arms from rowing: for after we entered Orenoque, the river lies for
the most part east and west, even from the sea unto Quinto in Peru. This river
is nauigable with ships little less than 1000. miles, and from the place
where we entered it may be failed up in small pinaces to many of the best
parts of Nueuo reyno de granada, and of Popayan: and from no place may the
cities of these parts of the Indies be so easily taken and invaded as from
hence. All that day we sailed up a branch of that river, having on the left
hand a great Island, which they call Assapana which may contain some five and
twenty miles in length, and 6. miles in breadth, the great body of the river
running on the other side of this Island: Beyond that middle branch there is
also another Island in the river, called Iwana, which is twice as big as the
Isle of Wight, and beyond it, and between it and the maine of Guiana, runs
a third branch of Orenoque called Arraroepana: all three are goodly branches,
and all nauigable for great ships. I judge the river in this place to be at
least thirty miles broad, reckoning the Islands which divide the branches in
it, for afterward I sought also both the other branches.

After we reached to the head of the Island, called Assapana, a little to the
westward on the right hand there opened a riued which came from the north,
called Europa, and fell into the great river and beyond it, on the same side,
we ankored for that night, by another Island six miles long, and two miles
broad, which they call Ocaywita: From hence in the morning we landed two
Guianians, which we found in the town of Toparimaca, that came with us, who
went to give notice of our coming to the Lord of that country called Putyma,
a follower of Topiawari, chief Lord of Arromaia, who suceeded Morequito, whom
(as you have heard before) Berreo put to death, but his town being far
within the land, he came not unto us that day, so as we ankored again that
night near the banks of another Island, of bigness much like the other, which
they call Putapayma, on the maine land, over against which Island was a very
high mountain called Oceope: we coueted to ankor rather by these Islands in the
river, than by the maine, because of the Tortugas eggs, which our people found
on them in great abundance and also because the ground served better for us to
cast our nets for fish, the maine banks being for the most part stony and high,
and the rocks of a blew metalline color, like unto the best steel ore, which
I assuredly take it to be: of the same blew stone are also diverse great
mountains, which border this river in many places.

The next morning toward nine of the clock, we weyed ankor, and the brize
increasing, we failed always west up the river, a and after a while opening
the land on the right side, the country appeered to be champaine, and the
banks showed very perfect red: I therefore sent two of the little barges with
captain Gifford and with him captain Thyn, captain Calfield, my cosen
Greenvile, my nephew Io. Gilbert, captain Eynus, master Edw. Porter, and my
cosen Butshead Gorges, with some few soldiers, to march over the banks of
that red land, and to discover what manner of country it was on the other side,
who at their return found it all a plain leuel, as far as they went or
could discern, from the highest tree they could get upon: And my old Pilot, a
man of great travel brother to the Cassique Toparimica told me, that those
were called the plains of the Sayma, and that the same level reached to
Cumana, and Carracas in the west Indies, which are 120. leagues to the north,
and that there inhabited four principal nations. The first were the Sayma,
the next Assawai, the third and greatest the Wikiri, by whom Pedro Hernandez de
Serpa before mentioned was overthrown, as he passed with three hundred horse
from Cumana toward Orenoque, in his enterprise of Guiana, the fourth are
called Aroras, and are as black as Negros, but have smooth hair, and these
are very valiant, or rather desperate people, and have the most strong poison
on their arrows, and most dangerous of all nations, of which poison I will
speak somewhat being a digression not unnecessary.

There was nothing whereof I was more curious, than to find out the true
remedies of these poisoned arrows, for besides the mortalitic of the wound
they make, the party shot indureth the most insufferable torment in the world,
and abides a most ugly and lamentable death, sometimes dying stark mad,
sometimes their bowels breaking out of their bellies: and are presently
discolored, as black as pitch, and so unsavory, as no man can endure to cure,
or to attend them: And it is more strange to know, that in all this time there
was never Spaniard, either by gift or torment that could attain to the true
knowledge of the cure, although they have martired and put to invented torture
I know not how many of them. But every one of these Indians know it not, no not
one among thousands, but their southsaires and priests, who do conceile it,
and only teach it but from the father to the son.

Those medicines which are vulgar, and serve for the ordinary poison, are made
of the juice of a root called Tupara: the same also quenches maruellously the
heart of burning feauers, and heals inward wounds, and broken veins, that
bleed within the body. But I was more beholding to the Guianians than any
other, for Anthonio de Berreo told me that he could never attain to the
knowledge thereof, and yet they taught me the best way of healing as well
thereof, as of al other poisons. Some of the Spaniards have been cured in
ordinary wounds, of the common poisoned arrows with the juice of garlike: but
this is a general rule for all me^ that shall herafter travel the Indies
where poisoned arrows are used, that they must abstain from drink, for if
they take any licor into their body as they shall be maruellously provoked
there unto by drought, I say, if they drink before the wound be dressed, or
soon upon it, there is no way with the^ but present death.

And so I will return again to our journey which for this third day we
finished, and cast ancor again near the continent, or the left hand between
two mountains, the one called Aroami, and the other Aio: I made no stay here
but till midnight, for I feared howerly least any rain should fall, and then
it had been impossible to have gone any further up, notwithstanding that there
is every day a very strong brize, and easterly wind. I deferred the search of
the country on Guiana side, till my return down the river. The next day we
failed by a great Island, in the middle of the river, called Manoripano, and as
we walked a while on the Island, while the Galley got a head of us, there came
from us from the maine, a small Canoa with seven or eight Guianians, to inuit
us to ancor at their port, but I deferred till my return, It was that Cassique
to who^ those Nepoios went, which came with us from the town of Toparimica:
and so the fifth day we reached as high up as the Province of Arromaia the
country of Morequito whom Berreo executed, and ankored to the west of an Island
called Murrecotima, ten miles long and five broad: and that night the Cassique
Aramiary, (to whose town we made our long and hungry voyag out of the river of
Amana) passed by us.

The next day we arrived at the port of Morequito, and ancored there, sending
away one of our Pilots to seek the king of Aromaia, uncle to Morequito slain
by Berreo as aforesaid. The next day following, before noone he came to us on
foot from his house, which was 14. English miles, himself being 110. yers
old) and returned on foot the same day, and with him many of the borderers,
with many women and children, that came to wonder at our nation, and to bring
us down victual, which they did in great plenty, as venison, porke, hens,
chickens, foul, fish, with diverse sorts of excellent fruits, and roots, and
great abundance of Pinas, the princes of fruits, that grow under the Sun,
especially those of Guiana. They brought us also store of bread, and of their
wine, and a sort of Paraquitos, no bigger than wrens, and of all other sorts
both small and great: one of them gave me a beast called by the Spaniards
Armadlla, which they call Cassacam, which seems to be all barred over with
small plates somewhat like to a Renocero, with a white horn growing in his
hinder parts, as big as a great hunting horn, which they use to wind in
steed of a trumpet. Monardus writes that a little of the powder of that horn
put into the ear, cures deafnes.

After this old king had rested a while in a little tent, that I caused to be
set up, I began by my interpretor to discourse with him of the death of
Morequito his predecessor, and afterward of the Spaniards, and ere I went any
farther I made him know the cause of my coming thither, whose servant I was,
and that the Queens pleasure was, I should undertake the voyage for their
defense, and to deliver them from the tyranny of the Spaniardes, dilating at
large, (as I had done before to those of Trinedado) her Majesty's greatenes,
her justice, her charity to all oppressed nations, with as many of the rest of
her beauties and virtues, as either I could express, or they conceive, all
which being with great admiration attentively heard, and maruelously admired,
I began to found the old man as touching Guiana, and the state thereof, what
sort of common wealth it was, how governed, of what strength and policy, how
far it extended, and what nations were friends or enemies adjoining, and
finally of the distance, and way to enter the same: he told me that himself
and his people with all those down the river toward the sea, as far as
Emeria, the Province of Carapana, were of Guiana, but that they called
themselves, Orenoqueponi, and that all the nations between the river and those
mountains in sight called Wacarima, were of the same cast and appellation: and
that on the other side of those mountains of Wacarima there was a large plain
(which after I discovered in my return) called the valley of Amariocapana, in
all that valley the people were also of the ancient Guianians. I asked what
nations those were which inhabited on the further side of those mountains,
beyond the valley of Amariocapana, he answered with a great sigh (as a man
which had inward feeling of the loss of his country and liberty, especially
for that his eldest son was slain in a battle on that side of the
mountains, whom he most entirely loved, that he remembered in his fathers life
time when he was very old, and himself a young man that there came down into
that large valley of Guiana, a nation from so far off as the Sun slept, (for
such were his own words,) with so great a multitude as they could not be
numbered nor resisted, and that they wore large coats, and hats of crimson
color, which color he expressed, by showing a piece of red wood, wherewith my
tent was supported, and that they were called Oreiones, and Epuremei, those
that had slain and rooted out so many of the ancient people as there were
leaves in the wood upon all the trees, and had now made themselves Lords of all,
even to that mountain foot called Curaa, saving only of two nations, the one
called Awarawaqueri, and the other Cassipagotos, and that in the last battle
fought between the Epuremei, and the Iwarawaqueri, his eldest son was chosen to
carry to the aid of the Iwarawaqueri, a great troop of the Orenoqueponi, and
was there slain with all his people and friends, and that he had now remaning
but one son: and farther told me that those Epuremei had built a great town
called Macuregurai at the said mountain foot, at the beginning of the great
plains of Guiana, which have no end: and that their houses have many rooms,
one over the other, and that therein the great king of the Oreiones and
Epuremei kept three thousand men to defend the borders against them, and
withal daily to invade and slaie them: but that of late years since the
Christians offered to invade his territories, and those frontires, they were all
at peace, and traded one with another, saving only the Iwarawaqueri, and those
other nations upon the head of the river of Caroli, called Cassipagotos, which
we afterward discovered, each one holding the Spaniard for a common enemy.

After he had answered thus far, he desired leave to depart, saying that he had
far to go, that he was old, and weak, and was every day called for by death,
which was also his own phrase: I desired him to rest with us that night, but I
could not entreat him, but he told me that at my return from the country
above, he would again come to us, and in the mean time provide for us the
best he could, of all that his country yielded: the same night he returned to
Orecotona his own town, so as he went that day 28. miles, the weather being
very hot, the country being situate between 4. and 5. degrees of the
Equinoctial. This Topiawari is held for the prowdest, and wisest of all the
Orenoqueponi and so he behaved himself toward me in all his answers at my
return, as I marvelled to find a man of that gravity and judgment, and of so
good discourse, that had no help of learning nor breed.

The next morning we also left the port, and failed westward up to the river,
to view the famous river called Caroli, as well because it was marvelous of it
self, as also for that I understood it led to the strongest nations of all the
frontires, that were enemies to the Epuremei, which are subjects to Inga,
Emperor of Guiana, and Menoa, and that night we ankored at another Island called
Caiama, of some five or six miles in length, and the next day arrived at the
mouth of Caroli, when we were short of it as low or further down as the port of
Morequito we heard the great rore and fall of the river, but when we came to
enter with our barge and wherries thinking to have gone up some forty miles to
the nations of the Cassipagotos, we were not able with a barge of eight oars
to row one stones cast in an hour, and yet the river is as broad as the Thames
at Wolwich, and we tried both sides, and the middle, and every part of the
river, so as we encamped upon the banks adjoining, and sent off our
Orenequepone (which came with us from Morequito) to give knowledge to the
nations upon the river of our being there, and that we desired to see the Lords
of Camuria, which dwelt within the province upon that river making them know
that we were enemies to the Spaniards, (for it was on this river side that
Morequito) slew the Friar, and those nine Spaniards which came from Manoa, the
City of Inga, and took from them 40000. pesoes of Gold (so as the next day
there came down a Lord or Cassique called Wanuretona with many people with
him, and brought all store of provisions to entertain us, as the rest had
done. And as I had before made my coming known to Topiawari, so did I
acquaint this Cassique therewith, and how I was sent by her Majesty for the
purpose aforesaid, and gathered also what I could of him touching the estate of
Guiana, and I found that those also of Caroli were not only enemies to the
Spaniardes but most of all to the Epuremei, which abound in Gold, and by this
Warunetona, I had knowledge that on the head of this river were three mighty
nations, which were seated on a great lake, from when ce this river descended,
and were called Cessipagotos, Eparagotos, and Arawagotos, and that all those
either against the Spaniardes, or the Epuremei would join with us, and that if
we entered the land over the mountains of Curaa, we should satisfy our
selves with gold and all other goodthinges: he told us farther of a nation
called Iwarawaqueri before spoken off, that held daily war with the Epuremei
that inhabited Macuregnarai the first civil town pf Guiana, of the subjects
of Inga the Emperor.

Upon this river one Captain George, that I took with Berreo told me there
was a great silver mine, and that it was near the banckes of the said river.
But by this time as well Orenoque, Caroli, and all the rest of the rivers were
risen four or five foot in height, so as it was not possible by the strength
of any men, or with any boat whatsoever to row into the river against the
stream. I therefore sent Captain Thyn, Captain Greenuile, my nephew John
Gylbert, my cosen Butshead Gorges, Captain Clarke, and some 30. shot more to
coast the river by land, and to go to a town some twenty miles over the
valley called Amnatapoi, and they found guides there, to go farther toward
the mountain foot to another great town, called Capurepana, belonging to a
Cassique called Haharacea (that was a nephew to old Topiawari king of Arromaia
our chiefest friend) because this town and province of Capurepnna adjoined to
Macureguarai, which was a frontier town of the Empire: and the mean while my
self with Captain Gifford, Captain Calfield, Edw. Hancocke, and some half a
dosen shot marched over land to view the strange ouerfalls of the river of
Carols which rored so far of, and also to see the plains, adjoining and the
rest of the province of Canuri: I sent also captain Whiddon, W. Connocke and
some eight shot with them, to see if they could find any mineral stone
along the river side, When we run to the tops of the first hills of the
plains adjoining to the river, we beheld that wonderful breach of waters,
which ran down Caroli: and might from that mountain see the river how it
ran in three parts, above twenty miles of, and there appeared some ten or twelve
ouerfals in sight, every one as high over the other as a Church tower, which
fell with that fury, that the rebound of water made it seem, as if it had
been all covered over with a great shower of rain: and in some places we
took it at the first for a smoke that had risen over some great town. For
mine own part I was well persuaded from thence to have returned, being a very
ill footeman, but the rest were all so desirous to go near the said strange
thunder of waters, as they drew me on by little and little, til we came into
the next valley where we might better discern the same. I never saw a more
beawtifull country, nor more lively prospectes, hills so raised here and there
over the valleys, the river winding into diverse branches, the plains
adjoining without bush or stubble, all fair green grass, the ground of hard
sand easy to march on, either for horse or foot, the dear crossing in every
path, the birds toward the evening singing on every tree with a thousand
several tunes, cranes and herons of white, crimson, and carnation pearching in
the rivers side, the air fresh with a gentle easterly wind, and every stone
that we stooped to take up, promised either gold or silver by his complexion.
Your L. shall see of many sorts, and I hope some of them cannot be bettered
under the sun, and yet we had no means but with our daggers and fingers to
tear them out here and there, the rocks being most hard of that mineral
sparre aforesaid, and is like a flint, and is altogether as hard or harder, and
besides the veins like a fathom or two deep in the rocks. But we wanted all
things requisite save only our desires, and good will to have performed more
if it had pleased God. To be short when both our companies returned, each of
them brought also several sorts of stones that appeared very fair, but were
such as they found loose on the ground, and were for the most part but
cullored, and had not any gold fixed in them, yet such as had no judgment or
experience kept all that glistered, and would not be persuaded but it was rich
because of the luster, and brought of those, and of Marquesite with all, from
Trinedado, and have delivered of those stones to be tried in many places, and
have thereby bred an opinion that all the rest is of the same: yet some of
these stones I showed afterward to a Spaniard of the Caracas who told me that
it was El Madre deloro, and that the mine was farther in the ground. But it
shall be found a weak policy in me, either to betray my self, or my
Country with imaginations, neither am I so far in love with that lodging,
watching, care, peril, diseases, ill favors, bad fare, and many other
mischiefs that accompany these voiages, as to woo my self again into any of
them, were I not assured that the sun covers not so much riches in any part
of the earth. Captain Whiddon, and our Surgeon Nich. Millechap brought me a
kind of stons like Saphires, what they may prove I know not, I showed them to
some of the Orenoqueponi, and they promised to bring me to a mountain, that
had of them very large pieces growing Diamond wife: whether it be Crystal of
the mountain, Bristoll Diamond or Sapphire I do not yet know, but I hope the
best, sure I am that the place is as likely as those from whence all the rich
stones are brought, and in the same height or very near. On the left hand of
this river Caroli are seated those nations which are called Iwarawakeri before
remembered, which are enemies to the Epuremei: and on the head of it adjoining
to the great lake Cassipa, are situate those other nations which also resist
Inga, and the Epuremei, called Cassepagotos, Eparegotos, and Arrawagotos. I
farther understood that this lake of Cassipa is so large, as it is above one
days journey for one of their Canoas to cross, which may be some 40, miles,
and that therein fall diverse rivers, and that great store of grains of Gold
are found in the summer time when the lake falls by the banckes, in those
branches. There is also another goodly river beyond Caroli which is called
Arui, which also runs through the lake Cassipa, and falls into Orenoque
father west, making all that land between Caroli and Arui an Island, which is
likewise a most beawtifull country. Next unto Arui there are two rivers Atoica
and Caera, and on that branch which is called Caora, are a nation of people,
whose heads appear not above their shoulders, which though it may be thought
a mere fable, yet for mine own part I am resolved it is true, because every
child in the provinces of Arromaia and Canuri affirm the same: they are called
Ewaipanoma: they are reported to have their eyes in their shoulders, and their
mouths in the middle of their breasts, and that a long train of hair grows
backward between their shoulders. The son of Topiawari, which I brought with me
into England told me that they are the most mighty men of all the land, and
use bows, arrows, and clubs thrice as big as any of Guiana, or of the
Orenoqueponi, and that one of the Iwarawakeri took a prisoner of them the year
before our ariuall there, and brought him into the borders of Arromaia his
fathers Country: And farther when I seemed to doubt of it, he told me that
it was no wonder among them, but that they were as great a nation, and as
common, as any other in all the provinces, and had of late years slain many
hundreds of his fathers people, and of other nations their neighbors, but it
was not my chance to hear of them til I was come away, and if I had but
spoken one word of it while I was there, I might have brought one of them with
me to put the matter out of doubt. Such a nation was written of by Maundeuile,
whose reports was holden for fables many years, and yet since the East Indies
were discovered, we find his relations true of such things as heretofore
were held incredible: whether it be true or no the matteris not great, neither
can there be any profit in the imagination, for mine own part I saw them not,
but I am resolved that so many people did not all combine, or forthinke to make
the report.

When I came to Cumana in the west Indies afterward by chance I spoke with a
spaniard dwelling not far from thence, a man of great travel, and after he
knew that I had been in Guiana, and so far directly west as Caroli, the
first question he asked me whether I had seen any of the Ewaipanoma, which
are those without heads: who being esteemed a most honest man of his word, and
in all things else, told me that he had seen many of them: I may not name him
because it may be for his disadvantage, but he is well known to Monsier
Mucherons son of London, and to Peter Mucheron merchant of the Flemish ship
that was there in trade, who also heard what he auowed to be true of those
people. The fourth river to the west of Caroli is Casnero which falls into
Orenoque on this side of Amapaia, and that river is greater then Damibius, or
any of Europe: it rises on the south of Guiana from the mountains which
divide Guiana from Amazones, and I think it to be nauigable many hundred
miles: but we had no time, means, nor season of the year, to search those
rivers for the causes before said, the winter being come upon us, although the
winter and summer as touching cold and heat differ not, neither do the trees
euersencible lose their leaves, but have always fruit either ripe or green,
and most of the^ both blossoms, leaves, ripe fruit, and green at one time: But
their winter only consilieth of terrible raynes, and ouerflowing of the
rivers, with many great storms and gustes, thunder, and lightnings, of which
we had our fill, ere we returned. On the North side, the first river that
falls into Orenoque is Cari, beyond it on the same side is the river of Limo,
between these two is a great nation of Canibals, and their chief town bears
the name of the river and is called Acamacari: at this town is a continual
markette of women for 3. or 4. hatchets a piece, they are brought by the
Arwacas, and by them sold into the west Indies. To the west of Lime is the
river Pao, beyond it Caturi, beyond that Voari and Capuri which falls out of
the great river of Meta, by which Berreo descended from Nueuo reyno de granada.
To the westward of Capuri is the province of Amapaia, where Berreo wintered,
and had so many of his people poisoned with the tawny water of the marshes of
the Anebas, Above Amapaica toward Nueuo reyno fall in, Meta, pato, and
Cassanar: to the west of those toward the provinces of the Ashaguas and
Catetios are the rivers of Beta, Dawney, and Vbarro, and toward the frontyer
of Peru are the provinces of Thomebamba. and Caximalta: adjoining to Quito in
the North of Peru are the rivers of Guiacar and Goauar: and on the other side
of the said mountains the river of Papamene which descends into Maragnon or
Amazones passing through the province of the Mutylones where Don Pedro de Osua
who was slain by the traitor Agiri before rehearsed, built his Briggandines,
when he sought Guiana by the way of Amazones. Between Dawney and Beta lies a
famous Island in Orenoque now called Baraquan (For above Meta it is not kowne by
the name of Orenoque) which is called Athule, beyond which, ships of burden
cannot pass by reason of a most forcible ouerfall, and Current of waters: but
in the eddy al smaller vessels may be drawn even to Peru itself: But to
speak of more of these rivers without the description were but tedious, and
therefore I will leave the rest to the description. This river of Orenoque is
nauigable for ships little less then 1000. miles, and for lesser vessels near
2000. By it (as aforesaid) Peru, Nueuo reyno, and Popaian, may be invaded: it
also leads to that great Empire of Inga, and to the provinces of Amapaia, and
Anebas which abound in gold: his branches of Cosnero, Manta, Caora descend from
the middle land and valley, which lies between the easter province of Peru
and Guiana; and it falls into the sea betwne Maragnon and Trinedado in two
degrees and a half, al which your Honors shall better perceive in the general
description of Guiana, Peru, Nueuo reyno, the kingdom of Popayan, and Roidas,
with the province of Vensuello, to the bay of Vraba behind Cartagena,
westward: and to Amazones southward. While we lay at ancor on the coast of
Canuri, and had taken knowledge of all the nations upon the head and branches
of this river, and had found out so many feuerall people, which were enemies
to the Epuremei, and the new Conquerers: I thought it time lost to linger any
longer in that place, especially for that the fury of Orenoque began daily
to threaten us with dangers in our return, for no half day passed, but the
river began to rage and ouerflow very fearfully, and the raines came down in
terrible showers, and gusts in great abundance: and withal, our men began
to cry out for want of shift, for no man had place to bestow any other
apparel then that which he ware on his back, and that was thoroughly washed on
his body for the most part ten times in one day and we had now been well
near a month, every day passing to the westward, farther and farther from our
ships. We therefore turned toward the east, and spent the rest of the time
in discovering the river toward the sea, which we had not viewed, and which
was most material. The next day following we left the mouth of Caroli, and
arrived again at the port of Morequito where we were before (for passing down
the stream we went without labor, and against the wind, little less then
100. miles a day:) As Soon as I came to ancor I sent away one for old Topiawari,
with whom I much desired to have further conference, and also to deal with him
for some one of his country, to bring with us into England, as well to learn
the language, as to confer withal by the way, (the time being now spent of
any longer stay there) within three hours after my messenger came to him, he
arrived also, and with him such a rabble of all sorts of people, and every one
laden with somewhat, as if it had been a great marker or fair in England: and
our hungry companies clustered thick and threefold among their baskets, every
one laying hand on what he liked. After he had rested a while in my tent, I
shut out al but our selves, and my interpreter, and told him that I knew that
both the Epuremei and the Spaniards were enemies to him, his country and
nations: that the one had conquered Guiana already, and the other sought to
regaine the same from them both: And therefore I desired him to instruct me
what he could, both of the passage into the golden parts of Guiana, and to
the civil towns and apparrelled people of Inga. He gave me an answer to
this effect: first that he could not perceive that I meant to go onwarde
toward the City of Mania, for neither the time of the year served, neither
could he perceive any sufficient numbers for such an enterprise: and if I did I
was sure with all my company to be buried there, for the Emperor was of that
strength, as that many times so many men more were too few: besides he gave me
this good counsel and advised me to hold it in mind (as for himself he
knew, he could not live til my return) that I should not offer by any means
hereafter to invade the strong parts of Guiana with out the help of all those
nations which were also their enemies: for that it was impossible without
those, either to be conducted, to be victualled, or to have ought carried with
us, our people not being able to endure the march in so great heat, and
travel, unless the borderers gave them help, to carry with them both their
meat and furniture: For he remembered that in the plains of Macureguarai 300.
Spaniards were overthrown, who were tired out, and had none of the borderers
to their friends, but meeting their enemies as they passed the frontier, were
environed of all fides, and the people setting the long dry grass on fire,
smothered them so as they had no breath to feight, nor could discern their
enemies for the great smoke. He told me farther that sower days journey from
his town was Macureguarai, and that those were the next, and nearest of the
subjects of Inga, and of the Epuremsi, and the first town of apparreled and
rich people, and that all those plates of Goldo which were scatterred among the
borderers and carried to other nations far and near, came from the said
Macureguarai, and were there made, but that those of the land within were
far finer, and were fashioned after the Image of men, beasts, birds, and
fishes. I asked him wether he thought that those companies that I had there
with me, were sufficient to take that town or no, he told me that he thought
they were. I then asked him whether he would assist me with guides, and some
companies of his people to ioyn with us, he answered that he would go himself
with all the borderers, if the rivers did remain fordable, upon this condition
that I would leave with him til my return again fifthly soldiers, which he
undertook to victual: I answered that I had not above fifty good men in all
there, the rest were laborers and rowers, and that I had no provision to leave
with them of powder, shot, apparel, or ought else, and that without those
things necessary for their defense, they should be in danger of the Spaniardes
in my absence, who I knew would use the same measure toward mine, that I
offered them at Trinedado: And Although upon the motion Captain Calfeide,
Captain Grenuile, my nephewe John Gilbert and diverse others were desirous to
stay, yet I was resolved that they must needs have perishr, dfor Berreo
expected daily a supply out of Spain, and looked also howerly for his son to
come down from Nueue reyne degranada, with many horse and soote, and had also
in Valentia in the Carneas, 200. horse ready to march, and I could not have
spared above forty, and had not any store at all of powder, lead, or march to
have left with them, not any other provision cytherspade, pickeaxe, or ought
else to have fortified withal. When I had given him reason that I could not at
this time leave him such a company, he then desired me to forbear him, and his
country for that time, for he assured me that I should be no sooner three
days from the coast, but those Epuremei would invade him, and destroy all
the remain of his people and friends, if he should any way either guide us,
or assist us against them. He further alleged that the Spaniards sought dis
death, and as they had already murtheaed his Nephew Moriquito Lord of that
province, so they had him 17, days in a chain before he was king of the
Country, and led him like a dog from place to place, until he had paid
100. plates of Gold, and diverse chains of splpen stones for his ransom: and
now since he became owner of that province that they had many times laid wait
to take him, and that they would be now more vehement when they should
understand of his conference with the English, and because said he, they would
the better displant me if they cannot lay hands on me, they have gotten a
Nephew of mine called Eparacano whom they have christened Don Iuan and his
son Don pedro, whom they have also apparelled and armed, by whom they seek
to make a party against me, in mine own country: he also had taken to wife
one Louiana of a strong family, which are borderers and neighbors, and my
self being now old and in the hands of death, am not able to travel nor to
shifte, as when I was of younger years: he therefore praid us to defer it
till the next year, when he would undertake to draw in all the bordererst to
serve us, and then also it would be more seasonable to travel, for at this time
of the year, we should not be pable to hasse any river, the waters were and
would be so grown ere our return. He farther told me that I could not desire
so much to invade Macureguari, and the rest of Guiana but that the borderers
would be more vehement the^ I, for he yielded for a chief cause that in the
wars with the Epuremei, they were spoiled of their women, and that their wives
and daughters were taken from them, so as for their own parts they desired
nothing of the gold or treasure for their labors, but only to recover women
from the Epuremei: for he farther complained very sadly (as it had been a
matter of great consequence) that whereas they were wont to have ten or twelve
wives, they were now enforced to content themselves with three or four, and
that the Lords of the Epuremei had 50. or 100. And in truth they war more for
women then either for gold or dominion. For the Lords of countries desire many
children of their own bodies, to increase their races and kindreds, for in
those consist their greatest trust and strength. Diverse of his followers
afterward desired me to make have again, that they might sack the Epuremei,
and I asked them of what? they answered, of their women for us, and their Gold
for you: for the hope of many of those women they more desire the war, then
either for Gold, or for the recovery of their ancient territories. For what
between the subjects of Inga, and the Spaniards, those frontiers are grown
thin of people, and also great numbers are fled to other nations farther off
for fear of the spaniardes. After I received this answer of the old man, we
fell into consideration, whether it had been of better advice to have entered
Macureguarai, and to have begun a war upon Inga at this time, yea or no, if
the time of the year, and all things else had sorted. For mine own part (as
we were not able to march it for the rivers, neither had any such strength as
was requisite, and durst not abide the coming of the winter, or to tarric any
longer from our ships) I thought it were evil counsel to have attempted it
at that time, although the desire of gold will answer many objections: But
it would have been in mine opinion an utter overthrow to the enterprise, if
the same should be hereafter by her Majesty attempted: for then (whereas now
they have heard we were enemies to the Spaniards and were sent by her Majesty
to relieve them) they would as good cheap have joined with the Spaniards at
our return, as to have yeel ded unto us, when they had proved that we came
both for one errant, and that both sought but to sack and spoil them, but as
yet our desire of gold, or our purpose of inuasio^ is not known unto those of
the empire: and it is likely that if her Majesty undertake the enterprise, they
will rather submit themselves to herobedience then to the Spaniardes, of whose
cruelty both themselves and the borderers have already tasted: and therefore
till I had known her majesty's pleasure, I would rather have lost the sack of
one or two towns (although they might have been very profitable) then to have
defaced or endangered the future hope of so many millions, and the great good,
and rich trade which England may be possessed off thereby. I am assured now
that they will all die even to the last man against the Spanyardes in hope of
our succoure and return: whereas otherwise if I had either laid hands on the
borderers, or ransommed the Lords as Berreo did, or invaded the subjects of
Inga, I know all had been lost for hereafter. After that I had resolved
Topiawari Lord of Aromaia that I could not at this time leave with him the
companies he desired, and that I was contented to forbear the enterprise
against the Epuremei till the next year, he freely gave me his only son to
take with me into England, and hoped, that though he himself had but a short
time to live, and that by our means his son should be established after his
death: and I left with him one Franncis Sparrow, a servant of captain Gifford,
(who was desirous to tarry, and could describe a country with his pen) and a
boy of mine called Hugh goodwin, to learn the language. I after asked the
manner how the Epuremei wrought those plates of gold, and how they could melt
it out of the stone; he told me that the most of the gold which they made in
plates and images was not severed from the stone, but that on the lake of
Manoa, and in a multitude of other rivers they gathered it in grains of
perfect gold and in pieces as big as small stones, and that they put it to a
part of copper, otherwise they could not work it, and that they used a great
earthen pott with holes round about it, and when they had mingled the gold and
copper together, they fastened canes to the holes, and so with the breath of men
they increased the fire till the mettell ran, and then they cast it into moulds
of stone and clay, and so make those plates and Images. I have sent your
Honors, of two sorts such as I could by chance recover, more to show the manner
of them, then for the value: For I did not in any sort make my desire of gold
known, because I had neither time, nor power to have a greater quantity. I
gave among them many more pieces of Gold then I received of the new money of
20. shillings with her Majesty's picture to wear, with promise that they
would become her feruantes thenceforth.

I have also sent your Honor of the oar, whereof I know some is as rich as the
earth yields any, of which I know there is sufficient, if nothing else were
to be hoped for. But besides that we were not able to tarry and search the
hills; so we had neither pioners, bars, sledges, nor wedges of Iron, to break
the ground without which there is no working in mines: but we saw all the hills
with stones of the cullor of Gold and silver, and we tried them to be no
Marquesite, and therefore such as the Spanyardes call El Madre de oro, which is
an undoubted assurance of the general abundance; and my self saw the outside
of many mines of the Sparre, which I know to be the same that all covet in this
world, and of those, more then I will speak of.

Having learned what I could in Canuri and Aremaia, and received a faithful
promise of the principallest of those provinces to become servants to her
Majesty, and to resist the Spanyardes, if they made any attempt in our
absence, and that they would draw in the nations about the lake of Cassipa,
and those Iwarawaqueri, I then parted from old Topiawari, and received his
son for a pledge between us, and left with him two of ours as aforesaid: To
Francis Sparrowe I gave instructions to travel to Marcuregnarai, with such
marchandizes as I left with them, thereby to learn the place, and if it were
possible to go on, to the great City of Manoa: which being done, we weyed
ancor, and coasted the river on Guiana side, because we came up on the north
side, by the launes of the Saima and Wikiri.

There came with us from Aremaia, a Cassique called Putijma, that commanded
the province of Warapana, (which Putijma slew the nine Spanyardes upon Caroli
before spoken of,) who desired us to rest at the port of his Country,
promising to bring us to a mountain adjoining to his town that had stones of
the cullor of Gold, which he performed: And after we had rested there one
night, I went my self in the morning with most of the Gentlemen of my company,
over land toward the said mountain, marching by a rivers side called Mana,
leaving on the right hand a town called Tuteritona, standing in the province
of Tarracoa, of which Wartaaremagoto is principal. Beyond it lies another
town toward the south in the valley of Amariocapana, which bears the name
of the said valley, whose plains stretch themselves some 60. miles in leugth,
east and west, as fair ground, and as beawtifull fields, as any man has ever
seen, with diverse copsies scatered here and there by the rivers fule, and all
as full of dear, as any forest or park in England, and in cuelic lake and
river the like abundance of fish and foul, of which Ieriparragosa is Lord.

From the diuer of Mana, we crossed another river in the said beiwtiful valley
called Oiana, and rested our selves by a clear lake, which lay in the middle
of the said Oiana, and one of our guides kindling us fire with two sticks, we
stayed a while to dry our shirts, which with the heat hong very weete and
heavy on our sholders. Afterward we sought the ford to pass over toward
the montain called Iconuri, where Putijma foretold us of the mine. In this lake
we saw one of the great fishes, as big as a wine pipe, which they call Manati,
and is most excellent and wholesome meat. But after I perceived, that to pass
the said river would require half a days march more, I was not able my self
to endure it, and therefore I sent Captain Keymis with six shot to go on,
and gave him order not to return to the port of Putijma, which is called
Chiparepare, but to take leisure, and to march down the said valley, as far
as a river called Cumaca, where I promised to meet him again, ( Putijma
himself promising also to be his guide,) and as they marched, they left the
towns of Emparepana, and Capurepana, on the right hand, and marched from
Putijmas house, down the said valley of Amariocapana, and we returning the
same day to the rivers side, saw by the way many rocks, like unto Gold oar,
and on the left hand, a round mountain which consisted of mineral stone.

From hence we rowed down the stream, coasting the prouice of Parino; As for
the branches of rivers which I ouerpasse in this discourse, those shall be
better expressed in the description, with the mountains of Aio, Ara and the
rest, which are situate in the provinces of Parino anp Carricurrina. When we
were come as far down as the land called Ariacoa, (where Orenoque deuideth
it self into three great branches, each of them being most goodly rivers, (I
sent away Captain Henry Thin, and Captain Greeneuile with the Galley, the
nearest way, and took with me Captain Gifford, Captain Calfielde, Edward
porter, and Captain Eynos with mine own barge, and the two wherries, and went
down that branch of Orenoque, which is called Cararoopana, which leads
toward Emeria the province of Carapana, and toward the east sea, as well to
find out Captain Keymis, whom I had sent over land, as also to acquaint my
self with Carapana, who is one of the greatest of all the Lords of the
Orenoqueponi: and when he came to the river of Cumaca (to which Putijma
promised to conduct Captain Keymis) I left Captain Eynos and Master Porter in
the said river to expect his coming, and the rest of us rowed down the
stream toward Emeria.

In this branch called Cararoopana were also many goodly I lands, some of six
miles long, some of ten, and some of Twenty, when it grew toward sun
set, we entered a branch of a river that fell into Orenoque called Winicapora:
where I was informed of the mountain of Crystal, to which in truth for the
length of the way, and the evil season of the year, I was not able to march,
nor abide any longer upon the journey: we saw it a far off and it appeared
like a white Church towr of an exceeding height: There falls over it a
mighty river which touches no part of the side of the mountain, but rusheth
over the top of it, and falls to the ground with a terrible noise and
clamor, as if 1000, great belles were knocked one against another. I think
there is not in the world so strange an ouerfall, nor so wonderful to
behold: Berreo told me that it has Diamondes and other precious stones on
it, and that they shined very far off: but what it has I know not, neither
durst he or any of his men ascend to the top of the said mountain, those
people adjoining being his enemies (as they were) and the way to it so
impassible.

Upon this river of Winecapora we rested a while, and from thence marched into
the Country to a town called after the name of the river, whereof the chief
was one Timitwara, who also offered to conduct me to the top of the said
mountain called Wacarima: But when we came in first to the house of the said
Timitwara, being upon one of their feast days, we found them all as drunk
as beggars, and the pottes walking from one to another without rest: we that
were weary, and hot with marching, were glad of the plenty, though a small
quantity satisfied us, their drink being very strong and headie, and so
rested our selves a while; after we had fed, we dre we our selves back to
our boats, upon the river, and there came to us all the Lords of the
Country, with all such kind of victual as the place yielded, and with their
delicate wine of Pinas, and with abundance of hens, and other provisions, and
of those stones which we call Spleenestones. We understood by the
chieferaines of Winicapora, that their Lord Carapana was departed from Emeria
which was now in sight, and that he was fled to Cairamo, adjoining to the
mountains of Guiana, over the valley called Amariocapana, being persuaded by
those ten Spanyardes which lay at his house, that we would destroy him, and
his country.

But after these Cassiqui of Winicapora and Saporatona his followers perceived
our purpose, and saw that we came as enemies to the Spanyardes only, and had
not so much as harmed any of those nations, no though we found them to be of
the Spanyardes own feruantes, they affured us that Carapana would be as
ready to serve us, as any of the Lords of the provinces, which we had
passed; and that he durst do no other till this day but entertain the
Spanyardes, his country lying so directly in their way, and next of all other
to any entrance that should be made in Guiana on that side.

And they farther assured us, that it was not for fear of our coming that he
was removed, but to be acquitted of the Spanyardes or any other that should
come hereafter. For the province of Cairoma is situate at the mountain foot,
which deuideth the plains of Guiana, from the countries of the Orenoqueponi:
by means whereof if any should come in our absence into his towns, he
would slip over the mountains into the plains of Guiana among the
Epuremei, where the Spanyardes durst not follow him without great force.

But in mine opinion, or rather I assure my self, that Carapana (being a
notable wise and subtle fellow, a man of one hundred years of age, and
therefore of great experience) is removed, to look on, and if he find that
we return strong, he will be ours, if not, he will excuse his departure to
the Spaniards, and say it was for fear of our coming.

We therefore thought it booteles to row so far down the stream, or to
seek any farther for this old fox: and therefore from the river of
Waricapana (which lies at the entrance of Emeria,) we turned again, and left
to the Eastward those 4 rivers which fall from out the mountains of Emeria
into Orenoque, which are waracapari, Coirama, Akaniri, and Iparoma: below
those 4. are also these branches and mouths of Orenoque, which fall into the
East sea, whereof the first is Araturi, the next Amacura, the third Barima, the
fourth Wana, the fifth Morooca, the sixth Paroma, the last Wijnsi: beyond them,
there fall out of the land between Orenoque and Amazones 14. rivers which I
forbear to name, inhabited by the Arwacas and Caniballs.

It is now time to return toward the North, and we found it a wearisome
way back, from the borders of Emeria, to recover up again to the head of the
river Carerupana, by which we descended, and where we parted from the galley,
which I directed to take the next way to the Port of Toparmaca, by which we
entered first.

All the night it was stormy and dark, and full of thunder and great showers,
so as we were driven to keep close by the banks in our small boats, being all
heartely afraid both of the billowe, and terrible Current of the river. By the
next morning we recovered the mouth of the river of Cumaca, where we left
Captain Eynns and Edward Porter to attend the coming of Captain Keymis over
land: but when we entered the same, they had heard no news of his arrival,
which bredde in us a great doubt what might be become of him: I rowed up a
league or two farther into the river, shooting off pieces all the way, that he
might know of our being there: And the next morning we heard them answer us
also with a piece: we took them abord us, and took our leave of putyma their
guide, who of all others most lamented our departure, and offered to send his
son with us into England, if we could have staide till he had sent back to
his town: but our hearts were cold to behold the great rage and increase of
Orenoque, and therefore departed, and turned toward the west, till we had
recovered the parting of the 3 branches aforesaid, that we might put down
the stream after the Galley.

The next day we landed on the Island of Assapana, (which deuideth the river
from that branch by which we sent down to Emeria) and there feasted our selves
with that beast which is called Armadilla presented unto us before at
Winicapora, and the day following we recovered the galley at ancor at the port
of Toparimaca, and the same evening departed with very foul weather and
terrible thunder, and showers, for the winter was come on very far: the best
was, we went no less then 100. miles a day, down the river: but by the way we
entered, it was impossible to return, for that the river of Amana, being in the
bottom of the bay of Guanipa, cannot be sailed back by any means, both the
brize and current of the sea were so forcible, and therefore we followed a
branch of Orenoque called Capuri, which entered into the sea eastward of our
ships, to the end we might bear with them before the wind, and it was not
without need, for we had by that way as much to cross of the maine sea, after
we came to the rivers mouth as between, Grauelyn and Dover, in such boats as
your Ho have heard.

To speak of what past homeward were tedious, either to describe or name any
of the rivers, Islands, or villages of the Tiuitiuas which dwell on trees, we
will leave all those to the general map: And to be short, when we were arrived
at the sea side the^ grew our greatest doubt, and the bitterest of all our
journey forepassed, for I protest before God, that we were in a most desperate
estate: for the same night which we ancored in the mouth of the river of
Capuri, where it falls into the sea, there arose a mighty storm, and the
rivers mouth was at least a league broad, so as we ran before night close under
the land with our small boats, and brought the Galley as near as we could,
but she had as much a do to live as could be, and there wanted little of her
sinking, and all those in her: for mine own part I confess, I was very
doubtful which way to take, either to go over in the pestred Galley, there
being but six foot water over the sands, for two leagues together, and that
also in the channel, and she drew five: or to adventure in so great a billow,
and in so doubtful weather, to cross the seas in my barge. The longer we
tarried the worse it was, and therefore I took Captain Gifford, Captain
Calfeild, and my cosen Greeneuile into my barge, and after it cleared up,
about midnight we put our selves to Gods keeping, and thrust out into the sea,
leaving the Galley at ancor, who durst not adventure but by daylight: And so
being all very sober, and melancholy, one faintly chearing another to show
courage, it pleased God that the next day about nine of the clock, we discried
the Island of Trinedado, and stearing for the nearest part of it, we kept the
shore till we came to Curiapan, where we found our ships a ancor, then which,
there was never to us a more joyful sight.

Now that it has pleased God to send us safe to our ships, it is time to
leave Guiana to the Sun, whom they worship, and steare away toward the
north: I will therefore in a few words finish the discovery thereof. Of the
several nations which we found upon this discovery I will once again make
repetition, and how they are affected. At our first entrance into Amana, which
is one of the outlets of Orenoque, we left on the right hand of us in the
bottom of the bay, lying directly against Trinedado, a nation of inhumaine
Canibals, which in habit the rivers of Guanipa and Berbeese; in the same bay
there is also a third river which is called Areo, which rises on Paria side
toward Cumana, and that river is inhabited with the Wikiri, whose chief
town upon the said river is Sayma; In this bay there are no more rivers, but
these three before rehearsed, and the four branches of Amana, all which in
the winter thrust so great abundance of water into the sea, as the same is
taken up fresh, two or three leagues from the land. In the passages toward
Guiana, (that is, in all those lands which the eight branches of Orenoque
fashion into Islands,) there are but one sort of people called Tiuitiuas, but
of two castes as they term them, the one called Ciawani, the other Waraweeti,
and those war one with the other.

On the hithermost part of Orenoque, as at Toparimaca, and Winicapora, those
are of a nation Called Nepoios, and are of the followers of Carapana, Lord of
Emeria. Between Winicapora and the port of Morequito which stands in
Aromaia, and all those in the valley of Amariocapana are called Orenoqueponi,
and did obey Morequito, and are now followers of Topiawari. Upon the river of
Caroli, are the Canuri, which are governed by a woman (who is inheritrix of
that province) who came far off to see our nation, and asked me diverse
questions of her Majesty, being much delighted with the discourse of her
Majesty's greatness, and wondering at such reports as we truly made of her
highness many virtues. And upon the head of Caroli, and on the lake of Cassipa,
are the three strong nations of the Cassipagotos. Right south into the land are
the Capurepani, and Emparepani, and beyond those adjoining to Macureguarai,
(the first City of Inga,) are the Iwarawakeri: all these are professed enemies
to the Spanyardes, and to the rich Epuremei also. To the west of Carols are
diverse nations of Canibals, and of those Ewaipanoma without heads. Directly
west are the Amapatas and Anebas, which are also marvelous rich in gold. The
rest toward Peru we will omit. On the north of Orenoque, between it and the
west Indies are the Wikiri, Saymi, and the rest before spokeen of, all mortal
enemies to the Spanyardes. On the south side of the maine mouth of Orenoque,
are the Arwacas: and beyond them the Caniballes and to the south of them the
Amazones.

To make mention of the several beasts, birds fishes, fruits, flowers,
gummes, sweet woods, and of their several religions and customs, would for
the first require as many volumes as those of Gesnerus, and for the rest
another bundle of Decades. The religion of the Epuremei is the same which the
Ingas, Emperors of Peru used, which may be red in Cieca, and other Spanish
stories, how they believe the immortality of the Soul, worship the Sun, and
bury with them alive their best beloved wives and treasure, as they likewise
do in Pegu in the east Indies, and other places. The Orenoqueponi bury nor
their wives with them, but their Jewels, hoping to enjoy them again. The
Arwacas dry the bones of their Lords, and their wives and friends drink them
in powder. In the graves of the Peruuians, the Spaniards found their greatest
abundance of treasure: The like also is to be found among these people in every
province. They have all many wives, and the Lords five fould to the common
sort: their wives never eat with their husbands, nor among the men, but serve
their husbands at meals, and afterward feed by thamselues. Those that are
past their younger years, make all their bread and drink, and work their
cotton beds, and do all else of service and labor, for the men do nothing
but hunte, fifh, play, and drink, when they are out of the wars.

I will enter no further into discourse of their manners, laws and customs:
and because I have not my self seen the cities of Inga, I cannot auow on my
credit what I have hard, although it be very likely, that the Emperor Inga
has built and erected as magnificent palaces in Guiana, as his ancestors did
in Peru, which were for their riches and rarenes most marvelous and exceeding
al in Europe, and I think of the world, China excepted, which also the
Spaniards (which I had) assured me, to be of truth, as also the nations of the
borderers, who being but Saluaios, to those of the lund, do cause much treasure
to be buried with them for I was informed of one of the Cassiqui of the valley
of Amariocapana which had buried with him a little before our ariuall, a chair
of Goulde most curiously wrought, which was made either in Macuraguarai
adjoining, or in Manca: But if we should have grieved them in their religion at
the first, before they had been taught better, and have dug up their
graves, we had lost them all: and therefore I held my first resolution, that
her majesty should either accept or refuse the enterprice, ere any thing should
be done that might in any sort hinder the same. And if Peru had so many heaps
of Gold, where of those Ingas were Princes, and that they delighted so much
therein no doubt but this which now lives and reigns in Manoa, has the
same honor, and I am assured has more abundance of Gold, within his
territory, then all Peru, and the west Indies.

For the rest, which my self have seen I will promise these things that
follow and know to be true. Those that are desirous to discover and to see many
nations, may be satisfied within this river, which brings forth so many arms
and branches leading to several countries, and provinces, above 2000. miles
east and west, and 800. miles south and north, and of these, the most either
rich in Gold, or in other marchandizes. The common soldier shall here fight for
gold, and pay himself in steed of pence, with plates of half a foot broad,
whereas he breaks his bones in other wars for prouant and penury. Those
commanders and Chieftaines, that shoot at honor, and abundance, shall find
there more rich and bewtifull cities, more temples adorned with golden Images,
more sepulchers filled with treasure, then either Cortez found in Mexico, or
Pazzaro in Peru: and the shining glory of this conquest will eclipse all those
so far extended beams of the Spanish nation. There is no country which
yields more pleasure to the Inhabitants, either for these common delights of
hunting, hawking, fishing, fowling, and the rest, then Guiana does. It has so
many plains, clear rivers, abundance of Phesants, Partridges, Quails,
Rayles, Cranes, Herons, and all other foul: Dear of all sorts, Porkes,
Hares, Lions, Tigers, Leopards, and diverse other sorts of beasts, either for
chase, or food. It has a kind of beast called Cama, or Anta, as big as an
English beef, and in great plenty.

To speak of the several sorts of every kind, I fear would be troublesome
to the Reader, and therefore I will omit them, and conclude that both for
health, good air, pleasure, and riches, I am resolved it cannot be equalled
by any region either in the east or west. Moreover the country is so
healthful, 2 s100. persons and more, which lay (without shift most sluttishly,
and were every day almost melted with heat in rowing and marching, and suddenly
wet again with great showers, and did eat of all sorts of corrupt fruits, and
mademeales of fresh fish without seasoning, of Tortugas, of Lagartas, and of al
sorts good and bad, without either order or measure, and besides lodged in the
open air every night) we lost not any one, nor had one ill disposed to my
knowledge, nor found any Callentura, or other of those pestilent diseales which
dwell in all hot regions, and so nere the Equinoctial line.

Where there is store of gold, it is in effect needles to remember other
commodities for trade: but it has toward the south part of the river, great
quantities of Brasil wood, and diverse berries, that die a most perfect crimson
and Carnation: And for painting, all France, Italy, or the east Indies yield
none such: For the more the skin is washed, the fairer the color appears,
and with which, even those brown and tawnie women spot themselves, and color
their cheeks. All places yield abundance of Cotton, of silk, of Balsamum,
and of those kinds most exellent, and never known in Europe; of all sorts of
Gummes, of Indian pepper: and what else the countries may afforde within the
land we know not, neither had we time to abide the trial, and search. The
soil besides is so excellent and so full of rivers, as it will carry sugar,
ginger, and all those other commodities, which the west Indies has.

The nauigatiou is short, for it may be sailed with an ordinary wind in six
weeks, and in the like time back again, and by the way neither lee shore,
Enemies coast, rocks, nor sands, all which in the voiages to the west indies,
and all other places, we are subject unto, as the channel of Bahama, coming
from the West Indies, can not be passed in the Winter, and when it is at the
best, it is a perilous and a fearful place. The rest of the Indies for
calmes, and diseases very troublesome, and the Bermudas a hellish sea for
thunder, lightning, and storms.

This very year there were seuenteen sail of Spanish ships lost in the
channel of Bahama, and the great Phillip like to have sunk at the Bermudas
was put back to Saint Iuan de puerto rico. And so it falls out in that
Navigations every year for the most part, which in this voyage are not to be
feared: for the time of the year to leave England, is best in July, and the
Summer in Guiana is in October, November, December, January, February, and
March, and then the ships may depart thence in April, and so return again
into England in June, so as they shall never be subject to Winter weather,
either coming, going, or staying there, which for my part, I take to be one of
the greatest comforts and encouragements that can be thought on, having (as I
have done) tasted in this voyage by the west Indies so many Calmes, so much
heat, such outrageous gustes, foul weather, and contrary winds.

To conclude, Guiana is a Country that has yet her Maydenhead, never sacked,
turned, nor wrought, the face of the earth has not been torn, nor the virtue
and salt of the soil spent by manurance, the graves have not been opened for
gold, the mines not broken with fledges, not their Images pulled down out of
their temples. It has never been entered by any army of strength, and never
conquered or possessed by any Christian Prince. It is besides so defensible,
that if two fortes be builded in one of the Provinces which I have seen, the
flood sets in so near the bank, where the channel also lies, that no
ship can pass up, but within a Pikes length of the Artillery, first of the
one, and afterward of the other: Which two Fortes will be a sufficient Guard
both to the Empire of Inga, and to an hundred other several kingdoms, lying
within the said River, even to the city of Quito in Peru.

There is therefore great difference between the easines of the conquest of
Guiana, and the defense of it being conquered, and the West or East Indies:
Guiana has but one entrance by the sea (if it have that) for any vessels of
burden, so as whosoever shall first possess it, it shall be found
inaccessable for any Enemy, except he come in Wherries, Barges, or Canoas, or
else in flat bottomed boats, and if he do offer to enter it in that manner,
the woods are so thick 200 miles together upon the rivers of such entrance,
as a mouse cannot sit in a boat vnhit from the bank. By land it is more
impossible to approach, for it has the strongest situation of any region under
the Sun, and is so environed with impassable mountains on every side, as it
is impossible to victual any company in the passage, which has been well
proved by the Spanish nation, who fince the conquest of Peru have never left
five years free from attempting this Empire, or discovering some way into it,
and yet of 23 several gentlemen, knights, and noble men, there was never any
that knew which way to lead an army by land, or to conduct ships by sea,
any thing near the said country. Oreliano, of which the river of Amazones
takes name was the first, and Don Anthonio de Berreo (whom we displanted) the
last: and I doubt much, whether he himself or any of his, yet know the best
way into the said Empire. It can therefore hardly be regained, if any
strength be formerly set down, but in one or two places, and but two or three
crumsters or galleys buylt, and furnished upon the river within: The west
Indies has many ports, watring places, and landings, and nearer then 300.
miles to Guiana, no ma^can harbor a ship, except he know one only place, which
is not learned in have, and which I will undertake there is not any one of my
companies that knows, whosoever hearkened most after it.

Besides by keeping one good fort, or building one town of strength, the whole
Empire is guarded, and whatsoever companies shall be afterward planted within
the land, although in twenty several provinces, those shall be able all to
reunite themselves upon any occasion either by the way of one river, or be
able to march by land without either wood, bog, or mountain: whereas in the
west Indies there are few towns, or provinces that can succor or relieve one
the other, either by land or sea: By land the countries are either defart,
mounteynous, or strong Enemies: By sea, if any man invade to the Eastward,
those to the west cannot in many months turn against the brize and easterwind,
besides the Spanyardes are therein so dispersed, as they are no where strong,
but in Nueua Hispania only: the sharp mountains, the thorns, and poisoned
prickels, the sandy and deep ways in the valleys, the smothering heat and
air, and want of water in other places, are their only and best defense,
which (because those nations that invade them are not victualled or provided to
stay, neither have any place to friend adjoining) do serve them in steed of
good arms and great multitudes.

The west Indies were first offered her Majesty's Grandfather by Columbus a
stranger, in whomethere might be doubt of deceit, and besides it was then
thought incredible that there were such and so many lands and regions never
written of before. This Empire is made known to her Majesty by her own vassal,
and by him that owes to her more duty then an ordinary subject, so that it
shall ill sort with the many graces and benefits which I have received to abuse
her highness, either with fables or imaginations. The country is already
discovered, many nations won to her Majesty's love and obedience, and those
Spaniards which have latest and longest labored about the conquest, beaten out,
discouraged and disgraced, which among these nations were thought invincible.
Her Majesty may in this enterprise employ all those soldiers and gentlemen
that are younger brethren, and all captains and Cheiftames that want
employment, and the charge will be only the first setting out in victualling and
arming them: for after the first or second year I doubt not but to see in
London a Contratation house of more receipt for Guiana, then there is now in
civil for the West indies.

And I am resolved that if there were but a final army a foot in Guiana,
marching toward Manoa the chief City of Inga, he would yield to her Majesty
by composition so many hundred thousand pounds yearly, as should both defend
all enemies abroad, and defray all expenses at home, and that he would besides
pay a garrison of 3000. or 4000. soldiers very royally to defend him against
other nations: For he cannot but know, how his predecessors, yea how his own
great uncles Guascar and Atibalipa sons to Guanacapa Emperor of Peru, were
(while they contended for the Empire) beaten out by the Spanyardes, and that
both of late years, and ever since she said conquest, the Spanyardes have
sought the passages and entry of his country: and of their cruelties used to
the borderers he cannot be ignorant. In which respects no doubt but he will be
brought to tribute with great gladness, if nor, he has neither shot nor Iron
weapon in all his Empire, and therefore may easily be conquered.

And I farther remember that Berreo confessed to me and others (which I protest
before the Majesty of God to be true) that there was found among prophecies in
Peru (at such time as the Empire was reduced to the Spanish obedience) in their
chiefest temples, amongst diverse others which fore showed the loss of the said
Empire, that from Inglatierra those Ingas should be again in time to come
restored, and delivered from the servitude of the said Conquerors. And I hope
as we with these few hands have displanted the first garrison, and driven
them out of the said country, so her Majesty will give order for the rest, and
either defend it, and hold it as tributary, or conquer and keep it as
Empress of the fame. For whatsoever Prince shall possess it, shall be
greatest, and if the king of Spain enjoy it, he will become irresistable. Her
Majesty hereby shall confirm and strengthen the opinions of al nations, as
touching her great and princely actons. And where the south border of Guiana
reaches to the Dominion and Empire of the Amazones, those women shall hereby
hear the name of a virgin, which is not only able to defend her own
territories and her neighbors, but also to invade and conquer so great Empyres
and so far removed.

To speak more at this time, I fear would be but troblesome: I trust in God,
this being true, will suffice, and that he which is king of all kings and Lord
of Lords, will put it into her heart which is Lady of Ladies to possess it, if
not, I will judge those men worthy to be kings thereof, that by her grace and
leave will undertake it of themselves.

An Abstract taken out of certain Spanyardes Letters concerning Guiana and the
Countries lying upon the great river Orenoque: with certain reports also
touching the same.
An advertisement to the Reader.
Those letters out of which the abstractes following are taken, were surprised
at sea as they were passing for Spain in the year 1594. by Captain George
Popham: who the next year, and the same that Sir Walter Ralegh discovered
Guiana, as he was in a voyage for the west Indies, learned also the reports
annexed. All which, at his return, being two months after Sir Walter, as
also so long after the writing of the former discourse, hearing also of his
discovery: he made known and delivered to some of her majesty's most
honorable privy Council and others. The which seeing they confirm in some
part the substance, I mean, the riches of that Country: it has been
thought fit that they should be thereunto adjoined. Wherein the Reader is to
be advertised, that although the Spanyardes seem to glory much of their
formal possession taken before Morequito the Lord of Aromaya, and others there
aboutes, which thoroughly understood them not at that time, whatsoever the
Spanyardes otherwise pretend: Yet, according to the former discourse, and as
also it is related by Cayworaco, the son of Topiawary now chief Lord of the
said Aromaya, who was brought into England by Sir Walter Ralegh, and was
present at the same possession and discovery of the Spayardes mentioned in
these letters; it appears that after they were gone out of their Country,
the Indians then having farther consideration of the matter, and more then
conjecture of their intent, having known and heard of their former cruelties
upon their borderers and others of the Indians elsewhere: At their next
coming, there being ten of them sent and employed for a farther discovery,
they were provided to receive and entertain them in an other manner of sort
then they had done before; that is to say, they slew them and buried them in
the Country, so much sought. They gave them by that means a full and complete
possession the which before they had but begun. And so they are minded to
do, to as many Spanyardes as come after. Other possession they have had none
since. Neither do the Indians mean as they protest, to give them any other.
One other thing to be remembered is that in these letters the Spaniards seem
to call Guiana and other Countries near it, bordering upon the river of
Orenoque, by the name of Nueuo Dorado, because of the great plenty of Gold
there, in most places to be found. Alluding also to the name of El Dorado
which was given by Martines to the great City of Manoa, as is in the former
treatise specified. This is all I thought good to advertise. As for some other
matters, I leave them to the consideration and judgment of the indifferent
reader.

W: R
Letters taken at Sea by Captain George Popham. 1594.
Allonso his Letter from the Gran Canaria to his brother being commander of S.
Lucas, concerning El Dorado.
There have been certain letters received here of late, of a land newly
discovered called Nueuo Dorado, from the sons of certain Inhabitants of
this City, who were in the discovery: they write of wonderful riches to be
found in the said Dorado, and that gold there is in great abundauce, the
course to fall with it is 50. leagues to the windward to the Marguarita.

Allonsos letter from thence to certain Marchantes of S.Lucas concerning the
Dorado.
SIrs, we have no news worth the writing, saving of a discovery lately made by
the spanyardes in a new land called Nueuo Dorado, and is two days sailing to
the windward of the Marguarita there is gold in that abundance, as the like
has not been hard of. We have it for certain in letters Written from thence
by some that were in the discovery, unto their parents here in this City. I
purpose (God willing) to bestow ten or twelve days in search of the said
Dorado, as I pass in voyag toward Carthagena, hoping there to make some good
sale of our commodities. I have sent you therewith part of the information of
the said discovery, that was sent to his Majesty.

Part of the Copy that was sent to his Majesty of the discovery of Nueuo
Dorado.
In the river of Pato otherwise called Orenoque, in the principal part there
of called Warismero, the 23. of April 1593. Domingo de vera Master of the Camp
and General for Anth. de Berreo Governor and Captain general for our Lord
the King, betwixt the rivers of Pato and Papamene alias Orenoque, and Marannon,
and of the Island of Trinidado, in presence of me Rodrigo de Caranc^a register
for the sea, commanded all the soldiers to be drawn together and put in order
of battle, the Captains and soldiers, and Master of the Camp standing in
the midst of them, said unto them: Sirs, Soldiers, and Captains, you
understand long since that our General Antho de Berreo, with the travel of 11
years, and expense of more then 100000. pesoes of Gold, discovered the royal
provinces of Guiana and Dorado: Of the which he took possession to govern the
same, but through want of his peoples health, and necessary munition, he issued
out at the Island Maguarita, and from thence peopled the Trinedado. But now they
have sent me to learn out and discover the ways most easily to enter, and to
people the said provinces, and where the Camps and Armies may best enter the
same. By reason whereof I intend so to do in the name of his Majesty, and the
said governor Antho: de Berreo, and in token thereof I require you Fran.
Carillo, that you aid me to advance this cross that lies here on the
ground, which they set on end toward the east, and the said Master of the
Camp, the Captains and soldiers kneeled down and did due reverence unto the
said cross, and thereupon the Master of the Camp took a bole of water and
drank it of, and took more and threw abroad on the ground: he also drew out
his sword and cut the grass of the ground, and the boughs of the trees saying,
I take his possession in the name of the king Don Phillip our master, and of
his Governor Antho. de Berreo: and because some make question of this
possession, to them I answer that in these our actions was present the Casique
or principal Don Antho. otherwise called Morequito, whole land this was, who
yielded consent to the said possession, was glad there of, and gave his
obedience to our Lord the King, and in his name to the said governor Antho: de
Berreo. And the said Master of the Camp kneeled down being in his liberty,
and all the Captains and soldiers said that the possession was well taken, and
that they would defend it with their lives, upon whosoever would say the
contrary. And the said Master of the Camp having his sword drawn in his hand
said unto me, register that art here present, give me an instrument or
testimonial to confirm me in this possession, which I have taken of this
land, for the governor Antho. de Berreo, and if it be needful I will take it a
new. And I require you all that are present to witness the same, and do further
declare that I will go on, taking the possession of all these lands
wheresoever I shall enter. Signed thus.

Domingo de vera and vndernetah, Before me Rodrigo de Caranca, Register of the
Army.
And in prosecution of the said possession, and discovery of the way and
provinces, the 27. of April of the said year, the Master of the Camp entered
by little and little with all the Camp and men of war, more then two leagues
into the Inland, and came to a town of a principal, and confering with him
did let him understand by means of Antho: Bisante the Interpretor that his
Majesty and Antho: de Berreo had sent him to take the said possession. And the
said friar Francis Carillo by the Interpretor, delivered him certain things of
our holy Catholic faith, to all which he answered, that they understood him
well and would become Christians, and that with a very good will they should
advance the cross, in what part or place of the town it pleased them, for he
was for the governor Antho: de Berreo, who was his Master. Thereupon the said
master of the Camp took a great cross, and set it on end toward the east,
and requested the whole Camp to witness it and Domingo de vera firmed it thus.

It is well and firmly done, and underneath, before me Rodrigo Caranca,
Register of the Army.
The first of May they prosecuted the said possession and discovery to the
town of Carapana. From thence the said Master of the Camp passed to the town
of Toroco whose principal is called Topiawary being five leagues farther
within the land then the first nation, and well inhabited. And to this
principal by mean of the interpretor they gave to understand that his Majesty
and the said Corrigidor commanded them to take the prossession of that land,
and that they should yield their obedience to his Majesty, and to his
Corrigidor, and to the Master of the Camp in his name, and that in token
thereof he would place a cross in the middle of his town. When run to the said
Cassique answered they should advance it with a very good will, and that he
remained in the obediene of our Lord the King, and of the said Governor
Antho: de Berreo whose vassal he would be.

The fourth of May we came to a province above five leagues thence of all sides
inhabited with much people, the principal of this people came and met us in
peaceable manner: and he is called Renato, he brought us to a very large house
where he entertained us well, and gave us much Gold, and the interpreter as king
him from whence that gold was, he answered from a province not passing a days
journey off, where there are so many Indians as would shadow the sun, and so
much gold as all yonder plain will not contain it. In which Country (when
they enter into the Borachera) they take of the said Gold in dust and anoint
themselves all over there with to make the brauer show, and to the end the
Gold may cover them, they annoint their bodies with stamped herbs of a
glewenous substance: and they have war with those Indians. They promised us
that if we would go unto them they would aid us, but they were such infinite
number as no doubt they would, kill us. And being asked how they gat the same
Gold, they told us they went to a certain down or plain and pulled or dug
up the grass by the root, which done, they took of the earth, putting it in
great buckets which they carried to wash at the river, and that which came in
powder they kept for their Boracheras and that which was in pieces, they
wrought into Eagles.

The eight of May we went from thence, and marched about five leagues: at the
foot of a hill we found a principal called Arataco, with 3000 Indians, men
and women all in peace and with much victual, as hens and venison in great
abundance, and many sorts of wine. He entreated us to go to his house and to
rest that night in his town being of 500. houses. The interpretor asked whence
he had those hens, he said they were brought from a mountain not passing a
quarter of a league thence, where were many Indians, yea so many as grass on
the ground, and that these men had the points of their shoulders higher then
the Crowns of their heads, and had so many hens as was wonderful, and if we
would have any we should send them Jews harpes for they would give for every
one two hens, we took an Indian and gave him 500. harpes, the hens were so
many that he brought us, as were not to be numbered: We said we would go
thither, they told us they were now in their Borrachera and would kill us, we
asked the Indian, that brought the hens if it were true, he said it was most
true. We asked him how they made their Borrachera, he said they had many
Eagles of Gold hanging on their breasts and pearls in their ears, and that
they daunced being al covered with Gold. The India^ said unto us, if we would
see the^, we should give him some hatches, and he would bring us of those
Eagles. The Master of the Camp gave him one hatchet (he would give him no more
because they should not understand we went to seek gold) he brought us an
Eagle which wayed 27 pounds of good Gold. The Master of the Camp took it, and
showed to the soldiers, and then threw it from him, making show not to regard
it. About midnight came an Indian and said unto him, give me a pickeaxe and I
will tell thee what the Indians with the high shoulders mean to do, the
Interpretor told the Master of the Camp who commanded one to be given him, he
then told us those Indians were coming to kill us from our merchandise.
Hereupon the master of the Camp caused his company to be set in order, and
began to march. The 11. day of May, we went about 7 leagues from thence to a
province, where we found a great company of Indians apparrelled, they told us
that if we came to fight, they would fill up those plains with Indians to
fight with us, but if we came in peace, we should enter and be well entertained
of them, because they had a great desire to see Christians, and there they told
us of all the riches that was. I do not here set it down, because there is
no place for it, but it shall appear by the information that goes to his
Majesty, for it should here be set down, four leaves of paper would not
contain it.

The letter of George Burien Britton, from the said Canaries unto his cosen a
french man, dwelling in S.Lucas, concerning the Dorado.
Sir, and my very good cosen, there came of late certain letters from a new
discovered country not far from Trinedado, which they writ, has Gold in
great abundance, the news seems to be very certain, because it passes for
good amongst the best of this City. Part of the information of the discovery
that went to his Majesty, gocth enclosed in Alonsos letters, it is a thing
worth the seeing.

The report of Domingo Martines of Iamica, concerning the Dorado.
He says that in 93 being at Carthagena there was a general report of a late
discovery called Nueuo Dorado, and that a little before him coming thither,
there came a Frigot from the said Dorado, bringing in it the portrature of a
Giant all of Gold, of weight 47 kintals, which the Indians there held for
their Idol. But now admitting of Christianity and obedienee to the King of
Spain, sent their said Idol unto him in token they were become Christians,
and held him for their King. The company coming in the said Frigott reported
Gold to be there in most abundaunce, Diamondes of inestimable value, with
great store of pearl.

The report of a french man called Bountillier of Sherbrouke concerniug the
Trinedado and the Dorado.
He says that being at Trinedado in 91. he had of an Indian there a piece of
Gold of a quarter of a pound in exchange of a knife, the said Indian told
him he had it at the head of the river which comes to Paracoa in the
Trinedado, but said within the river of Orenoque, it was in great abundance.
Also in 93 being taken by the Spanyardes; and brought prisoner into the Island
of Madera (the place for his prison) there came in this mean time a bark of
40 tons from a new discovery, with two millions of Gold, the company whereof
reported Gold in that place to be in great abundances, and called it the Nueuo
Dorado. This french man passed from Spain in the bark, and having a cabben
nere a gentleman, one of the discouerers that came from that place in the said
bark, had diverse times conference with him, and amongst other things of the
great abundance of Gold in the said Dorado being as they said within the river
of Orenoque.

Reports of Certain Marchantes of Rio de Hacha, concerning the Nueuo Dorado.
They said (advancing the kings great treasure in the Indies) that Nueuo Reyno
yielded very many Gold mines, and wonderful rich, but latly was discovered a
certain province so rich in Gold as the report thereof may seem incredible, it
is there in such abundance, and is called the Nueuo Dorado: Anthonio de Berreo
made the said discovery.

The Report of a Spanyard, Captain with Berreo in the discovery of Nueuo
Dorado.
That the information sent to the K. was in every point truly said, that the
river Orenoque has seven mouths, or out lets into the sea, called Las Sciete
bocas de drago, that the said river runs far into the land, in many places
very broad, and that Antho: de Berreo lay at Trinedado making head to go to
conquer and people the said Dorado.


