A TREATISE OF THE SACRAMENT OF CONFIRMATION WHEREIN IS SHOWED THE NECESSITY,
spiritual profit, and excellency of this Sacrament. Composed by W* ^*

S. Melchiades Epist. 2. Albeit to those that are straightwaies to die the
benefit of Baptism do suffice, yet to those that are to live the help of
Confirmation is necessary. Printed at Doway by GERARD PINCHON, at the figne of
Coleyn, 1629.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
GENTLE READER
I was induced to compose this short treatise of the Sacrament of Confirmation
for two Causes: The one was to supply the Bishop of Chalcedon his want of
opportunity sufficiently to instruct those to whom he ministers this
Sacrament; For the holy Council of Trent commanding Bishops, that at what
times they administer this Sacrament, they should declare to the people the
dignity and profits thereof, that thereby they may come more worthily to
receive it, and that he has seldom opportunity to make any such sufficient
declaration: I thought it fit to supply the want of his Speech, by this my
writing. The other was to instruct both those who had received this Sacrament
how great a benefit they had received; that thereby they may be the more
grateful unto Almighty God, and more careful not to receive the grace of God
in vain, but to make use thereof to their greater glory and happiness; and
also to let those who have not yet received, know, what obligation they have
to receive it, and what a great good they want, that thereby they may do
their best to procure it. And because I write only to Catholics, I prove not
that either it is a Sacrament, or that it gives grace, or imprinteth a
spiritual Character in our Souls; but supposing all these points (which the
Catholic faith teaches us) I only attend to show the necessity,
spiritual profit, and excellency of this Sacrament: and this I do not so
fully as perhaps the learned would expect, and the matter requires, nor as
perchance I could, If I had more leisure or more store of books, but so far
as may give the learned occasion to think of more, and so to profect this
treatise, and as may suffice to the unlearned to know their duty toward
this Sacrament, as by diverse good treatises in our English tongue, they learn
their duty concerning the Sacraments of Confession and of the holy Altar: And
I wish they had the like Treatises of all the other Sacraments, that thereby
they might better know the bou^tie of Almighty God, the spiritual riches
and treasure of the Catholic Church, and their own happiness and felicity
in being Catholics; Farewell the 24. of June 1629.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS Contained in this Treatise.
Chap. I. HOw it is certain, that the Sacrament of Confirmation is necessary,
or not necessary: and how it is doubtful. page 1. Chap. II. That it was the
general Custom of Christ's Church even from her beginning, that Christians
should be confirmed. page 12. Chap. III. That there was a Law or
Commandment in the Church of God, that Christians should be confirmed. page
30. Chap. IV. That there was an Ecclesiastical precept of Confirmation, proved
out of diverse other sayings of the holy Fathers. page 40. Chap. V. That in
England Christians are bound to be confirmed by an express Command of diverse
Provincial Counsels. page 48. Chap. VI. The necessity of Confirmation proved
by the authority of Divines and Canonists. page 57. Chap. VII. Of the effects
of Confirmation common to all that receive it. page 79. Chap. VIII. Of the
effects which Confirmation works in those that worthily receive it. p. 88.
Chap. IX. Of the Prerogatives of the Sacrament of Confirmation. page 100. Chap.
X. What Ceremonies are required in the administration of the Sacrament of
Confirmation. page 121. Chap. XI. What disposition is required in those that
receive the Sacrament of Confirmation. page 125. Chap. XII. How one may know
whether he has worthily received the Sacrament of Confirmation. page 128.
APPROBATIO.
EGo infrascriptus Sacrae Theologiae Doctor and Collegij Anglorum Duaceni
Praeses testor me legisse libellu^ cui titulus, A Treatise of the Sacrament of
Confirmation; nihilque in eo deprehendisse quod fidei Catholicae aut bonis
moribus vllatenus aduersatur: quinimo vtilissimam ac saluberrimam doctrinam
continere qua populus Christianus instrui potest de vtilitate and necessitate
suscipiendi Sacrame^tum Confirmationis; nec non de modo conseruandigratiam per
illud acceptam. Datum Duaci. IV. Non. Sept. M. DC. XXIX.

MATTHAEVS KELLISONVS.

Visa hac approbatione Ex. Domini M. N. Matthaei Kellisoni, and mihi probe
perspecta eiusdem probitate and eruditione; hunc tractatum de Sacramento
Confirmationis, vtiliter praelo committi posse Censui. Duaci 3. Septembris 1629.

GEORGIUS COLVENERIVS Sacrae Theologiae Doctor and regius ordinariusque
Professor, Collegiatae Ecclesiae S. Petri Praepositus and Canonicus, Academiae
Duacenae Cancellarius, and librorum Censor.

OF THE NECESSITY, SPIRITVALL PROFIT, AND Excellency of the Sacrent. of
Confirmation.
CHAPTER. I. How it is certain, that the Sacrament of Confirmation is
necessary, or not necessary: and how it is doubtful.
EVERY thing that is necessary, is necessary to some end or purpose. Now
there be two ends, to which one may think that Confirmation is necessary:
The one is Salus, (as divines Two ends to which Confirmation may be thought
necessary
speak) that is, Christianity or Salvation: The other is Perfectio Salutis,
that is perfection or Co^plement of Christianity or of Salvation; For as in
our corporal life, we be first Children, and after perfect or complete men:
So in our spiritual life we be first Children and (as S. Peeter speaks,
Like Infants 1. Petr. 2.
newborn, weak and imperfect, and after by spiritual growth and strenght we
become perfect and complete Christians.

And as there are these two ends, to which it may be thought that Confirmation
is necessary: So also there are two kinds of necessities Two kinds of
necessity.
by which likewise it may be thought that it is necessary to either of them;
For some things are necessary (as Philosophers and divines speak) necessitate
medij, as a necessary means, because it is the only mean to attain unto
such an end; So is a ship necessary to travel by Sea, food for to live, and
the like; Other things are necessary necessitate praecepti by necessity of
precept or command, which are not simply necessary of them selves, but only
because they are commanded; So to fast in Lent, to communicate at Easter, and
the like, are necessary to Salvation, because they are commanded by the
Church.

Now certain it is and undoubted, Confirmation not necessary as a necessary
mean to Salvation.
that Confirmation is not necessary necessitate medij, as a necessary mean
to Salvation, because it is not instituted by our Savior as a necessary mean
to save us; For as Saint Thomas and divines S. Thom. 3. q. 65. ar. 4.
teach, in this sort three only Sacraments are necessary: to wit, Baptism
to all, and Penance to every one that after Baptism falls into mortal
sin, and Order in respect of the whole Church, for where there Proverbs. 11.
is no Governors the people will fall; And in like manner certain it is, that
Confirmation is necessary necessitate medij, But necessary as a mean to the
perfection of Salvation.
as a necessary mean to the perfection or Complement of Christianity or
Salvation for to become a perfect or complete Christian; For as Baptism is by
Christ instituted as a necessary mean to Salvation or Christianity, so as
none can be saved or be a Christian, if he may be baptized, and will not:
So is Confirmation instituted by him, as a necessary mean to the perfection
of Christianity or Salvation, in such sort as none can attain to the
perfection or complement of Christianity or Salvation, if he may be confirmed
and will not, And therefore Without Confirmation he s^all neit^er have the
Cha^a^^er of a Souldiet of Christ, nor the Sacramental grace of Confirmation.
Saint Cornelius Pope and Martyr in Eusebius l. 6. Histor. c. 35. says of
Nouatian the Heretic, who had not been confirmed: Which (Confirmation) he
having not received, how I pray you had he the holy Ghost? The like says,
saint Clement, saint Fabian and others hereafter related chap. 3. Likewise
saint Thomas. 3. p. quaest. 72. artic. 6. As none obtains the effect of
Baptism without the desire of Baptism: So none obtains the effect of
Confirmation without the desire of Confirmation; And Cardinal Bellarmin l. 1.
de Sacrament. c. 22. expressly says, that The Eucharist, Confirmation, and
Extreme Unction Confirmation, necessary means ad been esse.
are necessary, necessitate medij (as necessary means) ad been esse (to the
perfection of a Christian) supposing Gods institution. Also necessary to the
Sacramental grace thereof.


In like manner it is certain, that none can have the Sacramental grace of
Confirmation, unless he be confirmed, because this Sacrament is instituted as
a necessary mean to give the Sacramental grace aunswearable unto it; Which
what it is we shall see in the 8. Chapter. Wherefore wisely and piously
advised Sotus in 4. d. 11. qu. 2. art. 1. Mark diligently, that the desire of
receiving the blessed Sacrament does not suffice to give the Sacramental grace
thereof. For it is a general Rule common to all Sacraments, that the degree of
grace which aunsweareth to the Sacrament, is never given unles the Sacrament
be actually received: And therefore Admonition of Sotus to be noted of
Priests.
Parishpriests are much to be admonished that they omit not for any light
cause to give the Eucharist to sick persons thereby depriving the^ of that
degree of grace: And it is evident in Baptism: For though with Contrition and
desire of Baptism, a man may so far attain to the effect of Baptism, as
he has remission of his Sins, yet neither does he attain to that degree
of grace, which Baptism of it self gives, but only to that degree which is
aunswerable to his Contritio^: neither receives he the Character of Baptism,
nor full pardon of all the pain due to his Sins, as he should do, if he
were actually baptized: And in like sort he that has no effectual desire to
be confirmed, receives no effect at all of this Sacrament; And he that What
they want that are not confirmed.
desires it, but yet is not actually confirmed, neither receaueth the
Character, nor that Sacramental grace due to this Sacrament, but that only
which is answeareable to his virtuous desire. And Confirmation being thus
necessary necessitate medij, as a necessary mean to the been esse, or the
Complement and perfection of a Christian, and also to receive the Character and
Sacramental Grace of this Sacrament, every pious and virtuous Christian sees,
how much he ought to desire it, and how loath he should be to want it,
though there were no Commandment at all to receive it: And much more, when he
shall see, that it is also necessary necessitate praecepti, as a thing
Confirmation necessary necessitate praecepti.
commanded, which I will prove in the Chapters following, against some who
call it in question or deny it; And first I will prove it out of the general
Custom of Christ's Church even from her first beginning.

CHAPTER. II. That it was the general Custom of Christ's Church even from her
beginning, that Christions should be confirmed.
ALbeit Christ, in the time of his mortal life, did not give the Sacrament
Why Christ did not give the Sacrament ^f Confirmation in his life time.
of Confirmation; because (as saint Thomas says. 3. p. qu. 72. art. 1.) in
this Sacrament is given the Fulness of the holy Ghost which was not to be given
before Christ's Resurrection and Ascension, according to that of S. John. 7. The
Spirit was not yet given, because JESUS was not yet glorified. Nevertheless
did he both institute this Sacrament, as he did all the rest, and also as
saint Fabian Pope and Martyr says Epist. 2. On Mandate Thursday: (As our
Predecessors received of the Apostles and they have left to us) he Christ
taught to make Chrisme.
taught them to make Chrisme: and also he expressly commanded his Apostles,
that they should tarry in Jerusalem Luc. vls.
till they were endued with power from high, that is, till they had received
that spiritual strenght, which is given by this Sacrament: For this is that
power or Strength whereof he meant, as we shall see hereafter.

Now after his Ascension, Grace of Confirmation first given on whit sunday.
upon the day of Pentecost or Whitsonday, he bestowed upon his Apostles and
disciples, in a miraculous and extraordinary manner, and in an abundant
degree, the grace of this Sacrament, without the Sacrament it self; For (as
the holy Fathers See infra cap. 8.
and divines teach) that grace which was then given them, was the grace of the
Sacrament of Confirmation; So that the grace of this Sacrament was bestowed
upon the Church of Christ, even at that very time when she was perfected and
accomplished, and when Christ's law was published and proclaimed by the
Apostles in Jerusalem unto all nations, (as Act. 2.
saint Luke speaks) under heaven; Or rather, the grace of this Sacrament was
given to the Church of Christ for to perfect and accomplish her, and to give
her courage for to publish and proclaim Christ's law. And thus we see, that
Christ confirmed his disciples; Now let us see, that the Apostles and holy
Bishops their Successors, did the like to their followers.

Not long after this, and as soon as the Apostles had understood, that the
Samaritans, The Apostles care to give Confirmation.
had been baptized by Philipp the Deaco^, straightway they sent two of the
cheifest Apostles, saint Peeter and saint John, of purpose to confirm them,
thinking that a journey worthy of such great personages; Who (says saint
Luke, Act. 8.) did impose their hands upon them, and they received the holy
Ghost: In like manner saint Paul S. Paul's care of the same.
was careful to enquire of Christians, whether they had received the holy
Ghost, and when they answered that they had not, he imposed hands upon them,
and the holy Ghost came upon them: Actorum 19. Both which places the holy
Fathers and Divines do understand of the Sacrament of Confirmation. And hereby
we see, both the Custom, and the great care the holy Apostles had to
confirm the Christians, let us see the like of the holy Bishops their
Successors.

Saint Denis Scholar to the Apostles in his Book de Ecclesiastica The same in
S. Denis his time.
Hierarchia cap. 2. describing, what was done to one in those times, that was
Christened, says: And the Priests taking him that is Baptized, deliver him to
his Godfather who brought him thither, and together with him putt upon him a
garment, beeseeming the purity of one that is baptized, and so attyred they
lead him again to the Bishop. He signing the man with divine designing
ointment, makes him partaker of the most holy Communion. For that perfecting
ointment makes him so perfected, notable with the fragrant smell of sweet
odor. And Cap. 4. Even to him who is consecrated with the holy mystery of
regeneration, the inunction of ointment gives the coming of the holy Ghost.
Behold, how they that were Christened, were anointed with divine ointment of
the Bishop, and thereby received the holy Ghost.

Tertullian also, not long In Tertullian his time.
after the Apostles time, writes thus; l. de Baptism. Then going from the
Lauer, we were anointed with a holy ointment according to the ancient
discipline. Whence Christ is called of Christ of Chrisme.
Chrisme, which is ointment, which gave our Lord his name: And, l. de Resur. c.
7. and l. 1. contra Mart. he has these words: The flesh is anointed, that
the Soul may be consecrated; the flesh is signed, that the Soul may be
fenced: the flesh by imposition of hands is shadowed, that the Soul by the
Spirit may be illuminated. Lo, how those that were Christened, were also
anointed with holy Chrisme and that according to ancient discipline; and that
their flesh was anointed, signed, and shadowed by imposition of hands, that
their Soul might be fensed, consecrated and illuminated by the Spirit.

S. Cyprian Epistola ad Iubaian; In S. Cyprians time.
Therefore because the Samaritans had received a lawful and ecclesiastical
Baptism, they were not to be baptized again: but that only which wanted was
done by Peeter and John, that prayer being made for them and hands imposed
upon them the holy Ghost might be inuocated and poured upon them: which now
also is done with us, that who are baptized in the Church, be offerred to
the Prelates of the Church, and by our power and imposition of hands, they may
attain the holy Ghost, and be signed with our Lords mark. In which words
he plainly says, that the Apostles confirmed the baptized Samaritans, and
that the Prelates of the Church in his time did the same.

The Council of Eliberie, which was held toward the At the end of the time of
persecution.
end of the persecution of the Primative Church, thus ordains Conc. 38. They
that travel by Sea a far of, if a Church be not near, a Christian may
baptize a Catechumene in extremity of sickness: but so, as if he recover, he
bring him to a Bishop that by imposition of hands he may be perfected. Of the
like law or decree make mention S. Cornelius, saint Hierome, and others whose
words shall be related; And thus we see the Custom and care of the
primative Church in her time of persecution under Heathen Emperors, for
confirming of those that were Christined. Now let us see her like custom in
time of Calm under Christian Emperors.

Saint Hierome, who lived In S. Hieroms time.
soon after the foresaid time of persecution, Dial. co^tra Lucifer. writes
thus in the person of a Luciferian: Art thou ignorant, that this is the Custom
of the Churches, that hands be after imposed upon them that are baptized, and
so the holy Ghost be inuocated? Do thou ask where it is written? In the
Acts of the Apostles. And if Custom of all the world.
there were no authority of Scripture, the consent of all the world to this
part would be as good as a precept. And saint Hierome answers in the person
of a Catholic: Surely I do not deny, that this is the Custom of the
Churches, that the Bishop make a progress into small towns for to impose
hands upon those, that have been baptized by Priests and Deacons for the
invocation of the holy Ghost: But what a matter is it, that thou wilst abuse
the Law of the Church.
Laws of the Church for herefie? Behold, how by the Confession, both of
Catholics and Heretics, it was in saint Hieroms time a Law and Custom of
the Church, and of all the world, that the Bishop should confirm those, who
had been baptized by Priests or Deacons, and that this is that which weeread
the Apostles to have do^ in their Acts. S. Prosper scholar to S. Austin S.
Austins time.
in his 34. sent. gathered out of S. Austin, has these words: Christ's name is
from Chrisme, that is, from anointing. For that end is every Christian
sanctified, that he may know he is partaker, not only of Priestlie and
Princely dignity, but also is made a wrastler against the Diuill; And the
like words has saint Austin. Tra. 33. in Ioannem. And. l. de Eccles. dogmat.
52. and habetur de Cons. d. 4. C. Si qui, he does appoint, that those that are
converted from Heresy: Be confirmed and strengthened by imposition of hands
and Chrisme, be admitted to receive the Eucharist.

S. Isidor, who was Scholar to S. Gregory the great, In S. Gregory's time.
l. 2. de off. c. 15. writes thus: And there was at that same time mystical
unction only in Kings and Priests, because Christ was figured, whence even
the name is derived. But after that our Lord the eternal King and Priest, was
anointed of God his heavenly Father with mystical ointment, now not only
Priests and Kings but all the Church is All the Church.
consecrated with the ointment of Chrisme, because it is a member of the
eternal Priest and King.

Rabanus l. 1. de Instit. Cler. c. 30. Last of all the holy Ghost is given of
the Bishop by imposition of hands unto the baptized, that he may be
strengthened by the holy Ghost to preach unto others the same guifte.

Author de unction Chrismatis in Saint Cyprian: Now in the holy Church, is
holy Chrisme made with other ointments for to sanctify the purchased people,
to be partakers of the dignity and name; The fulness of this grace is poured
upon all Catholics that as Christ is All Catholics.
called of Chrisme, in that God has anointed him with the oil of singular
excellency: So also, whosoever are partakers of him, may be partakers both of
the ointment and name. More Fathers might be alleged, but these may suffice
to know, that it was the general Custom of the Church even from the
beginning, that Christians being baptized, should be confirmed of a Bishop.
And seeing that Custo^e (as Divines and Lawyers Custom binds as well as a
Law.
teach) is a law not written, and binds as well as a written law does, it is
evident, that by this general Custom, Christians in times past were bound to
be confirmed. Now let us see, that some of them expressly say, that there
was also a law of this.

CHAPTER. III. That there was a Law or Commandment in the Church of God, that
Christians should be confirmed.
SAint Clement Pope and Successor to saint Peeter, Epistola, 4. writes thus:
All must make have without delay to be regenerated to God, and after
Christians must be confirmed.
to be signed of the Bishop, that is, to receive the Seauenfold grace of the
holy Ghost, -- Because otherwise Not a perfect Christian without Confirmation.
he cannot be a perfect Christian, nor have place among the perfect, if he
remanie so, not upon necessity, but through negligence and his own will,
as we have received of saint Peeter and the rest of the Apostles have taught
according to the Commandment of our Lord. In which words he seems to say,
that it is a commandment of Christ, that Christians should be confirmed: of
which opinion are absolutely diverse great divines, as Scotus in 4. d. 7. q. 2.
Richardus 16. art. 5. Thomas Walden l. 2. cap. 3. Sotus lect. 2. de Confir. and
others; and of the same mind (for time of persecution) are Durand Gabriell,
Marsilius, Turrecremata, and also Filliucius tract. 3. c. 2.

S. Fabian Pope and Martyr Epistola 2. having said (as before is related) that
Christ taught the Apostles to make Chrisme, and that it is to be renewed every
year, adds: These things we received of the Apostles and their
Successors, and we command The Apostles commanded the making of Chrisme.
them to be observed of you; and a little after: The Apostles taught these
things that the old Chrisme should be burnt, and suffered it not to be used
above one year, and commanding thaught that we should use the nevve and not
the old; And surely if the Apostles did make such commandment touching
Chrisme, which is but the matter of this Sacrament, it is most likely, that
they made some Commandment touching the Sacrament it self.

Saint Cornelius also Pope ad Martyr in Eusebius l. 6. Histor. thus writes of
Nouatian, who afterward became an Heretic: In the bed where he Lay,
being sprinkled with water, he was baptized: but recovering of his sickness
neither had he the other things which according to the Canon of A Canon of
the Church to be confitmed.
the Church he should have, neither was he signed of the Bishop with our
lords mark, which having not received, how I pray you had he the holy
Ghost? Wherein he seems to avouch, that it was a Canon of the Church, that
Christians being baptized, should be singned, that is confirmed, of the
Bishop, and that for want thereof, Nouatian had not received the holy Ghost.

Theodoret. l. 3. Fab. speaking of the Nouatian Heretics, Holy Fathers
command Confirmation.
followers of the foresaid Nouatian, says: They give not holy Chrisme to those
whom they baptize, wherefore the holy Fathers have commanded, that those who
out of this Heresy are united to the Church, be anointed; Behold a plain
Commandment of the holy Fathers, that Christians be anointed with holy
Chrisme. And the same confirms saint Petrus Damianus, Ser. 1. de Dedicat.
Eccles. in these words: The Decretalls and The Decrees of Fathers for
Confirmation.
Constitutions of holy Fathers do decree, that the virtue of this Sacrament
(of Confirmation) is not to be differred after Baptism, least that the
deceitful adversary find us unarmed; Saint Hierome, also in the words before
cited expressly says that it is a law of the Church; And of this opinion are
many grave divines as Alensis, saint Bonauenture, Paludanus, Siluester, and
others; And as Maldonate says, q. 2. de Confirm. The Example of the Apostles
and so general Custom of the Church, has taken place of a precept; And of
the same opinion are, or ought to be all they, who either say, that
Confirmation is commanded, as Bellarmine l. 1. de Sacram. c. 22. for they must
at least mean, that it is commanded by an Ecclesiastical precept: or say,
that it is a venial Sin not to be confirmed even without contempt, as
Nauar. Man. c. 22. number. 9. Caietan. verb. Confirmatio, No sin is where no
precept is.
Victoria lib. var. resol. c. 10. and others, because no sin ca^ be, where
there is no Commandment. And much more the Canonists, who (as we shall
hereafter report out of Paludan. in 4. d. 7.) do say, that it is a mortal
sin not to be confirmed when one may.

Moreover, seeing there is an Apostolical precept of August. l. 2. de visit.
infirm. c. 4. Nec praetermittendum est illud Iacobt Apostoli preceptu^.
Infirmatur quit etc.
being anoiled when one is sick, delivered by S. James chap. 5. why shall we
not think also, that there was an Apostolical precept of Confirmation, at
least in time of persecution? because two ends of this Sacrament do then take
place, to wit, to beecome perfect, and complete Christians, which end holds
even in time of peace, and also to have spiritual strength and armor to
profess Christ's faith, which is more proper for time of persecution; And who
being to go to a dangerous Co^bat, and may have sure Armor, Confirmation
more necessary in persecution then extreme unction at death.
and will not, exposes himself to danger of being killed: Besides, more
Christians fall from their faith in time of persecution then in time of
sickness or natural death. If therefore extreme vnctio^ were by the Apostles
commanded to the^ that are in danger of natural death, why not Confirmation
to those that are in danger of violent death by persecution? Unless we will
think, that the Apostles had less care of Christians when they are in greater
danger, then when they are in less. But this Ecclesiastical precept of
Confirmation, which we have proved out of the expressie sayings of some
Fathers, let us also prove out of diverse other sayings of theirs.

CHAPTER. IIII. That there was an Ecclesiastical precept of Confirmation,
proved out of diverse other sayings of the holy Fathers.
SAint Cyprian l. 2. Epistola 1. ad Ianuar. It is necessary Confirmation
necessary.
(says he) that he who is Christened, be anointed, that having received
Chrisme, that is, unction, he may be both the anointed of God, and have the
grace of Christ in him.

Saint Melchiades Pope Epistola ad Episc. Hispan; inserted in the Canons de
Co^secr. d. 5. But these two Sacraments (Baptism and Confirmation)
Confirmation not to be separate from Baptism.
are so united, that unless it be by reason of death, they may not be
parted, and the one may not rightly be given without the other -- Again -- If
the benefit of Regeneration suffice for them, that are ready to die; yet the
help of Confirmation is necessary Necessary.
for them that are to live.

S. Urban Pope and Martyr Epistola, ad om. Christianos Christians must be
confirmed.
related in the Canons loco cit. All the faithful after baptism must receive
the holy Ghost, by imposition of hands of the Bishop, that they may be full
Christians.

The Council of Laodicea, Canon. 4. 8. The baptized Must be confirmed.
must after baptism receive most holy Chrisme, and be made partakers of the
holy kingdom.

Saint Pacian Epistola. 3. How has your people the holy Must be confirmed.
Ghost, whom an anointed Priest does not sign? The like had saint Cornelius
above cited.

Saint Cyrill Cathechisme 3. mystag. Having received this Not properly
Christians without Confirmation.
gift of holy Chrisme, you are rightly called Christians, making true the
naming in the regeneration; For before this grace was given you, you were not
properly worthy of that name, but going forward, you are come so far, as you
are made Christians.

The Council of Orleans Cap. 3. cited in the Canons loco cit. He shall never
be a Not Christians.
Christian, unless he be anointed with Episcopal Confirmation.

And why should these holy Counsels and Fathers say that Confirmation is
necessary to Christians, that Christians must be confirmed; that without
death Confirmation is not rightly separate from Baptism: that without
Confirmation we are not full Christians, not properly Christians, and simply
not Christians, unless they thought, that Confirmation was at least necessary
by necessity of precept?

Moreover, saint Leo, Epistola S. Leo bewaileth want of Confirmation.
73. al. 75. greatly bewaileth, that in a place the hallowing of Chrisme had
failed, which thing was to be bewailed in England for many years; And the Sea
Apostolic has been so loath, that Christians should want Confirmation, that
sometimes she has given leave to Priests to confirm for want of Bishops,
albeit many grave Divines think, that such power cannot be given to Priests;
And likewise, in times of Interdict, when she forbids to minister extreme
unction, yet she forbids not Confirmation, no more then Baptism or
Confession: which argues, that she thinks Confirmation to be more
necessary then extreme unction.

To the former sayings of Fathers we may add, that Hugo de sanct. Victore
(related by saint Thomas 3. p. q. 72. art. 8.) affirms. It would Danger to
die without Confirmation.
be most dangerous, if one should depart out of this life without
Confirmation; And though saint Thomas add, that he should not be damned
without contempt; yet neither does Hugo say, that it were dangerous to die
with contempt of Confirmation, but without Confirmation, which insinuates a
necessity of Confirmation it self; Neither perhaps does saint Thomas there
take Contempt so strictly, as it is distinguished from negligence, both for
that we shall say hereafter, as also because him self there says: This is
natures intention, that every one that is corporally borne, do come to perfect
age; And much more it is Gods intention to bring all things to perfection;
Gods intention that we be confirmed.
whereupon it is said Deutr. 32. Gods works are perfect; And therefore this
Sacrament must be given to all; And if it be Gods intention, that every one
be confirmed, and that every one must be confirmed, this argues, that even
negligence of this Sacrament is dangerous, as we shall see more hereafter
Cap. 6.

CHAPTER. V. That in England Christians are bound to be confirmed by an
express Command of diverse Provincial Counsels.
ARchbishop Peckham in a Provincial Council held at Lambeth Anno 1271. made
this decree: Many Expres Command of Confirmation in England.
rashly neglect the Sacrament of Confirmation; which damnable negligence we
resisting, do decree, that none be admitted to the Sacrament of the body and
blood of our Lord (except at the point of death) unless he have been
confirmed, or justly hindered from receiving Confirmation: In which decree I
note, that not contempt of Confirmation, but even rash negligen^e that is,
gross negligence Even negligence of Confirmation damnable.
thereof, is counted damnable; likewise, that it commands to receive
confirmation under a great punishment, to wit, of not receiving the blessed
Sacrament, which is a certain sign that it commands it under mortal
sin. And this Priests must not communicate those that will not be confirmed.
decree, that Priests might better remember it, is putt into the Rituall or
Sacrame^tall of Sarum; where also the Priest is appointed to command the
Parents, that they carry their Child to the Bishop if he come with in seven
Miles of them.

Stephen also Archbishop of Canterbury in a Provincial Council at Oxford
Anno 1230. commands, that Priests do often admonish the People for
Confirmation of their Children after Baptism; And Linwood l. 1. de Sacram.
iter. C. Ignorantia: relates these words of an other Provincial Canon. Five
Sacraments (debent) must be received of all Christians, to wit Baptism,
Confirmation etc. Wherevppo^ Linwood says: They must be Must of necessity
be confirmed.
received of necessity, as appears by that word (Debent) ar. de cel. Miss.
C. exparte.

And besides these express General Custom of England to be confirmed.
Canons, there was such a general Custom in England of being confirmed, that
as D. Saunders l. de Schism. testifies, it was accounted infamous not to have
been confirmed before one was seven years old: And (as before we said) a
general Custom binds as well as a law; So that in England there be two
strong bonds to bind Catholics to be confirmed, to wit, Provincial Canons,
and general Custom; Neither let any think, that these Canons or Canons of
the Church of England not abrogated.
Custom, are abrogated by this long Non-vse, or discontinuance in time of
Schism. For besides, that these Canons were confirmed again in a Provincial
Council held by Cardinal Pole in time of Queen Mary, and this Custom then
renewed with such ze^e of English Catholics, as in some places the Church
could not contain D. Saunders de Schism.
the People that flocked to the Bishop, that he was feign to confirm in the
Churchyard, and to be defended by armed men from the press of the people.
Besides I say this, it is not mere Non-vse or not practice for want of the case
of the law (as was here in former times for want of a Bishop) that does
abrogate a law, as all Divines and lawyers agree, but it must be a positive
practice against the law, when the case of the law is. But in England
heretofore has been a mere Non use of the said Canons ad Custom, for want of
a Bishop by whom men might be confirmed, and no positive practice or
discontinuance of all or of the greatest part of Catholics, when there was
means to be confirmed; wherefore howsoever Catholics in other Countries be
not bound to be confirmed by any Ecclesiastical law, because perhaps they,
by a contrary custom have abrogated the law, even when the case of the law
was, and means were to be confirmed, yet in England they are bound under
mortal sin to observe this law of Confirmation, as well as they are bound
to observe other Ecclesiastical laws, of communicating at Easter, confessing
o^cea year, hearing mass on holidays, abstayning from flesh on forbidden
days, fasting on Fridayes, and the like, to wit, when they can observe them
without their notable prejudice or danger; And in the same manner, Priests
are bound not to give the blessed Sacrent. to such as are notably negligent in
this point, unless it be at the hour of their death, because the foresaid
Canon as well binds Canons of Confirmation mo^e bind ^ow then in Catholic
times.
Priests to this, as it binds laics to the other; yea the foresaid Canons
have more reason to bind now then in Catholic times, by reason that we not
only live in persecution, but also because we live amongst Protestants who
contemn this Sacrament, with whom by our deed, that is, by our gross
negligence thereof, we may seem to consent: And (even as they grant, who say
there is no sin not to be confirmed) a man may sin herein mortally by
reason of scandal if so he behaueth himself, as he gives suspicion of
contempt; And thus much for the necessity of Confirmation out of the general
Custom of Gods Church, out of the Churches law thereof, out of the holy
Fathers, and out of the Provincial Constitutions of the Catholic Church of
England. Now let us hear the opinions of Divines and Canonists.

CHAPTER VI. The necess^tie of Confirmation proved by the authority of Divines
and Canonists.
FIrst, all agree, that it is a Mortal Sin not to be confirmed of contempt.
mortal Sin, not to be confirmed upon contempt of the Sacrament, and the
holy Council of Trent thus speaks of the contempt of extreme unction.
Sessio. 14. cap. 3. Neither can the contempt of so great a Sacrament be
without great sin and injury to the holy Ghost; And doubtless the same is
of the contempt of Confirmation: And though contempt strictly taken be more
then negligence, for as Sotus in 4. d. 7. q. un. art. 8. What Contempt is
properly.
says; Contempt, as the word sounds, is to make no account of athing, and to
reject it as if it were nothing, yet in this matter they seem to confound it
with gross negligence; First, because such a formal contempt of a Sacrament,
can scarce fall into the mind of a Catholic, who believes it to be an
Instrument of grace; For how can a man, that contemns not grace, contemn an
Instrument of grace? Secondly, because not only our foresaid Provincial Canon
does expressly say that gross negligence of Confirmation is Gross negligence
damnable.
damnable, but also some others do express them selves, that in this matter
by contempt, they mean gross negligence. For thus writes Linwood upon the
foresaid Canon l. 1. tit. de sanct. vnct. C. Confirmationis; Where one may be
confirmed, and will not, such negligence falls into Contempt. For to neglect,
and to contemn in a manner are equal; For albeit in their natures they be
different, as is gathered 20. d. Si decreta. Yet sometimes the Canons use these
words indifferently as notes Card. and Archid. de Electione C. Cup^entes
verb. Contempserit in 6. And here note, where negligence rises of ones fault,
as that being monished and induced by his Curate to go to Confirmation, he
will not but neglects to be confirmed, while he has means of a Bishop who
can and would confirm What negligence of Confirmation worse then Contempt.
him, then such negligence is compared, not only to contempt, but also to
deceit. Ar. C. vnic. in fin. de concess. praebend. in Clem. Et faciunt ^ot per
Io. And Gloss. fin. de Appellat. C. Ab eo. l. 6. Mark Here, what negligence of
Confirmation, Linwood accounts not only contempt, but also worse. Angelus
also verb. Confirmatio says out of Paludan: That he s^meth to When is
contempt, of Confirmation.
contemn, when having sufficient opportunity, without any reasonable cause
does not receive this Sacrament; And the same has Tolet. l. 2. Instruct. c.
24. and adds l. 7. c. 3. That it were contempt (of Extreme When of Extreme
Unction.
Unction) when the time being of Extreme Unction, and occasion offered of
receiving it, not to receive it, as we (says he) said of Confirmation; And
the Gloss. de Elect. C. Cupientes in 6. Make Here no difference beetweene
contemn and reglect, though otherwhere there seem to be, 20. D. Si, decreta:
Thus they expound, what they mean by Contempt, when they say, that Cross
negligence accounted contempt.
Contempt of Confirmation is damnable, to wit, gross negligence thereof.

Secondly all agree, that so Mortal Sin in scandal of Confirmation.
to neglect to be confirmed, as thereby scandal is given, and suspicion of
contempt of Confirmation, is mortal and damnable; See Suarez. to. 4. d. 38
sect. 1.

Thirdly diverse Divines expressly affirm, that gross or notable negligence
of not being confirmed (especially in time of persecution) is a mortal sin;
For thus has Manipulus Curatorum tract. 3. C. 5. If there be opportunity to
Gross negligence of Confirmation mortal Sin.
receive this Sacrament (of Confirmation) every one must receive it, and if he
omit it without iustcause, he sins mortally unless he receive it. Sotus
also in 4. d. 7. q. un. art. 8. writes thus: There follows another doubt not
to be contemned, whether there be any precept of Most Diuin^s say
Confirmation is commanded.
Confirmation: to which most of the Doctors answer affirmatively as Richardus,
Durandus, Paludanus, Siluester; And again. Richardus, Marsilius, Paludanus
say, that as often as there is commodity of a Minister to confirm, if a man
may commodious^y receive this Sacrament, then not Gross negligence is mortal
Sin.
only the contempt, but even the gross negligence it self, which is cause
that the Sacrament is not received, is mortal Sin, And Victorellus in l. 2.
Toleti c. 24. cit. says: that, Petrus Sotus lect. 2. Durandus and Richardus d.
7. think, that not only contempt, but also notable negligence to be a
mortal sin, for the Commandment of the Church: Fillucius tract. 3. c. 2.
If in any place there be necessity Especially in time of persecution.
of professing the Faith, we must say, that there even now this precept (of
Confirmation) does continue and bind, because he should rashly expose himself
to danger of falling; Angelus verb. Sacramentum; Sacraments of necessity are
Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance, and Extreme Unction; Of the same
opinion ought all Divines to be, who say, that it is a sin to neglect to
receive this Sacrament, which most Divines do say. And besides those above
named, Sotus loco cit. says: Where one may be co^modiously confirmed, Sin
not to be confirmed-
it were Sin not to receive this Benefit of God; And again: It is sinful
negligence to defer this Sacrament beyond that age (of 12. or. 14. years.)
For the right order is not to receive the Eucharist before Confirmation, as was
the Custom in the primative Church; And Bellarmin l. 1. de Sacram. c. 22. Who
neglects to receive this Sacrament, sins. For if there be a Sin not to
receive this Sacrament, there is a precept thereof, and if there be a precept,
the breach thereof is a mortal The breach of a precept in a matter of moment
is a mortal Sin.
sin, because (as well says Suarez loco cit.) it is in a matter of moment;
And howsoever one may probably deny, that there is any general precept of
Confirmation in the universal Church which binds every one, or that such a
precept binds under mortal Sin, partly because it is abrogated by contrary
Custom, partly also because it Greatness of punishment argues a mortal Sin.
was not imposed under any great punishment, no Divine can reasonably deny,
that there is a special precept thereof in England, and that it binds under
mortal Sin, by that which has been said above; And agreably to that which
has been said of the negligence of people to receive this Sacrament, Angelus
and Siluester verb. Confirm. and others say: that notable negligence of Bishops
in Mortal Sin in Bishops not to confirm.
not confirming, is a mortal Sin in them, which also Tolet. insinuates li.
5. cit. c. 4. And thus much for Divines.

As for the opinion of the Canonists say it is a mortal Sin not to be
confirmed.
Canonists in this matter, thus writes Armilla verb. Sacra. The Sacrament of
Baptism, Confirmation, Communion, Penance, and Extreme Unction according to
the Canonists (as writes Paludanus 4. sent. d. 7.) are necessary, that is,
under precept, so that who can receive them, and will not, does Sin mortally.
Thus we see, by the testimony of Armilla and Paludanus, what is the general
opinion of Canonists, and by the Confession also of Sotus, what is the general
opinion of Divines, In dubijs tutior pars est eligenda.
whose opinion it is securest to follow, especially seeing, there is so little
labor to receive this Sacrament, and so great good gotten by it, as shall
hereafter appear.

Moreover, since (as is before said) all agree, that not to receive this
Sacrament upon contempt, is a mortal Sin, how can he, who considers the
giver, the excellency of the gift, the great profit himself may reap
thereby, and also the great need he has thereof, especially in time of
persecution, be not thought to contemn Whence we may gather a contempt.
the gift, and also such a giver, if he receive it not, when he may
conveniently? For if all would condemn him, who refuses a precious gift,
which a Prince has at his great cost provided for him, and which is both
honorable, profitable, and needful to him, and no way incommodious; what shall
we think of him, who refuses the Sacrament of Confirmation, which Christ
has provided for him at the price of his precious blood, which is most
honorable to him before God and man, most profitable to his Soul, and no way
painful, or troublesome for him to receive? And the like I say of the
Eucharist and extreme Unction.

If any object, that if not to care to receive a Sacrament, were to contemn
it, the^ not Difference beetweene Confirmation and Orders and Matrimony.
to care to receive the Sacrent. of Orders or of Matrimony, were to contemn
them: I aunsweare, that Orders and Matrimony were not instituted one will;
Secondly, every one necessitate medij ad been esse or ad perfectione^
Christiani, as Confirmation is: Fourthly, State; For which causes a man may
justly be presumed not to take them without any contempt, but the like is not
of Confirmation, Eucharist, or Extreme Unction; And therefore not to receive
these (especially Confirmation, being the compleme^t of our Baptism which we
have already received) in all our life, when conveniently we may, may justly
be termed a contempt. And perhaps for this cause, because Confirmation is the
compleme^t of our Baptism, and makes us complete and perfect Christians, our
Savior called it Baptism with Why Confirmation is called Baptism.
the holy Ghost, saying. Act. 1. You shall be baptized with the holy Ghost
after few days.

And this necessity of Confirmation, which we have proved by the Custom of
Christ's Church, even from her beginning, by the testimony of holy Fathers, by
the express Commandment and Custom of our English Church, and by the
doctrine of Canonists, and Reasons of the necessity of Confirmation.
most of the Divines, we may confirm by reason; For seeing (as saint Thomas
says) it is Gods intention, that we should become complete and perfect
Christians, and that we cannot be such but by Confirmation, seeing, by it is
given us strength and armor to resist the enemies of our faith in time of
persecution, and that it is temeritie to enter into a dangerous Combat without
Armor, when we may easily have it: seeing, that Christ commanded his
Apostles not to depart out of Jerusalem till they had received the grace of
this Sacrament; seeing also, that so great commodities come to us by this
Sacrament, as we shall she we hereafter; and finally, seeing that all would
greatly condemn him, who at the time of death would not receive extreme
Unction, when conveniently he may; how can we not greatly condemn him who
(at least in time of persecution) may receive this Sacrament of Confirmation
conveniently, and yet will not, seeing he does thereby frustrate the intention
of God, deprive himself of the complement or perfection of a Christian, expose
himself unarmed to the darts of the Enemy, adventure more then Christ
himself would have his Apostles to adventure, hinder himself from that State
in which the Apostles were putt on Whitsonday, and from great increase of
grace in this world, and of glory in the next, and more neglect the Sacrament
of Confirmation, then he would do the Sacrament of Extreme Unction? And thus
having seen the necessity of Confirmation; Now let us see the effects or
profits thereof.

CHAPTER. VII. Of the effects of Confirmation common to all that receive it.
AS touching all other Sacraments, so also concerning Confirmation, there are
some that receive it worthily, and some unworthily, and in both sorts it
works someeffects, and of these we will speak in this Chapter, and in the
next of those which it works in those that receive it vvorthily.

The first effect which it Spiritual affinity in Confirmation.
works in all that receive it, is spiritual affinity; this it does by the
institution of the Church, which ordains that there shall be a spiritual
affinity, between the Bishop that confirms, and the person confirmed and
his Parents, and also between the Godfather or Godmother, and the party
confirmed and his Parents; which affinity is of the self same nature, of
which that is, which is contracted in Baptism, and in like sort hinders
Marriage between the^ in whom it is, as that does.

The second, is a spiritual Characters of a perfect Christian and Soldier.
and invisible Character, which it imprinteth in the Soul of him that
receives it, and therewith marketh him in the sight of God and his Angels,
for a Soldier of Christ, who ex officio, and by special profession, is to
confess his faith eue^ before persecutors. For as in Baptism there is
imprinted in the Soul, a spiritual Character, where with we are marked for
Children or Subjects of God, and in Orders an other, where with they that
receive it, are marked for Christ's Officers in his Church: So in Confirmation
there is printed the like, whereby we are marked for Christ's Soldiers, who by
special office and profession undertake to profess Christ's faith even The
confirmed pro^^sse their Faith ex officio.
before persecutors. For as all Subjects are bound to fight for their Prince,
but his Soldiers more especially by their Profession and office: So are all
Christians bound to profess Christ's faith, but those that are confirmed, are
bound thereto, by their special office of spiritual Soldiers; And if they
continue true Soldiers to their great Captain, this mark will remain in
their Souls for all eternity more glorious then any Star in the The glory
of the Character of Confirmation.
firmament, as a perpetual sign and testimony that here in this world they
undertook to be Soldiers of Christ, and to profess his name in what peril
soever: and contrariwise to their eternal confusion, if they prove Traitors
to Christ and his Camp.

The third effect which Confirmation works in all that receive it, is that in
the face of the Church and before men, it makes us absolute and co^pleate
Christians, and worthy of that name in all respects; For whereas before by
Baptism we were but in the State of Children or Childish Christians, by
Confirmation we are putt in State of men or manly Christians. And therefore,
as a man better deserves the name of a man, then a Child does: So a confirmed
Christian better deserves the name of a Christian, then one who is not
confirmed; Moreover, Christ name of Chrisme and consequently Christian.
though those who are baptized, deserve the name of Christians, so farrefourth
as Christian simply signifies a disciple and member of Christ yet as the name
of Christ is derived from Chrisme, and consequently the name of Christian
according to the perfect and entire deriuation thereof from the name of Christ,
does also signify a Chrismed or anointed disciple of Christ: so the name of
Christian according to its complete and perfect signification, does agree only
to those that are confirmed; And for this cause saint Cyrill and the Council
of Orleans before cited, said, Supra. C. 4.
that men till they were confirmed were not Christians or not properly worthy
of that name: And Author de vnct. Chrismatis: As Christ is so called of
Chrisme: So all that are confirmed, are thereby made partakers both of an
ointment and name. The like have saint Cyprian, saint Prosper, and saint Austin
before cited; Furthermore, by Baptism we are but admitted into the City of
God, but by Confirmation we are also admitted into his Camp, and thought
worthy to fight for his cause.

And for these effects of Confirmation saint Thomas 3. p. q. 65. art. 4. says:
Confirmation in a sort does perfect Baptism; q. 72. art. 1. In Confirmation a
man comes as it were to perfect age of spiritual life Art. 5. Confirmation is
a spiritual growth setting a man forward to a perfect spiritual age: Art. 6.
The ex^^^lencie o^ one ^o^firmed over himself not confirmed.
This Sacrament is given for a certain excellency, not of one man over an
other, but of one man above himself as the same being a perfect man in
respect of himself being a Child. Art. 10. Therefore As a man over a Child.
he who comes to this Sacrament is held, as being yet spiritually weak or a
Child: And Art. 5. He that is confirmed receives power publicly to profess
Christ's Faith by mouth as it were by office. By which words of saint Thomas
we see, both the effects and end of this Sacrament, which is to make strong
me^ in Christ, of weak Children, to perfect that which Baptism had begun, and
to make Soldiers of Christ by office and profession: But now let us see the
effects, which Confirmation works in those that worthily receive it.

CHAPTER. VIII. Of the effects which Confirmation works in those that
worthily receive it.
But as for those who worthily receive the Sacrament of Confirmation, besides
the effects spoake^ of in the former Chapter, it woorketh The confirmed putt in
the State of the Apostles on VVhitesonday.
many other and more notable effects; For first it puts them in the same
Estate, in which the blessed Apostles were putt by the descent of the holy
Ghost on Whitsonday, though not in that miraculous manner, nor in that high
degree; For (as is before said) the Apostles then received the grace of this
Sacrament Without the Sacrament it self. Christ by his power of Excellency
(whereby he is not tied to Sacraments) gave them the grace of this Sacrament
without the Sacrament, and the primities or first fruits of the holy Ghost;
This testify saint Cyprian and saint Hierome in the words related supra. c. 2.
and also saint Melchiades Epistola cit. in these words: What imposition of
hands in the confirming of new Cbristians gives to every one, that then the
descent of the holy Ghost upon the faithful people, gave to all: The same
professes the holy Church in the prayer, which she makes over the^ that are
confirmed, saying: God who gave the holy Ghost unto the Apostles, and would
have him given to the rest of the Faithful by the^ and their Successors; And
the same teaches saint Thomas 3. p. q. 72. art. 7. Christ (says he) by his
power of excel^encie gave his Apostles the effect of this Sacrament, without
the Sacrament, because they received the primities of the holy Ghost; And the
same say other Divines.

Secondly, it gives habitual Confirmation gives abundance of grace.
or justifying grace, and in that abundance and ple^tie, as it is said of the
holy Fathers and Divines to give the Fulness of the holy Ghost, and not grace
only, but also the. Seven gifts of the holy Ghost: For thus speak the Canons
And the seven gifts of the holy Ghost.
de Constable. D. 5. C. Nouissime: The baptized, is signed in the forehead, that
the seauenfold grace of the holy Ghost with all fullnes of Sanctity, knowledge
and virtue, may be declared to come upon man. Saint Clement Epistola cit. All
must be consigned of the Bishop, that is, receive the seauenfold grace of the
holy Ghost. Saint Ambrose l. 3. de Sacram. c. 2. These are the seven virtues
when thou art confirmed. Saint Thomas. 3. p. q. 72. ar. 1 Confirmation is a
Sacrament of the fulness of grace: Again, this Sacrament is given to obtain
the fulness of the holy Ghost, whose working is manifold according to that Sap.
7. And art. 11. In this Sacrament the seauenfold grace of the holy Ghost, with
all fulness of Sanctity, and knowledge and virtue comes to man; And Sotus in
4. d. 7. qu. vnica art. 7. It is a point of Faith, that this Gives more grace
then any Sacrament except the Eucharist.
Sacrament is instituted to give the fullnes of the holy Ghost, whereupon it
follows, with great appearance, that in this Sacrament is given a greater and
more plentiful degree of grace, then in Baptism or in any other Sacrament,
except the Eucharist and perhaps Priesthood; This show the Canons which say,
that by this Sacrament we be made full Christians, increase of grace is
afforded, and the seauenfold grace of the holy Ghost, with all fulness is given;
And this appears in the holy Apostles, who Example of the Apostles.
though they had received the Sacraments of Baptism, of the Eucharist, and of
Orders, yet were fearful, till they had received the grace of this holy
Sacrament, and thereby were endued with strength from above; And as for the
Sacrament of Baptism, the grace thereof seems to be so far exceeded, by
the grace of Confirmation, as the strength of a Child is exceeded by the
strength of a man; For thus says saint Thomas. q. 72. cit. This Sacrament is
given to a certain excellency of a man above himself, as the same being a
perfect man excels himself being a Child. And ib. art. 11. For the greater
effect this unction is re-reserued to the Bishop. The like has Sotus loco cit.
art. 1.

Thirdly, it not only gives Confirmation gives a Sacramental grace.
habitual or justifying grace, and the seauenfold gifts of the holy Ghost, but
also it gives a special Sacramental grace. For as it is a special
Sacrament, so also it gives a Sacramenrall grace, which is a special
assistance, which God binds himself to afford to those, who receive any
Sacrament, for to effect that for which he instituted that Sacrament. And
because the end for which God instituted this Sacrament of Confirmation, is (as
is before said) to become full and perfect Christians, and courageously to
profess his faith, he does bind himself peculiarly to assist to this end,
those that receive this Sacrament; This What i^ the Sacramental grace of
Confirmation.
teaches Suarez to. 4. d. 34. art. 2. It gives (says he) Sacramental
grace, that is a special protection of the holy Ghost constantly to hold and
profess a lively Faith; And seeing a lively faith includes, both faith and
Charity or grace, this Sacrament gives a special protection of the holy
Ghost consta^tly to hold both Faith and Grace; by which alone appears, what
great good is gotten by having this Sacrament, and what great loss by
wanting it; The like has saint Thomas q. 72. ar. 5. In Confirmation (says
he) a man receives power to do those things, that belong to a spiritual
fight against the Enemies of the Faith. And Pope Eugenius in Decreto Fidei. By
Confirmation we receive increase of Grace, and are strengthened in Faith. S.
Petrus Damianus sermon. 1. de dedicat. In baptism the spirit is given for
pardon, here for fight, there we are cleansed from Sin, here we are armed
with virtues saint Melchiades Epist. cit. Before the desce^t of the holy Ghost,
the Apostles were terrified even to denial, but after his visitation they
were armed with contempt of life even unto Martyrdom: The same says saint
Gregory of saint Peeter.

Lastly, Confirmation remitteth Sin in those who Confirmation remitteth Sin.
have not culpable ignorance thereof; For thus writes saint Thomas q. 72. cit.
ar. 6. If any man being in Sin, whereof he has no remembrance, or else
came not with perfect Contrition: So that he came not fainedly, he shall
obtain remission of Sins by the grace given in this Sacrament; And the same
Sotus in 4. d. 7. q. un. art. 7. and others say, who teach, that, Attrition
thought to be Co^trition is sufficient to come to this Sacrament; And for
these so many and so great effects of Confirmation saint Denis c. 2. Eccles.
Hierar. says: Confirmation makes men most Divine Confirmation makes men
Divine.
and c. 4. calls Chrisme, a Deifying Ointment; And the Council of Laodicea
cap. 48. The ointment of Supercelestiall Chrisme, and most holy Chrisme.
Chrisme a Deifying ointment.
And thus have we seen the effects of Confirmation. Let us go to the
Prerogatives thereof.

CHAPTER IX. Of the Prerogatives of the Sacrament of Confirmation.
THe first Prerogative of The name of the holy Ghost attributed to Confirmation.
the Sacrament of Confirmation, whereof we will speak, is taken from the
name, wherewith either it self, or the effect thereof generally and usually
signified in the holy Scripture, which is the very name of the holy Ghost, the
third person in the holy Trinity; For Christ our Savior speaking Act. 1. (as
is before related) of the grace of this Sacrament: which he would power down
upon the Apostles in the day of Pe^tecost, says. Ihon indeed baptized with
water, but you shall be baptized with the holy Ghost after these few days:
And S. Luke Act. 2. relating the performance of this his promise says There
appeared to them parted tongues as it were of fire, and they were all
replenished with the holy Ghost; And C. 8. speaking of the Confirmation of the
Samaritans by saint Peeter and saint John, he says: Who when they were come
prayed for them, that they might receive the holy Ghost, for he was not yet
come upon any of them, but they were only baptized in the name of our Lord
JESUS: Then they imposed their hands upon them, and they received the holy
Ghost. And when Simon (Magus) had seen, that by the imposition of the hand of
the Apostles the holy Ghost was given he off^red them money, saying: Give ^e*
also this power that on whomsoever I impose my hands he may receive the holy
Ghost. Note. 1. How often in so few ^ordes the Sacrament of Co^^^rmation or
the effect thereof, is called the Holy Ghost. 2. How, even they, who had been
baptized, are yet said not to have received the holy Ghost, till they were
confirmed; And in like manner he says Actor. 19. Hearing these things, they
were baptized in the name of the Lord JESUS, and when Paul had imposed hands
upon them, the holy Ghost came upon them.

Now if it were a singular h^nour to Abraham, and S. Peeter, that God would
give them special names beca^se that did both declare Gods special favor to
them, and the names did declare their Excel^encie, because God giuet not
empty names.
God does not impose vain or empty names, which signify nothing, as Abr^hams
name does signify that he was, Pater multarum gentium and Peeters name that
he was The Ro^ke of the Church, what a Prerogative or honor think we is it,
to this great Sacrament, that God would not only give it a peculiar name, but
also would appropriate his own name unto it, at least in it is effect; For this
must needs argue both his special favor toward this Sacrament, and also a
peculiar virtue in the Sacrament, and Gods special assistance in working of it.

The second Prerogatine is Confirm^tion called the Sacrament of Chrisme.
taken from that name, which the holy Fathers, Greek and Latin, have given to
this Sacrament, calling it the Sacrament of Chrisme; For seeing (as the same
Fathers teach) Christ's own name is derived from Chrisme, it must needs argue
what great account they made of this Sacrament, in giving to it that name of
which Christ's own name is derived; So that the Sacrament of Confirmation has
at least in it is effect, the name of the holy Ghost appropriated unto it by the
holy Scripture, and also the fountain and origin of Christ's name appropriated
to it by the holy Fathers, which are as great Prerogatives for names as can
be.

The third Prerogative is taken from the promise of The grace of Confirmation
the great promise of God.
the effect of this Sacrament, which seems by Christ's words Act. 1. to be
that great words Act. 1. to be that great and special promise of his
Father, whereof he had so often spoake^ to his Apostles: For thus writes
saint Luke: He commanded them that they should not depart from Jerusalem,
but should expect the promise of the Father, which you heard says he by my
mouth; For Ihon indeed baptized with water, but you shall be baptized with the
holy Ghost after these few days; Lo how he calls the grace of this
Sacrament, that great promise of his Father, which so often he told them of,
And the like may be gathered out of saint Peeters words: Act. 2. And sure it
is that that which God the Father so specially promised, and which Christ so
often spoake of, is some special and singular matter.

The fourth Prerogative is Confirmation specially graced with miracles*
the great and continual miracle, wherewith Almighty God in the beginning
of his Church vouchsafed especially to grace and authorize this Sacrament; For
when the grace of this Sacrament was bestowed upon the Apostles act. 2.
Suddenly there was made a sound from heaven, as of avehement wind coming,
and it filled the whole house where they were sitting. And there appeared to
them parted tongues as it were of fire, and it sat upon every one of them,
and they were all replenished with the holy Ghost, and they began to speak
with diverse tongues, as the holy Ghost gave them to speak; And Act. 19. When
saint Paul had imposed hands upon some, the holy Ghost came upon them, and
they spoke with tongues, and prophesied. Lo with what great miracles
Almighty God did in the beginning of the Church grace and commend to us this
great Sacrament, as that at the giving thereof he would give the gift of
tongues and of prophecy: the like gracing of other Sacraments we find not in
holy Scripture; which perhaps was the cause, why that wretch Simo^ Magus
specially desired to buy the power to give this Sacrament; Neither did God
only in the beginning of his Church thus grace this Sacrament with miracles,
but also afterward; For saint Optatus l. 2. tells that when the Donatists
cast out of a window, a vial of holy Chrisme, there wanted not the hand of an
Angel to receive it, and by the power of God it rested unbroken among the
Stones: Saint Bernard in vita Malachiae, reports, how saint Malchus cured a
Lunaticke person by Confirmation, and he greatly commends saint Malachie,
for renewing the most wholesome use of Confirmation, which had been for some
time intermitted in Ireland. Saint Rembert also curied a blind man by
Confirmation, And the like did saint Faro, as may be seen in their lives in
Surius; And as the Ecclesiastical Histories record, The Devils mouth stopped
where the confirmed are ver.
the Devil could give no answer in presence of confirmed Christians: See
Lactant. de ver. Sap. cap. 27. Turon. de Glor. Mar. l. 1. c. 41. Nazian. Orat.
1. in Iul. Prudent. in Apotheasi.

The fifte Prerogative is, God appoints his chief Officers for proper
Ministers of Confirmation.
that the Holy Ghost, as he appropriated his own name to this Sacrament; so
he chose the Apostles and Bishops their Successors who^e he appointed for
Governors of his Church, for the proper Ministers of this Sacrament. For
whereas other Sacraments besides Orders, can be administered by inferior
Priests, this can be administered only by a Bishop, where upon in our English
Why Confirmation called Bishoping.
language it is called Bishoping of the proper and peculiar Minister thereof;
For thus defines the Council of Florence; Whereas a simple Priest may give
the other unctions, this none but a Bishop must give, because it is read of the
Apostles alone (whose place Bishops have) that they gave the holy Ghost by
imposition of hands. The same is to be seen. De Consec. d. 5. Com. de his,
Cap. Man. and d. 4. Conc. Presbiteri. Herevppon the holy Church says in her
prayer after Confirmation: God who gave the holy Ghost unto the Apostles, and
would have him given to the rest of the Faithful by them and their
Successors etc. In which words the holy Church both says, that God would have
all Christians to be confirmed, and also that he would have them confirmed by
the Apostles and Bishops their Successors, and does insinuate as well, that
God commands Christians to be confirmed, as that they should be confirmed
by Bishops. And why God would have Bishops to be the proper and peculiar
Ministers of this Why Bishops properly Officers of Confirmation.
Sacrament: Saint Thomas 3. p. q. 72. gives two reasons. The one is because
men in this Sacrament are made Soldiers of Christ's Camp, and to make
Soldiers, belongs only to the Captains of the Army, as Bishops are: and
not to inferior Officiers, as Priests be. An other is, because this Sacrament
is to make me^ perfect, and therefore belongs to Bishops, who are in State of
perfectors and of dispensers of Gods mysteries; And herevppon saint Melchiades
Epistola cit. infers, that because Confirmation can be given only by high
Priests, that is Bishops, and Baptism can be given by inferior Priests,
therefore, Confirmation is more to be reverenced and esteemed Confirmation
preferred before Baptism.
then Baptism; And saint Thomas q. cit. adds: Because this Sacrament is of
more efficacy to perfect in good, then Baptism, therefore it is committed to
a more worthy Minister.

The sixth Prerogative of The noblenes of the matter of Confirmation.
Confirmation is taken from the noblenes of the matter thereof: For whereas the
matter of Baptism is simple water, and of Extreme Unction, simple oil, the
necessary matter of this Sacrament, is Chrisme, that is a mixed or Compound
ointment of oil and Baulme, which is a most precious liquor and rare to be
found; And (as Pliny says l. 12. c. 25.) to be preferred before all odours;
And besides this, Chrisme must be hallowed by a Bishop; For thus declares the
Council of Florence: The matter of Chrisme is made of oil, which signifies
the cleanenes of the Conscience, and of Baulme, which signifies the odor of
good fame, hallowed by a Bishop. And as Suarez says, tom. 4. d. 33. art. 2. It
is of necessity of the Sacrament, that Chrisme be hallowed of a Bishop, and
it is the opinion of all Divines few excepted; And in like manner Sotus in 4.
d. 7. q. v. art. 2. says: It is the general opinion almost of all, that the
mixture of Baulme is of the Substance of the Sacrament; And it must needs
argue a great dignity of this Sacrament, that the holy Ghost would require
for the necessary matter of it, so rare and precious a liquor, and also the
hallowing thereof by his chief Officiers, and Governors of his Church.

The seventh Prerogative The noblenes of the part whereon Confirmation is
ministered.
is, that whereas other Sacraments are ministered in other parts of our body,
Confirmation can be ministered only in the cheifest and highest part thereof,
that is, in the forehead: This well noted saint Austin in psalm. 14. in these
words: Many Sacraments we receive in other and other manner, for some we
receive with our mouth, other through all our body, but because we blush with
our forehead, he that said who shall be ashamed of me etc. Has set as it
were the very ignominy, and which Pagans deride, in the Seat of our
bashfulnes; Do thou here a man insult upon one that is shameless, and say,
he has no forehead? What is it, He has no Forehead? He is shameless? Let
me not have a bare forehead, Let the Cross of Christ cover it. So that we
see that this Sacrament of Confirmation challenges unto it self by Gods
appointment, the cheifest name, to wit the name of the holy Ghost, the
cheifest Minister in Gods Church, to wit a Bishop; the cheifest matter, to
wit holy Chrisme; and the cheifest place of our body, to wit the Forehead;
which are great Prerogatives, and clearly show the greatenes of this
Sacrament. Now let us see the Ceremonies, which are to be used in the
ministration of this Sacrament.

CHAPTER. X. What Ceremonies are required in the administration of the
Sacrament of Confirmation.
THe first Ceremony touching The attire of the Bishop when he confirms.
the Bishop is, that he be attired with a Cope, Miter, Stole and Crosier, as
is described in the Pontifical, and appointed by the S. Congregation de
Episcopis, And an other Condition is, that the Bishop confirm none but in
place of his own Jurisdiction, and those only also, who are under his
Jurisdiction. Piasecius. 1. part. Praxis C. 2. art. 2. Armilla verb.
Confirmatio, Tolet. l. 1. c. 24.

As for those that are to be confirmed, the first Ceremony Sign of the
Cross.
is, that their anointing in the forehead be done with the sign of the
Cross, without which sign (as saint Austin says) no Sacrament is rightly
made. An other is, that the party confirmed have a Godfather or Godmother
Godfather.
for to instruct the new Soldier of Christ, how he is to use his spiritual
weopons and armor then given to him. And none can be Godfather or Godmother
in Confirmation to any, to whom they cannot be such in Baptism, Neither yet
may the same be Godfather or Godmother to any in Confirmation, to whom they
were such in Baptism, but different Godfathers or Godmothers, are required in
these different Sacraments; A third Ceremony is, that a Stroke on the Cheek
be A Stroke on the Cheek.
given by the Bishop to the party confirmed, to admonish him thereby, that now
he undertakes a profession to bear blows if need be for the profession of
Christ's faith; And in Catholic times there should be a band of linen bound
about his Forehead for three days, till the Chrisme were dried, and then his
Forehead washed by a Priest, and the washing and linen cast into the fire.

CHAPTER. XI. What disposition is required in those that receive the Sacrament
of Confirmation.
AS for their disposition in Soul, First is Disposition in Soul.
required, that they have been Christened, because Baptism is the foundation
of all Sacraments, and particularly required before Confirmation, because this
is the perfection and Complement of Baptism; Secondly, they must be in State
of Grace, or at least not guilty of the State of mortal Sin, because this
Sacrament is instituted to increase Grace, not to remit sin though it do so
sometimes, as is before related out of Saint Thomas; Thirdly In mind or purpose.
one must not receive it for Curiosity, or that he may say he has been
Bishoped but with a purpose to become a perfecter Christian then he was
before, more courageous in professing of Christ's faith, and more thankful to
God, who bestowed this great Sacrament on the Church; to Christ who purchased
it with the price of his precious blood, and to the holy Ghost who cooperateth
with it since it was first instituted, and that without all Exception of
persons; And as for disposition of body, it should In body.
be received fasting, and not only in the morning, but even with fasting over
night.

CHAPTER. XII. How one may know whether he has worthily received the
Sacrament of Confirmation.
Seeing that Gods grace is never idle, except it be our fault, but ever like
fire, active and working, and that the grace of Confirmation, is of Children to
make us men in Christ, and of Ordinary Christians, to make us chosen and
courageous Soldiers; If we consider, what is the difference betwixt a Child
Difference betwixt a Child and a man.
and a man, and betwixt an Ordinary man, and a Soldier, we shall gather
whether we have received the grace of Confirmation or no. A Child therefore
looks only to things present, a man looks also to things to come: A Child
only attends to pastime and pleasure, a man has also consideration of
profit; A Child is ready to sell his Inheritance for a trifle or babble, a man
makes more account of his Inheritance; A Child has Childish behavior, a man
has more mature and decent Carriage; And in like manner, an Ordinary Betwixt
an Ordinary man and a Soldier.
man is fearful, not only of great, but also of small dangers, and not
only of true dangers, but also of shadows; a Soldier aduentureth upon
Pikes, upon Canons, upon breaches, upon what danger soever preferring the
honor of his profession and quarrel of his Prince before his life.

Wherefore if after Confirmation When one has unworthily received
Confirmation.
we be as Childish in Conditions, as we were before, think as much of this
world and as little of the world to come, as before we did; be as much given
to vain pastimes and pleasures, and as little regard our spiritual profit as
before, be as ready to sell our heaue^lie Inheritance for bables or trifles
of this world as before we were; and finally be as Childish in our
conversation and imperfections as before: And likewise if we be after
Confirmation so fearful of persecutions and troubles for profession of
Christ's true faith, as we were before, it is greatly to be feared, that in
vain we received, the grace of this Sacrament (as saint Paul speaks,) or
rather have received the Sacrament, but not the grace thereof.

But contrariwise if after we be confirmed, we find When worthily.
our selves to thinkelesse of things present, and more of the world to come, of
the eternal reward of virtue, and the everlasting punishment of Sin, if we
scorn to sell our heaue^lie Inheritance for trifles of this world, if we be
more atte^tiue to our spiritual profit, and to lay up treasure in heaven, if
our Conversation toward God and the world be more discreet, more mature, and
grave, we may justly hope, that we have worthily received this Sacrament, and
say with the Apostle: When I was a Child I thought as a Child, but being now
become a man, I have cast away that which is Childish; And the same we may
gather, if like worthy Soldiers of Christ, we contemn dangers for his
Cause, knowing that we fight under a far greater Captain, the^ temporal
Soldiers do, Different cause of temporal and spiritual Soldiers.
for a far better cause, with far surer hope of Assistance, with far
greater Assurance of victory, and for a Reward inco^parably greater, which
neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor heart has conceived; which
God for his goodness and the Passion of Christ grant us all by this Sacrament
to attain unto.

FINIS.
All Praise to Almighty God.
Faults
Pa. Lin. Escaped. Corrected. 3. 1. the se these 21. 15. power prayer 22. 10.
Conc. 38. Canon. 38. 25. 12. 34. Sent. 342. Sent. 33. 1. such commandment.
such a commandment. 111. 10. curied. cured.


