THE DISCOVERY OF THE MAN OF SIN: WHEREIN IS SET FORTH THE CHANGES OF GODS
CHVRCH, In her Afflictions by his Reign. In her Consolations by his Ruin.


First preached in diverse Sermons to the University and City of Oxon, by a
Reverend and Judicious Divine HR. D. of Divinity and sometimes of Queens
College.

And now published for the farther use of both, and comfort of all that hate
Antichrist and love the Lord Jesus Christ wheresoever: By W. H.

1. COR. 16.22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ let him be Anathema
Maranatha.

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes. 1614.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL my Reverend and right worthy friend Mr D. AIRAY,
Provost of the Queens College in Oxford, Grace and Peace.
I have adventured once again Right Worshipful, reverenced, and beloved in
Christ Jesus, to put into your hands, and present unto your view, what has
fallen into my lap, and lot from the Lord. This worthy, and excellent Treatise
so behoofefull for all persons, so needful for these times, being formerly
commended to my use, with some other things of like nature, by my beloved, and
gracious friend: I did accordingly as I had occasion, use, and pervse. Now the
more I did read, ponder, and consider what I read, the more I did admire the
Impressions of wisdom, learning, religion, sanctification, and many other rare
parts, which in fair characters of Grace, I found stamped almost in every page
of it. Certainly this Preacher sought to find out both profitable, and
pleasant things, words of delight, and words of truth: not to humor, and tickle
the itching ear by plausible, and vain sounds, as of tinckling Cymbals: but
to refresh the thirsty heart with waters of life, and satisfy the hungry soul
with good things, I know, Sir, you are no stranger, neither to the Tree, nor
fruit, having formerly dwelt together under one roof, drank together of one
Cisterne, and mutually reioiced together in all offices of d^ty and love: yet
may you now renew the tenderness of your affection by renewing your
acquaintance with the Fruit of his labors. For, seeing here your eye may with
more serious observation behold, what with good attention heretofore your ear
has heard: both eye, and ear, head, and heart, may be refreshed anew with the
renewed presence (as it were) of an absent, and ancient friend. David for his
love to Jonathan the Father, showed great kindness to Mephibosheth his Son,
and I doubt not but this Infant for his Fathers sake, this work for the
Authors, shall find access, and acceptance in like manner at your hands. And
so commending this and my self to your favor and love, I pray for continuance
of Gods mercies and increase of his graces, and that both for your person, and
place, to the farther building up of the Body of Christ both in your self, and
in all that depend upon you. Bunbury in Cheshire, July, 8. 1614.

Yours ever in all Christian affection* W. HIND

AN ADVERTISEMENT to the Reader.
CHristian Reader, I take not upon me to speak so much ^ither of the Author,
or his labor, as may match their deserts, or raise men's thoughts to any higher
strain of opinion, or admiration of the same. Yet if my words were of so
great weight, and my testimony of that worth, that I might in discharge of this
duty, procure them their due: It were a labor neither misplaced nor misspent:
seeing that is no less due to the Gracious man, then to the virtuous woman,
Give him of the fruits of his hands and let his own works praise him in the
Gates. Howsoever, for my own part, I cannot but speak what I have found and
felt. Wisdom herself (it seems) had a purpose to broach some of her best
wines when she made a vent in ^^is Vessel, and called so earnestly upon all
that thirst, to come, and buy wine without money, and drink freely. It is now
about 12 years ago since first I tasted of this wine, above 30 since first it
was mingled, and reached out to cheer the hearts of Gods children: and yet,
old as it is, it is so pleasant, and wholesome at this hour, that he that
drinks of this old, will not straight desire new, but will doubtless
acknowledge, the old is better. It was then a cup of salvation and consolation,
first tempred for, and ministered unto the Spouse of Christ, as a Preservatiue
against the cup of abhominatio^ in the whores fist; and as a Confortatiue
against the cup of Affliction in her Fathers hand, whereof she must needs taste
and pledge her Lord, that had himself begun so deep unto her. And I nothing
doubt but as the taste yet remains, so the vigor and virtue will be now no
less effectual then before. Is any weak and feeble, wanting a spiritual
appetite unto heavenly Manna and wholesome food? let him drink a little of this
wine for his stomach sake, and for his often infirmities. It shall refresh his
spirits, warm his heart, and quicken his desires unto good things. Has any
drunk so deep of the whores Chalice, that being giddy therewithal, he reeles
and staggers in opinion, and religion, as a drunken man? and is ready to sink
down and perish in his sin? O then give him of this sovereign and sweet
wine; and stay him with these flagons, comfort him with these apples; and if
once he thirst, and drink of this fountain, if once he hunger and eat of this
fruit, he shall be sick of love, and his soul shall live. I add no more.

Only be advertised, Christian Reader, that albeit the copy which I had, was
for the Bulk and body of it, reasonable entire, yet was it not without some
blemishes, and breaches as it came to my hands, which by some other help that
I had, I labored to repair. For Allegations, and Proofs, I found it very
naked and bare, and have therefore made such supply in the marg^nt out of mine
own observation, and provisio^, as might give some better co^tentment ^o such
as should desire to see, and search farther into such things. Which I the
rather mention, that if any thing in the margent ^ee not so well and fitly
suited, and matched with the tenor of the Text: the Printer, and my self
might divide the fault betwixt us, but the Author might be free Wahtsoever my
pains have been in searching out, and setting down testimonies of Scripture
and Controversy records of Story and Antiquity (as the great variety of
matter herein contained did evidently require) The comfort I have taken in the
book it self, the love I have ever borne unto the Author, and the hope I have
conceived of the benefit that may grow unto many thousands by putting it forth
unto public view, have lightened and lessened* yea swallowed up, and devoured
all. Wherefore Christian Reader, commending this to thy use, and thy self to
Gods Grace, I entreat a favorable acceptance of my poor labors, and a portion
in thy hearty prayers, and so ever rest,

Bunbury in Cheshire, July 8. 1614. Thine in the Lord Jesus WILLIAM HIND.

2. THESE. 2.3. Let no man deceive you by any means, for that day shall not
come, except there come a departing first, and that man of sin be disclosed
even the son of perdition.


WHereas there are two points which not a little trouble the minds of many:
the first, how it stands with the promise of God toward his Church, that the
outward form thereof should so alter, and change, that not only the beauty and
glory thereof should seem to be defaced, but that the very face thereof should
scarce appear: The second how in that so universal and general change God
should keep his number to himself, a company which fear, and worship him,
and continue in the profession of his truth: Both these are in this chapter
handled by the Apostle, the first from these words unto the 13. verse, the
second thenceforth unto the end of the chap. Augustine reads this place,
August. lib. 2^. de Civit. Dei cap. 19. Sic Hieron. in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
unless that Runnagate come first, but the word here used by the holy Ghost in
civil matters signifies the shrinking of soldiers from their General unto
the enemy: now it is by proportion drawn from hence to signify an Apostasy,
and backsliding from ^he profession of Christ to the contrary part, that is,
to Antichrist.

And this backsliding we expound to be general not of a few men, or sects, or
countries, but of a great and universal revolt in each country and sort of
men. And this we prove for that the Apostle speaks thereof indefinitly not
restraining it to some. And besides, seeing the Apostle was to give unto the
faithful a sign and token, it must of necessity be, that he should yield such
a one, as neither was already present (for then were they never the later in
suspense concerning the point in controversy) nor that incontinently was to
fall out. For there was already a sliding of many from the truth, and therefore
if it were not meant of a general, that might have been for all this
concluded by the Thessalon. That the day of the Lord was at hand.

The Rhemists in their notes mislike in our interpretation two things. Rhem. in
2, These. 2.
1. That we say this revolting should be general. 2. That we say it must be in
matters of Religion: whereas the most part of the Fathers (say they) expound it
of the revolting from the civil obedience to the Empire of Rome. But if that
were granted them (which how true it is, shall after appear) yet little makes
it for their purpose. Now for our interpretation there are many things that
make, namely the words following which serve to the same purpose that these
do: for after that he had said a departure, he adds straight, and that the
man of sin be disclosed, of whom it is verified, that he should sit in the
temple of God, and show himself to be God, which cannot be understood
otherwise then of Spiritual matters.

Secondly, the signification, and use of the word in other places, proves,
(...)
that it is so meant here as: in Act. 21. ver. 21. Luke 8.13. Which in the time
of temptation go away. Heb. 3.12. To depart away from the living God. 1. Tim.
4.1. Some should depart from the faith, on which place the Rhemists themselves
note that it signifies to be Apostataes from the faith, as the Greek word
(say they) imports.

Thirdly, this may appear by the conference of other places of the scripture,
wherein this same doctrine is delivered; Apo. 12.6. Where the woman flees into
the wilderness: and Apoc. 14.8. Babylon made all nations drunk with the wine of
the wrath of her fornication. But for that they say, the fathers agree that it
is meant in civil matters: let us first admit they did, and all, if they
please: Aug* ep. 19 ad Hieron.
yet may we answer, with that of Austin, though I could find out as many
Fathers on my side, yet will I say Paul shall serve me for all, to him do I
fly, to him do I appeal from all the Doctors. Andrad. defens fidei Trid* lib.
2.
And as the writer of the defense of the Tridentine council in lib. 2. In some
points we may lay all the fathers aside, and find out our selves or by some
other means the truth of some points. And as Caietane, Caietan. in prae^a^.
Com. in lib. Mos.
who confesses that in interpreting diverse places of scripture he goes
against the stream of all the Doctors. But now they confess that not all
Fathers are of this mind, for when they say (in manner all) it is evident they
except some.

Now the Papists in the Council of Trent confess that the most of the Fathers
conclude that the words in the 6. of John, Conc. Trid. Sess. 5. c^p. 1. sub
Pi^ 4. An, D. 1562.
imply the receiving of the Supper in both kinds, against the which
notwithstanding the said Council has determined. And the very props and
pillars of their Religion confess, that in points wherein the lesser part of
the Fathers agree, a man may probably dissent from the greater.

Now of the Fathers (whereof they speak) there are 3. whereof 2. make for us,
and one is indifferent. His wickedness is described to be notable in that he is
called the man of sin, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
which is more, then if he had said a sinful man: and where he calls him the
son of perdition, which is more vehement, then if he called him only a
reprobate, as Paul calls Elimas the child of the Devil, Act. 13. and
tearming him the son of perdition, Act. 13.10.
he means one made to be destroyed: for whom is prepared some marveilous and
extraordinary kind of death and destruction: as Moses speaks of the
rebellious Corah and his company. Numb. 16.29.30.
He means therefore hereby, that he should not only be sinful in his own
person, and bring a marveilous destruction upon his own head, but that he
should lead away many to the like wickedness, and make them partakers with him
of the like grievous punishment. As it is said of the dragon, that he should
draw with him the third part of the stars, Apoc. 12.4.
and the Whore should make others drink of the wine of the wrath of her
fornication, Apoc. 14.8. and 17.2.

2 His malice is set out in this, that he is called an Adversary, a chief
enemy against God and his Saints, as that horn in the 7. of Dan. which made
battle against the Saints of God and prevailed, and as he is described in the
Revelat. Dan. 7.21. Apoc. 12.15.
That he threw out floods after the women that she might be carried away of
the flood.

3 Dan. 11.36.
3 His Pride is declared to be notable, in that he should exalt himself against
God, Antiochus Epiph. ^ren. lib. 5. cap. 25. Hieron. in Dan. cap. 11.
as Daniel prophesies of another, and that he should sit in the temple of God,
which some have expounded of the material temple at Jerusalem which the
Antichrist should reedifie and sit in it: but this word is never so taken by
the Apostle. To fit, here is to reign, rule, govern, and have dominion, as
the word is taken in other places, as when the mother of Zebedeus children
required of Christ, that one of her sons might sit at his right hand, Mat.
20.21. Mat. 19.28.
etc. And when Christ says to his Disciples, you shall sit and judge, wherefore
this sitting betokens his government in spiritual matters, when he shall
undertake to make laws and constitutions at his own pleasure, which is, to
depose Christ out of his kingdom. For although that the whole world be his
kingdom, yet the Church of God is so properly called, for that he chiefly
rules therein, and is obeyed and honored as the Lord and only Prince thereof.
Wherefore if any shall say, the breath of my lips shall be a law, 2 Thessalonians
2.3.
and ordinance for the Church of God, Hier. ad Algasi. Quaest. 11.
he is that Antichrist, this is to fit. It is said also (to set out his pride)
that he should show himself as God, not only he should say so, Hieron. in ^ Thessalonians. 2.
but show it, and make it evidently, and manifestly known, Aug. lib. 20. de
Civ Dei c. 19
which is referred either to that which went before, where it is said he should
sit. 1. take on him that which properly belongs to God, Chrysostom. 13. Hom. in
Th. 22
or to that which follows: whence it is said, he should come in lying
wonders, etc. Jerome although in some place he leans to their opinion
concerning the revolt, Aug lib. 20. de Civ cap. 19.
Refugam vocat a Domino Deo.
yet in his commentaries on this place (if the work be his) confesses that it
may indifferently be meant either of the declining from subjection of the
Gentiles, or from the faith. Chrisost. in ^ Thessalonians. 2.
Augustine and Chrysostom, they say that the Empire must be taken away first,
that afterward Antichrist may succeed, yet ground they it not upon these
words, but on those that follow. And Augustine, as we before noted, says that
he shall be a runagate from God. Chrysostom says that there shall be such a
revolt from God, that scarce the best shall escape from being offended, Ita vt
offenderentur si possibile esset and electi.

Fathers making for our interpretation. (...).
Socrates setting down an epistle against Arius Ep. Alexandri Episc. Alexand.
Animos hominum ad defectionem quae praenuncia and quasi praecursor Antichristi
est, docere nituntur. Cyril. Catech. II (...)
Cyril thus,

Now is the departure or Apostasy: For men have departed, or are become
Apostataes from the right faith. (...).
Oecumenius on this place says he: means a departing from God, and the thing
it self. The common Gloss thus, Gloss. Ord. vel hoc dicit de spirituali
imperio Romanae Ecclesiae, vel discessione de fide,
he says this of the spiritual Empire of the Roman Church, or of a departure
from the faith.

Aquin. in 2 Thessalonians 2. Ideo dicendum est quod discessio a Romans Imp. debet
inrelligi non solum a tempora. lised a spirit^^ali scilicet a fide Catholica,
etc.
Thomas Aquinas, Therefore we must hold that the departure from the Roman
Empire ought to be understood not only from the temporal but spipituall
state, namely from the Catholic faith. Anselm. in 2 Ep. These. c. 2. sieve vt
multitudo Eccl^siaru^ discedant a Po^tifice Raman. sive multitudo hominum
discedant a side.
Anselmus says, al nations must depart from the Empire of Rome, whether it be
that a multitude of Churches shall depart from the Bishop of Rome, or that many
men shall depart from the faith. Lyrain 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Lyra disputes the matter, and concludes that the Apostasy shall be general.

Lastly, the Rhem. in 2, These. 2.3. number. 6.
Rhemists themselves in their notes following, say the same, viz. It is very
like that this great defection shall not be only from the Roman Empire, but
specially fom the Roman Church.

So that by Fathers our exposition is also confirmed. witness of our
adversaries our exposition is also confirmed. Rhemists themselves our
exposition is also confirmed.


Now follow in the Apostle these 5 things 1 Properties of the person, who shall
be the ring leader in this defection. 2 Time of his cumming. 3 Overthrowe of
him. 4 Means to bring it to pass. 5 Persons in whom this adversary shall work.


1 For his properties it is said that he should be notable in 1 Wickedness. 2
Malice. 3 Pride.


2 The Time; before the Apostle come to declare the time of this departing, he
interlaceth a note of remembrance. ^2 Thessalonians. 2.5
Know you not that when I was yet with you I told you these things: whereby he
notes that the thing is worthy the noting. For surely if these things had not
been foretold, when seely souls should behold the Church so generally
defaced, it were no marvel if they murmured with ^ Ier. 4.10.
Jeremy, and said we have been deceaved and thou have deceaved us. Wherefore
it pleased God (for help of our infirmity) to foretell his Church of these
things that when they come to pass, they may bear them more patiently. And
knowing that they were before appointed in the determinate Act. 4.28.
counsel of God, we may assure our selves that they must needs turn to his
glory, and so to the Romans 8.28.
benefit of his Church that has appointed them. For this cause is it that the
Paul 1. Tim. 41. Pet. 2. ep. 3.1. 2. 1. Ioh 2.18.
Apostles by preaching and writing so often and diligently taught this point: and
that it is laid out in sundry places of the Apoc. 13.17
Apocalips, and often signified by our Mat. 24.
Savior.

The time of revealing is expounded by some, of the revealing of Christ in
judgment, but that which is repeated proves the contrary.

That which lette^; Vide Occum. in bunc loc. The^d. Calvin,
some say is the Son, others the holy Ghost, some the preaching of the word.
But seeing it is said that 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.
that which lets shall be taken out of the way (which phrase signifies a
corruption, which cannot agree to any of these things) it appears that this
interpretation cannot stand. Wherefore Chrysostom. and Occum. in 2 Thessalonians. 2 Hieron.
ad Algasi. qu. 11.
their exposition seems to be the simplest, which say that hereby is meant
the state of the Empire of Rome, for that when it should be removed, the
kingdom of Antichrist (the platform whereof was already begun to be laid)
should show itself. And herein also our Rhem. in 2 Thessalonians. c. 2.2.
adversaries agree likewise with us. The mystery of iniquity which the
Apostle says, began then to work signifies the corruption of doctrine which
was labored by heretics, which the rather is to be noted, for that it may
appear how fondly the Papists urge that therefore the man of sin must be one
singular man, because the greek (...).
article is set before the word, which is the chiefest ground of Sand. Them. 1.
Saunders demonstration, to prove the Pope not to be Antichrist. And it is
urged also by the Rhem. 2. These. 2.3.
Rhemists in their notes: and as making much for them, they have taken the
pains to set the greek words in the margent. But when 1. Ioh. 2.22.
S. John says, he that denies is (...).
that Antichrist, he must (if that be true which they say) mean but one: but
the same Apostle in his 2. epist. ver. 7. says that (whosoever) and affirms
that there be many such, wherefore it cannot mean one. Besides the Apostle
here adds the Article to the (...)
mystery which is meant of corruption of doctrine by many. And again, [so (...)
he that letteth] which is not one particular Emperor but the whole company as
the Papists themselves say: wherefore the article proves nothing.

Out of this text there are two points of doctrine to be observed.

1 The changeablenes whereto the visible Church is subject. 2 Secondly the
person or state which comes nearest to this description of Antichrist; and
whereunto the properties here set down do most properly belong.
This is a matter both of wit and importance.

1 Here is wisdom let him that has wit count the Rev. 13.18.
number. 2 The Apostle not only when he was present taught it them, but by his
Epistle puts them in mind of it as a thing worthy the remembrance.
Now the question is not who is an Antichrist. For who so breaks the unity of
the Church by scisme or heresy is such a one. Whereupon S. John says, that
even in his days there were 1. Ioh 2.18.
many Antichrists. Aug tract. 6. in 1 Ep. Ioh.
And Augustine, Whosoever thou art that come against Christ thou art an
Antichrist, whether within the Church or without.

But the question is, who is the firstborn of Satan, in whom dwells the
fullness of wickedness, that (...).
Adversary, etc.

Neither is it, what particular man he is, but what state of Government, for
it is spoken of some common state. Even as in this same place when it is said,
that he only 2 Thessalonians. 27.
which withholdeth must be taken out of the way: though he speak of him as of
(...).
one man, yet it is not meant of one particular person alone. For if (as most
Occum. in 2 Thessalonians. 2. Chrysostom. in 2. Tb. 2, Hier in 2. Th. 2. Idem ad Algas
Quaest. 11.
writers agree) thereby be meant the whole state of the empire of Rome that it
must cease, it cannot be understood of Nero or any one of the Emperors. Even
so when he speaks of Antichrist though it be under the name of one, yet the
whole is understood. Even as Dan 7.3.4.
Daniel in his 7. chapter, where he speaks of 4. Monarchies calls them 4.
beasts and 4. kings, whereby are meant four whole kingdoms. As for that shift
of Sand. Them.
Saunders it is to no purpose, for says he these places are not alike, because
that where Dan. speaks first of the^ he has not the Article adioined in the
greek, but by the way you may note, he denies not that the Article is
adioined afterward, as it is indeed very often. Whereupon me thinks (seeing
that in the same thing the Article as he grants, is indifferently adioined or
omitted) it is a hard matter to make hereupon a demonstration, that because the
Article is adioined, it must needs signify a singular person.

Most of the fathers indeed expound it as meant and spoken of one: howbeit Aug
lib 20. de Civ Dei c. 19
Augustine shows that, there were some that thought it was meant not only of
Vide Whitak. Re^p. ad Sand. Them p. 158.
one, but of a whole body that it should be Antichrist: and he goes further
seeming to allow of that exposition, when Aug. vbi sup.
he says, that he should sit in the temple of God and as the temple. 13. hom.
in Apocal. that goes under his name.

And Orig Hom. 30 in Mat.
Origin, Vnus Antichrist. in genere, multi in specie. Wherefore seeing that
some as Augustine reports himself, as it seems, and Origin have thought
hereof as we do: we may see how false that is of Sannd. Them. 1. rat. 7.
Sanders, that all authors, etc: so expound it as they do, as also that of the
Rhemists.

Moreover, if the question be, what state this is, which comes nearest unto
this description, Aliquid deest.
and whereunto the properties of Antichrist here set down do most properly
belong: I say, that so far as I can judge the Bish. of Rome with that state
is he. And hereby I mean not the Bish. alone, but the whole government: not
the Head only, but the whole Body, arms and legs: as is likewise meant in Dan.
7.17. Dan. 8, 10, 21
Daniel by the names of the kings, and kingdoms.

Neither mean I, that always the Pope is the greatest and chiefest enemy and
wicked one, but that sometimes some that are under him are the special
instruments, and dealers in his kingdom of wickedness. As is also in Daniel
meant, when it is said that the Dan. 7.5.
Bear had in his mouth between his teeth three ribs, to whom it was said,
arise, devour much flesh: whereby was signified the cruelty that should be in
that kingdom: which was not so much in the Kings and Governors themselves, as
in those who were under them. For 2. Chr. 36.23 Ezra. 1 3 Ezra. 3.7.
Cyrus gave license and commandment to build the Temple, and Dan. 6.14.
Darius would have preserved Daniel from the den of Lions, but they were such
as were inferior in place, who hindered the Ezra. 4.1.
building, and Dan. 6.4.5.
caused that Daniel was cast to the beasts.

Hereto be we led, first by the circumstance of the times. For seeing that
which withheld the discovery of Antichrist, was the Abolishing of the Roman
Empire (wherein we have the assent of our adversaries, and consent of the
Fathers) and that the erecting of the Popedom was the abolishing of that
Empire, I see not how our adversaries can well avoid it, but that the Pope with
that state must needs be Antichrist. Whereunto we may adioyne the place
deciphered in the Apoc. 17.9.
Revelation to be the city seated on seven hills, which had the government of
all the earth. And whereas against this the Sand. Them. 4.
adversaries take exception, for that they say the Emperor is not yet gone
thence, it is a slender shift, for that there remains to him the only naked
name, the city of Rome yielding neither tribute, nor subjection unto him. And
if the name were enough, Ier 52.31.
Ichoiakin being carried captive to Babylon was then called king, and his throne
set above the rest of the kings that were there: and yet then was fulfilled
that Hos. 3 4.
prophecy that Israel shall be without a king. And that of Jeremy Lam. 5.8.
Servants have borne rule over us. And no otherwise is the name yet given to
the Emperor then as of men to their Images and tombs. But as the Apostle
meant that not the name but the power and regement of him that he meant,
hindered the revealing, so he meant, that, not the name but the thing should
be first removed, whereupon also Lyra a friend of theirs, Lyra in 2. These. 2.
A quo recesse rum quasi omnia Regna negantia ei subii^i and reddit^onem
tribu^i, la^ a multis ann^s illud etiam Impe^ium caruit Impera^ore pluribus
annis.
says that the Empire many years had been without tribute, or subjection.

Secondly we are led thus to think by those properties whereby Antichrist here
is described. As when in general he is called that man of sin which is
amplified in particular by 2 points. when he is 1 called an adversary. 2 said
to ^^t in the Temple of God.


1 An adversary he is against both 1 Religion. 2 Professors.


1 An enemy of religion because he sets himself against 1 Gods glory 2 Man's
salvation.
both points handled elsewhere.

2 Enemy he is to the professors as has bin particularly showed in the
comparion of Papists with Idumeans, Obad. 12, 13.14.

Secondly he is said to sit in the Temple of God. Our adversaries to clear
their holy father, Sand D^m. 17. Bella^. lib 3. de Rom, Pon^, c. 13
interpret this of the rased and decayed Temple at Jerusalem. Wherefore they
think that so long as that lies wast the Pope cannot be he, and so far as
the Bishop of Rome is from Jerusalem, so far he is from sitting in
Antichrists seat. But this is the very stone whereat also the Jews have
stumbled, for look what great and large promises were made to the Church of
God, those have they applied to the materiali Temple, the city of Jerusalem,
the hill of Syon. Wherefore having thus expounded it of the material temple at
Jerusalem, they have cast the world in a deep slumber, that they should be far
from thinking the Pope to be Antichrist, while they remembered how far the
Popes sea at Rome was distant from the Synagogein Judea.

1. Cor. 3.16.17 and cap. 6, 19. 2 Cor. 6, 16. 1. Pet. 2.5.
But we know how this name of Gods Temple is used by Paul, as when he says,
the Temple of God is holy, which Temple are ye. And by Peter where he makes
Christians living stones of this building. Wherefore as the Jews, so they have
stumbled at the stones of this Temple. Bellar de Pont. lib. 3. c. 14 Lactani.
de verasap. l. 4 c. 13. Sand. Them. 36.
And as they have erred in the seat so in the doctrine of that which concerns
his declaring of himself to be God. For they say that Antichrist shall take
away all manner of worship both of God and Idols. Wherefore they gather that
seeing the Pope has established a continual and daily worship of the Mass,
though it were Idolatry (as we say) yet even for that cause could he not be
Antichrist. But we have a rule out of the Scripture, whereby we know that
they exalt themselves above God, not only which take from him al his power and
majesty, but who translate his honor to themselves. When Rahel said to Jacob,
Gen 30.1.2.
give me children or else I die, it is written that Jacobs anger was kindled
against her (though he loved her dearly) and said am I in Gods steed? 2. King.
5, 6, 7.
When Naaman was sent to the King of Israel with his Masters letter that he
might heal him from his leprosy, the king of Israel reading the letter, even
for indignation rent his clothes, and said, am I God to kill and to give life?
If to heal and to give children be so proper to God that to give it to men is
to make them Gods: what shall we say to him who sets aside Gods law, and
places instead thereof his own? Iam. 4.12. 2. Chr. 15.3.
There is one Lawgiuer, says James, that is able to save and to destroy. And
Azariah to king Asa, for a long time has Israel been without the true God,
without Priest to teach, and without law. Whereby is understood that it is so
proper to God to make and appoint laws, whereby all his people should be
governed, that he who takes on him to do it, displacing Gods law, places
himself in Gods room, thrusting him out of his seat, for to be without Gods
law, is to be without God himself.

Wherefore as Princes when they have subdued any people, to show that they are
their governors, are wont to change their customs, alter their state,
abrogate their ancient laws and and appoint new at their pleasure: so the Pope
herein shows himself as God, in that occupying the place in Gods church he
takes upon him to establish and make new and strange ordinances at his good
pleasure, whereby it comes to pass that by tying them to the necessity of
the keeping of the^ ne sits in their consciences as God in the temple of God.

Moreover, to sit in the temple of God; is therein to exercise rule and
government, as it is taken when Zebedeus children would sit, the one, on the
right hand, the other on the left, Mat 20.21.
in the kingdom which they imagined he should have. Extravag. Johan. 22 c vnam
Sa^ctam de maioritate and obedient. Cap. omnis extra de poenit. and remiss.
Council Trident. Sess. 22. cop, 2. Canon. 1.3.
This then belongs most properly to him, who takes to himself al
jurisdiction, to whom all souls must be subject, without whom is no pardon and
remission of sin, who challenges authority at his pleasure, to shut, and open
heaven, to whom, and whenever he please. He who has appointed for Gods
people none other Pastors but Idols, and Idol shepherds, who has taught them
that pennance-pilgrimage, alms, etc. were the satisfaction for their sins:
that let them know no other Christ but that which the Priest held up between
his hands. Who let them have no other scripture but lying lege^ds, fables,
dreams, the very discovering of which dirt shows the great filthiness of it.

Now at what time they were come to the height of their abomination, it
pleased God to show mercy to his church, by opening the eyes of some to see
this wickedness, he gave his word and great was the number of preachers. Psalm.
68.11.
Hereupon when the hearts of many were touched, they saw the blindness wherein
they had sat, their hearts were troubled within them and they repenting stroke
upon their thigh, Ier 31.19.
etc. Besides the Lord stirred up the hearts of christian Princes to reform
their kingdoms. Such as were against this when they saw the hand of God in
this wonderful alteration, their hearts fainted, and became like the heart of a
woman in her travel: their consciences told them that many things were
disordered, and that a reformation was necessary: yet when they had considered
how these disorders were so linked to the triple crown, that the removing of
them would work the overthrow of it, they brought the matter to this issue,
that how soever they could not deny but that many things were amiss, yet that
Princes might not lawfully without the Popes authority deal ought in the
matter. Whereupon Paul the third blamed the Emperor for that toleration which
he had permitted till the next general Council, comparing him most absurdlie
to Vzza, worthily punished by God, for laying his hand to stay up the Arc. As
though it no more appertained to Princes to look to the maintenance and
reformation of Religion, 1. Chr. 13.9.10.
then for Vzzah to deal with the thing which no way appertained unto him.

And this indeed is the point worthy the marking, whereupon our Adversaries
stand. For if such as amongst us refuse to communicate with our church in
prayer and sacram^nts, were in their conscience to answer, why they are hereto
moved, they could not say for any dislike in the things, but only for that they
are not ratified by the Pope. So that questionless, if he would allow them,
they also would. And is not this then, to sit in Gods temple, to have his will
and pleasure, for a law to the people of God, whereby they must be led to the
approving or disliking of every thing. So that howsoever it concerns Gods
glory: without his approbation they will not attempt it; no prince may go about
to restore Gods truth and worship, unless by him he be first authorized.

In this matter we may note Gods 1 Severitie. 2 Mercy.


1 In that he would so punish his church, that he would let the son of
perdition sit even in his chair and seat.

2 For that notwithstanding his rage against Christ, and his church, yet he
kept even there a remnant, so that his name was among them. For there were some
sparks of his truth though covered with the mist of errors and ignorance, some
water of life, though much poison: wherein appeared the great and omnipotent
mercy of God, that in that great ruin and co^fusio^ of Gods church we may see
some stones as remnants of the old building. Wherefore in comparison of those
that have not heard of Christ, there be amongst them fair stones; as I have
said. The Turk has not a stone of this foundation or building: but here
though the wall be miserably shaken, yet appear the ancient stones. As the
acknowledging and keeping of the scripture, the confession of the Articles of
the christian Religion, all this in general. The sacrament of baptism, though
covered under the dust of many vain and profane ceremonies. Yet so long as
they have thus much, albeit in generality confessed: yet remains there a
church. Even as the Prophet in the person of God says, I have brought up
rebellious children, Is. 1.1.2. Ezekiel. 16.21.
children they were, yet rebellious. And in the 16. of Ezech. he says, thou
have made my children to pass through the fire, yet were they children of
Adulterers. So that they were not altogether dead, though dead sick, and as a
man in a consumption far wasted and spent.

So that when we consider the general corruption, they may be termed an
adulterous seed. And as we are to wonder at the Lords severity, who so greatly
punished his church: again, on the other side we are to praise and magnify
his mercy: who in this great famine, had kept some bread and some water, bread
and water, but in a scant measure, yet such as might serve for to save the life
of some, 1. King* 17.16
as the oil in the cruse, and the meal in the barrel, a few were saved, but
being pulled as brands half burnt out of the fire.

So that the seat wherein Antichrist is to sit, is not that of the Turk a
professed enemy to religion: but of Gods temple, that thereby he may the
easilier deceive and work his strong illusions.

Besides to show how he challenges the right and title of God we might bring
sufficient testimonies out of his own laws and Canons, Cap cum inter Extravag.
Job* 22. tit. 14. cap. 4 in fi^^.
whereof some give him the very name of God. But seeing the modester sort of
Papists are ashamed of such terms, let it suffice to have showed that he is
the person who takes to him that which is proper to God, (not to give
children, heal the sick, etc.) But to hold the winds from blowing, who
causes that which God has said to be doubted off, Apoc. 7.1.
and will have his word to stand for a law: which teaches, that it stands
upon the necessity of salvation, Bellar. lib* 5 de R^m Pont cap. 6. and. 7.
Sand. lib. 2. de visib. Monar. cap 4. Genebr. Ch^on. l. 4 ad An. 1578 and 1581.
Cicarell in vi^ Gregorii 13. cause. 23. cap. omnium and Ex* com.
that every soul should be subject to his authority. Who honors the perjury
of Princes, and their murdering of their innocent subjects, with a holyday:
and counts the perjury of subjects to their Princes a holy thing, yea the
slaughter of Princes by their subjects, a thing meritorious and worthy reward;
and to speak the truth in a word, howsoever by the Pope and his adherents,
other things be pretended for all their doings, yet in truth is it nothing that
they regard or strive for, but to hold him in his seat, to ratify his
authority and usurped government: so that if reformation could stand with the
Popes crown and the Monks bel^y, the matter had been at an end long before
this day. The things which for our edification we may learn hence, are these,
that seeing ambition and filthy covetousnes were the two wings wherewith this
Antichrist flew so high; we are to beware, seeing we make profession that we
hate him, least we love and favor the things for which he has deserved this
hate. Wherefore let such take heed as to advance themselves, make no conscience
of the duty they owe to God, least their punishment be like his whose sins they
imitate. And such as make marcha^dise of the rooms and places in Gods church
or his sanctuary. Such as sold do^es and changed money which was necessary for
the sacrifices in the temple, made it a den of thieves: and what do they that
buy and sell the places thereof? they be their own (they say) and so of some
of them I may say indeed as one said of Sylla that the Pretership was his
indeed because he had paid well for it. Plutar. in Sylla


Concerning the properties of Antichrist, the time of his appearing, and the
state which of al other comes nearest here unto, as I have received of the
Lord, so have I delivered unto you* Now follows his overthrow: wherein the
holy Ghost fetteth down two things to be considered.

1 The overthrow, that God will consume him. 2 The Means, by the breath of his
mouth.
1 Consume, abolish, destroy. If the Lord had given no notice before hand
hereof, when men had seen such an enemy rise, even out of the church of God,
considering man's infirmity: we must needs think that many would have
staggered, and enquired after the truth of his promises. But for to avoid this
danger he has forewarned us, as he faith to his Disciples, Ioh. 16 4.
I have told you before of these things, that when the hour is come, ye might
remember that I told you them. Besides if he had spoke of the power of
Antichrist, and not of his overthrow the children of God considering the
mightines thereof, might have doubted how he should have oppressed! and have
said with* them in Isay, Shall the pray be taken from the mighty? Isay 49.24.
or the just captivity delivered? but now hearing the promise ^hey may in the
midst of trouble cleave to the Lord, as it is in the Prophet, and and this is
the patience of Saints. Apoc. 14.12.


2 The means whereby this should be wrought is the word of the Lord, Isay 11.4.
which is called the breath of his mouth. It seems that here the Apostle
alludeth to a place in Esaias, where it is prophesied of Christ, that he should
smite the earth with the rod of his mouth and with breath of his lips should
slay the wicked: speaking of the first coming of Christ and of the secret
power of his word; and (as there he speaks of the overthrow of one special
enemy.) Here we are to mark the glorious testimony of the mighty power of the
word of God, to which purpose it is, Ier. 1.10.
that in the prophecy of Jeremy it is attributed to the Minister and publisher
thereof. I have set thee over the nations and over kingdoms, to pluck up and
to root out, etc. By which place Boniface 8. would prove his power over
temporal Lords. And hereby was Pius 5. moved to depose the Queens Majesty.
Pii Quinti Sententia Declarat cont. Eliz^b. D^ Maiorit. cap. vnam Sanctam Ier.
23.29. Lyrain Ierem. cap. 1. vt evellis. i. evellendo denuncies tra^sf^rendos
inde habitatores. 2. Cor. 10.4, 5 Luke 10.18.
And Saunders, in this case, as also the Libeller against the execution of
Justice, leans hereunto. But who sees not that Jeremy speaks of the word
of God in the mouth of the Prophet which in another place is said to be like
fire, and the people as stubble. So Theodoret and Lyra also have expounded it.

The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, etc: having ready vengeance not
only against men but against Satan, meant by the name of principalities, and
therefore no marvel if against Antichrist. Seeing Satan fell down from heaven
like lightning. God will send his messengers to pull his wings and make him
stand on his feet. But because this beast has many heads, therefore should
receive indeed a deadly stroke, Apoc. 13.3.
yet should he not quite be destroyed till Christ come, whom he will destroy
with the brightness of his coming. Some expound so this phrase as though it
were used by the Apostle to show how easily God can and will destroy him, but
the most plain signification seems to be that by the brightness of his
coming, we mean, his bright coming: 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.
as it is said in the first chap. flame of fire for flaming fire. The Apostle
here alludeth to that description of Christ's coming, which is there laid
down. Till that time all enemies shall not be taken away. Souls under the
altar cry how long Lord, Rev. 6.10.11*
holy, and true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on the^ that dwell on
the earth. And it was answered they should rest till the number of their
brethren were fulfilled, etc. Luke 18.8.
Hereto agrees that of our Savior, when the son of man comes shall he
find faith on the earth? Wherefore though Antichrist be not quite abolished,
we must take that which God has begun in good part, knowing that our full
deliverance, and his everlasting overthrow shall be wrought at Christ's coming.

Here may we learn that when all strength in the world besides, is laid
together, yet is it nothing of force to displace Satan, unless the word of God
and preaching of his truth be adioined. It is indeed a great blessing of God
that Kings make good and wholesome laws for the suppressing of Idolatry, and
promoting of Religion, as it is a great plague either to have no Judges, or to
have such as was Gallio, who when Paul would have answered the accusation of
the Jews, told them that if it were a matter of wrong, Act, 18.14, 15 16. Act.
2^.18.19
etc. but if it be a question of words and names, and of your law, etc: or as
Festus: Questions of superstition and of one Jesus. Yet when all power and
wisdom and policy is laid together, it appertains alone to God the
lawgiver to change the hearts. The want of preaching of Gods law, is the cause
why so many souls among us are not yet delivered from the power of Antichrist,
why after so long calling so few are willing to come, why the Man of sin is
not overthrown, even because we have fought against spiritual adversaries
more with the weapons of man, then of God. We accuse Turk and Pope for
enforcing men by violence, bands, and death, to believe their religion, and yet
we rather practice man's means, Hilar. contra Auxent. Terret exiliis and
carcaribus Ecclesiae Bucer. De regno Christ. lib. 2. c, 5.
then the way God has appointed to engender faith in men's consciences. Bucer
has said that Humane laws may well make hypocrites, but faithful Christians
the word of God alone makes. Which I would they had considered who have
stoared the Church of God with dry nurses. The dragons stretch out their
breasts, and give suck to their young ones, but these, like the Ostrich which
leaves her eggs, are become careless and cruel, hardened against their young
as though they were not theirs. When the Son of the Shunamite was dead, no
reason of her husband, nor heat of harvest could hold her but she would to
Carmel to the man of God. 2. King. 4* 24.25. etc.
Carmel was a place whereas the children of the Prophets used to meet to have
conference apart. Elizeus sent his servant with his staff (as others will have
their deputies,) but the woman lay at the feet of the Prophet, and would not
rest till she had him to come himself with her. If the people abroad knew the
sickness their souls are in, for want of their Prophets, so well as this woman
felt the grief for her son departed, I doubt not, but even though it were in
the heat of harvest, 2. King, 4*30.
they would come to Carmel, and lie at the feet of their Prophets, and protest
as she did, not to depart and leave them. It was as much as Elizeus himself
could do to bring life into the child.

Secondly we may hence note that though ungodliness prosper for a while, yet God
will bring each work to judgment. The Deluge, Sodom, Egypt, may be proofs
hereof. How often has this scepter of England changed? The cause of those in
Scripture is laid down because all flesh had corrupted his way. Gen 6.11.12.
Polyd. Virg. Hist. Angl. lib. 1 p. 16. Gildas de Ex^idio Brita^niae.
And Gildas writes of our country that before these plagues came on it, the
corruption was so great, that who so would keep a good conscience must have
separated himself as Enoch. The like does Matthew Paris. write before the
coming of the Danes, when Popery had the pre-eminence, so that all men said,
great is Antichrist, then came the destruction on them, God even brought out of
their bowels, Apoc. 13*3.
the means whereby that state was overthrown. Luther out of a cloister,
Wolsey had leave from Rome to pull down the lesser houses, and H. 8. beginning
where the Cardinal left, proceeded to the greater, till he left not one stone
upon another: so that each man may take up a proverb against them, thus has
the Lord done to the^ because the fear of the Lord was not in those places.
Gen 20.11. Ep. Iud v. 7. 1 Cor. 10.11.
Now as Jude teaches us that Sodom is left for an example to us. And Paul. 1.
Cor. 10. speaks of the Jews, so are these also for us, he that chastises
the nations shall not he punish? Psalm 94.10.
Many and mighty are the sins of our land. Oppression; how many have built
them goodly houses, Hab. 2.12.
whereof the first stone lies in blood? many join house to house, field to
field, Isay. 5.8.
till there be no place that they may be placed by themselves in the midst of
the earth, ever laboring about such things as make us unwilling to die. But
the cry of the poor goes up, Iam 5 4. 2. Pet. 2.3.
and the damnation of these men sleeps not. We have seen Popery shaken, and
I am persuaded that there be many here which shall see Gods judgments on these
ungodly men, which shall be such that it shall make each ea^e that hears it
to tingle.

There be three things, says one, that gape after our death, our friends for
our goods, the worms for our body, and the devil for our soul. And there be
three that follow, our goods to the beer, our friends to the Devil, the
worms to the grave. Wherefore seeing the fashion of the world passes away, 2.
Cor. 7.31. Ps. 62.10. Genesis 30.30.
let us not set our hearts on the things thereof, yet so that Jacobs rule be
not forgotten of us. When shall I look to mine own house? and this, 1. Tim.
4.8.
so that it be still joined with godliness which has the promise both of this
life, and of that which is to come. And then God being in the midst of us, we
shall not be moved though nations rage, and kingdoms be moved, Psalm. 46.7.
for the Lord of hosts shall be with us, the God of Jacob shall be our refuge.
Remember David who in his affliction was counseled by his friends to use
humane and fleshly means, to follow policy and wisdom of man: the Prophet
answers. I trust in God, Psalm. 11.1.
how say you then to my soul* get thee as a bird to that hill. I trust in God,
says he, etc. A lesson for us to learn when we be persuaded of a change,
of trouble, or danger, flesh and blood bids us fly to that hill. Use these
unlawful means, this is the only way to escape, get to this hill. But if that
spirit be in us that was in David we will answer, I trust in God, how dare ye
then say to my soul, fly as a bird to this hill. These words, and such
allureme^ts of flesh and blood cannot avail with that soul, which has placed
his affiance and safety on the Lord. For when we shall think that the earth
is the Lords, and all therein at his appointment, Psalm. 24.1.
so that nothing can comfort and profit us without his blessing, we will never
be brought to seek after any unlawful or ungodly means.

In the description of this adversary which was to come before the coming of
Christ, there were five things proposed to be considered, 1 The properties of
this adversary. 2 The time of his appearing. 3 His overthrow, of which
hitherto has been spoken. 4 The Instruments which he shall use to deceive the
world. 5 A description of the persons whom he shall deceive.


4 Of the Instruments he says, that his coming shall be by the working of
Satan with all power, etc. In the sons of Beliall Satan works mightily,
Ephesians. 2.2. Genesis 25.5.6.
but as it is said of Abraham, that he gave all the goods unto Isaac, though
he gave gifts also to the sons of his Concubines: And as it is said that
Elkanah gave to Peninnah his wife, 1. Sam. 1.4.5.
and all her sons and daughters portions, but unto Hannah he gave a worthy
portion: Deuteronomy. 21.17.
And as the first borne in the law, was to have twice so much as any other;
even so though Satan impart much subtlety to other of his children, yet this
being his first borne, shall come with a double measure of his gifts, and a full
power to deceive. The meaning therefore is, that such as are to encounter with
this adversary, shall find him to be no common enemy. For though he shall
be a man, and therefore shall also die as the sons of men; yet so great
power shall be given him to deceive the world, that such as have to deal with
him, shall find that they are to strive with more then flesh and blood. Ephesians.
6.12.
Whereas therefore the Church has been always in afflictions, yet those which
she shall suffer under Antichrist, shall be so great, that whereas these were
but rods, 1. King. 12.10 11
these shall be scourges, his finger shall be heavier then other enemies loins.

Where it is said, that he shall come with all power] it is not meant that such
might should be given him that he should do what he will, for such power is
not given to Satan himself, it being a prerogative peculiar to Christ
himself, Mat* 28.18.
To me is al power give^; for were it so meant, then indeed should there no
flesh be saved. But the general sign is to be restrained to the matter in
hand, that it be meant of the power of working miracles so as that if I had all
faith so that I could move mountains. 1. Cor. 14*3.
Even so here, after he had said all power, it follows, and signs and lying
wonders. For he would hereby show how that as Christ in the days of his flesh
wrought such works as declared him to be the son of God, Luke 10*9.13. 19.
Mat. 11.4.5.
and as for the confirmation of the doctrine which they were to teach, the Lord
gave to the Apostles the gift of working miracles: And so Christ answered John's
disciples. Even so in the end of the world Antichrist coming to teach a new
doctrine contrary to the gospel of Christ, should labor to confirm the same
by miracles. Whereupon must needs rise a double grief to the Saints, Apoc.
13.13.14.
both for that they should be persecuted and suffer tribulation, and that for
resisting the doctrine which the world should see confirmed by strange and
wonderful m iracles.

Augustine moves a question, Aug. lib. 20 de Civ. Dei. cap. 19
whether these should be wonders indeed, or else only appear so: which he says
shall then be known when they appear. But that Satan works sometimes wonders
indeed, may appear, Aug. de Trinit. cap. 7. and 8. Ang. tractat, 30 in Ioh.
Hieron. in Psalm. 57. Cassiod. in Psalm. 57.
Deuteronomy. 13.2. As Satan had the winds at commandment, Job. 1.19. The Beast in
Apoc. 13.13. made fire come down from heaven. The question is more doubtful of
the Enchanters in Egypt, whether the rods were turned indeed Psalm. 58.
Inchanters have serpents at commandment, as Jerome and Cassiodore expound.

Wherefore if Satan has power to work miracles indeed, it is like, seeing that
Antichrist is to come with the full power of Satan, that he shall work such
wonders as are indeed, and not only appear to be, as Rev. 13. fire from
heaven. And they are al called (lying) whether they be false indeed appearing
to be that which they are not, or for that they serve for the proof and
confirmation of a ly. 2 Thessalonians. 2.1^.
Of vnrigteousnes] hereby may be meant al offenses committed against the first
table, which concern faith or calling upon the name of the Lord, Romans 1.18.
as Romans 1. which withhold the truth in righteousness. Where he shows what is
thereby meant, they do not receive the love of the truth but believe lies.

All deceaueablenes] whereby is signified that he shall lack no means to
deceive the world. Romans 16*18.
Toward such as are simply minded, he shall come with a show of godliness:
toward the fearful he shall show strength and force; Apoc. 13.16. and 21 8.
Luke 4.6. Apoc. 13.13.14.
to the ambitious he shall pretend power to dispose of kingdoms, to them which
look for wonders, he shall work them, etc.

In the description of the persons who shall be deceived we may note 3 things 1
Who they are. 2 The cause why they shall be deceived. 3 The double punishment.


1 The persons are said to be such as perish, whence is gathered a special
comfort, that notwithstanding the power of Antichrist shall be so great and
mighty, yet shall it not be able to prevail any whit with the elect. Christ
says, They shall deceive the very elect if it were possible* the^ is it indeed
impossible. In the^ therefore only shall all his deceits be effectual which
partake with him, Mat. 24.24.
etc.

2 Thessalonians. 2.10.
2 The Cause laid down is, for that they received not the love of the truth,
that they might be saved. Some expound it of the holy Ghost; but it seems to
signify the doctrine of the truth, which they refuse, as it is said, they
received not Christ, Ioh. 1.11.12. which believed not in him. Ioh. 1.11.12.
When it is said, that they received not, etc.] Thereby is meant, not a bare
negligence in them, for the^ he would have said, for that they sought not
after: but a wilful despising of grace offered. As they who being called to the
supper refused to come. Mat. 22.5.
Which point is amplified further, when it is said, that they might be saved.
In that they neglect the doctrine of truth confirmed by Christ's works, and that
wherein life and salvation consists, to follow after lies and death.

3 The Punishment is double 1 Secret in this life which is away to the other. 2
Open in the world to come.
God will send them] On which words the Rhemists note out of Aug. Deus mittet.
i. permittet. Aug. de Civit. Dei lib 20, 19 Lyra in 2. These. 2 mittet. 1.
(...). Aug. loc. citat.
Whereby they gather that God permits: wherein they speak the truth, but not
all the truth. For in these things God is not only a sufferer, for he that
sends (as it is said here) does more them permit, which they might have
gathered out of the words following those which they allege, Judgments of God
secretly just, and justly secret: Iudicatiseducentur illis iudiciis Dei occul^e
justice and iust^ occultis. Idem ibidem. Deus facit iusto iudicio. quod Satan
iniquo malignoque. consilio ibi^ 2 Thessalonians. 2.12.
whereby though he acknowledge Satan to be a worker, yet says he not, that he
alone works. For even the same action in respect of Satan is naught and
wicked, which yet in respect of God is just and righteous.

2 The second punishment is, that all they may be damned. Wherein is laid
down the fearful estate of the wicked, who refusing life offered them, have
therefore instead thereof sent the^ false teachers, whom they may believe, that
so being carried from sin to sin, etc: they may at the last be brought to
final destruction.

Here are out of this place 4 things to be considered.

1 That Miracles are no sufficient proof for us now to try Religion by. 2 How
far Satan can go in deceiving the world: and herein to consider what we are to
think of our fathers. 3 How grievously the Lord takes and how sore he
punishes the contempt of his truth. 4 The order and great justice of God in
bringing punishment upon the wicked. Mat. 12.39.

1 Miracles] a wicked and adulterous generation seeks after a sign, so deal
our enemies with us since the time of reformation, calling on us for signs,
and miracles, Bern. Se^m. 2, de advent. Do^.
to confirm our doctrine. and as Bernard says, that as men in danger of
drowning, lay hold fast on that which comes next to hand, be it dirt or what
else, and leave it not at all: so our enemies seeing their case desperate, among
other dirt and baggage which they have laid hold on, retain still this one
point of miracles, as some great and high matter. Brist. Mot. ^.


Bristow in his motives making a distinction of miracles Dogmaticall and
personal, teaches, that whatsoever doctrine has been proved by miracles, is
truth, Brist. Mot. 6.
and that no instance can be brought against it. And in another, Whosoever
wrought miracles was a preacher of the truth, Rhem. in Io^. 15. v. 24.
and that no instance ca^ be brought against it. And the Rhemists on the 15. of
John note, that if the Jews had not sinned in refusing Christ, having not
wrought such works and miracles among them, that the foolishness of
Catholics were great, to receive Luther without miracles. And as Occupiers
which are ready to break, make the greatest show, and bring forth to the view
whatsoever they have: so deal they in this matter, Brist. Mot. 5. fol. 22.
Brist. Mot. 6. fol. 31.
bringing out all the stuff they have. Hereupon Bristow tells us of hosts,
which being pricked did bleed. And how Pius 5. was endued with the gift of
working miracles, who at one time drove the devils out of certain women,
Brist. Mot. 5. fol. 20. Rhem. in All 7.58.
as also of one, who playing the harlot in London, and going beyond sea,
falling lame, was afterward cured at a processio^. The Rhemists also upon the
Acts, tell us of a stone which being thrown at Steven, hitting him on the
elbow rebounded back: etc: for the truth whereof they refer us to the 10. Tom.
of Aug. 38. ser de diversis in editione Paris.

As for the 3. miraculous hosts which they say have bin kept above 200. years,
we need believe the thing no whit the sooner therefore, for the blood of Hales
was kept amongst us herein England a far longer time. Concerning Pius 5. we
know not what power he had to bind and command Satan, but we are sure he had
no power to deliver unto Satan, for had he, it had gone with us and our realm
very il by this time: and we conceive that he had no great gift to do good with
his blessing, Pii. 5 sentent. Declarat. cont. Eiizab. Regin. Angl.
seeing such as he has cursed most bitterly have sped the better for it rather
then the worse.

The healing of the lame woman, were it well sisted, would prove no such
miracle as sundry of our Justices of peace have wrought in England, more
strange then that. For, that it was a piece of knavery co^veied between the
suffragan that wrought the feat, and her, may partly appear, in that the woman
had told sundry before, that such a day she would cast away her crutch; and
that the Suffragan having the same day diverse ge^tlemen and great persons to
minister the Mass unto, yet left them all of purpose to minister to her. And
if for this miracle, any be disposed to repair to that place on pilgrimage,
they may a great deal better go to Bridewell where there are store of ^eliques
of such miracles. As for the place in Augustine, if I should find it, I would
crave pardon of him, if I believed it not. But having sought it in all the
editions I could see, yet could I not find it, and having seen one Edition at
Paris. therein was no such thing. And it is great marvel, that seeing the
edition of Aug. works overseene by Pop. divines and printed by Plantin^ came
out 5. years before the Rhemists Testament, that they should not rather follow
that: but because indeed, there is no such thing found therein, Lyra in Dan 14
Et simili^er fit in Ecclesia max ima decepti^ populi in miraculis fictis a
sacer dotibus vel ipsis adherentibus propter lucrum temporale Can. l. 11.6.
they send us to another edition which has not that authority with them
generally as the other, and of us cannot be so soon met withal. How they are
deceived, see Lyra on the 14. Dan.

Alexander Hales confesses that there has sometime bin flesh seen in the
Sacrament by the subtle working of Satan.

Canus complains on the impudency of such men as have not spared the Virgin
Mary, no not Christ himself. Ludovicus Vives, also for that the histories of
the Saints are so penned that they lie covered with the darkness of error,
whereas the histories of the heathen flourish amongst al men. But if it were
true that many of these things were done indeed, yet have we warning, that If
one tell a thing and it come to pass; Deuteronomy. 13.2.3.
and therevpo^ he seek to lead us after other Gods that we should not for all
that follow him. Wherefore that of Bristow is false, Brist. Mot. 5.
that whatsoever at any time has been taught by miracles is undoubtedly true.
It shall be permitted to the be^st to give signs on the earth, Apoc. 13.13.
Exodus 8.7. Lactant. de Orig. Error. lib. 2 cap. 16. Lactant. de Just. lib. 5 c.
3. Greg Turonensis. lib. 10 c. 24. Hom. 49. in 24. Mat. in opere impers. opud
Chrysostom. tom. 2. p 1109. Gal. 1.8.
as we read also of the Inchanters of Egypt. Lactantius confesses many things
reported of the Idols to be true, and yet was it right and just for the
Christians then to oppose themselves against them. Greg. Turonensis, l. 10. c.
24. reports of one who took upon him in France to be Christ, who also
healed such as he touched.

Whereas our Adversaries will us to prove our new doctrine by miracles, we
answer, that if we brought any new doctrine they were accursed that should
believe it, not only though it were accompanied with miracles: but even
although an Angel from heaven should come and teach it. Whe^efore the only way
to try the truth of doctrine is the word of God. And who so now receaueth not
that without a wonder is as Aug. faith a wonder himself. Deuteronomy 13.1, 2, 3 Mat.
27 41.42 43.
Let us then remember Moses his rule, Thou shall not harken to the words of the
Prophet, or unto that dreamer of dreams, etc. and that it was the scoff of
Christ's enemies, when they bad him to come from the cross that they might
believe in him. And so do our enemies call on us, let them give sight to the
blind, and lims to the lame, and then will we believe their doctrine. As for
their miracles whatsoever, they be no other but such as the Apostle here
calls lying wonders, false they are, and lying either because they appear to
be that which they are not, or for that they tend to the confirmation of lies
and falsehood.

2 The second general point concerns the persons that by this Man of sin
shall be deceived, which are by the Apostle termed (such as perish) wherein
by limiting the compass of the Man of sin, and his deceit, he leaves unto
us this comfort, that he shall not be able to deceive al, but only them that
were hereunto appointed. Apoc. 7.2, 3.
Even as when the four destroying Angels held the four winds, the Angel which
came from the East, having the seal of the living God, commanded them, not to
hurt the earth till the servants of God were sealed. And again, where the
general Apostasy is spoken of the power given to the beast over every kindred,
tongue, and nation, it is tied only to them, whose names are not written in
the book of life of the lamb. Apoc. 13 ^.
And when our Savior says that the days should be so wicked that even the
elect if it were possible should perish, Mat. 24.24.
he declares that the elect cannot possibly fall away. Which is the thing
which the Apostle in this place lays down, and is true in Gods Church, and
every true member thereof, because they are founded on that rock which shall
not shrink, Mat. 7.25. and 16.18, Ioh. 17.17.
and sanctified by that truth that must always prevail, of which point we
shall have occasion to speak more afterward.

Now because I have signified that of al estats, that of the Popedom is most
properly designed by the properties of Antichrist laid down before, and for
that most of our ancestors and Predecessors died in the midst of that darkness
and professed that Religion; the Papists would have it answered what we think
to have become of all the^. For if we shall say that all Papists are condemned,
the^ shall we justify that slander of us, wherein we are accused to condemn to
hell all our parents and forefathers. If we shall answer that we think not so
hardly* of them, then will they be ready thereon to conclude, that we must
needs allow of popery, which even such as are saved have professed.

Bristowe enquireth, If there were ever any Protestant so bold as to condemn
to hell Augustine, etc. all our ancestors, Fou^ders of Colleges, who himself
answering for us says, that we do not, as may appear in that we thank God
heartily for them, etc. The like matter ha^dleth he in his 46 Demand, where he
says that we are so far from condemning them to hell that Calvine sets
down the quite contrary. Whereas then they commonly slander us, that we should
condemn al our parents and predecessors, our adversary as you have heard,
clears us from it. Brist. Mot. 36. Dioscor. lib. 9. c. 4. Plin. lib. 22. cap
15. Dioscor. lib. 4. cap 205. lib. 8. cap. 3.
And thus far may we use the scorpion for a remedy against his own biting.
But yet are we to beware of the poison which is in his tongue, for the end is
naught to which he alleges this. For he asks how we can condemn the
doctrine of these men for naught, of whom we have so reverend an opinion as to
think that their souls be in rest and bliss. Which argument though at the
first show, it seem strong and forcible yet when we take a narrow view of it,
we shall find it to be nothing.

For if we should ask them if ever any Papists might be found so peremptory
that would adiudge to hell. Adam, Lot, David, the Apostles, and Peter himself,
who were greevious sinners, as guilty of Incest, Adultery, Murder, declining
and denying of Christ, they would say none would, we might therefore in like
manner conclude (as well as they) that disobedience, d^unkennesse, incest, etc.
were allowed by them, etc. If they say that there is difference, because these
sins of theirs were excusable and not damnable, they continuing in profession
and outward service of God: The course of the scriptures is against them, Isa.
1.15. Isa. 58.4.
though you make many prayers I will not hear, for your hands are full of
blood. Wherefore have we fasted and thou see^t it not: chastned our selves,
and thou regardest not: behold in the day of your fast you will seek your will,
and require all your debts. Where, notwithstanding the laying aside of their
costly apparel, and girding themselves with sackcloath, faststing, etc. so
long as they remained cruel hearted, envious, etc. Their prayer and their
fasting was turned into sin. 1. Cor 69.
Paul says, of such deeds, that they who do them shall not inherit the
kingdom of heaven. Wherefore the consequent is naught, Men which did these
things were saved. ^rgo these things which they did were not damnable. If they
say that the examples are not like in life and doctrine, yet I say that the
form of argument in both these cases is one, for they gather, These men were
saved, ergo nothing they believed was damnable. And why not as well these were
saved ergo nothing they did was damnable. Moreover when our first parents
sinned, it was not only in eating the fruit forbidden, but in hoping to become
like unto God, Genesis 3.5.6.
which the Devil had put into their heads, and beguilded them, which the Lord
also notes, when scorning them, he says, Now is man become like one of us.
Genesis 3 22. Act. 26.9, 10, 1. Tim. 1.13. Act 16. Luke 24 11 Ioh. 20.27, 28
And Paul erred in doctrine and opinion while he was a persecutor, so did the
Apostles whilst they dreamed of a worldly kingdom which Christ should have,
and were in darkness concerning Christ's resurrection, and Thomas expressly, who
was so far from believing for the time, that he would not believe, till he had
thrust his finger into the print of the nails and put his hand into his side.
Yet I ask whether there were ever any Papist so bold as to condemn to hell
one first parents, the holy Apostles Paul, Peter? etc. And because they do
not, must they, or we therefore necessarily allow their error? Whatsoever
they can except against this argument, the like may any one against theirs. If
they say that these repented the^, eve^ the same may we say of our Ancestors.
2. Sam. 12. Ps 51. Act 9. Mat. 26.75.
Yea but they reply, we have evident tokens in these, and test^monies out of
the scripture, as of David, Paul and Peter, etc. And though this be true, will
they the^ co^de^ne as impenitent all them of whom they read not the like. For
we read not (that I know) any thing of Adams conversion, nor of Lots, yet
cannot we condemn therefore our first parents, unless we say that God had not
a church so soon as the Devil had a chapel. And we cannot take from Lot that
honorable co^mendatio^ which the holy Ghost gives him, for he being righteous
and dwelling amongst them, in seeing and hearing vexed his righteous soul,
etc. Cyprian in a Council decreed, Cypr. epist. 70. ad Ianuari^m. Cypr. cp.
73. ad Iubaian.
that such as were baptized by heretics should be rebaptized. Tertullian
condemned utterly second marriage, many of the ancient Fathers favored the
Millenaries, and I think the Papists will bring slender proofs that they
recalled their errors, Eusebius. l, 7. c 3. Tertul. lib. 1. ad ^^orem.
yet I think no Papist so presumptuous as to condemn al these to hell. As for
us, as w^e rest in hope that many of our Predicessors are saved, Just. Mart.
D^al^cum. Tryph. p. 239. Liaen. l 5. c. 23. vide Hier. Catalog. Papias Tertu^.
Chiliast^ fait lib. 3. con^. Marc.
so also hope we, that they found mercy at the hands of our merciful God
whereby their eyes were opened to see the truth so much as was necessary to
salvation, and to renounce the contrary errors. Yet say I not, that it was
necessary they should renounce each particular error, but that they received
mercy and pardon for them, yea although they knew them not to be errors.
Wherefore the Prophet prays, Cleanse me from my secret faults, Lactant. de
^ivin. praemio l. 7. cap. 23.
who knows how often he offends? Now if we know not the faults for which we
pray for pardon, sure it is we cannot reform the^, Psalm. 19.12.
and yet do we pray and by Gods mercy shall obtain remission of the^. That we
may conceive this matter the easier, we are to mark that there is a difference
both between sins and errors. For

There are sins some 1 Which we bring with us from the womb, and such as are
of infirmity. 2 Crying sins, ruling in us and carrying us away from all
godliness.


Such as are of the first sort may be pardoned and yet remain in us, else could
there not possibly any flesh be saved. To Paul there was give^ a prick in the
flesh, 2. Cor. 12.7.
the messenger of Satan to buffet him. He be sought the Lord ^hrice that it
might depart from him. It was answered him, My grace is sufficient for thee,
etc. Paul himself was buffeted, he prayed, yea thrice, yet could not be
delivered, but received com^ortable answer that Gods grace should not fa^le
him. And hence may we gather strong co^solatio^ that when we feel not in us
that zeal in prayer which is required, neither present release from those
pricks of sin wherewith all we are troubled, yet to keep us still on this
ground, My grace is sufficient for thee. The second sort of sins are Crying
sins, of which the Apostle speaks, 2. Cor. 6.9.
know ye not the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not
deceived, neither fornicators, nor Idolaters, Ephesians. 5.5.
nor adulterers, etc. And again, no whoremo^ger, etc: has any inheritance in
the kingdom of Christ and of God. These are of that nature, that although the
children of God before their calling and after it may fall into them, yet they
cannot find pardon for them, unless they leave and forsake them. As is plain
by the words of the Prophet Isaiah. Isai. 1.16, 17. Ier. 4.14.
For it is not enough to offer sacrifices, to fast, etc: unless we put away
the evil of our works yea even the evil thoughts out of our hearts, and
learn to do well, Prove. 28 9.
without which reformation our prayers themselves shall be turned into sin. So
that without the forsaking of them they cannot be pardoned us. For it is not
enough to confess them, Prove. 28.13. Exodus 9.27. Numb. ^3.10.
so did Pharaoh, neither to wish and crave for pardon, for so did Balaam, but
this made him the more inexcusable, that whereas he wished to dy^the death of
the righteous, he had no care to live the life of the righteous.

As we have divided sins so may we also distinguish Errors. For there are.

Some 1 Which shake the very foundations of faith. 2 That men build contrary to
truth, yet on the foundation.


These then have a diverse consideration, For although some of them proceeding
from ignorance may find mercy, as the Prophet prayed, Ps. 19.12.
Cleanse thou me from my secret sins: yet when ignor^ntly we defend and
mainetaine such points as shake the foundation: so far off is it that ignorance
should excuse us, that rather it carries us on to greater sin and punishment,
where the Apostle in the former chapt. sets this ignorance down as an
especial cause procuring Gods everlasting indignation. 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.
Rendering vengeance unto them that do not know God. As on the contrary part,
Ioh. 17.3.
It is life to know God to be the only very true God and whom he has sent
Jesus Christ. So Paul though he had zeal, and what he did was ignorantly, 1.
Tim. 1.13.
yet had he not received mercy to repent, and forsake his error, and ignorance,
he could not have bin saved. And even so all damnable heresies must be recalled
in particular. So Peter having told the Jews that what they and their
Governors did, it was through ignorance, bids them Amend their lives and
turn, that their sins might be put away. Act. 3.17.19.
Otherways such as renou^ced not their sins, were for their ignorance justly
by God punished. Whereas then our adversaries ask of us what is become of our
Fathers: we say that as we hope well of the^ in the judgment of charity, so do
we trust also that of God they received mercy to believe and know the
foundation and ground of faith, although in other opinions by me^ built on this
foundation they might err and continue therein. But we say that he whosoever
stands on Fathers or predicessors what or howsoever they believed, when Gods
truth is laid open before him, may receive of men a commendation for his
natural affection, but he shall then be allowed of God, and saved, when the
natural man shall possess the kingdom of heaven. Ioh. 3 3. 1. Cor. 15.50.
For this shall you mark in the scripture for a certain ground and sure Rule
of a rebellious people to oppose the example of Fathers to Gods plain word and
express commandment, as the Jews answered the Prophet, Ier. 44.16, 17.
The word that thou have spoken unto us in the name of the Lord we will not
hear it of thee: But we will do whatsoever is gone out of our mouth, as we have
done, and our fathers, and our kings, and our Princes. It was a notable saying
of Jerome (which I take at another man's word, not knowing where it is in his
works) but it is a saying worthy so excellent a man. If my father stood weeping
on his knees before me, and my mother hanging on my neck behind me, and all
my brethren, sisters, children, kinsfolk, howling on every side to retain me
in sinful life with them: I would fling my mother to the ground: despise all
my kindred, run over my father and tread him under my feet, thereby to run to
Christ when he calls me. Which as he said, for reforming his manners, so
might he also say well enough concerning faith and belief. And howsoever Jerome
either said, or thought, we know that one greater then Jerome had said no
less, Luke 14.26.
Whosoever loves father or mother, etc: more then him, is not worthy of him.
Moreover when to move us they cite a Catalogue of fathers, whom they brag to
have bin of their Profession, ^it has bin (Gods name be praised therefore)
made evident that al me^ see how hitherto with this vain show they have
deceived the world. Jewel in his Reply and Defense.
For it is manifest that these fathers and their childrens children were
gathered to their fathers before the grounds of Pope^y were laid. C^us 9 q. ^.
N^mo D^stinct 96 cap Duo. and Nunquam Did. 40. cap. si Papa.,
For neither to Augustine, etc: nor to Gregory were these articles of their
belief ever known or signified, of the absolute authority of one man over
prince and people, to set up, and depose princes at his pleasure, on whom al
truth ha^geth, whose power is so great, tha^ how great so ever corruption be in
Religion, yet that no man may correct and redress it with out him. This which
is the ground of all Popery began indeed to work, Magdeb. Cent. 5 cap. 10.
when Zosimus labored to have all appea^e^ made to Rome, to which purpose was
alleged a Canon of a former Council, Council. Carthag. 6 cap. 3.4.
which the Council withstood, finding out the corruption of the Canon, who
therefore wrote to the B. of Rome of their determination, Council. Aphrica cap
105.
and of the forgery of the Canon. The like did Gregory to the B. of
Constantinople seeking pre-eminence over all Bishops. Cent. 6. cap. 7. cont
Primatum Greg. Ep. lib 4 Ep 34.
So that although this Monster began then to breed, yet took it such a blow at
the hands of those good fathers that being smoothered it vanished away like the
untimely fruit of a woman. Gre l 6. Ep 30 Eg^ sidenter dico etc. Did. 99. cap.
Primae Sedis and seque^t. Conc. Trid. Sess. 13, cap, 5.
The like may said of the breaden God, their private mass, their dry
communion, whereof none durst put forth the head, whiles those watchmen stood
upon the walls. Of Fathers therefore we may say, that although they have in some
places let fall from their pen, some things that are to be covered, yet that
out of their own writings and sayings, we may deduce such speeches as correct
their escapes, and confirm the truth against the foundations of Popery: I will
not cite many examples hereof, one may suffice for many. Ambrose and Austen
have happily somewhere too too swelling words, as concerning our works, yet
Ambrose when he was ready to die is said to have uttered these words, Paulin
in vita Ambrosi*
I have not lived as that I am ashamed to live any longer, neither have I so
lived as that I am afraid to die presently, Possidou in vit^ August.
because I have a good Lord. Of which Aug. says, that considering his
conversation among men, he knew it was such as before them he needed not to be
ashamed, and his confidence before God proceeded from the affiance he had in
Gods mercy, because he had a good Lord. Wherefore we are to come to the reading
of the Fathers, as to a ^ich treasure, whereas is much gold, and some dross,
and therefore are we to pray God to open our eyes that we may discern the
one from the other. As for these writers of later sort, the judgment of them
is harder, for it is likely that many of them lived and died Papists. But yet
we say that as in Eliahs time, God had reserved seven thousand that never
bowed to Baal, so it might be the^ They mock us, I wot well, for this
answer. But they cannot refuse it, without refusing also the truth delivered in
the scriptures. Of the Church it is prophesied in the Revelation, that she
should flee into the wilderness. Apoc. 12.6. Rhem. in Apoci. 12. Isai. 26.20.
And the Rhemists themselves say that in the days of Antichrist this shall be,
that it may be verified of the Church, which is said by the Prophet, Go hide
thy self in thy closser, etc. And as in the days of Eliah besides those
known to the Lord that had not bowed their knee to Baal, 1. King. 19 18
there were also many who though they had bowed their knee to Baal, yet when
Eliah had preached the truth to them, and declared God to be the Lord, 1. King.
18*39
did then confess the Lord he is God the Lord he is God: Even so we are to
think, that many there were even among them in the deepest darkness of Popery
who saw most, and yet herein offended that they communicated with them, whom
yet the Lord as he pleased showed grace unto to confess him. Hereof may we
take example fro the days of Edward 6. how many were there who vnfa^nedly
embraced the Gospel, then freely preached, when it might have seemed that the
tyranny of the 6. Articles had consumed all the Professors of the truth. In
which res^ect also the Church wondereth in the Prophet at her sudden
increase* Isay. 49 31.
who has begotten me these. As concerning our Founders, we answer even as they
do for us, that we bless God for them, and have hope of their blessedness,
yet so as we profess that the building of all the Schools and Colleges in
the world cannot deserve the joy of one day in the kingdom of heaven, and as
we have an honorable opinion of them for the purpose which they had, though
they did many things which we cannot commend, so do we say that the great^st
happiness and blessedness which could come unto them, Psalm. 32 1. Act. 3.26.
was to have their sins and offenses pardoned them. And whe^eas they say this
is no other hope then we may have of Pagans, and Infidels: we answer that there
is great odds. For it was the singular mercy of God, even still to leave
certain grounds of salvation even amongst them, as the word though greatly
corrupted and darkened: the Articles of our belief, the Sacrament of Baptism,
etc. wherefore though many perish^d, Cant. 5.7.
when the watchmen not only slept, but took away her veil from her, as the
spouse in the Canticles complains, yet no doubt God so provided, that such as
he had appointed to salvation had so much bread as would save their life,
bread in a measure, and water in a m^asure, though not enough to keep them in
good plight, and to give them a fresh color; the like they find not among the
Pagans, wherefore we absolutely say for ought we can see they be damned.
Lastly, where they ask us what excuse the learned ca^ find who cannot be said
to have erred ignorantly, we tell them that Paul was as well learned as they,
who yet says, that what he did, h^ did ignorantly. 1 Timothy* 1.13. Act. 17 23.30
A^g ep 48. ad Vincentium.
And to the learned Athenians he obiecteth ignorance, the time of this
ignorance God regarded not. See what Augustine says of Cyprian. Else if lack
of learning were excuse sufficient to save us, and there were no excuse for
learning, the next and readiest way to salvation, were all ignorance and
Barbarism. We say then that very many, who spent great labor in serving of
sin, were yet saved even as brands half consumed and so plucked out of the
fire. And howsoever, or whatsoever many have spoken before men, yet when they
were to commune with God himself, the whole stay and confidence which made
them bold to die, they felt and acknowledged to be this, Paulin. in vito
Ambrosi^.
Quia bonum habemus Deum, to pardon our errors and judge us according to our
works. Yea when many were in the waters over head and ears, and nothing out
but even the hair even thereby have they been drawn out and saved. To
conclude, the former times were cruel times when the watch men were not only
sleepie, but even hinderers and spoilers of the city: yet God had means to
keep some from falling into error, others that fell thereinto, he in good
time called some at the first hour, others at the last. Although they saw not
all the errors, yet such as overthrew the foundation of Christianity no doubt
they understood and withstood. And we are to think that unto them many things
were pardonable, which now to us are not. And we boldly say as did the
Prophet, Isa. 1.^.
had not the mercy of the Lord been great to leave us a remnaent we had been
al as Sodom, and had been like to Gomorrha. But when we speak of Gods mercy
we speak of a thing that is bottomless and incomprehensible. When they ask
of us. How many or who are they who thus were saved? What other answer can they
have but this; Romans 11.34.
Who has known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his counselor?

We are then to think that God had some which never bowed their knees to Baall,
many who although partakers of many their errors yet held the foundation. Some
also who being deeply sunk in their gross idolatries, were notwithstanding
saved as brands half burnt out of the fire, being effectually called, some
sooner, others later according to the rich mercy of God.

There remain as yet two points of those which have been proposed. The
former, the Cause why God sends this great punishment. Wherein we are to
consider how il he takes the contempt of his word. The later, the order and
severity of God in condemning of such as refuse the word of truth offered.

11 And therefore God shall send them strong delusions, that they should
believe lies.

12 That all they might be damned which believed not the truth but had pleasure
in unrighteousness.

But because the later containing the grievousnes of the punishment does
sufficiently express how il the Lord takes the offense which deserves it, I
shall touch the same so far as this gives occasion.

Some there are to whom the word of truth was never sent, which abide in
darkness and ignorance, so that no man can express the wrath that lies on
them. Howbeit if we compare it with the fircenes of that wrath which is here
declared against them to whom the word of truth has bin revealed, but who have
refused it, we shall see, that it is but very little. For here is laid down
the displeasure of God against them, to who^ bread and water was offered, but
they as scornful children have cast it away, and instead thereof have poison
given them whereon they feed, and drink to their utter destruction. Foolish
men who when they had the light sent amongst them, Ioh. 3.10.
loved darkness more then light, who therefore had a perpetual night brought on
them, and so were led from iniquity to iniquity, til that punishment of
damnation light upon them.

The Judgments here threatened are two.

1 One in this life. 2 The other in the life to come.
The former, a punishment and sin. A sin in that they take pleasure in
believing lies and delusions, a punishment, in that they are given over
thereunto.

The later a punishment only. In the first men are both doers and sufferers: in
the later they are sufferers only against their will.

The Pelagians long since, the Papists at this day, with some others, whose
names I spare, have so interpreted both this, and the like places, as having no
other meaning, but that God suffers them to be given up to delusions, etc:
least if they say as the Apostle does, that God sends them, they should make
him the author of sin. Job. 13.7.
But we may say to them, as Job, Is it fit to lie for God? We must say that
which is the truth notwithstanding the vain imagination which men have of
false consequents. For the Scripture is plain that God not only is a sufferer*
but a worker also in these punishments, yet without all sin or blame. For
seeing it is said that he sends delusions as his messengers, it is plain
that herein he has his work. After which manner the scripture speaks in
other places. 1 King. 22.23.
The Lord put a lying spirit in the mouth of the Prophets. And in the Prophet,
I the Lord have deceived that Prophet. Ezekiel. 149.


The Rhemists in their marginal note on this place, send us to a place in
Augustine, out of which to learn how to expound this and other like places.
But Augustine shows that in these things God is more then a bare sufferer.
Aug lib. 20 de Civ. Dei. cap. 19 Iu^^o ipse ^^dicio Q^is non i^^a ^udicia
divina cont^emisca^ ^uibus agit Deus in co^dibus malorum hominum quicquid vult.
Mat 10.2^. Dan. 4.31.32.
When he calls it a righteous judgment, which judgment must needs be his
work; but to know S. Aug. meaning read the 5. lib. contra Pelag. c. 3. where
he shows that herein is not only his sufferance but his power. So that God
marveilously works not only in the bodies, but also in the hearts of men. And
for all works we are to hold this: that if we say that God suffers any thing
which he cares not how or in what fort it falls out, we deny his Providence,
if he suffer any thing against his will, we deny his omnipotent power. But we
may herein note the exceeding power of God, which of the sins of the godly can
make comfort to the godly and raise glory to his name; Romans 8.28.
yea the sins of the faithful to turn to their good, as he made the buffetings
of Satan means to keep Paul from being proud through the multitude of
revelations. If any man be curious in this, 2. Cor. 12.7^
and will not be satisfied but bring Gods works to man's tribunal, let him look
to be consumed of his glory, and he that cannot hereof speak with reverence,
let him hold his tongue altogi^her. Job. 13.5.
O that you would hold your tongue that it might be imputed unto you for
wisdom. After then that men refuse the love of the truth, God in wrath
leaves them to the rage of Satan, Mat. 12.44, 45
who finding the house swept returns with 7. other worse* then himself, and
there takes up possession, leading them on from one sin to another, 2. Tim.
3.13.
and at last to perpetual destruction. When that choice was offered David of
the three punishments to take one, he said, 2 Samuel 24.14.
he was in a great strait, but if he had added for a fourth to have bin left
over to Satan, and to have bin forsaken of God, the choice had bin easy.
Better it is (said David) to fall into the hands of God then of man, but far
better had it bin to have fallen into all the evils which all the world could
do, then to be give^ up to be punished by Satan. It is a pitiful sight to see
children die at the head of every street, for want of food, or that the sword
should destroy our people, Lam. 2.12.
or that the pestilence should walk through our cities, Exodus 12.30.
if it were to slay but one in a house, as in Egypt, but yet were all this
comfortable in comparison to see our friends die before our eyes, whether
famished, slain with the sword, or destroyed with pestilence; if they died thus
in the favor of God this I say were comfort in comparison of this, to see them
like wandering sheep, Mat. 9.36. Act. 16.6.7. 2 Timothy 2 26. Apoc 21.27. Apoc.
20.10.
scattered without hope, forsaken of God bound with chains of sin, held under
the thraldom of Satan, to see heaven shut against them, and hell gaping to
receive the^, their eternal damnation already prepared for them. And such is
the heavy judgment of God against all contemners of his word, whereof we have
proof in all ages. And expressly in the Jews, Rom 9.3.
to whom the promises were made, among whom Christ preached, lived, and wrought
his miracles, who because they refused this holy one, reviled, crucified him,
and wished that his blood might be on their heads, for this cause the wrath of
God came upon them even unto the uttermost. 2 Thessalonians. 2.16.
It had bin a small matter, if only they had bin in the promise of grace of
salvation made to their fathers, but this punishment passes all.

To omit the East churches, whose candlesticks are removed, in whom Mahomet the
enemy of God sits and keeps them in most miserable servitude, we may see
how in the West churches also, God has punished this sin. For having at first
for the doctrine of Christ, brought in the doctrine of man, they proceeded
farther, and set up one man to uphold it and so holding on they buried Gods
word in ignorance, and led away the poor people to dumb and senseless
creatures, In the midst of these thick mists it pleased God to open his light
in sundry places, as in this country of ours, and to send salvation among us,
which many have refused, and some of them fled from it; but consider how the
judgment of God has fallen on the^, into what gross absurdities have they
run, and how like foolish builders they made that which should be the
foundation the roof, or rather indeed have left it no place in the building,
that is, setting aside Gods word, Pe^es. de Trad. Duran. Rat. Council. Trid.
have made for the ground of their faith and religion, men's traditions, men's
doctrines, and devises, So that the Divines of Spain and Portugal, which have
not heard of the truth, as these men have done, have thought and written far
more of the truth and soundnes of the original, of the dignity and sufficiency
of the scripture. And where the Divines of Lovan have cleared the fathers from
forgeries and singled out the counterfaits, our men have stuffed their
Testament with such ware. I know not who says as Stapleton does, that the
Church has authority to Canonize for scripture* those that are not, as the
Canons of the Apostles, the book called the Pastor, long since condemned for a
notable forgery. But this is Gods judgment fallen upon them for their refusal
of Gods truth. I will end with them having rehearsed that place which S. Paul
did against the Jews out of the Prophet. Hearing ye shall hear and shall not
understand, etc: for the heart of this people is waxed sat. Act. 28.26.27


Now let me speak to you of whom I hope better things, and I would to God I
might hope so good, that I might not have occasion to say as the spirit of God
faith to the Church of Ephesians. I have somewhat against thee. Hoseah says, Apoc. 2
4. Hos. 13.12.
The iniquity of Ephraim is bound up. Alluding to the manner of covetous men,
who having store of money before hand, are wont to bind it up and lay it by,
till it so fall out that they may purchase some gainefull thing thereby. In
which manner the iniquity of Ephraim is said to be bound up, as reserved and
kept for some purpose. After which manner also the Apostle speaks of ungodly
me^ that they treasure up to the^selus wrath against the day of wrath. I am
afraid lest that our sins be bound and kept together for some purpose, and
sealed up as Job speaks in a bag for some purchase. Romans 2.^.
Whereof I wish you in the fear of God to judge. Job. 14 17. Mat. 22 4.
The Lord has prepared a great banquet, the guests have bin bidden, all manner
of fare has bin appointed, both for the weak and strong, yet have the comers
bin so thin, as they are but as a cluster of grapes, yea of the whole vine not
so many as will make a cluster. I could wish that some would make a table in
his heart of such as he thinks are effectually called, and I suppose he
should find the number to be very few. Cornelius when Peter was sent unto him,
was ready with his friend, before God to hear whatsoever was commanded him of
God. Act. 10.33.
Are there many among us like Cornelius, which wait for the coming of Peter,
with their acquaintance and friends? And are there many which come with such
reverence before God? Some there are that come, but it is while their yearly
dignity lasts. Show me such householders as bring their families and
friends to hear what God has commanded to be told them, and we will give
them the commendations which Cornelius had. Think you that your wives,
children, and servants have no souls, or that they are given them only for
this life, instead of salt to keep their bodies from putrefying. Trow you that
the blessing of God can rest upon that house, wherein there is no one that
fears God or delights to hear his word? You are like to bestow much in
maintaining the liberties of your city, and I could wish you did so, if it be
your right, but if you knew what it were to be free of the kingdom of
heaven, you would more earnestly labor for that freedom then for the other.
Follow the example of them that are mentioned, Mal 3.15 16.
Malach. 3. etc. who when ungodly men set their hearts on wickedness,
condemning the justice of God. Such as feared the Lord spoke every one to his
neighbor and there was a table of remembrance. Otherwise, unless we reform
this falt, we are to fear least God will punish it in displeasure, and leave
in this place a mark* of remembrance for the contempt of his mercy.

To you my brethren of the University, I must say somewhat In the 2. King. 4.
it is said that when the famine was great in the land, the children of the
Prophets dwelt with Elizeus, and he appointed to make pottage for them: it
seemed that that was their ordinary fare, for it is reported afterward, that
a good man brought Elizeus bread of the first fruits, 2* King. 4 42.
and twenty loaves of Barley, and full ears of corn, which the Prophet
bestowed among his sons. 2. King. 6.1.
In the 6. Chapter, mention is made of them again, that complaining of
Elizeus, that the room where they were was too little for them, they obtained
leave of him to go to Jordan, and take every man a beam, and so make a place
to dwell in. Our commons are I confess in many places very slender, and short
of that which our good Founders meant for us, which has risen through the want
of faithful stewardes, yet no where is it so scant, as that we are enforced
to gather herbs to make pottage, or to feed on a few Barl^y loaves. Their
dwelling place was enlarged by themselves, and it is likely they were not very
sumptuous, for they were not able to bear the charges of an axe head which
they had borrowed. We may thank God for our sumptuous palaces, ready prepared
for us. I would to God we were like to the^ in other things. At this time the
kings of Israel had banished religion from amongst them: these me^ for the love
of the truth and knowledge of God forsook their own dwellings, contented to
live far from all courtly preferment, preferring their own buildings before the
stately palaces of Samaria. These men dwelt with Elizeus, though the famine
were great without murmuring; so dear unto them was it, to hear the Covenant,
and be made partakers of the promise. Elizeus was not behind for his part, but
as they were obedient unto him, not to build without his leave: so went he in
and out before them, looking to them as the shepherd to his flock: not only
instructing and teaching them, but also in providing necessaries for them, yea
setting his own meat and provision before them. So these men lived in this
manner, insomuch that I think if Saul had come into the midst of these men, he
would certainly have prophesied among them. But things go not so among us,
do the Heads and Governors go in and out before their children, do they
take that which is sent them, and set it before their Companies, or rather take
they not that which is appointed for others, and devour it themselves alone,
as though our Colleges were made only for Heads, not at all for members. We
need not as Elizeus did, part with our own portions, or not rece^ue as
Nehemiah, Nehem. 5.18.
the bread of the Governor, nay we lay ou^ hands on that which is none of
ours, as if we were come to a common spoil, we set all things to sale, and
make merchandise of that which we should bestow freely. And what though under
some such naughty Governors, there have good men come up, this is no great
commendation, nor more wonder then that a Buffard should hatch good hawks. As
for the common order; to contemn Statuts, and all good and lawful orders, is
the readiest way to any preferment. Popery is indeed in some sort banished our
Colleges, so that I think there be not in any of them, any manifest recusant,
yet are there such, whom we may look upon as the Prophet did on Hazaeli, 2.
King. 8.1^.
with watery eyes, remembering the harm that he should do to Israel But let us
for all this abide in Gods fear and service, such as are Governors and godly,
continue it, considering what a worthy thing it is, not only to beget children
to God, but even many Fathers to beget many children. Let us content our selves
with the small portion which God has allotted us, knowing that a little with
the fear of God and his favor, is better then all the world besides. And as
God did increase the widows oil in her cruse, 1 King. 17.14.
so can he increase that little which we have, so that our hearts shall be
therewith more satisfied, Psalm 4 7.
then when their corn and wine and oil is increased. Let us refuse no pains
for precious things. Jacob served seven years for his wife and it seemed a
short while unto him, Genesis 29.20. Genesis 31, 38.
because he loved her, yea though it should cost you twenty year^s service as
it did him, yet the delight which I hope you have in it, Prove 8 33.
will make them seem short unto you. Blessed is he that seeks after
wisdom, and finds it. Take that counsel which Joseph gave his brethren,
Genesis 45 24.
fall not out by the way. And that of the Apostle, Heb. 13.17.
Obey them that have the governance of you. If we shall do this, we are to
hope, that in the midst of our want, God will open the heart of some well
minded men to enlarge his benefits, as he sent the man to Elizeus, but if we
hold on, there is no doubt, but as the wrath of God fell in abundance upon
Abbeyes wherein he was dishonored, which rased the foundation, and left not a
stone upon a stone* and alienated their lands from doing good to his Church, so
shall it likewise fall upon our Colleges, when he will remove the light of our
Candlestick, and bring upon us, either Popery, or Barbaritie: which the Lord
grant that by hearty and unfeigned repentance we may turn away from us.

13 But we ought to give thanks always to God for you, brethren, beloved of the
Lord, because that God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation through
sanctification of the spirit and the faith of truth.

14 Whereunto he called you by our Gospel to obtain the glory of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

The Apostle has heretofore opened the rising and fall of Antichrist, the
place where he should set, the pride of his heart how far he should prevail,
the righteous and severe judgment of God upon such as should refuse the truth,
and take pleasure in unrighteousness, howbeit notwithstanding that multitudes
should be carried away with the spirit of deceaueablenesse, so that who so
should look upon the outward face of the Church with a carnal eye might
think that there were none left to call upon the name of the Lord, and pray
with Eliah to take away his soul, 1. King. 19* 4. Apoc, 13 16.
etc. because that both small and great had taken the mark of the beast in
their foreheads: yet the Apostle sets out that in this general backsliding,
the Lord will keep a residue, though in comparison of the rest they should be
but as a cluster in the vintage, or as one grape of a cluster, there should be
some saved, though they were not but as a leg or an ear caught out of the
mouth of the lion, Am. 3 1^.
as the Prophet speaks, Apoc. 12.9. Apoc. 14.1.
that howsoever Antichrist should deceive the world yet that there should be a
number to stand with the lamb on mount Sion, and to accompany him whether
soever he should go. The Evangelist showing that when our Savior came into
the world, and among his own, the world knew him not, Ioh. 1.11, 12.
his own received him not; yet it there follows, that some there were that
received him, for to them that received him, he gave power that they should be
the sons of God.

Therefore the Apostle comes here to speak of the comfortable state of the
godly, how God preserves them in these great changes.

1 First, then in the person of the Thessal. he shows from whence such as are
preserved have this grace, in these 2 verses. 2 Secondly, he sets down a
rule for them to rest upon verse. 15. stand fast. 3 Thirdly, declaring that as
the beginning and means* so the end also and continuance was from God, he
shuts up the whole matter with prayer unto God.
But we ought to give thanks, etc. in which words he declares that both the
beginning, means, and end, come only from the mercy of the Lord, therefore
least the wi^e man should glory in his wisdom, Ier. 9* 23. 1. Cor. 1.31.
etc. he lets them understand whence it is tha^ they stand, where other fall,
beginning with thanks that God has from the b^ginning chosen you: even as he
had done in the former Chapter: 2 Thessalonians. 1.3.
because your faith grows exceedingly: and in the same manner he begins
almost every Epistle. Not only to note that these things are Gods benefits and
blessings, as are food, and raiment, and health, (for these are common to the
good with the bad, which men may enjoy, and yet be not a whit in their nature
changed) but that these are moreover so proper to Gods children, that the
wicked have no part in them, they being such as are able to make a change and
alteration in them, etc.

Therefore neither the Pelagians attributing so much to free will as that by it
without the special grace of God he may perform the law of God. Nor the
Papist which to Gods grace ioineth his natural strength, is sufficiently
thankful to God, Mat. 16.17. Ioh 3.36. Gal. 1.13.14.
but he only, that confesses flesh and blood to have nothing to do in this
work, which is brought to pass without, and against our nature. We see here
wherein we are to rejoice; that is, when we see others to obtain like
precious faith, 2. Pet. 1.1.
wherein our hearts ought to joy, that Christ's kingdom is increased, therefore
this mind should be in every one of us, that was in the disciples, Act. 11 23.
Act 13.48.
who greatly reioiced when they heard that other churches had received the
gospel, and as the Apostle, who says of such as he converted to the truth,
that they were his Crown and his reioicing in the Lord, Phil. 4.1.
so say I, should our hearts be filled with joy, when we hear that God has
added any to his Church. This is spoken to stir up the dullness which is in us,
pitiful it is to see, that whereas among us, our principal care should be in
winning and confirming men in the truth, it falls out by the strong delu^ion
of Satan, Act 1^.45.
that we not only do not so, but are g^ieved and offended, when we see me^
b^ought to Christ. Numb 11.26, 27, 28.
And as when Eldad and Medad prophesied in the host, Joshua would have had
Moses to have forbad the^, so many envy at others blessings, etc: Would to God
as our Savior sends us to the unjust steward to learn wisdom, Luke 16.18.
so the example of the adversaries diligence, might stir us up to the building
of Christ's church. They spare no travel by sea nor land, Mat. 23.15. Bellarm
Tom. 1 p^aef. ad L^ct. M^^t. N^var. Cons^l. lib. 3. Cons. 1. Alle^. Apol. pro
Seminar. cap. 2.
they stick not to hazard their life (I would to God not their souls also) to
win any in whom they fee any towardnes of wit or learning: and use all
encouragement and means whatsoever, in the end to make them of their
Proselits. I would that half this care were in us to maintain the truth, that
is in them to uphold error. But it falls out with us otherwise, for as
covetous men, we think the more that others have of Gods graces the fewer we
should have our selves.

It follows, for you beloved in the Lord] Where he shows plainly whence it
came, that they stood in this great falling away, even from God, because he
had set his love upon them. Here then is the cause of our certainety and
assured stay, 1. Ioh 4, 19.
not that we loved God first, but that he loved us. Wherefore we are here
taught that when we speak of the certainty of our standing, we beware that we
think not any thing to be in us, for which God should the ^ather love or
favor us. For we must ^o rest on Gods love, that we shut out our selves quite
from all cause thereof. Even as Moses taught the Israelits, that God had chosen
them, not because of their might or number, etc: Deuteronomy 7 7* 8. ^e^t 9.4, 5.
but for that he had a love to them. So this is the ground of all, when we seek
the cause of love, and mercy toward us, we shall find it to be none other
then love, etc. ^^h 1. ^ 6*7. and 2 7 2. Th^ss. ^.^2.
So also the Apostle speaks in the former chapt. to fulfill the pleasure of
his goodness,] where not content to have named once Gods goodness, he doubleth
it as wanting other words to express that which he would say, concerning Gods
free mercy and love.

He adds, for that God from the beginning has chosen you] where he declares
the continuance and ancientnesse of this love, which was before the world was
made, ere the heavens were made, the earth set upon his pillars, ^ere the
foundations of waters appeared, Ephesians. 1.4.
etc. It was his secret purpose to make us instruments of his glory. How happy
sons are they which have such a father, as provideth for them even before they
be! When we look hereupon, it may be a stay of comfort unto us against all
temptations. For when we know that it was his only love which from the
beginning moved him to have mercy on us, we learn that howsoever our sins be
in multitude as the sands of the sea, Isai. 1.18. Romans 8 38.
and in color as red as scarlet; yet that they are not able to separate his
love from us. For before he framed us, he foresaw the evil which we should
commit, and yet he chose us: they are not therefore these things that can
separate between him and us, Numb. 23.19. Deuteronomy. 31.16.20, 21. Romans 9.11.12.
Ephesians. 1.4. Rom 9.12.
for he is not as man, that he should be changed. Wherein as we have a just
exception against some christians, which set down the foreseeing of our works,
as the cause of our election, whereas the Apostle lays down the love of God
before the world, for this cause, that we might know there was no respect had
of the works, as he also disputes elsewhere of the choosing and reiection of
Jacob and Esau, before either of the^ had done good or evil: Even as Austine
says, that he chose us not because of the works which he foresaw, but he
foresaw the works because he chose us; as the moving of the Wheel, is not the
cause of the roundnes of the Wheel, but the roundnesse the cause of the
moving: so here is also laid a foundation of consolation, for such as faint
under the burden of their sins, and think that by the reason of the greatness
of them, they cannot be the children of God. This way Satan buffeteth many:
For as he draws many into sin by laying before the^ the mercy of God so he
leads not a sew to distrust, by opening unto them the severity of Gods
judgments. Whereof when they th^nke* they suppose no death more grievous. But
let them know they have no more dishonored God by the sins they have
committed, then by thinking that he will not pardon and forgive them.
Wherefore, when we consider that God of his free grace foreseeing how ill we
would be, did yet choose us, let us be stirred up to glorify his name, and
break out with the Apostle into these words, who shall separate us from the
love of God?

And as he has set down the ground of our salvation, Romans 8.35.
so goes he on (through sanctification, etc:) We have seen the foundation
laid before in the former words, to be only the good will of God, he shows
how he goes on in bringing his purpose to pass, for God leaves not his work
imperfect, but brings his decree to effect, and whom he has chosen, them he
calls, etc.

The means he uses are two 1 Inward, his Spirit. Romans 8.30.
2 Outward, his Word.


Which both are here expressed.

1 Through sanctification of the spirit] whereby God sanctifies our minds,
and causes us to yield obedience unto him. 1. Pet. 1.22. 1. Cor 6.11.
Where he names (sanctification) he shows how loathsome we are of our selves
in Gods sight till he make us clean, and pure. And where he names the
(spirit) he shows how we receive this grace, and what the cause is that some
notwithstanding they hear the word, yet remain unfruitful. It is his
heavenly grace, and holy spirit that works sanctification in us, thereby
teaching, that howsoever Paul plant and Apollo water, that it is God alone
that gives the increase, 1. Cor. 3.6. Isai. 55.10.
unless that God soften the ground, the rain returns without fruit for our
salvation, though effectual on the other side to the hardening of our hearts.
So great a work is it to save a few miserable sinners, that as first they were
to be chosen by God, so no creatu^e in the world, but only Gods holy spirit can
work this sanctification in us. Here also is consolation for the faithful
minister who considering the small success of his travel, though he says
with Christ, I have labored in vain, etc. Isai. 49 4. Ier. 6.29.
And that it be truly said, that the founder casts in vain, the lead is
consumed etc: yet let him know that his message may be faithful, and that he
may say with Christ, my work is with the Lord; for the converting of souls is
a work proper to the holy Ghost. So in these words he shows the especial
and first cause that brings this to pass* viz: the holy Ghost working in us
an effectual faith, which is the mean whereby we lay hold of the benefits of
Christ. For notwithstanding Gods grace be offered to all, yet they only, that
believe shall be saved, so that all receive not commodity by Christ, though he
be the son of God, and full of power, yet all are not profited by him, but
only they that receive him too, and to receive him is to believe in him. But
for as much as all faith does not justify, Ioh. 1.12. Ioh. 3.16.
the Apostle limiteth it when he calls it the faith of truth. Wherefore the
zeal of the Jew in this case profits not, Rom 10.2.
because it is without knowledge, nor of the Papists that submit not themselves
wholly to Gods wisdom, nor of any other heretic, can justify; it must be the
faith of truth. In the former Chapter it was observed that such as are to be
eternally punished, are said to be such as have not known God. Ioh. 17 17.
The thing that sanctifies us, the word of truth, Gods word is truth. Here
have I just occasion to complain of our adversaries, who have made it a ground
of their religion, to be ignorant: for which they labor by all means to
keep away from men the key of knowledge: Conc. Trid. Sess. 22. cap. 8.
whatsoever other grounds they pretend: that it is not good for the common
people to hear or read the Scriptures. Luk 11.52.
And although they have translated the Testament, Bellar de verbo Dei lib. 2,
c. 15
yet it appears that their meaning is to bury up the true knowledge of God
therein contained. In their fourth rule concerning the forb^dding of reading
certain books, they so terr^fic the multitude from meddling with them, that
they say, who so reads those books translated without permission* Rh^^^. in
praes.
they cannot have remission of their sins. And in the sixth rule they teach,
that to read books of controversy, it is not lawful, no not for some
Jesuits. So eve^ for those that must be their guids, it is not lawful to come
to the truth any further then they give them leave: no they let them not read
even their own corrupt translation, least eve^ in that puddle they should meet
with some clean water.

Whereunto he called you by our Gospell] here he expresses the outward means:
for the inward means (as has been said) is Gods spirit, taking possession in
our hearts, and working faith in us, the ordinary means to bring the which to
pass, is the preaching of the Gospel, which was also set down in the former
chapter (because our testimony toward you was believed) which he calls our
testimony, because they delivered it. The Gospel therefore preached by the
Apostles and Pastors, is the ordinary means to bring men to salvation, the
only rule to direct our knowledge and deeds. And when he calls it ours, he
shows also, how the grace of God, and word of God is thus fruitful in us,
namely when it is preached sincerely, by such as are thereunto lawfully called.
For though it be profitable to read and meditate in the word of God, and
necessary for parents to instruct their children; yet the word has then
especially the promise of fruit and effect, when it is to us delivered by those
that are appointed stewards over Gods household. 1. Cor. 41.
Wherefore as before the coming of Christ, the Church of God was provided of
Prophets, so Christ has ordained that to the end of the world, there should
be Pastors over his Church to preach his word to his people, Ephesians. 47.
and gather together his Saints, therefore this promise is not tied to the bare
word, but to the preaching and hearing thereof. And those special prerogatives
and promises annexed to the word, chiefly take effect, when the word is
preached by them that are in that office. So James means, Iam. 1.21.
when he wills us to receive with meekness the word that is engraf^ed, etc.
where he compares the Minister unto a husbandman, by whom the word preached
is as it were engrafted into us. So also St Paul, Romans 10.14.
when he says that says comes by hearing, he shows what hearing, nameof a
preacher, and how can they hear without a Preacher. This as it is to be
considered, and observed against the fanaticall dreams of the Anabaptists,
Bull. cont. Anab. lib. 3. c. 4.5, 6. lib. 1 cap. 3.
which refuse the ordinary means of ingendring faith, and fly to their
dreams and revelations, so also to the just reproof of our adversaries, who
not requiring the preaching of the word in the Ministers, have also given the
administration of the Sacrament unto them that are no ministers. ^ellar. de
Cler. lib. 1. cap. 13.
For we are to think that as the ordinary promise appertains to the word
lawfully preached, so also the promise of the Sacrament belongs to the due
and lawful administration thereof.

Heb. 5* 4.
Moreover as hence this is to be noted, that no man take this honor upon him,
but he that is thereunto called, as was Aaron, so seeing we know that this is
the means appointed by God, Romans 10.14.
to save such as he calls, let al such fear as cloth themselves with the
skins of Gods people, and drink their blood, not regarding at al to feed
them, Act. 20.28.
over whom the holy Ghost has made them overseers, etc.

To obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.] this is the last point which
is here to be observed of us, the end of all. If the Apostle had said that God
had chosen us to greater store of health, wealth, honor, ease, etc. then the
rest of the world, they had bin great things, and such as we should be
thankful for, but when it is said, that it is to obtain the glory of our Lord
Jesus Christ, it passes all the benefits that are in the world. Whether by the
glory of our Lord be meant the glory which he is in, or which he has purchased
for us, I know not: the doctrine which both senses minister is good, that by
him, and with him we shall obtain a kingdom, 1. Cor. 15.25.26. Romans 8.37.
and that, as he has trod all our enemies under his foot, so we shall
conquer through him, sin, death, and hell, which we are assured shall be
accomplished at his coming.

FINIS.

