A REVIEW OF THE COUNCIL OF TRENT.

Wherein are contained the several nullities of it: With the many grievances
and prejudices done by it to Christian Kings and Princes:

As also to all Catholic Churches in the World; and more particularly to the
GALLICANE Church.

First writ in French by a learned Roman-Catholique.

Now Translated into English by G. L.

HORAT. Suis and ipsa Roma viribus ruit.

OXFORD, Printed by WILLIAM TURNER, Printer to the famous University, for
VV.T. Edw: Forest, and Will: VV^b. Anno Domini MDCXXXVIII.

To the Right Worshipful CHRISTOPHER POTTER Doctor in Divinity, the Reverend
Deane of Worcester, and worthy Provost of Queens College in Oxford.
SIR:
THe double title which you may justly challenge both in the Author and
Translatour of this work, has made this dedication a matter of necessity, not
election. For the former, I dare not seem to instruct that knowledge to which I
confess I owe mine. But for the later, I beseech you give me leave to tell you
in public, what I have never blushed to profess in private, of that deep
interest which your early favors have purchased in all that I call mine,
(except my faults,) such and so many as would have left me highly inexcusable
if I should have entertained a thought of offering these my first fruits in
this kind upon any other altar than this. For, as touching my knowledge (if it
be any) in the tongues, the common influence of your example, and your benigner
aspect upon my mean endeavors made me first able to do^ something, and the
desire of obeying your pleasure willing to do this. I am bold to call it a
work of obedience, as being first occasioned by some speeches, which, however
they proceeded from you, were received by me in the nature of a command: your
wish in general that such a thing were done, my obligations made me construe
to an injunction of doing it. This pu^ me first upon it, and the ^everent
opinion of your judgment of the work, with the grounded confidence of your
future approbation of my pains, sweetened that into a recreation, which had
otherwise been a punishment. I will not here indulge so much to my just
ambition of proclaiming your virtues, as to insist upon each particular: only
I shall beg leave to be the weaker echo of the public voice of that body
over which it has pleased God to make you the worthy Head, and my self, by
your means, an inferior member: To say, That we largely enjoy in you what we
shall ever pray for in your Successors; that your place may ever have as great
an ornament for the credit, and as happy an instrument, for the profit of our
House: That, of those Royal favors which it pleased their Sacred Majesty's to
confer upon us, (and ever blessed be their memory therefore!) though in all
humility we give Them the glory of being the Authors, yet we cannot rob your
pious diligence of the praises due as to a principal procurer. We detract
nothing from the fountain, when we commend the streams: nor is a benefit
lessened by being obtained by intercession. The Majesty of Heaven does not
ordinarily bestow his blessings without mediation: nor does the intervening of
second causes render us less engaged to the first. To whom I do^ now, and
shall ever, send up my hearty prayers for his choicest blessings upon you and
yours: more particularly, (as your present weakness now requires me) that He
would be pleased to grant you a perfect health, and constitution of body
answerable to that of your mind, for the greater manifestation of his glory,
the good of his Church, the joy and comfort of you and yours; in which number
he desires to be reckoned who here presents himself and his present pains to
your courteous acceptance, as

Queens College in Oxford April 1^. 1638. Your Worships in all humble
observance, GERARD LANGBAINE.

To the Reader.
I Have something to inform both concerning the Author, the matter, and the
translation of this discourse. For the first, that he was a French man, and a
Lawyer, none will doubt but such as will not read; and that he followed the
Court, and was of some eminency there, is sufficiently evident from one Cap. 1.
ad fin.
passage of this work. But as for his religion, though not absolutely
certain, yet, his many protestations make it more than probable he was no
professed Protestant. He protests frequently not to meddle with controversies
of faith, but points of Law and policy; not to oppose the Canons, but Decrees
of the Council of Trent; not to wri^e in behalf of such as have separated from
the Church of Rome, (Protestants) but of good Catholics, (he means
Papists.) And therefore I have adventured to allow him the name of Catholic,
with the forename Roman; which they of that party will, in spite of all
contradiction, needs pin upon their own sleeves. For I am indifferently
confident that for outward communion he was a member of that Church, some of
whose faults are here required to a reformation. As for ought that may be
surmis'd to the contrary, it will not work much upon any that knows the
liberty of that people, who were never thoroughly broken to the discipline of
Rome, I am domiti ut pareant, nondum ut serviant; and which has ever bin more
eminently conspicuous in those of that faculty whereof the Author is
confessedly one. However, those many other writers which he every where
urges, and of whose testimonies the whole work mainly consists, were in their
times (ancient Councels and Fathers excepted) all, or most, known Papists:
though some of them in these later days have bin shrewdly censured for
Schismatic, because not altogether so transcendently Papal. Now for the
furth^r satisfaction of my self and others to those ordinary interrogatories,
(...); it has cost me some diligence to draw this Apelles from behind the
curtain. Some of my foreign intelligencers returned me little but a Non
liquet, yet the learned Patron of the work showed me first In his answer to
Coeffereau, entitled, Remarques sur la responce au mystere d' iniquite. part.
1. Section 26. number. 33. page 543. Edit. Salmur. 1620.
where it was cited by Dr. Rivet under the name of du Ranchin; and I have found
some succenturiating opinions since. Now William Ranchin, (whom I conceive to
be the man) was in his time a Doctor of Law, Counselor to King HENRY the
fourth of France, sometimes Fiscal Advocat in the Court of Aids at Occa, and
afterward A^turney General in the Sovereign Court of Aids at Montpelier; one
who by his works in that kind has deserved well of his profession. Thus much
of the Author.

As for the Work it self, it is now almost forty years since it was first
published; the copyes are grown very rare and (it may be, therefore) dear
even in Paris: whether the love of their friends or the malice of their enemies
has made them so, I know not. It does strongly vindicate the rights of
Christian Princes and the liberties of particular Churches from the grand and
yet growing usurpations of Popes, and the bold attempts of pretended General
Councels. It shows the many hot skirmishes which Princes have been put to for
the preservation of their liberties, and how loath they were to part with them.
It points at the means whereby the State spiritual stole up by degrees to
such a height of temporal greatness. It uncovers the shame of that Popish
Helena, the Council of Trent; by laying open the many nullities and injust
proceedings of it. It shows the weak, the no effects of those strong hopes of
a reformation from it: and makes it apparent that what by the patients was so
earnestly desired as a remedy, was by the fraudulence of the Physician turned
to a worse disease. It fairly acquits their rejection of that Council for
matter of Discipline, (and why not therein ours for matter of Doctrine?) from
the imputation of Schism, as being driven to the necessity of abrogating that
excessive power of the Pope, which he could not be brought to moderate: being
both forced to shake off that heavy yoke which his ambition was unwilling to
remove, so long as our patience was willing to endure. And (though it be
besides the purpose, if not against the intention of the Author) it ministers
just grounds of questioning the absolute infallibility of Popes and Councels in
matters of faith. Who both jointly and severally (it is to be feared) have been
too dareing to entitle the Holy Ghost to their many weakly probable opinions,
if not some errors. Whence it is that the present Church is as much pestered
with a glut of Councels, Canons, and Curses, as the Primitive was with
heresies: under the weight of which burden many weaker consciences, if they
do not quite sink, cannot choose but groan. Whence it is that the modest and
sober liberty of re-examining any thing which has been once decided, is
utterly excluded: which notwithstanding most good men have in all ages been
willing to tolerate, many to desire, and some few bold to make use of. Amongst
these few we may well reckon this Author for one. Far was He from the high
uncharitableness of those fierce and fiery spirits that scorn to go to Heaven
in the company of any that are called heretics by the Council of Trent: that
pronounce upon all men according as they find them devoted to this their Diana;
making less conscience of a text of Scripture than a Canon of Trent; and like
their heathen forefathers, Non alios judices quam seipsos patientur. Lastly,
this work presents us with many remarkable passages concerning our own Nation;
where we may read our present h^ppinesse in our Ancestors miseries: for
amongst all those authentic records, which are here recited of the Popes
usurpations, I do not find any more woeful tragedies of his tyranny than such
as were acted upon our Stage. No higher trophyes erected to his ambition, than
here. No more rare examples of a devout abused patience, than ours, till
extreme necessity made us despair into fortitude; when the avarice and
exactions of Rome, having left us nothing else, to her grief and our glory, at
last robbed us of our patience too.

Besides these there are other considerations in the work it self, which (it
may be) wrought a far far better judgment than mine own to the approbation
of it. In submission to which I have taken the pains to make it speak
English; and that is all. For as for the quotations, (which might happily be
expected from me) my other employments would not allow me strictly to examine
them all, but so many as I sought did sufficiently confirm my opinion of the
Authors fidelity in the rest. For adding more testimonies of my own out of
other authors in the like kind and to the same effect, however I could
frequently have done it, yet I obtained so much of my self as to forbear:
being much abhorrent from engaging my self in a quarrel of this nature, and
creating an adversary where I might fairly choose to want one. For my
expression, I confess, upon a second review, I find I have been somewhere too
pedantique and precise in keeping to the phrase of my Author, and otherwhere I
meet with a little Patavinity of my own. But for this I must tell my Pollio it
was neither necessity nor chance that cast me upon it; for I am here of his
mind, Qui non ignoravit vitia sua, sed amavit. My greater fear is lest there
be somethings in the matter which may be liable to a juster exception. Which,
however they might have been omitted by the Author, could not so fairly be
left out by the Translatour: This castrating of dead Authors being a piece of
politic cruelty, which himself Lib. 1. cap. 7.
condemns in their Church, and (I hope) is rarely practiced in ours. I do not
deny but here are, amongst many which I could commend, some passages which I
had rather excuse^ such as need not be approved, yet might well enough be
printed^ We allow a stranger more liberty than a native: and in this
consideration I held it a piece of injustice to offer, so much violence to my
Author as to subdue him wholly to our domestique customs. He still speaks
French in part, and retains a few marks of his birth and breeding: yet such
as can be no eysore to those that will observe withal, how, when he barely
relates the Laws of his own Country, he neither censures nor sets rules to
ours. For what concerns the distinction of jurisdictions, there is a vast
difference betwixt their State and ours. Here, though they are conveyed in
several channels, yet they are all derived from the same fountain, the King.
Whereas there, the Pope shares it with the Prince; and not content with his
part, will needs ingrosse the whole. Hence those bitter complaints of the
Author against inferior Judges, which, when he drives the nail up to the
head, fasten lastly all upon his Holiness. Thus far I thought fit to
fortify against future mistakes; knowing that what was well meant might be ill
taken; and that it is not ever in the fates of innocence to be exempt from
misconstruction. For other peccadillos I am not very careful to excuse them;
hopeing that the judicious Readers will not much bogle at them, and the
ordinary (it may be) never observe them; nor do I mean they shall be
beholding to me for the knowledge of them further than by this intimation:
which perhaps may whet some duller capacities to a sharper inquiry after them,
such as think they are bound in conscience to find a crime, because I
confess the possibility of a fault: and will be ready to strain at Gnats,
who without this caution would have swallowed Camels. And yet I fear there
will not want some among them that will receive those things with applause,
which I desire may pass with pardon. Nay (it may be) if the Author were
questioned for some places, the most (I do not say the best) would be content
to absolve him, if not ready to reward him. But the Translatour professes his
name in another cense; and is not so sollicitous to please those, as answer
these: to whose graver judgments he submits both himself and these his weak
endeavors, in a modest confidence of their candid interpretation.

AN ADVERTISEMENT to the READER, prefixed before the FRENCH Copy.
THis Book is not for those that have made separation in point of Religion;
but for such good Catholics as desire to see an holy reformation of it. Here
you shall find the demands that were put up to that end at the Council of
Trent, by the Emperor, the King of France, and other Catholic Princes, not
Protestants, and the small regard that was had of satisfying them. Here you
shall read the tricks that were used both in this and some precedent Councels,
to wave that reformation which was so earnestly sought after: and withal you
shall understand a good many of the points wherein it consists. The method
which the Author has used, may be set down in few words. He makes two
kinds of nullities; one in the form and manner of proceeding, [which he
delivers in the first Book]: the other in the matter. And these later consist
either in denial of justice [which is handled in the second Book;] Or in the
injustice of the Decrees themselves: concerning which he sets down two maxims.
The first, that they advance the Pope to an unlawful power, stripping
Councels, Clergy, yea Kings and Princes of that authority which belongs unto
them, to transfer it upon the Pope; [and this is proved in the third, fourth,
fifth and sixth Books]: The second, that they pull down the honor and
authority of Christian Princes, and Secular powers: [which is treated of in
the last Book]. See here the subject wherein many learned men, both Devines and
Lawyers have travailed long ago, before the names of Luther and Calvin, and
such as embrace their doctrine, were ever heard of: which doctrine is not here
defended, nor shall you find any thing that concerns them in particular. The
ancient liberties of the Church are represented here in diverse passages, the
very same with those that carry now the name of the Gallicane Church; whither
they made their retreat when they were chased out every where else: yet not
without danger of being lost, and that not in part but in whole, by a blow from
Trent. Which would plunge us again into those miseries, whereof our Ancestors
begun to be sensible long ago: which they have left unto us by tale upon
record, in the ancient Histories and Edicts of our Kings, the Rolls of the
States General, the Remonstrances of the Courts of Parliament, and many other
ancient Monuments. Nor does it less concern the interest of our Sovereign
Lord the King; whose honor and dignity are shamefully disgraced, his
authority vilified, his power rebated; with a general prejudice to all the
French, who in particular are egregiously wronged in diverse things, as may be
fully known from this discourse. You must further observe that the Author was
not willing to meddle with what properly concerns divinity, as unwilling to
transgress the bounds of his profession, or speak any thing upon this
occasion of those demands which were made, by Catholic Princes in this
Council, touching the reformation of abuses about Images, Pilgrimages,
Relics of Saints, keeping of Holy days, convenience of the marriage of
Priests, Communion in both kinds, celebration of divine service in a vulgar
tongue, and such like; contenting himself with a bare mention of those
demands, and no more.

A SVMMARY OF The Chapters.
BOOK I.
Chap. I. Page 1. 1 THe many abuses of the Pope and Court of Rome. The occasion
of calling this Council. How the Popes sought means to decline it. How
politiquely they carried themselves in it: in the election of the place;
admittance of persons; and passing of Decrees. The great account they make of
it. 2 No no^^l^y (...) oppose the Pope, or a Council. Ancient bickerings of
Popes with the Emperors of Germany. With the Kings of England. 3. etc. With
the Kings of France. 8 Where the Kings were assisted by the Parliaments,
Universities, Devines, Lawyers, Prelates, and other Clergy both several and
in Council. 9, 10 Councels against Popes. 13 Harsh letters to Pope Nicholas.
14, 15 Councels suborned by Popes against Princes. 16 The Council of Ferrara
or Florence not admitted at all in France. 17 That of Basil but in part. That
of Lateran totally rejected. The Council of Trent more usurping than any, than
all these. Chap. II. p. 12. 1 Several instances made to the Kings of France
for the receiving of this Council, but still rejected. As to Charles the ninth
by the Pope, the Emperors, and other Princes. 2 His answer to their demand.
4,5 Instances made to Henry the third by the Clergy of France. With several
Orations to that purpose. 9 His answer to the King of Navar. 13 He further
importuned by Provincial Councels. 15 All these instances made by the Popes
i^stigation. 16,17 Who use to serve themselves of the Clergy against Princes.
19 The rejection of this Council never objected to this King by his accusers.
20 Some things ordained consonant, some things contrary to this Council. Chap.
III. p. 20. 1 THe Pope was a party, and therefore could not call the Council,
nor be judge in his own cause, 2 According to his own Canon law. Besides,
there were several Appeals from him, put up by Luther, the Archbishop of
Cullen, the Vnivositie of Paris, the Protestants of Germany, and therefore he
was disenabled from being Judge of the Appeal. Chap. IV. p. 21. 1 THat the
Pope stood in need of reformation (and therefore incapable of being Judge). 2
Confessed by Pope Adrian. 3 By the Councels of Constanc^, 4 Basil, and Pisa.
Yet nothing reformed. Chap. V. p. 23. 1 PRotestants were condemned before they
were called to the Council; and may therefore justly refuse it. 3 The Pope
knownly hated them; therefore they needed not obey his summons. 6,7 An enemy
should not be a Judge. Chap. VI. p. 25. 1 Wars on foot in the time of the
Council. 2 Complained of by the Protestants. 3 Confessed by the Popes. 4
Approved by the Council. 5 As the Parman war, 7 And civil wars of France.
10 Whereby many were hindered from going to the Council; 11 And therefore ought
not to be prejudiced by their absence. 12,13 The Council questioned whether
continued or ended. Chap. VII. p. 30. 1 DEmands that the Council might be kept
in some free place, made by the Germans: 5 By the King of England: 6 By the
King of France. 7 As formerly by the Pisan Fathers. 8 Their Apology. 10 Trent
no free place, but subject to the Pope. 11 Letters of safe conduct no good
security. 12 Of what consequence the place has been anciently reputed. 13 By
Pope John the 23. 14 Summons to a place not safe, are invalid. 15 And have
be^ne so judged by Popes, 17 And Canonists. 18 Where the place of judgment is
not safe, there may be an Appeal. Chap. VIII. p. 36. 1 ALL were not called to
this Council that should have been. 2 No^ all the Clergy; nor any of the
Laity. Contrary to ancient custom. 3, 4 Lay men sometimes admitted to be
Judges in controversies of faith. 5 Yea even Heathen Philosophers. 7,8
Controversies sometimes decided by Councels. 9 Sometimes by reference. 10
Sometimes by conference. A means proposed for reconciling the present
disterence in Religion. 11, 12 Further prosecuted. 13 Lay men's plea for
admittance in this Council. 14 Bellarmines answer examined. 15 The power of
Emperors and Kings in this case. 16, 17 Some of them have been Judges in
Councels. 18,19 Lay men admitted by Kings to assist at several Councels. 30,
31 And Spain. 32,33, etc. And England. 36, 37 Admitted likewise by Emperors.
38 Yea summoned by Popes. 40 Lay men's presence in Councels not absolutely
necessary, and when convenient. 43 The ignorance of the Popish Clergy. 44 The
Authors apology. 45 The assistance of the laity allowed by several authors.
46,47 Practiced at several Councels, Trent excepted. 48 Anodious doctrine to
Popes, and why. Chap. IX. p. 47. 1 THe Trent Fathers were the Popes creatures.
2 That abuse observed by the Emperor. 3,4 Complained of by the French
Ambassadors. 5, 6 And Protestants of Germany. 8 As good as confessed by the
Popes themselves. 9 The charges of Councels defrayed formerly by the Emperors.
10 Of late by the Pope. And therefore the judgment of such Councels in the
Popes cause refusable. Chap. X. p. 51. 1 THis Council compared with others for
number of Bishops. 2 Which were so few here, that it cannot be accounted
general. 3 Henry the seconds protestation against it upon that ground. 4 The
number in the later Sessions does not legitimate the paucitie in the former.
Chap. XI. p. 53. 1 THe Emperors letters to the Pope about the indirect dealing
of the Council. 2 The French Ambassadors oration in the Council to that
effect. 3 Their retire from the Council. Chap. XII. p. 54. 1 ALL process made
by a suspected Judge is void. 2 The Pope challenged as an incompetent Judge in
this Council. 3 The Council protested against by the Germans; 4,5 By the King
of England. 7 By the Kings of France. 9 Sentence passed upon absents invalid.
10 Yea though they had been present, there may be a second judgment. 11 As
was in the case of the Donatists. 12 And Arrians. 13 Otherwise we cannot
decline the sentence of the Council of Ariminum. 15,16 Other heresies
sentenced in more Councels than one. 17 The injust dealing of the Council of
Ephesus. Pope Leo's protestation against it, holds good against this of Trent.
BOOK. II.
Chap. I. p. 61. 1 NVllities in the matter of the Council: As in denial of
justice. 2 In things demanded by the Emperor. 3 By the King of France. 4 By
the Catholic Princes of Germany. 5 By the Duke of Bavaria. In which demands
are particularly mentioned such abuses as should have been reformed. 7 Many of
them confessed by the Deputies of Paul the third. Chap. II. p. 65. 1 THe abuses
complained of, not reformed by the Council. 2 Reformation of the Head, the
Pope and Court of Rome, demanded by Princes; confessed necessary by Popes. 3
Yet not meddled with by the Council. 6 The Authors protestation to set down
the Papal, not the personal faults of Popes. 7,8,9, etc. The complaints of
many ancient Popish authors against the abuses of the Pope and Court of Rome;
with some Councels that attempted, but effected not a reformation. Chap. III.
p. 74. 1,2, etc. ANcient complaints against the inordinate desires of the Popes
after temporals, which made them neglect spiritual matters. 5,6, etc. All
things set to sale at Rom^; even the Holy Ghost. 7,8 The avarice and exactions
of that Court. 10 As great since as before this Council. Chap. IV. p. 78. 1 BY
what means the Popes enriched themselves. 2 A price set upon all sins in his
Penitentiary tax. 4 The tax of the Chancelourship. 6 The tax upon Bishopriques.
7 Exactions of Annats or first fruits. 14 When the Pope first usurped them. 18
The Emperors anciently required them not. 21 Of selling the Pall. 22,23 The
state of first fruits in France. 25 The Popes ancient incomes out of England.
26 Their simoniacall gettings by Reservations, Graces, Provisions, etc. 27
Their impositions of taxes and tributes upon kingdoms. Particularly upon
England. 28,29 What tricks they used to oppress this Realm. 30 The Popes
proverb of England. 31 The like oppressions and complaints in France. 33 The
Pope^ challenge to the goods of Clergy men that die intestate. Their revenues
on^ of the stews. Their yearly Kin^. Chap. V. p. 91. 1 THe Popes exactions
under color of a holy war. By absolving such as had taken the Cross upon
them. 2 And raising levyes for the maintenance of the holy Land. 3 And
reparations of St. Peter's Church. 5 The Popes used the color of a holy War,
to wreake their own spite. 7 And converted those collections to their private
ends. Opposition made against them in Spain. Chap. VI. p. 94. 1 BY what means
the Popes cheated other Patrons of their advousons and presentations to
Ecclesiastical livings. 2,3 Ancient complaints against this abuse. 5 Of their
conferring them upon lewd persons. 6, 7 Remedies provided, but not applied.
9,10 Of their preferring dunses. 11 And aliens. 12 The inconveniences that
follow upon this. 13, 14 Urged by the French. 15 Confessed by the Cardinals,
but not yet reformed by the Pope. Chap. VII. p 99. 1 OF drawing all suits
concerning causes and persons Ecclesiastical out of other nations to the Court
of Rome. 2 Inconveniences thence ensuing. 3, 4, 5, etc. Complaints made against
them. 7 Of appeals to Rome. 8^ 9 The multi^^de and abuse of them. 10, 11 The
Court of Romes usurpation upon the Lay jurisdiction. Chap. VIII. p. 102 1 BY
what means the Popes get the jurisdiction over causes and persons civil. Of
Ecclesiastical informations. 2 Of the intervening of an o^th. 3,4 A law made
in France against the Popes usurpation in this kind. 4 And the statute of
Praemunire in England. 5 The Popes intermedling with Emperors and Kings. Their
crowns and dignities. 6 As King Edward the first of England. The Pope rejcted
by Parliament. 8 The judgment passed by Secular Princes, dis^^^^ed by Popes.
10, 11 Of their metamorphosing Lay men into Clergy men. 12 Of the Popes
Commissaries, and Delegate Judges. 13, 14 Anciently complained of. 15 Not
reformed but confirmed by this Council. 16 Of the Popes Legates. 17, 18 Their
power to legitimate bastards. 20 And other faculties, as to dispense with
Councels. Chap. IX. p, 107 1 OF the Popes usurpation of Lordships^ and
Kingdoms. 2 Of their temporal domin^on in Rome. 3, 4 How they hold it, and
when they got it. 5 Their claim^ to Scotland. 6 Encroaching upon Poland. 7 And
Sicily. 8 Especially England in the time of King John. 9, 10. That story more
at large. 11^ 12 Excommunications abused by Popes to secular ends. 1^. 15. etc.
Their inordinate desire of preferring their Nephews, and kindred by indirect
means. 19, 20, etc. Their excessive luxury. Chap. X. p. 112. 1 OF the
unlimited and injust power of Popes. 2, 3 Given them by their flatterers. 5 And
admitted by themselves. 8 Wherein the pl^nitude of the Popes power is said to
consist. 9 How superior to Angels. 10 And The Apostles. 12^ 13^ 14 How deified
by his flatterers. 15 The adoration of his feet. 20 The donation of
Constantine. 21, 22. etc. Several Popish maxims concern^ng the Popes supreme
authority in temporals. 30,31, etc. Of his transferring the E^pire and
bestowing of Kingdoms. 41 Absolving subject^ from the oath of ^ll^geance. 52
Power (...) Infidel Princes. 53 Donation of the West Indies. 55 Testimonies of
Popes for their supremacy. 56 The King of France (...) how evaded by Popes. 57
The Popes usurpations over Kings approved by this Council. 59 The King of
France frivolously excepted. 60 The ill consequences of the Popes temporal
power. Chap. XI. p. 120. 1 OF the Popes honors. How they make Kings their
Lacqueyes. 2 By their Ceremonial. 3 And have required the actual performance
of these services. The quarrel with the Emperor Frederick for holding the
wrong stirrup. 4 For putting his name before the Popes. 6, 7 Other insolent
carriages of Popes toward several Emperors and Princes. 10,11 A draught of
the Popes greatness. 12 Those authors that extend it furthest best
encouraged; others suppressed and purged. Chap. XII. p. 123. 1 POpes opposed in
their attempts over Kingdoms and Empires. By the Clergy of France. 3, 4 In
their excommunicating and deposing of Emperou^s. 5 By the Clergy of Liege. 6
The Popes power in temporals spoken against by St Bernard. 7,8, etc. And diverse
others. 10,12 Opposed by the Nobles of England. 13, 14 The Nobles and Clergy of
France. 15 The States of the Empire. 16, 17 The Canonists. 21, 23 Devines and
Historians. 24, 25 Princes and Parliaments. 26, 27 Popes absolving subjects
from their allegiance disproved. 33 A list of such authors as deny their
temporal power. Chap. XIII. p. 131. 1 A Parallel betwixt Christ's humility and
the Popes ambition. 2 The pride of Rome bodes her fall. 3 The Court of Rome
like the image in Daniel. 4 A prophecy of a King of France. Chap. XIV. p. 134.
1 THe number of Cardinals too great. 2 An occasion of many abuses^ 3 Of their
prodigious plurality of benefices. 4 Their number anciently complained of. 5
But not reformed by the Council.
BOOK III.
Chap. I. p. 137. 1 THis Council gives too much to the Pope. 23 By allowing
them the power of calling it. 4 And submitting all the Decrees to him. 5, 6 And
allowing him the power to translate it. 7 Popes usurp the power of calling
Councels. 8 Or at least of approving them. 9 Councels anciently called by
Emperors, not Popes: without either their command, or explicit consent. Both
general, a^ the first of Nice. 12 the first of Constantinople. 13,14, etc.
Without any command from the Pope; proved at large against Bellarmine. 18 The
first of Ephesus. 22 Bellarmines ans^^rs refuted. 26 The first of Chalcedon. 30
The Council of Sardis. Chap. II. p. 145. 2 THe fifth General Council at
Constantinople, called without the Popes consent. 3,4 So likewise the sixth. 5
And seventh, being the second Nicene. 6 And eight general, at Constantinople
8,9, etc. Fifteen other Councels, some (...); called by Emperors witho^t the
Popes (...) 19 The (...) t^ come upon the Emp^r^urs call. 20 That Con^^l^ were
called by Emperors is confessed by Popes. Chap. III. p. 149 1 EMperors called
not Councels by commission from the Pope. 2 But Popes were petitioners to them
for the holding of them. As Liberius to Constantius 3 Celestine to Theodosius.
4, 5, 6 And other Popes to other Emperors. 7, 8 Which was the common practice
of other Bishops. 9 Popes sometimes called Councels by commission from the
Emperors. Chap. IV. p. 151. 1 THat Emperors when they called Councels,
directed their summons to Popes as well as to other Bishops. 5 How in ancient
Councels they spoke by interpreters. 6 The Popes ignorance in the Greek. 7, 8
Popes presence at Councels not entreated, but commanded as well as others.
Chap. V. p. 153^ 1 Diverse particular Councels called without the Popes
presence, consent, or authority. 2 Yet they claim the power of calling them as
well as general 4 Examples of several Councels called against Popes. Chap.
VI. p. 154. 1 THat notwithstanding all these authorities, the Popes arrogate to
themselves the power of calling Councels. 2,3 Their testimones answered. 4
General Councels should not be held unless the Pope be called to them. 5,6,7
That privilege common to him, with other Patriarchs. 11 The old Canon, upon
which the Popes build their authority, examined. Whether one of the Apostles.
12 Whether confirmed by the Nicene Council. ( 13 Ancient esteem of the Bishop
of Rome.) 14 Or at Alexandria. 16, 17 Spurious Canons and testimonies imposed
upon ancient Popes. 18 Ancient practice contradicts that pretended Canon. 20
How long it is since Popes first took upon them to call Councels. 21 Emperors
called some since that. 23 Popes may call Provincial Councels within their
own Diocese. (Their particular Diocese of what extent.) 26 As may other
Patriarchs. 27 Whether a General Council be now possible: if not called by
the Pope Chap. VII. p. 161. 1 POwer of calling Provincial Councels given by
the Council of Trent to the Popes. 2 Which anciently belonged to Kings and
Princes. 3 Proved to belong to the Kings of France in France. 4, 5 A particular
enumeration of above forty national Councels called by command of the Kings of
France. 18 Of others by their consent and approbation. 19 Councels called by
the Kings of England within their dominions. 20 Many others by the Kings of
Spain. Chap. VIII. p. 167. 1 THat it belongs to the Emperors and Kings to
appoint the place where Councels shall be held, and not the Pope. 2 Proved by
examples of Emperors and petitions of Popes. 4 That Princes also prescribe the
time when Councels shall be holden. Chap. IX. p. 169. 1 THat the power of
prorogueing, translating and dissolving Councels, belongs to Emperors and
Kings, and not to the Pope. 2, 3 That power used by the ancient, 6 Challenged
by late Emperors. Chap. X. p. 170. 1 THat it belongs to Emperors and Kings to
prescribe what persons shall b^^ admitted in Councels. 2 And what matters shall
be handled in the ^^ 3 And in what manner. 7 And form. Chap. XI. p. 173. 1
THat the Presidence in General Councels belongs not to the Pope exclusively,
but to Emperors, as also the judgment in them. That Constantine was President
of the Nicene Council. Reasons to the contrary answered. Athana^ius his
testimony censured. 3 How Princes may fitly use their authority in Councels. 5,
Who presided in the second Council of Ephesus. 6 Zonaras and Evagrius
misalledg'd by Bellarmine. 7. The Emperor appointed Judges in the Council of
Chalcedon. 8 Which were not the Popes Legates. 8, 9, etc. Arguments to the
contrary answered at large. 20, 22 The Presidents in the fifth, 23 And sixth
General Councels, appointed by Emperors. 24, 25 Not by the Pope. 31 Emperors
not bare spectators in Councels, nor mere executioners of their Decrees, 32 As
the Council of Trent makes them. Chap. XII. p. 182. 1 THat the Pope has no
concurrent right to preside in Councels with the Emperors. 2 Bellarmines
reasons to prove the Popes Presidence in the Council of Nice answered. 3
Whether Hosius were President there. 4 That the Pope presided not in the second
General Council. 6 Nor in the third. ( 7 In what nature Cyril of Alexandria
presided there.) 8 Nor fourth. 9 Nor could he have presided in the fifth if he
would. What is meant by Prince in a Council. 10 The Popes carriage concludes
his pretended presidence. 11 The Pope no President in the sixth Council. 12 The
seventh, eighth uncertain. 13 The Popes presided in the eight General
Council. 14 Yet does not that destroy the Emperors right. 15 As some Popes
have given out. Chap. XIII. p. 188. 1 THat the Presidence in national Coun^els
belongs to Kings and Princes. 2, 3, etc, Proved by sundry exampl^^ of the
Kings of France, 11 England^ 12 And Spain. 13 Princes did not always exercise
this power. Chap. XIV. p. 191. 1 THe power of authorizing Councels given to the
Pope by the Trent Council. 4 How general Councels were anciently promulgated
and authorized. 5^ 6 How Provincial. 7 The power of approving Councels belongs
no more to the Pope than to others. 9 His rejection of no more force then
others. 10 Councels anciently confirmed by Emperors. 12 Published and
promulgated by them. 13, 14. Provincial Councels confirmed by particular
Princes, as in France.
BOOK IV.
Chap. I. p. 197. THat the Council of Trent (indirectly) advances the Popes
authority above a Councels. 2 By suffering him to command them as he did. 13
And to mulct, 14 And transfer them. 15, 16 Pope Julius, Paul more bold with
the Trent Council than Eugenius with that of Basil. 17, 20 But with unlike
event. 21 The Popes authority in all things reserved by this Council, 22, 23
Which ought not have been done. 24 The whole power of expounding the Decrees
wrongfully given to the Pope. 26 Their desiring his approba^ion. 27 The oath of
obedience to him, inusuall and injust. 28 So was the Popes cre^ting of
Cardinals during the Council. 29 And his taking upon him to accord Princes. 31
Depriving Councels of the election the Pope, 36 The faculties of Legates
derogaroty to Councels. Chap. II. p. 206. 1 THat the Pope is not above a
Council. 2 For so no need of Councels. 3 So the Pope should be the Church,
which is absurd. 4, 5, 6 What is meant by Tell it to the Church. 7 Popes have
confessed themselves inferior to Councels. 9, 10, 11 The authority of
Provincial Councels greater than the Popes. 13, 14 Much more of General. 15,
16, etc. Saint Ieroms testimony about the Popes authority examined. Chap.
III. p. 212. 1 POpes may be, and have been judged by Councels. 2 Yea and
condemned too. 3, 4 Pope John deposed by a Council. 8 Popes in fact have used
Councels against other Popes. 9 And submitted themselves to their judgment. 11
The quarrel betwixt the Pope of Rome and Patriarch of Constantinople, judged
by the Council of Chalcedon. 12. The Popes definition of faith examined there.
17 A cause judged by the Pope may be judged again by a Council, as Saint
Austin. Chap. IV. p. 217. 1 OF several Appeals that have been made from Popes
to Councels, whereby the superiority of Councels are proved. 2 Appeals made by
Emperors. 3 By Generals of Orders. 5, 6 By Kings of France. 7 By the
University of Paris. 8 A copy of their Appeal. 9 Such Appeals allowed by
Canonists. 10, 11, 12 Bellarmines three examples of Appeals from Councels to
the Pope answered. Chap. V. p. 217. 1 THat a Council is above the Pope, proved
directly. First from the decrees of Councels, 2 As of the first Pisan. 3 Those
of Constance, Basil, Bourges. 4 That of Lausanne, 5 Another of Pisa. 6, 7, 8
All which Councels were either called or approved, and confirmed by Popes. 9 A
reference to several authors that teach a Council to be above the Pope.
Chap. VI. p. 224. 1 THe opinions of several Universities touching the
authority of Councels above the Pope. 2 As the University of Cullen, with
their reasons. 3 The University of Erford. 4 Of Vienna. 5 Of Cracovia. 6, 7 Of
Paris. 9.10 The Councels of Constance and Basil in this point approved by most
of the Kings in Christendom. 11 Particularly by the French, in the Pragmatique
Sanction. 12 Which is still in force. Chap. VII. p. 230. 1, 2 EXceptions
against the validity of the former Councels answered. 3 The absence of some
Prelate destroys not the generality of the Council of Constance. 4 Because
they were schismatical: and so judged by the Pope. Nor was it destitute of a
lawful Pope. 5 But confirmed by one. Bellarmines evasion refused. 7 And
retorted against the Trent Council. 8 The Council of Constance approved by
succeeding Councels, as that of Basil. 9, 10, 11, 12 And this confirmed by
three several Popes. 13, 14 Nor generally rejected by the Church. 15 but only
by some, and in part. 17, 18, etc. The validity of the Pi^an Council asserted;
the nullity of the Laterane; and the story at large of both. 21 The oath of the
Cardinals for reformation. 22 Pope Julius his perjury; 23 Which occasioned the
calling of the Pisan Council. 24, 25 His demeanor in it. 26 His conditions.
27 The Lateran Council justly rejected. 28 As prejudicial to France. 29 Is
but a Conventicle. 31 And appeal made from it by the University of Paris. Chap.
VIII. p. 241. 1 A Refutation of those five reasons which Pope Leo with his
Council of Lateran urges to prove his authority over Councels. 2 The first
drawn from a supposed Decree of Nice. 3 The second from Pope Leo's translating
the Council of Chalcedon. Which is neither true nor proving. 4 The fourth that
Pope Martin did the like; but not without the consent of the Council. 6 The
fifth from the Popes prerogative above others. This granted for honor, not for
authority. 7,8 Obedience of Councels to Popes pretended, not proved. 10 The
fifth reason drawn from hence, that some Councels have desired the Popes
approbation. Refuted, 11 Retorted. 12 The repeal of the Pragmatique, 13, 14
Invalid, and never admitted. 15 Pius the seconds inconstancy. 18 Bellarmines
argument from the order of names, refuted.
BOOK V.
Chap. I. p. 249. 1 ABuses committed by the Pope in matter of Indulgences. 2,3
An occasion of much wickedness. 5,6, etc. A Bull of large Indulgences granted
by the Popes in the time of the Trent Council to the Fraternity of the
Sacrament of the Altar. 42 The abuse of Indulgences anciently complained of.
43,44 The doctrine condemned by Gerson. 50 Reformation hereof demanded at the
Council of Trent. 51 But not obtained. Chap. II. p. 260. 1 OF Fraternities,
how devoted. 2 How dangero^^ to the State. 3,4,5 Of the Fraternity of the
Chaplet, or the Order of Penitents. 6 Of the sect of Flagellants 7, 8 Their
original, and orders. 10 Gersons book against them. Chap. III. p. 265. 1
DIspensations abused by the Pope. 2 He takes upon him to dispense with the
Laws of God and man. 3 Complaints made hereupon by the Catholics in Germany.
6 By Saint Bernard. 7 By the Parliament of England. 9 By the Council of
Constance. 10 By John Gerson, 11 By the deputies of Pope Paul. 12 Reformation
demanded at the Trent Council. 13 Which meddled with them only in three cases.
14 And that as good as nothing. 15 And contrary to the liberties of France.
Chap. IV. p. 269. 1 OF unions of Benefices both real and personal. Which the
Council leaves to the Popes disposal. 2 Which of right belongs to the Bishops
of the Dioceses, with consent of the patrons. 3 Upon reasonable cause. 4, 5, 6
Otherwise they have and may be disanull'd, nothwithstanding any prescription. 7
Contrary to the Council of Trent; which allows prescription in some, and the
Popes pleasure in all. Chap. V. p. 271. 1 OF the residence of Bishops. Which
the Council leaves to the Popes approbation: To the prejudice of Princes and
Metropolitans. 3 To whom it belongs to approve the causes of their absence. 2
How Popes by this means depriv^ Princes of their best servants. 4,5,6 For
Kings to approve of non-residence, was the practice of France before this
Council. 8 And the law since. Chap. VI. p. 273. 1 BY this Council of Trent
there can be no more G^nerall Coun^els but when the Pope pleases. 2 Which
takes away all hope of reformation. 3 And is contrary to the Decrees of former
Councels. 4 The benefits proceeding from the frequency of Councels. 5 They
bridle the Popes power: And therefore they decline them. Chap. VII. p. 275. 1
OF Jesuits. Their Order confirmed by this Council. 2 Their special vow of
obedience to the Pope. 3 Their deifying of him. 4 They are the Popes Ianizaries
and Emissaries in the State. 5 Slaves to the Pope; and therefore n^ good
subjects to their Prince. 6 Their doctrine that Kings may be deposed. 7 And, of
excommunicate, killed. 8,9 That heretics are to be put to death. 17 Jesuits
pernicious to the State, therefore (once) banished out of France. Chap. VIII.
p. 280. 1,2,3 THat this Council (in effect) gives the election, nomination,
and investiture in all Abbeyes and Bishopriques to the Pope. 4 How this is
prejudicial to Princes. 6 How elections were anciently made by the Clergy and
people. 7 Sometimes by the Pope. Yet still by a power derived from Emperors and
Princes. 8,9 Proved out of the Canon law. Popes anciently elected by the
Emperor. 13, 14 This prerogative not renounced by the Emperor Jews, nor
Henry. 15, 16 But practiced by Emperors, and allowed by Popes till Gr^gory the
s^venth. 18 And then taken from them by usurpation. Chap. IX. p. 285. 1 THe
election and investiture of Patriarchs and other Bishops belonged to the
Emperors. 2, 3 In which the Popes had nothing to do but by commission from
them: 10 Till Gregory the sevenths time, who first usurped this power. Which
was afterward the occasion of many quarrels betwixt Emperors and Popes. 11,12,
etc. As betwixt Henry and Paschal about investitures. 16 The Emperors
renu^^iation invalid, 17 Because compelled; 18 And does not bind his
successors: 19 Who redemanded their right. 20 The Councels that condemned
Investitures for heresies censured, 21, 22 And Ivo for defending them: 23 Who
contradicts himself. 24 The Emperor Henry in part excused. Chap. X. p. 291. 1
ELections, nominations and investitures belonging to other Kings and Princes in
their own dominions. As the Kings of Spain. 2,3 etc. The Kings of England
possessed of this right both before and since the Conquest. 11 With the Popes
ap^^^bation. 12,13 The Kings of Hungary (...) Apulia have done the like.
14,15,16 How the Kings of France have behaved themselves in this point 18,19
Their right confirmed by Cou^^el 23. And testified by Civilian^. 26 El^ctours
to have ^^e Kings Conge d'^li^e. 27 And the elected to t^ke the oat^ (...)
^llegeance. ^8, 29 That the Kings of France ret^^ne the ^omi^^tion and the
Popes have got the confirmation of Bishop^^ 30 Which r^^ders them obnoxi^^a to
the Popes, and car^l^sse of their Prince. 31,32. etc. Examples t^^^eof in
Engl^^d and France^
BOOK VI.
Chap. I. p. 299. 1 ALL jurisdiction in all causes and over all persons belongs
originally to Secular Princes. 2 This Council exempts Bishops, and even in
crimi^all causes submits them only to the Pope. 3 Contrary to right. 4, 5 And
anc^ent practice. 11, etc. How Emperors have exercised their jurisdiction over
Clergiemen, sometimes by their Delegates: 12 Sometimes by Councels 15, 16, etc.
This right of Princes acknowledged by Popes. 18 Established by the Imperial
laws. 19 Allowed by Councels. 21,22,23 French Bishops judged by their Kings.
Sometimes with a Council, 24 Sometimes without. 26 This judgment of Bishops
refused by Popes. 27,28 The present practices of France in such cases. Chap.
II. p. 306. 1 THat Bishops by this Council are made the Popes delegates in
matters of their own ordinary jurisdiction. 2 As visitation of Monasteries. 3
Providing for Sermons in peculiars. 4 Assigning a stipend to Curates. 6
Visiting of Clergy men. 7 Assigning of distributions in Cathedral Churches. 8
And assistants to ignorant Rectors. 9,10 Uniting Churches. 11 Visiting exempted
Churches. 12 And others not exempted. 14,15 Visiting of Hospitals and Schools.
16 Disposing of gifts to pious uses. 17 Such delegations prejudicial to
Bishops, Archbishops and Lawyers. 18 Evocations of causes out of other Courts
to Rome, allowed by this Council. 19 The inconveniences thence ensuing. Chap.
III. p. 313. 1 THis Council entrencheth upon the Secular jurisdiction, by
attributing seemingly to Bishops, 2 But really to the Pope. 3 The cognizance of
many things which in the Realm of France belong to the Civil jurisdiction in
some cases, not wholly to the Ecclesiastical. 4 As libels. 8 Sorcerers. 9
Clandestine marriages. 10,11 And some other matrimonial causes. 12 Right of
patronage for the pos^essory. 13 Lay appropriations. 15 Maintenance of Priests.
17 Visitation of benefices, so as to compel reparations to be made. 20
Sequestration of fruits. 21 Royal Notaries. 22 Simple Shavelings. 25 Civil
causes of Clerks. 26 Adul^^r^es. 29 Seizure of goods. 30 Imprisonments. 31, 32
Appeals as from abuse: abrogated by this Council. 33 Erection of Schools. 34
Building-money. 35 Means of hospitals. 36 Infeodation of Tithes. 39 Taking of
the accounts of Hospitals, Colleges, and Schools. Chap. IV. p. 32^. 1
EXemptions granted by the Pope to Churches, Colleges, Abbeyes, etc. confirmed
by this Council, to the prejudice of Bishops. 2;3 Many complai^^ anciently
made against them. 4 The Popes have no power to grant them. 5,6 The
unlawfulness and abuses of them. 7 Reformation hereof desired ^t the Trent
Council. 8 But not obtained. 9 Exemptions how used in France. Chap. V. p. 327.
1 THe power of granting pardon^ for criminal matters, 2 Allowed to the Pope by
this Council. 3 Unknown to antiquity. 4 Being the true right of Princes.
Chap. VI. p. 328^ 1 THe number of Papal Constitutions and Decrees complained
of to this Council. 2 Yet not abated, but all confirmed by it. 3 Many whereof
were not received before. 4,5 Ancient complaints made against them. 6 By what
degrees Popes usurped upon Princes by them 8,9 Many pretended Decretals are
suppos^titious. 15 Many abusive. 17 And derogatory to the Imperial laws. 19
The worst Popes authors of them. And the greatest enemies to Princes. Chap.
VII. p. 335. 1 THe censure of all books left to the Pope by this Council. 2
The extent o^ this power, and mystery of the Index expurgatorius. 3,4 Wherein
they condemn all authors that stand for the rights of Secular Princes. 5 Or of
Councels against Popes. 6 And all that have writ against the abuses of their
Court. 7,8, etc. And by the like reason they may condemn all or most of the
laws of Princes, and liberties of the Gallican Church.
BOOK VII.
Chap. I. p. 341. 1 THat this Council tends to the depressing and abasing the
authority of Christian Princes. 2 By robbing them of their temporal
jurisdiction. 3 Especially in case of duels. That a Council has no coactive
jurisdiction over Princes. This proved by authority of Scriptures. 4 And
ancient Fathers. 5 And Popish authors. 6 All coactive jurisdiction derived
from Princes. 7,8 Over the Clergy variously exercised by the Imperial laws.
9 What use the Popes make of them. 10 They do not bind present Princes. Chap.
II. p. 346. 1 THat a Council has no power in temporal matters. Proved by
authority of Fathers (against the Trent Council.) 3 By the practice of Popes.
5,6.7 And ancient Councels. 8 By reason. 10 Secular Princes may require
subsidies of Clergy men. 11 Even by the Canon law. 12 If they have any
exemptions^ 13 (As they have many) 14 They were first granted by Princes. Such
subsidies injustly prohibited by this Council. 15,16 And some former Popes.
Chap. III. p. 352. 1 EXcommunications abused by Popes against Princes. 2 Kings
should not easily be excommunicated. 3 As they are by this Council. 4 The King
of France claims a privilege and exemption from excommunication: 5 And why.
7,8,9 This privilege acknowledged by Popes. 10 Maintained by Parliaments. 11
Confirmed by Popes. Chap. IV. p. 355. 1 THis Council uses commanding terms
to Kings and Princes, and makes them but the Bishops officers and executioners
of their Decrees. 2 Contrary to the practice of former Councels. 3,4, etc. This
makes Princes inferior to Priests in point of honor. 9 How much the Pope is
greater than the Emperor. 11, 12 The humility of ancient Popes; and the great
respect they used to Kings and Emperors. Chap. V. p. 359. 1 THe authority of
Kings in the Church and over the Clergy. 2 More in right than in fact. 3,4,5
They are the patrons and defenders of the Church. 6 And have power to reform
it. 7,8,9 This power confessed by Popes. 10,11 And Popish writers. 12,13
Exercised by Emperors, 14,15, etc. And kings of France. Chap. VI. p. 365. 1
THat Emperors and Kings have in all ages made laws of Ecclesiastical polity
and discipline. 3,4 Both before Christ, 5,6 And since. 7 That they had power so
to do. (But not to administer the word or sacraments.) 8 Especially the
Emperor, the Kings of England and France. 9, 10, etc. This power of Princes
confessed by Councels, and ad^itted by Popes. 16 Who became suitors to them in
that behalf, 17,18 And pro^oters of their ordinances. Chap. VII. p. 371. 1 THe
King of France wronged by this Council i^ point of precedence before the King
of Spain. 2, 3 The quarrel betwixt their Ambassadors at Trent about it. 4
The Spanish party favored by the Pope. 5,6,7,8 And by the Council. 10,11 The
King of France his right proved by Councels. 13 Doctors. 14 Even Spaniards. 15
The Popes prevarica^ion in the cause. 16 Which is not yet decided. Chap. VIII.
p. 377. 1 INdults and expectative graces utterly prohibited by this Council. 2
But tolerated by the laws of France, and practiced there. 4 All power in
excommunications, either for procuring or prohibiting them, taken from Civil
Courts and Magistrates by this Council. 5 Contrary to the law and custom of
France. Where the kings (by their officers) do decree them. 6 Or prohibit the
execution of them. 7 Thereby curbing the attempts of Popes. 8 Prejudicial to
the lay Judges. 9 Censures and excommunications abused by Popes. 10 And
therefore opposed by Princes. 11 A reformation required at Trent. 12,13,14 And
before that they might be used for petty matters. 16 Yet no remedy obtained.
Chap. IX. p. 383. 1 THis Council disposes of the goods of Religious persons.
Contrary to Law. 2 Gives Mendicants leave to possess lands, contrary to their
Order, and its own Decree. 3 And the laws of France. Notwithstanding the
Popes dispensation. 4 This Council cancels some leases of Church lands,
injustly, because without the Kings leave. 5 It ordaines about commutation of
last Wills, contrary to the laws of France. Chap. X. p. 385. 1 THis Council
commands all Clergy men to receive the Decrees, without regard to their
Princes consent. ( 2 Contrary to the practice of other Councels) 3 It denounces
excommunications in case of refusal. Requires an oath of obedience. Disa^lowes
toleration of Religion. 4 Approves violence in rooting out heresies. 5,6 And
ordaines the Inquisition for them. 7 Contrary to the Edicts of pacification in
France. 8 The prejudices done by this Council admit of no qualification. 9 And
therefore it has been justly rejected.
Faults escaped.
Page Line Fault. Correction. 24. 37. preceed. preside. 31. 18. to stain,. ^
to stain. 40. 36. Trent. Tire. 41. 34. Rhegno. Rhegino. 58. 9. a. dele. 64.
21. Holiness. Highness. 32. discords. disorders. 71. 43. Of Chartres. Of the
Charterhouse. et 224. 5. 75. 24. Fontanus. Fontanus has put. marg. Alberius.
Albericus. 81. 3. exequeter one yeeros. exchequer one years. 83. marg.
Valoterran. Volaterran. 86. 41. Princes. Provinces. 94. 33. this. in this. 95.
9. Apostles. Apostle. 101. 40. rank. instance. 109. 24. gave. have. 121. 46.
writ. went. 122. 53. Avarus. Alvarus. 125. 30. in. into. 130. 46. at. as. 159.
marg. Radericus. Radenicus. 166. 34. Sismand. Sisenand. 187. 10. Emp^rour.
Emperors. 191. 27. assembling. ascribing to him. 194. 13. commanded them that.
dele. 222. 22. to wit. dele. 241. 2. that. by that. 251. 36. found: founded.
253. 26. blessed. the blessed. 257. 47. the. at the. 265. 5. they. an. the.
and. 269. 3. to Popes. to the Popes. 278. 16. Monarchy. Monarch. 288. 42. you.
yon. 293. 4. Doctor. rings. Doctors. Kings. 5. eight. right. 33. were. they
were. 296. 42. Churches. clutches. 307. 21. honor. under. order. over. 310.
41. Judges Royal, Ordinaries. Ordinary Judges Royal. 314. 7. confute. confute
it. 323. 23. the. dele. 328. 25. by. to. 331. 19. authenthenti^ue. authentic.
33^. 14. by. ly. 336. 36. Hugenots. Huguenots. 367. 20. Church. Clergy. 374.
36. George of. George. Of.

A REVIEW OF THE COUNCIL OF TRENT.
CHAP. I. Of the resistance that has been made against such Popes and unjust
Counsels as took too much upon them.
THE Council of Trent was called of purpose to reform those abuses of the
Pope and Court of Rome which were the occasion of that Schism under which we
now groan: The occasion of c^lling the Council.
which have raised all Christendom up in arms in these latter days, and for
the space of two hundred years and upwards, in sundry Councels: which Pope
Adrian did confess in the Diet at Noremberg. and some of which the reformers
of Paul the third could not deny. But the Popes turned the Cat in the pan, and
carried the matter so handsomely, that in stead of a natural birth, the Council
was delivered of a monster; and for a Canon or Synodicall Decree, brought forth
a Papal Bull: in stead of an extirpation of abuses, a nursery of errors: a
depravation, for a reformation: a source of injustice: an authentic title to
legitimate all the usurpations that ever the Popes have made upon the authority
of the Church and other Ecclesiastiques; upon Emperors, Kings, and
Commonwealths, with their officers, liegemen and subjects: in a word, upon all
Christendom, with all the Estates therein, as well Temporal as Spiritual. To
the holding of this Council they were in a manner compelled by violence: The
occasion^ of calling the Council.
for, excepting honest Adrian, (who went about it with an upright intention)
all the rest would gladly have been fairly quit of it. Clement the seventh did
openly contradict the proposal of it, which Charles the fifth at his
coronation caused to be made by his Chancelour at Bononia: But the Emperor
prosecuting his suit daily with the successors of Clement; they were
constrained to make show of an inclination thereunto: yet so, as they stood a
consulting about the calling of it full five and twenty years, from 1522.
(what time Adrian by his Legate at the Diet at Norimberg engaged his promise for
it) till 1546. still giving out fair pretenses, and studying for new occasions
to delay it: posting it from one to another, and passing it over as a debt to
their successors. Yea and even after they had set about it, they managed it so,
that they kept it low, betwixt living and dying for eighteen years, taking
their time of purpose that they might level their stroke right, wherein they
have outstript the choicest masters of that art in Palestine; they have good
reason to understand this passage. Many of their predecessors had left their
weapons there; many had received blows and mortal wounds there. Germany was
fatal to them, and the remembrance of the Councels of Constance and Basil
madded them; when they thought upon the deposall of so many Popes; the
discipline whereto they were made subject; and the cutting short of their
power. They had observed the saying of John the 23. Nau^leru^ Volum. 1 generat.
48.
The place of the Council is all in all; I will not have it in a place where
the Emperor has the upper hand: and the despair he conceived both of
himself and his fortunes, when he received the news that his Legates had
condescended to the election of the City of Constance. They perceived withal
that all Germany banded with the Emperor to have the Council amongst them,
and bended all their designs to that end: so that it necessarily concerned
them to save themselves by flight; to shuffle on the time; to spin out delays;
to pump for pretenses; and in fine, when they could no longer shift it, it was
behooffull they should pitch upon some such City as would be sure unto them,
that depended on them, and wherein they had absolute authority. Such, in
conclusion, was Trent: yea and that after they had made enquiry about some
others which (as they conceived) lay more convenient for them in Italy. It must
be their next care to be special wary to what persons they yield admittance;
to bestow such only there as were engaged, that so they might make it more
firm for them; and proceed now quick, then slow; now an amble, anon a gallop;
holding that course which best fitted with the nature of the affairs, and the
disposition of the persons. It behooved them also now and then to break off
and defer it, and when their party was somewhat ill at ease, to adjourne it
to another place, as as to Bononia, under color of some sorry indisposition of
the air: Besides, to move all Catholic Princes to an utter extirpation of
the Protestants, and such as had taken their long leave of the Pope. And if
this would not serve the turn, then they must scatter reports amongst the
Catholics themselves, to set them by the ears together, and kindle the fire
in all quarters of Christendom; enter league with the stronger party, to
support their greatness, and raise it to a higher pitch. They must by all
means possible win the Bishops and the rest that had ought to do in the
Council; feed them fat with promises; present them with commodities, make them
joint sharers in their dignities and benefices, and gain them to their side by
such like allurements. Then they must submit themselves to these conditions,
Not to determine any thing, but with the good will and pleasure of the Holy
See, which, when need required, sent the Holy Ghost in post in a cloke-bag,
making him take a good many journeyes: To anathematize all the opinions of the
Lutherans, Huguenots, and Calvinists, without exception, how true soever; for
fear of giving them the least advantage. To make goodly decrees in appearance
for the reformation of manners and Ecclesiastical discipline, about points
unnecessarie, and such as never came in question: The occasion of calling the
Council.
and under hand to forge others to confirm the groundless usurpations of the
Pope, and quite a^ull all the pleas of Christian Princes, to elude all their
reasons and demands. On the other side, to set up such as would enlarge that
immense power of the Pope, to make it truly Monarchical; such as would make
all the Kings and Princes of the earth to tremble at their voice; such as would
put a rod into his hand, wherewith he might whip them at his pleasure, upon any
conceived grudge; or rather a material sword, or some such like offensive
weapon, wherewith he might assassinate them, when they should wax either cold
or lukewarm toward his imperial Edicts. It behooved them also to disannull
all the Decrees of the Councels of Constance and Basil which were any way
prejudicial unto them; either covertly repealing them, or by some oblique
means voiding the force of them; and so to deal with the rights and liberties
of some such Realms and Provinces as durst stand upon their prescriptions,
privileges, laws and statutes, whereby they pleaded exemption from their
upstart Decretalls. Lastly, it concerned them to take special care how they
meddled with the reformation of the Pope; how they spoke of his excessive power;
of the abuses and misdemeanors of his Court; of his injust attempts, and the
little care which he has of his spiritual charge, and the good of souls.
This was a rock they must not touch upon in any case. And so well they knew
how to steer for their best advantage, that whosoever reads their Decrees,
cannot choose but forthwith confess that it is a work merely Papal, and such
as none else could have a hand in; and will ever remain of this opinion, that
this last Council is nothing behind with those of Florence, and that of
Lateran, which were called of purpose to disannull that of Basil, and the
second of Pisa: just as this of ours was to stop the clamours of the Christian
Princes and people, lest they should have put up one or other in Germany, like
to the first of Pisa, or some others held in after ages. For you shall never
read of any Council that was so much to the Popes honor and good liking, as
this. Amongst so many Bulls and Constitutions which have come forth since, you
shall scarce find any which does not make mention of this Council; which does
not name it with honor; which does not express an earnest desire of the
observation of it, and which does not in some sort confirm it. Let a man but
read the Commissions of the Nuncio's, which since that have come into France
and other Countries; so many articles in them, so many rehearsals or
reinforcements of this Council. To say nothing of the great pains they have,
and do daily take, to have it generally received and kept: Among all the
Councels that ever were, no compare with this for reverence and respect. It
has quite defaced and extinguished the memory of all the rest. It Is their
minion, their favorite, their champion, their arcenall, their bulwark, their
protector, their issue, and their creature: and good reason why they should
make so much of it. Now the more highly they prize it, the more should we
suspect it; the more should we strain our veins, and bend our nerves, our
force and vigor, to repel and stifle it as a venomous serpent: what we do in
this kind will not want a president. When Popes and Councels have straggled
out of the right way, when they attempted more than of right they ought, when
they took their passion for their guide, they have ever encountered with just
disobediences, and lawful resistance; with strong mounds and fences, which
have stopped the current of their out-breakings and injust enterprises.

2 The Emperors of Germany are all full of wounds and scarres, which they
received in such like scuffles. I may well say received, not only in the
authority they have or should have in the Church, in the rights of their
Empire; but even in their persons: I may well say scuffles and combats, they
being ofttimes constrained to buckle on their harness, and take up their
swords in their own just defense, to repel the offensive arms of him who
under pretense of the Spiritual, usurped upon the Temporal; stirred up
against them their vass^ls and subjects; took the Crown from them, and
elected others in their place^ pretending himself to be Emperor and Lord
paramont of the Empire, and all the Kingdoms of the world: who made as much
use of Paul's sword as Peter's keys, to atchieve his conquests, to wreake his
vengeance, to ingrosse all authority unto himself, and like the old Romans,
to make himself Monarch, Commander, and Lord of the Universe. The examples of
the Henry's, Frederickes, Ludovicus Bavarus, and many other Emperors, are
sufficient proofs of what we here speak. England has had such sufficient
experience of the eff^cts of that tyrannical government, that after she had
lost all her liberties both Ecclesiastical and Civil, (which were not
inferior to those of France) after she had been ransacked and ravazed in a
Scythian and Tartarian manner, she was miserably enslaved and made tributary to
Rome; and her Kings, for all their honor, declared feudataries to the Pope;
stooping under that base servitude till Henry the eight; who, to be revenged of
an injury received touching his marriage, withdrew himself and all his
Kingdom from his obedience to the Pope, and that while he was yet a Catholic.

As for our Vid le recueil de^ li^ert^s de l' E^li^e Galli^ane.
France, it is a long time since the French Church has been at
daggers-drawing with the Pope and Court of Rome, for the preservation of their
rights and liberties; which consist mainly in the not acknowledging of the
Popes power any way in temporals, nor in spirituals, but so far as is
conformable to the ancient Canons and Decrees. Sometimes they went so far in
the controversy, that he, that shall read the histories of it, will never
marvel at those writings which have been set forth against the Pope in these
latter days. The commendation of preserving these liberties belongs
principally to our Kings, who have ever opposed themselves against the avarice
and ambition of the Court of Rome, as Guardians, Protectors and preservers of
these liberties; and have stopped the course of that, not without a great deal
of trouble and turmoile, by the good advice and counsel of the States of the
Land, and chiefly of the Parliament and University of Paris, who have ever
been the for^^esses of France. King Philip Augustus, Saint Jews, Philip the
Fair, Charles the sixth and seventh, Vid le^ remons^^an^es ^a^tes a^ Roy Loys
11. pa^ la Cour de Pa^lement^ sur les p^ivil^ges de l'Eglise G^llicane, l'an.
1461. et les memoires d^ M Iean du Tillet. Et appendicem ad Martinum Po^onum,
sub anno 1312. E^ l'advis de M. Iean du Tillet sur les libertes de l'Eglise
Gallicane.
Jews the eleventh and twelfth, did strongly withstand the transportation of
gold and silver, the collation of Benefices and Bishoprics by the Popes their
usurping of jurisdiction, first fruits, graces in reversion, reservations, and
such like trumperies of the Court of Rome.

Philip the Fair rejected the Bull of Clement the fifth, concerning the
confiscation of the goods of the Templars, (although it was confirmed by the
Council of Vienna^) as entrenching upon jurisdiction within his Realm; it is a
wonder to think how far they went in some particulars.

Platina in Bonifacio 8. Martinus Polonus sub anno 1301. Iean Bouchet en la 4
party des Annals d' Aquitain.

Nicolas Giles en ses Annals de France en la vie de Philippe le Bell.

Chroniques de Bretagne l 4. chap 14.

Vid libellum de statu Ecclesi^e Gallicana in schismate. and Papon l. 1. tit.
5. ar. 27.


This same King was the first that felt the effects of their indignation upon
that occasion, by the sauciness of Boniface the eighth; who being incensed by
the resistance of that Prince, thundered so thick upon him, that after he had
pronounced him his vassal and subject as touching his temporals, he denounced
an anathema against him in reference to his spirituals. The King being justly
provoked herewith, assisted by the Lords Temporal and Spiritual of his Realm
assembled in Parliament, by their counsel and advice, repelled that injury:
and paying him in his own coin, caused his injurious and proud letters to be
burnt; sent his Nuncio's home again with shame enough; accused him of heresy
and symony; yea and put him in such a fright by that brave spirit Nogaret of
St. Felix, that he died upon it.

Charles the sixth being excommunicated by Benedict the thirteenth, put the
bearers of his Bulls to the Amend honoraire so they call this kind of
ignominious punishment.
honorable Amends, making them to be carried in tumbrels, apparelled in
painted coats, with paper Miters upon their heads, and the Popes Bull
represented in their hands, and his arms reversed. All which was done by the
advice of the Princes, Lords, Prelates, and other Ecclesiastiques of his
Kingdom, together with the Parliament and University of Paris; as appears by
the Acts published concerning this particular.

Jews the eleventh, to wave the censures of Pius the second, made his Attorney
general put in an appeal from that Pope to the next Council. Jews the
twelfth had a defensive war against Julius the second, upon this occasion. He
had suspended him by the Council of Pisa, whereupon he procured a Synod of
the Gallicane Church held at Tours in September 1510. to determine against him,
That it is lawful for Christian Princes to defend themselves against such
Popes as stir up unjust wars against them, and to substract their obedience
from them.

The Parliaments of this Kingdom, and namely that of Paris, Vi^ les
remonstrances faites au Roy Loys 11 pa^ la Cour de Parliament de Paris sur les
privileges de l'Eglise Gallicane l'an 1461. Vid. Libellum de statu Ecclesiae
Gallicanae in schismate page 77. and Gaguinum in Ludovico 12.
have always engaged their authority for the justice of such defense; either
by way of humble remonstrance made to our Kings, (who, upon the persuasion of
some bad Counselors, sometimes yielded too much to the Popes impositions; or
else by reason of the exigency of their affairs, which those cunning fowlers
were ever ready to spy out, soothed them up in their humor too much) or else
by cancelling the Popes Bulls in cases of appeals as of abuse, or some other
way: where the Advocates and Atturneyes general have ever had a fair occasion
to show their strength and abilities in, and whence many of them have purchased
eternal commendations. The famous University of Paris, and more especially the
learned Sorbon, have as it were set bounds and limits to the power of the
Popes, and made them know their duty; they have slighted their injust Bulls;
and, what by their consultations, what by their appeals to future Councels,
they have preserved our liberties and privileges entire even until this
instant. I will not rob the Clergy of France of the honor they have
achieved, nor of the share which is due unto them in all these trop^ees. What
though there were some of that rank defective in their duty to their Prince,
out of a timorousness which they might have of being disobedient to him whom
they accounted their spiritual Head? yet there wanted not some of them who
stood in little awe of his chafings and thundering.

The Prelates of France, in the Synod of Rhemes held under Hugh Capet,
Concilium Rhemense.
made a declaration: that the Popes have nothing to do to usurp the power and
authority of Kings. Arnalt Bishop of Orleans maintained in that Synod, that the
Popes have no power at all over the Bishops of France, so as to have any
cognizance of cases belonging to them; and he declamed most stoutly against
the avarice and corruption of the Court of Rome. Gerbert Archbishop of Rhemes,
and afterward Pope of Rome, in an Epistle of his writ to Seguin Archbishop of
Sens, says, that Rome approves such things as are condemned, and condemns
such as are approved, Gerbertus in epistola ad Siguinum Senonensem
Ar^hiepiscopum.
That (says he) which we say belongs only to God; the Apostle tells us. If
any preach unto you any other things than those ye have received, though it be
an Angel from heaven, let him be accursed. Must all Bishops burn incense to
Jupiter, because Pope Marcelline did so? I dare boldly say, if the Bishop of
Rome have offended one of his brethren^ and will not hear the admonitions of
the Church, he ought to be accounted as a Heathen and a Publican.

The Bishops of the Council of Ments writ yet a little more tartly to Nicholas
the first, Vi. Annals incerti authoris inter scriptores co^^taneos Pithoei.
calling his fury tyrannical; his decree injust, unreasonable, and against the
Canon laws; accusing him of rashness, pride, and cousenage; and so giving him
to know that he had no power over them, and that he ought to acknowledge them
for his brethren and fellow-Bishops.

Urban the second forbade the Bishops of France to crown Philip whom he had
excommunicated; Ivo epist. 134.
but they were readier to obey their Kings commands, than his prohibitions, as
we shall tell you anon. The most of those oppositions made by our Kings,
whereof we have spoken, were abetted by the Prelates, and other
Ecclesiastiques. These latter times afford us as pregnant examples as any of
the precedent; (...)lling the ^ou^^ell.
wherein we have seen the most learned and honorable Prelates of France
banded together for the maintenance and defense of their King, their rights and
liberties of their Country and Church of France, against a Gregory the
fourteenth, a Sixtus the fifth, and such others as projected the demolition and
utter ruin of this State. It were too hard a task to go about to reckon up
the words, deeds, and writings of the many Prelates and Churchmen of this
Kingdom, whereby they have many times repulsed the invasions of Rome.

12 Suffice it us to say, that in the greatest storms God has ever raised up
men of courage and discretion, as many, yea more of that order than any other,
who have rung the alarm, sounded the trumpet, taken up arms, and given our
Kings to understand how far they might exercise their power in spiritualls,
for the preservation of their rights and liberties.

Annals in^ert^ ^ut^or^^ in col^loctione Pi^hoei, sub anno 863. and Aventinus
l. 4 hist. Bo^o^um.
13 Nicholas the first in a Synod of his holden at Rome in the year 865. revoked
the Decrees of the Council of Ments, pretending that it had attempted to make
a divorce betwixt King Lotharius and Thiberg his wife, promising withal that
he should afterward marry with Waldrada, and this without the authority of the Sea Apostolic: he also deprived of their dignities, and excommunicated
Theugot Archbishop of Triers, and Gunther Archbishop of Cu^^en, and passed the
same sentence of condemnation upon the rest of the Bishops of that Council, in
case they did imitate and uphold the former. Please you hear his own words.
The sentence of deposition, which we have denounced against the foresaid
Theugot and Gunther, and the other chapters made by us and the holy Council,
shall be here inserted. Yet for all these menaces, they caused pretty stout
letters to be writ to the Pope in the name of Theugot and Gunther, whereby they
showed that they made no great reckoning of his thundering and condemnations,
though he had given them a taste of a Council. We do not receive (said they)
that corrupt sentence, which is far from any zeal of equity, injust,
unreasonable, and against the Canon law. But, together with the whole assembly
of our brethren, we disregard and reject it, as a matter unconscionable and
full of wickedness, pronounced in vain. Nor will we communicate with thee,
who art a favourer of such as are anathematized and cast out, despisers of holy
Church, and do indeed hold communion with them. But we content our selves
with communion with the whole Church, and that fraternall society which thou
proudly misprizest, in exalting thy self above it, and excludest thy self
from it, making thy self unworthy of it by an over-haughty advancing thy
self: So that out of an inconsiderate lightness thou art struck with an
anathema by thine own sentence; in as much as thou writest, Cursed be he that
does not keep^ the Apostolical commandments; which, it is well known, thou
both heretofore many ways have, and at this present do violate, trampling
under foot both the laws of God and the holy Canons of the Church at once,
making them of no effect nor use in as much as thou can; never treading near
the footsteps of thy predecessors the Bishops of Rome. We therefore having
experience of thy craft and subtilty, observe withal thy indignation and high
swollen ambition, and we do not yield an inch to thee nor to thy pride,
whereby thou hastenest to bring us under hatches, prosecuting herein the
desires of our enemies, but thy favorites. Nay thou shall know, we are none of
thy Clerks, (as thou do boast and brag) but that thou should
acknowledge us for thy brethren and fellow-bishops, if thy arrogance would
permit thee so to do.

14 When the Popes had not power enough of themselves to compass their ends,
to tame Princes, to trouble and enthrall Christendom, or happily when they would
set a fairer gloss of justice upon their actions, and cut off all means of
gainsaying, then they releeved themselves by the authority of some Council or
other called together by their cunning, and packed up according to their
humor; whereunto all men, in honor and reverence to the Church, readily
submitted themselves as unto some divine Oracles. The occasion of calling the
Counce^l.
Till at last they begun to find out the mystery, and perceive plainly that
those assemblies, under color of piety and religion, served but for
instruments to the Popes humors, to wreake their humane malice; stuck close
unto their tyranny^ and gave authority to their injust usurpations. This was it
which often times gave occasion to reject those Councels as spurious and
adulterate, as the Synagogues of Satan; yet always conserving a due reverence
to those true, holy, lawful, and Oecumenicall assemblies assembled in the name
of the Holy Ghost, wher^of we shall give you an instance or two.

15 Gregory the seventh excommunicated the Emperor Henry the fourth, by virtue
of a famous Council holden at Rome, H. Mu^^^^ l. 15. Germani^.

Chron^corum page 118.


in the year 1074. The Pope (say the German Chronicles) called a famous Synod
of Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical Prelates at Rome, in which Council
diverse things to be observed by all Christians, concerning the Popes
authority, were enacted and ordained. There also was Henry afterward
excommunicated as an enemy and persecuter of the Church. Platina has set down
the form of that excommunication. In vita Greg. 7. Guilielmus Malmes^u^. l. 4.
c. 2.
An English Monk does ascribe it to the Council of Cleremont; but he does but
equivocate in that, unless he mean that it was repeated there. Yet for all
this the Bishops of Germany did set so light by it, that the next year after
being Synodically assemb^ed at Brixin in Austria, they deposed Pope Gregory,
and chose Gerbert Archbishop of Ravenna in his stead, calling him Clement. Idem
Mutiu^ Germanicor^ Chroni^orum l. 15. page 120
Henry desiring to secure the fluctuating and troubled estate of the Church
(they are the words of the same Chronicle) called a Council at Brixin a City
in Austria; where he assembled all the Bishops and Abbats which were of his
opinion, against Pope Gregory: In which Counce^^ they by their decrees deposed
Pope Gregory, in his absence, from the Sea apostolic, as a perturber of the
Church, and a wild headed Monk (for he was a Monk before he was Pope) and
chose in his place Gerbert Archbishop of Ravenna. Afterward he sets down the
very words of the Decree. Platina, though an officer of the Popes, affirms as
much. In Greg. 7.
Then (says he) Henry being rather incensed than admonished by these censures,
having assembled a company of Bishops ill affected like himself, he created
Gerbert, late Archbishop o^ Ravenna, Pope, and called him Clement. The Council
of Cleremont holden under Urban the second, and where he was personally
present, in the year 1094. or (as others are of opinion) 95. made the like
attempt to excommunicate King Philip in his own kingdom, by reason of his
marriage; and again in a Council holden at Poictiers not long after by the
Popes Legates. In this Council (says Matthew Paris, Matthaeus Paris in
Will^lmo 2. page 29.

Willelmus Malmesbur. l. 4. in Willelmo 2. cap. 2.

Ivo Carnutensis epist. 212.


speaking of that of Cleremont) Pope Urban excommunicated Philip King of
France. And another English Author; In this Council the Pope excommunicated
King Philip of France, and all such as should call him their King or their
Lord, and which should obey him, or speak unto him. In like manner Ivo Bishop
of Chartres speaks of them both. By reason of this accusation King Philip was
excommunicated by Pope Urban at the Council of Cleremont; and having resumed
the same wife after he was divorced from her, he was afterward excommunicated
at the Council of Poictiers by the two Cardinals John and Bennet.
Notwithstanding which excommunication he was crowned by the Archbishop of
Tours, in a full assembly of other Bishops. Know you therefore (says the same
Bishop of Chartres in a letter of his to Pope Urban, Idem Ivo epist. 68.
whose partisan he was) that, contrary to the prohibition of your Legate, the
Archbishop of Tours has set crown upon the head of the King. He speaks
afterward of the election of a Bishop, made at the same time by those who were
assembled with the said Archbishop. And in another epistle of his to one of the
Legates of Pope Paschal the second, Idem Ivo epist. 134.
Certain Bishops (says he) of the Province of Belgia, crowned the King upon
Whitsunday, ^ontrary to the Edict of Pope Urban of happy memory. In another
Epistle former^y writ to the same Urban, he gives him to wit how Philip had
sent Ambassadors unto him with prayers in one hand, The o^^a^ion of calling
the Council.
and threats in the other, such as these; That the King and Kingdom would
relinquish their obedienec to him, unless he did restore the King unto his
crown, and absolve him from the sentence of excommunication. Ivo epist. 28. ad
Vrbanum Pa^^m.
And afterward he advertiseth him, how the Archbishops of Rhemes, Sans, and
Tours had, by injunction from the King, appointed their suffragan Bishops to
meet at Troyes, the first Sunday after All Saints day, after he should have
returned his answer. Whence we collect two things; first, that the Bishops of
France did not cease to acknowledge their King, nor to obey him and communicate
with him, notwithstanding the prohibition from the Council of Cleremont: next,
that they were very ready to put in execution those threats which the
Ambassadors went to make unto the Pope, in case he did not condescend unto the
Kings pleasure. And yet that was as renowned a Council as this of Trent, if
not more; where the Pope himself was present in person; where that great
Croisada for the holy Land was concluded upon: Matthaus Westmonast. l. 2. sub
anno 1095.
and one of our Historians speaking of it, calls it in terminis, The great
Council. In the year 1215 Innocent the third in a general Council holden at
Rome, did excommunicate Jews the eldest son of Philip Augustus King of
France, with all his adherents. The same year (says an English Monk) upon S.
Martins day, Matthew. West. monast. lib. 2. sub anno 1215.
was there a general Council holden at Rome under Innocent the third; at
which were present, Primates, and Archbishops sixty one; Bishops, four hundred
and twelve, and eight hundred Abbots and Priors. In which Council the said
Pope did excommunicate Jews the King of France his eldest son, and all the
Earls and Barons of England, with their accomplices, which conspired and
rebelled against the King of England. Philip Augustus knowing the
excommunication, said to Gualo the Popes Legate, Idem ad ann. 1216.
The Kingdom of England (which the Pope pretended to be feudatary to him, and
thereupon proceeded to that sentence of excommunication) never was, nor is, nor
ever will be S. Peter's patrimony, in as much as no King or Prince can give
away his Kingdom without the consent of his Barons, who were bound to defend
it. And if the Pope intend peremptorily to stand in this error, urged thereto
by a desire of enlarging his dominion, he will give a bad president to all
Kingdoms. Whereupon the nobles of France, seconding the words of their Prince,
begun in an instant to cry out with one voice, That they would stand for that
article till death. And yet all this was against the decision of a solemn
general Council. Platina in Bonifa^io 8.

Martinus Polonus l. 4 in Boni^acio 8. sub an. 1302.


Boniface the eighth (says Platina) having called a general Council,
subj^cted Philip the Fair and his Kingdom to the Emperor Albert: this was
(says the Bishop of Consentia, who relates the same story) in the year 1302.
Notwithstanding this decree of the Council, Philip the Fair did revenge
himself upon Pope Boniface, in such sort, that if his violent death had not
ensued upon it, his proceedings had never been blamed nor condemned by any man.
Platina, Platina in Bonif. 8.
after he has delivered the story at large, gives him this elogy; Thus dyed
that Boniface, who studied rather to strike a terror then religion into all
Emperors, Kings, Princes, Nations, and people; who labored to give and take
away Kingdoms, to repulse and recall men at his pleasure; insatiably thirsting
after an incredible mass of money, which he had raked together by hook and
crook. Wherefore let his example be a lesson to all governors, religious and
secular, not to rule their Clergy and people proudly and disdainfully, as the
man we speak of did, but piously and modestly. Benedict th'eleventh, who
succeeded this Boniface, being informed of the justice of the cause of our
King, absolved him from the interdict, whereto both himself and all his
Kingdom were subjected; Extravagant Meruit. de privileg.

M^rtinus Polinus in Clemente ^ sub an. 1305.


and besides set forth a declaration for the exempting of the Kingdom of
France, from that power which Boniface by his Decretall did arrogate to
himself over all Empires and Kingdoms whatsoever, and for the preserving of
it in the ancient rights and liberties thereof.

16 Pope John the twenty second (say the German Chronicles) Henry the 3. urged
^o receive it.
having called a Council at Avinion of Bishops and Cardinals not a f^w, passed
the sentence of exc^^munication upon Jews the Emperor, and gave his reasons
in his B^ll against Jews; Mutius in Germanic. Chronic^ l 24 page 2^6.
because he had aided heretics and schismatiques, and had ever been a
favourer of rebels. And besides he denounced the sentence of excommunication
against all those that did not sequester themselves from his company, and of
deprivation of their benefices and dignities against such Priests as should
celebrate divine service in his presence. The Author adds one thing very
remarkable; These proceedings (says he) of the Sea of Rome, were in those
days of great efficacy; for it was a crime inexpiable to be of another opinion
then the Pope of Rome: yet were there some notwithstanding who ^ided with Jews
without any regard of the excommunication: but these not very many; for in an
imperial Diet called afterward by the Emperor, to see if he could find any
relief against that sentence; all the world was frozen-hearted and
crest-falne. All the refuge that poor Emperor had, was in a few Lawyers, who
stoutly defended his right, and thereby confirmed most of those who were
wavering. Jews had (says the same Chronicle) some Doctors both of the Civil
and C^non Law, who were of opinion, that the Popes sentence was null and
invalid; which opinion of the Doctors was a means why diverse did not abandon
him. See here how the Emperors party, notwithstanding his right, was at first
but very weak; yet afterward grew so strong, that every one openly rejected
the unjust decree of the Council. The Estates assembled at Francford the year
1338. did cancel and disanull all these lawless proceedings, by a fair
decree which we may read at large in Nauclerus, Nauclerus Volum. 2. Generat.
45. Extat etiam apud Aventin. l. 7. Annalium Botorum Vide etiam Alber^um
Argentinensem in Chronic Et Albericum de Rosate in L Been ^ Zenone C. de
quadrie^ praescrip.

Albertus Argent in Chron. Panormit. in tract de Concilio Basiliensi, ci^ca
princip number 6.

Extart hi articuii apud Nicolaum de Clamengiis post Arrestum de Anna^is page
128.


Provost of Tubinge, wherein are set down all the authorities and reasons in
law against the forementioned sentence and process, with this close, By the advice and consent of all the Prelates and Princes of Germany, assembled at
Francford, we decree that the former process, be void and of no effect, and
pronounce a nullity upon them all. One of our commentators affirms, that even
in the Court of Rome, where himself afterward was, many Prelates and many
laiques, well skilled in both the Laws, did hold that the Emperor was
wronged. To be short, there was not one till Pope Benet the twelfth, who
succeeded Pope John, that did not disrelish that process; and yet it was done
in a Council. The Council which was begun at Ferrara 1438, and continued at
Florence, was never received and approved of in this Realm of France. The
Bishop of Panormo tells us so; The King of France (says he) did expressly
forbid upon great penalties, that any of his dominions should go to Ferrara to
celebrate the Oecunmenicall Council. Charles the seventh tells some Cardinals
downright so, who were sent Ambassadors from Eugenius, and were come to Bruges
to get him to accept of it, and amongst others to present him with this
Article; That since such time as it was translated to Ferrara, the King should
reject the Council of Basil, and receive the Council of Ferrara with the acts
thereof. Whereto he made answer, after six days deliberation with his Prelates
and others assembled at Bruges, That he had received the Council of Basil for
a Council indeed; that he sent his Ambassadors thither; that many things were
there wisely determined concerning faith, and manners^ and such a^ he liked
well of: But for that of Ferrara, he never did, nor never would take it for a
Council.

17. These articles and answers are extant in the works of Nicholas de
Clem^ngiis. Vi. Editionem Romanorum Ac^orum generalis 8. Synodi pe^ Antonium
Bladium, anno 1516.
And yet for all this Clement the seventh styles this the Eighth General
Council. For mark how he speaks of it in his Bull of the 22. of April 1527.
directed to the Bishop of Farnasia. We cannot choose but l^nd you our
assist^^ce in the impression of the Acts of the eighth General Council held
at Florence, which you have translated out of Greek into Latin. True it is,
that Laurence Surius disavowes it, (...) not admitted.
when he says, it was not well said to call it the eighth Council, because
that is not it is place. He wist not happily, that a Pope (so says Bellarmine,
them to a greater Doctor than Clement) ranckt it the sixteenth amongst the
approved General Councels. There has been such a stir in France about
placing it according to it is rank, Su^ius in ^pist. a^ l^ctorem pos^^ ^a^te
Council (...) t^m. 4 ^on^il. p^g. 780 Bellarm. 1. tom. 4^ contr. gener. l. 1. c.
5.
that the que^tion hangs yet in the Court undetermined. As for the Council of
Basil, although the Ambassadors of France were there, and Charles the seventh
confess that he received as a Council; yet for all that he approved it but
in part: for of forty five Sessions of that Council, France has received
only the thirty two first, and those too not without some qualifications and
restrictions. Some Decrees as they lie, others with certain forms and
modifications; so says the Pragmaticall Sanction. V^. ^ragmatic Sanc^ion^m in
pro^^m.
As for the last, which mainly concern the deposing of Pope Eugenius, and the
creation of Felix the fifth, Charles the seventh made this protestation: The
King protests as a most Christian Prince treading in the footsteps of his
predecessors, This p^otestation was p^int^d ^t Paris by John Daillier, anno
1561. togeth^r with an o^ation mad^ before Charles ^he 6. in the name of the
University of Paris.
that he is very ready to give ear to the Church rightly and lawfully called
together. But for as much as many honest and grave personages make a question,
whether the suspension, deprivation, and ^lection which ensued thereupon at
Basil, were rightly and Canonically performed or no^ and seeing it is doubtful
whether that assembly did sufficiently represent the Church Catholic, then
when the matters were acted and agitated, so as they might proceed to points of
such great consequence and difficulty, therefore the King does persevere and
continue in his obedience to Eugenius, wherein he is at this present. That
which Benedict, sometimes Counselor to the Parliament of Tholous, has
delivered in his works concerning this point, is very remarkable. Herein
(says he) appears the error of some, Guilielm. Benedictus in repe^it. cap.
Raynutius in verb. Et uxor. nom. Adelas. number. ^84.
who hold that the French Church assembled at Bourges in the time of Charles
the seventh King of France, could not^ as she did, reject any Canons of the
Council of Basil: for she might both reject, and not accept them, and
qualify those she received by adding to, or detracting from them, and so put
them in form and fashion: not upon misdoubting of the power and authority of
that General Council which made and published them; but to fit and
accommodate them to the exigencies of those times, and to the conditions of the
places and persons in the Kingdom, and in Dauphine; in such sort as those
Fathers have expressed, and as it appears by what we have delivered, but
more plainly, in the text of the pragmaticall Sanction: so that if they might
be wholly rejected, much more might they be only in part received, and that
with some qualifications and conditions. As for the last Council of Lateran,
however the Popes make high esteem of it, as being very advantageous to them,
yet indeed it cannot justly be tanked amongst the number of lawful Councels,
both because it was purposely called for a countermine to the second Pisan, to
elude the reformation intended as well in the head as the members; and also by
reason of the iniquity of the Decrees there made; whereof we shall treat
elsewhere more at large. Here I need say no more, but that it was never
received nor approved in France; Extat in fascicu^o re^um expe^end^rum page 346.
nay more, the University of Paris did put in an appeal to the next Council:
the copy whereof may be read in some authors, where it is said, amongst other
things, that this same Council was purposely assembled against France: as
indeed it was. For there both Jews the twelfth was excommunicated, the
Pragmaticall Sanction repealed, and the second Pisan Council consisting mainly
of French (which was their fault, not our plot) in like manner condemned. It Is
said also, how that Council was not assembled in the name of the Holy Ghost:
and a Germane Monk styles it a pack of Cardinals; P^ulus Langiu^ in Chron.
Sitizensi sub ann. 1513
commending and approving that appeal which was made concerning it by the
University of Paris: It will prove cozen germane to that of Trent^ so that I
will not here set down the very words of that appeal, because I take occasion
to speak of them elsewhere. He that shall seriously consider these instances,
he will find, This Coun^^ll more encro^ching ^han othe^s.
that the rejection hithertowards of the Council of Trent, both in this and
other Kingdoms, is no novelty nor extraordinary thing. For many of those by us
mentioned were more famous, more general, more legitimate, and withal far
less prejudicial, than this. They contained only some petty grievances, some
personal injuries, some particular intrenchings upon some rights, either
Ecclesiastical or Temporal: But this keeps neither rule nor measure, but
turns the state of the Church, and all Christendom topsie-turvie: it sets the
Pope above all: above Kings^ Princes, and Councels^ yea it puts Kingdoms and
Empires in subjection under him: and for Temporal matters, it gives him full
power and absolute authority over such Ecclesiastical persons as did not
acknowledge any jurisdiction of his, save such as remained upon record: it
reduces us to our former miseries, to a necessity of going to Rome to plead
our causes, that so it may squeeze our Countries both of men and money: it
entitleth him to the election into Bishoprics and Benefices, so to cozen the
naturals of each Kingdom and Province of them, and to transfer them upon
such strangers as will be at his devotion: it robs Kings of the nomination of
Bishops and other Ecclesiastiques, and of that jurisdiction over them which
they ought to have; nay and in some cases even over mere Laymen; devolving
all to the Pope by means of appeals, commissions, evocations, reservations,
exemptions, and that absolute authority which it gives him in such things as
concern^ the manners and discipline of the Church, nay indeed in all things
without exception: It repeales the ancient Canons and Ecclesiastical
Constitutions, subjecting us wholly to all the Papal Decrees, which dispose as
boldly of Temporalls, as Spiritualls. It totally reduces all ancient liberties
to servitude, and particularly those of France, whereby we were ever preserved
from an insupportable tyranny; from those troubles and calamities which were
prepared for us, and under which our ancestors groaned, whenever they were
careless to preserve them. Whereupon they have (as it were) pourtrayed them
forth upon a tablet, Vide constitutionem Ca^oli 6. latam anno 1406.
to serve (as they say) for a caution to posterity, that so they may take heed
of making shipwreck of their liberties. So as a many would say, they knew by a
secret revelation that the Council of Trent would come, and foresaw our future
stupidity. And yet even then when they gave us this counsel, they were only
busied about the maintaining of some few of their liberties, whereas now all
are going, (as we shall make it plainly appear in this Treatise) beside^ many
other injustices, which it would be too long to specify in the prologue. And
for as much as that which first put me upon this enterprise, was the earnest
suits, which, being at Court, I have seen exhibited to our Sovereign in
behalf of the Pope for the receiving of this Council, I thought fit to show
in the first place, that this is no new thing, but that whatsoever they can
urge concerning this point, has been heretofore urged to our precedent Kings,
but in vain, and with no effect; for they would never give ear to the
publication of a thing so dangerous both to the Church and State.

CHAP. II. Of the instances which have been made unto the late Kings, for the
receiving of the Council of Trent.
C^arles the 9. urged to r^c^ive it.
1 THe Council of Trent was no sooner finished, but Charle^^ the ninth was
moved by the Ambassadors of Pope Pius the fourth, of the Emperor, the King of
the Romans, the King of Spain, and the Prince of Piemont to keep, and cause
to be kept within his Dominions, the Canons and decrees of that Council: Mark
the very Article of their embassage; Voyez le troisiesme volume de recueil des
chooses memorables pour le fait de la religion and estat de Royaume, enl^ ^n
1563.
The first point is, that they have solicited the King to observe and cause to
be observed in all his Kingdom, Countries, places, and Signiories within his
Dominions, the articles of the holy Council lately holden at Trent, which they
had brought with them. And to the intent they might be read unto him, and an
oath administered before the delegates of the said Council, the King was
appointed to appear at Nants in Loraine, upon our Ladies day in March, where
the said Grande's would likewise appear, they and all the Kings and Princes of
Christendom; where they determined to make an universal law, like to that
which was was enacted and agreed upon at the said holy Council, for the
extirpation of heresies and uncouth doctrines; such as should be found
repugnant to the holy Council aforesaid.

2 They made also some other requests unto him; as, that he would put an end to
the alienation of the temporal goods of the Church; that he would cause the
ringleaders of the seditious and schismatic persons in his Dominions to be
punished; that he would revoke the pardon and absolution granted by his
proclamation, especially in respect of such as were guilty of treason against
the Divine Majesty; that he would put his hand to the sword of justice, for
the punishing of the murder committed upon the person of the late Earl of
Guise. To all which demands, he made answer by writing in this sort. I thank
your Masters Majesty's for the good and commendable advice they give me; and
you also for the pains which it has pleased you to take in that behalf:
giving you to understand that my very purpose is to live and cause my people to
live according to the ancient and laudable custom kept and observed in the
Church of Rome: and that the peace which I made hereupon, was to clear my
Kingdoms of the enemy: and for the present, my desire is, that justice be
observed in all places of my Dominions. But I entreat them to hold me excused,
for a reason which I shall send unto them in writing; and because I will have
the advice of the Princes, Lords, and persons of note of my Counsel; which I
will call within these few days for that purpose.

3 It was determined by the Counsel not to hearken to these persuasions and
impressions; and that not only now, but afterward also in the year 1572, when
Cardinal Alexandrino the Popes Nephew, came forth of Spain into France, with
commission to reinforce this instance. And yet this King may seem to be more
obliged herein, then his successors; considering how he had bestirred himself
for the continuation of the Council ever since his coming to the Crown; and
how he had sent his Ambassadors, and Orators to it; and had caused the Bishops
and Abbots of his Kingdom to go thither. As appears both by his letters writ
to the Council, and by the relations of his Orators; more particularly by that
of the Lord of Pibrac. Henry ^h^ 3. urg^d to receive it.
As for the reasons of his refusal, we shall speak of them anon.

4 King Henry the third was entreated and urged in this point several times,
not only by the Pope, but also by the Clergy of his Kingdom, who never ceased
hammering of this iron, yet could they not work it to their liking. Monsieur
Arnalt of Pontac, Bishop of Bazas, does testify as much in an oration of his,
delivered the third of July 1579; This thing (says he, speaking to the King
about the receiving of the Council) for which the Clergy has many times
heretofore petitioned you, and namely in the last general assembly of the
States holden at Blois. He means especially that in the year 1576. where
Monsieur Peter Espinac Archbishop of Lions, in an oration made by him in the
name of the State Ecclesiastical of France, speaks thus unto the King: They
most humbly desire you, that according to their more pa^ticular requests
exhibited in their Remonstrances^ you would authorize and cause to be
published, the holy and sacred Council of Trent: which by the advice of so
many learned men has diligently sought out all that is necessary to restore
the Church to her primitive splendour. Wherein (Sir) they hope and expect from
you, as a most Christian King^ and most affectionate to the Church of God, the
assistance of your authority to put this reformation in execution. And here it
is worth observing, that diverse Ecclesiastickes were of opinion, That the
publication and observance of the said Council might be required, Voyez
l'extrait des registres des Estats sur la recepti^n du Concile de Trent.

Th^se are the very words of the collection of all that passed in the assembly
of the three Estates of France, in the general assembly at Bloi^, printed anno
1577.


without any prejudice to the liberties of the Gallicane Church, with exemption
of the jurisdiction of the Cathedral Churches of this Kingdom, which they
enjoyed at that present, and of such privileges and dispensations as they had
already obtained, and not otherwise. Whereupon a protestation was drawn the
23. of December, in the same year, and afterward printed 1594. the 26. of
that month. Certain delegates of the Church appeared in the Council, and
exhorted the three Estates to tolerate but one religion, viz. the Catholic
Roman, and the Council of Trent; and to take a view of those Articles which
are general and common to all the three Estates, to have them collected into
one scrowle, and authorized by the King, to make them more authentic. Yet for
all this, nothing was done, as appears by the report afterward set forth in
print.

5 The same request was again repeated by the Clergy of France, assembled at
Melun, in July 1579. as appears by the speech made before the King by the
prenamed Lord Bishop of Bazas, out of which we have extracted these words: The
Clergy humbly entreats your Majesty, that it may be lawful for them by your
authority to reduce Ecclesiastical discipline, and reform themselves in good
earnest. Amongst all the rules of reformation and discipline, they have pitched
upon those which were dictated by the Holy Ghost, and written to the holy
general Council of Trent; in as much as they cannot find any more austere
and rigorous, nor more proper for the present malady, and indisposition of all
the members of the body Ecclesiastic: but chiefly, because they are tied and
bound to all laws so made by the Catholic Church, upon pain of being reputed
schismatic against the Catholic Apostolic Church of Rome; and of incurring
the curse of God and eternal damnation. And presently after he adds,
Wherefore the Clergy does most humbly beseech you, that you would be pleased to
ordain, that the decrees of the most sacred Council of Trent may be generally
published throughout your Dominions, to be inviolably observed by them.

6 Nicolas Angelier Bishop of Saint Brien, made the like instance to the same
King, October the third 1579, in the name of the Clergy assembled at Melun. We
have (says he) earnestly desired, and do now desire more earnesty, and will
desire, as long as we breath, of God and you, that the Council of Trent may be
published, Henry the 3. urged to receive it.
and the elections restored to Churches and Monasteries: Which publication of
the Council is not desired by us, that we may thereby raise up you and other
Catholic Princes in arms, to spoil and butcher such as have stragled from
the true Religion: for we desire not to reclaim and reduce them to the flock
of Christ by force, but by sound doctrine, and the example of a good life: For
he, we know, came not into the world to destroy, but to save the souls of all
men, for whom he shed his precious blood: and if need so required, we would
not stick in imitation of him to lay down our lives for the salvation of those
poor misused souls. But we desire that Council may be published for the
establishment and maintaining of a true, sound, entire, and settled discipline;
which is so necessary and behoofefull for the Church.

7 July the seventeenth 1582, Renald of Beaune, Lord Archbishop of Bourges, and
Primate of Aquitane, delegat for the Clergy in this case, spoke at
Fountainbleau in this sort; The whole Church, Christian and Catholic, assisted
by the Legates and Ambassadors of the Emperor, of this your kingdom, and of
all other Christian Kings, Princes, and Potentates, did call, assemble, and
celebrate the Council of Trent; where many good and wholesome constitutions,
useful and necessary for the government of the Church and the house of God,
were ordained: To which Council, all the Legates and Ambassadors did solemnly
swear in the behalf of their masters, to observe and keep, and cause it to be
inviolably kept by all their subjects; yea, even the Ambassadors of this your
Kingdom solemnly took that oath: Now it is received, kept and observed by all
Christian Catholic Kings and Potentates, this Kingdom only excepted, which
has hithertowards deferred the publication and receiving of it, to the great
scandal of the French nation, and of the title of MOST CHRISTIAN, wherewith
your Majesty and your predecessors have been honored: So that under color of
some Articles touching the liberty of the Gallican Church, (which might be
mildly allayed by the permission of our holy father the Pope) under scugge I
say of this the stain and reproach of the crime of Schism, rests upon your
kingdom amongst other Countries: which signifies no less in Greek, then
division and disunion; a mark and sign, quite contrary to Christianity, and
which your Majesty and your predecessors have ever abhorred and eschewed: and
when some difficulty was found about the receiving of some other Counsels, as
that of Basil and others, all was carried so gravely and wisely, that both the
honor and unity of the Church, and also the rights of your crown and dignity,
were maintained and preserved. And this is the cause, why the Clergy does now
again most humbly desire your Majesty, that you would be pleased to hearken
to this publication, and removing all rubs, which are laid before you
concerning it, that you would with an honest and pious resolution, make an end
of all to the glory of God, and the union of his Church.

8 There was a Nuncio from the Pope, who arrived in France, in the beginning of
the year 1583, who prosecuted this matter with a great deal of earnestness:
yet for all that he could not move Henry the third one jot; who, like a great
statesman as he was, perceived better then any other, what prejudice that
Council might be unto him. ^enry the 4.
His majesty that now reigns, was startled at that instance, and afraid,
least that importunity should extort from him somewhat prejudicial to France;
whereupon he writ to the late King concerning it; who made him this answer.

This Letter was printed ann. 1583.
9 Brother, those that told you, that I would cause the Council of Trent to be
published, were not well informed of my intentions, for I never so much as
thought it. Nay, I know well how such publication would be prejudicall to my
affairs: And I am not a little jealous of the preservaton of my authority,
The Council rejected by Henry the 3.
the privileges of the Church of France, and also of the observation of my
edict of peace. But it was only proposed unto me, to cull out some certain
articles about Ecclesiastical discipline, for the reforming of such abuses as
reign in that State; to the glory of God, the edifying of my subjects; and
withal, the discharge of my own conscience: A thing which never touches upon
those rules which I have set down in my edicts, for the peace and
tranquillity of my Kingdom, which I will have inviolably kept on both sides.

10 November the nineteenth 1585, the same Bishop of Saint Brien, delivered
another oration in the name of the said Clergy, and was their deputy; whereby,
after he had commended the late King for his edict of Reunion, and exhorted him
to the execution of it, and the reformation of Ecclesiastics; he addes^ This
is the reason, Sir, why we so earnestly desire the publication of the holy
Council of Trent: And above others my self have a more special command s^ to
do. For that Council has not only cleered^ resolved, and determined those
doctrines of the Church Catholic, which were controverted by heretics; to the
end that people might not waver, and suffer themselves to be carried away with
every wind of doctrine, raised by the malice and cunning of men, to circumvent
and e^tice them into errour^ but also it has most wisely counseled and
ordained every thing, which may seem necessary for the reformation of the
Church, considering the exigency of these times.

11 There was also another assault made upon him O^tober the fourteenth 1585,
by the Lord Bishop, and Earl of Noyon, in the name of the Clergy assembled in
the Abbey of Saint German, near Paris; which is more pressing than the former;
We present unto you (says he to the King) a Book which was found at the
removing of the Churches treasures, writ by the prudent and grave advice of the
many learned and famous men, assembled in the Council of Trent; guyded by the
holy Ghost: who with a great deal of travel, pains, and diligence, have
renewed the ancient ordinances of the Church, which were most proper for our
maladies; and for those vices which at this present are most predominant in the
State: and withal have provided for those, which being of no great standing
amongst us, had not any particular remedies assigned them. The royal Priest
has put them into our hands, that we might present them to yours. First, our
Lord Jesus Christ^ who having a special care of this Church, has by his holy
Spirit provided a remedy for her, who directed the Fathers in that Council;
next unto him and under him, our holy Father, the chief ministerial head of
the Church, having authorized and confirmed it, and exhorted all Princes, and
republiques, to receive and observe it; and with him the whole Church, not the
Gallicane only, but the Catholic, does summon, entreat, and pray you to
receive it. That blessed Council carries with it, to him that will duly read
and consider it, the mark of the Author in the face of it; and he that will
judge of it without passion and prejudice, will say it is rather the work of
God than men. No good Christian can or ought ever to make any question, but the
holy Ghost did preside in that goodly company which was in that manner lawfully
assembled at Trent, with the intervening authority and command of the holy See;
the consent of all Christian Princes, who sent their Ambassadors thither, who
stayed there till the very upshot, without the least dissenting from the
Canons, and decrees there published; there being such a number of Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbats, and learned men from all parts; yea, not a few Prelates of your
own Kingdom, sent thither by the late King your brother; who having
delivered, consulted and spoken their opinion freely, did consent and agree to
what was there determined. And therefore we are bold to tell you that we bring
unto you, The Council rejected by K. Henry the 3.
the Book of the Law of God, which we humbly entreat you to receive, with as
much earnestness as we can possible.

12 A little after he adds; If there be some particulars in that Council,
which some body, (either by reason of their particular interest and commodity,
or because their bodies and humors are not sufficiently prepared, and disposed
for the taking of such strong physic,) do complain of and make some dorres
about them; there is a good remedy for that: and we dare undertake and
promise, that recourse being had to his Holiness, and he required thereunto,
he will not refuse to provide for it. In like manner as the Chapiters and
exempted corporations have by our means, and we with them already preferred a
petition, that their privileges and exemptions may be preserved entire unto
them, and that this publication may in no sort prejudice them; expecting herein
a new decree from his Holiness; after he shall be sufficiently instructed by
those remonstrances, which may be made unto him concerning this point. As also
we mean not by this publication, to prejudice the immunities and liberties of
the Gallicane Church, which we persuade and assure our selves, his Holiness,
when he shall be thereunto entreated, will be content to maintain and
preserve. These overtures being already twice made upon the petition of the
publication of this Council; to wit, at the assembly of the States at Blois,
and of the Clergy at Melun, we think it our duty not to give them over.

13 The provincicall Synod holden at Roan 1581, made this instance to the same
Prince; After that a good number of Bishops and proxyes, for those that were
absent, together with Ecclesiastical persons, from all quarters of our
Province of Normandy, were met in our Metropolitan Church at Roan: they tendered
nothing more, than earnestly to solicit the publishing and promulgation of
the Council of Trent within this Realm. Wherefore this our assembly by common
consent, have resolved to present their humble petition to our Most Christian
King, in like manner as was formerly done by the States of Blois, and the
Clergy convented at Melun; that he would be pleased, for proof of his true
piety and religion, to enjoyne the publication of the said Council; whereby
the maintenance of the Church is well provided for, which is observed to be
daily impared and abated. In the end of this Council, there were thirteen
doubts proposed to the Pope, with his final resolution to them: the last
whereof was a demand of the confirmation hereof, which was condiscended unto.

14 The provincial Council of Aix in Provence 1585, petition the King at the
beginning of the Acts, That he out of his singular piety, would command the
Council of Trent to be published, which had so exactly provided against those
dangers, wherein the Christian Commonwealth was then implunged.

15 We must not think, that these earnest solicitations, which our
Ecclesiastics here make, did proceed from them, but rather from the Pope. One
argument hereof which may be alleged, is this, that they were not now
interested herein; for the most of the decrees which concerned them, were
admitted; and there was no default in the observation of them, unless it were
on their part: and one company of them were inserted in the Edict of Blois, the
rest in diverse other Provincial Councels, holden afterward in France: the
Canons whereof are to be seen in print; at Roan 1581, at Bourges 1584, at
Tours 1585, and at Aix in Provence the same year: all which are put out in
print at many other places. Another argument may be the slight account they
made of observing the Council in such things as depended merely upon them, and
which were in their power to do; which plainly shows, that all they did, was
but to humor another. I speak not this of my own head, but from Claudius
Espensaeus, a Sorbon Doctor, The little goo^ the Counc^ll did.
Do we dally (says he) in a matter so serious? or rather do we make a
mock of those which desire a reformation, under color of decrees? What
reformation can be expected from us who do not observe those things, which we
have so lately decreed? Claudius Espe^saeus l, 2^ digress. in ep. ad Timoth.
page 157.
He speaks this to those Prelates of France, who were present in that
Council; and after their return made no reckoning of observing that
discipline which depended mainly on them, and was withal conformable to the
ancient Canons. See here (said he) that which they of Trent ordained; but
where is it observed? as for our Bishops who were at Trent and Bonony, there is
not any of them that instructs the people in his own person; at least not any
that I hear of.

16 And in his commentaries upon the Epistle to Titus, speaking of the
discipline of the Church; In cap. 3^ digress. 10.
But it is not long (says he) since they have determined this point: the Pope
and Council of Trent, have brought it lately to an upshot. But what? were
those pastors which came from thence, and had a hand in the making of those
Canons of reformation, those injunctions of residence and preaching, ere a whit
more diligent in feeding their flocks, or less silent in their pulpits after
the Council was confirmed by the Pope? their non-residence was as great as
formerly, and they almost as dumb as ever. They had rather tire then give
over, and be cast out of their livings by those who style themselves reformers
forsooth (when indeed they are nothing less) than endure to be reformed by
Kings and Princes, and by them be constrained to do their duty. It is no
marvel i^ they do somewhat for him to whom they are bound by such a strict
oath, and who flatters and wooes them extremely to do the deed. But when the
Churchmen, of our age especially, do any famous exploit against the Pope; this
is news indeed, both in regard of that command which he has got over them;
and of the fear they ought to have, least they should be sentenced for
heretics in these controversies of religion. And this is the cause that the
Popes have always had recourse to them when they intended to do some ill
offices to our King and Kingdom. Boniface the eighth, by a gloseing letter of
his writ unto them, endevors to make them approve his injust proceedings
against Philip the Fair: where he says, amongst other things, Epistola
Bonifacii 8. ad Episcopos regne^ Franciae.
Those who hold that temporal matters are not subject to spiritual, do not
they go about to make two Princes? He complains also of the Parliament
holden at Paris, where it was enacted, says he, by underhand and begged
voices, that none should appear before him upon the summons of the Sea
Apostolic. He complains also of the report which was made to that assembly by
M. Peter Flotte, whom he calls Belial, half blind in body, and quite in
understanding: This was the man who being sent in embassage unto him by King
Philip, to that saying of his, We have both the one power and the other, made
this reply in behalf of his Master^ Yours is verbal, but ours is real, Matthew
Westmonast. l. 2. su^ ann. 1301.
as it is related by an English historian.

17 Innocent the third did the like in his scuffle with Philippus Augustus: his
Epistle to the Bishops of France was put among the Decretals, wherein he omits
no art to nuzle them up, and persuade them that his proceedings against the
King, and putting their Kingdom under an interdict was just, (as the learned
Cujacius has very well observed) and indeed his projects throve so well that
he won their consent at last. Hark how a French Historian of ours speaks
of it. Rigordus de gestis Philippi Augusti sub ann. 1099.
The whole country of the King of France was interdicted; at which the King
being highly offended after he had notice of it, he stripped all his Bishops
out of their Bishoprics, because they had consented to that interdict; and
commanded that their Canons and Clerks should be put out of their livings,
expelled out of his dominions, and their goods confiscated: he discharged also
the Parish Priests, and seized upon their goods. The French Bishops at first
did stif^ly oppose Gregory the fourth, who siding with the children against the
father, was minded to come into France to excommunicate Jews the Gentle, and
they had put on this resolution, Aymomius l. 5. c. 14.
To send him home again excommunicated, if he came there to excommunicate.
Henry the 3. refus^d to receive i^.
But when all came to all, he had such a stroke over them, that he made them
not only Theganut de gellis Ludovi^^ imperatori^ cap. 43.

Idem cap 44.


abandon, but depose him. He was vexed by all his Bishops, (says an ancient
Historian) and more particularly by them who were raised to those dignities
from a low degree, and such as coming out of barbarous Countries were
preferred to that height of honor. And he afterward adds, They said and did
such things as the like were never heard of; using reproachful speeches
toward him, they took his sword from his side upon the judgment of his
servants, and wrapped it in a sackcloth. It is true indeed that not long after
repenting themselves of their proceedings, they restored him to his former
dignity of which they had despoiled him. And the Archbishop of Rhemes, Ebon by
name, who had been the maine man amongst them, declared himself in writing,
Histo^red^ Rhem^ livee 2. ch^p. 18. Ibid.
That whatsoever had been attempted against the honor of the Emperor, was
against all right and reason. And yet we must not accuse all the Bishops of
France for this: for many of them were offended with it; and particularly those
of the province of Belgia deposed Ebon their Archbishop upon this occasion,
condemning his proceeding herein. But let us now ret^rne to our intended
subject.

18 One of the Kings Lieutenants general for administration of justice in an
assembly of the States particular under the late King 1588. For the
reestablishing (says he) and better settling of Christian religion within this
Kingdom, S^e this o^ation printed at Paris ^h^ same ^^er^.
our suit unto the King is, that like a most Christian and eldest son of the
Catholic Church, he would receive the Council of Trent, and cause it to be
inviolably observed by all his subjects. If any here will interpose, and tell
me that there are some articles in it which are repugnant to the liberty of the
Gallicane Church; and some others which seem too harsh and against the form
of justice now used in France; I answer, that the Lords spiritual may more
wisely advise of this in the assembly general of the States; and if need so
be, communicate it with the other Orders, to make a Remonstrance thereof to our
holy Father the Pope. By this means all those Edicts, which, to the great
regret of the King, the Princes, and Catholic subjects, by reason of the
necessity of the times did tolerate this medley of religions, shall be repealed
and abolished.

19 Amongst those great disorders of this Kings reign, this very Council was
called in question in the Assembly at Paris, which was holden in the name of
the States in behalf of the league: where it is remarkable that those who had
shaken off the Royal yoke, and undermined all the fundamental laws of this
Kingdom, how distempered soever they were, yet they had their judgments so
sound, as to discern a good many decrees in that Council, which were
prejudicial to the liberties of this Kingdom. Extrait du registre de l'
assemblee tenue a Paris sous le nom de Esta^s ^ ^n. 1593.
As appears by the extract which was published hereupon. We may observe by the
way, that those who raised the most false and abominable calumnies against the
late King that ever were heard of, in all their defamatory libels never
objected this unto him, that he refused to receive the Council of Trent. I
will use no other proof than of that damnable script hammered out in hell, De
justa Henrici 3. abdica^ione Francorum regno.
Of the just deposall of Henry the third from the Kingdom of France; which
sets down the causes of his excommunication, making him a murderer, a
heretic, a favourer of heretics, simoniacall, a sacrilegious approver of
duels, a profaner of religious persons, a confederate with heretics, a
spender of the substance of the Church without any leave from the Pope, a
fal^ifier of the letters Apostolic, a superstitious fellow, a deteiner of
Churchmen. But not one word of the Council of Trent^ although he had in that
point been disobedient to the Popes will, and made small account of his
earnest and often request; for it is certain that all the speeches which come
to our hearing, were delivered in his behalf, and upon his motion.

20 Nay more, The decre^s of the Council in part received, but not as of the
Council.
he did not receive so much as those very Decrees of the Council which were
no way repugnant to our liberties, and the observation whereof was necessary
for the Ecclesiastical policy: but suppressing the name of the Council, they
decreed the very same things in the Parliament at Blois 1579. (a plain proof,
that it was rejected by the common consent of all France.) Which is evidently
verified by comparing the Decrees of that Council with the Articles of this
Assembly; as in those places where they speak of the Council. Trid. Sess 6. c.
2.

Ordon. de Bloi^ artic. 14.


residence of Bishops, the Council. Trid. Sess. 24. c. 13.

Ordon. de Bloi^ artic. 22.


maintenance of Curats, erection of Council Trid: Sess. 23. c. 18. and seq.

Ordon. de Bloi^ art. 24.


Schools and Schoolemasters, the bringing of Council. Trid. Sess. 25. c. 8.

Ordon de Bloi^ artic. 27.


exempted Monasteries under the visitation of certain congregations, the
Council Trid. Sess. 25. c. 15.

Ordon. de Bloi^ art. 28.


age required in religious men and women before they profess, the Council.
Trid. Sess. 23. c. 12.

Ordon. de Bloi^ art. 29.


age of such as enter into holy Orders, the Council. Trid. Sess. 21. c. 8.

Ordon. de Bloi^. arts 30.


visitation of Monasteries by Bishops, the Council. Trid. Sess. 25. c. 5. Ordon.
de Bloi^ art. 31.
reinforcing of the cloysture of religious houses, Council. Trid. Sess. 5. cap.
1. Ordon. de Bloi^ artic. 33. and 34.
Prebends for Divines, asking the Con^il. Trid. Sess. 24. cap. 1. Ordon. de
Bloi^ ^rtic. 40.
banes of Matrimony before Marriage, and such like. Yea more, in many of these
points they derogate from the Decrees of the Council, and prescribe quite
different from that which is there set down. The like was done before by an
ordinance at Orleans set forth in the time of the Council 1561. Whereby our
Kings have shown the power they have in matters of Ecclesiastical discipline,
and the slight regard they had to that silly Conventicle.

21 We will conclude then, that seeing two of our Kings, very zealous in their
religion, assisted by a Council no way liable to suspicion, would yet never
give way to this publication so often entreated, desired, and urged from them,
it must needs follow that this Council comprehends something prejudicial to
this State: considering withal, that all the mitigations which are sought
after now adays were then proposed, as namely that it might be received
without any prejudice to the liberties of the Gallicane Church, and without
ever drawing the sword against those of the Religion, which are the two maine
plasters which seem to salve up all the badnesse that is presumed to ly
lurking in it. It remains now that we show the true reasons of this refusal;
which we shall do by laying down the nullities which are both in the form
and matter of it.

CHAP. III. That the Pope, being a party, could not call the Council, nor
preside in it: and that there was an appeal from him.
The Pope was a pa^ty.
1 ANullity in the form of this Council is argued first from this, that it was
called by the Pope, and that he did preside in it, yea and did defer and
transfer it at his pleasure. The plea hereupon is this, That the Pope was a
formal party, that it was he was urged to a reformation; and therefore it is
said, that he could not be judge in his own cause: and that he should have
left both the one and the other to the Emperor; according to the opinion of a
great Robertus Maranta specul. aur. part. 6. In ^ erb. and quandoque appella
tur number. 32.
Doctor of the Canon law; who after he has concluded that the calling of a
Council belongs to the Pope, adds notwithstanding, that in default of the
Pope, that right belongs to the Emperor; now there can be no fairer
opportunity than when the Pope is taken for a party. Another Barbatius in cap
quod t^ansl^tionum. Col. 32. de offic. legate.
Doctor says, that the defect of that power in the Church is supplied by the
Emperor. And Ioh^rnes apud Baldum. Baldus in cap. olim. ad sinem ^xtrav. de
rescrip.
another yet, that when the controversy is touching the Pope and his cause,
then his authority is not requisite for the calling of a Council. It is a rule
of law received amongst the Canonists themselves, that when the will and
consent of any man is required to some act, such requirall has no place then,
when a point is pleaded against himself.

2 Ludovicus Barvarus, and all the States of Germany with him, do plead this
nullity against the sentence and proceeding of John the 22. and of his
Council. Nauclerus volum. 2. generat. 45.
The third reason (says he) is, because no man ought to be judge in his own
cause, and do justice to himself; but it is a plain case that this said John
pretended to have a plenitude of power over us and our Empire, even in
temporal matters; and did actually conspire against us and the laws of the
Empire, which he attempted to usurp, and caused us to be pursued like an enemy.

3 The gloss upon the Canon law, says in express terms, that the Pope
cannot be both judge and party in any case whatsoever. Can. 2^. q. 3. inter
que^^las ^^ne quis in propria causa i^ ^ubro and in nigro

Gloss. in Can Consuetudo 16. q. 6.


Hence we collect (says it) that if the Pope be at variance with any body, he
ought not to be judge himself, but to choose arbitrators. Decius in cap. cum
veniss^nt. ^u. 37. extra de Iudi^.

Sleidan comment. lib. 1. not contradict^d by Surius and ^ontanus.


Some of the Canonists have written also, that when the Pope is accused of
false doctrine, he has no more power to call Councels. All these reasons hold
good, supposing the Pope to have by right the power of calling general
Councels; which yet is denied, as we shall prove more at large in another
place. Besides, there were some appeals put up from the Pope to the Council,
as is related by Sleidan in the first of his Commentaries. Luther (says he)
being advertised by Cajetans lo^ters, that they would proceed against him at
Rome, he thereupon drew a ne^ appeal November the 28. and a little after,
being pressed and pinched with extreme necessity, he was glad to appeal from
the Pope, to a future Council. And also by the Archbishop of Cullen, being
excommunicate by Paul the third, 1546, because he went about to reform his
Church, contrary to the Bull set forth by Leo the tenth against Luther and his
adherents, appealed thereupon to the future Council. ^leidan. c^mmen^ l. 18.
not con^^adicted by Surius and ^ontanus.


4 We have discoursed in the last book (says Sleidan) how the sentence of
excommunication was denounced by the Pope against the Archbishop of Cullen,
upon the sixteenth of April, who having c^rtaine notice of it the fourth of
November, he put forth a book presently after, Appeal was made from the Pope.
wherein he gives his reasons why he refused the Pope for his judge, because
he had stood a long time accused of heresy and idolatry: Wherefore he
appealed from his sentence to a lawful Council of Germany, wherein he
protested so soon as it was opened, he would implead the Pope as a party, and
prosecute against him. The Protestants, as is well known, did the like diverse
times. There was also another appeal to a future Council put in by the
University of Paris, May the 27. 1517, about the repealing of the Decrees of
the Council of Basil, and of the pragmatique sanction, by Leo the tenth. In
the act of which appeal, these words are inserted; Extat in fasc^culo rerum
expetendarum page 36.

Et de ea Langgius in Chron. Citizensi sub anno 13.

Robertus Maranta in specul. aur. part. 6. in verb. Et quandoque appellatur,
number. 61.


We the Rectour and the University, finding our selves grieved, wronged, and
oppressed, as well for our selves, as for all others subject to our University,
and all such as will take part with it, do appeal from our holy father the
Pope ill-advised^ to a future Council lawfully assembled, in a safe place,
whither we may freely and boldly go, about the abrogation of the Council of
Basil, and the pragmatick sanction lately set forth by these new decrees.
Notwithstanding which appeal the Pope was set over the Council by the Fathers
assembled at Trent. Now it is a thing never seen nor heard of, that he from
whom the appeal is made, should be judge in the very case of appeal: for our
Doctors find, that the judge from whence an appeal is made, may be refused in
all other causes, which concern the appellant, so long till the appeal be void.

CHAP. IV. That the reformation of the Pope was the thing in question.
IT is further alleged, that Pope Adrian the sixth, did freely confess by the
mouth of Francis Chregat; Lord Bishop of Abruzzo his Legate, at the Diet of
Noremberg 1522, that the Sea of Rome was corrupt and depraved, and that the
corruption of the Church was derived from the Popes; wherefore he did promise,
they should have a free and general Council. Now this acknowledgement does
disable him for being head of the Church. This is further verified by his own
instructions given to his Legate; where in the tenth article he says thus:

2 We know that within some years ago, Extat In fasciculo rerum
expetendarum, page 17.

Et refertur totidem verbi^ a^ Rovero Pontano Carmelita. l. 2. rerum memorab.
p. 74. Et a Claudio Espensaeo, in comment. in Epist. ad T^^tum, cap. 1.


some abominable things have crept into this holy See, some abuses in matters
spiritual, some transgressions of Commissions, and all out of order; and it is
no marvel if the infection descended from the head to the members, from the
Pope to the under-Prelates. We have all degenerated, (I mean we
Ecclesiastical Prelates) we have gone astray out of the way; there is not one
that has done good this long time, no not one. Wherefore, for as much as
concerns us, you may assure your selves, that we will take pains in the first
place, to reform that Court from whence happily all this evil has come: to
the end that as the corruption proceeded from thence to the inferior orders,
so soundness and reformation may come thence also. Which to do, we perceive
our selves so deeply obliged, that we see the whole world call for a
reformation. Howbeit no man must admire if he do not see an absolute
reformation of all errors and abuses in an instant; the malady is too far
spread, and too deep rooted. We must go step by step to the cure of it, and
hye ^o such things as are of most importance and greatest danger, Popes needed
reformation.
for fear of putting all out of joint, by attempting to reform all at once.
All sudden changes are dangerous in a Commonwealth, says Aristotle; and he
that wrings the nose hard, brings forth blood. Mark here the words of that
honest Adrian. So that it has been conceived the common voice of Christendom
for these two hundred years almost, that it was fitting there should be a
reformation in capite and in membris, both in the head and the members: but the
Popes wrought so well by their schisms, shifts, and tricks; that the endevors
of those that engaged themselves herein, were to no purpose; and the Synods
called about this were all to no effect, and fruitless. The Council of
Constance after the deposall of Pope John the twenty third, had made this good
decree.

Council. Constant Sess. 40.
3 That the new Pope who should be next chosen, together with the Council
before he departed from thence, should reform the head of the Church and the
Court of Rome, about such articles as had been put up by the people and
nations. But Pope Martin the fifth, as soon as he was created, did quickly
shift himself from those who cried so for a reformation, and amongst others
from the Emperor Sigismond, who was more hot upon it than any else. Platina
gives the reason of that delaying; Platina in vita Martini 5.
A matter of that weight being finished as well as heart could wish, by the
travail and endeavor of all the Princes, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, but
especially of the Emperor Sigismond: they begun to talk of the reformation of
the manners, both of the Laity and Clergy, which were much debauched by
overmuch licentiousness. But because the Council of Constance had continued
four years already, to the great incommodity both of the Churchmen and their
Churches; it seemed good to Martin, with the consent of the Council, to defer
a matter of such importance to a more convenient time. For he said, the thing
required maturity and deliberation, seeing that, in Hieroms opinion, every
country has their several customs and conditions, which cannot be removed
on a sudden, without disorder. They have had leisure enough to think of it
since, for we are yet consulting about it, and nothing at all has been done
besides.

4 The acts of that very Council, and of that at Basil, and others since, give
us sufficient proof hereof; who being not able to compass this reformation,
put it off from hand to hand, and commended it in succession one to another;
ordaining that the keeping of Councels should be every ten years, but so as
the first should be within five years, and the next within seven: and this
principally to provide for the reformation of the head and the members. The
second Pisan holden 1512, which was assembled for the same ends, was so
belabored by Julius the second, and Leo the tenth, that it was constrained to
yield to their mercy, and give place to the Lateran, which was called for no
other end, but to countermine and disanull that other, as is confessed by the
Onuphrius in Iulio 2.
historian of the Popes. These good Fathers, however they were for the most
part Frenchmen, have left us in their acts, a testimony worth our observance,
and that is that, Acta Concilii Pisani 2.

Lutetiae ex causi in vico divi Ia^obi ad in^ersignium lilii ^urei. Et
Mediolani per Go^ardum Ponticum ann. 1512. Vi Acta Concilii Later^n. Sess. 3.

Et Onuphrium in Iul 2 Arno. ^eiren. in Lud^^i^o 1^.


For many years there had not been any general Councels: and if any were
called, as the first at Pisa, and that at Constance, Seen, Basil, and Florence;
yet the Church could not be reformed to the purpose, by reason of those
impediments and cavils which were procured thereupon; which befell themselves
also. For Julius the second, and Leo the tenth, had the wit to win first
Maximilian the Emperor, and then the Cardinals that were at Pisa. King Jews
the 12, after the death of Julius, suffered himself to be led away with the
blandishments of Pope Leo, considering withal the danger whereinto the first
had put both him, and all the Kingdom of France, (against which he had
procured the Kings of England and Spain to take arms) insomuch that
renouncing the Concell of Pisa, (...) preposte^ously first condemned, the^
summon^d.
he acknowldged that of the Pope, and caused certain Ecclesiastics of his
Kingdom to do as much. But from that time till this, we could never see this
reformation; for as for the Councels of Lateran and Trent, Vt. Acta ejusdem
Concilii. Lateran. ult Sess. 8. and 9.
they never cared for meddling with it. Which was worthily represented by
Monsieur Arnald de Ferriers, the French Ambassador at the Council of Trent,
in an Oration delivered by him, September the 22. 1563, where he said, That
they had been entreating for a reformation of the Church in the head and
members, above 150 years to no purpose, and that in sund^y Councels, as those
of Constance, Basil, Ferrara, and the first at Trent; and that the demands
which were made in that of Constance, by John Gerson, Chance^our of the
University of Paris, in behalf of the King of France, may be ^ead to this
day: as also those that were made in behalf of the same Prince, by M. Peter
Daves, at the first Trent Council.

CHAP. V. That the Pope had passed sentence before: and that he was moved with
hatred against those whom he summoned to the Council.
1 COmplaint is also made, that the Pope should show himself so passionate,
that before the calling of the Council, and after that, before the holding of
it, he condemned the doctrine of those who were summoned to appear there in
judgment, and declared them to be heretics: which gave them just occasion of
suspicion, and instructed them to go wisely and warily about their business.
By reason whereof they say, they cannot justly be blamed for desiring to quit
his jurisdiction, Can. quod suspecti and ib^ gloss. 3. q. 5.
and making so much ado about the form of the Council, and the persons of
the judges; seeing these are things which must be looked to at first, and
before we enter the lists. Now that their doctrine was condemned by them who
desired to be their judges, is verified by the Bull of Leo the tenth, bearing
date the 8. of June 1520, where after he has reckoned up Luthers opinions,
concerning the Sacraments of the new testament, the Eucharist, repentance,
contrition, confession, satisfaction, absolution, venial and mortal sins,
indulgences, the Popes excommunications, priests, general councels, works,
heresies, freewill, purgatory, and the Catholic Church, he decrees as
follows. Extat in collect. diversarum ^onstitut. Romanorum Pontif. part. 1.
page 158.
Wherefore, by the advice and consent of our reverend brethren, and by their
mature deliberation, by the authority of Almighty God, the blessed Apostles
Peter and Paul, and our own; we condemn, disprove, and totally reject all and
every the foresaid articles, or errors, as heretical, either scandalous or
false, or offensive to piou^ ^ars, or tending to the seduction of simple
souls, and contradicting the Catholic truth. And we decree and ordain by
these presents, that by all faithful people of both sexes, they be holden for
condemned, disproved and rejected.

2 It may be answered, that Pope was dead when the Council was held, and
another sat in his stead whereof they needed have no such fear. To which we
reply, that there was indeed an alteration of the persons, but not of the
conditions nor proceedings. For Paul the third, when he begun the Council at
the very same time, which he designed for the calling of it, declared that the
end of it was the extirpation of the Lutheran heresy; The Popes h^tred to some
whom he summoned.
as appears by a Bull of his, bearing date the 23. of August, 1535, entitled,
Deputatio executorum super reformatione Romanae curiae, mark the words of it:
In eadem collect. Diverse. constit. part. 1. page 240.
Whereupon we, desiring to provide for the Church, and to cleanse her of all her
stains have determined to appoint and solemnize a General Council, upon
earnest and urgent motives, which concern the state of the said Church and See
Apostolique^ and the extirpation of the plaguey Lutheran heresy, and others,
having already dispatched our Nuncio's to Christian Princes for that purpose.

Sleidan. l. 11. not contradicted by Surius or Fontanus.
3 This Bull came to the Protestants ear; for hark what they say of it in the
declaration which they made at the assembly of Smalcald 1537. Besides, not only
because the Pope is a party, but seeing he has already condemned our doctrine
long before, he is grown more suspicious. And who can doubt what judgment
will pass upon our doctrine in his Council? Yea more, he confesses that the
cause of publishing the Council is, that the new-sprung heresies may be
rooted out: It Is true, that may bear a larger construction; yet there is no
question but he means of our doctrine, seeing it is scarce credible that he
should speak of his own faults. And that it is so he has published another
Bull since, about the reformation of the Court of Rome, wherein he confesses
downright without any flattery, that a Council is called for the rooting out
of the pestilent heresy of Luther. Seeing the case stood thus, they had been
mad to have put themselves upon that Council, to abide the judgment of him
who had condemned them already. Considering withal that Leo the tenth, in the
precedent Bull, says; how he has caused their doctrine to be pronounced
heretical by a conclave of Cardinals, and also by the Priours of the religious
Orders, and by a pretty company of Divines and Doctors in both the Laws. So
that they had but even gone to be whipped, as Hosius of Corduba, to the Council
of Antioch, in case they should have refused to subscribe to the determination
of the Council. It is a folly for a man to cast himself upon such disasters,
and a piece of discretion to avoid them. Sozom. l. 3. c. 5
Maximus patriarch of Constantinople, would not be seen at the Council of
Antioch; because he foresaw that if he went thither, he should be constrained
to subscribe to the deposall of Athanasius, for which he was never yet blamed
by any body. To conclude this point, it is holden for a ruled case in law, that
a judge who has discovered his opinion already, may be refused; much more he
who has passed the sentence before he be made judge. Add we hereunto the
mortal hatred of the Pope against Protestants; the Pope, I say, who calls the
Council, who summons none to judgment but his own creatures, who must
preceed there either in person or by his Legates, and must be supreme moderator
and judge in all things. This point of the Popes enmity against protestants,
and all those who have rid themselves out of the Popes servitude, is so well
known that it needs no proof. Henry the eighth, King of England, then a
Catholic, laid open the hatred of the Pope against him and his subjects, as
an excuse for not going to the Council. Sleidan. l. 11. app^ov^d by Surius.
For he says, That the Pope hates him mortally, putting him out of favor with
other Kings as much as he can; and that for no other reason but because he had
cast off his tyranny, and had made him loose his yearly rent; and for this
cause he could not come thither.

V. libel. de Eccles Gallic. Stat. in schism. page 178.
4 Henry the second, King of France, complains also how Pope Julius the third,
instigated by the ill will which he bore him, without any sufficient reason,
had denounced war against him during the time of the Council, depriving him
thereby of the means of sending the Prelates of his Kingdom thither:
whereupon he made those protestations which we mention elsewhere. This
consideration makes a nullity in the Council, and serves for a lawful excuse
to such as would not go thither. For in this case, he who is summoned to a
Council is not bound to appear. Theodoret. l. 1. ^. 28.
So Athanasius (says Theodoret) knowing the hatred of his judges against his
cause, went not to the Council of Cesarea. An enemy should not be a judge.
Which was purposely called for him, and yet no man ever said, ill did he.

5 Anastasius Bishop of Perrhenue, Cause. quod suspecti 3. q. 5.
was three times summoned by his Patriarch, before he was deposed, and yet that
deposall was judged unjust by the Council of Chalcedon, after it appeared that
he was his enemy.

6 Pope Gelasius, speaking of the Bishops of Constantinople, with whom he had
some bickerings, says something which is very remarkable in these times. For
the question being about the taking up of their quarrel, he speaks thus, D.
Can. quod. suspecti.
I ask, where is that which is able to pass the judgment which they pretend?
shall it be amongst them? so the same enemies should be both witnesses and
judges: but even humane affairs ought not to be committed to such a
judgment; how much less divine and ecclesiastical, every wise man does
perceive. Say we then, that those who were out of favor with the Pope and his
adherents, were wise and well-advised, that they would not trust themselves to
his judgment.

Pope Nicholas the first, who quotes these two examples in an epistle of his to
the Emperor Michael, gives us this rule, Nicholaus Papa in Epist. ad Michaelem
Imper. and d. Can. quod suspecti. Robertus Maranta in speculo aureo part. 6. In
verbo: Et quandoque appellatur. number. 35.
That our enemies, and those whom we suspect, should not be our judges. Which
(as he says) was decreed at the General Council of Constantinople, and gives
this reason of it, Because nature teaches us to avoid the plots of suspected
judges, and refuse the judgment of our enemies. After all this Gratian makes
this conclusion, That how manifest so ever a man's offenses be, he should not
for all that be condemned by his enemies. It were superfluous here to allege
the Civil Law, to prove that the enmity of the judge gives sufficient cause of
refusing him in point of judgment, seeing it is a matter well enough known.

CHAP. VI. That the Council was holden in the midst of diverse troubles and
tumults.
THE hatred of the Pope toward the Protestants and the King of France, did
show it self so fully, before that it burst out into cruel wars. Where we
may observe an egregious nullity of the Council in all the Sessions thereof,
in that it was begun, continued, and ended amongst the troubles raised
against the King of France, the Protestants of Germany, and them of the
Religion in France, by the instigation and inducement of the Pope and his
instruments. This is evidenced by the very acts of the Council it self, for
at the end of the tenth Session holden September the 14. 1547. the Cardinal de
Monte, the Popes Legate, and President of the Council, speaks thus, Besides
these difficulties, there is the heynousnesse and enormity of an unexpected
accident which befell the person of the most illustrious Duke of Placentia,
which does so take up our employment for the defense and safeguard of the
liberty of the Cities which belong to the Church, that we our selves are not in
safety one hour, no not one minute of an hour. The Popes Legates make this
remonstrance in the sixth Session, That of a sudden there are such broiles
and such wars kindled, (they are the very words of the Council) that the
Council is constrained as it were to stop it self, and break off its course,
with no small inconvenience; W^^res in Germany.
and all hope of proceeding further is now quite taken from it; and so far is
the holy Council from redressing the evils and incommodities of Christians,
that contrary to its intentions it has rather irritated than appeased the
hearts of many. Sleidon. l. 16.
Pope Pius the fourth, in his Bull of the publication of the Council, which
was for the continuation of it, bearing date the 30. of December. 1560. affords
us such another testimony, But (says he) as soon as new broiles were raised
in the neighboring parts of Germany, and a great war was kindled in Italy
and France, the Council was afterward suspended and adjourned.

2 But it is requisite we make these troubles more plainly evident, seeing it
is a most just exception against the Council. The Protestants complain that
the overhasty resolution made by the Fathers in that Council, was purposely to
wage war against them. The Duke of Saxony and the Lantgrave of Hassia say so
downright in their letters. Whereas you buckle up your selves to set upon us
with force, without once telling us the reason why, we refer that to God,
and as soon as we shall know what ye accuse us of, we will answer so as every
one shall say that we are wronged, and that ye undertake this war by the
impulsion of the Antichrist of Rome, and the wicked Council of Trent. Though
we give no credence to these letters, yet let us hear what Pope Paul the
third says to it in his letters to the Suitzers of the third of July 1546.

Extat haec Pauli Epist. ad Helvetios, Paris. impressa in Off^cina Calderia^^
ann. 1547.
3 We thought the obstinacy of these villains would put us upon the necessity
of falling to force and arms: but having often considered what was to be done,
praying God to let the light of his divine counsel shine upon us, it is fallen
out fitly, that our most beloved son in God, Charles, Emperor of the
Romans, ever Augustus, being offended merely with the same villainies of those
rogues that we were, and for that a Council being granted by us to the German
nation, mainly by his means, and at his entreaty, those who despise it despise
also his authority, and all that he has done concerning it, (as some do very
injustly and sawcily) has resolved by force of arms to revenge the holy cause
of wronged truth. Which occasion, as being without doubt offered unto us by God
himself, we very readily embrace, being resolved to second the good intentions
of that great Emperor, with all the means and forces which either we or the
Church of Rome can raise.

4 Now that the Council of Trent has had a hand also in that design of war,
not only the Historians relate, but it may be fairly concluded from hence,
that they never gainsaid it. For it is not any way likely that they should
suffer such a war to be made under their noses, and they not approve of it.
While the preparations were made for it, nay while the armies were in the
field, and that under the conduct of Octavianus Farnese the Popes nephew, and
all was in an uproare and combustion, the Council made decrees about the
controversies of greatest importance, when there were but a very small number
of Bishops there.

5 When Julius the third came to the Popedom in February 1550. upon the
Emperors entreaty he ordained, that the Council should be continued. Where
we may observe, that at the very same time a war was denounced against King
Henry the second, by the Pope and the Emperor, and that upon an injust
quarrel. Which is proved out of Onuphrius, Onuphrius in folio 3.
an Historian of the Popes, in the life of that Julius. He gave some hopes
(says he) of composing the differences in religion, when at the request of
the Emperor he declared by his ^ull in the first year of his Popedom, that
the Council should be continued at Trent, at the beginning of the next May.
And presently after he adds, Natali^ Comes lib 14. hist. sui ^emporis.
He unwittingly put himself upon the war of Parma, and thereby set all
Italy, nay all Europe on fire. Another Catholic Historian says, During the
time that these things passed upon the frontiers of Flanders and Picardy, the
Pope, at the Emperors request, summoned the Council to Trent, War of Parma
in the time of the Council.
for the extirpation of heresies. Because it was plai^e that Bononia, whither
it was adjourned by reason of the plague, was ^o free place for them all. Then
he prosecutes the narration of the ^arman wars now lately begun. So then
the Pope makes war on the one side, and keeps a Council on the other; this
is truly and without a figure, to bear St. Paul's sword, and St. Peter's keys.
The first Session upon the first of May, and the ^econd upon the first of
September 1559. were only for Ladies, for there was nothing done. King Henry
set forth an Edict at the same time, dated the third of September, in the same
year, containing a restraint of transporting gold and silver to Rome: where he
sets down at large the occasi^ns of the war of Parma begun by the Pope, and
amongst other things he saith^ E^^^ du Ro^ He^ri^ i^prime a Paris ^an^. 1551.
Which holy father upon a sudden fit of choler, had caused a certain company
of men of war, both horse and foot, to be levied and set forth, and also
enticed and persuaded the Emperor (with whom we were in good terms of peace
and amity) to take arms, to aid his forces in the design of the recovery of
Parma, and after he had harrased and laid waste all things wheresoever he
pleased in the Country of Parma, he caused his said forces to march toward
the territories of Mi^andula; which has for a long time, even during the life
of our late most honored Lord and Father, been in the known protection of the
crown of France, which he beleaguered, using most incredible and inhumane
cruelties toward the inhabitants of the said territory, yea such as barbarians
and infidels would not have used the like: giving the world to know very
stoutly that he meant them to us, who have not deserved any such thing at his
hands or the Holy See.

6 There were six Sessions holden in the time of that wa^^e, the two we spoke
of, and four more; in two whereof the most material points of faith, of
manners and Church discipline were discussed and determined: as those, of the
blessed sacrament of the Eucharist, Transubstantiation, the sacraments of
Penance and Extreme Unction: as also about the jurisdiction of Bishops; where
many blows were struck at the liberties of our Gallicane Church, and the
rights of the Crown. Now the war continued all the time of these Sessions
without any intermission, for there was no respit of peace, save in May 1552.
what time the said King put forth another Edict derogatory to the former,
whereby he licensed the transporting of gold and silver to Rome. Wherein he
says, Our holy father the Pope having now of late made known the love and
affection which his Holiness bears continually toward us, by good and honest
demonstrations, etc. Another Edict ^f K. Henry the 2. (...) it the Camp nere
Weldenaggbes May 21. 1552 and p^inted at Paris the same yeere^

The Kings lette^s to all the States of the Em^i^e, printed at Paris 1552.


But the Sessions we mentioned were ended before this; for the fourth of them
was upon the 25. of November 1551: and for the two following, they did but
bandy for balls in them, for they treated of nothing but the safe conduct of
Protestants, and the suspension of the Council. Now the writing sent by the
same Prince to all the States of the Empire, February the third 1552.
witnesses that during those Sessions all was on a fire; where after he has
laid down the original and progress of the war of Parma, and laid the
blame of it upon the Pope and the Emperor, whom he impeacheth also of other
things, he profers his help and assistance to the Princes of the Empire. We
offer (says he) of our free and princely pleasure merely, to deliver the
German nation and the sacred Empire, from that servitude wherein it now is; to
gain thereby, as Flaminius did in Greece, an immortal name and everlasting
renown.

7 From this time till the beginning of the year 1560. our Council did stark
nothing; what time Pius the fourth, so soon as he got into the chair, sent
forth a declaration for the continuation of it against Easter day the next
year; this Bull was dated November the nineteenth, or (as some copies have it)
December the thirtieth 1560. The first Session was the eighteenth of Ianaury
1562. the last, December the third 1563. during which time there was nothing
but troubles and turmoiles in France, Warr^s in France.
so that those of the religion there have good reason to say, that nothing
could then be passed in the Council to their prejudice, they being debarred of
the means of going thither. It is plain, first from the Edict of pacification
in January 1561, that at the time of the calling it, there was a great deal of
stir in France, and that they had something else to think of, than of making
ready to go to the Council. For it is said at the beginni^g thereof. It is
too well known what troubles and seditions have been heretofore, and are
daily raised, abetted and augmented in this Kingdom, by reason of the badnesse
of the times, and the diversity of opinions in point of religion, which now
reigns. This Edict thus made for the good of the Country, it was requisite to
sue for the publication of it, by reason of the difficulties raised against it
by the Court of Parliament; this hung on till the sixth of March in the same
year, what time the publication was made in some kind by constraint; witness
those words, Obeying herein the Kings pleasure, without the approbation of the
new religion, and all by way of caution. Yea more, six days before, upon the
first of that month, was the execution done at Vassy, against them of the
religion, which impestered this Realm in more troubles than ever: The Duke of
Guise making his party the strongest at Court: The Prince of Conde being
retired to Orleans: which they went about to reform quickly after, in April
next. So that King Charles set forth a declaration upon his former Edict, where
he says toward the beginning; Whence it is the more strange, that some of
them are now risen up in arms, and have assembled themselves in great number,
as we see in sundry places; and namely in our City of Orleans, under pretense
of a certain fear, which they say they have, least they should be debarred
the liberty of their conscience, and the enjoying the benefit of our Edicts and
ordinances in that behalf.

8 They had reason to be afraid, lest their consciences should be rifled in
such sort, as were those of Vassy. About the time of the first Session, all was
in an uproare in this Realm, and there was nothing settled concerning the
peace; as may be gathered from an answer made by the Qu^ene mother to
Mounsieur the Prince of Conde, dated the 4. of May 1562, where amongst other
things it is said, In regard of the violence, oppressions, murders and
outrages, committed since the edict, and in despite of it, both by the one
side and the other, her Majesty will cause such justice to be done, and amends
to be made as the case shall require, both for public satisfaction, and also
private to such as have received any wrong. And also from an edict set forth by
the late King of Navarre, Lieutenant General for the King over all this
Realm, dated the 26. of May 1562, containing an injunction to some suspected
persons of the religion, to depart from Paris. Where it is said, As for the
putting in execution of the design which we have undertaken to perform out of
hand, with the army of our said Sovereign Lord the King, against those that
hold some cities of this Kingdom, with prejudice to his authority, and the
obedience which belongs unto him; We have determined to depart within a few
days from this City of Paris, with the said army, and to cause all the forces
both horse and foot, as well within the said city as without, to march along.

9 There was also another declaration set out concerning the edict of peace, by
the same King Charles, at Amboys, March the 19. 1562. but it was not put in
execution till the next year about June; what time the King sent certain
Commissioners through the several Provinces to that effect; as appears by the
copy of the Commission given out thereupon, dated the 18. of June in the same
year. ^x^^t Pari^ii^ impressa apud Iohannem D' Allier an 1563 ^t in Ac^i^
Con^ilii.
And yet notwithstanding our Council was consummated the fourth of December
1563. The Cardinal of Lorrain in an oration of his, delivered in the Council,
November the 23. 1562, makes a long story of our miseries in France, W^^res, a
just exception against the Cuncell.
and the wars which were a foot there. There is no sparing of any thing
(says he) armies are raised succors are called in from all parts, entry is
made by force; yea, the sword pierces our hearts, how victorious soever our
hands be: Our goods are taken from us, and the Kingdom is brought to a
miserable pass. So then the case standing thus, the^e is never a Lawyer but
will constantly affirm, that as much as concerns those who went not thither
may be righted, and that all things should be restored to the state wherein
they were at first.

10 The Kings of France by reason hereof did prejudicate their subjects of the
religion (yea and their Catholics too) whom they re-estate in their former
right; Edict de pacification de l^ an. 1573. art. 15. de l' an. 1576. art. 33.
and 37. de l' an. 157^. art. 38. de l' an. 1598 art. 59. Theodoret. l. 2. cap.
16.
Notwithstanding all processes made, judgments and arrests granted during the
troubles. Non-suits, prescriptions, both legal, conditional, and customary,
attachements of feuds, which happened during the troubles, or issued from
thence by course of law. It stands with better reason, that all should be
re-established, which concerns point of religion; which has ever been as
good a cause of replacing all things is statu quo prius, as absence. Which is
plain from the discourse of Pope Liberius, with the Emperor Constantius, in
the case of Athanasius; Athanas. apol. 2 Theodo^et. l. 1. c 28.
from the letter which Pope Julius writ thereupon to them of Antioch; and from
that passage of S. Hilary; Hilarious in fragmento recens excuso.
I omit that the judgment of the Emperor was passed without hearing of the
cause: Nor do I repeat how the sentence was extorted against one that was
absent, (however the Apostle says, That where faith is^ there should be
liberty, the simplicity of the priesthood should not endure this;) but I omit
these things, not because they are to be slighted, but because there are
others more intolerable. The same may we say of the Council of Trent.

11 So then these wars were the cause why many that would have gone to the
Council, could not; they were the cause why it was so often broke off, and
prorogued, and that in such sort as it seemed sometimes to come to just
nothing: Hence it was, that they did not proceed to the creation of new Popes
in the place of those that dyed during the time of the said Council; nor of
the new Cardinals, which had otherwise been done, it being a matter which of
right belonged unto them, according to the determination of the Councels of
Constance and Basil, Council. Constant Sess. 14. Cancil Basil. Sess. 37.
as we shall show in another place. Hence it was that there was such a great
dispute in the consistory of Rome, when Pius the fourth renewed the Council;
some being of opinion that it was ended, and that he should call a new one:
others maintaining that it was yet in being, and that he ought only to continue
it: But the Pope used such phrases in his Bull, that it could not be perceived,
whether it was a continuation, or a new convocation. Some might happily take me
up for lying, if I had not Onuphrius for my warrant; Onuphrius in Pio 4.
But here arose a controversy, whether it should be a continua^ion of the
Council of Trent, or a new convocation: The Pope found out a wholesome remedy
to set all men's minds at quiet; for he used such a form of speech in the Bull
of promulgation, as might satisfy both parties, and withal the authority of
the Council be no way impeached. The use we make of this passage is, That
whereas, by their own confession, that Council was sometimes at so low an
ebb, that it was questioned whether it was ended or no: it would be a better
way to have a new one, which might be to the content of all parts, to put an
end to our differences: Considering that this was deserted and cast off, that
it did not discharge the office and function of a true Council, that it was so
weak and feeble that it deserves not the name of a Council.

12 Here we must observe that the French Ambassadors at the Council 1563, had
an express commission to urge, that this last Council might not be ac^ounted
a continuation of the former. And there was an express article against those
things which were put off by them at the beginning.

The place of the Council not free.
13 The Lords of Ferriers and Pibrac after their departure from the Council,
when they were retired to Venice, writ letters to King Charles, dated November
25. 1563. Wherein after they have acquainted him with the reason of their
departure, they give him notice, That the Council would move his Majesty to
send new Ambassadors, which he could not do without great prejudice. That
the Pope would cause them shortly to proceed to the last Session; wherein it
must be determined, whether this Council shall be taken for a continuation of
the first, or for a new one: That if it be concluded to be the same Council,
(as they are all inclined that way) the French Ambassadors, who ever refused
to admit of the first, should hereby receive a great blemish; and the
proceedings of King Henry, who protested against it, should be condemned.

14 These and other le^ters by me quoted, which I have seen, remain in the
hands of good Catholics, who will be ready to produce them upon occasion,
with many other memorable acts concerning this subject.

CHAP. VII. That the place where the Council was held was not free.
IT is urged moreover, that the place of the Council was not free and safe:
and that the suit being commenced against the protestants of Germany, the
Council should have been called within that country^ according to the r^quest
exhibited by the body of the States of Germany assembled at Noremberg, whose
words are these; Vid. responsionem principum and aliorum Imperii ordinum
pontificio legato ^edditam, in ^as^i^ulo rerum expetendarum page 173.
They cannot think of a more powerful and present remedy^ than that the Pope,
by the consent of the Emperor, call a free Council in some convenient place
of the Empire, as soon as may be; as at Strasburgh, Mayens, Cullen, Ments^ or
at some other place convenient in Germany. In r^ference to this, the German
Bishops assembled in an imperial Diet at A^sburg 1547, com^laine to Pope Paul
the third, for not causing that Council to be holden in Germany, and the
inconveniences that followed thereupon, with the little good it did. See the
tenure of their letters set down by Sleidan, Sleidan. lib. 19. not
cont^^dicted by Suri^s and Fontanus.
and not contradicted by those that have written against him.

2 Whereupon the Bishops of Germany sent letters unto him the 14. of September,
whereby they certified him of the State and danger of Germany, and said, it
might have been prevented, if in good time the remedy had been applied by a
general Council, to the disease, when it was first a breeding: for which
Council they had often importuned the Emperor, that he would procure so much
as that it might be kept within the confines of the Empire; that so the
Bishops of the country, who were princi^ally concerned in it, might be there.
For considering, their jurisdiction is of such a large extent, it would be very
inconvenient for them to travail out of their country, especially at this
time. Finally, by diligence of the Emperour^ when there wa^ not a living soul
to be found at Mantua, nor Vicenza, the Council was concluded upon and begun;
but without the bounds of Germany; namely at Trent, which belongs rather to
Italy. This was the reason there were so few Germans the^e; nor indeed could
they be; especially in a time of war, when all the passages were stopped and
guarded.

3 The Protestants also have ever made the like demand, in many several
assemblies of Germany: namely, that there might be a free Council; Counsels
should be holden in a free place.
and that it might be held in some imperial City of Germany; as well for the
liberty, as for the convenience. And besides, because the differences in
religion were borne there.

4 I will set down only what they say in a letter writ by them to the Emperor
Charles the fifth, dated August the 11. 1546. Any body (say they) may easily
see and perceive that this is none of the Council, with the vain hopes and
promises whereof you have a long time fed us in many Diets: to wit, of a
general, Christian, and free Council; and that it should be in Germany; as
we and our associats in religion have made remonstrance to your Majesty in
the last Diet at Worms.

5 The King of England demanded likewise, that the Council might be in a
place free and safe, out of the Popes dominions. And when he understood that
Italy was the place assigned, he protested against it as null, in the year
1537. His life lies at stake (says he) that dares reprove the Pope, Sleidan.
Comment. lib. 11.
and accuse him to his face, unless it be in a lawful Council: nor he nor
his are secured by safe conduct. And say he were, there are apparent dangers
and good reason why he should not come there; for it is no new thing with the
Popes to violate their faith to stain, and imbrue themselves in the blood of
innocents: and howsoever others may safely go thither, for his part he could
not, for evident reasons: For the Pope lies in wait for him, and hates him
mortally.

6 The King of France made the like instance, in the protestation which he sent
to Trent, and was presented by Monsieur James Amiot, Abbat of Bellosane, the
first of September 1551. For after he had made rehearsal of the war, which the
Pope had raised up against him; he shows, Extat haec pro testatio in libr^ de
Ecclesia Gallicanae statu in schismate.

Ad futurum Concilium legitime ac in loco tuto and quem libere et cum
securitate nos eadem Vniversitas, vel a no^^^ and ab ea deputandi adire
p^terimus prov^camus and appellamus.

Vid. fascic. rerum expetendarum. page 36^


That he could not send the Bishops of his Realm unto the Council, seeing
they could not have free and safe access. Now this demand of the freedom and
safety of the place is no new thing, but has been put up at other times upon
the like occasion. The University of Paris in the act of their appeal (whereof
we spoke before) makes express mention of the safety of the place to which the
appeal should be brought. The Fathers in the second Pisan Council, offer Pope
Julius the second, to submit themselves to a Council of his calling, but not
in Rome, as he would have it; but in some other free place, where they needed
not fear: Yea, they named ten Cities to him in several places of
Christendom, that he might make choice of one; or they would give him his
choice to name ten in Italy; so they were not under his jurisdiction nor under
the Venetians.

7 The delegates sent to the Pope at Rome by the same Council, according to
the commission which was given them; made proffer to the College of Cardinals,
of all peace, unity and obedience; always provided they should agree of a
common place of safety, and which stood neuter, for the celebration of a
general Council; the city of Rome being much suspected both by them and many
more. But it is fitting we here translate word for word, the reasons which were
urged by that same Council of Pisa in their apology against the Pope and
Cardinals, who were obstinatly bent to have the Council in the city of Rome.

8 God forbid we should think the Lateran a safe place to meet in, and treat
of the affairs of the Church, This apology of the Council of Pisa, ^as printed
at M^lan by Gora^dus Ponticus ann. 1512^
with safety and truth. We much suspect there are some ambushes lurking in the
Lateran: and therefore from henceforth, we do most resolutely and earnestly
refuse it, a^ a place notoriously and evidently suspect; as dreadful and
dangerous to our lives, especially now when we stand upon other protestations.
We confess indeed, and that confidently; that place i^ very fitting and most
safe for projectors: there are a great number of men, The Council of Pis^'s
apology.
well furnished both foot and horse: there are strong forts, a navy not far
off: And lastly, the City it self, with the adjacent people trained up in
arms, and accustomed to the wars, all at the Popes devotion. There are
Captains which make but small reckoning of Cardinals and Prelates, when it is
the Popes pleasure: And the Cardinals being already possessed with this fear,
are not in case to counsel what is true, but what will please. Nay there is
not a man alive, but will take his oath without scruple, that the place
designed at Rome, is full of treacheries, and very dangerous, both for those
who called the Council at Pisa, and all those that were present there. And we
know nothing in all the world so certain, but is less certain than what we
said before. If then the coming into the City at this time, be generally
reputed and esteemed to be with the great hazard of the lives of the Fathers;
this refusal ought not to be offensive. For what man is he (as Clement the
fifth said) that will easily come before a judge guarded with a strong army?
Who durst, or could be thought to appear willingly before him, and put
himself into their clutches, whose violence he has good reason to be afraid
of? Which is a thing to be feared of right, and which we usually eschew, which
reason enforces us to do, and which nature abhors. As for the Popes fair
words in offering us safe conduct, and his promise to receive and intertaine us
courteously, and lovingly, these will not serve either to remove, or lessen the
just fears which possess the minds of the Fathers. For what faith and promise
can be made with more solemnity, than that of the Conclave, confirmed by vow
and oath, and that in form of a contract? Yet the late creation of Cardinals,
whose liberties were not preserved, does give sufficient testimony how it was
kept. But suppose we were in hopes that his Holiness will keep his promise
with an upright heart, without suffering himself to be transported either with
hate or choler: how can the Fathers be assured in their hearts, when they look
back upon things bypast, though his Holiness should not be touched with
indignation? Popes are men, and God says, there are twelve hours of the day:
Who will secure us against the infinite number of persons which depend upon the
Pope? against the injuries and affronts of those lewd people, which swarm in
the Court of Rome? The intolerable wrongs, the cruel insolences, the horrid
and unheard of butchering, which some Fathers have suffered that followed the
Court, are a sufficient item to us, and make us more wary. Not to go far for
examples, the Pope himself, when he was but yet of an inferior order, has
sufficiently instructed us, how far we may rely upon the safe conducts of the
Court; (from which there is no appeal) for he was wont to say, It is a great
piece of folly to change life and liberty, with the skin of a dead beast: that
is, with a parchment of safe conduct. It will be hard for him to make others
believe what himself was so resolute not to believe, and that for so long a
time. Which indeed stands with good reason; for even Innocent the fourth tells
us, that no man is bound to put himself into the power of his enemy with
letters of safe conduct. Hereupon the former Popes, after they had got Armies,
Garrisons, and Cittadels into Rome, were wont to assemble Councels in other
places, rather than there. And if there be no more liberty allowed to the
Senate, than what they now have, if the Popes do not take another course of
life and government, than they do, no man can ever think that in such kind,
of Ecclesiastical liberty as this, there is any fit and convenient place for
receiving the Holy Ghost, who does usually reside in free so^les assembled in a
Council. Seeing then that the exception against the place is proved to be
lawful by all right and reason; seeing the profer of safe conduct cannot in
right and reason remove the just fear, which is such as may be incident to
men of fortitude; would to God those projectors would make no more mention of
the place of the Lateran: Trent, subject to the Pope.
for by standing so peremptori^y upon the difficulty and difference of place,
they give no small occasion of sus^ition, that they do not so much desire that
the Synod should be held at the Lateran, as to hinder the holding of it at Pisa
or elsewhere.

10 All the reasons alleged in this Apology are very pat for the Protestants.
They always demanded, that the Council might be kept in Germany this demand
was repeated in all the Diets h^lden in those days. The C^tholique Princes and
States of Germany made the same request to Pope Adrian the 6^ in the Diet of
Noremberg, (as we said before) but there was ^o w^y to compass it. The Pope
has not yet forgot the Councels of Constance and Basil. He thinks Germany is
fatal to him; but the worst is, he will not b^^ge out of Italy. One while he
will have it at Mantua, anon at Vicenza, t^en at Trent^ afterward at Bonony,
lastly at Trent^ but still in Italy. For it cannot be denied but Trent is in
Italy, although in the description of it at the beginning of the Council it is
said to be in the confines of Italy and Germany. All antiquity puts it in
Italy. Ortelius in his Theater of Geography^ puts it in the map of Italy. This
City was otherwise no less formidable to the Protestants than Rom^ was to the
Pisan Fathers. The Bishop was Lord of the Town, and the Pope of the Bishop;
who had taken an oath of him, and was bound unto him b^ a red hat which he
received from him. Besides, it is a City subject to treacheries and
ambushments, the places thereabouts being at the Popes devotion. The denial of
having the Council kept in Germ^ny, or any other pla^e of free access, breeds
a suspicion of fraud and false-dealing. As for safe conduct, that was offered
here also; but if they of Pisa could not rely upon it, much less the
Protestants; especially so long as the memory of John H^^ and Ierom of Prague
was not extinct, and the decree of the Council of Constance stood in force;
which says, that process must be made against heretics, notwithstanding the
safe conduct of the Emperor and other Kings: and some shift might be found to
wave that also which was granted by the Council.

11 There needed no more but that one Canon, Bad promises must be broken, to
thunder-strike all heretics, notwithstanding their safe conduct; and that
rule which is given us by Boniface the eighth, It is not necessary for a man to
keep his word in unlawful promises. And God knows there was no w^n^ of such
Doctors as would put such a gloss on those decrees as would best suit with the
point in question. For is there any thing worse than a here^ique? to
communicate and converse with them, Angelus Imm^la.

S^cinus Decius in Consiliis adversus Iuliu^ 2 Ia^oba^ius. and alii.


is it not a kind of contract is it not a^ obligation? The Canonists advise us
not to trust too far to such safe conducts, and excuse them that take their
council, from all defaults that they can incur; acquitting them from all
sentences and process made against them, which they brand with a nullity.

12 When the great schism was in the time of the Emperor Sigismond, for the
appeasing whereof the Council of Constance was called, th^re was a great deal
of ceremony about choosing the place. That very point was held so material,
that the winning or losing of the cause was thought to depend upon it. Mu^iut
German. Chron. lib^ 27. circa princip.
They agreed well enough of the time (so the Germane Chronicl^s) but a great
controversy there was about the place. The Popes perceived well enough that
the place was all in all, and no question but he of Rome had been cast, had it
been in any place that acknowledged him of France for the true Pope; and on
the contrary, the French Pope deposed, if in a place where the Roman was taken
for the lawful Pope. And therefore they contended a long time about the place
Pope John did wisely dissemble, and not communicate his counsel save to one or
two; his chief care was that it might not be in any place where the Emperor
was the stronger party. Which notwithstanding fell out against his will, which
almost made him to despair. T^^ (...) now ^cc^unt^d of b^ Po^es.
The Legates being returned to the Pope, (say those Chronicles, meaning John the
three and twentieth) and having certified him of the place of the Council,
which was agreed upon, he had like to have gone mad by reason of the excessive
grief he conceived thereupon, and cried out he was undone, and began to cast
about for the alte^ing of it. But all his counselors lying their heads
together could never invent a pretense fair enough to bring that about.
Nauclerus has the very same in a manner, who brings in the testimony of Aretin
in this sort:

Naucle^us vol. 2. g^nerat. 48.
13 We must not omit (says Leonard Aretin) a memorable accident which f^ll out
then, whence we may learn that all things are disposed from above^ The Pope
(says he) had secretly imparted unto me his intention and design, (he was the
Popes Secretary) saying unto me, All depends upon the place of the Council, I
will not have it in a place where the Emperor is stronger than I, wherefore I
will give a large commission and authority to the Legates whom I shall send for
fashion sake, which they may show in public; but in private I will restrain
their power to certain places; and he told me the number of them. Persisting
many days in this mind, the time came that he must dispatch the Legates. Then
having caused all other to avoid the room, my self only excepted (says
Leonard) he communed secretly with the Legates, and exhorted them with many
arguments to be diligent in performing the charge of their legation;
representing unto them how the business they were sent about was of great
importance: then coming to curry favor with them he commended their discretion
and fidelity, saying, they knew better what was fitting to be done than he
himself did. While he was speaking and repeating these things, his affection
did alter in a moment a plot which was long before intended. I had purposed
(said the Pope) to nominate some places, to which and no other you should
condescend; but I have changed my mind at this very instant, and leave all to
your discretion: consider with your selves what will be safest for me, and what
I need be afraid of. Then in their presence he tore the Paper wherein the
names of those places were writ, without naming any place at all to them. The
Legates being dispatched toward Sigismond, pitched upon the City of Constance
for the place of the Council, which was within the Emperors dominions. But
when Pope John heard of it, you would not think how he was grieved at it; he
cursed himself and his fortunes. But there is no resisting of the will of God:
God had ordained long before that there should be but one ^^ock, and one
shepherd.

14 Amongst other nullities, the States of Germany assembled in the Diet at
Francford the year 1338. do urge against the sentence and proceeding of Pope
John the 22. and his Council, concerning the excommunication of Jews the
fi^th, the little safety in the place appointed for the Emperor to make his
appearance at. That the citation (say they in a Decree which runs in the
Emperors name) bind the party assigned to appear, N^^clerus vol. 2. generat.
45.
it is requisite there be a time appointed him, and that the place where he is
to make his appearance be safe. But it is notoriously known that this same
John does bear a capital hatred to us, and has with an army of soldiers
pursued us, our liegemen and confederates. Besides, the City of Avignon, the
Pope himself, and the Lord of it, have a long time hated both us and the
Roman Empire; wherefore it were senseless for any man to say that such a
summons was Canonical: for on the contrary, it is utterly void and invalid in
Vt probatur cap^ ex part D. de appellat. 3. q. 9. Hortamur ut lite non con.
test. accedens. D. de judic. l. ^i locum.
law.

13 The authority of Clement. Pastorall^ de sen^ent. and rejudis.
Clement the fifth may serve to prove, that those who are summoned need not
appear but in a place of safety, in as much as his disanulling of the sentence
of condemnation pronounced by the Emperor Henry the sixth against Robert King
of Sicily, was mainly grounded upon this very consideration. Safety of the
place enquired by the Canon Law.
It is a thing evident and unquestionable, (says he) that during the time of
this process and quarrel, even then when the sentence was given, there was
always a great army about the Emperor, that pursued the King and his
partakers with mortal hatred, and that the City of Pisa, where the sentence
was given, had an ancient grudge against the said King, as every body knows.
Supposing then, that the King was lawfully cited upon those grounds by the
Emperor, was he bound to come before a judge that was accompanied with a great
army? one that hated and was incensed against the party summoned, as was said
before? Was he bound to appear in a populous place, of great strength, and
which bore hatred toward him? who durst do so? or by what r^ason should any
man be bound to bide his doom in such a Consistory, to cast himself into his
enemies bosom, to present himself voluntarily to die, and that for no just
cause, but by an open injury: He were a fool that would think such a citation
bound the party cited to make appearance.

16 All these considerations hold good against the Council of Trent. For
besides that all the Cardinals, all the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priours,
and others that bore place in it, were enemies to the Protestants, and to them
that were out of favor with the Pope; the City was at enmity with them, and
the Lord of it. Moreover the Popes armies were almost continually abroad in
Campania during the time of the Council, either against the Protestants, or
against the King of France, or upon other occasions, as we shall show anon.

17 Nicholas the first, speaking of the suit which was betwixt King Lotharius
and his Queen Thieberg, Can. ^ine de Con^ugii. Cau. 33 q. 2. Add can.
Lotharius. cause. 3^ q. 3
whom he put away from him, ordaines that the cause shall be debated in a
place of safety, where they need to fear nothing. Wherefore it is fitting
(says he) to procure such a place where the force of a multitude needs not to
be feared: And the gloss upon it; Archidiaconu^ de Turrecremata, and alii
ibid. Et Regin. sub ann. 864.
This is an argument that the judge is bound to provide a place of judgment
for the hearing of the cause, where the parties may meet freely and safely.
Which gloss is approved by the common opinion of the Canonists.

18 Innocent the third will have it to be a just occasion of appeal, when the
party is appointed by the judge, to come to a place which is not safe. As often
(says he) as you shall be summoned before any judges, if it be dangerous to
appear before them, you may lawfully become appellants.

19 Innocent the fourth speaking of the satisfaction which he offered to make
the Emperor Frederick, and referred it to be determined by Kings, Princes, and
Ecclesiastical persons, whom he offered to call together in some place for
that end, makes express mention of the safety of the place. We are ready
(says he) to assemble Kings, Prelates, and Princes, both spiritual and
temporal in some place of safety. And the gloss upon this; A judge should
appoint such a place, or else there is a just cause of appeal, although it be
said that no appeal shall be admitted.

20 Ivo Bishop of Chartres complains of the Popes Legate, Ivo epist. 94.
because he had chosen the city of Bloys, there to decide the cause of the
Clergy of Chartres; who could not repair thither with safety by reason of the
populacy of that City.

21 The same Bishop having a controversy with some of his Clergy depending
before the Archbishop of Sens his Metropolitan, Ivo epist. 205^
entreats him to appoint a place for judgment, whither they might go and come
with safety.

22 The Legate we spoke of, having appointed a Council, consisting of French
Bishops, to meet at Sens, Ivo epist. 166^
for the absolution of King Philip the first, from the excommunication which
was darted out against him by the Pope, by reason of his unlawful marriage,
he gives him notice, that he might have done better, to have proceeded to
that absolution in another place then Sens, that so every one might have had
means to speak his opinion freely.

The Roman Clergy only called to the Council.
23 The Doctors of the Canon law do all agree, that an exception against the
safety of the place is pertinent, and ought to be admitted^ that it is good
both by the Civil law, and the law of nature, that a man summoned to a place
where any danger threatens him, is not bound to appear, nor to send his
proctour; and that a judge is bound to assign the parties a place of safety
for the hearing of their cause, Doctores in Clement. Pastoral^^ de sententia
and rejudicata. Oldrad. Cons. 43. Calderinus Cons. 5. Abbas, and Moderni in
cap. veniens de accusat. Marian. Socin. in rubric. de dilat art^ 15. q. 5.
Gloss. in cap. cum locum. Extra. De sponsal. and matrimonio.
otherwise there is just cause of appeal.

CHAP. VIII. That all those who ought to have had a decisive or deliberative
voice in the Council, were not called.
1 COmplaint is made also, that all those who ought to have had a consultative
or deliberative voice in the Council, were not called thereunto. Paul the
third by his Bull, dated in May 1542, and Pius the fourth by his in November
1560, call none to that Council to deliver their opinions, but Cardinals,
Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, and Generals of Orders. They do not
mention in express terms either the first or the last of these, but yet they
are comprehended under those words, All others whosoever, which are restrained
to them alone. For this sense the Popes expositors put upon them, and this is
the form which is received in the Church of Rome; witness Bellarmine,
Bellarmin. lib. 1. de Conciliis. Johannes de Turrecremata lib. 3. cap. 12. ^^
15.
and those whom he urges. Nor was there any but those who had voices in the
Chapter of the Council. All the petty Ecclesiastiques had nothing else to do
there, but to pick their fingers, or to pen neat speeches of such matters as
were there treated of. But for decrees, those lettice were not for their lips.
All this is confessed by the Doctors themselves; yea, and defended too. The
Popes whom I named, exhort those whom they call thither, that they should not
fail to come there; yea, they straightly injoyne them by virtue of that oath
which they have taken to them, and to the Holy See; which cannot be referred
neither to Protestants^ nor any other that have drawn back from their
obedience to him, nor yet to Lay men howsoever obedient.

2 Hence two complaints arise; one, that the Ecclesiastiques of the Protestants
side, being they could not have a deliberative voice there, had nothing to do
to go thither. The other, that the Laiques of both religions^ have ground of
complaint, being excluded from this judgment. As for the first^ when any
controversy arose, diverse courses have been taken to compose the differences
in religion: Sometimes the Emperors have appointed judges, before whom both
parties came and discussed their opinions freely. Ph^tinus Bishop of Smyrna,
being accused for a heretic by the Council there, was afterward admitted to
dispute with the Catholic Bishops, Sozomen. lib. 4. ^. ^.
In which dispute (says Sozomen) certain judges were ordained for presidents
of the Council, who from that time forwards, were accounted men of prime rank
in the Palace, both for knowledge and dignity, After many objections and
answers pro and con; Basil, Bishop of Ancyra, who defended the doctrine of the
Catholics, got the victory; and Photinus was condemned and sent into
banishment. Lay men admitted to Councels in the Primitive times.
At the general Council of Chalcedon, which consisted of six hundred Bishops,
there were diverse officers of the Emperors Valentinian and Marcian; and a
good number of Senators that came to preside there; yea, and to judge of all
differences and controversies, Vid. Acta Concilii Chalced. tom. 1. Conciliorum.
even such as concerned faith and religion^ who behaved themselves so, that in
some points they swayed that great company of Bishops by their advice. As we
have observed more particularly in the title of the presidency in Councels.
Honorius the Emperor, to lay the quarrels that were in his time between the
Catholics and the Donatists in Africa, Vid. Acta Collationis Carthagini
habitae^
called them all together at Carthage, and deputed Marcellinus, one of his
officers to be judge; who after he had heard all along the reasons on both
sides, pronounced the sentence of condemnation against the Donatists. Wherein
he says amongst other things;

3 To the end that apparent error may undergo the yoke of revealed truth,
Vid. Acta ejusdem Collationis circa finem.
by the authority of this present Edict I advise all men of what condition
soever, landlords, stewards, and farmers, as well which hold of the Crown, as
of private possessions, with the Ancients in all places, that, not forgetting
the laws, their own dignity, honor and safeguard, they do their endeavor to
hinder all Conventicles of the Donatists, in all towns whatsoever; who shall
be bound to surrender up to the Catholics those Churches which I allowed them
of courtesy until the day of sentence, without commission from the Emperor.

4 Possidius, Possidius in vita D. August.
that writ the life of St. Austin, reports as much in plain terms. This
happened mainly (says he) by occasion of the conference which was at Carthage
between all the Catholic Bishops and the Donatists, by the command of the
Emperor Honorius, who sent Marcellinus the Tribune into Africa to be judge in
that collation. In which controversy the Donatists, being thoroughly confuted
and convinced of error by the Catholics, were condemned by the sentence of
the judge. He adds moreover, that they appealed from that sentence to the
Emperor, and that they were afterward condemned by him, and declared
heretics.

5 Pope Miltiades also with some other Bishops, August. ep. 162^
had passed sentence in that cause, but the Donatists being not well content
with his judgment, the Emperor remitted them afterward to the Bishop of
Arles, as St. Austin relates. That which Cardinal Iacobatius, a stickler for
the Popes authority, says, is very remarkable, that laymen were sometimes
admitted to Councels, to be judges betwixt those that canvassed some deep
point. Iacobatius lib. 2. de Concili^ art. 6.
Hereupon (says he) in a Synod holden in a Council before Constantine and
Helena, where it was disputed, whether the Jewish law or the Christian should
be preferred, Craton the Phil^sopher who would not possess any worldly goods,
and Zenosimus who never received present from any one in the time of his
Consulship, were appointed for judges. With which does accord (to speak it by
the way, but not much from the purpose) that saying of Gerson the learned
Chancelour of Paris. There was a time, when without any rashness or prejudice
to faith, the controversies of faith were referred to the judgment of Pagan
Philosophers, who presupposing the faith of Christ to be such as it was
confessed to be, however they did not believe it, yet they knew what would
follow by evident and necessary consequence from it, and what was repugnant to
it. Thus it was in the Council of Nice, as is left unto us upon record. So
likewise Eutropius a Pagan Philosopher was chosen judge betwixt Origin and the
Marcionites, who were condemned by him.

6 When any upstart opinion or heresy was broached, Origin in dialogo contra
M^^c^o^itas^
the manner was to proceed against them, by assembling Councels against the
authors of them; whom they condemned, together with their heresies; which they
were forced either to abjure, or to suffer banishments and other punishments.
Hereof we have examples in store, so well known that we need not set them down.

The f^^e disput^s in former ^ouncels.
7 Sometime they had free Councels, unto which it was lawful for the Bishops of
both sides to resort, dispute, and deliver their opinions. We have some
examples hereof, which would suit very well with these times, and which we
ought to imitate. The two Emperors, Constans and Constantius, the one a
Catholic, the other an Arrian; V Theodoret. l 2 c. 8.

Et Socr^tem l. 2 c 29.


the one of the East, the other of the West, to decide the controversies in
religion, agreed together to call a free and general Council at Sardis;
whither all the Bishops of both parties might have means to repair with all
safety. Which was done accordingly. Socrates lib. 1. cap. 16.
Then was there a general Council appointed (says Socrates) and ordained
that all should repair to Sardis, a City of Illyrium; which was done by the
joint consent and agreement of the Emperors; the one having required so much
by his letters, and the other of the East having willingly embraced the motion.
By the consent of both Emperors (says Sozomen) it was ordained that the
Bishops of either part should meet at Sardis, Sozomen. l. 3. cap. 10.
a City of Illyrium upon the day appointed.

8 The Council of Ariminum, consisting of above four hundred Bishops, almost
all of the West, and that of Seleucia of above an hundred and six Eastern, both
holden about the same time, were of the same nature with this. For all the
Bishops, both Catholic and Arrian, were without distinction admitted thither,
both to dispute and to determine. The Bishops in those days were not sworn to
the Pope; nor did he take upon him to call them, but the Emperors, who
summoned such as they thought good. This manner of calling Councels with all
freedom, is then mainly required when the number of believers on both sides is
great, when the complaints are formal, and when there are some ancient
opinions defended by whole Provinces and Nations. When the case stands thus, it
is no proceeding by censures and condemnations, the one side against the other;
when all comes to all, there is nothing got by that. But then they must take a
fair way; come to conferences, treaties of agreement and arbitration. This
course was taken with the Greek Church in the time of the Council of Ferrara.
Vide Acta Concilii generalis Ferrariensis five Florentini. tom. 3. Council.
Session 3. (...) in Concilio Lateran.

Vid. Concorda^a inter Francisc. 1. and Leonem 10.

Cap ad Apostolica. De sententia et re judicata in 6.


The Greek Bishops were seated amongst the Latins; they conferred together;
they disputed and gave up their opinions without any advantage the one over the
other, either for judgment or number; and the issue was so happy, that in the
end they came to an accord. The Popes for a long time branded all the French
for Heretics, by reason of that poor Pragmatique Sanction, which has been
as much vexed by the Popes since, as ever was Psyche in Apuleius by offended
Venus. Yet in the upshot they are come to those terms of accord, and articles
of agreement under which we live at this instant.

9 Innocent the fourth after he had excommunicated the Emperor Frederick, he
and all his Council make this profer to him, (in case the Emperor did
complain of injustice) to refer the matter to the Kings, Prelates^ and
Princes spiritual and temporal, assembled about it in a place of safety. Why
is not the like put in practice now adays toward those which complain of
this Council, and are ready to defend their cause, and justify their right?

10 This calm way has been sometimes attempted in Germany, not altogether
without success. It has been also practiced in France, when the conference
was at Poissy; yea and that with such success, that the grand controversy
touching the real presence in the Eucharist, so much canvassed amongst us now
adays, was there composed by the twelve deputies, in spite of all the
opposition made by those that envy the quiet of France. And what great matter
were it to try that way yet once again by general or particular conferences?
We must of necessity be driven to one of the two means formerly proposed; to
wit, either that Christian Princes appoint certain Judges, some Clergy men,
some Lay men, an equal number of both religions; or that there be a friendly
meeting about it, where they may continue victorious right or wrong, (as most
do now adays) but with a holy desire to live from thenceforth in peace, Lay
men ^ot^^ly excluded f^o^ this Cou^^^ll.
or stop the veins that have shed so much blood. For to have recourse to the
rigor of the formalities and caltrops of the Council of Trent, is but for men
to cosen themselves: the event has proved the design to be naught. This
Council instead of appeasing the troubles did excite them; and invenomed those
minds which were exulcerated before. In stead of settling the repose and unity
of the Church, it raised wars in Germany, the Low Countries, and in our
France, not only during the time of the sitting, but afterward: and this is
the reason why King Charles did earnestly solicit the Fathers there by his
Ambassadors to the embracing of peace. Mark what the Cardinal of Lorrain
says to them about it, in his learned Oration.

11 The most Christian King, although he be thoroughly persuaded of all these
things, and expect nothing from us which may make against them: yet there are
two things whereof he puts you in mind, out of the good will he bears toward
the Synod, and the great vexation he endures by reason of these differences in
Religion. First, that as much as we can we avoid all new controversies, that
we lay aside all uncouth and impertinent questions, that we bend all our
forces as much as we may, to effect that Princes and Provinces would give over
their wars. We must be far from any desire of stirring up wars, that so
they who have departed from us, and are cut off from the Church of God, may not
think that this assembly was rather to raise up Princes in arms, and to enter
leagues and confederacies, though for a holy war, than to procure a general
reconciliation of the minds of all men. The other maine point of my ambassage^
is, that which from the beginning was common to my master the most Christian
King, with the most Illustrious the Emperor, and all other Kings and Princes
who have their right honorable Ambassadors here present, is that you would in
good earnest take order for the reformation of manners^ and of the
Ecclesiastical discipline.

12 This demand so affectionate, was never made but upon some ground. So then,
there is good reason why this Council should be suspected; and why the form
which was observed in the judgment and decision of matters should be excepted
against. For what has been said touching the Pope, does equally concern the
Bishops, who were summoned to a reformation as well as he. That passage which
we have now cited, is a sufficient proof thereof, so that we need not produce
any more. Consider the parties, the demands are mutual, the actions double;
the Pope complains that the yoke of his obedience is cast off, and impeacheth
them of heresy that did it; so do the Bishops. The Protestants accuse him of
tyranny, usurpation, and error; them of many vices and disorders: and both
together of false doctrine: Who shall be judge herein? Surely neither the
accusers, nor they that are accused; and the more they busy themselves to have
the cognizance of it, the more suspected and refusable they make themselves.

13 So then recourse must be had to that friendly way which we mentioned
before; where if there be any proposal of using the extremity of justice, it
is necessarily requisite the Laymen have a hand in it; else what for passion,
what for fury, it is impossible to see any good end of it. Hence it is that
they complain of the Pope for excluding them out of the Council. It is a
thing which he could not do of right, and that chiefly for two reasons. One,
because that when it was first spoken of in the Diet at Noremberg, all the
States of Germany desired of Pope Adrian the sixth, that admittance might be
granted as well to Lay men as Clergy men, and that not only as witnesses and
spectators, but to be Judges there. Vid. Fasciculu^ rerum expetend^^um.
And that it may be lawful (say they) for every one as well of the Laity as of
the Clergy, that assist in the Council, to speak freely, notwithstanding all
oaths and obligations whatsoever^ and to provide for the glory of God the
salvation of souls, and the safety of the Christian Commonwealth, without any
hindrance. The next reason, because from all antiquity Lay men have had their
place in Councels, ^^y men may b^ ^dmitted in C^unc^ls.
not only to deliberate, but to determine also. This is evident from the
testimony of holy Scripture. A^t. 6.2.
St. Luke says, The multitude of the Disciples were called together to make an
election into the ministry. It has no color to say, that among all those
Disciples there were no ^ay men. In the Council which was called about
Circumcision, mention is made not only of the Apostles, Act. 15.23.
but of the Elders of the Church, and of the brethren.

14 Bellarmin grants this to be true, (for he cannot deny it;) but he says
withal, Bellarmin. l. 1. de Conciliis c. 16.
that some were there to judge, as the Bishops; some to consult, as the
Priests; and some to consent, as the rest of the multitude. But if he were
sworn to tell us who taught him this, he would be mightily puzzled to find his
author, unless it be happily some smattering divine of these latter days. But
such authorities are of no price: and if it were lawful to rove in this sort,
in the exposition of holy Scriptures, and to apply our own idle fancies unto
them, there would be no certainty in them. He says, That the form observed in
other Councels holden after the Apostles times, may make us believe that it is
so. But what Councels are there which he urges us with, seeing we find
nothing of any form that was observed till Co^stantines time? That of Nice, V.
Acta Concilii Ni^^ni. and Ruffin. l 1.
which was holden under that Emperor, makes wholly for us; for there Lay men
were admitted, and did dispute and debate controve^sies. I conf^sse it does not
appear whether they gave voices or no. The Apostle in another place uses this
form of speech; It pleased the Apostles and Elders with the whole Church; Act.
^5.^2.
which is the very Sacramental word that was afterward retained in giving of
voices in Councels, as is plain from their acts: and even till this hour, all
the speech which our Fathers nowadayes make at the delivering of their opinion,
is no more but pronouncing this word pla^et, with a good grace, and a low nod.

15 Those examples which we before alleged, concerning the deputation of
judges, do plainly prove that Lay men may judge of Ecclesiastical matters;
Cap. 32. Tom. 1. Act. Council. Ephefini. Eusebius de vita Constantini lib. 4. c.
42. Act. Council. Ephesians. tom. 1. cap. 12.
yea, and that they have assisted at Councels in the nature of Judges. I
confess, that sometimes their commission was limited, and that they were sent
only to be auditors, to see that there were no disorder, and to look to the
carriage of all things: To cause the Fathers to deliberate upon such points a^
were proposed, and to keep every man in order. So Dionysius som^times Consul,
at the Council of Trent, ^and Candidianus at that of Ephesus. But that which
we said must be likewise granted, it was a matter which depended upon the
Emperors, to allow what power they thought good, unto those that supplied
their place of presidency; as also it belonged to them to call Councels, and to
admit or exclude whom they pleased.

16 And as for themselves, they behaved themselves herein several ways: For
sometimes they contented themselves with a honorary presidency, without
intermedling so far as to dispute, consult, or decide. Others there were who
executed the office and function of judges. In this manner Constantine the
Great assisted at the Council of Nice. V Act^ Conc. Nicani cap. 8.
Which may be proved from hence, that certain Bishops putting up bills of
complaints, and mutually accusing one another, they preferred their libels and
petitions to him, to have justice of him: which though he indeed refused to
do, yet another man has done: What he said or did in this case, was out of
modesty; as also diverse other things, which nevertheless were otherwise
wr^sted, to the prejudice of them who were too full of their courtesie^. He
desired to be amongst them in the rank of a Bishop; for mark how he writes,
after the breaking up of the Council, to some Bishops that were absent,
Theodore^ (...) ^. ^. p. 10.
I assisted there as one of you, and I will never deny (for it is a thing I
much joy in) that I joined my self with you in that ministry. The ^re^^
Father restrained of their lib^rty.
Therefore he was one of the judges, else he should have been less than the
Bishops. It was he also that passed the last decretory sentence, from whence
there lay no appeal, upon the Donatists, after they had been formerly condemned
by the Pope and the Council of Arles. Another Constantine was president of the
sixth general Council at Constantinople, Vid. Acta Concilii Cons^antinop 6.
tom. 2. Conc.
with a good number of his officers assisting; and the acts of the Council
make it plain, that he was not a mere honorary president, but that the whole
action was guided by him; that he pronounced the sentence an^ gave judgment:
and in sum, did all that belongs to an Ecclesiastical president to do.

17 Charles the Great, did the like in the Council of Francford; Vid. Acta
Council. Franc^ord. in libello sacro. syllabo. tom 3. Council. page 6^5 H^c
dec^eta extant MS. in vet. Bibliothecu.
where he discoursed of points of faith, and made them deliver their opinions
upon such as himself proposed. The Canons and Decrees run also in his name,
The Emperor (says he) has ordained, with the consent of the Synod, etc.

18 The name of Charles the Great, puts us in mind of inserting some of our
French Synods in this place, which we find oftentimes to have consisted both
of Lay men and Clergy men, jointly to determine of matters, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil.

19 In the year 742, in the reign of Childeric, Carloman Duke and Prince of
the French, V. Synodum Francicam tom. 2. Con p. 456.
called a Synod in France, where he had some Bishops, some Priests, and some
Lay Princes of the Realm; by whose advise and counsel he made certain
Ecclesiastical constitutions; By the advice of the Churchmen, and the Princes
of this Realm, we have ordained, decreed, etc. See how he speaks in the
Decrees of that Council.

20 The year 744, under the same Childeric, Pepin a French Duke and Prince
called another Synod at Soissons, consisting of Churchmen, and some chief Lay
men of the Realm; with whom he enacted some Ecclesiastical laws. V. Synod.
Suession. tom. 3. Council. p. 438.
Wherefore with the consent of the Bishops, Priests, and servants of God, and
the advice of the chief of the Kingdom, we have decreed to renew the Synod
every year, etc. Againe^ We have constituted and ordained by the Council of
the Clergy men, and the chief men of the Realm aforesaid. See you in what
style the decrees of that Council were conceived.

21 The year 787, the Emperor Charles the Great, being departed from Rome to
come into France. As soon as he was arrived at Worms, Rhegno sub an. 787.
(says Rhegno) he called a Synod, and declared the reasons of his journey to
the Clergy and Princes of his Realm.

22 The Council of Meaux, under Charles the second, 845, mentions some former
Councels, that consisted of Clergy and Lay men. Council. Meldense. tom. 3. Conc.
p. 866.
Another was holden (says it) at his return, and confirmed under the proper
seal of the Prince, and all the rest both Clergy men and Lay. And in another
place, They ordained first of all to settle something that had been formerly
decreed by the same Prince, together with the Lords spiritual and temporal.

23 The Council holden at Pistis upon Seyn, the year 863 was of the same
nature with these^ as we may perceive by the beginning of it. Synodus Pistis
in Princ tom. 3. Conc. p. 900.
In the name of the Holy and indivisible Trinity, Charles by the grace of God,
King of France, together with the Bishops, Abbats, Earls, and the rest of the
faithful regenerate in Christ, gathered together from diverse Provinces, at a
place called Pistis upon the river Seyn, in the year of our Lord 863, the 23
year of the reign of our Sovereign Lord King Charles, indiction the tenth. The
Kings and Bishops assembled before us^ being guided by the fear and love of
God, have made diverse constitutions and decrees, with the Counsel and consent
of the rest of the faithful people of God. And in the second chapter; For the
putting of which things more particularly in execution, we have thought fit
here to renew some amongst many, of the constitutions and decrees of our
predecessors, and the ancient Councels. It follows afterward chapter the
third, We have constituted and ordained by common advise, etc. Lay men have
assi^t^d at Counc^ll in Fr^nce.


24 The Council of Tribur was nearly of the same kind; for there were diverse
Laymen there with King Arnulph, who was President in it. He came (says the
Preface to it) into the royal City of Tribur in France, Vide Council.
Tribu^iense in princ. and in fine tom. 4. Council. pa. 26.
with the Bishops underwritten, the Abbats, and all the Peers of his Realm,
and there flocked thither both Clergy and Laymen, in great troops. And at the
end, This holy subscription was confirmed and fairly approved by the reverend
profession, and worthy answers of the Priests, Deacons, and Lay Nobility. This
Council contains eight and fifty Chapters concerning manners and
Ecclesiastical discipline.

Rigordus de gestis Philippi Augusti sub anno 1179.
25 Philip Augustus intending to declare his son Philip his successor in the
Realm, called a general Council at Paris, of all the Archbishops, Bishops,
Abbats, together with the Princes and Lords of his Kingdom, that they might
herein pitch upon a resolution according to his desire. And it is observable,
that in these Councels they treated of all things both spiritual and
temporal. Whence that appears to be true which a learned Frenchman has
written long ago, M. ^ean du Tillet greffier en ses memoires. V. Capitulare
Caroli Magni lib. 2. ca. 24. and 25.
That anciently the affairs of France were managed by the Clergy and Lay men
jointly. Which is yet practiced by the General and Provincial States, as also
in the Courts of Parliament consisting of Counselors both Ecclesiastical and
Civil. There was a Council holden at Soissons in the same Kings reign by the
Legates of Pope Innocent the third. Rigordus de gestis Philippi Augusti sub anno
1200.
In this Council (says an ancient Historian) King Philip was assistant, with
the Archbishops, Bishops, and chief Lords of the Realm, where the point of
the divorce or confirmation of the Kings marriage with Iugerberga was discussed.

Idem Rigordus.
26 The Patriarch of Jerusalem being arrived in France in 1184. with the Priour
of the Hospital of Outremer, and the Grand Master of the Templars, to demand
succor of King Philip Augustus against the Saracens, He sent out his Mandamus
to call a General Council of all the Archbishops, Bishops, and Princes of his
Realm (says the same Historian) which was holden in the City of Paris.

27 The Council of Vezelay which was called by Jews the Young, son to Jews
the Gross, Pope Eugenius the third being then in France, was of the same
composition. Which thing being certified to Jews the Young, son to Jews the
Gross, (says Iean le Maire en la 2 party de la division des schisms.
John le Maire) he was much grieved thereat; and for remedy thereof he caused
a Council to be assembled at Vezelay in Burgundy, consisting of all the
Prelates and Princes of France, and ordained that St. Bernard Abbat of
Clervaux, should represent unto them viva voce, all the mischief that was
befalne in the Holy Land.

28 The like was done in the Council of Paris, which Philip the Fair called
against Boniface the eighth. After this the same King (says a Martinus
Polonus, ^ive additio adeum. Postea idem Rex^ convocatis Praelatis, Baronibus
^c Comit^ regni Parisiis ^oncilium celebravit: petens ^oncilium e^ auxilium
contra Papam praedictum.
Chronicler) having called together the Prelates, Barons, and Lords of the
Realm, held a Council at Paris, where he demanded aid and advice against the
said Pope. And M. Iean Bouchet en la 4 party des annals d^ Aquitaine. Platina
in Bonifa^io 8.

V. Pragmat. Sanctionem in principio et in fine.

Vide hunc appellationis libellum in fasci^ulo rerum expe^endarum.

I^an de Maire en la 2 party de la di^^ere^ce des s^hism.


John Bouchet in his Annals of Aquitain, And immediately after he caused a
Council of Prelates and Barons to be assembled at Paris, in which Council
King Philip was appellant.

29 The Pragmatique Sanction of King Charles the seventh, was made in a Synod
assembled at Bourges, consisting of Archbishops, Bishops, Chapters, Abbats,
Deanes, Provosts, and other Ecclesiastical persons, together with Doctors of
Law both divine and humane, and other learned men of the Realm, and also of
the chief Lords of France, and others of the Kings Council, about the
receiving of the Councels of Constance and Basil. I say Synod, for so it is
called in the act of Appeal of the University of Paris. A while after King
Jews the eleventh assembled a Council of the Gallicane Church, and all the
Universities in the City of Orleans, as well to understand the purport of the
Pragmatique Sanction, as to give direction for the annates of benefices, says
the Author before alleged. Before we leave France, Lay men admit^ed to
Council in England and Sp^ine.
we will set down what an English Historian says of the Council of Rhemes
hol^en by Pope Eugenius the third, ^^4^. About that time (says he) Eugenius
Pope of Rome coming into France, out of the affection he bore to
Ecclesiastical discipline, set up a general Council a^ Rhemes: Neubrigen^is
l. 1. ^. 19.
where he sitting with a great company of Bishops and Nobles, there was a
pestilent fellow brought before him, who being possessed with a devil, had
seduced a great many by his tricks and juglings.

30 Spain can furnish us also with such like examples; and assure u^ that,
when it pleased their Kings, even Lay men were admitted into their Councels, to
have a deliberative voice there, and to judge of matters.

31 This may be collected from the sixth Council of Toledo, Council. Tole^. 6.
Tom. 3. Council. page 83.
holden under King Chiutillaud, and by his authority, the year 654. where in
the thir^ chapter we read thus: Wherefore we decree and denounce with heart
and mouth this sentence pleasing to God, and conformable to our Kings, and do
furthermore ordain with the consent and advice of the Grandes and honorable
persons of his Kingdom, etc. To the same effect we find the eighth Council
of Toledo, Council. Tolet. ^: Tom. 3. Council. p. 184.
holden under King Recessuinth, and by his command, subscribed with the signs
of fifteen of his Officers. King Eringus caused diverse of his Lords and
officers of the Court to assist at the twelfth Council of Toledo, holden in
the year 681^ and ordained them for Judges, together with the Bishops, to
consult of such things as should be handled there: to all whom he made this
exhortation at the opening of the Council. Council. Tolet. 1^ versus princip.
Tom. 3. Concil^ page 374.
I do admonish and conjure you in commune, both you holy fathers, and you
right honorable of my royal Court, whom we have chosen to assist in this holy
Council, by the name of God, and as you will answer at the dreadful day of
judgment, that without all favor or acceptance of persons, without any
froward wrangling, or ^esire of perverting the truth, you treat of such matters
as shall be pro^osed unto you with a sound examination, and that you express
them with a more sound judgment. His subscription to the Acts of that Council
have these words. Great good will accrue to our Realm and people, if these
decrees of the Acts of the Synod, as they were made by our procurement, so they
be confirmed by the oracle of our lasting law. To the end that what the
reverend Fathers and Lords have ordained by virtue of our command, may be
defende^ by our Edict. All his Courtiers and Officers are subsigned to the Acts
of that Council.

32 The same form was observed in England: Math. Westmonast l 1. sub an. 905.
for in the year 905. King Edward, and Plegmond Archbishop of Canterbury,
assembled a great Council of Bishops, Abbats, and other faithful people in
the southern parts of England^ says Matthew Westminster.

33 In the year 1150. King Stephen having done what he would at York,
Neubrigens. lib. 1. cap. ult.
and the adjoining shires, returned toward the southern parts about the feast
of Saint Michael the Archangell, to keep a Council at London, together with
the Bishops and Nobles of England, both for the affairs of the Kingdom, and
of the Church of York, which was then vacant.

34 The year 1170. at the request of the King of England, two Cardinals,
Neubrigens. lib. 2. cap. 2^.
Albert and Theodinus, were sent into France from the Sea Apostolic, who
having called a great assembly of Ecclesiastical persons and Noblemen within
the territories of the King of England, they solemnly admitted him to purge
himself of the murder of Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury.

35 In the year 1190. the Bishop of Ely, Chancelour of England, Idem Neubrig^
l. 1. cap. 14.
and Lieutenant general of the Realm, in the absence of King Richard the
second, who was then at the war, in the Holy Land, called the Bishops and
Lords of the Kingdom together. And presenting them upon the sudden with the
in^strument of his Legation, he openly declared himself with a great deal of
pomp and insolency to be Legate o^ the Sea Apostolic. ^o^^ L^y men have and
may be admitted to Councels.


36 Come we back to the Emperors; there we have the example of Oth^ the
first, who made up the Council which he held at Rome for the condemnation of
Pope John, of Ecclesiastiques and Lay men. Of which rank these are named by
Luitprandus. Luitprandus rerum per Europam gestarum lib. 6. cap. 6. 10. 11.
Of the Nobles, Stephanus filius, Johannes superista, Demetrius Meliosi,
Crescentius Caballi marmorei, Johannes Puisina, Stephanus de Musa, Theodorus de
Rusina, Johannes de Primicerio, Leo de Camurzuli, Ricardus, Petrus de
Canaperia, Benedictus, and Bulgaminus his son: Of the communalty, Peter
Imperiola, with all the Roman army. And afterward by their unanimous advice,
the Emperor pronounced the sentence of condemnation against John, and created
Leo in his stead by the same advice.

Martinu^ Polonu^ in Henr. 3. sub anno 1058.
37 We have also the example of Henry the third, Who (says Polanus) having
called a Council at Worms, consisting of four and twenty Bishops, and many of
the Nobility, he there commanded the decrees of Pope Gregory to be disanulled.

Vetu^ author qui scripsit de investituris apud Theodoricum a Nihem in tract.
de privileg. and ^urib^s Imperat. page 785.
38 We may further allege the example of Popes. For Adrian did summon many Lay
men to the Lateran Council holden by him and Charles the great, what time he
caused him to be proclaimed Emperor. There was a holy Synod called (says a
good Author) by Pope Adrian of happy memory, at the Palace of Lateran, in the
Church of St. Savior, which was most solemnly kept by fifty three
Ecclesiastical persons, Bishops or Abbats, together with ^udges, Magistrates,
and Doctors of Law, from all parts, and also person^ of all states and
conditions of that City, and all the Clergy of the holy Church of Rome. Who
made enquiry concerning the customs, laws, and manners of that Church and
Empire: consulting also by what means heresies and seditions might be rooted
o^t of the Apostolic See; and treating of the dignity of the Senate and
Empire of Rome; seeing that by reason of these things a foul error was spread
over the whole world.

^dem author.
39 In imitation of him Pope Leo did the like in another Council at the
Lateran, under the Emperor Otho the first. For as much as your ^umility (says
he) does humbly desire our Apostleship that dispatching the holy Synod
assembled by your advice at the Patriarchall of the Late^an, in the Church of
St. Savior, and consisting besides of Judges and Doctors of law, we would
declare how we may live in peace and quiet.

40 I am not ignorant that many examples may be urged to the contrary^ and
that in many Councels there were no Laymen at all, at least for ought we know.
I grant it; but I would have it acknowledged withal that they might have been
there, and that it belongs to Princes to admit Laymen when they think good;
as Marsilius of Padua holds, and we shall prove hereafter. Neither will I
maintain that it is necessary they should always be admitted, but only upon
great occasions, about some weighty matters, and in case of urgent necessity.
When we speak of Laymen, we mean only the learned, not the ignorant; for as
for these, whether Lay or Clergy, they are good for nothing but to make up the
tale, and therefore have nothing to do to go there; this is the opinion of
Cardinal Cusanus. Nicol. C^sanus lib. 2. de concor. ^athol. ^ap. 16.
There (says he) where the sentence of definition go^s by plurality of voices,
and not by consent and unanimity, it is good reason that discretion, wisdom,
and authority should be considered, that the judgment of fools, who are ever
the greater number, may not overb^are the opinions of the wiser sort. So then,
we maintain that the learned ought to be admitted, by a reason which is
backed with authority; and that is, beca^se what concerns faith is a common
case to Laymen as well as Clergy^ and therefore when there is any controversy
about it, every man ought to deliver his opinion. Nico^a^^ in epist ad
Mi^^ae^em Imper.
Pope Nicholas has said as much in downright terms. Faith (says he) is
catholic and commune to all, it belongs as well to Laymen as Priests. Yea to
a^^ Christians. He speaks expressly of Laymens assisting at Councels, For
what end Lay men may be admitted.
whom he would have admitted when controversies of faith are handled.

41 Let us apply this to our Council of Trent. There were deep points of
faith handled in many Articles of it, therefore the laymen should have been
called, and admitted, and have delivered their opinions.

42 Bellarmine shifts it off after his way, Bella^m. lib. 1. de Council. c^. ^^
when he limits the admittance of Laymen to Councels (spoken of by Pope
Nicholas) to these ends, only that they may see and hear what passes, but
not judge. This gloss corrupts the text, which speaks without distinction:
besides the cause being the same both in re^pect of Clergymen and Lay, the
effect should likewise be the same.

43 The second reason is the abuses which have been committed by these many
ages, in the disposal of Bishoprics and benefices, whence the number of the
learned Clergy has been more impared, than it were to be wished it had, and
is so at this day. Marsilius de Padua in desens. pac. part. 2. cap. 20.
Mark what Marsilius of Padua said of it above three hundred years ago;
Nowadayes (says he) by reason of the corrupt^on which is crept into the
regim^nt of the Church, the greater part of Priests and Bishops are but meanly
skilled in holy Scripture: and (if I may lawfully say so) this insufficiency
comes by reason that some ambitious and covetous persons, and Lawyers, will
needs purchase the temporal means of Church livings; and do so, either by
their services, entreaties, money or temporal power. And God is my witness,
and the number of the faithful, that I remember, and have seen many Priests,
Abbats, and Ecclesiastical Prelates, so poorly learned that they were ^ot able
so much as to speak true Latin. Hence it follows, that Lay men should be
admitted into Councels, considering withal that it was anciently accustomed.
At the most noted Councels (says he) the Emperors and Empresses assisted with
their officers, for the resolving of Scripture doubts, as appears by Isidores
Code: although there was no such necessity of calling in Lay men in those
days, as there is now, by reason of the great number of Priests and Bishops
which are ignorant of Gods Law.

44 I do not urge all these passages to offend the Ecclesiastical order, nor
many learned Prelates now alive, whom I much reverence for their learning and
worth; but only as suiting with the subject I have in hand. I am certain they
will in heart confess what I say to be true, That at this present there are
some Ecclesiastiques which have voices in Councels, that are incapable of that
privilege: And on the other side, there have been, and yet are, some Lay men
of all sorts, well skilled in Divinity, however they make no profession of it.
Being then in the danger we are, the fire being kindled through all parts of
Christendom, by reason of religion; the Turks pressing so hard upon us, that
if God be not merciful to us, our slavery is not far off: Is it not reason
to confer about these differences, with all sorts of people, to the end that
some remedy may be found out for them? There was a poor ignoramus that pu^led
a great Philosopher at the Council of Nice; Vide A^^a Concilii Nicaeni.
possible the like may befall us. The opinion of one godly man ought to be
preferred before the Popes, if it be grounded upon better authorities of the
Old and New Testament, says the Pa^ormitan Abbat. Panormit. ^n cap
Signi^ic^st^ de Elect.
Every learned man may and ought to withstand a whole Coun^ell, if he perceive
it erres of malice or ignorance, says Mr. John Gerson. But where, and how, I
pray you, if not in a Council? Or, to speak more properly, where can they do
it more fitly than in such an assembly? and how should they do it there if
they be not admitted?

45 It will be replied, that they may be allowed to come there, but only to
consult: and so they will expound most places out of Couuncels and ancient
authors. For example, that which Socrat. lib. 1. Eccles. hist. ca. ^
Socrates says of the Council of Nice; There were present (says he) many
very learned Lay men, and well skilled in disputations: that which was ordained
at the Council of Council. Tolet. 4. tom. 3. concil^ pag^ 65^
Toledo, concerning the assistance of Lay men at Councels: L^^ m^n admitted at
Constance and Pisa.
that which we find recorded of the sixth general Council at Council gener. 6
Constantinople, and of the Constable. et Conc. generale 7. Nicaenum tom. 3. Council
page 234 and 452.
seventh general, which was the second Nicene Council, at both which, in all
of their Sessions, diverse Senators and officers of the Emperor did assist:
that which Guilielm. Du^ant. in trans. de Council.
Durand Bishop of Mande says in his treatise of Councels: that which the Abbat
of Panormo, in his allegations for the Council of Basil: In tract. de potest.
Papa lib. 3. c. 12.

Et in Conc. gen^ralia did. 13. q. 4.


Cardinal Turrecremata, and Cardinal Cardinalis Iacobatius lib. 2. de Council.
Art. 6.
Iacobatius, who admittes them in diverse cases, and amongst others in this
very case whereof we speak. Yet for all that, I cannot see what they can
answer to Marsilius part. 2. cap. 20. in def pac.
Marsilius of Padua, who allows Lay men to be judges in Councels; for he would
have all countries in the world, and famous commonwealths, following the
ordination of their humane lawgiver, to elect out of faithful men, first of
Priests, next of others, provided they be fit men of an honest life and well
versed in Gods Laws. And as for the places before alleged, let them say what
they will, it is plain enough in most of them, that Lay men were admitted into
Councels to give voices, and be partners in the judgment.

46 But be it granted that they ought not to be received, but only as
councillors; yet still there will be a grievance here, seeing they were never
admitted nor summoned thither in that kind. There were only three Doctors of
the Civil and Canon Laws, (says Onuphrius) that were indeed called thither:
or, to speak more properly, sent thither. But what to do? to be slaves and
servants to the Lords of the Council. Mark what service Bellarmine deputes
them to. Onuphriu^ in Pio 4.

Bellarm. lib. 1. de council. ca. 15


Of Laymen (says he) some few shall be called thither as shall seem
serviceable and necessary for some office in the Council. That is, in plain
English, the Pope will send some such as he means to serve himself of, so as
the gate is shut against all others: and such, says Bellarmine, was the
practice of the Council of Trent. We desired to hear thus much from him^ that
our complaint might have the surer ground. This was not the form of that
famous Council of Constance, Vide chronicum Pauli Langii anno 1417.

Et Pietro Messia en la vita de Sigismondo.


where were present men of great eminency of all countries and conditions:
those that have left us the description of it, say there were twenty four
Dukes, a hundred and forty Earls, diverse Delegates for Cities and
Corporations, diverse learned Lawyers, diverse Burgesses of Universities. And it
may easily be gathered from the Acts of that Council, that the Laiques were
not debarred from giving of voices, and power of deliberating.

47 At the first Council of Pisa, there were the delegates of Universities,
the Proctors of Cities, and some Doctors in law, to the number of four
hundred. Apologia concilii 2. Pisani Impressa Mediolani per Gotardum Ponticum
^nno 1512.

Vide Acta con^ilii Pisani 2.


All of whom (says the Apology) treating of points of divinity, when they had
deposed the two antipopes, that contended for the Popedom, and elected
Alexander the fifth Pope in their stead, a most learned and discreet man, made
many good ordinances in the Church of God.

48 At the second Council of Pisa, there were also the delegates of
Universities, amongst others of Paris, Tholous, and Poictiers, with sundry
Doctors in Law, and other men in great abundance, (say the Acts) well skilled
in matters both divine and humane. Thus should general Councels be composed;
mainly then when the question is about putting an end to disorders, schisms,
wars, and bloodshed; then when the Clergy cannot agree themselves. I know well
it will be hard to persuade the Pope and his disciples to this; who having
usurped all authority over Councels, surely over Clergy men of the meaner sort,
will be loath to let it go. I know besides, the Pope is not well content that
his presidency should be disputed, nor his power of calling and confirming
Councels, which he pretends a title to: that he is very impatient that any man
should call him in question, and indeed not without good cause; there i^ matter
enough to put him past his patience. Let us therefore take a friendly course,
handle the matter gently, Nothing done in the Council but what the Pope
pleased.
confer together and depute some men of rare knowledge of all conditions
whatsoever; it may be God will bestow his blessing upon it. At least this
care, this endeavor, this attempt, will be commendable, and excuse both before
God and men, those whom it concerns to provide for such matters.

CHAP. IX. That this Council was nothing else but a Papal conventicle.
1 WE may collect from the former discourse, that no man had any voice in the
Council, but such as were sworn to the Pope; and thence quickly infer,
therefore nothing was done there, but what he pleased. Though the conclusion
be good, yet will we descend to the proof of it. King Henry the second says
as much in his act of Protestation; Extat in libello de statu Eccles. Gallic.
in schismate.
He has bred a suspicion in all men, (says he, speaking of the Pope) that
this calling of the Council again, was not any way for the common good and
profit of the Catholic Church, but rather upon compact and accord with those
whose interests are served in this assembly: He means the King of Spain, who
was the Popes favorite, and by consequence the Councels. Nor was there any
Canon, or Decree, or any other thing resolved there, but by direction from the
oracle of the Court of Rome; Extat in eodem libello.
witness Mr. James Amiot, Abbat of Bellosane, and afterward Bishop of
Auxerre, who presented the act of Protestation to the Council the first of
September 1151, and who set down the whole story of it in a letter of his
written to Monsieur de Morviller; They will not (says he) have this act come
to light, till there be some or other answer to it, which they expect to be
sent them from Rome, This makes that story credible, which some have delivered
in their writings, Du Moulin en son conseil sur le concile de Trente.

Et l'autheur de l'advertissement sur la reception du concile de Trente.


urging Mr. James de Ligueris for proof thereof, who went to the Council in
behalf of King Henry, the year 1551, to see what was done there; namely, how
the article of the residence of Bishops, being even upon the point of being
concluded upon, with some infringement to the Popes authority; he being
advertised thereof by his Legates, commanded them to defer the conclusion of
that decree for six months; during which time he mustered up, or created anew
full forty Bishops of Apulia and Sicily, whom he presently embarked and made
them hye to Trent: and how when they came there they hindered that resolution
which was like to have been made, crying out that the Council could not set
laws to the Pope, and that they were all nothing but his Holynesses creatures.

2 The Emperor Ferdinand has said as much in terms so express, Extat hac
epistola Parisiis impressa apud Nicholaum Chesneau anno 1563.
in a letter of his writ to Pope Pius the fourth, as takes away all scruple
which can be made hereof. That it may be lawful (says he) for the Fathers,
freely to speak and decree that which the Holy Ghost and their own consciences
shall suggest unto them without fear or favor, all good order being there
observed, by which means all confusion which might be feared shall be avoided,
so as there shall be no need of running out of the Council for the
determination of such points as are debated in it. We are confident your
Holiness will never bend your designs that way; Lay m^n calle^ to Councels in
France.
and that you will never give way to the introduction of any novelty, into a
State so distempered and troubled, whereby the liberty of the Council may
seem to be any way abated or violated. There are yet other complaints in the
same letters, which show but the too great slavery of those good Fathers, and
the little respect that was used toward them.

Guido Faber in Oratione sua habita in Conc. Trid 4 Iunii, ^nn. 1562.
3 The French Ambassador gives them also some quips, and those pretty ones, and
plain enough: Christendom (says he) has reapt but little or no good at all
from the many Councels which have been holden in and before our times, both in
Germany and Italy; things remain still at one stay, that is, in a poor and
miserable plight. But the ca^se of that misery does now cease, and has no
place in this present assembly; for their judgments were not free, and for a
great many of them there was more subjection to the humors of great personages,
than liberty of conscience; which is much to be feared in a matter of this
nature. But as for you, Sirs, who are here assembled in the name of God, you
acknowledge no superior, but the honor of God, and the quiet of his Church.

4 And presently after he adds; If we will apply our selves to the humor of
this or that Prince whatsoever; and if we choose rather to mistake the truth by
that means, than embrace our own salvation, and the right managing of affair^
there is no question but the neglect of our duty deprives us of the glory of
heaven and if so be there be any default of yours in this respect, (howbeit
your virtues do assure me of the contrary) the state of religion will be so
desperate, that there will be no hope of remedy left. I have seen the
original copy of a letter in the hands of a learned Catholic, dated the 19
of May 1563, written from Trent to Rome, by Monsieur de Lansac, King Charles
his ambassador at the Council of Trent, unto Monsieur de Lisle, the same
Kings ambassador to the Pope; wherein he entreats him to deal so, that the
Pope would leave the Council to their liberty, and send the Holy Ghost no more
in a Clokebag. The Lord de Ferriers, assisted by the Lord of Pibrac in his
oration delivered in September 1563, touching the precedence of the King of
France, before the King of Spain, accuses the Pope of bereaving his eldest
son of the honor that belongs unto him; of arrogating unto himself power over
the Council, and prescribing unto it what it must follow and observe. And in
the letters written by the same Ambassadors unto King Charles, the 25 of
November 1563, upon occasion of their retiring to Venice; they say amongst
other reasons, they departed from the Council, Because nothing was done there,
but what pleased the Pope; and hereupon they stood so long upon determining
things proposed, if there was any difficulty, because they must send to Rome to
seek the Popes resolution.

5 This is also the great complaint, which has ever been made, and that
justly, by the Protestants of Germany. Hear what Paul Vergerius (who had
formerly been the Popes Legate in Germany against Luther and the Protestants)
speaks concerning it in an Epistle of his to the Bishops of Italy. Voyes ^es
commentaires du Sieur president de l' estat de la religion et republique so^s
Henri et Francois 2. et Charles 9.
I desire you moreover to consider a little, and thoroughly to inform your
selves of that which Pope Paul the third, and Julius the second lately
deceased, were wont to do: they framed Ordinances and Decrees to their
carrier, then they sent them to Trent, with an express injunction that nothing
should be determined, but what they commanded. Which I know to be very true,
because in the time of Pope Paul my self being then Bishop was at Trent, from
whence I was ferreted, because I was suspected to have taken notice of it:
whereupon they were afraid lest I should disclose it; howbeit I knew but very
little of it at that time. And there is none now but knows that all the
definitions which were first made at Rome by the Popes commandment were sent
afterward to the Legate, that he might look well to this, that the divines
observed the same order and platform in their disputes, as was prescribed to
them. Whence it came to pass, that they commonly say nowadayes, The Holy Ghost
came to Trent packt up in a Clokebag.

6 A learned man of those times among the Protestants, The Council depended
wholly upon the (...) Pope.
called Fabricius Montanus, has made a great complaint hereof in a speech of
his pronounced before the States of Germany; which is contradicted by
Fontidonius a Doctor in Divinity, he that made the speech in the behalf of the
King of Spain at that Council. Apol^^ia Fontidonii.
I shall content my self with two passages which that Apologist labors to
refute in his rejoinder. As for that (says he) which you urge and account for
a fault, that the Pope does not submit himself to the Council, but rather the
Fathers of the Council are subject to him, what furtherance can that bring to
your cause? And in another place; You rake up many calumnies, not crimes, which
you do not confirm by any arguments, as that the Fathers of the Council do
wholly conform themselves to that which is prescribed in a certain schedule
containing the declaration of his pleasure. There are many other writings
besides, wherein may be read the same complaint.

7 Howbeit the Doctor do peremptorily deny that it was so, and says that the
Pope and the Council did accord very well, yet for all his answer it is not
amiss to tell him what Onuphrius says in the life of Paul the third,
Onuphrius in vita Paull 3.
for it serves very well to our purpose. Being thus highly offended with the
Emperor (says he) without any dissembling of it, he began to think of
suspending the Council (which he had formerly commanded to be kept at Trent,
in courtesy to the Emperor) and of removing it to Bononia, which he was the
more willing to do, because he had understood how his dignity^ was taxed and
disparaged by the malice of some su^orned Prelates, in certain sanctions
decreed upon in an odious disputation. See what the Popes use to do when the
Councels do^ not please their palate, and do what they would have them: so Pope
Eugenius dealt with the Council of Basil, AEn^as Sylviu^ i^ comment ^^^cil.
Basil^
and Pope Julius the second with that of Pisa. This transferring of the
Council was put in execution, howbeit it was contradi^ted by diverse Bishops,
as appears by the eighth Session.

8 We will conclude, we need not seek a more authentic proof hereof ^han
the determinations of the Council it self, which were all entirely submitted
to the Popes authority, and which for the most part tend to no other end but
the support of his greatness. So Pius the fourth in a public oration of his
delivered in the Consistory after the conclusion of the Council, thanks them
heartily for having such a tender regard to his authority, when they went about
an Ecclesiastical reformation; in so much that if he had undertaken to
reform himself he should have gone more severely to work; as appears by
that Oration printed with the French translation of the Council of Trent,
which was very wisely retained by a learned Sorbonist. But indeed it is a thing
not much to be marvailed at; for what could such men do else, which were not
their own masters, which were bound to the Pope by such a strict oath that
they durst not flinch from him, yea they durst not so much as speak the truth
in what concerned him? So said AEneas Sylvius in an Epistle to the Chapter of
Mayence: Even to speak truth against the Pope is to break the oath of a
Bishop. And indeed mark the purport of one of the clauses in the new oath,
They shall disclose, and effectually hinder with all their might whatsoever
shall be plotted, negotiated, or attempted against the Pope. They are also tied
by the ancient form, Cap. Ego de jurejurando. Extra.
To defend the Popedom of the Church of Rome against all sorts of men. Besides
it was very equitable that they should do something for him, considedering the
benefit they received from him. First, it is to be considered that they were
maintained there at his proper cost and charges; which (if it be duly
observed) was no small matter, to defray such a number of men for so many
years. Onuphrius in vita Pii 4.
Pope Pius (says Onuphius) spent a great sum of money in the celebration of
this Council, considering that he gave liberal allowances for diet and
maintenance of the poor Bishops and Priests, and to all the Officers of the
Council: a thing which was anciently done by the Emperor.

(...) bea^e ^h^ ^ha^g^s of ^ Coun^^ll.
9 AS for this last, we read indeed that Constantine the Emperor feasted all
the Bishops of the Council of Nice; that he bore their charges, and gave
presents to them; as also he caused his officers to allow them the coaches and
horses of the State to help them on their way. ^useb. lo^. 10. ^^p. 5.

Ch^odoret l. 2. ^. 16.

Eusebius. de vit^ ^ons^antini lib. 3.

^heodoret. l. 21 cap. 30.

Sozomen. lib. 4. cap. 16.

Sulpitius Se^erus Sacra hist. lib. ^.


The same Emperor sent the chief of his Court to Jerusalem to minister such
things as the Bishops there assembled, with their associates, and all other
necessitous people stood in need of. And thus must we understand that which
Sozomen speaks of the expenses of the Commonwealth upon the Bishops which were
summoned to Synods; for this must be referred to the Emperors. Constantius
commanded that the Bishops at the Council of Ariminum should have their
lodging and diet allowed; but our Frenchmen were so scrupulous that they would
not accept of it; choosing rather to live sparingly upon their own pittances,
than to feast it at the public charges.

10 It was good reason this charge should be transferred from the Emperors to
the Popes; since they pretend now adays that the right of calling Councels,
and presiding in them belongs to them, which was formerly the Emperors: nay
more, since they have now engrossed all the Imperial power and dignity into
their hands, that so he that enjoyes the honor, should also bear the charg^s.
Yet these are they that underwent this charge, that they might thereby confirm
their claim of presidency and convocation which was questioned, and to win a
more favorable verdict from those Fathers. If a Judge may be refused by course
of Law, because he has eaten or drunken with one of the parties, much more may
they be that make themselves domestiques and pensioners, as those Bishops did,
whose judgment is therefore lawfully rejected at this present.

11 Pius the fourth did them yet another courtesy, for by his Bull of the
first of April 1561. he exempted them from all paying of tenthes during the
time of their abode at the Council: and it is furthermore probable that he
anointed them in the fist with some good fat Benefices, at least the stoutest
of them, and those which did him the best service.

CHAP. X. That the number of Bishops there present was so small, that it cannot
be accounted General.
1 LEt us here observe that the number of Bishops in this Council was so
small, This Council compared with others for number of Bishops.
that it does no way deserve the style of General and Oecumenicall. In the
first Session there were four Archbishops, twenty three Bishops, the King of
the Romans Ambassador, the Captain of the City of Trent, five Generals of
Orders, and a few Doctors. In the next there were five Bishops and three Abbats
more. In the third there was an eke of one Cardinal and two Bishops. In the
fourth they were in all nine Archbishops, and forty three Bishops. In the fifth
there came in five Bishops more. In the sixth there were fifty seven
Archbishops and Bishops in all Yet I have seen a Catalogue printed 1546. where
when the 6. Session was se^ are r^ckoned but 3. Ca^dinals, 3. Archbi^sh^ps, 1.
Ambassador, the Secretary, and Proctor of the Council, 4. ^enerals, and 2.
Spanish Doctors: in all 38. AEneas Sylv. live. 1. Comment. Council Bas. Bellarm.
de con^cil. author. l. ^. cap. 19.
. In the seventh three Bishops more. In the eight, forty three Bishops, and
eight Archbishops; and so on in the most of the rest, except the last, wherein
the number was greater. But what is this I pray in comparison of that of Nice,
where there were three hundred and eighteen Bishops? Or that of Ephesus, where
there were two hundred? that of Chalcedon, where there were six hundred? that
of Constance, three hundred? that of Basil, where were above four hundred
Bishops, and others? The first at Constantinople was the thinnest, where there
were only a hundred and fifty Bishops; but the reason of that was, because at
the same time there was another holden at Rome.

2 We urge this of purpose that we may serve our turn with that which
Bellarmine says; who would make us believe that the former Sessions of the
Council of Constance are null and invalid, because that certain schismatic
Bishops fell off there and were defaulty, because they sided with the factions
of the two schismatic Popes, these (as he says) made up two parts of the
Church: howbeit in those very Sessions there were present two hundred Bishops,
diverse Cardinals, the King of the Romans in person, and sundry Princes and
Ambassadors. Now by the same reason we may lawfully say that the greatest part
of the Church made default in this of Trent, yea and that it was no better than
a Conventicle, or at the best a National Council. And indeed if we thoroughly
read the acts of this Council, we shall find that the greatest part of the
Bishops and Ecclesiastics that were there were either Italians or Spaniards;
and that there was but a very slender number of other nations; and that
especially toward the end. In all the Sessions under Paul the third we find
but two Frenchmen, and in some none at all. Insomuch as one of the Presidents
of that Council in a discourse of his in the last of those Sessions, said,
That many Prelates are not yet come, who we know very well are upon their
journey, (says he) and especially the devout and noble French Nation. They
were not only not come, but which is more, they came not at all, as appears
by the catalogue annexed after that same Session. And after the death of Paul
the third, the Council was forthwith broken up, from the fourteenth of
September 1547. till the first of May 1551. that it was set on foot again and
continued by virtue of the Bull of Julius the third, under whom were holden six
Sessions, and not a Frenchman assistant in any one of them, as appears by the
same Acts. Thus it was at the time that Henry the second protested against the
Council, Henry 2. ^ro^ests ^g^inst the Cou^c^ll.
and prohibited the Ecclesiastiques of his Realm to go thither, as shall be
said hereafter.

Extat in libello de statu Ecclesiae G^lli^anae in schisma^e.
3 That Protestation may be seen in print, bearing date in August 1551. out of
which we have borrowed these words: He protested (as he may do by law) that
being busied in great wars, he is not bound of necessity to send the Bishops
of his Kingdom to the Council of Trent; inasmuch as they could not have free
and safe access thither; and because the Council it self, from which he was
excluded against his will, is such as was never reputed for a general one of
the whole Church; but rather accounted a privy Council, invented not out of
any desire of reforming discipline, and restoring it, but for countenancing and
favoring some body: briefly, such as that there are more private respects than
public in it. Nor was there only a want of French Bishops and Ambassadors
there, but besides in all the Sessions holden under those two Popes, there was
but a very small number of Clergy men, so that it cannot be said that it was a
general Council.

4 As for the other Sessions under Pius the fifth, from the 18 of January 1562,
till the end of the Council, the Bishops and other Ecclesiastiques of France
were there indeed, howbeit no great store; as also the Ambassadors of Charles
the ninth. But mark what is urged, That which is invalid from the beginning,
cannot be made valid by tract of time: the last Sessions could not legitimate
the former, nor purge them of that vice which was inherent in them. We may add
moreover, that the same plea of enmity which was alleged for Protestants,
holds good also for our Kings of France; inasmuch as Pope Julius the third
took part with the Emperor against King Francis; and Julius the third with
heart and good will made open war upon Henry the second, declaring him to be
his enemy; whereof he complains in the forementioned act of Protestation: as
also that he sought peace and quietness by the Lord Tervie^ his Ambassador,
and all other means possible, but to no purpose.

CHAP. XI. The nullities of the last Sessions.
AS for those latter Sessions under Paul the fourth, it is urged, Complaints
made by the Emperor and the French king
that being built upon a weak and frail foundation, they cannot hold out
against a tempest, bu^ must of necessity fall to the ground. Authorities for
proof of this have been produced by those that writ before me. Vid. Can.
principatus 1. q. 1. t. Egi tecum.

D. De rejudicat^ l. Sedet and manente precario. D. De prec. Canonist in ca.
51. qui authoritate de praeb^n. in 6. Bald. Cons. 50^ l 5. and alios.


Besides, all the faults and defects of the former Sessions, redound unto them,
and must be reckoned and imputed to them too; as also all other nullities,
which we have hitherto insisted upon, seeing they belong as well to the last
Sessions as the first. Over and above all this, we will here add the
complaints that have been made of the inujust proceedings of that Council. The
Emperor Ferdinand in his letters written to Pope Pius the fourth, May the
third 1563, faith, We have with great grief of heart been given to
understand, that in this holy Council things are not carried in that order and
fashion as we and all devout people could wish, and which the miserable state
of the Christian commonwealth, and our distressed religion might justly
require, which grows less and less every day; it being to be feared, that if
convenient remedies be not presently applied, the issue of the Council will
be such as will minister scandal and offense to all Christendom, and
occasion of laughter to such as have cast off their obedience to your
Holiness, and the holy Apostolic See, and of maintaining with greater
obstinacy than ever those several opinions repugnant to our faith, which they
have already embraced. And a little after; Alas, what a pitiful thing it is,
that the Fathers and Doctors in the Council should begin to abandon
themselves to quarrels and contentions, to our great loss and discredit, and
to the scorn and derision of our adversaries?

2 Arnalt Ferriers, President in the Court of Parliament of Paris, in that
oration which he made in the Council, September the 22, 1563, assisted by the
Lord of Pibrac, complains thus; That the Council did not set about the
reforming of the Church as they ought to do: That it was not the reformation
of those which are dead, or those which shall come after, which was demanded.
Non di^o, sed ^ numeratione sacile conclusio inferri potest.
Of whom then? I will not tell you, but it is easy to collect by enumeration.
If any will reply, that there have been certain decrees made concerning
reformation, and that by them satisfaction is given to such things as were
demanded. We answer, that they might indeed afford sufficient content, if one
thing might be paid for another without consent of the creditor: Si invito
creditore aliud pro alio solvi possit.
That there was a great deal of stir about reforming those things that needed
not: That Kings and Princes were hereby deprived of their rights: That censures
and excommunications had been denounced against them: That the liberties of the
Gallicane Chuch, have been beleaguerd; whereupon according to the command which
they had received from their Prince, they were constrained to oppose themselves
as they did.

3 I have seen the letters of King Charles, dated August the 28. 1562, written
to his Ambassadors the Lords of Ferriers and Pi^rac; wherein he commands
them to retire from the Council, and to cause the Bishops of France to retire
also. In another oration of his spoken about the end of the same September,
complaining of the wrong done to the French King touching precedence; The
French Ambassadors lef^ the Coun^^ll.
he said, That the French would not acknowledge Pius the fourth for Pope; and
that according to the command which they had received, they charged the Bishops
and other Ecclesiastiques of France, to retire themselves and depart from the
Council. They were so hot then, that the Council was upon the point of
inditing them; yea, they had entered the action when they went to Venice, from
whence they writ a letter to the Lord Cardinal of Lorrain, that stayed at
Trent, dated the 24 of October 1563, wherein they complain unto him that some
French Bishops blamed their proceedings; and amongst others the Archbishop of
Sens, who had said, that it was all one as to turn Protestant; that is,
Heretic; which they stranged very much at, seeing they had done nothing in
that matter but by specia^l command from the King. And in the letter which they
writ to King Charles from Venice the 25 of November 1563, they certify him of
their departure from the Council according to his command; telling him
particularly the great motives they had of so doing.

4 The nullity of their proceedings shall more plainly appear by such reasons
as we shall urge in the following Books; where we shall show how this Council
has not had so much regard to the justice of the maine demands put up by
Catholic Princes, as to assert and augment that injust power which the Pope
has usurped over the Church and secular States: and that it has even trampled
under foot the right of our Kings, and the liberties of the Gallicane Church.

CHAP. XII. That in regard of the protestations made by those that complain^ of
this Council, their right remains entire.
In what ^se a judge may be refused.
1 BUt before we pass to the handling of such points as concern the ground of
the matter, it is fitting we proceed to show, that there is nothing that stops
our entrance, or can hinder our passage; that there are no pertinent or
approveable reasons for the rejection of our plea. Amongst such as have reason
to complain, some say they were not heard: others, that if they were, yet that
is no hindrance, but the judgment may be reiterated^ So then, here is the
question, if so be they may have a hearing, whether there must be a Council
assembled again, or we must do them right some other way? Gl^ss. in C^n.
^l^. cause. 3. q. 5. in verb. canoni^.
The glossator of the Canon law decides the first point, when he says, That
he which has been lawfully obstinate; that is, against whom the formalities
required in case of obstinacy, have been observed, before a judge which is
suspected and refuseable, is not bound to send a proctour there to plead the
causes of his suspicion; nay, it is not necessary to protest: but even eo ips^,
inasmuch as he has occasion to make refusal, all the process is avoidable.
The reason whereof, in my opinion, is, because the judge that knows himself to
be suspected, should have the modesty to refuse himself, and not stay till it
be said unto him, Forbear. So the old Tacitus ^ive Quintilian. in dialogo de
causis corrup. eloq.
Romans used to do; and it is the practice in France, which has been
prescribed to us by our L'ordinance d^ ^lo^^.
ordinances: recusations have ever been admitted with ease; and oftentimes it
has been sufficient to Vtebantur hac formul^ EIVRO NIQVVS EST.

Asconius in Verrinam 2^


swear, that the party refused was an injust Judge, The King of Englands
Protestation.
without rendering any further reason. It was to be wished that the Pope had
asked his own conscience, and examined whether he could be judge in the case in
hand; seeing that he was accused and taken for a party himself, and he also
presecuting the condemnation of his enemies, those whom he had pursued with
fire and sword, and condemned already by his Bulls. Which seeing he did not do,
he is therefore the more refuseable, and there is a flat nullity in all his
proceedings.

2 In the first place, the Princes of Germany assembled with their Divines at
Smalcald, the year, 1537, after they had proposed by the Vicechancelour of the
Emperor Charles the fifth, Matthias Held, a^^ declared the reasons that
withheld them from repairing to the Council, they published a writing to that
effect, the contents whereof were, Sleidan. comment. lib. 11^
that a Council where the Pope and his adherents have the commanding power,
ought not to be holden legitimate: That the power of judging belongs not only
to the Pope and the Bishops, but to the Church, wherein are comprehended Kings
and other States: That the Pope in this case is a party: That it is not only
his power and excess which is called in question, but his laws and doctrine,
and he is accused of heresy and idolatry: That he has already condemned those
whom he intends to judge in the Council: That the Convocation of it is not
such as was promised it should be, namely in a place of freedom and safety,
and that in one or other of the Cities of Germany. But because the author of
this narration may be suspected by some, I will produce his adversaries.
Pontanus speaking of this assembly, says, that the Protestants after much
deliberation made answer, that they would never give way to the keeping of the
Council in Italy; nor that the Pope and his confederate should be presidents
of it: That the Pope and his favorites should condemn their doctrine, however
sound: That they would not submit themselves to his tyranny.

3 Laurence Surius is yet more ^ull; for speaking of that very assembly he
says; Surius in hi^ His^o^y; in the (...) 1537. ou^ of the French tr^^sl^tion
by James Estou^neau.
The twenty fourth of February, all the confederates made answer at large;
which answer I would here set down, if it were to any purpose. They talked
much of the Council, which they would have to be free, and that Luther
forsooth and his companions, should have as much power and authority in it, if
not more, as the Pope of Rome; although it be directly against the customs of
antiquity. And this they said not without many bitter taunts of his Holiness;
saying, that he had broached, and at that present defended a doctrine not only
contrary to the word of God, but also to the ancient Fathers and Councels. And
anon after, The last of February the Protestants made answer at large to the
points proposed by Held, but I am loath to set them down: The sum of all
that they said, is in their answer to the Council set forth by the Pope. For
they plead, that the authority of judging belongs not only to the Pope and the
Bishops, but also to the Church, in which Kings and Princes are comprised. They
might as well say, Hucksters, Catchpols; Druggists, Apothecaries, and such
like. As if it belonged to Lay men, to a Cook, or, a Cowheard, to intermeddle
with the questions and decrees of the Church.

4 Henry the eighth, King of England, although he was then a Catholic, made
the like protestation; for hark what Surius says of him. Surius ibid.
About the same time the King of England set out a book, wherein he showed the
little account he made of the Pope of Rome, and that he would neither come nor
send his Ambassadors to the Council which the Pope had called; and he ever
and anon put in good store of jerkes at St. Peter. Considering what we have
heard from Surius, that which Sleidan relates will not now be suspected.

5 Presently after (says he) the King of England put forth a book in the name
of himself and the Lords of the Land: The King of Englands protest^t^on.
wherein he complained that the Pope took upon him to call the Council; a
thing not in his power to do: and that he called it then when there was open
war betwixt the Emperor and the French King. Sleidan. comment. lib. 11.
Besides, the City of Mantua, where he appointed it should be, is no sure
place for all parts, nor yet convenient. For his part he desired a Christian
Council, but he would not go to the Popes, nor yet send his Ambassadors:
for their common practice is in such assemblies to oppress Christ and his
truth for their own advantage. Nor has he any thing to do with the Bishop of
Rome, whose Edicts and commandments do concern him no more than any other
Bishops. The custom was to call Councels by the authority of the Emperor and
Kings, and it were fitting that custom were put ^n ure again, especially in
these times when the Pope has so many vehement accusations laid against him:
And yet it would cost a man his life if any one shuold be so foolhardy as to
reprove him and accuse him to his face, unless it were in a lawful Council.
Nor he, nor his are secured by safe conduct; and say he were, there are such
apparent dangers, as it is not fitting he should come there: for it is no new
thing with the Popes to break promise, and to stain and imbrue themselves
with the blood of innocents. And however other men may safely go thither, yet
for his part he cannot, and that for reasons well known: for the Pope lays
snares for him, and hates him mortally, putting him out of favor with other
King^ as much as he can: and this for no other reason, but because he has
ca^t off his tyranny, and withholden his Peter Pence, which mads him so; and
the rather, because he is afraid lest other Kings by his example may ere long
do^ the like. At this instant the Council is prorogued till the first of
November, without any mention where it shall be kept, and the fault is put upon
the Prince of Mantua. Is not this to gull the world? the Prince of Mantua
wrongs no body if he will not abandon his City to so great a multitude without
a garrison: but all the blame should be laid upon the Pope, who does not as yet
go roundly about the busi^esse, but is ever a playing tricks and treacheries.
If he remove the Council to another place, he must take a City that belongs to
some of his feudatary Princes, or else one of his own: for he has a goodly
patrimony, with many fair Cities, gotten by his predecessors either by force
or knavery, and now kept by him by the bad title of coven and fraud. Now seeing
that almost every man of judgment does despair of ever seeing a true
Council, he thinks it most fitting that every Magistrate reform religion
amongst his own people. If the Pope plead custom, that will not serve the
turn; for, as Saint Cyprian says, Custom without truth is but an inveterate
and grounded error. Therefore this is his advice, and this he thinks the best
course; but if any know a better he will readily embrace it.

6 Now the King of England never deserted these protestations and declarations,
much less the Protestants; nay they repeated them diverse times after; Sleidan.
l. 16. This answer was printed an. 1561.
and amongst the rest at an assembly at Worms holden 1545. and another a
Naumburg the year 1561, where an answer was given to the same effect to Pope
Pius the fourth his Legates, who came thither to summon them to appear at the
Council.

7 There were yet some other Protestations made against the Council on the
behalf of our Kings: Henry the second protested against the Pope and the
Council in the year 1551, saying amongst other things, V. libellum de statu
Ecclesiae Gallic. in Schismate page ^78. 179.
That the publication of it which was made, regarded not the good of the Church
Catholic, but the commodity of some particulars: That it seemed the Pope
would exclude him from it: That the beginning, progress, and issue of his
Holiness designs did intimate as much: That being employed in the war which
he had raised up against him, he could not send the Bishops of his Kingdom
thither, seeing they could not have safe and free access: and that neither he
nor the people of France, nor the Prelates and Ministers of the Gallicane Church
will be bound to it hereafter.

8 King Charles the ninth, upon notice that all things went amiss in the
Council, and that the demands of the Kings and Princes Catholic, There were
diverse Councels about the same thing.
were not satisfied, that the reformation was not applied to such things as
stood in need of it, and were required to be reformed; yea more, that they
entrenched upon the liberties of the Church of France^ and the rights of the
Kingdom, caused protestation to be made by his Ambassadors against the same
Council, as appears by the Oration made by M. Arnald de Ferriers, the 22. of
September 1563. where amongst other things, after he has laid down many
grievances, he says, that according to the command of the most Christian King
they were constrained Concilio intercedere, ut nunc intercedebant ( to
interpose in the Council, as they interposed.) Whereupon it is storied, that a
certain Prelate of the Council not well understanding the propriety of the
word intercedere, which the Tribunes were wont to use of old when they made
their oppositions and hindrances, asked his neighbor, Pro qu^ orat Rex
Christianissimus? What does the most Christian King intercede for?

9 But say the Pope and the rest that joined in judgment with him were not to
blame; say they were competent Judges, and such as could not be refused; say
the proceedings were lawful; yet still it was a ju^g^ment and sentence passed
upon men in their absence, so that the door is open to all those that will
enter their plaint: they may justly demand to begin anew, and that things be
reduced to their first state. A repeal may be had against a sentence given in
case of contumacy, only paying the charges. But for them, I think the Pope
that bo^e them will never ask them again: and if he should, it is a question
whether his demand were good or no: for who bid him be at the charges? he was
not bound to it: it is a liberality which he was willing to undergo, to show
his magnificence: and in case he might redemand them, he must commence his
action either against those whom he defrayed, or against the Emperor,
who was anciently used to pay them, and not against those who do now desire to
justify themselves; seeing that according to the Decrees of Constanc^ and
Basil General Councels should be holden every ten years.

10 Let us proceed further, and see if they could have any good grounds to
demand, that a second judgment might be had, supposing they had appeared at
the Council, and had audience there. For this may be questioned in regard of
the King of France, who complains now how he was wronged in his rights, and
yet he had his Ambassadors resident at the Council, We say he is nere the
worse for all that, considering that diverse protestations were made against the
Council on both sides. This we shall prove by some examples.

11 We read how the Donatists were many times condemned, and that by many;
Augustine. in in breviculo Collat. cum Donatistis.

Et Optatus Meli^it lib. de schismat. D^natist.

Et Collatio. Carthagini habit^.

Idem August. in Collat. 3. dict, cap. 12.

Idem ib. c. 19.

Idem ib. c. 2.


how the Emperor Constantine the Great, yea the whole Church, and the great
Doctors of those times, bore with them in their reciduations, without ever
troubling them with writs of rejection of their cause, and other such shackles
of law-formes. They were first sentenced by Pope Miltiades and his Council at
Rome; from which they appealing, their cause was afterward examined at the
Council of Arles: the Emperor Constantine the Great took the pains to hear
them himself: and yet after all this, under the Emperor Honorius, and by his
command there was a general conference of all the Bishops Catholics and
Donatists at Carthage in Africa. Where it is to be observed, that the
Catholics desired that Conference: so says St. Austin, who was one of the
disputants, The Emperors commission being read, it was declared how the
Catholics had demanded the conference, and that it was granted unto them.

12 It is well known how many Councels were called and kept to convince the
Arrians: the first that was holden against them might have sufficed, namely,
that of Nice, considering the ^ame and worth of it; and yet there was another
General Council holden at Sardis, where the Emperors suffered them to dispute
anew all that had been controverted and canvassed, and especially of that holy
faith and the integrity of that truth which they had violated: The ca^^^ag^ of
the Coun^^l at Ariminum.
so say the Fathers of that very Council, in a letter of theirs to Pope
Julius. And after that there were yet two others called both at one time, one
at Ariminum of the Western Bishops, Hilarious in fragmento ex opere historico.
the other at Seleucia of the Eastern: where, howbeit the Catholic Bishops
were more in number than the Arrians, yet they suffered themselves to be
supplanted, Sulpi^us Severus in historia sacra.
chiefly in that of Ariminum, by the subtilty of the other, who were backed
with the favor of the Emperor Constantius.

1^ But it is expedient we here set down the very words of a Sulpitius
Severtus, Idem Sulpitius li. 2. Sac. hist. Ac siqui ^ertinactus obsislerent,
dummodo is numerus intra quindecim esset, in exilium pellerentur. Idem ibid.

Dubious anni^ [ Hilarious scilicet] and magna curarum mole aes^uans, cum
plerisque videretur non ineundam cum his co^munionem qui Ar^minensem Synodum
re^^pissent, optimu^ sactu ^r^itratus [ sic legendum; non, arbitrati] revoc^re
[ incipit,] cunct^s ad emendationem et paenitentiam frequentibus int^a Gallias
Conciltis atque omnibus fere Episcopis de er^ore profit enti^us ap ud Ar^minum
gest^ condemnavit, and in statum prislinum Ecclesiarum fidem reformavit.


who has well related the whole History; After (says he, speaking of the
Council of Ariminum) that they were all met, they divided themselves into two
companies, ours took the Church, the Arrians another place, who were in all
but four score; the rest, who were three hundred and twenty, were all of our
side. After many disputes, and a delegation to the Emperor, this was the
issue; Many of our men, partly by reason of faint heartedness, partly of
distemper which their long journey had cast them into, yielded themselves to
the adversaries; who after the return of the delegates, were now grown the
stronger party, and had bestowed themselves in the Church when they had
expulsed our men; and having once daunted their courage, they ranked themselves
in great troops o^ the other side. If we would here stand upon terms of
non-admittance, our case were desperate. What would be said against this
Council? It is true, Constantius the Emperor was inclined to Arrianis^^, yet
for all that he allowed them to dispute with all freedom; there were a great
many more Catholics there, than other; he used no kind of violence against
our men, but only commanded his Lieutenant not to suffer any body, either one
side or other, to depart the Council, till such time as they were agreed; yet
so as he should meat and maintain them at his charges: Only he ordained, that
in case they should come to accord, so as not above fifteen dissented, those
should be banished. The number of Arrians grew so great at last, that the
Catholics were almost quite out of hopes. But mark here one thing
observable, such as, if others will not make use of, our French ought to take
notice of, because it is a domestique example. The Catholics that remained,
being but a very few, were so scrupulous that they would have no communion with
such as had received the Council of Ariminum; Hilary on the other side thought
it best to converse with them, and to call them to such Councels as were
frequently holden in France upon such oc^^sions: and he wrought so, that
correcting them, and advising them to repentance, they almost all acknowledged
their error, and in fine, the Council of Ariminum was condemned, and true
faith replanted in its former state. See here how those that go astray should
be dealt with; see what use there is of the frequency of Councels. That which
cannot be done in one, may be done in another. A Council is the touchstone to
try doctrine by, so it be free, and not enslaved.

13 Let us not then so rest upon the determinations of one Council, as not to
be willing to come to another: Vide Epist. Council. Aquileiensis ad Imp. Gratian
Valentin. and Theodos. and ^^ta ^jusd. Council.
for notwithstanding all that passed concerning the Arrians, the Council of
Aquil^i^ under Theodosius the elder, did not stick to give audience to those
that remained of that sect, and dispute with them, and convince them. How
necessary this Assembly was (say the Fathers there) will appear by the event;
considering that Palladius and Secundianus, those two enemies of God, defenders
of the Arrian sect, who only durst come to the Council, after they were
convinced of their impiety, had such a sentence as they deserved passed upon
them to their face. And it appe^res by the Acts of that Council, that St.
Ambrose disputed with them.

Vide Council. Constant. 1. ^om. Conc.
14 The General Council of Constantinople holden about the same, time proceeded
likewise to the condemnation of Arrianis^^, and that upon the advice, which the
Council of Aquileia gave to the Emperors, Councels have been repeated about
the same thing.
Gratian, Valentinian and Theodosius, who sent the letter to Constantinople.

15 The third General Council at Ephesus under Theodosius the younger, had
condemned the doctrine of Nestorius; Can. did. 15.
and yet for all that the fourth General of Chalcedon did not stick to take
it under hand again, as Isidore says, whose words are inserted in Gratians
Canons, to make one of the Popes Laws.

16 The Felician heresy was condemned in a Council in Germany, Aimonius l. 4.
cap. 83. 85 V. Acta Conc^lii Francof. to, 3. Council.
called by Charles the Great: it was after that condemned by Pope Adrian and
his Council at Rome: and lastly it was condemned at Francfort, at a Council
called by the same Emperor, whereof Rhegno makes mention. In this Synod (says
he) the Felician heresy was condemned the third time. Rhegno. sub ann. 794. In
hac Synodo tertio condemnatia est baresis Feliciana.


17 There are many more examples of this kind that have been observed by such
as writ before us: we will add but one more very proper for this discourse.
The second Council of Ephesus had been lawfully called and lawfully begun;
Pope Leo had consented to it, yea and sent his Legates thither also: yet for all
this the process of it was illegitimate, there were some quarrels, practices and
plottings of murders after all that; the Popes Legates retired themselves and
protested against it, yet nevertheless it held on. But what was the issue? Leo
rejected and detested it, who had formerly approved it; he begged another of
the Emperors, and obtained it, which was at last assembled at Chalcedon. But
to give a better luster to this example, we must see what Leo says at first,
and then we shall see what he said at last. Leo in epist. 14 ad 2 Synod. Ephesians.
tom. ^. Council.
In his Epistle to that Synod at Ephesus he says For as much as such things
ought not to be neglected, and seeing it has pleased the most Christian
Emperor to cause a Council of Bishops to be assembled, to the end that by
more sound judgment all errors may be abolished, we have sent our brethren
Julian a Bishop, and Renald a Priest, with our son Hilary a Deacon, and
Dulcitius the Notary, of whose fidelity we have experience, to the end that
they may assist in our stead in your holy Assembly, to ordain by commune
consent with you, such things as shall be well-pleasing to God. He says as
much in Idem Leo epist. ad Flavian. Constan. 15. Ad Theod. August 16. Ad
Pulcheriam 17.

A Iulianum Episc. 18.


other places, and namely in an Epistle of his written to Bishop Julian, he
says he has given sufficient instructions to his Legates. Now let us see the
other side. In an Leo epist. 21. ad Constant.
Epistle of his to them of Constantinople he says, Having understood what
has passed at Ephesus, contrary to the judgment of all men, we confess our
heart was much grieved, and we should never have thought that injury had got
the head so far, had not our son Hilary the Deacon, who was sent thither
with others to supply our place in the Council, returned from thence by flight,
to escape the having a hand in an unjust sentence. For when our Legates opposed,
the Bishop of Alexandria, having usurped all power into his own hands, refused
to give ear; he drew the Clergy to his side against their wills, and made them
subscribe by force, howbeit there was no reason at all to proceed to any
condemnation. And in his Epistle to the Emperor Theodosius. Whiles particular
interests are prosecuted under pretense of religion, Idem epist. 2^. ad Theodo.

August. V. etiam epist. 26. ad Faustu^ et 30. ad Marri. et Faust.


a fact has been committed by the impiety of some, whereby the whole
Catholic Church is blemished. For we are given to understand, not upon
uncertainties, but by the credible relation of Hilary the Deacon, (who fled
away from thence, lest he should be compelled to subscribe) how that many
Ecclesiastiques arrived at the Council, who would have been very serviceable
both for deliberation and judgment, if he that assumed unto him the first
place would have contained himself within the bounds of Ecclesiastical
modesty; and been content ( as the manner is) with a fair and equitable
examination, with all liberty of speaking what is agreeable to faith, and
profitable for those that are in an error. But on the contrary, we are
informed that all those that came to the Council did not give voices the
judgment; Pope Leo's protestation holds good against T^en^.
and that some were put back, and other some admitted, namely, such as had
rendered their hands captive for the subsigning of those impious subscriptions;
knowing that it would go ill with them, unless they did what they were
enjoined. And after that; Which our Legates perceiving, they boldly protested,
as they ought to do, etc. And yet after. Wherefore (Reverend Emperor) we
entreat you to command that all things abide in the same state they were before
this judgment passed, till such time as a greater number of Ecclesiastiques be
assembled from all parts of the world. There is nothing in this but may be said
at this day against the Council of Trent, as we have formerly proved; and to
make it the more evident, we will add the protestations that have been, made
against it at diverse times, and by diverse men, that we may from thence
conclude, That neither absence nor presence could be any prejudice to those
that now find fault with this Council.

A REVIEW OF THE COUNCIL OF TRENT. BOOK II.
CHAP. I Of the denial of justice made by the Council to such demands as were
there proposed by Catholic Princes.
1 HAving treated of such nullities as concern the form and proceedings of
the Council, Nullities in the matter of the Council.
we now come to those which concern the matter: and these we make of two
sorts; for they consist either in the denial of justice, or in the making of
injust Decrees. For the first, we may truly say, this Council made no
conscience of satisfying the requests and demands of Christian Princes. I will
not speak of those the Protestants made, and others that have drawn back
from their obedience to the Pope^ but only of such as were made by
Catholics, the Emperor, the King of France, the Duke of Bavaria, the whole
German Nation, represented in an Assembly of the States, and others, upon the
point of reformation. Some of those demands, though but very few, were taken
into consideration, and judged by the Council: so that by consequence, though
the judgment were injust, we cannot ground a plea of denial of justice upon
them: however not to divide them from the rest, we shall here set them down,
after we have done with those that concern the Pope and the Court of Rome^ not
meddling with others, nor with the points of Religion now in controversy, which
belong properly to Divinity.

2 The Emperor Ferdinand by his Ambassours (as a Catholic historian has it)
desired a reformation both of the Pope and Court of Rome; The demands of the
Emperor and French King.
to have the Cardinals reduced to the number of twelve, or twenty six at most;
an abrogation of scandalous dispensations; a calling in of immunities granted
against common right; a reducing of Monasteries under the jurisdiction of the
Bishops of the Dioces where they stand; These demands of the Empero^r and some
others, are related by Natalis Comes l. 4 hist. sui temporis.
an abatement of the multitude of Canons and Decrees; a repeal of many that are
superstitious; a reducing of Ecclesiastical constitutions to the rules of Gods
law; prohibitions against proceeding to excommunication, unless it be in case
of mortal sin, or public scandal; a purging of Masse-books and Breviaries,
and expunction of that which is not taken out of the Scripture; a joining of
certain prayers and orisons in the vulgar tongue, together with the latin
hymns: communion under both kinds: a mitigation of that extreme rigor of
fasting, and license for eating flesh: a permission for the marriage of
Priests: a rasing out of diverse glosses upon the Gospels, and a making of some
new oaths by the most lea^ned men, which all Curats should be bound upon great
penalties to receive.

3 The King of France his Amba^sadours, had some such like Articles in their
instructions: as concerning the reformation of the Court of Rome,
excommunications, the restoring of the cup, marriage of Priests, prayers in a
known tongue: and for this last their instructions were express, to demand
that Psalms might be sung, the Sacraments administered, and a Catechism made
in the vulgar tongue: And besides, to assist all such as should require a just
reformation in all other matters. The originals of these instructions which I
have seen, were signed by the late King Charles, the Queen mother, Monsieur
the Duke of Anjo^, the King of Navarre, the Prince of Rochesuryon, the
Constable, the Duke of Guise, the Marshal Memorancy, the Chancelour of the
Palace, and some others. Natali^ Cames lib. 14. hist. sui ^^mporis.
Hereupon the King of France his orator said when they proposed these demands,
that they did wonderfully agree with those of the Emperor, and for that reason
they had deferred the proposal of them; supposing that if the other were
assented unto, they should also be satisfied: But perceiving the lingrings and
delays that were used in that behalf, and withal pressed by the letters of
the King their master, they were constrained to make a motion of them. They
required further, that all mandates of provision of benefices, all reversions,
reassumptions, resignations, holding of livings in trust, and commendams might
be quite taken away, as contrary to the decrees; and that resignations in
favor might be banished the Court of Rome, as forbidden by the sacred Canons;
that a course might be taken for instructing the people what they ought to
bel^eve concerning the worship of Images, and to clear it from all
superstitions and errors, if any were crept into it: and the like essay to be
made about indulgences, pilgrimages, relics of Saints, and fraternities: that
not only the ancient form of public penance might be restored in the Church
for heinous and public offenders, but also public fasts for the appeasing
of Gods wrath: that general Councels might be holden every ten years: that
for abridging of suits about benefices, that distinction of petitory and
possessory might be taken away: or rather for the utter extinguishing of such
suits, that Bishops might be enjoined to bestow them not upon such as seek
after them, but those that are worthy of them and avoid them; and for certain
proof of their merits to make them preach sometimes, and those such as have
taken some degree in the Vniversities^ upon whom only livings might be
conferred by the consent of the Bishop and the people. Vid. Centum grav^mina.
Et ^laudium Espens^um (...) comment. ^d cap 1. epist. ad Titum page 67. and 134.


4 The Catholic Princes and all the States of Germany, assembl^d in an
imperial Diet at Noremberg 1522, put up certain articles in some points
agreeing with these, but in number far more: Which they imparted to Mr.
Francis Cheregat, Pope Adrian the 6 his Legate, upon the declaration which he
made unto them in the behalf of Adrian; that for appeasing differences in
religion, and reforming of abuses, a free Council should be called. Grievances
put up by the Princes of Germany
He departing sooner than any man expected, it was decreed to send them to the
Pope, to the end that he might be provided for their just demands at the time
of the Council. Amongst other things they complained against the forbidding of
meats, and marriages at certain times: of those mercenary dispensations,
whereby all that great rigor was remitted for a little money: against the
abuse of indulgences, by which means Germany had been polled and impov^rished,
sins remitted as well future as by past, souls delivered out of purg^tory;
remedies applied to all diseases by promising the assistance of some particular
Saint: against the weakening of ordinary jurisdiction by drawing all to Rome,
and that at the suit of Lay men; nay the utter extirpation of it by the Popes
granting of Conservators, or sending of Commissaries: Against the exemptions
and immunities granted to certain monasteries by the Popes; the entrenching
upon the right of advowson; the usurping of the benefices of such (...) dyed in
the Court of Ro^^, or in the way thither; the tricks that are used to hook in
the benefices of such as converse with Cardinals, by pretending that they are
of their table; nay even such as never were in the Court of Rome, under color
that they were officers either of the Popes household, or of his Court: the many
suits that are commenced in the Court of Rome about benefices, even against
those that have quietly enjoyed them for many years, who by reason of their
age, and indisposition of body, are enforced to condescend to some injust
conditions, to allow pensions, reversions, and such like charges: Against the
cautions that are put in at Rome for all kind of benefices, the collation
whereof does of right belong to the Ordinaries: Against reservations for the
future, conferring of benefices upon strangers at Rome, and ignorant persons;
as also the bestowing of Abbacies, Priorships and other Ecclesiastical
dignities to be holden in commendam; against the impunity of Clergy men, by
reason of their privileges: Excommunications for petty matters, and that even
for the fault of neighbors, which they cannot avoid: Against the interdicting
of a whole town or towns upon the murder of a Clerk: Against the excessive
number of Holy days: Against the abuses and attempts of the Clergy in point of
jurisdiction almost in all causes and occasions, to the prejudice of the Laity:
As also the abuse in excommunicating Lay Judges, whereby they compel parties
to compound, because they cannot have justice: Against the abuses committed by
the Popes Legates, and the County Palatines of his institution.] And other
things of this nature, which it were too long to set down.

5 The Orator of Albert Duke of Bavaria according to his masters command,
August. P^ungartus, cujus oration excus^^ est Pari^iis anno 1563. apud Iohannem
D' Allier.
was very earnest for the marriage of Priests, and the r^storing of the cup:
and for the former, he first tells the occasions, before he ^^kes his demand.
In the last general visitation (says he) overall Bav^ria, whoredom was found
so frequent, that scarce three or four of an hundred but were either common
whoremongers, or privately m^rried, or else p^^^^quely. And he afterward^
adds; Men of judgment and dis^r^tion, who have mo^e nee^ly and ^xactly
examined these things, are of opinion, ^h^t to supply the scarcity of a learned
Clergy, it will be very ^^rd to m^ke ^p so many as to suffice for divine
service, especially at this time, by any other means, ^nle^^e it be by
admitting unto holy orders such married men as have learning and ability to
instruct others, as it was accustomed in the Primitive Church; es^^^i^lly that
they may preach the Word of God. For the other point, hark what he says,
There are not a few that depart from us, and side with those sectaries that
stand for the defense of both kinds; being of opinion that the Word of God is
express for communion under both kinds: but for one kind only not a word.
Whereto we may add, that the use of both kinds is frequent and evident not
only in the Primitive Church, The Duk^ ^f ^avaria's dema^ds.
but in all the Eastern Churches at this day; yea the Church of Rome it self
was not exempted anciently from this custom, as may be easily proved by diverse
testimonies of History. Lastly, after many discourses upon this subject he
concludes;

6 That the most experienced and wisest Catholics think that the people who
are puffed up with a desire of innovation cannot be kept in obedience to the Sea Apostolic, nor diverted from a separation to which they are inclining,
unless holy orders and license of preaching be conferred upon chaste married
men, to take away the liquorish custom of keeping Concubins; and also the use
of both kinds be allowed to appease the minds of the incensed multitude. He
goes yet further, and shows that there is somewhat to be reformed in matter
of opinion and doctrine: which notwithstanding he will not meddle with, till
such time as this entrance upon a reformation be brought to some issue;
considering the jealousy he has, least that design might breed some trouble.
But when this is done (says he) it will be then full time, when all things
shall be at quiet amongst us, to enter upon a more solid consideration of
doctrines and opinions. Now what manner of consideration that must be, if it be
for the good of the Catholic religion; my most Illustrious Prince is not
peradventure the only man that knows; but is plainly perceived by the common
voice, and that not to be slighted of devout Catholics concerning this
point. And if so be that his Holiness opinion be demanded herein, he could
without much entreaty inform what has been any way treated of concerning
this matter.

7 Many more requests and demands were put up as well by the Ambassadors of the
forementioned Princes, as others; which we cannot at this present se^ down,
because we have not the Acts by us. And it is far from our intention to
speak any thing without proof. We may here add the consultation which was
made when the Council was talked of at the commandment of Pope Paul the third
1538, Extat hae^ consultatio in to. 3. Council. page 819. in Coloniensi edict.
facta 1551.

Item apud Sleidan. Et ejus capita quae dam ^eferuntur ab Espensaeo in co^^en^.
in epist. ad Titu^. page 71:


by the Cardinals and other Ecclesiastiques, in number nine, deputed for that
purpose, to advise him what was best to be done about the reformation of the
Church. In which Act they say expressly, That all the discords, abuses, and
diseases now reigning in the Church, which has brought it almost past hope of
recovery, proceed from the Pope and Court of Rome; and that conceit which their
flatterers have buzzed into them, that they may do what they will, that they
are the Lords of all benefices, that it is impossible for them to commit
Simony, considering that the proprietary may lawfully sell what belongs unto
him. And on the other side they set down this maxim, That it is not lawful
for the Pope to take any thing for the use of the power of the Keys, which
Christ has committed unto him; seeing Christ has commanded, Freely ye have
received, freely give. They set down many other heads of reformation like
these, which were never provided for. As for example, the abuses committed at
Rome in the granting of benefices and Ecclesiastical dignities, by
dispensations, indulgences, exemptions, reversions, commendams, etc. which are
all derogatory to the Canons of the Church. And yet these deputies composed
these Articles of reformation, after the Pope had charged them by oath to tell
him the truth upon pain of excommunication, as they themselves testify in the
same Act.

CHAP. II. General complaints touching the reformation of the Head.
AFter the proposal of these demands, R^formation of the Head desired, but not
obtained.
I will now show you two things; First, that the Council never touched upon
most of them, and therefore there was a plain denial of justice: Next, that
they are no new demands, being they were made and repeated diverse times, in
diverse ages, and by diverse men; to which we shall add the several complaints
that have hereupon been made by many good men, for the most part of the
Clergy. The very same demands were also for the most part made by the
Protestants, and the rest that had relinquished their obedience to the Pope.
But I will not speak a word of that; as I protest also that I will not use
reasons of divinity to justify them, nor authority of Fathers, but very
seldom.

2 The first and principal, and that upon which many others depend (which we
shall only handle, not meddling with the rest) is the reformation of the Head,
that is the Pope of Rome, which was required by the Emperor Sigismond, and
that in terms very respective; hear his own words. First, that the supreme
Bishop would be entreated to condescend that there might be some reformation
in himself and the Court of Rome. Conformable whereunto was the King of France
his demand, for he required in express terms that the abuses of the Court of
Rome might be reformed, with proffer of reforming those of his own kingdom;
besides, his Ambassadors had an express Mandamus to adhere unto such as
should desire any reformation. Pope Adrian the sixth had professed also that it
was very necessary, in regard of the great abuses and corruptions of that See.
The Deputies of Pope Paul the third make all the abuses and maladies in the
Church to be derived from thence. Those enormities which were required to be
reformed, were the cause of all the schisme^ and divisions in those times; for
thence grew the first original of complaining; that was it that caused this
Council to be so desired and sought after.

3 Yet for all that the Fathers of that Council would never touch upon it so
much as with the tip of their finger. This is plain from all the Acts and
Decrees of it, as also from the oration which Pius the fourth made in the
Consistory, upon the confirmation of the Decrees of that Council. We heartily
thank the Fathers (says he) that in matters concerning the correction of
Ecclesiastical discipline, and reformation of manners, they had so much
respect unto our authority, and were so moderate on our behalf, that if we
our selves would have been our own reformers in what concerns us, and not
have left all to the Fathers we should have been more severe against our
selves. Adding afterward: If the^ Fathers for reasons best known to them,
have omitted any thing, or been too timorous, we are ready to releeve their
modesty, and supply the rest, as being left to our judgment. See here fair
promises, but we yet expect the performance of them. We will here add by way
of commentary, that which Claudius Espenseus a Sorb^n Doctor, Claudius
Espensaeus in ep^ ad Titum c. 1. digres. 2. p 74. and 75.
and a witness above all exception has written hereupon.

4 Wherefore (says he) that Council so much desired by all men, interrupted
for ten whole y^eres, at last obtained of Pius the fourth, resumed again at
Trent, and there assembled the third time, The Auth^^^s protestation.
although all was by the Pope referred to the Fathers, yet it s^ forbore the
purging of the Court of Rome, that even in all that it prescribed to
inferiors, touching the reformation of manners and Ecclesiastical discipline,
it protested that the authority of the Sea Apostolic stood safe and sound; in
the 21. Canon of the ninth and last Session. In so much that the same Pius no
less pious than sensible hereof, did heartily thank the Trent Fathers, in an
Oration which he delivered publicly at Rome in his Consistory of Cardinals,
who were there assembled in great numbers, that they had such a specia^l regard
of his authority, in the Ecclesiastical reformation, and had used him so
gently, that if he should have undertaken to reform both himself and th^se
about him, he should have been more severe. What remains, then but that he
refuse not the authority of a reforming Council? and that he supply what the
Fathers for certain reasons did o^^it? and that wherein they were over
timorous, it being left to his discretion, as he promised to do in that
Oration? For if it was as truly as freely spoken by Pope Adrian. that the
corruption of manners now reigning is derived from the head to the body of the
Church, Ezekiel 9.1. Pet. 4.
it is requisite that his successor Pius s^^^e his Sanctuary, and begin at
his own house. He sees well enough to what plight the Church of the holy
Apostles, yea the whole Church of Christ is brought by the base gain and
filthy avarice of some of his predecessors; who sought that which was their own
and not that which was Christ's: how many men are gone away from it within these
few years, in so much that it is to be feared there will more go yet, if he
do not now at last apply some remedy, after much delay of salving those sores
wherewith the Church is oppressed; which delay, the longer it is, the more
chargeable it will be. The principal cause of these so long stirs, is,
because for so many years nothing is altered, nothing amended: and that which
cuts off all hope of reformation, is, that they would see a reformation in all
the rest of the body of the Church, who have suffered for so many hundred
years together that City wherein they have both mere and mixed power and
jurisdiction to be the most deformed of all. For what excuse can they allege,
or what can they invent either true or likely, they to whom neither King nor
Emperor, people nor Clergy, not a General Council, no nor the whole Church
must say so much as, Why do you so? What pretense, I say, can they have for
delaying so long to reform them and theirs? For where shall we find under
the Sun greater licentiousness in all evil, greater outcries, greater
impunity, I had almost said infamy and impudence? Without doubt such and so
great it is, that none will believe it but he that has seen it; none will
deny it, but they that have not seen it.

5 See you here what this excellent Devine speaks without any flattery; but
let us go to them of more antiquity, and see how long it is since these
complaints against the Sea of Rome begun first to be made. Idem Espens^^^^
ibid page 76.
If we believe the same author, this complaint is pretty ancient, and it is a
long time since this reformation has been called for: for see you what he
speaks of it in the sequel of the forecited passage: I will omit the
complaint which has ever been made thereof from age to age, even from St.
^eromes time.

Vid Paul^ and Eustochii Epist. ad Marcell^^^ inter epist. Hie^ony^a.
6 Nor will we take our rise so high, but will insist upon these latter ages.
But here first I protest I have no purpose to discover the shame of that
supreme See, to expose her faults to derision and mockery, but only with
intent to see them corrected and amended. As also I declare that I mean not to
enquire into the personal vices of the Popes, for that would rather tend to
calumny and injury, than the end which I purpose, but only the abuses of the
Popedom, the maladies of the Sea, the usurpations and over-bold attempts which
have been derived to their successors; briefly, no more but such vices as are
become hereditary. Which to compass we will begin with the general
complaints that have been made in diverse ages, and thence descend to
particulars, as from the bole to the branches; speaking always by another man's
mouth, unless it be when the connection of places shall enforce us to contribute
something of our own. The reigning false of the Popedo^e.


7 The Acts of the Council of Rhemes holden under Hugh Capet the year 990.
have these words: Acta Synodi Rhemensis.
Poor Rome, what clear lights of fathers have thou brought forth in the time
of our predecessors? what horrible darkness have thou poured out upon our
times, which will redound to our shame and dishonor in future ages? Hildebert
Archbishop of Tours, who lived about the year 1100. has left us two pretty
nipping verses against the Popes: Rome, to be masterlesse were well for thee,
Or some to have not void of honesty,
Saint Bernard, who lived under the Emperor Conrade, and Pope Euge^ius the
fourth, cries out bitterly against the vices that were even then annexed to the
Papacy: as against ambition, dominion, pomp and vanity, avarice, jurisdiction
over temporal goods, against the abuses of dispensations, indulgences,
appeals, exemptions, and such like wares; we will bring the places hereafter,
and dispose every one in due order. That holy man is to be commen^ed for
speaking so home of those abuses, and that even while he wrote to a Pope; for
which cause he is applauded by every one, and with a certain emulation cited
in honorable terms by all those that lived after him.

8 Marsilius of Padua, who writ above three hundred years ago in the time of
the Emperor Ludovicus Bavarus, about the year 1320. has spoken of the abuses
of the Pope and the Court of Rome, both in gross and by ret^ile: for in the
24. Chapter of the second part of his book entitled Defensor pacis, he says,
That the body of the whole Church has been infected by that ple^itude of
power which is allowed unto the Pope; and he adds afterward, Let the
faithful cast their eyes that way, those who have visited the Church of Rome (
which I might more truly call a shop of traffic, an horrible den of thieves)
shall plainly see, and those who were never the^e shall learn by the report of
an infinite number of men of credit that it is become the receptacle of all
rogues and rascals, of truckers for all wares both spiritual and temporal;
for what is it else but a haven for Simoniacall persons, who repair thither
from all quarters? what else but a noise of Lawyers, an assault of detractors,
a v^xation of honest men? the justice of the innocent is there in hazard, or
else is so long deferred (unless it be redeemed with money) that being at
length quite exhausted, and wearied by infinite troubles, they are en^orced to
give over their just causes full of commiseration. For there the laws of men
do ring again, but Gods laws are either quite dumb, or at least very rarely
understood. There is nothing but plots and projects how to seize upon Christian
countries, to win them by force of arms, and wrest them out of the hands of
such to whom they do of right appertain. No further care, no consultation
ever about the conquering of souls. Besides, no order dwells there, but a
perpetual horror.

9 In the eleventh Chapter of the same Book, he makes along discourse of the
robberies of the Popes and the Court of Rome: of their Simony, luxury,
sensuality, vanity, desire of domineering, and of invading Lordships and
Principalities; and in an infinite company of places he shows the injust
power which the Popes arrogate unto themselves over matters both spiritual and
temporal, and the means they used to usurp it, some passages whereof we
shall elsewhere relate. This great divine was not moved to write these things
by any hatred or discontent toward the Popes, but only by a just obligation
to defend the Emperor Ludovicus Bavarus, who was injustly excommunicate.

10 A little before this devine put forth that Book, to wit, in the year 1310,
William Durant Bishop of Menda in Languedoc, Reformation of the Pope r^qu^red
in the 12 and 13 age.
being summoned by Clement the fifth, to the general Council at Vienna, to come
and see what was fitting to be reformed in the Church, made a book De
Conciliis, toward the beginning whereof he says, It seems to be a thing
considerable, that it is most expedient and necessary, that before any thing
else we should proceed to the correction and reformation of such things as
ought to be corrected and reformed in the Church of God, as well in the head as
in the members. And in the first Chapter of the third Book; Certes as
concerning the reformation of the Catholic Church to bring it about
profitably with perseverance and effectually, it seems expedient that it begin
at the head; that is, at the holy Church of Rome, which is the head of all
others. Then he sets down in particular such things as stood in need of
reformation, representing a good many abuses of the Sea of Rome that deserved
to be corrected. But for all his learned discourse, there was nothing done
about them in that Council, witness the Bishop of Panormo in his advice
touching the Council of Basil. Panormit. de Concilio Basil.
This decree concerns the estate general of the Church, and the matters
belong to a general reformation, which may be hindered by a dissolution, as it
was by the dissolution of the Council of Vienna.

11 Nicholas of Pibrac, who lived about the year 1290, tells strange stories
both of the Pope and his Court, in his book called Occultus, which I will not
here insert. And he afterward adds, Dites au Pape je vous pry
Que sous couleur de piete
L' eglise abonde en Simonie;
Et y a multiplicite
De maux: que s'ils sont de duree
Nuiront a cette foy doree
Eclipseront la purete.
Tell the Pope, I pray, from me,
That under color of piety,
The Church abounds in Simony;
And such a many faults there be,
That if not mended presently,
They will eclips the purity
Of faith, that shines so gloriously.


12 Francis Petrarch who lived about the year 1370, under the Emperor Charles
the fourth, and Pope Gregory the 11 reproving also an infinite number of
abuses; speaking of Rome under the name of Babylon, and of his departure from
thence, in the 92 Sonet he says, De l' empia Babilonia; ond' e fuggita
Ogni vergogna, ond' ogni been e fuori;
Albergo di dolor, madre d' errori,
Son fuggit 'io per allungar la vita.
From wicked Babylon from whence is fled
All modesty, all goodness banished,
Harbor of grief, mother of errors rife,
I fled, in hopes so to prolong my life.


In his 20 Epistle he styles it, The nest of treasons, wherein the venom of
all the world is hatched and brought up.

13 Francis Zabarel Cardinal of Florence, who lived about 1400, Reformation of
the Pope ^equi^ed in the 14 century.
in a tract which he writ of the Schism a little after the first Pisan
Council, speaks thus concerning the reformation of the Head, which (as he
says) must be done in a Council. These laws are observable; Francis^us
Zabarella in tract^ de schismate pontificio.
insomuch that they were not well considered of by diverse flatterers that would
often heretofore humor the Popes, and who still persuaded them they might do
what they list; yea, even that which is not lawful, and in that respect more
than God himself. For hence have ensued an infinite company of errors,
insomuch that the Popes have usurped all the right of inferior Churches, so
that other Prelates are but ciphers; and if God do not provide for the state of
the Catholic Church, it is like to go to wrack: But by the grace of God
there is some hope of reformation, if the Council which is appointed in the
Church do indeed meet, as it is reported it shall. In which assembly order
must be taken, not only for the present schism, but for the future also; and
the power of the Pope must be so moderated, that inferior powers be not
overthrown; and that from henceforth the Pope may not do what he will, but
what is lawful.

14 At the Council of Constance there were articles put up by diverse Natitions
about the point of reformation, Council. Con^stant. Sess. 40.
wherein it was demanded amongst other things, That there might be a
reformation of the head and Court of Rome. Whereupon was enacted this good
decree; That the Pope whom they should create, together with the Council; or
such as should be deputed by every nation, should proceed to the reformation of
the head, the members, and the Court of Rome, according to equity and the good
government of the Church, before the breaking up of the Council. But Pope
Martin the fif^h, being elected by them, did ease them of that trouble,
Platin^in Martino ^.
putting off the reformation till another time, to the great regret of many,
seeing it is ever to begin anew.

15 The Cardinal of Cambray, who lived about 1414, Petrus de Atliaco in tract.
de reform. Eccles. c. 1.
and was at the Council of Constance, in a certain Treatise of his, Of the
reformation of the Church, after he has showed the good that comes of the
celebration and frequency of general Councels, he adds^ The second
consideration is of such things as ought to be reformed in the Head of the
Church; that is, concerning the state of the Pope and his Court of Rome. Idem
cap. 2.
And he afterward speaks, of the abuses of exactions, excommunications, the
multitude of Canons and decretals, presentations to benefices, elections to
dignities, granting of exemptions, and many such like excesses, which (says
he) it would be too long to relate, which he desires may be reformed.

16 Mr. John Gerson Chancelour of Paris, who was also at the Council of
Constance, in a Sermon made by him upon the voyage of the Emperor, Ioannes
Gerson in sermon pro viagio Regis Romani. in 2. directione.
says, It is expedient to do so now before the election of the Pope, in many
things which concern the state general of the Church, which the Popes abuse
by too much using the plenitude of their power: as in this that they will never
keep any general Councels, nor suffer inferior Prelates to enjoy their
ordinary rights; wherein they have manifestly erred without any manifest reason
or convenience; sometimes disanulling the decrees of general Councels,
sometimes altering them, sometimes expounding them at their pleasure; sometimes
granting privileges and exemptions.

17 Nicholas de Clemangiis, Nicolaus de Clemangiis in lib. de ruin. and
reparat. Eccles.
one of the most learned and eloquent divines of his time, who was contemporany
with Mr. Gerson, speaks also very bitterly against the Sea of Rome in diverse
tracts, but especially in his book De ruina and reparatione Ecclesiae. I shall
set down some passages in general terms: First (says he) let us speak of
the Head, upon whom all the rest depends. He afterward adds, For the supreme
Bishops (that I may come to them in the last place) who by how much they see
themselves ranked above others in greatness and authority, (...) of the Cour^
of R^me.
by so much they labor the more to overth^ow them, out of a domineering humor
for the enlarging of their primacy and supreme power, considering that the
commodities of the Bishoprique of Rome, and S. Peter's patrimony which is very
large and above any Kingdom, (though it have been sufficiently curtalled by
their negligence) can no way suffice to maintain the greatness of their
state, which they have purposed to raise high enough above all the Emperors
and Kings in the world, have cast themselves into those others flocks that
abound in breeding, in wool, and in milk. He afterward specifies the
looseness, luxury, vanities, worldlines, rapi^es, vexations, usurpations,
oppressions, and other such like vices and abuses of the Popes and their Court.
In another book of his, entitled, Clemangius in lib. de lapsu et repar. just.
page 10.
De lapsu and reparatione justitiae; he shows that the Court of Rome has
infected France by coming there, specifying all the vices and blemishes which
are communicated unto it, and those no small company.

18 Lastly (says he) there was a time when the Apostolic Bishop being vexed
with the tyranny of the Italians, made choice of France for his seat, and for
all the Court or Rome, supposing he could not ^inde assured refuge elsewhere: to
whom I could wish the strength of France had never proved a staff of a reed,
as it was a long time before foretold that it should^ what was it else that
brought France upon the sudden into these miseries, making her fall away from
that eminent glory which made her flourish above al other nations, but that,
degenerating from those ancient virtues which adorned her with such an
excellency of honor, she is changed from valor to cowardice, from diligence
to sloth, from honesty to ignominy, from gravity and constancy to a wanton
lightness, from temperance to luxury, from courage to presumption, from
liberality to covetousness and unrestrained spoiling, from thrift to
prodigality, from trust to treachery, from piety to impiety, from order to
confusion, from a solid glory to pride and vanity, from zeal of the public
good, to private gains, from correction and discipline to a general impunity
and license of all wickedness and misdemeanors? and, to sum up all in a
word which is proper for our present subject, from justice to injustice and all
iniquity?

19 The author of the book entitled De Hierarchia subcoelesti, De hierarch^a
sub^^lesti lib 14 cap. 7.
who lived about the same time, under Charles the fifth and sixth, has made us
also an inventary of the abuses, deformities, and debauchments of the Court of
Rome, which (as he says) crept into it for the most part after Clement the
fifth. Celestine the fifth (as the story goes) seeing the state of the Court of
Rome even then disorderly and corrupted, retired himself of his own accord,
and renounced the Popedom: and although it be said that he was chea^ed by
Boniface the eighth his successor (of whom it is said that he entered like a
Fox, and reigned like a Lion) yet the same Celestine was moved so to do,
rather out of a desire of avoiding pomp, and enjoying the embraces of his
Rachel. Benet, who was of the order of the Pre^icants, succeeded Boniface, who
having made peace with the King of France, with whom his predecessors were at
ods, he undertook to reform the Church, but he could not go through with
it, being he lived not a whole year. After him there was a Pope chosen by the
name of Clement the fifth, an Archbishop of Bourdeaux in France, under whom all
the Canons, the Customs Ecclesiastical, and other virtues did utterly perish,
their gallantry was increased, Simony flourished, avarice sprung up, pride and
pleasure waxed hot, they gave themselves up to the delicacies of the palate; a
puddle of luxuries did overflow all, and was poured down upon the Clergy. Was
not all the Church afterward made tributary? Consider the pecuniary tithes,
the slaughter-houses, the procurations in absence, the injust reservations of
all dignities, The ^efo^m^tion of the Pope ever desired, never effected.
the bestowing of benefices put all into one man's hand, the exemptions which
are as it were the maimes of all the members of the Church, the plenary
indulgence of all sins granted to rich men. Consider also the presenting of
insufficient men to Bishopriques, and the commutation of all offenses into
pecuniary mulcts.

20 John Duke of Bourges in an Epistle which he sent to Pope Innocent the
seventh, amongst other things tells him, Epistola Ioannis quondam Regis
Francorum filti B^turigum Ducis ad Innocentium 7. super ^a^lo unionis Ec. les^
habetur in libro de hierarchia Subcoelesti.
That in Peter's case the Sun of righteousness was wont to rise, and the
fruitful earth brought forth fruit of the purity of the divine seed a hundred
fold: that there the authority of the Fathers remained entire and incorrupted,
whereas now we see a head faint, a heart sick, and scarce ought sound from the
sole of the foot to the top of the head. And he had said before, That ambition
the fountain of other vices, is now growing in the Church of Rome, and that it
spreads abroad monstrous and abominable vices over all the earth, like branches
of a green stock.

21 Afterward the Council of Basil was called; many good decrees were there
made: there the Popes, who had now reered their power too high, were brought
under the yoke of a Council; there their enterprises were reprehended, their
power bounded and regulated. Hark what Sylvius says: How that decree was
necessary to curb the ambition of the Popes of Rome, AEnaas Sylvi^us de
Concilio Bas. lib. 1. in fine.
who thrusting up themselves above the Catholic Church, thought it was
lawful for them to do what they list, and a little to divert the thoughts of
the Popes from the care of temporal matters, considering that they never
thought of spiritual. But when all came to all, this was to no purpose: for
the Popes hold that Council to be apocryphal, yea heretical; they condemned
it in the Lateran, for as much as concerns them; so that we are to begin
again. Whereupon it was expedient to call yet for a reformation of the Head.
Besides what we have elsewhere spoken of the Council of Basil, we will here
set down the testimony of Gregory Haymbourg a German Lawyer, who lived at that
time. Gregorius Haymburg. in tract. de refut. primatus petri.
The Council of Basil endeavoring to abolish and reform that, and desiring to
reduce the present Vicar of Christ to some form which come near the life of
Christ, has bin let hither toward; forin the prosecution of that
reformation which w^^ begun, so soon as it touched upon the Court of Rome,
there was such a storm raised against it, that the ship of Peter seems buried
in the waves, where it swims, being it cannot sink.

22 Nicholas Cusan Cardinal of St. Peter ad vincula, who writ not long after
the Council of Basil, in his books De Concordia Catholica, says, The power
of the Bishop of Rome ought to be handled in the first place, Cus^nus lib. 2.
Cap. 27.
because ( as Gregory says) in a Council where they meddle with reformation,
they must begin at the head. And afterward he says, That when the head is
sick all the members are sensible of it, and that the health of inferiors
depends upon the soundness of those that are set over them; and that there
cannot be a greater enormity than when he who thinks every thing lawful for
him in regard of his uncontrouled power, invades the right of those that are
under him.

23 James de Paradise, of Chartres, who writ also a little after the Council
of Basil, in his book De septem statibus Ecclesiae, says: Seeing then we
hold it possible to proceed to a reformation as well of the head as the
members, by such as have authority and presidency both spiritual and
temporal, Iacobus de Paradiso in libro de septem stat. Eccles.
it must be either by one man or more. That it should be by one man, is against
all reason, how eminent soever he be for his virtues, his knowledge, his worth,
although he be renowned for his miracles, nay in my opinion not by the Pope
himself alone. For there are so many Canons, Decr^tal^, and Constitutions made
by them already, as are good for naught but filling up parchment to no purpose,
without working any reformation. Besides, seeing it is evident, ^ay palpable,
that hi^ own Court stands in great need of reformation, a^ has been well
known by the common cries of the last General Counc^^^^; which Court of hi^
if he either cannot or will not reform, (...) P^pe (...), b^t not (...).
which he covers under his wing, how is it credible that he should ^eforme the
Church which is of so large an extent? Besides, it may be objected to him^
Apply the salve to your own sores first as being the head; for when that is
cured, you may with less difficulty cure the members; wherefore Physician
heal thy self. You must first take the beam out of your own eye, and then you
may take the mo^e out of your brothers eye, else you will do no good by an
inverted order. Unsavory salt is not good for seasoning. Wherefore by the just
judgment of God his decrees are scarce well received yet, nor ever will be
till he have reformed himself and his dependants. And in good deed I think
the chi^fe cause of the deformation of the Church is the wound in the Head,
which has need to be cured first and foremost.

24 And anon after, Wherefore it seems to me an incredible thing that the
Catholic Church should be reformed, unless first the Court of Rome be so;
but as the world goes now, we may see how hard a thing that is. And anon after.
Those which have the presidency in Councels on the Popes behalf, when they see
that matters in the Council make against their masters and them, what can be
expected from them, but that they will withstand the decrees of such Councels
with might and maine, either by dissolving them, or sowing dissentions in them,
and so the thing shall remain unperfected, and we be driven to r^turne to the
old wilderness of error and ignorance? Every body knows this to be most
true, unless it be some one happily who is not experienced in times past. The
tragedy which was acted in our age at the Council of Basil does sufficiently
prove it, as they knew well who have laid down the story before our eyes.

25 Felix Hemmertin who lived at the same time, a great zelot of the Popes, so
far that he railes upon the Councels of Constance and Basil; yet he thus
speaks of them. Felix Hemmer^in Cantor Tubi^ensis in tract. de liberate
Ec^lesiastica.
I protest I will open my mouth to speak in parables, and will at first set
down such propositions as are things which we have seen and known, and which
our forefathers have declared unto us, and which have not been concealed by
their children in another generation. Truly by reading^ turning, searching,
perusing, and examining all the histories, and all those that have been versed
in them, we find that since the time of the Prince of the Apostles, through
all his successors one after another, following herein those that have writ
exactly of the acts and affairs of the Bishops of Rome until this present, we
never saw, heard, nor understood that greater and more notorious excesses were
committed in point of avarice, ambition, oppression, cheating, cozening,
naughtiness, cruelty and severity by way of state^ and under color of
mildness, than is now adays committed by great and small that have any
command in the house and Court of Rome.

26 James Piccolominy Cardinal of Papia, who lived in the time of Pius the
second, has inserted amongst his epistles a letter which a friend of his writ
to him from Rome in this manner. Johannes Pe^ru^ Arrinab. in epist. ad Iacobum
Piccolomini Cardinalem Papiensem page 75.

Ipse provocator ^ell^ non lacessitus suit.


Would you know what is done in the City? nothing but as it used to be, nothing
but coursing, canvassing, and plotting; the saying of the Philosopher is
verified, the Court is a place ordained for deceiving and being deceived
mutually; the Counsel seldom sits; the Pope is mightily troubled with cares,
that is, with the care of that war which he had voluntarily undertaken, as
the same Epistle tells us, lest any should think that it was the zeal of thy
house has eaten me up.

27 In the dialogue entitled Aureum speculum Papae, made about two hundred
years ago, we find this exclamation. Good God, with what danger i^ the ship
of St. Peter tossed! the preaching of Paul is despised; the doctrine of our
Savior neglected; and in the Court of the Church of Rome ( which is the head
of all other Churches) there is no soundness from the sole of the foot to the
crown of the head. Theodorick of Nihem who was the Popes Secretary,
Theodoricus a Nihem de ^schism. l. 2. ^ap ult.

Clemangius de ^^ina and re^^^. ^cal^s.


said as much in the end of his second book of schism, which he writ in the
year 1410. In effect there is no soundness in the Catholic Church even from
the head to the sole of the foot. As also Nichola^ Cl^mangiu^ in his book Of
the ruin and reparation of the Church. The saying of the Prophet is true,
Simony practiced at Rome.
from the sole of the foot unto the crown of the head there is no soundness
in it.

28 Baptista Mantuan a great Devine in his time, Espensaeus in epist. ad Titum.
cap. 1. digress. 2. a page 76. ad 8^.
a Friar of the order of St. Mary of Mount Carmel, an Italian borne, who lived
about 1490. has spoken much of this subject: Espensaeus the Devine has
stuffed ten or eleven pages with his verses, which talk of nothing more than
the vices, abuses, and abominations of the Popes and their Court of Rome. I
will forbear to recite them, contenting my self to refer the curious reader
either to the author himself, or to him that there quotes them.

29 Mr. John le Maire one of our French Historians, who writ his book of
Schism about the year 1500, gives us to understand that they were about this
reformation in his time, without which the former Councels were to no purpose,
showing withal how necessary a thing it is. Every good Christian (says he)
ought to pray God that the two last Councels of the Gallicane Church may
engender one great universal and general Council of all the Latin Church,
to reform that Church as well in the head as the members, so as those General
Councels use to do. And that if it be not kept at Lions it may be kept in some
other place most expedient and necessary for the public good: which may be
very well done at this present, considering the great peace, amity and union
which is betwixt the two greatest Potentates in Christendom, the Emperor and
the King, together with their third confederate in the league, the Catholic
King Ferdinand of Arragon, who ought altogether to be inclined to reform the
abuses of the Church of Rome: which reformation must of necessity be made.

30 The second Council of Pisa was holden in the year, 1512, where they
consulted about many good rules against the Pope: But Julius the second played
them a trick^ calling the Council of Lateran, which made that of Pisa to
cease, and dis^nulled all the decrees thereof; so that we are yet complaining
against the Court of Rome. Now that it was necessary at that time to proceed to
the reformation of the Head, we perceive well enough by the testimony of
Mantuan and John le Maire: as also it is evident from the Acts of that Council
of Pisa, as we have said in the fourth Chapter of the first book. This very
necessity continued till the Council of Trent; so much we learned from Pope
Adrian the sixth, and the relation of the delegates of Paul the third for
matter of reformation: As also it is confirmed by Langius a German Monk in the
Chronicle which he writ in the year 1520. For see here the description of a
few abuses of Rome under Leo the tenth. Paulus Langiu^ Monachus Bozawiensis in
Chronico Cit^zensi sub ann. 1113.
The desire of money makes all things saleable at Rome; Simony is tolerated for
gold; pluralities of prebends are granted in great number; all benefices and
dignities of what condition soever are reserved for the Cardinals,
Protonotaries, and Popes minions; graces and resignations are granted without
any stint; annates, or half of fruits are exacted without delay: yea, not only
those annates that were granted by Princes for three years in the time of Pope
Calixt the third are yet in force, but are enhansed daily; pressing and
oppressing more grievously than ^ver. And if the Princes do not take an order
with it, all the gold and silver raked and squeazed out of Germany, will be
carried to Rome at time and time, as into an holed sack and an insatiat gulf:
the dismembring of monasteries, and chopping of Churches are allowed against
all right and reason: the government and administration of Churches are not
bestowed on those that deserve best^ but those that bid most: the elections
made by Bishops are commonly rejected, and devolved to them of Rome: great
store of money is exacted and extorted for the purchase of Bishops pals, to the
detriment of the Churches. At last he makes this Epilogue. By reason of the
foresaid grievances. and such like as proceed from the Court of Rome, there
grows nothing but ruins, destructions and miseries over all Christ^ndome.
Conclude we then, The Popes care o^ temporals, neglect of spi^ituals.
that there was good reason why the Emperor, the King of France, and the
States of Germany demanded this reformation of the Head and Court of Rome, and
no reason why it was denied. This is not all; we must now see in particular
where in this reformation con^ists, at least for the maine heads of it, and
show in particular the abuses that are to be corrected, and the plaints that
were put up against them.

CHAP. III. Of the Popes too great care about temporal means, and of their
greediness in getting them.
1 THe first thing that ought to be reformed in the Church of Rome, is the
overgreat care which the Popes take of temporal things now-adayes; and the
trick they have got of raking up goods, revenues, and riches together; of
setting their hearts wholly upon them with an ardent and inordinate desire;
yea, so far as they forget spiritual matters and set light by them. AEneas
Sylvius, AEn^as Sylvius lib. 2. de Council. Basil.
who was afterward Pope Pius the second, makes the president of the Council
of Basil speak in this manner. This decree was necessary to divert the minds
of the Popes a little from the care of temporal things, seeing they never
thought of spiritual. He speaks of that decree whereby the Popes power was
abated, and made subject to the power of a Council. But they knew well enough
how to take order with it afterward, by means of the Councels of Lateran and
Trent, who have given them the upper hand, and shamefully sold the liberty of
the Church.

2 Cardinal Cusan speaks of this matter more at large: The Pope (says he) has
hooked unto himself so much money by investitures, Nicolaus Cusanus lib. 3. de
Concord. Cathol c. 29.
that they complain generally in Germany, not that they are overcharged, but
that they are quite broke and utterly undone: there is a raging appetite after
the temporal means annexed to Churches, which possesses the hearts of our
ambitious Bishops now adays; so as we see them commit that openly after their
promotion, which they labored for underhand before. All the care is of the
temporal, none of the spiritual. That was not the meaning of the Emperors;
they never intended that the spirituals should be swallowed up by the
temporals, which were bestowed on Churches for their augmentation. And
presently after; The Court ingrosseth unto it self all the best and the
fattest; and that which the Empire has set apart and ordained only for the
service of God and the public good, by pretended reasons and new inventions
is diverted another way, since lust and avarice have so seized upon it, that
what was Imperial is now made Papal, and the spiritual temporal.

Theodoricus a Nihem l. 3. de schism. c. 10.
3 Theodorie of Nihem, in his third book De Schismate; speaking of the large
revenues which the Emperors had bestowed upon the Popes, says, What comes
there of all this pomp, of so much temporal means, wherein the Church of
Rome prides her self in these times, but a neglect of spiritual matters, a
setting up of tyrants over them, a many divisions and schisms in that Church,
and many other malladies? This is well enough known.

4 Mr. John Gerson in his book De Ecclesiastica Potestate, after he has spoken
of diverse abuses of the Popes, he adds, Romish Simony.
What shall we think is to be said of an infinite number of such like things
that are done, casting aside all care and regard of all spiritual and divine
matters which concern the Christian faith and religion?

5 It is a wonder to think whither the ardent desire of getting has
transported them: They have not spared Gods service, and all that depends upon
it to attain their ends, to become rich, and make themselves great Lords: They
have spared neither Croisada's, excommunications, nor any thing that is most
holy and sacred, which they have not made stales to their avarice, luxury, and
ambition, not without treason against the Divine Majesty. We speak too much
hereof of our selves, although we do not say all: let us give place to our
witnesses to speak, who we desire may believed, and not our bare word. In the
first place let us produce those that testify the setting to sale of
spiritual and holy things, which is practiced at Rome. We will marshall the
Popes own domestiques in the front. Vid additionem ad glos. in cap^
fundamenta. in verbo gens Sancta de elect. in 6.
See what is said to this purpose in an addition to the Canon Law, taken out of
Johannes Andraeas, and inserted in the gloss. The same John the Monk said,
that Rome being founded by robbers, does yet retain her first original, being
called Roma quasi rodens manus, because she corrodes the hands; and he added
that verse, Roma, manus rodit,
Quos rodere non valet odit.
The hands Rome grates,
Or if not so, she hates.
The elegance of the French complies with the Latin. Fontanus in addit margin^
add gloss. Vid. Accurs. in l. Libertas D. de regulis juris.
James Fontanus puts this other in the margent borrowed from the glossator of
the Civil Law, Rome is the fountain head of avarice,
And therefore all things there are at a price.
Gregory the thirteenth has expunged all these additions in his new purgation
of the Canon Law. It were fitting that covetousness were blotted out of their
hearts, not their books. Avery of Rosate, an ancient commentatour of the Law,
Alberius in Lexico. in verb^ Roma.
mentions the forecited verse, and puts this other to it, Dantes custodit,
Non dantes spernit and odit.
The givers it protects,
The rest hates and neglects.


5 AEnaeas Sylvius before he was Pope, writ to a brother to his, AEneas Sylvius
epist. 66.
There is not any thing which the Court of Rome bestows without money; even
the imposition of hands, and the gifts of the Holy Ghost are set to sale there;
no remission of sins but to such as have money. Pope Honorius the third, in his
letters to the Clergy of England, Matthew. Paris. in Henric. 3. page 316.

Matthew. Westmonast. l. 2. sub ann. 1226. page 119.


does freely confess the villainy of his Court, but to a pretty purpose I
trow; mark what the English Monks say of it, And though the Popes Nuncio did
publicly rehearse before them all the letters wherein the same Pope did
allege the scandal and old reproach of the holy Church of Rome; to wit, the
imputation of covetousness, which is the root of all evil. And mainely in
this, that no man could dispatch any business at Rome, without chaffering and
disbursing large sums of money, and giving of bribes. Co^ruptions in the
Court of Rom^.
But in as much as the poverty of Rome (said he) is the ground of this scandal
and infamy, the natural children ought to relieve the poverty of their mother.
Wherefore (said he) for the utter rooting out of this scandal, we require that
two prebends be allowed us out of all Churches and Abbeys, and the means of
one Monk out of every Covent. But the English perceiving the fallacy to be
too gross, made a mock of that demand.

Albertus Argentin. in Chro. in Joan. 22. sub anno 1334.
7 We must here relate a dream which a certain Bishop had of the Election of
Benedict the 12, and what he said unto him. He dreamed that some body appeared
to him upon the night, and said, Thou seek the Pope; He is not. And
returning again a little after said, Would thou see the Pope? This is he;
showing him a big man whom he knew not; but being arrived at Avignon, where the Sea then was, just upon the point when they were going to the election of a
Pope after the death of John the 22. Having found that Cardinal Blank was the
man which was showed unto him, he sought him out, saying unto him, Father, you
shall be Pope: And having rehearsed his dream unto him, he added, He that
showed me your visage, carried me into a most filthy stable, full of dirt and
dung, where I saw a coffer of most white marble quite empty; you are that
coffer, which you must fill with virtue in executing this charge. O you
shepherd and stable-groome, cleanse the Court and See Apostolic, which is now
naught else but a filthy nasty stable of villainy, covetousness, and Simony.

Jason in l. qui Roma.. Scia. n^. 16. D. ver. obligat.

Ludovicus Comes in Regal. Cancel de valo. exprim^ in praesat. page 451.6

Felinus in cap. 2. colum. 8. De rescrip.

Ioannes Andreaes Gr. p. 232.

Petrus de Ferra^i^^.


8 One of our Law-commentators says, The Emperor like the Eagle leaves his
prey, and does not as one insatiable^ set his teeth to every kind of meat: but
it is otherwise with the pope, who like the universe co^tains all things. An
officer of the court of Rome, after he has spoken of several taxes of the
Chancery, says, By these upstart and unusual exactions, is verified the
saying of Alphonsus King ^f Arragon recorded by Antonius Panormitanus in his
book of the Apothegms of Alphonsus; to wit, that the Harpies do not live now
in the Isles, but have shifted their habitation and reside in the Court of Rome.
So true they found it, that one of our greatest Canonists cites the very same.
Another Canonist geeringly says, The Pope is very liberal that takes a great
deal of gold for a little piece of lead. But he hit it more fitly that said,
The Pope in this had found out the Philosophers stone. One of our ancient
practitioners makes this prayer, That some good Emperor would stand up against
those that destroyed the world anciently by their devotion, but now by their
covetousness and rapine; who have ruined the state of the Empire, and all Lay
men. And in another passage, speaking of charges, Idem Ferrar. in ^orm. libell.
qua uxor agit ad dotem. in verbo, matrimonium page 168.
The Pope (says he) has reserved them both in this case, and many of this
nature, to fill his own purse, and his insatiat Court. And again he says,
That the ground of all avarice and ambition is in the Court of Rome, and that
the Romanists do many things against God and his laws, to their eternal
disgrace, and everlasting loss of their souls.

Matthew West monast. l. 2. sub anno 1181. page 56.
9 An English Monk says, that in the year 1181. under Alexander the 3.
Prester John King of the Indies (for so he calls him) was aminded to serve the
Church of Rome; Of which great design there had been a happy issue, if the
same, or rather the infamy of the Roman avarice had not defiled the whole
world through all parts of the earth, which made his devotion to grow somewhat
cold. V^. Paulum Langium in Chron. Citizen. si sub ann. 1404 page 878.
Theodoric Vric a Devine of the order of the Austin Monks, in his first book
De consolatione Ecclesiae, which he dedicated to the Emperor Sigismond,
affords us also this testimony. Papa stupor mundi cecidit: secumque ruere
Calica templa Dei, membra simulque caput.
Papa dolor, mundique pudor, per crebra patescit
Crimina seu scelera famine sonifero.
Heu, Simon regnat! per munera quaeque reguntur;
Iudiciumque pium gaza nefanda ^etat. Corruptions of the Court of Rome.

Curia Papalis fovet omnia scandala mundi,
Delubra sacra facit perfiditate forum.
Ordo sacer, baptisma sacrum, cum chrismate sancto
Venduntur turpi condition fori.
Dives honoratur, pauper contemnitur, atque
Qui dare plura valet munera, gratus erit.
Aurea quae quondam fuit, hi^c argentea, Papae
Curia procedit deteriore modo.
Ferrea dehinc facta dura cervice quievit
Tempore non modico, sed modo facta i^tum.
Postque lutum quid deterius soletesse? recordor
Stercu^, and in tali Curia tota s^det.
Down goes the Pope, the wonderment of all,
With him Gods Church, the head and members fall.
The Pope, the worlds both grief and shame, is known
By's many crimes, which now are famous grown.
Now who but Simon? bribes are all in all,
And wicked pelf just judgment does forestall.
The Popish Court does foster all disgrace,
And turns the Church into a market place.
Chrisme, Orders, Baptism (all which holy are)
Are basely sold as at a pedling fair.
The rich is honored, and the poor neglected;
He that can give most shall be best respected.
The Court of Rome, which was of gold before
Then turned to silver, of a baser ore;
Next, stiffe-neck'd she, not only for a flirt,
Grew into iron, now is turned to dirt.
And after dirt what worse? yet now I think on it,
What but? Sir reverence, all the Court does -- on it.
[All this which the author delivers in a hobling verse, Petrar^^ in ep.
Du Ranchin translated word for word, to keep the closer (as he says) to the
sense. But we have expressed it as you see.]

10 Petrarch in an Epistle of his says, That the grim porter is appeased with
gold; that heaven is opened with gold, and Christ himself sold for money.
Espensae^^ in comment. in epi ad Titum. cap. 1. page 76.78.
Learned Espensaeus complaining of the connivence of the Fathers in this
Council, cites diverse verses out of Mantuan, wherein the vices of the Court of
Rome are represented, wherewith he has filled diverse pages; but not to swell
this Treatise too big, I shall content my self to set down here only this
little fragment of his discourse. Whose distich is this I pray you? (says he:)
Vivere qui cupitis sancte, discedite Roma.
Omnia cum liceant non licet esse bonum.
He that would holy be from Rome must ^ye,
All things are lawful there but honesty.
Surely it is not only a Poets, but a Philosophers, yea a Devines, yea a
Monks, and that an Italians, namely Mantuans: the very same is urged also by
Clenard the Devine, professor of Hebrew at Lovaine, Clen^rd^^ in epist.
at Paris, in Portugal: yea more, this man who was nothing less that a
Lutheran, has ventured to express the same in this other distich. Popisa
exactious.
Quisquis opes sacras nummo reperire profano
Quaerit, ^at Romam, sacra sunt vaenalia Romae.
He that would purchase sacred wealth with gold,
Get him to Rome, there sacred things are sold.
He cites these verses also out of the same Author.

-- Vaenalia nobis
Templa, sacerdotes, altaria, sacra, coronae,
Ignes, thura, preces, coelum est vaenale, Deusque.
We sell the temples, altars, priests, and all,
Incense and fires, which we most sacred call,
Crowns, vows, and zealous prayers, we spare them not,
Heaven with his lights, and God himself to boot.
The same Doctor adds, Mantuan lib. 3. de calamit. temporum.
O that our holy Father Pope Pius the 5. would understand thus much, and at my
request now at last take notice of it. I know not whether his immediate
predecessor Sixtus the fourth ever heard of it, but I am sure he took no
order for it. All this was spoken and published since the Council of Trent,
and therefore so much the more remarkable.

CHAP. IV. Of the means which the Popes used to enrich themselves by, and
first of Taxes.
1 NOw they served themselves of diverse means and instruments to compass
these riches. Claudius Espensaeus in comment an epist. ad Tit. cap. 1^ digress.
2.
Doctor Espensaeus sets down a list of the many tricks and devices of the
Court and Chancery of Rome, invented merely for catching of money; where he puts
in among the rest expectative graces, or reversions; howbeit this was after the
Council: knowing very well that the reformation made in that regard did not
bind the Pope. Now (says he) to omit Annates, under what color or pretense
soever they be demanded, which were condemned as Simony in the 21. Session of
the Council of Basil, what shift can we use to excuse from dishonest and
filthy lucre those things which they call graces expectative, secret
reservations, bestowing of Benefices upon the first commer, uniting of many
benefices to one Chapel, Prebend, or other Benefice; mandates, preventions,
propinations, small or ordinary services, conditional resignations, detaining
of all the revenue in liew of pension, and a number of such like things which
were not heard of for a long time in the Church, and which would be strange
news to Peter and Paul, ^ Pet. 2.
if they should come into the world again. This is no more yet than what the
latter of them foretold, that they should buy and sell us with feigned words,
by reason of their covetousness, such and so excessive are these abuses, that
not so much as their own glossers but speak against them. For the Commentator
upon the rules of Innocent the eighth, ^eg. 8.47.66.
sometimes styles the Chamber Apostolic the money-mother; sometimes with
Iugurtha in Salust, he confesses that all things are saleable at Rome;
Exa^^ions for pa^dons and ex^ommunications.
sometimes he does not conceal diverse things either appointed or granted for
the getting in of money by hook or crook: according to what was observed by
Ioannes Andreas i^ cap. Seeds. In Rescriptis. And his holiness great
liberality in giving lead, and taking gold, which Mantuan speaks of, is
publicly known even to children without any contradiction. Eclog. 5. and. 6.


Si quid Roma dabit, nugas dabit, accipit aurum
Verba dat: heu! Romae nunc sola pecunia regnat.
Hoc est Roma viris, avibus quod noctua.
If Rome give ought, it is naught: She takes your ware,
And gives you words. Alas! there is none reigns there
But Lady money now. And as the Owle's
To other birds, so Rome to simple souls.
2 This learned devine has spoken much of these things, yet withal he has
omitted more; as we shall also do, referring those that desire further
information herein to the book entitled Taxa Cancellaria Apostolicae, printed
at Paris by Toussaint Denis the year 1520. And yet this is nothing in
comparison of the penitentiary tax, printed with the same book, where every
sin, every crime, how heinous so ever, has his price set; so that to have a
license and impunity for sinning, there needs no more but to be rich; to have a
pasport to Paradise^ both for a man's self and his misdeeds. But (that which
might make Rome blush if there were any shame in her brow) these pardons and
indulgences are denied to the poor and indigent, who are not of means
sufficient to raise these criminal and incestuous impositions. It was not
enough to exclude them indeed, but they must specify so much in downright
terms, for fear least some body might presume of some favor or exemption
herein. For in the second Tax marked B. under the title De rebus
matrimonialibus, it is said, The dispensation for contracting within spiritual
kindred. g. LX. The same judgment serves for the scond degree; for which the
Datary must be compounded with, for some great sum, sometimes three hundred,
sometimes six hundred, or otherwise according to the quality of the person. And
mark it well, that such graces and dispensations as these, are never granted to
poor men.

3 So that we live not in those days when it was more hard for a rich man to
enter into the Kingdom of heaven, than for a Camel.
cable to go through the eye of a needle; for now the Kingdom of Heaven
belongs to them, and not to those beggarly creatures that have nothing but a
staff and a wallet. We might here allege many testimonies concerning this
subject, to evince this abuse; but because it is too apparent, we will content
our selves with setting down the complaint which the same Espensaeus makes
hereof, after the Council was done; that so every man may perceive that those
abuses were not taken order with, but are now more frequent than ever they were.

4 There is a book publicly set to every man's view (says he) which sels as
well now as ever, entitled, Claudius Espensaeus in comment. in epist. ad Titum
cap. 1. digress 2. page 67. et seq.
Taxa Cancellaria Apostolicae, which is prostitute and set out for gain, like
a common whore; whence more naughtines is learned, than from all the Summists
and summaries of all vices. There is license granted for many of them, and
absolution for all; but only to such as will buy them. I forbear the names, for
(as one says) they are very fearful even the sound of them. It is strange
that in these times, in this schism, that index and inventary of so many
unclean and abominable villainies, so infamous that I am confident there is
not a more scandalous book in all Germany, Suitzerland, Exac^ions by
disp^ns^tions and takes.
or any other place, which has separated from the Church of Rome, was not
suppressed: Yea, it is so far from being suppressed by the Treasurers of the
Church of Rome, that the licenses and impunities, for those so many and such
horrible crimes are renewed, and for the most part confirmed by the faculties
of the Legates, which come from thence into these quarters, with power to
restore to their former estate all things that were utterly lost, and so to
legitimate all bastards, whoresons, and such as were begot by any unlawful
conjunction, etc. to allow people marriage with such as they had formerly
committied adultery with, to absolve such as were perjured, Simoniacall,
falsifiers, robbers, usurers, schismatiques, heretics recanting; Yea, and
even to admit them to orders, honors, dignities, and all sorts of benefices;
to dispense with casual, not wilful murderers; howbeit the forecited Tax
does not except wilful parricides, killers of father, mother, brother, sister,
children, or wife: sorcerers, enchanters, concubin-keepers, adulterers,
incestuous with parents or kindred, Sodomites, sinners against nature, abusers
of themselves with beasts, etc. O that Rome would from henceforth have some
shame, and cease to set out such a shameless catalogue of all manner of
wickedness.

Nicolaus de Clemangiis in tract. de praesulibus p. 66. 6.
5 We will here add the complaint of Clemangius the devine upon this subject:
So the Church which Christ has taken for his spouse, without wrinkle or
blemish, disfigured by this horrible villainy, is now the shop of all pride, of
all tradeing, of all filching and stealing, where the Sacraments are hung out
for a show, all the orders, even the priesthood it self: where favors are
sold for silver, dispensations for not preaching, licenses for non-residence:
where all offices and benefices, yea, even sins are bought and sold^ Lastly,
where Masses and the administration of the Lords body are set to sale. Would
any man have a Bishoprique? let him provid^ his money, and that no little sum,
but a pretty great one for so great a Title; and let him not stand upon
emptying his purse for the purchase of such a dignity, seeing he will quickly
fill it again, and that more soundly then he could do by many sorts of
Merchandise. Does any desire a prebend, a Provosts place, or some other
dignity? it is no matter for knowing his deserts, his life and conversation;
but so many crowns as he has in his chest, such hopes may he conceive of
compassing his desire. For what skils it to speak of poor folks, who are
accounted unprofitable in all things, and unworthy of all government or charge;
and who have no other hopes but to wax old and pine away in misery
dis-respected and despised. What should a poor man go to market for with an
empty pouch, when he has nothing to buy the wares with?

L. Plebeiis. C. Theodos. De Episcop. Eccles. and ^leric.
6 The case is finely altered; the Imperial laws exclude rich men out of
Churches, and the Papal poor men. These last examples lead us to a third kind
of Taxes, which is raised out of Bishopriques, and other benefices; in the
catalogues hereof are set down what sums of money the Pope was wont to exact
for first fruits, vacancies, or expedition^ There were two of these printed
among the rest, the one in Germany, containing the taxes of Archbishopriques,
Bishopriques, Abbeys, Priories, and other benefices thoughout all Christendom:
The other (which is particular to France, containing only the tax of the
Bishopriques and benefices of this Kingdom) at Paris by Toussaint Denis 1517.
Paulus Langius in Chronico Citizensi. sub ann. 1404.

Platina in Boni^acio 9.

Theodorius a Nihem de schism. l. 2. c. 7.


The sums that came into the Popes coffers by this means are inestimable:
nothing like to this for the destruction of Kingdoms: and yet Princes are so
bewitched as to suffer it. Boniface the 9 was the inventour, or at least the
Promoter of it, after John the 22 had given a hint to it: for before this time
the world knew not what it meant. So many writers do testify; amongst others
Langius, Platina, and Theodorick of Nihem; the words of the last are very
remarkable.

7 About the tenth year of his Popedom, Of Annates o^ first fruits.
to go more cunningly to work in that matter, and palliate the Simony which
he practiced under some color of necessity, he res^rved to his exequeter one
yeeros first fruits of all the Cathederall Churches and Abbeys that were
vacant; Ludovicus Comes in Regal. de valor exprim p. 451. et in prooemio. q. 1.
in such sort, that whosoever would be preferred by him to any
Archbishoprique, Bishoprique, or Abbey, he was constrained first of all to pay
the first fruits of the Church or Monastery, to which he would be sent;
although perhaps he could never get possession of it, for this Boniface scarce
ever thought of that: Nay, on the contrary he was wont to say, God grant he may
not get possession of this Church, or that Monastery: which he therefore
desired that he might get money for it of another. Now these first fruits were
rated by him at thrice as much as those levies which were formerly made, for
discharge of ordinary duties, by l^tters out of the Apostolical Chamber. And,
for as much as all those that desired to be preferred, had not always so much
money in their purse when they came to the Court as was needful, Usury grew so
frequent at Court in the time of this Boniface, that it was not thought to be a
sin any longer; nay, such Usury was sometime publicly required in the
presence of the Judges and Officers of the same Boniface.

8 He relates diverse other tricks of the same Pope concerning taxes; so foul
and stinking, that I will not defile this discourse with them. It will be said
that these are personal faults; so say I, but they suited so well with his
successors, that they derived them through their veins, and that with
interest. I speak not only of first fruits, but the tricks of petty tols,
graces expectative, altering the rules of Chancery, to put all in confusion,
dispensations, subscriptions, and such like things, which that Historian
thought horrible matters at their first beginning, but custom has sweetened
them unto us. And for annates, whereas Boniface the 9 exacted them only of
Bishopriques and Abbeys, they brought in Priories, and other benefices in after
ages: For mark the title of those of France; Here follow the names of the
Archbishops, and Bishops of the Kingdom of France, and also of all Abbeys,
Priories, and other benefices within their circuit, with the tax which is
reserved upon them for the Sea Apostolic, when they come to be void, and
which is paid for annate, or provision. Hieron. Gigas in tract. de pension. q.
25^ number. 2
Leo the 10 extended this tax to pensions also, as is testified by a Doctor of
the Canon Law. This was the custom (says he) till the time of Leo the tenth,
what time it was ordained, that annates should be paid out of pensions also,
if they amounted to twelve ducats of Gold in the Popes book. This tax was
further enhansed by his successors, and made far more heavy than before, at
it is affirmed in the 77 Article of the remonstrance of the Court of
Parliament, made to King Jews the eleventh.

9 Item, it is to be considered, that though the exactions were excessive, both
in the vacancies, and otherwise, then when these constitutions were made: Yet
after the repealing of them, in the time of Pope Pius, Remonstrance of the
Parliament of Pari^ Art. 77.
and at this present they are more excessive by half: For then in case of
vacancy, they paid but ad volorem taxae, reduced ad mediam taxae; but after
that repeal ordinarily there was more exacted in the vacancy, than the whole
tax came to as sometimes a whole years value of benefices, sometimes two.
Insomuch that some pawned their Bulls to the usurers, as the Abbey of Bernay by
name, because two hundred ducates were demanded, whereas the Abbey was not
worth two hundred: and nine hundred for St. Pharon of Meaux: So likewise of
graces expectative, they took two parts or the thirds, and more than ever was
accustomed.

10 This open Simony, like a poison which has gotten to the heart, has
occasioned many complaints and groans. Marsilius of Padua, says; Marsilius
Patavinus in 2 part. def paci^ cap. 24. p. 361.
By the same power he reserves unto himself the rent and revenues in all
places whatsoever, of all benefices for the first year of their vacancy,
engrossing to himself by that means all the treasures in the world, wiping all
Kingdoms and provinces of them.

Of Popish Symony ^^sks, and hist (...).
11 The Bishop o^ Menda, in the reformation which he proposed to the Council of
Vienna, says, The Court of Rome, and the College of Cardinals, together with
the Pope, would have a certain allowance of all Bishops that are preferred
there; Gu^lielm. Durand^ ^n tract. De modo Celebrand^ ^oncilii g^n^r part. 2.
^t. 20.
it seems very requisite that this were taken order with. For this heresy
does much corrupt the Catholic Church, and the common people; and the
remedies which have been applied hitherto are quite disrespected, inasmuch,
that the contrary is usually practiced in the Court of Rome, as if it were no
sin at all to commit Simony, or if it were not all one to give first, and
then take, as first to take and then to give. The thing was taken into
consideration at the Council of Vienna, so as they were once advised to allow
the twentieth part of all livings in Christendom, to the Pope and his
Cardinals; but at last it was shifted off without resolving upon any things A
Doctor of the Canon law, says, Ioa^nes Andr^^s in Ca. inter ^aetera de
o^fi^^^nar.

E^tq em ^itat G^ynnerin prag. Sanct. ^^t.

De Annatis in verbo Annata. Nicola^s ^usan.^ lib. ^. de Conc. Cath. c. 30


it was better for that, because their covetousness is so insatiable, that if
that had been resolved upon, they would have taken both.

12 Cardinal Cusanus desired the very same reformation at the Council of
Basil; The world cries out (says he) of the gettings of the Court of Rome; if
Simony in its kind be an heresy; then sure it is a sacrilege to oppress
inferior Churches: If he that does such things, according to the Apostle, be
an idolater, it will be very necessary by way of reformation, to take away all
these and such like gains, especially because the Catholic Church is
scandalized for this covetousness of her governors, and the Church of Rome
more than other Churches. Wherefore it is expedient in this holy reforming
Council, to remove that especially which is so opposite to Gods Laws, so
prejudicial to souls, and so scandalous to the whole Church, that all things
be done gratis in the Church of Rome, and other Metropolitan Churches.

Clemangius de ruina and repar. Eccles:
13 Nicholas Clemangius in his book De ruina and reparatione Ecclesiae, says,
The Popes, over and above the former charges, have laid other tasks upon
Churches and Ecclesiastical persons, to fortify and maintain their Chamber,
or rather their Charybdis: For they have made a Law, that as often as any
Ecclesiastical person dies, of what dignity or condition soever he be, or
exchangeth his benefice with any other whatsoever, their chamber shall receive
all the fruits and revenues for the first year next ensuing, rated at a
certain sum according to their good will and pleasure. Which exaction, and
diverse others, by him reckoned up there, he blames and condemns.

14 The Glosser upon the pragmatique sanction, says; That Boniface the 9 was
the first that extended the use of annates to all Churches, contrary to the
equities of all Laws, C^smo Guy^nerin in P^^g. mat. Sanct. de annatis in verbo
anna^ ^ page 1936.

Theodoricus de Nihem in notis ad tra l. de privilegiis et ^ur. ^mp.


divine and humane. And he afterward adds, What are they that give, and
receive annates, but the buyers and sellers of the Temple cast forth by Christ?

15 Theodorick de Nihem upon the tract De privilegiis and juribus imperii,
says, There is no reason why the Pope and the Cardinals should not prefer
other men to Bishopriques, Monasteries, and other Ecclesiastical dignities
gratis, and freely, without any intervention of money, promise or compact
whatsoever. But if it be said that the Pope is the general steward of all
Bishopriques, Monasteries, and other Ecclesiastical preferments, and of all
the goods that belong unto them, (howbeit no such thing can be proved out of
the Gospel, the holy Scripture, nor by the testimony of the Saints,) yet we
must believe and maintain that this jurisdiction reaches no further, than to
the giving unto discreet and faithful Popes and Cardinals, the power of
disposing Ecclesiastical benefices, dignities, and other means, to distribute
and bestow them freely, as they have freely received them, upon serviceable and
deserving men. And a little after; Besides, hence it is that they never regard
the will of God, nor the benefit of the people committed to their charge, but
their own gain, as many good Devines say. Hence have risen every where some
great errors in Christendom, and grievous defamations against the Court of
Rome; which is also drawn into an example by others.

16 He adds yet further; Exactions by Annates or first fruits.

Idem ibid p. 830.


What then, if he that has the power of preferring make a law, (which is the
case in hand) that he which will be preferred to such a dignity, shall pay
before his preferment one full years value of that dignity? Many great Devines
are of opinion, that it is a heresy to hold and maintain that such a law may
be observed without mortal sin; because the inferior cannot abrogate the
law of the superior, and he can make no such law of himself, how great
soever his state and glory be. And anon, Whence then comes this power of making
and observing this law? Ye may say that it is abusively by the devils
suggestion, which haunt them that buy and sell holy Orders; which obtain by
Simony Bishopriques, Prebends, Curates, etc.

17 In another place he says thus, Idem ibid p. 791.
Simony is always excepted in the bestowing of Bishopriques, and supreme Sees;
which if so, why was it brought up by the Church of Rome, and the Churchmen
thereof (to wit, the Pope and the Cardinals, who were then at Avinion,) that
those who should be preferred by them to any Archbishopriques, Bishopriques, or
Abbeys, should compound with the chamber Apostolic, and for the ordinary
service of the Lord Cardinals? otherwise none should be preferred or created
Bishop from thenceforth, unless he either paid or entered bond for the payment
of so much, upon most damnable forfeitures.

18 The Author of the book, Tract. de privileg and juribu^ Imp. p. 831.
entitled, De privilegiis and juribus Imperii, which is very ancient, shows
that these annates were never exacted by the Emperors, when they bestowed
investitures; and he takes offense at the Popes using them; We never read,
(says he) nor is it credible that the Emperor Otho did ever either demand, or
receieve by himself, or by any other, the fruits of one whole year; no, nor
of half a year, for any Church, Monastery, or Ecclesiastical dignity, which
he bestowed upon any man for a title. Why then is the contrary pactised by some
Ecclesiastiques? It is a strange thing: And perhaps by reason of the excess
herein, or because no regard is had to the ancient laudable customs, which
have been left by the holy Fathers to the Church militant, the covetousness
of the times keeping it so close, it appears more in deed that in writing, in
what sort the Catholic faith prospers by this means.

19 Gregory of Haymburgh a German Lawyer, Greg. Haymb. in confut primat. Pap.
who lived in the time of the Council of Basil, complains likewise of these
Annates, and other exactions of the Pope upon benefices, and Ecclesiastical
preferments; The Empire (says he) being thus divided or vacant, they proceeded
further, reserving to themselves all advowsons and dignities how Canonically
soever disposed of; yea and the presentations to benefices; surcharging withal
the Bishopriques, and other livings, with Annates, and other Symoniacall
exactions, for investiture into these livings, that otherwise belonged to the
Empire; that the Popes by this means might squeaze all the treasures of the
world, as if they were not content to have usurped the Empire. It was one of
the Articles proposed by all the Nations of Christendom at the Council of
Constance, there to be reformed; Council Constable. Sess. 40.
conceived in these terms, Of Annates, and petty services. And indeed there was
a mighty bickering about it betwixt the Cardinals, who opposed the proposal,
and the French who did earnestly solicit the contrary: as appears by the
answer of our French men, printed amongst the works of Nicholas de Clemangiis;
but at last the Cardinals, by means of their shiftings and put-offes, got the
victory, insomuch that there was nothing done in it.

20 Albert Crants, a German Historian and Devine, in his book, called,
Wandalia, Albert Crantziu^ Wandal. lib. 13. c. 5.
speaking of a tenth which Pope Paul the second would have laid upon Germany,
for making war against the Turk, says, That the Archbishops of the Rhene were
scarce willing to give way to this imposition, because the Pope received the
first fruits, which was a great pressure to Germany; Valaterran. Comment l 30.
Cap. quomodo servi tractand^^
and all (says he) that the Cardinals may have to feed their beasts.
Volaterranus speaking of Rome in the 30 book of his commentaries dedicated by
him to Pope Julius the 2, says, That livings are there bestowed for wages,
(...).
and the spiritual treasure is made a merchandise.

21 There is an arrest of the Parliament of Paris, dated the 11 of September
1406, wherein it is said, (...) hoc Arr^^^um ^pud N^^ de Clem^^ p. 115. (...)
Basil Sess 21.
That Pope Benet and his officers should from thenceforth give over and
abstain from the exaction of Annates in this Kingdom of France, and the
Country of Daulphiny. The Council of Basil, made also a very remarkable
Decree hereabout in the 21 Session; The holy Council ordains, that from this
time forwards, there shall be nothing exacted either in the Court of Rome, or
else where for letters, Bulls, seals, Annates, common and petty services,
first fruits, or any other title, name, or color whatsoever, for confirmations
of elections, admission of requests, provisoes of presentations, nor for any
collation, deposition, election, demand, or presentation to be made even by
Lay men. Nor for institution, installation, and investiture in Churches, (even
Cathedral and Metropolitan) Monasteries, dignities, benefices, and other
Ecclesiastical offices whatsoever: Nor for Orders, nor the sacred benediction,
nor for the Pall. This same decree was in express words inserted in the
Pragmatique ^anction, and confirmed by it. We may take notice by the way, of
the prohibition made by the Council, and the Pragmatique sanction against the
Popes, that they should not take any thing for the mantle or Pall, which they
were wont to sell to Archbishops and Metropolitans, at a good round price; as
they did also afterward notwithstanding these decrees; as appears by the
complaint which Langius makes against Leo the 10; Paulus Langius in Chr^ni
Citiz: sub ann. 1513.
A great sum of money (says he) is extorted for the purchase of Bishops
Palls, to the detriment of Churches, against the constitution of the holy
Council of Basil, which ordained that nothing should be paid for the Pall,
nor for the confirmation or obtaining of other offices. But to return to
Annates.

22 It may seem that the Bull of Pope Leo the 10, added at the end of the
Concordate, and confirmed by the letters patents of King Francis the first,
has derogated from the Pragmatique sanction. But that Bull was never received
and approved in France, P. Rebu^^us in Concord.

Rubric. de man^ dat. Apostol. s^n.

Et Rubric. de Annat.

Ordinance d' Orleans Art. 2.


as M. Peter Rebuffus does testify; This constitution (says he) as being
about a money matter, was never received by the inhabitants of this Kingdom.
Nor is it comprehended within the Concordate, nor the Kings declaration
concerning it, verified in the Court of Parliament: And indeed all such Annates
are expressly prohibited in the second Article of the Decree at Orleans; Upon
the remonstrance and request of the delegates of the said States, to the end
that for the time to come no money for vacancy, nor Annate be paid for the
grant of Archbishopriques, Bishopriques, Abbeyes, or other benefices that
concern the Consistory; we have determined to confer and treat more largely
hereabout, with the Commissioners of our holy Father the Pope; and in the mean
time, by the advice of our Council, and according to decrees of the sacred
Synods, and ancient Statutes of the Kings our predecessors and the arrests of
our Courts of Parliament; we do ordain that all transportation of gold or
silver out of our Kingdom, and all payment of money under color of Annate,
Vacance-money, or otherwise shall be left off and surcease; under pain of
paying fourfold, to all such as do contrary to this present decree. But
afterward the execution of this decree was suspended by the letters patents of
the same Prince, dated the 10 of January 1562, procured by the earnest entreaty
of the Cardinal of Ferrara; and Annates were tolerated in this Realm, by
reason that the Pope assured the King, he would take order for a reformation
herein, as appears by the contents of the said letters: which run thus;

23 Charles, etc. Whereas at our coming to the Crown, at the request of the
three estates of our Kingdom, holden in the City of Orleans, by the advice of
the Princes of our blood, and other great eminent persons of our privy
Council, we commanded our subjects, that they should not transport or carry
any more money out of our said Realm, under color and pretense of Annates,
and Vacants; Of Annates or first fruits.
and made other prohibitions concerning the obtaining of benefices by
anticipation, devolution, dispensation, or such like means of dispatch, sent
out of the Court of Rome, as is specified in the copy of the Ordinances
aforesaid, in the second, fourth, and twenty second Articles: Which
prohibitions were published in our Court of Parliament, and other the
jurisdictions of our said Kingdom: whereof complaint and remonstrance has
been made unto us by our dea^ly and welbeloved Cozen, the Cardinal of
Ferrara, Legate in France, who has entreated us to restore the things
aforesaid unto that state wherein they were before the said Ordinance of
Orleans: We declare, that we desire to render all honor and filial devotion to
our Holy Father, and out of the great confidence we have, that his Holiness
will look to provide, and speedily to take order, as need requires, that the
matters aforesaid may be reformed, as our said Cozen, the Cardinal of Ferrara,
his Legate, has promised unto us on the behalf of his said Holiness, and
whereof indeed he has already made great overtures; for these causes and other
considerations us thereunto moving, having a regard unto the foresaid
remonstrances made unto us, with the advice of our most honored Lady and
mother the Queen, the Princes of our blood, and our Privy Council: we have
removed and taken away, and do hereby remove and take away the prohibitions
aforesaid, and the penalties annexed, to be imposed upon the offenders against
them, by our Edict and Ordinance of Orleans, and do make void the Ordinances
aforesaid, for the reasons before mentioned.

24 The Council of Trent was holden at the time when this declaration was
made, See the remonstrance of (...) Co^^^ of P^^ha^^ ^. Artic. 68.^3,74, 75,
76.79,80.

V. Syloam. Locoru^ Communium Henri^^ Token.

Mathh West. l. 2. sub ann. 1245 p. 191.

^ecit per ^ingulos Comitatus Anglie inquiri summam redituum Rom^no^um et
inventum est quod ad tan^un lem pecu^ia ad^cendisset quantum reditus ^ s^us.
viz. sex^ginta millia marcarum puri reditus^

Exceptis vari^s e^olumentis. Matthew. Paris. sub Henrico 3. p 647.

Estat de Tours. See the e^tr^ce joined with the book, De Ecclesia Gallicanae
statuin schismate.


from which our King expected a great reformation concerning the premises, and
particularly considering what assurance the Pope had given him hereof. But all
in vain. Whence it follows, that the cause of this suspension ceasing, the
effect should cease likewise; and that therefore we are under the Ordinance of
Orleans, which was just and good: to the observation whereof we ought the
rather to be inclined, in as much as we understand by the testimony of the
Court of Parliament, and the accounts hereupon made by it unto Jews the 11:
that by reason of Vacancies, Expectatives, and such like means, there goes
almost a million of crowns from hence to Rome every year. Which is further
confirmed by the testimony of the Ambassadors of the Archbishop of Magdenburg
in Germany, who was present at the Council of Basil, who has left upon
record, that he learned from the Archbishop of Lions, then living; that during
the Popedom of Martin the fifth, who sat 14 years, there were carried to
Rome out of this Realm of France only, nine millions of Crowns, without
reckoning what was brought in by the Clergymen of inferior quality.

25 It is reported by an English Historian, that Henry the 3 King of England in
the year 1245, caused an estimate to be taken of the pure rents which the Pope
had out of his Kingdom, and that it was found they amounted to as great a
sum of money, as all that he himself received out of his Realm, nor
reckoning diverse other commodities beside. The like is affirmed by all England
together in an epistle sent to Pope Innocent the 4. where it is said, That he
received more pure rents out of England, than the King himself, who is the
guardian of the Church, and the governor of the Kingdom. And hereupon the the
transporting of gold or silver to Rome was forbidden in this Kingdom by many
good Statutes made at several times. Saint Jews, who amongst diverse others
made one hereabouts expressly forbidding all such exactions, was nevertheless
Canonized for a Saint. King Charles the 6, Henry the 2, Charles the 9, and
others, were never thought the less Catholic for this; nor the people of
France that demanded it in their Councels of State, ever reputed the less
zealous in Religion. For by this means the Popes and Cardinals would be the
more honest men; Po^^sh Simony and ^x^ctions by taxes.
for there is naught that spoils them, but too much ease and wealth. And so
they should both clear themselves from that infamous crime of Simony, which
all Christians detest and abhor; and also acquit all those that barter with
them; who, according to the opinion of Theodoric. a Nihem lib. 2. de schism. c.
2. and in tract. de privileg and ^u^ibu^ Imperii p. 829. and seq. Marsiliu^
Patavinus in defens Paci^ part. 2. c. 11. 24.
Devines, and the sentence of the Parliament of Paris, in the 71 Article of
their Remonstrance, share with them in the sin also. For to believe the Popes
Iohann^s de Turrecremata inc. Si qui^ pe^unia. nu. 4. did. 79

Iacobatius l. 4. de Con^il. art. 4. Aug. de Anco^a in lib. de potest.
E^clesiastica. q. 5. art. 3.

Et alii ab iis ^itati.


flatterers, who go about to persuade them in their filthy writings, that
though they practice Simony, yet they cannot be Simoniacall: this were to hood
wink the eyes against all truth, and to sleep in a blind ignorance. The men
who were the most eminent for learning in the time of Pope Paul the third; who
were bound by oath, and adjured by him, upon pain of excommunication, to tell
him the truth concerning the reformation of the Church, told him plainly,
amongst other things, Council. dele^torum Cardinalium de emendanda Eccles. Paulo
tertio jubente. conscriptum ann. 1538. Extat. tom. 3. Conciliorum Co^oniae.
editorum ann 1551.
That it was not lawful for the Pope and Vicar of Christ, (these are their
very words) to make any gain out of the use of the power of the Keys,
committed unto him by Christ: For it is Christ's command (say they) Freely ye
have received, freely give.

26 The Emperor Natalis Comes l. 14. Historiae sui tempo^is.
Ferdinand, in his demands, put up at the Council of Trent, required that the
ancient Canons against Simony, might be restored. Now these ancient Canons bind
the Pope, as well as other Bishops; and you shall find no exception for him
there; but our Council had no leisure to think of this. I could here make a
large discourse of the Reservations of Bishopriques, and other dignities, and
benefices Ecclesiastical: of the granting out of Graces, and the next voydance
of benefices; of mandats of provision, and other ways which the Popes have
used and do use to this day, to enhanse their revenues. The Ordinances of our
Kings, are full fraught with complaints made, concerning this particular; as
are also the works of diverse authors. All those that ever meddled with
reformation, put always up some Articles about this point: The deputies of
Paul the third, have a whole Chapter of it in their Council. The Council of
Basil, and the Pragmatique Sanction has condemned them: The King of France
desired the like in his demands: Yea, and the Council it self has taken an
order with them, but it is with reservation of the Popes authority above all;
which is as much as to put a gull upon all Christendom, seeing the reformation
in this case was demanded only against him, inasmuch as he is the man from
whence all the disorder proceeds. And after this, all that are acquainted with
the Court of Rome, do very well know, and can testify, how the Pope does
still practice these means, and whether all the decrees of this Council have
debarred him of dispensing his favors.

27 The Popes not content with the gold and silver which they get by these
means, do use taxes and tributes besides, like secular Princes, not only upon
Clergy men, but Lay men also; yea, upon whole Princes and Kingdoms. Gregory
the 9, the year 1229, demanded of the Kingdom of England, the tenth part of
all the moveable goods, as well of the Laity as Clergy, to maintain his war
against the Emperor Frederick^ telling them that he only had undertaken that
war in behalf of the Church Catholic. Matthew. Paris. in ^ist. Angl. sub
Henrico 3 page 349.
Which demand, Henry the third, King of England, (says an English Monk)
having passed his word to the Pope, by his officers, for the paying of those
tenths, had no way to gainsay. But the Earls and Barons, and all the Laity did
oppose it, refusing to engage their Baronies and demaines. As for the Bishops,
Abbats, Priours, and other Prelates, after three or four days consultation,
they at last condescended to it, with a great deal of murmuring; fearing the
sentence of excommunication in case of refusal; as the Monk has it word for
word. The execution whereof ensued as rigorous as ever: For one Mr. Otho, who
was sent as Legate upon that occasion, did not spare excommunications: causing
besides, certain great sums of money to be levied for the defraying of his
charges; England opp^essed by ^he Popes exactions.
because (as he said in this commission) he was not bound to make war at his
own charges. Mean while the Legate not forgetting himself, did not neglect to
extort both money and means for himself: Idem ibid. page 506.

Idem page 507.


for compelling every one to pay him procurations, he sent certain rigorous
injunctions, to the Bishops and Archdeacons to this effect. He afterward
demanded the fifth part of all the goods, and spiritual revenues of the Clergy
men aliens, who had any preferments in England, whereof there were then good
store; and from them he proceeded to the rest: and all to make war against
the Emperor Frederick. And whereas diverse were marked out for that beyond sea
voyage, he dispatched a pretty commission to his Legate, to absolve them of
their vow, and to exact of them certain great sums of money. All these evils
were occasioned mainly by the softness of King Henry the third, who when it
was asked by his subjects, Why he would suffer England, Idem page 508.
considering the large privileges thereof, like a Vineyard without a wall^ to
ly open to the prey and desolation of passengers; He replied, ^ neither will
nor dare contradict the Pope in any thing.

28 Nor is here an end; Matthew. Paris. page 51^.
For about that time (says the same Author) there came into England a new way
of exaction, most execrable, and unheard of in any age. For our holy Father the
Pope^ sent a certain exacter into England, Peter Rubeus by name, who was
instructed to wipe the poor English of an infinite mass of money, by a new
invented mouse-trap trick. For he came into the Chapters of the Religious,
cozening, and compelling them first to promise, and then to pay, after the
example of other Prelates, whom he lyingly affirmed to have paid already. For
he said, Such and such a Bishop, such and such an Abbat have already freely
contributed; why do you slowbacks delay so long, that you may loose your
thanks with your courtesy? Besides, this cheater caused them to swear not to
reveal the manner of this exaction to any, till half a year after; like
robbers, who compel those they rob, to promise that they will not speak of
it. But though men should be silent, the very stones out of the Churches would
cry out against such rake-hells. This fit of the fever descended like an
hereditary disease upon his successors. Innocent the fourth knew well enough
how to husband such a fertile field; but so as he made all England cry out of
him, who brought their complaints as far as the Council at Lions, in the year
1245, then and there demanding for justice and relief against these
tyrannical exactions; and that even before the Popes nose, who was there in
person, who (as the Historians say) casting his eyes down for shame, durst not
say mum. Matthew. Paris. sub Henrico 3. page 646.648.

Matthew. Wes^monas^. l. 2 sub ann. 1245. p. 195.

Matthew. Paris. in Hen. 3. page 677.


And for the Council which regarded nothing but the Popes pleasure, it was
deaf on that ear. The same complaint was afterward put up in a Parliament in
England by King Henry himself, who begun to mean himself; where these
Articles were exhibited amongst others: The Kingdom of England is grieved,
inasmuch as the Lord Pope is not content with the subsidy of Peter pence, but
does extort a grievous contribution of the whole Clergy of England^ and intends
to extort far greater yet; and this he does without the assent or consent of
the King, against the ancient customes^ liberties, and laws of the Kingdom,
and against the appeall and protestation made by the Proctours of the King and
Kingdom, in the general Council.

29 This Parliament used so much respect to the Pope, as to content themselves
with sending some soothing letters to him, thinking to soften his heart with
the relation of their miseries: but this was all in vain, for the grievance
grew daily greater and greater; and indeed you may observe a new kind of
extortion, whereof complaint was made to King Henry; Idem Paris. in Hen. 3.
There were lately brought certain letters from the Sea Apostolic,
containing no little prejudice against the King and Kingdom; to wit^ that the
Bishops should maintain some ten men of war, well provided of horse and
armor, some five, some fifteen, to send over to the Pope, The Popes exactions
in Englan^.
for the service of the Church, for the space of one whole year, to be paid by
the Bishops of England, and employed where the Pope should think expedient;
which Knights service is not due, save only to the King and Princes of the
Realm, etc. Idem p. 694.
A little after, The Pope taking courage to trample under-feet the poor
English, (as the same Historian calls them) and in trampling to impoverish them,
commanded the Bishops of England with more imperiousness than was usual, that
all the beneficed men in England, should contribute unto him; to wit, such as
were resident, the third part of their goods, and the rest, half: adding
withal, some very hard conditions. Idem p. 706.
He sent to one M. John, his Legate, that if any Bishop should make dainty of
paying the subsidies which he demanded, under color of exemption, that he
should sesse them deeper. Another English Historian, speaks thus of this
matter, Ma^th. Westmonast: l. 2 sub ann 1247. page 222.
By reason of these, and such like oppressions, there was a great murmuring,
both amongst the Clergy and people; insomuch, that whatsoever was contributed,
was given with imprecations; or to speak more properly, and not conceall the
truth, with downright cursings, putting the Pope in mind of their grievances,
with a complaint proceeding from the bottom of their hearts, and setting
before him their insupportable oppressions. And he afterward adds these
grievances; The Church of England is intolerably vexed with infinite charges,
in the tenth of all their goods, in the hastening of reliefes, in the money
levied for Soldiers, in the subsidies diverse times exacted by Otho the Legate,
in the paying of 6000 Marks, in the twentieth part of their three years
revenues, in the subsidy of the Roman Empire, in the subsidy granted freely.

Matthew Paris. p. 729.
30 Matthew Paris sets down an infinite company of other barbarous exactions,
saying, The charges were marvelously increased, with a great deal of overplus;
and flowed day by day from the Court of Rome, over the miserable Kingdom of
England; besides the burden, and unwonted slavery; insomuch, that the Bishops
were debarred from the bestowing of their benefices, till they had discharged
these exactions, and yet the pusillanimity of the King never contradicted it.
Horrible burdens, and unheard of oppressions, did spring up daily. We have
thought fit to insert in this book, not all the charges, for that would be a
very hard thing, nay, altogether impossible to set down, but only some few;
to the end, that such as read them, may be sorry for them, and pray to God
that we may be one day freed from them. We should spend too much paper in
setting down all which is delivered by him at large, concerning this point; it
shall suffice us to recount the proverbiall speech of that Pope; Idem p. 683.
England (said he) is indeed the garden of our pleasures, an exhaustible pit:
and where there is abundance, out of much, much may be taken. This proverb was
received with all honor and reverence by his successor Alexander the fourth,
who sent one M. Rustand into England, who rifled the purses of the poor
Clergymen soundly, with the aid and assistance of the Bishop of Hereford, who
was licensed by the Pope to borrow money in the name of the Abbeys, and
Monasteries, and to pawn their goods for the payment thereof. Which he so
effected, that the money went to the Pope, but the bond laid upon the Abbats
and Priours; which they were compelled to pay, together with the costs and
damages, and interests. The pretense was, that that money should be employed to
the use of the Abbeys, and Monasteries. But for fear, least the juggling should
be discovered, he took a course to hinder the thing from ever coming to
trial by any means whatsoever. An English Historian after he has delivered
this relation, adds these words, Idem Paris. p. 886.
These things, and others like detestable, O shame! O grief! did spring at
that time from the sulphurous fountain of the Church of Rome. The same M.
Rustand had commission to levy the tenth of the goods in England, Scotland,
and Ireland, and to raise some other great and intolerable exactions, with
injust actions, and contumelious speeches, hear what the ^ame Author says of
it. Idem p. 884.
At that time Rustand called all the Bishops of England together at London, by
virtue of the Popes authority, The Popes ex^ctions in France.
to hear his commission: where being met after the faculties of the said
Rustand were read, he brake with them, requiring of them all an infinite sum
of money, by virtue of certain writings full of injury and injustice, which
might have deeply wounded the hearts of the most patient men: if that sum had
been levied, the Church of England, yea the whole kingdom should have
undergone a most base servitude, and been thrown into an irrecoverable
poverty. Afterward he commanded his debts to be discharged by the English
Clergy, Idem Paris. p. 904:
writing to this or that Bishop by name to pay such a sum, excommunicating such
as were refractory. There are an infinite examples of the like nature, recorded
by Historians from age to age, which witness unto us, that this is not a fault
personal, but perpetual and Papal.

31 Nor has England only made these complaints. France also has diverse times
groaned, and appeared to be in a kind inslaved. Nicholas de Clemangiis, a
French Devine makes a long and ample description of the taxes and subsidies of
the Popes; amongst which he ranks the imposition of tenths, and diverse other
tributes; What shall I say of the spoiling of Prelates? of the too too usual
tenths, and of other taxations? And a little after, Nicolaus de Clemangiis de
ruina and reparatione Ecclesiae p. 4.
What should I do setting down particularly an infinite company of other
tributary impositions, which are daily exacted of the most unfortunate Clergy?
The Pragmatique of S. Jews is very observable concerning this point; Item, we
will not in any wise, that there be any levy or collections made of the
charges and exactions of moneys, imposed by the Court of Rome, upon the
Churches of our Realm, by means whereof, our said Realm has been
impoverished. Nor is it less considerable which Matthew Paris relates, to have
happened under that Prince; Matthew. Paris. sub Henrico 3^
About the same time (says he) the Pope sent his authentic letters to all
the Bishops in France, in particular by his solemn Nuncioes, to the
Predicants, and Minorites, entreating them that every one of them, according to
his ability, would furnish him with a certain sum of money, which he would
undoubtedly repay so soon as he begun to get breath. This coming to the Kings
ear, who suspected the avarice of the Court of Rome, he sent out
prohibitions, that no Prelate of his Realm should impoverish his country in
that kind, upon pain of forfeiting all his goods. And so those sophistical
Legates of the Pope, upon whose shoulders this charge was laid, returned out of
the Realm empt^-handed, with hissings and mockings. He means Innocent the 4,
in whose time King Jews reigned, the year 1247, what time this was done. This
was the Pope, who so soon as he was come to Lions to hold his Council,
wherein he excommunicated the Emperor Frederick, made such a pitiful
complaint of his poverty, and the great sums of money which he ought, that
our French Prelates shifted themselves to their very shirts, to exercise their
charity toward him; without sparing either gold, silver, movables, apparel,
vessels, horses, or other things; whereby he got an inestimable treasure.

32 But the story of the Abbat of S. Dennis is memorable, Matthew. Paris. in Hen.
3 p. 64^
who having extorted great sums of money out of his Abbey, to present unto
the Pope as others did, in hopes to be made one day an Archbishop, S. Jews the
King, as Patron of that Abbey, compelled him to repay the said sum out of his
own purse. Charles the 6 in a Decree made February the 18, 1406; They take
occasion to reserve the first fruits in the vacancies, and to extort great
sums of money^ whereby the kingdom is exhausted, and to thrust themselves
upon the Popedom, for to enrich and prefer both them and theirs. And in
another Decree made the same year, he accounts this amongst other extortions;
Imposing tenths and other subsidies at their pleasure, without ever consulting
with the rest of the Bishops about it; in the raising whereof, there is no
mean observed either of justice or equity. And in another made in March 1418.
That an infinite deal of gold and silver, O^ the Cl^^gy (...) w^ls. A^^ o^ the
(...).
and rents were transported out of the Kingdom and the Province of Dauphiny,
to the prejudice of the ancient customs, and the undoing of the Realm, to the
irreparable loss and damage of the Commonwealth, and the miserable desolation
of the Churches, as well such as were of royal foundation as others. We will
here relate what Marsilius says of tenths; Mars^lius in de^ens. pa. par. ^. c
^1
So that this Bishop (speaking of the Pope) seeking to get this jurisdiction
over earthly Princes, although wrongfully, by such a kind of distribution, or
donation of such like temporal, matters, of benefices, and tenths, (which when
I look upon all Kingdoms at once, do amount to an inestimable deal) he may
stir up a great deal of sedition; and indeed has ever hithertowards so done,
and does yet, more especially in the Catholic Empire of the Romans.

33 The Popes do likewise claim unto themselves the spoils and inheritance of
the rest of the Clergy, and therefore have denied them so much power as to make
their wills and dispose of their own goods. Concerning which we have already
heard the testimony of Nicholas Clemangius; let us now hear what Marsilius of
Padua says; Marsilius in de^ens pac. part. 2. cap. 24.
Add hereunto (says he) a new branch of that root, how that the Bishop of
Rome, by virtue of that plenitude of power, has forbidden all such as have any
Ecclesiastical preferments in what place soever, to make any testament without
leave from him; and has decreed that their goods shall devolve immediately to
his See, whether they dye intestate or otherwise. Charles the 6 in an Ordinance
of his, dated October 6, 1385, registered in the old book of Ordinances, which
is at the Parliament of Paris, folio 114; That our judges do not in any case
permit the goods of such as die, to be transferred to the Pope; but to their
heirs or executors, or others to whom the said goods of right appertain. And
in another of the 18 of February 1406, Certain Co^^ectors, and other the Pope
of Romes officers particularly for his moneys, have for some years of late
oppressed and vexed the Church and Churchmen of our Realm and Province of
Dauphiny, by an insufferable slavery, in seizing upon the goods of the Bishops
and Clergy men, both Regulars and Seculars, presently upon their decease.
Matthew Paris says, Matthew. Paris: in Henrico. 3 p. 685.
that Innocent the 4 made a constitution touching this point; Hereupon he made
(says he) a new and unheard of law, that if any Clergy man from thenceforth
should die intestate, his goods should be converted to the Popes use. Matthew
Westminster confirms it; Matthew West. monast. lib. 2. sub a^no 1246. p. 206.
The Pope (says he, speaking of Innocent the 4) reached out his hands further
to get and grasp within the clutches of his covetousness, the goods of all
such as dyed intestate, not without wrong and damage on the behalf of Princes.
And even till this day they exact and levy certain taxes of the Stues and
Courtesans, whom they tolerate by reason of that infamous gain which they reap
from thence. Nicholas Clemangius does abhor this villainy; Nicholas de
Clemang. in tract. de praesul. Simoniac. p. 670.
I purposely pass over those things (says he) which it is a shame to speak;
as the open toleration of whoredom for a certain yearly sum; and the
public permission of whores and Concubines, who are now called by a common by
name, YEARLY KINE. And thus must those verses of Mantuan be understood,
unless we will put some mystical sense upon them; Baptis^a Mantu^nas d^
Nicolao Tolentino. l. 2.
-- Roma ips^ lupanar
Reddita, foemineo Petri domus oblita fluxu
Ad Stygios ^let usque lares, incestat Olympum
Nidore hoc, facta est toto execrabilis orb.
Rome now a stew's, where Peter once did dwell,
Infect with female flux, does beastly smell
Down to the Stygian vaults, up to the skies;
And is grown loathsome in the whole worlds eyes.
It will not be amiss to add in this place what the Deputies of Paul the
third said concerning this point, Rom^sh luxu^y. V Cons^itut. delectorum
Cardinalium Paulo 3. exhibit in to. 3. Council. edit. Colon ann 15^1 pa. 819.
in their consultation about the reformation of the Church; Besides, the whores
in this City pass along the streets as honest women, and ride upon their
mules, attended on the high light day by the chiefest servants or retainers of
Cardinals, and by Clergy men. We have not seen the like corruption in any
other City save this, which is an example to others. Besides, they dwell in the
fairest houses. This vile abuse ought to be corrected.

CHAP. V. Exactions under pretense of a Holy War.
1 But behold a kind of sacrilege which outstrips all the rest: Namely, that
they have diverse times served themselves of Croysada's for the conquering of
the Holy Land, or making war against the Turks, to make a hand and scrape up
money by that means. Matthew Paris relates it thus, Matthew. Paris. in hist.
Anglicana p. 507.
At the same time my Lord Legate received a commission from the Pope, to wipe
faithful people of their money by another trick; in such sort, as shall
appear to the observing reader in this following script. Such and such a
Bishop to our welbeloved sons, all the Archdeacons within our Dioces, greeting.
We have received letters from my Lord Legate, the tenure whereof runs thus;
Otho. etc. Being given to understand, that certain English men crossed for the
Holy wars, which are not of ability for that service, have recourse unto the Sea Apostolic to be absolved from the vow of the cross which they had made;
having also received a commission from the supreme Bishop, not only to absolve
them, but also to compel them to redeem their vows; being pleased herein to
ease them of some pains and charges: wherefore we command your fatherdome, by
virtue of the authority committed unto us and withal entreat you, that you
cause this power of ours, granted by our holy Father the Pope, ^o be forthwith
published throughout your Dioces, to the end that the said crosse-bearers may
repair unto us, to receive that courtesy, according to the form prescribed
unto us. Speaking of the Council of Lions under Innocent the fourth, where the
Croisada for the conquering of the Holy Land was agreed upon.

2 As for the business of the Cross (says he) there were somethings
determined at the Council, Idem Paris. p. 658.
very profitably and wisely, but as soon as the contribution of money was
mentioned, they contradicted the Pope openly and to his face^ even because of
that addition which was generally odious. That they should contribute their aid
and relief, by the hands of such as should be appointed for the purpose by the
providence Apostolic for as much as the faithful in the Church have very
often complained, that they have been cheated by the Court of Rome of the
money which they bestowed for the maintenance of the Holy Land.

3 A German Monk and Historian, charge Leo the tenth, P^ulus Langius in
Chron. Citiz. sub. ann. 1513.
with levying a great sum of money for himself and his Cardinals, under
pretense of a war against the Turk. At the same time he created (says he)
other thirty Cardinals, of whom he received by compact fifty thousand crowns:
he had put them in some fair hopes, but being either not able or not willing
to perform his promises truly out of S. Peter's patrimony; however to stop
their mouths and keep covenants, he invented this means, or rather this cheat
and cosenage^ to send four of his Legates into diverse parts of the world,
Le^i^s for^h holy Wa^ ^n Engl^nd and (...).
to levy a huge mass of m^ney under pretense of a war with the Turk. And
that with many indulgences, to the end that he might deal amongst those new
creatures of his, the Cardinals, all the money that was collected by this
device. He adds another trick, no less impious than the former; Otherwhiles
(says he) he is enforced with great greediness to scrape up money by hook
and crook out of all parts of Christendom, but especially out of Germany, by
means of his Commissaries sent with his indulgences, under color of building
and repairing S. Peter's Church: howbeit Pope Julius his predecessor, who begun
that work with great care and magnificene, left an infinite treasure to that
end. Yet the work begun goes but softly and slowly on: and no marvel,
considering that the stones which are hewn by day, are (as it is reported)
secretly carried away by night to the great Palace of the Medici at Florence^
which is now a building; and the money which was collected is not bestowed upon
the building, nor employed against the Infidels, but distributed amongst the
Cardinals and the Popes minions. Guicciardine says, Guicciardine in h^s (...)
bo^k of the W^^^^s of It^ly.
his sister Magdalen had a good share of it, and that it was not done in hugger
mugger.

4 Besides, they served themselves of these Croisada's and indulgences to
wreake their malice, or strengthen their purposes, to the disturbance and
confusion of all Christendom. An English Monk of good credit, tells us how
Urban the second had this bad design, when he caused the conquest of the Holy
Land to be undertaken at the Council of Cleremont; In the year of grace 1095,
(says he) Pope Urban the second, Guilielm. Malm^sh. hist. Angli^. lib. 4. ^. 2.
who sat in the Sea Apostolic, having passed the Alps, came into France: the
cause of his coming which was publicly given out, was, that being chased out
of Rome by the violence of Gilbert, he came to solicit the Churches on this
side the mountains to assist his Holiness: but his more private end was never
given abroad; which was, that by the advice of Boadmond, he might stir up all
Europe to make war in Asia, to the end that in the general hurly burly of all
Provinces, Urban might with case possess himself of Rome; and Boadmond of
Illyrium and Macedonia, after they had consulted with such as were to assist
them.

5 Alexander the fourth turned the vow of Jerusalem into a vow of Apulia, in
the case of Henry the third King of England; Matthew. Paris. hi^^. Anglic. in
Hen^ico 3. p. ^84.
that is a cross of devotion into a cross of revenge. The Pope gave his
Legates power to absolve the crosse-bearing King of his vow, dispensing with him
for going to Jerusalem, always provided that he should go into Apulia, to
make war upon Manfred, the son of Frederick late Emperor, an arch enemy of the
Church of Rome. The English author who relates this story, complains in
another place, I^em ibid. p. 890.
that the tenth was granted for the relief of the Holy Land, and we are
compelled to turn it to the aid of Apulia, against the Christians.

6 A Croisada for the conquering of the Holy Land being resolved upon at the
Council of Vienna, under Clement the fifth; Philip the Fair and his three
sons, as also Edward King of England took up the cross to go thither in
person, with an infinite number of men besides, Then did Pope Clement (says an
old French Chronicle) grant great indulgences to such as could not go, but on
condition, that they should find money for that use: So as he that gave a
penny was to have one years pardon, he that gave twelve pence, twelve years
pardon, and he that would give as much as would maintain a man going over
seas, a plenary pardon for all. And the Pope appointed certain men whom he put
in trust for the receiving of this money. A man cannot conceive the great
sums of money that were given for the purchasing of these pardons for five
years together: And when five years were gone and past, and the good men were
ready to go and perform what they had promised and vowed, the business was
brook off, but the Pope kept the money, the Marquis his Nephew had a share of
it, and the King, and other who had taken the cross stayed here at home. The
Saracens there are in peace and quietness, and I think they may yet sleep
securely. Levies for the holy War in ^paine.


7 The same Pope Leo, whom we spoke of before, caused in his time the tenth of
all Ecclesiastical revenues to be levied in some places, under color of
defending the Christian Commonwealth against the Turk, but indeed to put it
into his own purse. This was the cause he found such strong opposition in
Spain, that it was th^re resolved by the Clergy Synodically assembled, that
they would not pay any thing to it. The Ar^hbishop of Toledo did presently
interpose, and told the Pope by his Proctour, that if his meaning was to make
war against the Turk, he should declare himself openly, which done they would
employ the best of their abilities, but not otherwise. Which the Pope
perceiving, he disavowed the act of his Legate in Spain in requiring the tenth,
because (said he) he was too hasty, and it should not have been levied yet. But
let us hear the Spanish author himself tell the story. Alvarus Gomecius lib.
7. de rebus gestia Francisc^ Ximenii.
Nor did be use less diligence (speaking of the Archhishop of Toledo) in
appeasing the commotions of the Clergy which were then a foot, by reason that
Pope Leo the tenth, ( by authority of the Lateran Council) required the tenth
part of the commodity of their benefices of the Clergy. It was demanded under
color of defending the Christian Commonwealth; for when it was supposed that
Selim Emperor of the Turks, having conquered the Sultan of Egypt, and put him
to an ignominious death would bend his forces against Italy: the Pope in the
last act of the Lateran Council, treated with the Fathers there, to have the
tenth of their benefices for three years, to defend the sea coast, and fortify
the passage against the enemy to the utmost of his ability. This was denied him
by diverse, who thought it very hard to see their livings overcharged in that
kind, contrary to the decrees of other Councels, and the constitutions of the
Popes; especially seeing Christian Princes, to whom the frontiers belonged,
were not mustering any armies nor made any semblance of war. The Pope on the
otherside maintained, that there was the like necessity now as at the Council
of Constance under Martin the fifth. For what greater cause could there be to
move them, than the preparations of the public enemy of Christianity for the
invading of Italy and Rome? The Clergy of Aragon, ( who were imboldened by the
Bishop of Saragossa the Kings Lieutenant there, and liberty which all in that
Kingdom enjoy) at their meetings in provincial Synods, determined to deny the
payment of those tenths. But forasmuch as it nearly concerned them to take the
authority of the Archbishop of Toledo along with them, who was in great account
with the Pope; as well the Bishop of Saragossa as the other Bishops of Aragon
entreated him by letters to undertake the cause of the Clergy, and that he
would not suffer, being such a potent man in the Province as he was, (wherein
he outwent all his Predecessors) the immunities of the Clergy to be so far
prejudiced. Ximenius, who had taken order that it should not be put in
execution in Castile, answered them courteously and with all mildness,
promising them that he would do whatsoever lay in his power, for the
preservation of their Ecclesiastical liberty. But in the mean time he advised
them to dissolve their assembly, and expect in patience what would be the event
of things; that he would treat with the Pope and the Emperor Charles
hereabout, and that he hoped the issue would be to their content. Whereupon he
thought fit in the first place to acquaint the Emperor, to whom he writ his
advice to this effect; That seeing the Clergy of Aragon had begun to oppose
by calling of Synods, that ours may have the like assemblies, to examine the
grounds of these exactions, and try whether that were true which the Pope
alleged or no; providing that in imitation of the Kings of Spain, the Clergy
did not meet to determine such controversies elsewhere than in the Kings Court.
On the other side he writ to Arteaga his Proctour at Rome, to go and greet the
Pope with all reverence, and offer unto him in his name, not only the tenths of
his Dioces, but even all the commodity, all the movables of the Churches, all
the gold and silver coined or uncoyned, which could be found in the Priests
coffers, The Po^^^^ demands denied in Sp^ine.
and the Chapels and Churches; but that he should earnestly entreat him
withal, openly to declare his purpose and resolution concerning the
preparation of the Holy War. For he would never be a means to make the
Spanish Clergy tributary (whom he had appeased, having been already in some
commotion) without very just cause. He enjoined his Proctour also to inquire
diligently, what was the determination of the Council of Lateran concerning
those tenths. Arteaga having informed the Pope of these things, together with
Lawrence Putius, and Julius de Medicis, Cardinals, the Popes privado's, they
made him answer in this sort; That the Pope had not as yet imposed any tenth
upon the Clergy, neither by authority of the Council nor otherwise: Nor would
he impose any but in case of extremity, and when his affairs did not only
require, but compel him so to do, according to the last Decree of the
Council of Lateran. But he laid the blame upon John Ruffus, Archbishop of
Cosenza the Popes Nuncio in Spain, who had (as they said) divulged these
things very iudiscreetly. Wherefore the Clergy of Spain might sleep secure for
ought that concerned the paying of tenths. And there was besides a Bull of the
Popes showed to the Proctour, which was shortly to be published, which
concerned the Act of the Lateran Council. Yet Ximenius, so soon as he
understood all these passages from Arteaga, did not let for all that to call
the Clergy together, who met all at Madrid, a little before he went to
Tourverte. For Peter Martyr who was present at that Synod, as Proctour of the
Church of Granada ( as appears by his epistles) declares how that it was
adjudged by common consent to deny that tenth; which consultation was commended
by the Archbishop of Toledo, promising to patronize and defend it if need
required. It is also plain, out of the Epistles of Bembus set out under the
name of Leo, that this tenth was really exacted, and that it was no flying
rumor or opinion. But, as I think, in Italy only, or other of the Popes
dominions.

CHAP. VI. Of other demandes concerning the abuses of the Court of Rome.
1 COnsequently to what we have already delivered in the former Chapters,
concerning the greediness and insatiable desire of the Court of Rome, we will
set down this certain complaints and demands exhibited by the States of
Germany in this behalf: The first whereof shall be against the proviso's and
clauses made at Rome concerning all manner of benefices, to the defeating of the
Patrons, both Ecclesiastical and Lay, of their right of advowson by diverse
subtle fetches: And all this for the great wealth the Court of Rome gains by
this means, and which is brought in thither out of all the Kingdoms and
Provinces in Christendom. This demand deserved to have been well considered
of, yet it was not; it is attended with many grievous complaints hereof made in
diverse ages. The Statutes of our Kings speak thoroughly of it, and amongst
others, that of Charles the eighth, of the 18 of February 1406; the words
whereof are these: Some years ago the Popes of Rome, in despite and contempt
of the Decrees of ancient Fathers and General Councels, have brought all
Ecclesiastical dignities, Cathedral, and Collegiate under their disposal,
Popes en^^^nching upon other Bishops.
and all others of greatest value next after Bishopriques; they have granted
livings in reversions upon the Vacancie to any that would sue for them, which
has been an occasion for one to thirst after the death of another: They have
invented abundance of tricks, whereby they have utterly annihilated the power
and authority of the Bishops, Chapters, and Colleges; insomuch that there is
none now that has the power to present to a living. Bernardus Clarevall lib:
1. de consider ad Eugenium.


2 S. Bernard touches this abuse to the quick, in his books De Consideratione,
which he dedic^tes to Pope Eugenius; Never tell me of the words of the
Apostles, who says, Being free^ I am made the servant of all. The case is far
otherwise with you: for to my knowledge there come unto you from all parts of
the world, ambitious people, covetous, Symoniacall, sacrilegious, adulterous,
incestuous, and such like monsters of men, to obtain, or retain
Ecclesiastical dignities by your Apostolic authority, etc.

3 The Bishop of Mende put up this abuse in the Council of Vienna to be
reformed. Guil Dura^d^ in ^^act d^ modo celebrandi Council. gener. part. 2. tit.
7.
For after he had said that every Bishops jurisdiction ought to be preserved
entire to himself, he adds, That Ecclesiastical benefices which belong to
the collation and disposal of Bishops are bestowed by the S^e Apostolic, and
others, even before they be void, and that not only in the Court of Rome, but
out of it, howbeit the Bishops must give an account of the cure, and of those
that execute them, whose consciences they are utterly ignorant of, in as much as
they are none of their preferring. He would never have demanded the reformation
hereof, unless the abuse had been notorious.

4 Marsilius of Padua his contempora^y tells us as much; Marsilius in 2. part.
defens. c. 24.
The Bishops of Rome (says he) reserve unto their own power immediately the
bestowing almost of al Ecclesiastical Preferments, yea even unto the meanest
and basest o^^ices; yea of such as may agree to mere Lay men, for any thing
that concerns Churches, by means of which reservation, they abrogate and make
void all elections how legally soever they were made, though of approved and
sufficient men.

5 The Cardinal of Cambray puts this also amongst those things which ought to
be reformed in the Church; Pet^us de Alliaco in lib. de reformat. Eccles. in 2.
consider.
It is further expedient (says he) to provide against certain grievances
which are offered to other Prelates and Churches by the Church of Rome, namely
about bestowing of livings and election of dignities, Nicholas de Clemangiis
makes a very bitter complaint against it in his Book De ruina and reparatione
Ecclesiae, Clemangius De ruina and reparat. Eccles p. 1.
where speaking of the Popes, he says, They have arrogated unto themselves the
right of disposing of all Churches, in all places, as far as Christian
Religion reaches, of all Bishopriques and dignities, which are conferred by
election, voyding and disanulling the Decrees formerly made by the holy
Fathers, with so much care and commodity, that so they may by this means fill
their own budgets the better. And a little after; But it may be peradventure
that the Bishops of Rome took the creation of other Bishops, and disposal of
the highest dignities in the Church into their own hands, quite abolishing all
elections, to the end that by their providence the Churches might be the better
provided for, and that such governors might be set over them, as are most
commendable for their life, and excellent for their learning. It might be
thought that this were the reason indeed if the thing it self proclaiming the
contrary, did not make it apparent, that since this custom was used, there
have been none but dunses, worldlings, money men, and such as were raised to
those dignities by Simony. And again, But to the end that the rivers of gold
derived from all parts, may flow unto them in a fuller stream, they have taken
away the power of presentations, and the liberty of bestowing and disposing of
benefices by any means whatsoever, from all Diocesans and lawful patrons:
Forbidding them, upon pain of Anathema, rashly to presume (for so their writs
run) to institute any person into any benefice within their jurisdiction, The
Popes ingrossin^ of ^hu^ch-livings
till such time as some one be presented to it, to whom by their authority they
have granted it.

Gerson in decla defectuum virorum. Eccl. c. 62.
6 M. John Gerson in his book De defectu virorum Ecclesiasticorum, where he
treats of the Reformation of the Church, and which he presented at the Council
of Constance, says, Mark what that means that now adays Bishops, Prelates,
and Parish Priests are mostly elected by the Pope; as much as to say, take an
order with that abuse. The Pragmatique Sanction has another relation much of
the same strain; The Prelates and other ordinary dispensers, as also the
Patrons are deprived of their right, the Hierarchy of the Church is confounded,
and many other things are committed contrary to the laws of God and man, to
the loss of souls, and the oppression of the Churches of our Realm. The
Council of Basil did provide a remedy against this abuse, and the Pragmatique
after it, but so as the Popes have cast off the yoke of it, having disanulled
almost all the Decrees of that Council.

7 The States assembled in the City of Toures 1483, in a bill which they
presented to King Jews the eleventh, amongst other things, say, That if the
King do not undertake to defend them, considering the quality of their
persons, the power and authority of the Holy See Apostolic, they shall not be
able to resist the usurpations and impeachments which any subject of the
Realm, and others ambitious of preferment, will make against the electors,
which have the right of election or ordinary donation, by censures Apostolic.
And by this means all this Kingdom, which is already at a low ebb, and very
poor, shall be stripped and dispoyled of that little money which remains of
the former exactions.

8 A German Paulus Langius in Chron. Citiz. sub ann. 1^1^.
Monk complains likewise, that under Leo the tenth, the elections made by
Bishops were quite rejected, and the right thereof devolved to them of Rome. A
certain Card. Zabarella in c. licet. extr. de elect.
Cardinal complains, That the Pope usurps all the rights of inferior
Churches, that he ingrosseth to himself all power and jurisdiction, making
nothing, as it were, of other Bishops; which he does not according to Saint
Peter's pattern. Marsilius Marsilius Patavin. in def. pac. part. 2. c. 22
says, That the Popes ar^ogate unto themselves a coactive power and
jurisdiction over the ministers of all Churches of the world, and that they
have expressed by their decretall epistles, that the dispensing and disposing
of the temporal means of all Clergymen belongs unto them, to do with them
as they list, without ever asking the consent of any College or particular
person, of what dignity or authority soever. The Parliament of Paris in their
Remonstrance made to Jews the eleventh, say, Remonst^ance of ^h^ Pa^liament ^o
Jews the 11. Art 41.
That in the time of Mounsieur S. Jews (these are the very words) those of
Rome begunn^ to go about to hinder elections, and let loose the raines to the
former inconveniences; but that he by good advice and Counsel made an edict,
and decree to the contrary. That is the Pragmatique Extat haec pragmatica inter
Constitutiones Regias in magno earum volumine.

Et in libello de Sta^u Eccles. Gallic. in schismate p. 124.


which we have at this day entire, wherein we read amongst other Articles,
Imprimis, that the Bishops, Patrons, and ordinary doners of the Churches of our
Realm, keep their right entire, and that every man's jurisdiction be
preserved. Item, that Cathedral Churches and others of our Realm have their
elections, and that they be the sole Judges of the validity of them. In another
Article Remonstrance of the Court of Pa^liament cap. 42.
of the same remonstrance, it is said, Item, And consequently King Jews Hutin
confirmed the same edict of S. Jews in the year 1315, and that of King Philip
the Fair, who had formerly made a like Decree. And afterward King John, the
year 1551, confirmed the said ordinance of his said Grandfather Philip. All
these ordinances tend to the repulsing of the usurpations of Rome, from which
our ancestors had so much ado to preserve themselves.

9 The States of Germany complained also in the process of their former
grievances, that the Pope, not content to usurp the right of another, in case
of elections, and investitures, committed also another intolerable fault in
conferring benefices and Ecclesiastical dignities upon ignorant people and
strangers, Livings bestovved upon dunces or ^^^ens.
respecting in his elections only his own gains, not their persons, which were
indifferent to him. We have told you already what Cl^mangius said of dunces, we
will yet add this out of him; You have seen many, which at their coming from
their studies and Schools; nay, which is worse, from the plough, have betaken
themselves to the care of the Church, and government of Parishes, and other
benefices, after they had practiced servile arts; which understood as little
Latin as Arabic; yea, which could not read, and (which I am ashamed to
speak) could not distinguish a B from a Bull-foot. He says as much concerning
their manners, declaring how those who were preferred by the Popes, were wholly
addicted to vices, and dissoluteness of life.

10 Marsilius of Padua said as much, Marsilius Patav. in 2 part. def. pac c. 24.
or more before him, In stead of sufficient and approved men, out of the
plenitude of their power, they ordain such as are ignorant of divinity, mere
idiots, and without scholarship, and oft-times debauched persons, and notorious
offenders. Charles the sixth in his ordinance of the 18 of February 1406; And
when there is any question of preferring men to elective dignities, they never
used those ways which ought to be observed, and which are appointed, to
examine and try them; whence it comes to pass, that it being not possible that
the Pope should know all men, and the state of the Churches, he admits diverse
into those dignities who are unworthy of them, and sometimes such as are
unknown to him, but by their money. Pragmatica Sanctio Car. 7.
Charles the 7 in his Pragmatique Sanction, says, That unworthy persons
unknown, and unexamined, are preferred by the Popes to the greatest dignities,
and fattest benefices of this Kingdom. The States of Tours in their complaint
say, V. Libel. d^ Statu Eccl. Gallic. in schis p. 148.
So illiterate people, and not Ecclesiastical, should be preferred to livings,
as we have formerly seen. Amongst the ten grievances which Germany presented
to the Emperor Maximilian, to be redressed, this was one; That at Rome the
government of Churches is committed to those who are the least worthy of them,
and who would be more fit to govern and feed Mules than men.

11 As for strangers preferred to benefices by the Popes, there have been
always great exclamations, by reason of the many evils and inconveniences
which follow of it, which have been diverse times exhibited, but to no purpose.
Marsilius of Padua urges this abuse, and shows that many are elected by the
Popes, Marsilius Patav. in d^f. Pacis par. 2. c. 24.
who cannot communicate or talk with those who are committed to their charge,
Wherefore (says he, speaking of John the 22) let him answer Christ, who
against or after elections, made or to be made, among other monsters which he
has made, and does yet make, he has created two Bishops, his own country
men of Languedoc, one of Winchester.
Silchester in England, the other of Lands in Dacia, over those people with
whom they cannot have any conference by discourse. As for their manners and
learning, it concerns not me to speak of them. Let the Bishop of Rome tell
me, say I, how that shepherd shall call his own sheep by their name, as
knowing their conditions by their confessions, and reproving them? or how can
the sheep follow him by hearing the voice of his preaching and teaching?

12 M. John Gerson in his treatise De defectu virorum Ecclesiasticorum, Gerson
in decl. de defectu virorum Eccles. c. 52
wherein he sets down such things as ought to be reformed in the Church, puts
this, That known men, and such as are most fitting, be elected out of the same
Country; that strangers in manners, Language, and education, be not sent and
set over Churches. King Charles the 7 in his Edict the tenth of May 1431,
assures us that it is a law established by his Predecessors, confirmed by the
Ordinance of his deceased Father Charles the 6, intimated to the Council of
Constance, and Pope Martin. He further treats of the inconveniences and
prejudices which follow upon it, when they are admitted; as, that divine
service is ^hereby neglected, by reason of their non-residence; that the
Schools of the Kingdom are unprovided of Students, Of preferring strangers.
and left desolate; that it is a hard case to see the noble and brave Scholars
of the Realm unprovided, and strangers preferred; that by this means enemies
and adversaries may be acquainted with the secrets of State, and the estate of
the Land; that strangers reap the profits, and get the honors of it.

13 Jews the 11 in an Ordinance made 1464, speaks hereof in this sort; Howbeit
that by privileges express, and Ordinances royal, no man can have any
elective benefice within our said Kingdom, unless he be a native; and that
for the safety of us and our said Kingdom, and Dauphine, it concerns us much
that the Bishopriques, Abbeys, and other dignities, and elective benefices be
furnished with able and known men, such as will comply with us, and be firm
and sure for us; especially such as hold the said benefices, and by reason of
them diverse places and fortresses, for which diverse duties and services belong
unto us from them: yet notwithstanding our late pious Father granted the said
favors and patents so plentifully, and to all manner of persons of what
Nation, Kingdom, or Religion soever they were without distinction, that many
under shadow and pretense of these licenses and patents, have insinuated and
intruded themselves into the said dignities and elective benefices of our said
Kingdom, and do hold them; howbeit many of them are strangers unknown, and
not to be trusted by us; and such as neither can nor ought to perform those
duties and services, which they are bound to do unto us by reason of the said
benefices.

Remonstrance of the Parliament of Paris to Jews the 11. chap. 53.
14 And the Court of Parliament in those Remonstrances which they made unto him,
amongst other inconveniences; which they urged would follow upon the abrogation
of the Pragmatique Sanction, say; By this means strangers would be pr^ferred
by the Pope, and not the natives of the Country, wherein the benefices lie;
not of the same qualities and conditions with the Country: Whereupon would
ensue questions and controversies betwixt the Churchmen or Seculars, to the
great hindrance of the salvation of souls, and irreverence of the blessed
Sacraments.

15 Henry the 3 in the fourth Article of the Ordinance of Blois; We mean^ not
that from henceforth any shall be preferred to any Archbishopriques,
Bishopriques, Abbeys, or to be Generals of Orders, neither by death,
resignation, nor otherwise, unless he be a natural Frenchman; notwithstanding
any dispensation or clause derogatory to these presents which they can obtain
from us, whereto we will not have any regard to be had. The deputies of Paul
the 3 touched upon this string in their reformation: Consil. delectorum
Cardina^ium. to. 3. Con^il. edi^. Colon. ann: 1551. page ^19.
That no benefices (say they) in England or Spain, be conferred upon any
Italian, nor on the contrary: Which ought to be observed as well in
Presentations upon vacancy by death, as by resignations, wherein regard is only
had to the pleasure of the resigner, and nothing else. Their Counsel did no
great good, for there was nothing done in the point for all that.

CHAP. VII. Of suits commenced at Rome, and of the entrenching upon other
Courts of Justice, and jurisdictions.
GERMANY complained also of suits commenced at Rome concerning benefices; Of
drawing suits to Rome
which is a very usual ancient complaint backed with sound reasons, seeing
that from hence comes the squeazing of Provinces, both of their men and money:
and abundance of other evils and calamities. Charles the 6 in the Ordinance of
the 18 of February 1406; They insert diverse clauses in their Bulls which are
sometimes inextricable; they make diverse rules beside the law, or else quite
against law, which they revoke at their pleasure; insomuch that the most
clear-sighted cannot discern who has best right amongst diverse pretenders.
Hence arise infinite suits in law, which they must go and prosecute out of the
Kingdom with great expense and charges.

2 Charles the 7 in the Ordinance made 1422; Diverse of our subjects and others,
by virtue of resignations, or Apostolic Bulls, do take and receive, and
endeavor to get and obtain benefices within this Realm, V Libel: de Statu
Eccles. Gallic. in schism. p. 75.
and take possession of them, and labor to summon, or cause to be summoned
our ^^ige subjects unto the Court of Rome, or before some Commissioners or
Delegates appointed by our Holy Father; which is downright to oppose the rights
and liberties of the Church and Clergy. Jews the 11 in an Ordinance of the 16
of August 1471; The most of the benefices in our Kingdom are in suit; in the
prosecution of which suits, a huge mass of money is strangely spent and
squandered away; nor is it certainly known to whom the livings do of right
appertain or belong: Whereupon divine service, instruction of the people, and
administration of the blessed Sacraments, are oft-times left off; and the
revenue of the livings, which should have been bestowed upon the reparations
of the Churches there, is employed in charges of Law, and suits: Whereupon some
great mischiefs and inconveniences have, and do daily come to pass.

3 Nicholas de Clemangiis, in his book De ruinis and reparatione Ecclesi^,
after he has spoken of the Canons and constitutions of the Popes, of the
ambiguity of them, and the controversies which arise from thence, he adds;
Nicolaus de Clemangiis in De ruina and reparat. Eccles^ p. 5.
It is hard to find any one, though he make his title to appear as clear as
the day, that goes away with a living without all dispute: For then they think
their Court to be most flowrishing and fortunate, when it rings with a
multitude of causes, suits, quarrels, and wranglings, with a wild and furious
noise: and on the other side to be lame, miserable and forsaken, when it wants
suits and is at quiet; when the incumbents do peaceably enjoy their right.

4 Cardinal Cusan in his book De concordia Catholica says, We know the
great noise of suits in the Courts both Ecclesiastical and Civil, Nicolaus
Cusanus in De Concord Cath. l. 3. c. 40. p. 669.
bring much hurt to the Commonwealth, by reason the suits are so intricate and
endless; but especially for that causes are not ended and determined in those
places where they were first conceived, in their own Country: but are
oftentimes drawn to the Court of Rome, and that upon every trivial point that
concerns benefices; whereas none but causes of importance ought to be brought
thither.

Of d^awing suits to Rome
5 The Parliament of Paris in the Remonstrance made to Jews the 11, in behalf
of the liberties of the Gallicane Church, and for the retaining of the
Pragmatique. Remonstrance of the Parliament Art. 60. 63,64.
Item, in very deed, if these constitutions were not, there would not be a
Clergyman certain of his estate. For proof whereof we may remember how they
of the Court of Rome have behaved themselves herein, after it was repealed by
the King. For they not only took upon them the cognizance of causes
Ecclesiastical, but also of causes concerning right of inheritance; yea and of
causes royal, the cognizance whereof belongs to the King and his Court of
Parliament; as has been seen in many particular cases, where the Court sent
to the King in Guien, and there the King provided for them, by remarkable
Edicts, which were registered and published in the said Court. Art. 63.
Item, to prove that it is a depopulation of the Kings dominions, it is
certain, that before these decrees and constitutions were made, by reason that
reservations and donations in reversion were in force, and the cases tried in
the Court of Rome, the subjects of the Realm left their Country in great
numbers; some to serve Cardinals, others to be officers, others wanting service
spent that means which their parents left them to to purchase some favor
there, and others in great abundance to vex and trouble those that stayed at
home, to get their benefices: insomuch that what by the tediousness and danger
of the way, what by reason of the plague, which is commonly at Rome, the most
of those that went thither dyed: and those that escaped these perils so
molested with citations old feeble persons residing upon their livings, and
such as were not able to defend themselves, that by reason of these vexations
they shortened their days, and dyed sooner than they would have done by the
common course of nature. Item, Others ambitious of preferments, exhausted the
purses of their parents and friends, leaving them in extreme poverty and
misery, which was sometimes a cause of shortning their days; and all the
gains they got was a piece of lead for gold, and when they thought to be
preferred by their patents, in comes another with an annullation; and sometimes
you might find ten or twelve grantees of the same benefice^ and upon the
controversy thence arising, all enforced to trudge to Rome again to plead the
case there: to the continual vexation of the subject, and the dispeopling of
the Realm.

Bernard^^ Abbas Clarevall. l. 1. de con^id. ad Eugen.
6 S. Bernard also exclaimes hard against these suits arising in the Court of
Rome; for, addressing his speech to Pope Eugenius the 3, he says, What means
this, I pray you, to plead from morning till night, or to hearken to those that
plead? with my consent let malice be content to take up the day; but the very
night^ are not free, there is scarce so much allowed to the necessity of
nature, as will suffice for the repose of this poor body; it must rise again
for these wranglers: one day begets suits to another, and one night
certifieth his malice to another.

7 In another place he complains of the great multitude of appeals, which ^low
to Rome from all coasts of the world; Idem Bern l. 2. de con^id. ad Eugen.
How long must it be before you awake, and consider such a mighty confusion and
abuse of appeals? They are commonly practiced without either right or reason;
beside all order, or custom; without any distinction or difference of place,
manner, time, cause, or person; they are easily admitted, and ofttimes
impiously. Those that would be wicked, were they not wont to be terrified with
them? but now they, on the contrary, do affright others, and especially honest
men with them: goodmen are appealed by knaves to hinder them from doing good,
and they give off for the awe which they bear to the voice of your thunder.
Lastly, appeals are put up against Bishops, that they may not dare to dissolve
or forbid marriages; appeals are put up against them to hinder them from
punishing or curbing rapines, robberies, sacriledges, and such like crimes;
appeals are preferred to hinder them from putting back, or depriving unworthy
and infamous persons of sacred offices and benefices. Of appeals to Rome.
Which he afterward proves by such examples as befell in his time, which we
pass over.

8 Hildebert Archbishop of Tours, Hildebert. ep. 82.
exhibited the like complaint to Pope Honorius the second, in these words; We
never yet heard on this side the Alps, nor found any such thing in the sacred
Canons, that all sorts of appeals should be received in the Church of Rome: but
if happily any such novelty be crept in, and it be your pleasure to admit all
appeals without distinction, the Papal censure will be undone by it, and the
power of Ecclesiastical discipline will be trampled under foot: for what
royster with not appeal upon the least commination of an anathema? What Clerk
or Priest is there, which will not defile, or indeed which will not bury
himself in his own excrements, upon confidence of his frustratory appeall; by
virtue whereof, the Bishops cannot presently punish, I say not, all sorts of
disobedience but, not any at all? The least appeals will break his staff,
rebate his constancy, quell his severity in putting him to silence, and the
malefactors to an impunity of offending.

9 They not only en^ruate the ordinary jurisdiction of Bishops, V. Marsil p.
354 36^.

Centum Gravam. p. 26.

Ivo epist. 269.


and other Ecclesiastiques by their appeals, but also by other ways, without
sparing of those that breathed nothing but the greatness of Rome; as amongst
others, Ivo Bishop of Chartres, who after he had done much good service to the
Court of Rome, insomuch that he cast himself out of favor with his Prince,
and did many ill offices to France, Idem epist. 2^^
was finally compelled to make make his complaint, that a cause of his
depending before the Ordinary, was removed to Rome by an extraordinary way: And
likewise that the ordinary course of justice is defeated and stopped by
Apostolical letters, and rescripts The German Nation framed likewise a
complaint concerning this point, and presented it to the Emperor Maximilian;
Fas^ic. rerum expetend. p. ^67
The causes (say they) that might be determined in Germany, where there are
both just and learned Judges, are removed to the Court of Rome without any
distinction.

10 The Popes have likewise gone about to usurp the Lay jurisdiction, and to
draw unto them all sorts of Lay men, even in profane ma^ters, whereof the
States of Germany made a grievous complaint also, which we will here insert.
Seeing that not only the grounds of equity, Centum Gravamina. c. 9.10
but also the orde^ of things does require, that the bounds of jurisdictions be
distinct and limited^ and that every Ordinary content himself with his own
bounds, without entrenching one upon another in the exercise of their
jurisdiction; yet the Popes heretofore never considered this equity, but
sleighting it, have oftentimes cited Laymen to Rome, and made them appear in
judgment before them; and that ev^n in causes profane, as cases of
inheritance, or morgages, and those of the first rank: Which thing tends to the
loss, damage, and misp^ision, not only of those that are summoned, but also
of the states of the Roman Empire, and to the disgrace and infringing of its
jurisdiction. Item, when any man offers to affirm upon oath at Rome, that he
does not expect that he can obtain justice of his competent Judge in Germany,
he is forthwith admitted to take that oath, and letters are granted to him to
set his adversary a day, and so the suit is removed from Germany to Rome,
without ever any request made to the Judge, or notice given to the party.
Whereupon under pretense of this oath, neither the reasons of not proceeding,
nor any other proofs are admitted, although it may be plainly convinced, that
the adverse party is perjured. Which thing, if it take any deep root, and be
not remedied in the beginning, all causes in fine will be devolved to the
tribunal of the Court of Rome, and all Ordinaries deprived of their
jurisdiction, which would be both unjust and untolerable.

11 We will here set down, by way of commentary on these Articles, the
several usurpations which the Popes have made upon Lay men in point of justice
and jurisdiction. Of usurping Lay jurisdiction.
The Glossatour upon the Canon Law freely confesses, Glosan C. Si Clericu^ de
soro competenti. Extr.

R^monstrance of the Court of Parliament to Jews the 11. c. 61.

Petrus de Ferr^^iis in forma respon. in convent. in verbo Excommunica^io.


That the Pope does daily give out writs to Clergymen, against Layiques, in
all causes whatsoever; and by this means gets the jurisdiction of the
other. The Parliament of Paris urges this usurpation in their Remonstrances to
Jews the eleventh, Item, the Clergy would not only be molested by citations
from the Court of Rome, but the Seculars would be like the Harbor before S.
Dennis of the Charter, who lost his son in the Court of Rome by the Pestilence,
and the Father was afterward summoned into the Court for his sons debts, as
also M. John d' Argonges, the Kings Advocate. One of our old Lawyers touches
this very usurpation, Observe (says he, speaking of the exception in case of
excommunication) that this was invented by the Pope for another reason; to wit,
that his power might be therein enlarged, as well in the Civil Court, as the
Ecclesiastical, which ought rather to be restrained, than augmented; inasmuch
as the psalterie does not agree well with the Iettren.

12 Other Prelates have done the like, after the example of their Head,
witness the complaint of M. Peter de Cugueres against the Clergy of France;
Although the cognizance of Lay men belong to the Secular Judge, excepting in
spiritual cases; yet the Bishops Officials cause them to be summoned before
them upon the demand of the parties; Petrus de Cugueriis in articulis Laicorum
^. 3.
and if the said Lay men decline the jurisdiction of those Officials; or those
Lords whose subjects they are, require that they may be dismissed, as being
their temporal Lords and Judges, the said Officials refuse to do it, and
compel the parties by excommunications to proceed before them. He quoteth
many other cases in diverse Articles, which the reader may see in the Author.

CHAP. VIII. Of Ecclesiastical informations: and of the Popes Commissaries,
and Legates.
1 THe chief means whereof the Popes have served themselves against Laymen,
to get the jurisdiction over them, even Kings and Princes, have been
Ecclesiastical denuntiations: for upon complaint and information made unto
them against a Layman, they would cause him to be summoned before them: namely
then, when there was any oath in the business, or any sin might follow upon
it, which commonly fell out in all causes. And suppose all this failed, the
Plaintiff needed but swear, that he looked for no justice from the Lay Judge,
as the articles of the States of Germany have it.

2 We have a pretty example in Philip Augustus King of France, who having some
difference with King John of England, surnamed Lacke-land, concerning the
Dukedom of Guyen and Earldom of Poictiers, Cap. Novit. De j^diciis extr.
which Philip supposed to belong to him, because homage was not done for them;
and concerning the Dukedom of Britain, which was confiscated unto him by the
murder of Arthur, King John's Nephew, whom he had killed; he was summoned to
Rome by Innocent the third, upon the information made by John, supposing that
the Pope ought to have the determining of their controversy, by reason of an
oath upon the settling of the lands formerly made between the two Kings,
Attempts upon the Civil ju^isdiction in France and Engl^nd.
and the violation thereof: concerning which he writ at large to the Bishops
of France, that they would approve of his procee^ings, which was so well liked
by his successors, that they canonized his Decretall, which nevertheless has
been disliked by some Devines. And for the Canonists, Gabriel Biel supra Can.
Missae. lect 75. Hos^iensis and al^i in cap. Novit. de Iudic. extra.
some of them have said, that the Protestation which he makes at the beginning
of it, contradicts the Act it self; in as much as he declares that he will
not meddle with the jurisdiction of the Kings of France, which nevertheless
he did; for the feudall differences being determined by the Peers of France,
betwixt Philip the Lord, and John the Vassal, yet the Pope would have his
Legates to have the cognizance of them; for hark how he speak^, That Philip
would patiently suffer the Abbat of Casemar, and the Archbishop of Bourges to
have the full hearing, whether the complaint put up against him be just, or his
exception legal. The observations of learned Cujacius up (...) that Chapter
are remarkable. Cujacius in d. c. Novit. de Iudic. extr.
He protests (says he) doing one thing an^ ^etending another, not to
intermeddle nor usurp the cognizance of the fieffs belonging to the King,
which he knows to appertain to the King and the Peers of France, but only
to have the cognizance of the perjury. And he afterward adds; All this he
wrote to appease the Prelates of France, and bear them in hand that he
proceeded justly against their King, and put all his Kingdom in an interdict
upon this occasion; yet for all that he gained nothing by it.

3 In the time of Saint Jews a great complaint was made against Innocent the
fourth by the Nobility of France, upon occasion of such usurpations. Yea in so
much that they put out a very bitter declaration, which startled him a little,
as the English Historians do record. Lo here a piece of it. Matthew. Paris. in
hist. Anglor. sub Hen. 3^ p. 798.

Et Matthew. Westmon. l. 2. sub ann. 1247


All we prime men of the Kingdom, perceiving out of our deep judgment, that
the Kingdom was not got by Law written, nor by the ambition of Clergymen, but
by the sweat of war, do enact and ordain by this present decree, and by
joint oath, that no Clerk nor Layman shall sue one another before the
Ordinary, or Ecclesiastical Judge, unless it be in case of heresy,
marriages, and usury, upon pain of confiscating all their goods, and the loss
of a limb to the transgressors hereof: for which certain executioners shall
be appointed, that so our jurisdiction being resuscitated may revive again,
and those who have enriched themselves by our poverty (amongst whom God for
their pride has raised up profane contentions) may be reduced to the state of
the Primitive Church, and living in contemplation may show us those miracles
which are fled out of the world a long time ago, and we in the mean time
lead an active life as it is fitting. The Historian adds, The Pope having
heard these things, sighed with a troubled mind, and desiring to appease their
hearts, and break their courage, after he had admonished them, he frighted
them with threats, but he did no good for all that.

4 The King of England, in imitation of our French, made also a Statute for the
preservation of his justice. Matthew. Paris. in Hen. 3. p. 705.
The same year 1247 (says Matthew Paris) the King of England following the
example of those Lords that made these Statutes in France which were approved
and sealed by their King, to tame in part the insatiable greediness of the
Court of Rome, ordained that these things following should be inviolably
observed. To wit, that Laymen should not be convented before an Ecclesiastical
Judge in case of perjury, or for breach of promise. Gregory the seventh kept a
fine decorum, when after he had deposed out of hand the Emperor Henry the
fourth, when he was doing his penance at Rome, and created Ralph in his stead,
he would afterward be the judge of their controversy, to see whether had the
wrong. Helmoldus Presbyter in Chron. Slav^^ c. 28.
A Germane Priest makes mention of the penance appointed to the said Henry,
whereof we speak in another place: he says moreover, that in the time of the
vacancy, The Pope sent a crown of gold to Ralph Duke of Suevia, The Popes
intermedling wi^h Kings, Crown^s, and dignities.
accompanied with a verse which we have cut into two as good as the Latin.
Petra dedit Romam Petro, tibi Papa Coronam.
The Rock gave Peter Rome in fee:
The Pope bestows the crown on thee.
He adds, that the Pope commanded the Archbishops of Mayence and Cullen, and
other Princes and Bishops of Germany to take Ralphs part, and to make him
Emperor; which was done accordingly. That the Bishop of Strasburg, the
Emperors great friend, going to Rome, after he had sought him diligently a
long time through the City, and found him in the places consecrated to the
Martyrs, and told him of the new election, and how much it concerned him to go
to Germany in all haste, to ^ll, ^nfort ^his friends, and repel the force of
his enemies, the Emperor making ^omewhat nice of departing without the leave
of the Sea Apostolic, the Bishop informed him that all the mischief of the
treason proceeded from the Roman treachery, and that it was necessary he
should fly away privily, if he would avoid being taken.

5 The case being thus, let us now hear the narration which Gregory made
hereof, in his Bull of excommunication, and his pretense for the judgment.
Certain Bishops, Platina in Gregorio 7.
and Princes of Germany (says he) having been a long time vexed by that wild
beast, in stead of Henry, who fell from the Empire by reason of his offenses,
chose Ralph of Suevia for their head and King; who, using such modesty and
sincerity as befits a King, sent his commissioners forthwith unto me, to give
me to understand that he undertook the managing of the Empire against his
will: That notwithstanding he was not so desirous of reigning, but that he
loved rather to obey us, than those who promised him the Empire: That he would
be always under our power and Gods; and to the intent we may be assured that
he will be so, he has promised to deliver his children unto us for hostages.
From thenceforth Henry has begun to vex himself, and entreat us at first
to repel Ralph from usurping the Empire, by anathema's: I replied that I would
see who had the right, and that I would send my Nuncio's to examine the whole
business, and afterward I would judge who had the better cause.

6 They have gone so far in this point, that they have attempted to exercise
jurisdiction over Kings and Princes in their own cause; Matthew Westmonast. lib.
2. sub ann. 1301. p. 419.
as Boniface the eighth, who having a controversy with King Edward the first
of England touching the Realm of Scotland, which the Pope said belonged to the
Church of Rome, he writ to him, That if he pretended any title to the Realm of
Scotland, or any part thereof, he should send his Proctours and special
Ambassadors to the Sea Apostolic, with all his rights and instruments
belonging to that particular, there to receive full justice upon the premises.
The King of England caused answer to be made unto the Pope by the chief Lords
and Barons of his Kingdom assembled together in Parliament (as they call it)
where they say concerning this point, Idem Westmonast. ann. 1302^ p. 436.
That the Kings of England have not nor ought not to answer for the titles
which they pretend to the said Kingdom, or other temporal matters, before any
Judge Ecclesiastical or Civil, by reason of their royal dignity and
prerogative, and the custom inviolably observed in all ages. Wherefore after
mature deliberation and advice about the contents of your letters, the common
and unanimous consent of all and every one of us was, and shall be without
starting for the future, that our King ought not any way judicially to make
answer before you concerning his right to the Kingdom of Scotland, or other
temporals, nor in any wise submit to your sentence, or bring his right in
question and dispute, Of turning Lay men into Cle^gy m^n.
or send his Proctours and Ambassadors before you for that purpose: and we do
not allow nor will in any wise allow, what we neither can nor may, that our
King, (if he would) do the said things which are inusuall, unlawful,
prejudicial, and unheard of; nor that he go about to do them in any wise.

7 Innocent the fourth (says another Historian) caused Henry the third King of
England to be summoned before him to answer to one David a vassal of his, and
to give him satisfaction, as he said, Matthew. VVestmonast. l 2. sub ann 1246
page 206.
for some injuries which he had done him: this thing was derided and made a
mock of among many.

8 They have not only attempted to determine of profane matters between Lay
men; but which is more, to disanull and correct the sentences of Emperors and
Princes, having caused their Arrests in this kind to be enrolled in their
books, as marks and Trophies of their victories, and to serve for perpetual
presidents for the future. Clementin. Pas^^^^^is de sentent et re judi^.
So Clement the fifth cassed the sentence and proceedings of the Emperor Henry
the sixth, or the seventh against Robert King of Sicily^ his vassal in case of
treason. Hark how he speak^s of it; We as well out of the superiority, which
without question, we have over the Empire, as out of that power, by virtue
whereof we succeed the Emperor when the Empire is vacant, but especially out
of the plenitude of that power which Christ the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords has conferred upon us, though unworthy, in the person of S. Peter, with
the advice of our brethren, declare and pronounce the sentence, and all the
proceedings aforesaid, together with all that followed thereupon, or from that
occasion, to be null, invalid, and without effect.

9 But see the censure which a Doctor of ours passes upon that Clementine;
Baldus in l lib^ert^ libertae nu 18. de oper^ liber.
In this Chapter (says he) there are somethings which taste a little of the
truth of law, and somethings which do nere a whit taste of it; and herein the
Pope has been more partial than Apostolical.

10 Now because the Popes found some resistance now and then, when they
attempted the jurisdiction over Lay men, to make the stream of their
usurpation run more even, they begun to metamorphize Lay men into Clergy men,
or (to speak more properly) to dress them up in a Mask, and make them
appear such when they came to them. Marsilius of Padua has detected this
policy unto us; Boniface the 8, Marsilius Pa^avin. in de^. ^a^. part. 2 c. ^.
(says he) to enhanse his Secular jurisdiction, ranked all such amongst the
number of Clergymen, as had married a Virgin, and who contented themselves
with one wife: and ordained by his Decretals, that they should be accounted for
such. And not containing themselves within these bounds, they have exempted
from all hu^^^^^ Civil Laws, a company of Lay men, whom in Italy they call
Fratres Gaudentes, but elsewhere Beguins: as also the Templars, Hospitallers,
and other such like Orders; together with them that are called, De alto pas^i^.
And by the same reason, they might do so with all the rest. But if all those
that be of this kind, be thereby exemp^ed from the juris^iction of Pri^ce^^
according to their Decre^als; it is very probable that most part of men will
enter themselves in their societies, considering that they receive, without any
^ifferenc^, as well the u^learned as learned.

11 M. Peter Cug^ores said the very ^^^e in his pleadings; Petrus de Cug^eriis
in articul^s La^cor^^ contra Praelato^ c 23. p. 21^.
To the end that the Ecclesiastical Court may be enlarged. (says he) the
Prelates make a great many shave-pates, some infants at under age, some the
children of servants^ some married me^ ^^learned and insufficient. We will
conclude this discourse with the saying of Cy^^^ Pist^r^usis, Cy^us
Pistoriensis inter e^s. ne ^ew^re. C de appel. Centum Gravam^ ^. 12.
one of our ^ost ancient law commentatours, The Popes Court ^o^ld gladly have
all the world to be squ^^azed in it, so great is their insatiable desire of
(...) and (...)

12 The States of Germany (...) ^efo^^ation in respect of the Popes (...) and
Delegates, which (...) all Provinces^ and which are ever a means to augment
both his power and riches. Of the Popes Commissaries and Legat^.
The Popes Holiness (say they) upon the request of the Clergy, is wont to send
his Commissaries and Delegate Judges through Germany, as Judges
Ecclesiastical, to the end that the plaintives that procure them may cause Lay
men of what rank and quality soever, to be convented before them in judgment
for profane matters.

Lib de Statu Eccles^ Gallic. in schismat. p. 75.
13 The Peers of France complained likewise of these Commissaries and Delegates
in the time of S. Jews, as we have seen proved already out of the place
before cited. So Innocent the third delegated the Abbat of Casemar, and the
Archbishop of Bourges, to judge the controversy between the King of England
and France.

14 Charles the seventh speaks of these Commissaries in his Ordinance of the
year 1422; Diverse (says he) do endeavor to cite our subjects, or cause them
to be cited in the Court of Rome, or before certain Commissaries or Delegates
of our Holy Father, which is directly to offend against the liberties and
privileges of the Church,

Council. Trid. Sess. 25. c. 10.
15 So far is the Council from providing against this complaint, that point
blanck to the contrary it has ordained certain delegated Judges, whom it will
have appointed and sent into every Diocese, to the number of four or upwards;
according to the nomination which shall be made in the Provincial Synod, or
Council of the Diocese, so as the names be sent to the Pope: As if there were
not Judges enough already, even Ecclesiastical, but they must needs proceed to
a new creation. Which mainly concerns Kings and Princes, without whose will
and consent, new Judges cannot be established within their Dominions.

16 They addressed a complaint also against the Popes Legates, which are his
Quaestors and Treasurers, whom he sends into the Provinces; who like those
that traffic in Peru, bring us little guegawes, to transport our gold for
them: Yea which proceed further now adays, and embroyle themselves in making
of Leagues to alter the state of Countries. The request which they made was
very pertinent; namely, that it might not be lawful for such Legates to
legitimate bastards, incestuous persons, and such as were got by a damnable
copulation, Centum Gravamina c. 9^.
so as to qualify them to inherit with other legitimate children, and make
them capable of all offices and dignities.

17 This power has been oftentimes granted to the Legates that came into
France, and amongst others to Cardinal de Boissy, who was sent hither Ann.
1519, in whose faculties this Article was included; The power of dispensing in
default of legitimate birth for inheriting of lands. As also to the Cardinal
of Ferrara 1561 in the 6 Article of his faculties; And likewise to legitimat
all bastards of either sex, even those that are borne by unlawful and damnable
conjunction, See the Grand R^^ueil des Ordonnances de Fontan^n. tit. 4. des
Legates.

Extant. Parifiis excusae hae facultates, apud Vincen^ium Sertenas ann. 1561.

Espensaeus in comment. in ep. ad Titum. c. 1. digress. 2^ p. 66.


jointly or severally, so as they may be admitted to their fathers
inheritance, and all other goods whatsoever, whether hereditary, or
emphyte^tiques, without prejudice of those that should succeed the intestate,
and received to all kinds of dignities, Magistracies, offices as well public
as private; and to exercise them in like manner, as if they had been truly
begot in true and lawful Matrimony; and to clear them and take away all
stain of birth, and restore them to their original legitimate rights of
nature.

18 Espensaeus exclaimes against these legitimations, and condemns them as
illegitimate; What shall we say (says he) of this, that by means of this
money, they legitimate bastards, or such as are begotten by a damned
conjunction, in unlawful marriage against the laws of God, the Church, and
the Prince; making them capab^^ an^ fit for the administration of all places
and dignities, and to share equa^^y in the inheritanc^ with the lawfully
begotten. He disclaimes also diverse other Articles of these kind of
faculties, Of the faculties of the L^g^ts.
as appears by the passage which we have urged elsewhere, speaking of the
penitentiary taxes of the Church of Rome.

19 This power was never more than imaginary in France; for Legates were never
permitted to exercise this faculty there, as being contrary to the Laws of the
Land, and indeed hark what the Collection of the liberties of the Gallican
Church says concerning this point; The Pope cannot legitimate bastards and
illegitimate persons, Recueil des libertes de l' Eglise Gallican^ c. 14.
so as to make them capable of succeeding, or being succeeded by others, nor to
bear office, and purchase temporal estates in this Kingdom.

20 Many other abuses might be here alleged which are committed in these
faculties, as they call them, and that in particular, which is so ordinary that
it can never be forgotten: To derogate from all Decrees of Councels, and
dispense with them, or (as others term it) to put a dorre or obstacle before
the Council, and other Constitutions derogatory to them. Of which abuse Gerson
speaks thus: Nicolaus Cusanus l. 2. c. 20^
It is not lawful for the Pope to make so much ado about these obstats which
are ordained in General Councels. Cardinal Cusan in his book De Concordia
Catholica, makes a large Chapter of this. But we should have enough to do if
we would seek out all the abuses and usurpations of the Court of Rome.

CHAP. IX. Of the Popes usurpation of Lordships, and Kingdoms.
1 THey have labored hard to usurp Lordships, Kingdoms, and Empires,
insomuch that they quite forgot the care of Spirituals. Two maine causes have
moved them hereunto, Avarice and Ambition. We shall here prosecute only so
much as concerns the first, or at least as belongs jointly to both. Mar^ilius^
Pat in def. pac. part. 2. c. ^5.
Marsilius of Padua, Not content with those Temporalls, which were bestowed
upon them by Princes, by reason of their insatiable appetite they have seized
upon many temporal things that of right belong to the Empire, as the Cities of
Romandiola, Ferrara, and Bononia, with diverse other possessions, and many
lands, and Lordships, then especially when the Empire was vacant.

2 Langius reports a passage out of the Chronicles of Engelbert Wester^itz,
Paulus Langiu^ in Chron. Citizens. sub ann. 1405.
a Clerk of Brandenburg, where as much is said of the City of Rome, The keys
whereof (says he) were presented by the Citizens to Innocent the seventh, with
branches of Palm trees, and the temporal dominion thereof granted unto him.
but with little equity and commendation; forasmuch as the abundance of
temporal things are no little impediment to spiritual; and the Pope, who is
Saint Peter's successor, ought not to take this dangerous temporal dominion
upon him; for we never read that in former times, even after the donation of
Constantine, (in which our curious Canonists do greatly hug themselves) that
any Pope did administer the temporal dominion of the City of Rome: but in
these latter days, and within our memory some Popes have ventured to meddle
with it, thereby heaping upon themselves both cares and troubles; howbeit, from
all antiquity, Rome was ever the royal and imperial City, else he that should
be lawfully preferred to the Empire by the Electors deputed, Popes usurpation
in Rome, Fr^nce, and Pol^nd.
whosoever he were, should be vainly and idly called the King of the Romans,
as commonly he is by the ancient Historians.

3 There is nothing here but very true: and yet our Popes, beside the donation
of Constantine, Can. Ergo Ludovicus. did. 63:
have forged us another made by Jews the Gentle, who bestowed upon them the
City of Rome in express terms, howbeit the ancient Historians speak not a
word of it, and it is plain they never enjoyed that right till within this
little while, to wit, after the time of Boniface the ninth: who being entreated
by the Roman^s to remove his seat from Avinion to Rome for the great gains
which they presaged they should reap by the approaching year of Iubilee, he
being arrived there, seized upon the Cittadell of the Castle of S. Angelo, and
made himself master and commander of the City for him and his successors. But
let us hear the testimony of Guicciardine concerning this.

Franc. Guicci^rdine in his history of Italy l. 4.
4 Being returned to Rome upon these conditions, while the Romans were busy
about the gains that year 1400, the Pope having got the command of the City,
fortified the Castle of St. Angelo, and bestowed a garrison in it, whose
successors till Eugenius, although they were troubled with diverse difficulties,
yet having fully established their government for the future, the succeeding
Popes have ruled the roast at Rome at their pleasure, without any contradiction.

5 But we shall speak more at large of such usurpations as these hereafter; we
will only observe, that the Popes were ever so crafty in the managing of
Empires and Kingdoms, under the pretense of spiritualty, as to pick out
something always for their own advantage. Matthew Westmonast. l. 2. sub ann.
1301.

Polydor. Virgil. l. 17. Anglic. hist.


So Boniface to take up the quarrel which was betwixt the King of England and
Scotland, whom the other King pretended to be his vassal, came in play as to
assist the Scotch, Affirming how that Kingdom belonged of right to the Church
of Rome, and that it was in his power only to give it or take it from whom he
pleased: which he affirmed so as that he would needs be the Judge himself,
but he met with a people that would not believe him.

6 A certain King of Poland called Casimire, being turned Monk, and en^red
into the Abbey of Cluny in France, was dispensed with for his vow by Pope
Bennet, Albertus Crantzius Wandal. l. 2. c. 37.
at the request of the Polanders, repenting themselves of their fault; so as he
had license both to reign and to marry: but, for the pot of wine, It was
ordained by the Pope, that the Polanders should pay a yearly pension to S.
Peter's Church in Rome, for maintaining of candles, which is called in Polonish,
Snatro Petre, that is, S. Peter's Saint.

7 Charles of Anjou, brother to S. Jews the King, was by Clement the 4, who
prosecuted the design of his predecessor Urban the 4, Platina in Clemente 4.
Declared King of Jerusalem and Sicily with this condition, that he should pay
forty thousand crowns yearly to the Church of Rome by way of fee. Wherein two
usurpations are remarkable^ one in the manner of the fee which Peter Anaclete
the Antipope had formerly laid upon Sicily: Albertus Crantzius Norman. l. 4.
c. 16, 17.

Matthew. Paris. in Johan. p. 225.


the other in the tribute, which Clement the fourth added de ^ovo.

8 But there is nothing so memorable as the usurping upon the Kingdom of
England, where excommunication was openly profaned. King John of England being
at enmity with the Lords of the Land, by reason of certain injuries pretended
to be done unto them by him, was excommunicated by Innocent the third, the
year 1513. This excommunication was carried from Rome by Stephen Archbishop of
Canterbury, William Bishop of London, and Peter Bishop of Ely, who thundered it
out in France, where that King had then certain Earledomes and Duk^dome^,
Verba Matthaei Westmonast. p. 92,93.
after they had acquainted King Philip Augustus with the whole business, Whom
those Bishops commanded, as also all others for the remission of their sins,
Popes u^urpi^g upon the c^^vvn of E^gl^nd.
that invading England in hostile manner, they should depose King John from his
crown and dignity, and substitute another worthy of it^ by the authority
Apostolic. The King of France having such a wi^^ed occasion offered,
Se^tentia ^ade^ etiam apud Parisiensem.
made ready for warre^ and mustered up an army: But in the mean time, (behold
the fraud,) while the coming of the King of France was expected by sea,
Pandulphus the Popes Legate, coming out of France, goes to King John, tells him
what eminent danger he is in, shows him how he is utterly undone, unless
he shadow himself under the Popes wings. The King having learned from him how
this protection might be, swears upon the holy Evangelists, in the presence of
the same Pandulphus, that he will submit unto the judgment of the Church.
Which judgment of the Church was, that this poor King should be a vassal, a
slave, and tributary to the Church of Rome. Hear the words of the same Author
ensuing immediately after^ Idem West^^nast. p^ 93^
Then he resigned the Crown of England to Pope Innocent, and did homage unto
him, bringing a most free country into bondage, to be made King of his own
Dominions, and that with a tribute, having framed an instrument hereof to be
pitied and abhorred of all those that understand it.

9 He that would read the Conveyance may find it at large in the Histories of
Matthew Paris, and Matthew Westminster; we will here relate so much of it as
shall serve our turn; We offer and give unto God^ and to his blessed Apostles
Peter and Paul, to our mother the holy Church of Rome, to Pope Innocent the
third, and his successors, all the right of Patronage which we gave to the
Church of England, together with the whole Realms of England and Ireland, and
all their rights and appurtenances, for the remission of our sins, and the
sins of our progenitors (as well alive as dead) and receiving at this present
from God and the Church of Rome, all the premises as a vassal and feudatary,
for which we do liege homage, and promise fealty to Pope Innocent and his
Catholic successors. And afterward. And in witness of this our gift and
grant, we will and decree that the Church of Rom^ receive yearly a thousand
Marks ^^erling of the proper revenues of our said Kingdoms, besides the
Peter Pence.

10 After this, that honest John Lack-land was absolved from ^is
excommunication, And my Lord Legate began earnestly to advise the King of France
to desist from his enterprise, Matthew. Paris. ubi supra.
who was now in readiness to pass over into England with great forces. So
Matthew Paris. Another relates it thus. The King of France being cozened by the
many talks and fair words of the Popes Nuncio's, seeing King John sheltered
under the shield of the Court of Rom^, gave over his enterprise after he had
spent forty thousand pounds upon it, receiving thereby a great deal of shame.
Thou wrongs him, Englishman, Matt^^ Westmon. ubi su^^^.
it is the sanctity of Rom^ which should have blushed at it rather.

11 This history with diverse others of this kind which we could urge, prove
that to be true which Marsilius of Padua witnesses. The Bishops of Rome (says
he) having thus broken the ice, they first excommunicated some, under pretense
of laboring for peace and unity amongst the faithful people of Christ,
whereas it is indeed because they refused to stand to their judgment.
Afterward passing sentence against them both real and personal, and very
roughly against some (namely such as are of least abilities to resist their
power, such are particular persons, and commonwealths in Italy) more mildly
against others, as Kings and Princes, whose assistance and coactive power they
are afraid of (on whom notwithstanding they incroach by little and little) and
they endeavored ordinarily to do it by usurping upon their jurisdictions,
having the boldness to throw at all at once^ by reason whereof, their close
prevarication has hithertoward^ kept secret, forasmuch as concerns the
Emperors of Rome and their subjects; Of the Popes Kindred.
yet so as that now they say they have all the coactive temporal jurisdiction.

12 The Emperor Frederick the second being excommunicated by Gregory the
ninth, could not make his peace with him without a great sum of money. He
obtained it not (says Platina) till he had given twenty hundred thousand
ounces of gold to the Church of Rome, Platina in Greg 9. p. 167. Blondus l. 7.
decad. 2 p. 282.
for the damages which he and put it to, and till he went in the habit of a
supplicant as far as Anagusie to the Pope: About the year 1338.

13 Jews King of Hungary was compelled to buy Campania at a dear rate of
Clement the sixth, which belonged to him as heir to his brother Andrew. About
this time (says Aventine) the King of Hungarie's Orators stuck fast in the
same mire at Avignon. Johannes Aventinus, ex Iohanne Mysta Strigenen^i, l. 7
annal Boiorum p. 627.
Jews King of Hungary, that he might not be excluded from his brothers
kingdom, bought Campania the inheritance of his brother Andrew, which was set
to sail by the Pope, and gave him two millions eight hundred and sixty
thousand crowns for it.

14 Now these great treasures which they rake up together, are partly for
themselves, partly for their children, nephews, and other kinsfolks, which
are oftentimes seen to be both beggars and Princes on one day. For the first
thing they do after they are settled, is to prefer and ennoble their kindred,
and divide amongst them not any petty sums of money, but whole Earledomes,
Dukedomes, and Principalities, to make them Generals of Armies, and such like
things, so as all the pomp and magnificence is for them.

15 This was in fashion in Marsilius de Paduaes, age, who lived about 336
years ago; for speaking of the Popes, he says, They either bestow when they
are alive, Marsilius Pat. in des. pac 2. part c. 11. p. 201
or bequeath when they are like to dye, as great sums of money as they can;
not upon the poor, but upon such as are linckt with them in affinity or
otherwise, however they be, robbing the poor of them. The author of the
Vergers dream makes the Knight speak thus: Le Song du verger c. 24.
Ye never consider the goods of holy Church which your children, your nephews,
your parents, and sometimes other lewd persons catch away.

16 Rodericke Bishop of Zamore in Spain, and Constable of the Castle of St.
Angelo, Rodericus episc. Zamorensis in Speculo humanae virae. impress.
Bisuntii. ann. 1488.
in his Book entitled The mirror of man's life, dedicated by him to Pope Paul
the second, about the year 1488. amongst other cares and inconveniences of the
Popedom reckons this for one: First (says he) domesticke care is an
hindrance; and besides, that most unjust greediness, and (as I may so say)
most enraged madness of preferring their parents, of perpetuating their
family, Frances Guicciardine in his fourth book of the Histo^y of I^^ly.
their kindred, and the whole generation of such as are descended of their
blood; for some Popes would not have one only, but many great families and
noble houses owe their original to them, and have honorable principalities
springing from them.

17 These are they of whom those words in the ordinance of Jews the 11, made
the 16 of August 1478, ought to be understood. It is a strange thing (says
he) that the unjust exactions of the Court of Rome should be suffered; such
are their expectative Bulls, and other like knackes, their money for vacancies,
which is levied contrary to the holy Canons and Decrees, and contrary to the
determination of the Catholic Church and sacred Councels, that what is so
gotten may be employed in purchasing of Earledomes and Lordships, to bestow
upon people of mean condition, and to prefer them without any precedent
merit, without any service or use which they can do to the Church, or for the
defense of the faith.

18 Francis Guicciardine in the fourth book of his history of Italy, in the
discourse which he makes of the Popes of Rome (which has been expunged by
some It is effaced by the Inquisition out of the Original in in most editions,
but the English reader may find the whole passage set forth by Dallington,
with a discourse upon it. As also annexed to The history of the Council of
T^ent.
cozeners) amongst other vices and abuses which he observes in the Popedom
thi^ is one, An earnest and everlasting desire of preferring their children,
their nephews, and all the rest of their kindred and allies, Of the luxu^y of
Po^^s.
not only to inestimable riches, but also to Kingdoms and Empires. And a
little after; To exalt their kindred, and rai^e them from a private state to
principalities, they have of late years been the authors of wars, and the
firebrands of the late combustions in Italy. We heard before what the same
author told us of the Indulgence money of Leo the tenth, how it was bestowed to
the use and petty pleasures of his sister Magdalen.

19 We will conclude this discourse with a passage out of the same author,
which will bring us upon another. Guicciardinc in his fourth book of the
history of Italy
Their study and business is not only (says he, speaking of the Popes)
holiness of life, nor the propagation of religion and charity toward God and
men^ but arms and wars against Christians, handling sacred things with
bloody thoughts and hands; but an infinite desire of money, new laws, new
trickes^ new inventions to ^nhanse their rents from all parts; for which ends
they shoot out their coel^^tiall arrows, they most impudently practice a trade
and traffic of all things sacred and profane; whereby their riches being
augmented to an excessive greatness, and scattered over all their Court, have
brought forth pride, luxury debauched manners, and most abominable pleasures.
See here the saying of a ringleader and conducter of the Popes army, of one who
was Leo the tenths favorite.

20 Let us pa^se a while upon this luxury which he speaks of, and set down the
complaint which diverse others have made against it: First, that which S.
Bernard says to Eugenius the 3, D. Berna^dus lib 2. de considerat. ad Eugenium
Papam.
I do not spare you here (says he) that God may spare you hereafter; show
your self a shepherd toward this people, or else confess that you are not
so; you will not deny that you are, leas^ you should deny your self to be his
successor, in whose See you sit, that Peter, who for ought that we know,
never went adorned with precious stones, attired in silks, and clothed in
gold, mounted upon a white palfrey, surrounded with a guard, attended with a
great many Lackeys; and yet for all he had the power, without all these, to
accomplish that saving commandment, If thou love me^ feed my sheep.

21 John Sarisbury Bishop of Chartres, who lived about 1180, says, Ioannes
Sarisburiensis in Policratico l. 6. c 24.
That the Pope is burdensome and insupportable to all men 3. ^e builds Palaces
out of the ruine^ of Churches; he goes accoutred not only in purple, but in
gold.

22 Marsilius of Padua. Marsilius Patavinu^ in def. paci^ part. 2. c. 11.
Let them tell me, I pray them, with what conscience, according to Christian
Religion, they spend the goods of the poor, living after a worldly fashion,
upon so many unnecessaries in horses, servants, banquets, and other vanities
and delicates, both secret and public? They, I say, who for the ministry of
the Gospel, ought to be content with food and raiment; according to the
Apostles appointment in the first to Timothy.

CHAP. X. Of the injust power of the Popes.
The Popes flatterers.
1 ONe of the maine points touching the reformation of the Popes, is the
unbridled and redoubted power which he challenges both in spirituals and
temporals; considering that he pretends to have an absolute and sovereign
power over both: It were fitting, me thinks, to set bounds to the plenitude of
that power which has neither banks nor bottom; to him that extends his
jurisdiction over all the world, even as low as hell and purgatory, as high as
heaven; which takes hold of great and small, Clerks and Laiques, things sacred
and profane; which has set all the Church, yea all Christendom, by the ears
together; which is the source and fountain of all our miseries, and against
which there have been so many complaints exhibited upon this occasion.

Consult d^lectorum virorum Tom. 3. Council. edit. Colon. 1551.
2 Paul the thirds Delegates had a touch at this point in their reformation^ In
former times (say they) the truth could not have access to the audience of
certain Popes, by reason of certain flatterers which magnified and extended
their power too much: persuading them that they were Lords paramount of all,
and might do any thing what they list: from this spring have so many miseries
in great floods overflowed the Church, that she is now quite overborne and
drowned. See here what they say, who were conjured by the Pope upon oath, and
upon pain of excommunication, to tell him the truth of all that required
reformation. We have formerly observed a place in Zabarel of the like strain
with this.

Ioannes Gerson de potest. E^cles. Confid. 12.
3 Master John Gerson in his book De potestate Ecclesiae, has the very same; On
the other side, (says he) upstarts cunning and glozing f^attery, whispers the
Clergy, but especially the Pope, in the care. O how great is the height of your
Ecclesiastical power! O sacred Clergy, all Secular authority is but a toy in
comparison of thine; seeing that as all power is given to Christ both in heaven
and in earth, so Christ has bequeathed all to S. Peter and his successors: So
that Constantine gave nothing to Pope Sylvester, which was not originally his
own, but only restored unto him what he injustly detained from him. Again, as
there is no power but is of God, so there is nothing temporal or spiritual,
Imperial or Regal, which is not of the Pope, upon whose thigh God has writ,
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. So as to dispute his power is a kind of
sacrilege. To whom no man may say, Why do you so? although he should
exchange, purloine, of sell all the temporals, the goods, lands, and lordships
of the Church. Let me be a liar if all these things are not written by such as
seem to be wise men in their eyes, and if they have not been believed also
by some Popes.

Marsilius in def pac. part. 2^ c. 25.
4 So Marsilius of Padua in many sundry places of his Defensor Pacis,
particularly in the second part, and twenty fifth Chapter; They have taken up a
title (says he) which they arrogate to themselves, and which they would make
an instrument of this wickedness, namely the plenitude or fulness of power; which
they say was given to them in particular by Christ in the person of St. Peter
as that Apostle's successors: By reason of which accursed title, Plenitude of
the Popes povve^.
and their sophistical manner of discourse, they use a certain captious kind
of arguing by equivocation, and labor to bring all Princes in the world, all
people, all corporations, and particular persons within their servitude. For
having first taken that term in the sense whereby it signifies an universal
cure of souls, and the power of absolving men from sins and punishments;
under color of piety, charity and mercy, underhand, and by little and little
they come to take it in a sense, where by plenitude of power is understood an
universal authority and supreme jurisdiction, or coactive sovereignty over all
Princes, all people, and all temporal things.

5 Gregory of Heymburg, a German Lawyer who lived in the time of Pius the
second, about the year 1460, says, Grego^ius Heymburgensis in De consut.
primat. Pap in princ 2 part.
After this the Popes being carnal, have presumed so far as to arrogate unto
themselves a fullness of power, by virtue of their Decrees, (as if that were an
authentic book) which they cannot prove out of Scripture: Yea so far forth
as that Adrian the second denied his benediction to Frederick the first, when
he asked it as his predecessors were wont to do, and that because he held the
left stirrup when the Pope alighted off his horse, and not the right, as the
Pope desired he should have done. Good God what a proud fellow was this! And
after he has set down the means which they used to arrive at this
plenitude, and given some examples of them, he ads, Well may our Popes call and
write themselves Christ's Vicars and S. Peter's, considering what we have said,
as if they derived from them the whole plot of the Plenitude of power; which
St. Paul notwithstanding calls folly.

6 Peter de Ferrariis a Paduan Lawyer who lived ahout the year 1400, Petrus de
Ferrariis in form. Opponend. Contra testes. in ver. Contra jus. p. 164.
in his pleadings of law, says; As for Plenitude of Power, which is used of
l^ter times to be ascribed to the Popes privileges and rescripts, it is
against God and all law, to the perpetual detriment and everlasting infamy of
their souls.

7 Clement the fifth assumes this Plenitude of Power, Clement. Pastoralis De
sent. and re judic. Extra. unam Sanctam. de major. and obedient ^an. omnes.
did. 22.
and extends it to Empires and Kingdoms, as do also other Popes of whom we
shall speak anon.

8 From this Plenitude of power are deduced those grand maxims which the Pope
and they of his Court take for granted, but good Catholics have ever denied
them. We will here set down some few of them, (not all, for that would require a
large volume) which we will produce either out of the Popes own books, or out
of such Doctors and interpreters of theirs, as are avowed and approved by
them. Behold here one of them in the first place which seems to comprehend
all; Lanc. Conrad. in Templo omnium judic. l^ 2. c. 1.. 4.
That the Pope is holden to be Christ's Vicar, not only in respect of things in
earth, in Heaven, and Hell, but even over Angels both good and bad Let us now
set down the rest in order.

The Baldus in l. Rescripta. C. de praeci. Imper. off nu. 7.
Pope alone has all the dignity and power which all Patriarchs ever had. The
Baldus ibid.
Popes power is greater than the power of Saints. The August. Triumphus (^ive
de Ancona) in De potest. Ec. q 18. art. 1.
Pope, to whom is committed the government of the Universe, excels all Angels
in jurisdiction. The Idem ib a 2.
Pope is greater than the Angels in respect of the administration of the
Sacraments, which was not committed to them by reason of their insufficiency
whereby they are not fit for it. The Idem ibid. art. 3.
Pope is greater than the Angels, as touching dominion, not in respect of
himself merely, but by authority from God. The Ibid art. 4.
Pope is inferior to Angels, in regard of natural knowledge, but in regard of
grat^itous revealed knowledge, he is above them. The Ibid art. 5.
Pope as concerning recompense of reward, may be superior to any Angels. The
Pope may excommunicate the Angels.
The Popes (...).
10 Besides, the Popes suppose the Angels to be but their ushers and Sergeants.
I did think that what is related of the Bulls of Clement the fifth, whereby he
commands the Angels to take souls out of Purgatory and put them in P^^adise,
was but a fable; howbeit they which urge them, assure us that they are extant
at Vienna, Poictiers, and Limoges: Extat h^^ Bulla in tract. de materiis
indulgentiarum^

Ioannis Phesfer Wittenberg Theol Pro^ess. in Universe. Friburg. scrip. a^^.
147^.

Decisio 1. vel 447. ^n compila. Rebuffi. Edit. Lugduni ann. 1555. p. 27. Extat
haec Ep. Nicholai 1. ad Michaelem Constable. to ^. con. Vnde sumptus Canon. Satis
evidenter. did. Augustine. Steu^cheus in lib de Donat. Constan^stantini. Audi^
summum Pontificem a Constantino Deum appellatum and babitum pro Deo? hoc
videlicet factum est cum illum praeclaro illo edicto decoravit. Adoravit u^
Deum. Augustine. Bero^us in rubric. de offi^. deleg. nu. 10.

Baldus in l. ult. C. de senten. rescindend. Lancelotus Conradus l. 2. de
templo omnium judic. c. 1.. 4. de praestantia and potesta^te Pont. maximi.

Idem ibid.

Idem l. 2. c. 1.. 4.

Hostiensis in tit. 4. de transtat Episc. and ^lii.

Lancelot Conradus ubi supra Bellar. de Romans Pont. l 4. c. 5. Idem Lanc. l. 2.
c. 1.. 4. De reservati^ Pontifici. Cap. Debitus de appellation. Idem Lancelot.
l. 2 c. 1. Baldus in cap. Cum Super. de causis propriet. and possess. Id^m in
cap. Eccles. u^ lite pendente. Lancelot Conrad. ubi supra. l. 2. c. 1.. 4.
Ceremonial. P^^tif. l. 3. tit. 1.


but I have met with one of Clement the sixth, where, speaking of altering the
Iubily from a hund^ed to fifty years; he ordaines among other things, That if
a man be going to Rome upon devotion in the year of Iubily, and happen to dye
by the way, he ^^all be totally acquitted and absolved of all his sins. And
he afterward adds, Howsoever we command the Angels of Paradise that they
convey his soul into the glory of Paradise, being totally absolved from the
pains of Purgatory.

11 They pretend also to be greater than the Apostles: Hearken what is said to
this point in the late decisions of the Rota of Rome; All that the Apostle has
commanded or prohibited is from God and the Holy Ghost, and binds all men; I
mean of inferior persons, not of the Pope, who is greater in power than the
Apostles, and therefore may dispense with the Apostles.

12 Nay they make themselves equal to God, and pride themselves in being
called Gods. Pope Nicholas the first, in an Epistle to the Emperor Michael,
says, It is evident that the Pope was called God by the devout Prince
Constance; and it is a plain case that God cannot be judged by man. The Gloss
would have this honor communicated to other Bishops, who (it says) are called
Gods likewise: But there be other interpreters who inform us, that it is
peculiar to the Pope only, and that the title is not given unto him as unto
others by way of hyperbole, but that he is a God indeed.

13 Augustine Steucheus, the Popes Library Keeper, Know thou not (says he)
that Constantine called the Pope God, and accounted him so to be? So he did
when he honored him with that goodly Edict, he worshipped him as a God. And
yet Constantine spoke of Bishops in general, for it was at the Council of
Nice, and not at the time of that pretended donation which never was made.

14 Elsewhere it is said, That the Pope is equal to God: That there can be no
appeall from him to God: That he is God upon earth: That as God he can judge of
the verity of the fact, and according to conscience: That he is never supposed
to judge otherwise than God himself: That God and he have one and the same
Consistory: That he can determine against the law of Nature, the law of
Nations, and the law of God with reason; yea that sometimes he can make
expositions and limitations against the law of Nature, of Nations, and of God,
with reason or without reason: That he must be believed upon his bare word,
even to the prejudice of another: That if he prefer an unworthy person, it
is to be thought he dispenses with him: That he can make something of
nothing: That he can go against all Councels and Statutes: That he can make
wrong to be right: That he can do any thing beside law, above law, against
law: To whom no man may say, Why do you so? Whose pleasure stands for reason:
Whose power may not be disputed, without incurring the crime of sacrilege,
forasmuch as he is the cause of causes, and the just cause; and for that it is
to be presumed that whatsoever pleases him is just and reasonable.

15 Divine honors have also been ascribed unto him: for it is appointed and
prescribed in the Ceremonial, That all persons of what dignity or degree
soever, when they come before the Pope shall bow the knee thrice before him at
a certain distance, and kiss his feet. Thence follows adoration. The Bishop
of Zamore says; The Popes usurped power over Princes.
Let him be highly honored, let him be extolled and adored in all the parts of
the world, let every knee bow before him, as is fitting they should Menot^^
speaks of these honors with a very good grace; I will make him speak in his
own language for the elegancies sake: Rodericus episc. Zamoren^is in Speculo
humanae vitae. l. 2. c. 3.

Michael Menotus in Sermon. quadrages. feria 3. post 2. dominicam quadrages

Haec est Arnulphi Aurelianensi^ episcopi oration habita in Concilio Rhemensi.
Actis inserta.


Nec est body princeps super terram qui non flectat genua coram Domino Papa,
and qul non se multum aestimet, qui ne se tienne bien fire, ejus pedes
osculari. Joseph Stephanus a Devine has writ a book in our days which he
intitles Of the adoration of the Popes feet.

16 These excessive honors, and this divine power which is ascribed unto him,
have constrained some to cry out and complain of them. In the Acts of the
Council of Rhemes under Hugh Capet, we find these words directed to the
Pope: What think you (Reverend Fathers) who that should be that is seated in
the highest place, who glisters with a garment of gold and purple, I say, who
think you that should be? if he be without charity, and be puffed up and
exalted only for his knowledge, then he is Antichrist sitting in the Temple
of God, and carrying himself as God: but if he be neither grounded in
Charity, nor exalted in knowledge, he is like an image, like an idol in the
Church of God.

17 The Emperor Frederick the second in the letters which he writ to the
Princes of Germany, says; The Pope being grown over wealthy to the great
decay of Christian piety, thinks he may do any thing, like most wicked
tyrants, as if he were a God, he will not give any reason for his actions to
any man; he takes upon him that which belongs to God alone, for it is thought
he cannot err. Eberhardus episc. Salisburiensis apud Aventinum l. 7. Annal.
Boiorum p 547.


18 A German Bishop who lived under the same Emperor, in a certain Oration
which he delivered in an assembly held at Rhegimburg, says amongst other
things, That the Popes will never have done till they have trampled all things
under their feet; till they be seated in the Temple of God, and exalted above
every thing that is adored. And a little after. He that is a servant of
servants desires to be Lord of Lord, just as if he were God.

19 One of our old French practitioners has made the very same complaint.
Ioannes Faber in praesat. ad Justinian. Institut. Papa in verbis se dicit
servum servo^um, de facto tamen se adoraripermittit^ quod Angelu^ in apocalypsi
refugit.

Zabarella Card^nal Flor. in tract. de schism. Pont.

Can. Constantius did. 96.


The Pope (says he) styles himself in words a servant of servauts, but in
very deed he suffers himself to be adored, which the Angel in the Revelation
refused to do. A learned Cardinal of Florence reproves the Popes slatterers,
because they bear them in hand That they may do any thing, that they may do
what they please, even things that are unlawful, and so more than God
himself: whence infinite errors have proceeded. He afterward adds, that in
the Council which shall be holden about the reformation of the Church, It will
be fitting to advise concerning the honor which shall be done unto the Pope,
that there be no excess in it, that he be not honored as God himself.

20 They take upon them also all power, authority and jurisdiction over
Emperors, Kings, and Christian Princes, and over all temporalties whatsoever.
We will here insert some of their maxims concerning this point: First, that
which they say is contained in the donation of Constantine: To the end that the
Pontificial dignity be not disesteemed, but more eminent in glory and power
than the Imperial, we give and grant to the most blessed Bishop Sylvester,
universal Pope, our Palace and City of Rome, together with all the Provinces,
Palaces and Cities of Italy, and of the Western Countries: we decree by this
our Pragmatique Sanction, that he and his successors may dispose of them, and
that they shall belong to the right of the holy Church of Rome. By this
pretended donation all the Princes of Europe are made the Popes vassals and
subjects. They say further,

21 That Cap. unam sanctam. extra^ de majorit, and obed.
it is necessary to salvation to believe that every creature is subject to the
Pope of Rome.

22 That Ca. 1. Extra^ de Cons^^t.
he is set over Empires and Kingdoms.

O^ t^^ Pop^s (...).
23 That C^ ^undament^. de elect ju.
he carries both the temporal sword and the spiritual.

24 That Clementin. Pastoralis. de r^ judi^.
the Empire depends upon the Pope, and that he has dominion over it.

25 That August. de Anco^a. De Potest. Ec^les. q. 36. art. 2.
the Imperial or regal power is borrowed from the Papal or Sacerdotall, for
as much as concerns the formality of dignity, and receiving of authority.

26 That Idem ibid. q. 35 art. 1.
he may choose an Emperor himself upon just and reasonable cause.

27 That Lancelot. Conradus in templo ^mnium judic. l. 2. c. 1.. 4.
he may appoint guardians and assistants to Kings and Emperors, when they are
insufficient and unfit for government.

28 That Idem ibid. de Praest. and potest. Pontis. maxim.
he may depose them, and transfer their Empires and Dominion^ from one line
to another.

29 That Ca. Venerabilem extra. de electione.
Pope Zachary transferred the Kingdom of France upon Pepin.

30 That August. de Anc. q. 37. a. 1.
the translation of all Kingdoms whatsoever was done by authority of the Pope,
or of some other that represented him.

31 That Idem q. 37. art. 2.
the Empire was transferred upon the Romans by the Popes authority.

32 That Idem q. 37. art. ^
the Empire was transferred from the Romans to the Grecians by the Popes
authority.

33 That Idem q. 37. art. 4

Et ^a. Venerabilem. extra de el^ctione.


the Empire was transferred from the Grecians to the Germans by the Popes
authority.

34 That Idem August. q 37. art 5.
the Empire may be transferred from the Germans upon any other by the Popes
authority.

35 That Idem q. 38. art 1.
the confirmation of the Emperor belongs to the Pope, to whom also belongs
an universal jurisdiction.

36 That Idem q. 38. a^t. 4.
the Emperor ought to swear allegiance to the Popes.

37 That Idem. q. 39. art. 1^
he cannot exercise his Imperial power, unless he be confirmed by the Pope.

38 That Idem q. 35. art 6.
the Pope may make the Empire hereditary, if he see it expedient for quietness
sake; for just as he now ordains that it shall be elective, so he may bring
in an hereditary succession.

39 That Idem q. 35. art. 3.
he may change the Electors o^ the Empire, if any evident and apparent benefit
of the Christian Commonwealth do so require.

40 That Idem ibid. art. 4.
the Electors of the Empire may be appointed out of another Country than
Germany, if any just reason so require.

41 That Idem q. 46. a. 3
he may absolve subjects from the oath of allegiance.

42 That the Pope upon just cause may set up a King in every Kingdom; for he
is the overseer of all Kingdoms in Gods stead, as God is the supervisor and
maker of all Kingdoms.

43 That Idem q. 45^ art. 3. art. 3.
if one be oppressed in the Court of external judgment, he may appeal from
any man, King or Emperor, unto the Pope.

44 That Idem ib a 2.
the Pope has jurisdiction over all things, as well temporal as spiritual,
through the whole world.

45 That Idem q 46. art. 1
it belongs to the Pope to correct Kings when they offend, seeing that he is
the judge of the quick and the dead in Christ's stead.

46 That Ibid q 44. art. 4.
the Pope may correct the Imperial law by his authority, as the divine law
does the humane.

47 That Idem ibid. art. 5.
the Pope may alter the Imperial laws according to the diversity of the times,
if any evident commodity be like to ensue upon it.

48 That Alvarus Pelagius de planctu Eccles. l. 1: art 37.
the Pope, by reason he has the Empire of Rome may and ought to reduce the
Holy Land under his jurisdiction.

49 That Idem ibid.
the Pope has the propriety of the Western Empire, and the rest of the world
in protection and tuition.

50 That Idem ibid.
he may justly make an ordination and decree against infidel Princes, although
their Countries were never possessed by Christian Princes, ^h^ Po^^s bestowing
of Kingdom^s.
that they do not injustly molest the Christians within their dominions.

51 That Idem ibid.
if they evil entreat the Christians, he may by his sentence deprive them of
that power and jurisdiction which they have over them.

52 That Idem ibid.
he may command the Infidels to receive the Preachers of the Gospel into their
territories.

53 For ought that I can see, the King of China and the great Mogul shall fare
no better than Christian Princes, unless they come very speedily and submit
themselves to the Pope. He has met with the Kings of India, of Peru, Brasile,
Cuba, and all those other ^les of the Ocean; which were of far more difficult
acces^e than those Kingdoms we speak of. Alexander the 6, anno 1493 made a
fair deed of gift to Ferdinand King of Aragon, C^p. (...) de insu^^ novi or^is
l. 7. Decret.
of all those poor Barbarians, and of all their Countries and Kingdoms,
although he never knew them, nor had they ever offended him: Of our mere
bounty and certain knowledge, and the Plenitude of our power Apostolical, we
give, grant, and by these presents, do assign to you, your heirs and
successors for ever, Kings of Castile and Leon, all the Islands and Continents
which have already been discovered and found out, or which hereafter shall be
toward the West and South, drawing a line thereof from the Artick or
North^Pole, to the Antartick or South Pole. And we make, constitute, and
appoint you, your heirs and successors Lords thereof, with full free and
absolute power, authority and jurisdiction. But enough of this, for any man may
judge by this what will become of the rest.

54 So one of their Doctors expounding that passage of sacred writ, Give unto
Caesar the things that are Cesars, Iac^bus de Teran^ in tract. Monar^h.
says, That was spoken but for a time, not for ever; that it was to hold only
till the ascension of Jesus Christ; and afterward that should come to pass
which was spoken, When I shall be lifted up from the earth, I will draw all
things after me. That is, (says this great Rabbin) I will recover all the
Empires and Kingdoms of the world, and will take them from Caesar, from Kings
and Princes, to give them to the Pope. See here one of the finest and truest
Prophecies that ever was read; for he has more stroke in the Empire and
Kingdoms, than the Emperors and Kings themselves, at least among Christians.

55 We need not wonder hereafter at the extravagant of Boniface the 8, ^^trav
Vnam s^nct^m. de m^^^rit. and obed.
where he will have it to be necessary to salvation, to believe that all the
faithful people of Christ are subject to the Pope of Rome; that he has both
the swords; that he judges all men and is judged of none. Nor of that which
he writ to King Philip the Fair, That he was subject to him both in
spirituals and temporals. Nor at that which a German Historian relates of him,
Albert. Crantz. M^^rop. l. 9. c. 201.

Platina in Greg. 7.


That supposing Kingdoms and Empires to be in his power, he made his brag
that he had two swords. Nor at that which before his time Nicholas the first
writ to the Milanois, That God has bestowed upon S. Peter and his successors,
the right both of the Terrestrial and Celestial Empire. Nor at that which
Gregory the 7 says in one of his Bulls, speaking of himself, That all the
world may understand at last, that we give and take away Empires, Kingdoms,
Principalities, and whatsoever mortal men are capable of. Nor at that pretense
of Clement the 5 in one of his Clementines, Clementin. Pastoralis de sent. and
re judic.
That without all doubt he has the command of the Empire, who, by reason of
that power which he has, succeeds the Emperor in the vacancy of the Empire.
Sabell^cus Ennead. 9. l. 8.
Nor at that which Clement the 6 pretended, that the Empire devolved upon him
after the excommunication of Ludovicu^ Bavarus, and that upon that occasion he
placed Governors in the Cities of Italy; N^uclerus Generat. 45.
following herein the example of his predecessor John the 22^ who set forth in
his Bulls to all the world, That he had divided all Italy from the Empire, and
from the Kingdom of Germany: That the Pope is universal Lord, not only of
things spiritual but also of temporal. Nor likewise at this, that the Popes
have declared all those to be heretics who in their writings have defended
That Empires and Kingdoms depend not upon the Pope, but upon God alone. Of the
King of France his Privileges.


56 The King of France is deceived if he think he is exempted by his
Clementine, Meruit; he has to do with people that know how to expound
Scripture; that will pick out the sense where all the greatest Doctors of the
Sorbon would be put past their divinity. They know well enough how to tell him
that he and his Kingdom are only restored by that Clementine, into the state
wherein they were before Boniface his Bull; that the Realm of France was,
before that, subject to the Popes Dominion, by the donation of Constantine;
Can. aliu^. cause. 15 q. 16.
That the Pope is Lord and Monarch of the Universe; that he has both the
swords; a plenitude of power both over temporals and spirituals; that the
Decrees which bestow this right upon him, are confirmed by the Council of
Trent: that Pope Zachary deposed Childeric, absolved his subjects from the oath
of allegiance, and bestowed the Realm upon Pepin: that this Pope Clement being
a French man would have favored the French, but he could not do it to the
prejudice of St. Peter's patrimony: that he trembles yet at the fright which
Nogaret put his predecessor into. And whereas it is conceived that some such
promise was extorted from him, and some obligation which bound him so to do,
upon condition he were made Pope, they will urge the example of the Emperor
Henry the 5. whom the Councels of Lateran and Vienna caused to give up his
investitures, notwithstanding the dispensation which Paschal the second had
granted unto him in that behalf; yea, and the examples of our own Kings^ whom
Benedict the 13, Julius the 2, Gregory the 14, and Sixtus the 5, did not stick
to excommunicate for all their privileges.

37 Besides, the Council of Trent being allowed, which gives all power to the
Popedom, even over Councels, it must belong to the Pope to dispose of all
things as supreme judge, to alter the Decrees of his predecessors, to abrogate
such as are disadvantagious unto him; who shall contradict him? No King dare
intermeddle how great soever he be; and if he do, he will but loose his
labor. We will return to the days of old, when excommunications from Rome
were so terrible, when all things shrunk at the flash of those thunders. The
Fredericks, the Henry's, the Ludovici Bavari have felt the force of it; they
have been abandoned of their subjects, their vassals, their kindred, their
allies, their own children: they have been trodden under foot, deposed from
their Empyres, defamed as heretics, chased like raskals. Goodly mirrours to
represent to the life to all Princes of Christendom, if they were not blind,
the miseries that hang over them and their successors.

58 Not without good reason did that great devine Marsilius, after he had seen
all the tragedies in his age acted, make a loud outcry, which deserves now
more than ever to pierce the ears of Princes, I cry aloud (says he) like a
trumpet of truth, Marsil^ Patav. in def pacis. part. 2. c. 25.
and tell you it is the greatest prejudice that ever was done to Kings and
Princes, to all people, assemblies and languages, which the Bishops of Rome
with their associats the Clerks and Cardinals have done: By this their Decree,
which is utterly false in all the grounds of it, (he speaks of the Clementine,
Pastoralis, after he has urged the words of it) they go about to bring you in
subjection to them, if you suffer this constitution to prevail; yea if you
suffer it to have the power and force of a law. For consider that it follows
of necessity that he which has authority to repeal a former sentence of any
Prince or Judge whatsoever, has also jurisdiction and coactive power over him;
and further, the power of erecting or putting down his Princedome. Now the
Bishop of Rome does challenge to himself this authority equally over all
Princes and Principalities of the world; inasmuch as by virtue of that
Plenitude of Power which he^ affirms to be granted unto him by Christ in the
person of S. Peter, The King of F^ance his privilege va^^n.
he has repealed the sentence of Henry the 7. No man can tell how to give the
force of a law to that Decretall which he speaks of better than by receiving
the Council of Trent; which expressly confirms all the Constitutions of the
Popes.

59 But it were fitting we here added the examination which the same author
makes of Boniface his Decretall, and the Clementine, Meruit, to show that the
King of France his privilege cannot choose but be void; Mursil. Patav. in d^s
p^c part^ 2. c. 20.
and that other Princes being the Popes subjects, he must needs be so as well
as they; Considering more thoroughly these kind of Epistles and Decretals, they
may seem to be mere fooleries: for that of Boniface obliges all Princes and
people in the world to the belief of it: that of Clement not all; for only the
King of Fr^nce and his subjects are excepted out of it. So then there will be
some things which some men by authority of Scripture are bound to believe upon
pain of damnation, which other some are not bound to believe: surely this is
not one God, one faith; all are not bound to go to Christ in the unity of
faith; and yet the Doctor of the Gentiles plainly affirms the contrary in
the 4 to the Ephesians. Besides, we may ask Pope Clement in what sacred sense
the King of France and his subjects could merit by their faith not to be bound
to believe those things which ought to be believed upon pain of damnation?
either then they merited by their faith to be Heretics and Infidels^ or else
the Epistle of Boniface contains a downright lie: and so things which are not
true ofttimes overthrow themselves when no body thrusts them. Besides, there is
matter of admiration for other Princes and people, who may demand what place of
Scripture, or what exposition makes them subject to the jurisdiction of the
Pope of Rome, and exempts the King of France? Or why some are more bound to
believe upon pain of damnation than others? For this being like a fiction,
has been deservedly much derided, and is yet; as proceeding from the ambition
of them that vent such things, and the earnest desire of reigning over Secular
Princes, and the terror of the most illustrious King of France.

60 We will add furthermore that this domineering power which the Popes have
usurped over all Princes of Christendom, has driven them into some heinous
injustices, as to usurp their Empires and Kingdoms, to raise up war among
them; to rob them of their inheritance^ to muster up their own subjects against
them; to sow quarrels and contentions among them; to cause innocent blood to be
shed; to abuse excommunications, and other spiritual weapons: and in a word to
exercise an intolerable ty^anny: Whereof there are so many pregnant proofs and
examples that no man can doubt of it, if he be not a mere novice in history,
or unless he have not bin extant in the world in these latter times.
Nevertheless I will quote some in the Venericus Vercellensis lib. de unit.
Eccles. conser. p. 12. 37. 40. Epistola Leodiensium tom. 3. Council ex edit.
Colon. ann. 15^1. Marsilius Patavin. in desens. pacis part. 1. cap. ult. and
part. 2. capi^ib. 22,23,24,25. Aventinus lib. 7. annatium Boiorum ubi refert
rogationem Procerum Germanorum page 621. and ubi loquitur de Frederico. 2. page
533. Arnaldus Ferronius de rebus gestis Francorum, ubi loquitur de Iulio 2
Guicciardinus lib 4 hist. Italia, in loco detracto. Baptista Mantuanus lib. 1.
Sylvarum. Erasmus in apologia adversus Stunica blasphemia^. L^dovicus Romanu^.
co^s. 522. number. 9. Martinus Pol^nus in Henrico 6. sub ann. 13^9. Guilielmus
M^lmesburiensis Auglus lib. 4. cap. 2. Platina in Gregorio 7. and in Bonifacio
8. and in Alexandr^ ^, and in Innocentio 4, and in Eugenio 4, and in Iulio 2.
Otho Frisingensis lib. 7. Chron. c. 9. Helmoldus in Chronico Slavorum c. 28.
and sequent.
margent to justify my assertion against detractours.

CHAP. XI. Of the Popes honors.
Of holding the Popes stirrup.
WE will now speak a word or two of those honors which they would have
Emperors and Kings, and other earthly Monarchs, to do unto them, whom they
make their Lackeyes, causing them to attend upon them in most shameful manner:
Can. Constant. did. 96.

August. Steuchius, Pape^ bibliothecarius, l. 2. de donat. Constant. c. 66.
Platina in Steph 2.

Ceremoniale pontif. Tit. 2. sub. Ordo processionis continet.

Et l. 3. sub. de prima lotione manuum.

Et. de modo portandi fercul. Helmoldus Presbyter, Lubecensis, in hist.
Slavorume 8.


For we are bound to believe, by the supposititious donation of Constantine,
that the Emperor Constantine holding the bridle of Sylvesters horse, underwent
the office of a Lackey. Some of the Popes domestiques affirm that Pepin, one
of our Kings, did as much to Pope Stephen the 2.

2 And in the Popes Ceremonial these Chapters are inserted; That Kings and
Emperors must hold his stirrup when he gets up, or alights from his horse.
That they must lead his horse by the bridle: That if he go in a litter, the
Emperors and Princes must carry him upon their shoulders: That when he sits
down to table, they must hold the basin while he washes: That they must carry
up his first mess.

3 Now these honors are not only set down in their Books, but have been
actually proferd and been admitted and received. Frederick^ the first is
thought to have fared but ill because he had not well studied this point of
civility and duty, when Pope Adrian the fourth came into his army; for, running
to the rising stirrup to help him in alighting, in stead of going to the other,
he is thought to have lost his crown for it: For the Pope was so offended at
him, and took it out so hainously in point of honor, that being desired to
proceed to his coronation, he made answer; that S. Peter had been
dishonored, in as much as the Emperor in stead of holding the right stirrup
had holden the left. Frederick being much amazed at that complaint, excused
himself, saying, That it was for want of knowledge, not devotion; and that he
haed not been accustomed to holding of stirrops. But the Pope from his excuse
drew a subtle argument against him, to pronounce him unworthy of the Empire;
for (says he) if he have neglected out of ignorance a thing which is so easy,
how think you he will manage weighty matters? The Emperor seeing himself in
danger to be degraded as insufficient and incapable of the Empire, bended all
the nerves and veins of his wit, to make this dilemma, which gained him the
cause, I would be better informed (says he) whence this custom proceeded,
whether out of good will, or out of custom: if of good will, the Pope has no
reason to complain, if a man have failed in a thing which concerns civility,
seeing that consists in the mind of the giver, and not in necessity of right:
if you say that this reverence is due to the Prince of the Apostles from the
first institution, what difference is there betwixt the right stirrup and the
left, so that humility be observed, and the Princ^ humble himself to the feet
of the supreme Bishop? The Historian adds, That the question was disputed a
long time, and with much eagerness. He says further, That they parted
without giving him the kiss of peace. It went so far, that the Pope returned
without crowning Frederick, and being entreated, and importuned thereunto by
the Princes of Germany, he commanded him first and foremost, for penance of his
fault, to go and conquer Apulia from the Popes enemies, to restore it to S.
Peter; The Popes pride ov^^ Emperors.
and he had much ado to make him give over that design. All this is reported
by a German Priest not suspected. Judge ye now if he did not play his part
well.

4 There was yet after that another great quarrel betwixt them, by reason of
certain letters which the Emperor had writ to Adrian, wherein he committed
this gross absurdity, to put his own name before the Popes: whereat he being
justly offended, told him in his letter. That he wondered much at this, that he
seemed not to give unto S. Peter, Nauclerus gener. 39.
and the holy Roman Church her due reverence, for (says he) in those letters
which were sent to us, you put your name before ours, whereby you incur a
censure of insolence, if not of arrogance. Whereunto the Emperor replied, That
all the royalty which the Popedom had, it had it by the liberality of the
Emperours^ and thereupon (said he) when we writ unto the Pope of Rome, we
put our own name before of right and custom, and by way of justice; we allow
him to do the like when he writes unto us. Search the records, and if you have
not observed what we affirm, we will show it you,

5 We might here add the picture of Rome, Albertus Crantz 2 Metrop. 6. c. 35.
which represents Innocent the 2 sitting in his pontifical chair, and
Lotharius the Emperor, who received the crown from him, lying prostrate at
his feet, which (as Historians say) caused the Emperor Frederick the first, to
fret and fume when he cast his eye upon it. As also that form of inscription
in Innocent the fourths letters; Innocent etc. The virtue of God, the wisdom
of God, Matthew Wes^ monast. l. 2. sub ann. 1245.
to whose unspeakable majesty all things are subject.

6 Henry the 4 was enjoined this penance by Gregory the 7. Not to go out of
Rome for a year; not to get on horse back; to visit the Churches in a
Pilgrims habit, and to bring forth fruits worthy o^ repentance, by fastings and
prayers. While the poor Emperor was at his Pater nosters, submitting himself
to all that he would lay upon him, the Pope made another Emperor to be
created in Germany, whereof a German Priest gives this reason, That the
Cardinals, and others of the Court of Rome, Helmoldus ubi supra.
seeing how the earthly powers trembled for fear at the shaking of the Sea
Apostolic, and how those that bore up the world did bow down to it, might
suggest to the Pope, that he should confer the Empire upon another. Another
time coming to meet with the Pope at Canisium, bare foot in the midst of
Winter, in Pilgrims weed^ he was compelled to stay three days in the Suburbs,
like a poor rogue, without obtaining audience.

7 The indignity done to Frederick the first, by Alexander the third, Abhas
Vispargensis in Hen. 4.
is well enough known, when he received him in peace, he cause him to cast
himself upon the ground in S. Marks Church in Venice, and to ask him pardon;
when, setting his foot upon his neck, he said these words^ Thou shall go upon
the Basilisk and Adder, the Lion and the Dragon shall thou tread under foot.

8 A Duke of Venice to make his peace with Clement the fifth, for himself and
the State, was constrained to go upon all four toward the Pope, Le mer de
histoires.
with a chain about his neck; Innocent the 4 would not forgive Frederick the
2, notwithstanding, the intercession made by King S. Jews, who writ unto him
in person to Lions; who offered in behalf of the Emperor for satisfaction of
his faults, To go in Pilgrimage into the Holy Land, to make war, and stay
there all the days of his life. Matthew. Westmonast. 2. sub ann. 1246.
Whereat the good King taking scandal, came home vexed and ill appeased, having
found no humility in the servant of servants, (says an English Monk). Nay
which is more, He forbad him entrance into his Kingdom, saying, The Vicar of
Christ follows not the footsteps of Christ, as the same Author.

9 The same King by the Council of the Peers in France, had formerly denied
Gregory the 9 entrance into his Kingdom, The Popes omnipo^ency.
Knowing that by his coming, there would no good come either to the King or
the Kingdom, says the Historian; Matthew Westmon. l. 2. sub ann. 1244.
who further adds this, speaking of the French men and the Pope; They were
afraid that he would not know his enemies, as the rat in the poke, or the
serpent in the bosom. And yet this King was Canonized by the Popes. Philip the
Fair was in danger to be so by Clement the 6, for sending Boniface into
Paradise. But Jews the 12 was excommunicated by Julius the 2 for being too
good to him: and Henry the 3 by Gregory the 14, because he was grown too
devout, and doted too much upon the relics of Rome.

Rodericus Episc. ^amorensis in speculo humanae vitae l. 2. c. 1.
10 Let us now see some draughts of the Popes greatness, taken from that
description which the Bishop of Zamore, and Constable of the Castle of S.
Angelo makes of it in his mirror of man's life, which he dedicated to Pope Paul
the 2. That the Pope is instituted and ordained not only for humane
principalities, but also for divine; not only to rule over mortals, but also
immortals; not only over men but also over Angels; not only to judge the
quick, but the dead also; not only in earth, but also in heaven; not only to
preside over Christians, but also over Heathens: And, to be short, that he is
instituted and ordained by the great God in his stead over all mortals; to be
held in the same dignity, to have the same power and jurisdiction, and the
superior and universal dominion over all the world.

11 Afterward he applies unto him certain places of Scripture which speak of
God: Of whom (says he) it was written by Job, Job 9.
that those which bear up the world stoup before him: and that the Kings of
the earth are matters worthy of derision: that he only has all power: the
Scripture says, that he is one, and there is not a second: and that it was
writ to him, Thou art alone and there is no man with thee. And again, Thou art
mighty over all them which are mighty: To whom all justice, power, and Empire
does belong, as the Prophet testifies; and whom David afterward meant, when he
said, He has given him the power and the Kingdom, and all people and
languages are subject unto him. And presently after he says, The greatness,
excellency, commodity and necessity of the Popedom is seen in this, that (as
the Philosopher testifies) the world could not be governed if there were not
some supreme principality in it. We must needs come to him only who directs
and governs all particular things: by whose managing and disposal all actions
of the Hierarchies are ordered: that in fi^e the disposal of this lower world,
may be administered conformably to the Celestial Monarchy. And yet more, The
power of Justice would decay (witness the same Philosopher) if there were not
one in the world to administer it to all, and supply the defects of the
negligent. And again, There can be no true nor right Commonwealth, if there
be not one above all the rest to guide and govern them. Which is the Pope the
Vicar of the immortal God. Afterward he ascribes unto him a commutative and
distributive justice over the universal world; and speaking of this last, he
says, that being exercised by him, it does institute and ordain dignities,
principalities, Kingdoms and Empires according to merits, and transfer them
from one Nation to another, according to their demerits.

Antoninus in 3 part. hist tit. 22. ^. 17.. 1. Iacobus de Terano in tract.
Monarch.
12 He that will not be content with this, may further read the Oration which
was spoken in the presence of Pope Pius the second, by the deputies of
Florence, registered in his History by A^tonine Archbishop of that City, for the
instruction of posterity. He may read also, that which one James de Terano,
Chamberlain to Urban the 6 has written concerning this point; and Avarus
Pelagius, great Penitentiary to John the 22. Together with other mercenary
authors, the Popes domestics; who spare no qualities, either devine, or
humane, to set forth unto us the power, the dignity, A censure of Popish
auth^rs.
and the divinity of the Popedom. Which authors and others above by us
alleged, are so well approved by them, that they sleep upon their pillows,
just as Homers Iliads did upon Alexanders. For that same Austin de Ancona, out
of whom we formerly cited many maxims, and those of the finest, was dedicated
by the author to John the 22, Ann. 1320, and afterward to Pope Gregory the
13, by a General of the Order of the Austin Friars, and printed at Rome by
George Ferrarius, Ann. 1582, with express privilege of the same Gregory. And
Lancelot Conrade, who helps well to build up this divinity and omnipotency, out
of whom we have cited some passages, professed in his Preface that his book
was approved by Pope Pius the fourth, one of the authors of the Council of
Trent, and one that did the most good there. To make this assertion yet more
evident, you need but read the Index expugatorius, set out by the authority of
the Council of Trent, where neither any authors of this stamp, nor any of
their fooleries and impieties are ever condemned; but all those who in diverse
ages have been so saucy, as to open their mouths, and utter any truth against
the Holy See, who have gone about to defend the right of the Church, of the
rest of the Clergy, of Kings, and Emperors against the tyranny of Rome.

CHAP. XII. Of the complaints and oppositions which have been made against the
Popes dominions over Kingdoms and Empires.
NOw these great attempts as they have occasioned great mischiefs, so have they
raised great complaints and just disobediences to their unjust commands. Our
French men, both Lay and Clergy, Hincmarus Episc Rhemen. in ep. ad Hadrianum
pap^m.
assembled in a Council at Rhemes about the year 870, gave Pope Adrian the 2
to understand (who would have put this Realm of France in an interdict, and
bestowed it upon another, by reason of the question betwixt King Charles the
Bald, and Jews the son of Lotharius) that his attempt was a novelty and
unusual, and they would never suffer it: For see here the resolution which was
sent unto him on their behalf, by Hincmare Archbishop of Rhemes, Hincmaru^ ibi.
That he could not be both King and Bishop at once: that his predecessors
disposed and governed the Ecclesiastical order (a thing which belonged unto
him) and not the Commonwealth, which belongs unto Kings.

2 In this action we may observe a double abuse: First, that the Pope
undertakes to transfer Kingdoms by excommunications: next, that it is not
for any spiritual matter, but upon a difference of succession, and therefore
that assembly added, That it was not fitting for any Bishop to say, that it is
lawful for him to deprive a Christian of his title, so long as he is not
inco^rigible, and the question is not of his personal faults, but of the
loosing or getting an earthly Kingdom.

3 The Emperor Henry the 4 was excommunicated by Pope Gregory the 7, Ann. 166,
and Ralph Duke of Suevia set up in his stead by his authority: and that because
he did not make his appearance before him, being summoned upon pretense of
Simony which he injustly laid to his charge. Of deposing of Kings.
The quarrel grew betwixt them upon this o^^asion, that the Pope was elected
without the Emperors consent, contrary to the ancient custom. Whereupon a
German Bishop writes thus, Idem Otho l. ^. c. 34.
I read and read again the lives and Acts of the Roman Kings and Emperors,
but I never find that any of them was excommunicated, or deprived of his
Kingdom before this, unless we take that for an excommunication which passed
in the case of Philip, the first Christian Emperor; who was put among the
penitents by the Bishop of Rome: or that of S. Ambrose who prohibited
Theodosius the Emperor from coming into the Church, because he had murdered
many men.

4 Godfrey of Viterbe in his Pantheon which he dedicated to Vrbane the 3, says
as much; Godofridus Viterbiensis in Chron. par. 2. in Henr. 4. p. 499.
We never read that any Emperor before this was excommunicated by the Pope,
or deprived of his Empire. Yet the Abbot of Vsperge says, that there are
examples of it, and he urges that of Pope Gregory the 3, who caused all Italy
to revolt from their obedience to the Emperor Leo, whom he had excommunicated
and deposed from his Kingdom; yet withal he gives us to wit, that he does
not approve the fact. Howbeit (says he) the Popes of Rome challenge this
power unto themselves, and make their boast that they have done it, yet we
acknowledge these things came to pass by the judgment of God, by reason of
the sins committed by the Emperors, the consciences of Princes and people
binding them to make resistance against them.

Epist. Leodiensium adversus Paschalem 2. tom^ 3. Council. Edit. Colon. 1551. p.
809.
5 The Clergy of Liege in their Apology against Paschal the 2, who had commanded
Robert Earl of Flanders to make war upon them, and had excommunicated them
because they would not abandon the Emperor Henry the 4; How comes this to
pass (say they) that Pope Paschall not content with the spiritual sword
alone, sends his Champion Robert to spoil the lands and inheritances of the
Church, which if they must needs be destroyed, ought to be so by the Edict of
Kings and Emperors, who bear not the sword in vain?

Bernard l. 2. de considerat. ad Eugenium papam.
6 S, Bernard exclaimes mightily against the Popes dominion, and gives good
advice to Eugenius the 3 about this particular, where he tells him amongst
^ther things, You were made superior to others, for what, I pray? not to
domineere I trow. We therefore having a conceit good enough of our selves, do
not yet remember that any commanding power was given unto us, but that a
ministry was laid upon us: You must consider that to do the work of a
Prophet, you stand in steed of a weeding hook, not of a Scepter. He says in
another place, This is plain, that dominion is prohibited by the Apostles: go
you then, I pray you, and (if you dare) usurp either the Apostleship as
rulers, or the power of ruling as the Apostles. The one of the two is forbidden
you; if you will needs do both you loose both. Do not think that you are
exempted out of the number of those against whom God makes this complaint, They
have reigned but not by me, etc. He has more concerning this point, but this
shall content us.

Venericus Vercellensis lib de Vnitate Ecclesia.
7 Venericus Wercellensis in his book of the unity of the Church, says, That
the sacerdotall judgment has no more but the spiritual sword, which is the
word of God. And speaking of Hildebrand, that is of Gregory 7, But Hildebrand
(says he) and his Bishops have doubtless challenged to themselves the very
top of regal Authority; yea they have usurped the function of both
jurisdictions, insomuch that the Kingdom is fully in their power, or where
they are pleased to bestow it: being grown more perverse by reason of this
great pride^ so that they can neither look to the one, nor the other; neither
the Priestdome nor the Kingdom: considering that no one man is sufficient to
discharge either of the two, they being such weighty employments: But however
he is neither Christian nor Catholic that contradicts the Gospel, and
despises the doctrine of the Apostles, which says, Give to Caesar the things
that be Cesars, and to God the things that are Gods. He that serves God
meddleth not with the things of the world. Fear God, honor the King: Be
subject to every humane creature for Gods sake, etc. The Pope^ usurp^tion upon
Princes.
He urges many other reasons and places out of Scripture, which to set down
might be troublesome.

8 A German Abbat who writ about 1^50, Albertus Abbas Stadensis in Chron ad
ann. 1245.
speaking of the excommunication of the Emperor Frederick the 2, whom Pope
Honorius had also deposed from the Empire; This sentence (says he) being
noised abroad into the world, some Princes and diverse others took it ill,
saying, that it concerned not the Pope to set up or pull down the Emperor,
but only to crown him after he is elected by the Princes.

9 An English Historian makes an observation herereupon, which may much import
all Princes, Matthew. Paris. in Hen. 3 p. 660.
One thing (says he) vexed all the Princes and Prelates, weighing the future
dangers by the foresight of their understanding; that was, that however
Frederick had sufficiently deserved to be deposed and deprived of all honor;
yet if the Popes authority by Gods permission deposed him, so as he could not
relieve himself, the Church of Rome abusing the grace of God, would grow
hereafter to such an intolerable height and pride, that she would depose
Catholic Princes, though just and innocent; yea and Prelates also upon slight
occasions^ or would cause them to be deposed and disgraced: and speaking
haughtily, and boasting themselves, however descended from low degree, they
would say, We have trod under foot the great Emperor Frederick; and who art
thou that think to withstand us?

10 The Pope having excommunicated King John of England, Matthew. VVestmonast in
Florib. hist ann. 1216.
and put his Kingdom in an interdict, compelled him to become a vassale and
tributary to the Sea of Rome. Whereupon Philip Augustus King of France gave him
to understand, that it was an unjust thing, and more than he could do: wherein
he was seconded by the great Lords of France, as we have said in the beginning
of the first Book.

11 In the reign of S. Lewis, ann. 1247, what time (as it is probable) he was
gone in the Holy wars, the Nobles of France finding themselves vexed and
troubled by Pope Innocent the 4, made a League and set forth a declaration
against him, where they say amongst other things, That the Clergy (pointing at
the Pope) swallow up and frustrat^ the jurisdiction of Secular Princes, so as
by their laws the children of slaves pass judgment upon free men and their
children: Whereas by the Secular laws of our Kings and Princes, they ought
rather to be judged by us.

12 The year 1244, the Prince of Northwales, being a vassaile of the King of
England, Matthew. VVestmon. in Florib. hist. ann 1245. p. 181. 1^9.
put himself and his Princedome into the protection of the same Innocent; who
received him by the mediation of a certain sum of money, promising him to
shake off his royal yoke. Th^se things (says an English Monk) being come to
the knowledge of the King, the Lords of the Land, and other Princes aliens,
they were much displeased at him; and abhorring the covetousness of Rome, they
persuaded the King of England to put it to a battle, to curb the upstart
insolence of such an ungrateful person. Matth^ VVestmonast ann. 1254 p. 265.
The same Pope Innocent the 4, after the death of C^^rade King of Sicily and
Apulia, seized almost all the Kingdom into his hand, and entered upon it with
an army: Which the chief of the Country perceiving (says the same author)
they were vexed at it, and setting upon Memfred, bastard son to the Emperor
Frederick, they adhered unto him, and did him h^m^ge.

13 Philip the Fair being excommunicated by Boniface, Epistola. Archi.
episcoporum, Episcoporum Abbatum, Priorum de Pari^iis Congreator^ ad Bonif. ^.
who pretended to be Lord Regent of France, was so borne out by his subjects,
that when he demanded their advice^ how he should demean himself, and whether
he should put up that wrong: they made answer unto him, commending his good
intention, That they were ready not only to spend their goods (which they
there wholly offered unto him) for that end, The Popes temporal dominion
oppugned.
but also to expose their persons even to death for him, not refusing any
torments. Adding further, and that more plainly by word of mouth, That if the
King (which God forbid) would suffer it, or connive at it, yet for their parts
they would never endure it. Which, and such like words as may be read in some
other passages of that Epistle, are no signs of disobedience, but testimonies
of ardour and affection to the service of Princes, which has often made their
subjects speak in this strain.

14 This reply was made by the nobility, and the three Estates, as is testified
by the Clergy in their letters to the Pope upon that subject: which Clergy
sided also with their Prince, as it appears by those same letters: yet with
more caution, by reason of the great reverence which they bore to his
Holiness. Mr. John Tillet Bishop of Paris, Joan Tilius in Chron. sub ann. 1202.
speaking of this fact in his French Chronicle, The impudence of this man
(says he of Boniface) was wonderful, who durst affirm that the Realm of
France was a benefice of the Papal majesty. But I think them the greater
fools who dispute the point; Whether the Pope has this power or no, he put
our France under an interdict for the time, but the Bishops took the Kings
part. Marsilius of Padua speaks of it in this manner: Experience the mistress
of all things, has shown as much; it is not long ago when Pope Boniface the
8 dared to excommunicate Philip the Fair of happy memory, Catholic King of
France, and put his Kingdom under an interdict, together with such of the
Clergy as adhered unto him. The King on the other side complaining of a
certain ordinance publicly set forth by the said Boniface, Marsil. Patav. in
def. pac part. 2. c. 21.
by the advice of his Cardinals, (which begun Vnam sanctam) containing amongst
other things, yea by way of conclusion, peremptorily determining, that all
Princes of the world, all Commonwealths and Secular persons, are subject to the
coactive jurisdiction of the Pope of Rome: albeit the same Boniface had
resolved at the same time, to band himself particularly against the said
Prince, and to stir up against him his subjects and adherents, and other
Christian Princes and people, if death had not hindered him: as the eternal
truth, and the memory of diverse yet alive can testify.

15 Ludovicus Bavarus was deprived of the Empire by Pope John the 22, because
he had taken upon him the name and title of Emperor, and demeaned himself as
such, Albertus Argentin. in Chr. Idem p. 129. Integra haec constitutio extat
apud Albe^icum de Rosate, in^. Been a Z^none C. de quadrien. Pr^script.

Et apud Aventinum l. 4. annal. Boiorum p. 6^1.

Extat haec constitutio apud Nauclerum generat. 45. Et Aven l. 4. annal. Boior.
p 623.


before he was approved by the Sea Apostolic. But an Imperial decree was
made thereupon, containing, That Pope John's proceedings were null, and that the
Pope could not attempt such things against the Emperor, considering their
jur^sdictions are distinct: So the German Historian, But you must know that
there were two Decrees made thereupon by the states of the Empire: by the one
it is enacted, That the imperial dignity is immediately from God alone, and
that he ought to be accounted and called King and Emperor of the Romans,
merely for his election; that he ought to be obeyed by the subjects of the
Empire; that he has full power to exercise all Imperial rights, and do all
other things, which belong to a true Emperor, and that he needs not the
approbation, confirmation, authority, or consent of the Pope, the Sea
Apostolic, or any other whatsoever. The other whereby the process of John
the 22, against Jews the 5 called of Bavaria, is cassed and nullified; whereof
we have spoken elsewhere, setting down the very same words.

16 This opinion was maintained at that time by diverse great Prelates, and
learned men in the Court of Rome, Albericus de Rosate being then present, who
witnesses as much in these words, Albe^icus in l. been a Zenone. nu. 16 C. de
quadrien. praescrip.
I hold (says he) that this opinion^ That the Emperor has his power from
God, is more true, by right, then by the authority of Innocent and others. And
there was a great controversy concerning this in the time of John the 22 and
his successor Benedict, betwixt them and Ludovicus Bavarus Emperor elect, my
self being at that time in the Court of Rome. The Pop^s usurping upon the
Empe^ours
But I heard then that some great Prelates, and some learned Lay men in both
the laws, inclined to that opinion as the truer.

17 The same Author says in his Dictionary, That the Pastors of the Church,
thrusting their sickle into an other man's harvest, made three Decretals
concerning that particular: Albericus indiction in verbo El^ctio Imperatoris.

Cap. ^en^rabilem Extr. d^^le. Cap. Ad Apos^olic^ extra. de S^ntentia et ^e ^ud
in 6. Cap. Pastoralis. ^esent. and re judi^. in Clem. Cap. 1. de ju^^ ju^ando
in Clement.


One about the election of the Emperor, another about the deposall of the
Emperor Frederick, a third about the dissension and sentence of treason given
by the Emperor Henry. There is yet another about the oath of allegiance,
which the Emperor is bound to swear to the Pope, and some other power of the
Pope above the Emperor. Which Decretals God knows whether they be just or
not; for my part, I think none of them are according to law, (with submission
to better advice, and under correction, if I think amiss) nay I believe they
were made against the liberties and rights of the Empire; and I hold that the
powers are distinct, and that they proceed from God.

18 Peter de Ferrariis, an Italian Lawyer, who lived about 1400, speaking of
the abuse of excommunication, exclaimes thus, O poor Emperors and Secular
Princes which endure this and other things of this nature, and inslave your
selves to the Church! You see they usurp upon the world infinite ways, and
you never think of any redres. Petrus de Ferra^iis in Practica. in ^orma
respons rei connect in verbo, Tanquam publi. p. 85.

Idem de Ferrariis ibid. in verb. praescrip. versus fin.


In another place, questioning whether the Canon law ought to be observed in
case of prescriptions after he had determined for the negative, he adds, The
Emperors do ill, yea very ill, to suffer them to have a mere and mixed
Empire, seeing God said to Peter, Put up thy sword into his place; thereby
expressly forbidding him to meddle in these matters, whereto Peter obeyed, (as
Cynus says in the Authentic, Clericus C. de Episcopis and Clericis) and
considering that this concerns the purchasing of Lay men's goods, the Pope
cannot determine any thing about it, for so he should put his sickle into
another harvest, contrary to the chapter Novit, and other such like, and the
Gloss upon that Extra de Iudie: let the Canon law then be observed amongst
the Clergy, who carry their conscience in their hoods, and loose it when they
leave them.

19 In another place he enlarges himself more fully upon this subject,
commenting upon those words, Plenam and omnimodam Iurisdictionem, The
covetousness of men (says he) is so much inhaunced, that they endeavor with
all their might to climb up to jurisdictions, honors, donations, and if it
were possible, to the thrones of Heaven: But they never consider what Tully,
the Father of eloquence, said in his Offices, we ought to take heed of the
desire of glory, This appetite and desire is so much enlarged, that not
Layiques only, but even great Prelates and Clerks are wholly infected with this
vice and malady. For you see how the Pope himself, who should like a true
Vicar follow the steps of JESUS CHRIST, bestirreth himself, to seize upon, and
by force of arms to keep the jurisdiction of Countries, Cities, Villages, and
other places which naturally and ever since the creation of the world, and by
Christ's own ordinance belong to the Roman Empire; according to that, Give unto
God the things which are Gods, and unto Caesar the things which are Cesars. Yea
the Pope stands to have superiority over the Emperor, which is ridiculous to
speak, and odious to hear: For naturally ever since the beginning of the
world, not only Lay men but the Clergy also have been subject to the power and
jurisdiction of the Empire.

20 Speaking in another place of a woman's jointure aliened by the husband, Idem
Ferrariensis in forma libelli in quo uxor agit a dot. in verbo, Coram vobis^
This (he says) cannot be recovered by the wife, when she is bound by oath,
according to the Canon law, which in this case is repugnant to the Civil: The
Canon law (says he) is observed, even in the lands of the Empire: Here take
notice how the Pope^ usurpes upon the jurisdiction of the Empire in this, as he
does also in diverse other things; which comes to pass, by reason of the
inexperince of the Emperors. Of the two swords.


21 Theodorick de Nihem in his third book De Schismate, speaks his mind very
roundly, exclaiming against those who put two swords into the Popes hands:
Theodoricus a Nihem l. 3. de schisma^e c. 7.
Now that the Empire (says he) depends principally and immediately upon God, as
well as the Church or Ecclesiastical power, is manifest by evident reasons. It
is further confirmed by that Decree, where the Pope writes to the Emperor, My
Church over which our God has ordained my Priesthood, while you govern humane
affairs, etc: It is proved also by diverse testimonies out of the Law. Whence
it follows, that they talk sorrily and soothingly, who say that the Pope or
the Church has two swords, the spiritual and the temporal: whereas it is
said in the Gospel, Put up thy sword into thy sheath: For if both the swords
were in the Popes power, the Emperor, or the King of the Romans should have
that title falsely and vainly given unto him. But these flatterers by such like
words and writings, breed a great error over all Christendom, and raise as it
were a continual emulation, or contention betwixt the Pope and the Emperor.
For by this means the Imperial authority is trampled under foot, and his
power called in question, to the great damage of the whole Commonwealth.

22 Antonius de Rosellis in his book De potestate Imperatoris and Papae, says,
Antonius de Rosellis in l. de potestate Imperat. and Pap. versu Ne Prolixius p.
9.
It is a foolish and heretical opinion, that the whole disposal of temporal
things i^ or ought to be in the Popes power, or any other Ecclesiastical
persons. He says further, He omittes that and laughes at it, which some use
for a shift, That the dominion over temporal things, belongs to the Pope
habitually, and in power, though he do not immediately actuate it, but by the
mediation of the Emperor, who (as they say) receives the Empire from the Pope,
and the administration thereof; so as he depends upon the Pope. For upon whom
the exercise is bestowed, to him also is the habit given much more; seeing that
virtue consists in the act, not in the habit. And in another place, Whence it
follows, that the Pope has not the power of electing and crowning the
Emperor, Idem de Rose^lis in versic. de^imaratio p. 11.
by virtue of his high Priestship, which he received from Christ: But he
performs the coronation by virtue of his commission granted unto him by the
Empire, which may also be revoked upon occasion.

Albertus Crantzius Vandali^orum l. 8 p. 179
23 Albert Krants a Dutch Historian and devine, who lived a little before these
late broils about religion, speaks so of the creation of Kings which the
Pope challenges, as that he plainly shows, that he dislikes it; For, telling
a story of a Duke of Cracovia, whom Pope John the 22 created King of Poland,
Then (says he) the Popes were come to that majesty (which Secular Princes call
presumption) that they created Kings.

24 In the Act of the Protestation made by King Charles, ann. 1563, upon the
monitory of Pope Pius the 4, set out against the Queen of Navarre, we find
this clause worthy our observation; As for goods the King thinks it strange,
that the said Holy Father will intermeddle with the confiscation of goods
within his Kingdom, or with the diminution or disposing of them, as the said
monitory affirms, contrary to all the constitutions and Canons of Councels
that were ever yet seen upon record in the books of his predecessors.

25 But there is nothing more masculine and generous than the Remonstrance of
that noble Parliament of Paris, exhibited to the deceased King, against the
Bull of Sixtus Quintus ann. 1585, whereby he excommunicated the King of
Navarre, our Sovereign that now is, and the Prince of Conde, depriving them of
their goods and Lands; As for the holy Bull, the Court does find it to be of a
new style, and so far from the modesty of the former Popes, that it has no
affinity with the ways of a successor of the Apostles: and forasmuch as we
do not find in our records, nor in all antiquity, that the Princes in France
were ever subject to the justice of the Pope, nor that the subjects sat in
judgment upon the Princes religion, Of absolving subjects from their oath of
allegiance.
the Court cannot take it into consideration till the Pope do first show some
right which he pretends for transferring of Kingdoms, ordained and
established by God before ever the name of Pope came into the world; till he
have showed us upon what title he meddleth with the successor of a Prince,
full of youth and strength, and who naturally ought to have his heirs of his
own body. He must inform us with what color of piety and religion he
bestows that which is none of his own, he takes from another that which
belongs unto him, he puts vassals and subjects in rebellion against their
Lords and Sovereigns, and reverseth the grounds of all justice and civil
government.

26 As for the absolving of subjects from the oath of allegiance to their Lords
and Princes, the last words of Ralph Duke of Suevia, whom Gregory the 7 had
caused to rise up against the Emperor Henry the fourth, loosing the tie of
that oath which bound him to his Prince, and creating him Emperor, are
sufficient proof to any man, that it is a very unlawful act; Helmoldus in
Chron Slavorum. c. 29. p. 65
You see (says he to his familiars) how my right hand is sore of a hurt, it
is the hand whereby I swore to Henry my Lord and Master, that I would never
annoy him, that I would never lay in ambush to intercept his glory; but the
Popes commands brought me to this, to break mine oath, and usurp an honor
which was not due unto me. You see what end it is come to. I have received this
mortal wound upon this hand which broke the oath. Let them then who have
incited us so to do, consider in what manner they urged us, for fear that we
be not brought to the downfall of eternal damnation.

27 Sigebert, Sigebertu^ sub ann. 1088^ p. 101^6.
speaking of the sam^ Henry, and of Pope Vrbane the second, who had also
excommunicated him, deprived him of his Empire, and absolved his subjects of
their oath of allegiance, I dare say (says he) by the favor and good leave of
all honest men, that that new doctrine (that I call it not heresy) was not yet
come into the world, That his Priests, who has said to a King Apostate, and
made an Hypocrite to reign for the sins of the world, teach the people that
they owe no obedience to bad Kings; no allegiance though they have taken an
oath to perform it: that those who take part against their King, cannot be
called perjured; but rather he that will obey the King must be accounted
excommunicate, but he that will be against him, absolved from injustice and
perjury.

28 He that writ the Book De unitate Ecelesiae observanda, in the time of the
same Henry the 4, which is supposed to be Venericus Vercellensis, Ven^ricus
Ve^cellen. in De u^i^a^e Eccles^ p. 31 and 33.
refuting the motives and reasons of Gregory the 7, says, As for that which he
adds, it seems wondrous strange, that any religious Bishop of Rome should
undertake to absove any man from his oath of allegiance. Not long after he
adds, See how the Catholic Church defends every thing which is not
reproveable; and therefore she defends both Zachary and Stephen Popes of
Rome, for the merit of their religion and piety: none of which (as we very well
know) absolved the French from their oath of allegiance which they had sworn
to their King, as Pope Hildebrand gives out in writing, that so by this
president he may cozen the Peers of the Realm: as if he could absolve them
from their oath of allegiance, which they have sworn unto their King in the
Name of God, intending by that means to depose him and strip him of his
Kingdom. Which being diverse times attempted within these fourteen years last
past and above, did never yet take effect for all that.

29 Afterward he relates the story of Pepins coronation, and there concludes,
Mark now the order how things were carried, and observe if any of the Popes of
Rome ever deposed the King of France out of his Realm, (as Pope Hildebrand
writes) and absolved the French from the oath of allegiance which they had
taken unto him: which oath (as has been formerly proved by the testimonies of
holy Scripture) no man can dissolve without making the party absolved a liar,
O^ ^^solving subjects from their ^ll^geance
and perjured, and damning of the absolver.

Extat ^aec apologia ^ive epist. Tom. 2. Council. edit. Colon. 1661.

Et in collect. de jurisdict. imperiali p. 134.


30 The Clergy of Liege, in their Apology against Pope Paschal the second,
speaking of the absolution of the oath of allegiance, which he had granted
against the same Henry the 4, Who can justly blame a Bishop for favoring his
Lords party, to whom he owes allegiance, and has promised it by oath? No man
doubts but perjury is a grievous offense: God only swears and repents not,
because wisdom keeps the Commandments of Gods oath: But for us, who often
repent that we have sworn, we are ^orbidden to swear: If man swear God
injoynes him to perform his oath unto the Lord. Which is not unknown to those
that rend the Kingdom and the Priesthood by a new schism, and with their
upstart traditions, (as some would have it) promise to absolve from all sin,
such as incur the crime of perjurie toward their King. Never regarding what
God said to Zedekias by the mouth of Ezekiel, who had committed perjury against
his King Nebuchadonosor, He that has broken the Covenant, shall he escape?
Which St. Ierom expounds thus; Hence we may learn, that we ought to keep
touch even with our enemies; and not consider to whom, but by whom we have
sworn.

Greg. Heym. in De confutat. primat. Pap.
31 Gregory of Heymburg in a tract of his, With what conscience (says he) dare
any Priest, even the Pope himself undertake to absolve the Liege subjects of
the Empire from their oath of allegiance and obedience, to which Christ and his
Apostles do bind every one, especially so long as the piety of faith is
preserved entire? And if the Pope may dispense by his oligarchicall law, yet
he cannot so by the divine law without imputation of error.

Marsilius in tract. de translat. Imperii. c. 5.
32 Marsilius of Padua in his Treatise, Of the translation of the Empire,
speaking of Gregory the 13, who made all Apulia, Italy, and Spain revolt from
their obedience to the Emperor Leo, and made them deny to pay him tributes and
subsidies, by reason of a controversy about Images which was then betwixt
them, says thus; For this reason the said Gregory undertook to excommunicate
the said Leo, and persuaded all Apulia, Italy and Spain to withdraw themselves
from his obedience, and as much as in him lay put it in execution, howbeit
without any great right: He also in solemn manner forbade him to receive any
subsidies: By what authority I know not, but I wot well by what temerity.

33 Diverse Doctors and learned men, both in divinity and in either law, have
in their writings in sundry ages opposed this usurpation of Rome, and proved by
sound reasons, that the Pope has no temporal sword: that it is in the power
of Princes, and other Magistrates: that he has no Secular power or
jurisdiction over Kings and Princes, nor over their Empires and Kingdoms,
which depend upon God, not upon him: that consequently he cannot take them
from them to bestow them upon another; nor absolve their subjects from the oath
of allegiance. These witnesses have withstood the Pope as stoutly by their
pens, at Kings and Emperors by their swords; yea so far forth that their
armor had been but very weak, if they had not been tempered in these
writings, as some Historians do assure us. And thence it is that the Popes
many times have darted out their thunderbolts against them, and their works.
Which our Council of Trent has used to do, and which our Popes do put in
execution daily, according to the commission granted them by i^, stuffing their
Index Expurgatorius, with their names. I should be troublesome if I should
here quote their a^thorities, and much more if I should set down their
reasons: Christ and the Pope para^leld.
I will content my self with citing some few in the Johannes de parisiis in De
potestate regia and Papali. Dantes Aligerius in De Monarchia. Rodulphus de
Columna De translatione Imperii. Guilielmus Occan. lib. 6. dialogorum part. 1
cap. 9. Et in De potestate Eccles. q. ^. cap. 8. Antonius de Rosellis in De
potestate Imperatoris and Papae. Iacobus Almain in De potestate Ecclesiastica.
Author privilegiorum and jurium Imperii ^ Theodorico ^ Nihem restitutus Somnium
Viridarii. AEneas Sylvius De ortu et authoritate Imper. Rom cap. 10. Michael
Vlcurrinus Pampelon. in De regimine mundi, ad Carolum ^, Imperatorem. part. 2.
q. 2. Andraeas de Iserina in usibus seudorum, Tit. Quae sui regal. Ioannes
Igneus in disputatione. An Rex Franciae recognoscat superiorem. Guicc^ardinus
lib. 4. de bello Italiae, in loco detracto. Franciscus Duarenus De sacris
Ecclesiae ministeriis l. 1. ^. 4.
margent besides those whom I have already alleged, to whom any man may have
recourse.

CHAP. XIII. The conclusion of all that went before.
1 NOw to make an end of this Treatise, we will here set down the antithesis
of Gregory Haymburg, Gregorius Haymburgensis in confurat. Primatus Papae part.
2. versus finem.
which suits very well with the former discourse.

1 CHRIST rejected the Kingdom of this world.

His Vicar canvaseth for it.

2 CHRIST refused a Kingdom when it was offered him.

His Vicar will needs have one which is denied him.

3 CHRIST refused to be made a Secular Judge.

His Vicar takes upon him to judge the Emperor.

4 CHRIST submitted himself to the Emperors deputy.

His Vicar preferres himself before the Emperor himself, yea before all the
world.

5 CHRIST reproved those who desired primacy.

His Vicar wrangles for it against all the Church.

6 CHRIST upon Palmesunday was mounted upon an Ass.

His Vicar is not content with a stately Cavalierie, unless the Emperor hold
his right stirrup.

7 CHRIST united the disagreeing Jews, and all other Nations in one
Ecclesiastical Kingdom.

His Vicar has oftentime^ raised seditions amongst the Germans, when they were
at unity.

8 CHRIST, though innocent, endured injuries patiently.

His Vicar, though nocent, cease not to do injuries to the Church and Empire.


2 Nicholas de Clemangiis after he has discoursed of all the vices of the
Popedom, Nicoldus de Clemangiis in De ruina and reparat. Ecclesversu^ finem.
and those of the rest of the Clergy, which he deriveth like petty rivulets
from that great fountaine^ applies in fine the ancient Prophecies to the Sea of
Rome, and bespeaks her thus; Rowze up thy self now at last from thy too long
slumber, O happy sister of the Synagogue! awake one day, and moderate thy
drunkenness, that I may so say, wherein thou have sleeped too long: see, read,
and understand this prophet, and the rest, (if yet thy drunkenness have not
quite bereft thee of all sense and understanding) if there be yet any spark
of sound judgment remaining in thee: search the words of the Prophets, and
thence consider thine estate, and thy confusion which sleeps not, but is
near at hand. The P^ide of Rome.
Thou shall see what ends are prepared for thee, and how that now is the time
that thou crouchest under these villainies with danger; but if thou will not
hear the Prophets, nor believe that they spoke of thee when they denounced so
many miseries, thou cheatest and deceivest thy self by a too dangerour error;
for it is of thee they spoke, and thou may perceive, if thou have not lost all
sense, that all those curses which are denounced shall fall upon thee. But
suppose their prophecies aim at another thing, what think thou of that
Prophecy in the Revelation of St. John? do thou not think at least, that it
concerns thee in some sort. Thou have not so lost thy shame with thy sense,
that thou will deny it: Observe it then and read the condemnation of the great
whore which sits upon many waters: there behold thy fine pranks, and thy
future miseries. Besides, when thou observest how all Empires and Kingdoms,
how great, large, and potent soever they are, have been brought to naught by
their pride and injustice, when thou see them turned upside down, and
overthrown; and how on the other side, thou have so far abandoned thy
humility, which was thy foundation, and lifted up thy horn so high, how can
thou imagine that the foundation of humility being taken up and razed, such a
great weight of pride as thou have built thereupon, should not fall to the
ground. It is a long time since thy pride, not able to withhold her self, has
begun to fall down, but slowly and by little and little, and therefore the
downfall was not perceived by many, but now it begins to fall headlong and
like a torrent.

Marsilius Patavinus in defpacis part. 2. c. 24.
3 Marsilius of Padua after he has represented all the Popish usurpations, and
the indirect means which they used, at last resembles the Court of Rome to
the Image in Daniel; which passage we will here insert, as fitting well with
the whole tract concerning the reformation of the Head; As for me which have
seen it, (says he, speaking of the Court of Rome) and who have been there,
me thinks I saw the terrible Image which Daniel tells that Nabuchadonosor saw
in a dream, having the head of gold, the arms and breast of silver, the belly
and thighs of brass, the legs of iron, the feet half of iron, half of clay:
for what is that great Image else, but the state of the people of the Court of
Rome, or of the great Bishop? who was anciently terrible to wicked men, but is
now horrible to be beholden by all good men? For the higher members of that
Statue (to wit, the Head, the breast and the arms) what are they else to the
eye, to the desire^ and to the embrace, but gold and silver, and the work of
men's hands? the belly and thighs, what are they but the noise and din of
pleadings, and processes for the goods of this world? but calumnies and
Simoniacall contracts as well of spiritual things as carnal? the thighs of
brass, what are they but the pompous preparations of pleasures, of luxury, and
all kind of vanities, even such as are not fitting for Lay men? which even
they do stamp upon the minds of men, who should be patterns of chastity and
honesty. The legs, feet, and toes of iron upon which the Image stands, and
which are partly of earth and clay, what do they import but the usurpation,
invasion, and seazing upon Secular Dominions, Provinces, and Kingdoms, by the
violent power of armed men, and overlaid with iron, upon which they bear their
superior members? the furnishing with gold and silver which invites the men of
war hereunto? the belly also and the thighs of brass, by a promise which is
often made both loud and large, by a cheating absolution of their sins and
punishments, and by an unjust condemnation and curse (however harmless by
^eason of Gods protection of such as stand in defense of their own liberty,
and will preserve the loyalty which they owe unto their Princes.) The basis of
the feet and the toes of earth and clay, which may therefore be broken^ what
do they denote but the inconstancy of the Court of Rome? Of the fall of Rom^.
what do they signify but the open weakness, that I say not the falsenes and
unjustnesse of those causes and occasions, which the Pope takes to oppress the
faithful people of Christ? But according to the testimony of the same Prophet,
there must a stone fall upon this Image, rent from the mountain without hands;
that is, a King whom God will raise up, having chosen him by his grace, from
amongst all people, giving unto him the power and Kingdom which shall not be
transferred upon an other; he (I say) more by the strength and grace of God,
than by the work and power of the hands of men, shall first break in pieces
that piece of clay, the feet upon which it unjustly stands; making the false
and unjust pretenses, or to speak more truly with the Poet those bald
occasions, appear unto all Princes and people; discovering their Sophistry,
refuting them by humane demonstrations, and disanulling them by the truth of
the holy Scripture. And afterward, repelling the iron, that is the barbarous
and impious dominion, and then the brass, that is, the authority of reviling
against Prince and people, which it challenges, he shall cause the tumults of
Secular usurped jurisdictions, and by consequence of processes and vexations to
be hushed: he shall cause the luxury of voluptuousness, and the pomps of
vanity to cease: he shall moderate the gold and silver, that is, the avarice
and rapine of the Pope, and those higher members of the Court of Rome, and
shall allow him the use of temporal things with due moderation.

4 A certain Chronicler writ a pretty while ago, Magister Iordanus in Chron.
ubi loquitur de Frederico ultimo.
that this King should come of the house of France, and the race of
Charlemaigne, according to that which was prophesied of him; Some say (says
he) that there is another common prophecy, that some of the Carolingians, that
is of the race of King Charles, and blood royal, shall have an Emperor of
France, by name Charles, who shall be Prince and Monarch over Europe, and
shall reform the Church and State. He that is curious to see this prophecy
may find it amongst the vulgar revelations. Now that the Kings of France now
reigning are descended from Charles the Great, the Popes themselves confess;
as Innocent the 3, who after he had made mention of Charlemaigne, he adds,
Of whose race this King, viz. Philip Augustus, is descended: Innocent. 3. in c,
Novit. Extra. de judic.
and by consequence all the rest of Hugh Capets line. Whether this prophecy be
true or no, I refer my self to other men's judgments. I will only say, that
it seems this reformation is destined to come from France, considering that in
the greatest distempers of the Church, our Kings have ever put to their hands
with the foremost; that they have ever either wrought, or procured a
reformation: That they have been instigated, and exhorted so to do by the
words and writings of the learned men of their times; (as we shall elsewhere
observe:) That they have preserved the liberti^s of the Church within their
Kingdom, more than any besides: That at this instant all men of understanding
cast their eyes upon them, as they who must be the restorers of the Church, and
which have more ability to do it now than ever. When God has appointed it to
be done, he will touch their hearts.

CHAP. XIV. Of Cardinals.
Of abating the ^umber of Cardinals.
1 AFter we have done with the Pope, we will speak a word of the Cardinals.
The Emperor Ferdinand desired they might be reduced to a smaller number; the
Council has determine^ nothing about it, and yet nothing could be more justly
demanded: that great company stands in great charges: they have need of many
incomes to maintain them. Hence mainely do proceed an infinite company of
abuses reigning now adays, which the Pope must dispense with to ease his
coffers of so much; for there is no good reason he should create such great
Lords as they are to starve them for want of sustenance. Besides, the public
must ever be sensible of it; Christian Princes and their Kingdoms must pay
dear for their folly, though they be hardly able; and all must light upon
their shoulders.

2 This is not the first time this reformation has been demanded, it is above
an hundred and seventy years ago since one of their own order complained of
it; namely the reverend Cardinal of Cambray in his book De reformatione
Ecclesiae, for amongst other ways which he proposes for the lessening of
those monstrons exactions which were made in his days in the Court of Rome,
he puts this for one, The diminution of the number of C^rdinals, that so their
multitude may not be so great and burdensome, as it has hitherto been: That
it may not be objected to the Court of Rome: Thou have multiplied thy people,
but thou have not grown greater; it would be expedient to take an order for
the means of Cardinals, and other Clergymen, so as it may not be lawful for
them to enjoy that prodigious and scandalous plurality of benefices: of which
abuse the ancient Sages have complained, and amongst them William Bishop of
Paris.

3 It will not be amiss to set down also the complaint of a French man of
our own, Nicholas de Clemangiis in his tract De ruind, and reparatione
Ecclesiae, who after he has exclaimed against their pride and vainglory, But
omitting their vanity (says he) who can sufficiently express the infinite
and insatiable hunger of their covetousness? First of all, what greediness is
this to hold such a number of repugnant and incompatible benefices? They are
Monks and Canons, Regulars and Seculars: Under the same habit they enjoy the
rights, degrees, offices. and benefices of all religions of all Orders, of all
professions; not two or three, but ten, twenty, an hundred, two hundred; yea
sometimes four hundred, even to five hundred, and upwards: And those no petty
ones, nor contemptible, hut of the fattest and best, and how great a number
soever they have of them, they are never content but would still have more.
They are daily suing for new graces, new grants: Thus they catch up all the
vacancies, and go away with all. He speaks yet more of this point, but this
must suffice for the present.

4 See then a reason of great consequence for the lessening of their number:
and indeed it was one of the petitions which were put up at the Council of
Constance by all the Nations of Christendom, and and which was set in the
forefront, Council constantiense Sess. 41.
Of the number, quality, and Country of the Lords Cardinals.

5 Upon which Pope Martin took time to deliberate; just so have his
successors done ever hithertowards; and for our Fathers of Trent, it never
troubles them.

A REVIEW OF THE COUNCIL OF TRENT. BOOK III.
CHAP. I. Of the calling of Councels.
WE come now to the grievances which are found in the Decrees of this Council
(for as for the Canons, The power of calling Councels.
we meddle not with them) and observe in the first place, that whereas former
Councels, at least such as were free and lawfully called, have always cowed
the Popes power, when it swelled into an excessive greatness, this has run
quite counter to the r^st, ascribing unto him a power truly sovereign: For the
Pope now adays has absolute authority over all things in the Christian world.
The power both in temporals and spirituals is given unto him, not only over
Kings and Emperors, but over Councels also: So that when he shall please to
wrong any man, there is no means left to resist him. We shall make this
appear so plain, that there shall be no occasion of further doubting, by
setting down here all the Decrees of the Council which concern this point.

2 First, it is to be observed that Pope Julius the 3, in his Bull, December
the 15, 1551, ingrosseth to himself the sole right and authority of calling
Councels. We (says he) to whom it belongs, as being now P^p^, to signify
and direct General Councels. Authority of calling Councels usurped by the Po^e.
This is the Bull wherein he signified the continuation of the Council of
Trent, which is inserted amongst the Acts ^f it.

3 But this is not all yet: for after he has declared that he will be
president in the Council, for the further manifestation of his high and
sovereign power he adds, Ordaining nevertheless that whatsoever any man, by
what authority soever, shall attempt to the contrary, whether he know of this
or not, shall be void and of no effect. Wherefore it shall not be lawful for
any man in the world to break or infringe this present Act of our advice,
pleasure, innovation, and decrees, or out of an audacious rashness to
contradict it. All these brags and bravado's were approved by the Fathers of
that Council; inasmuch as the Council, which had kept Holiday for full four
years, and been adjourned to Bononia by Paul the 3, was brought back again
to Trent, by virtue of this Bull; so that the Bishops there obeyed the Pope
sans contradiction.

4 So then he challenges the power of Convocation exclusively to all others,
wherein he is avowed by the Council; nay it is the Council it self which
gives him this prerogative: For after all the resolutions it made both about
faith and discipline, it adds; Session. ult. in fin^.
If it so fall out that any thing herein contained, stand in need of further
declaration or determination, besides other remedies appointed in this
Council, the Holy Synod trusts that most blessed Bishop of Rome will take
order that the necessities of the Provinces shall be provided for to Gods glory
and the peace of the Church; either by sending for such (out of those Provinces
especially where such difficulty shall arise) as he shall think fit to
negotiate such a business; or by holding a General Council if he think it
necessary; or any other more commodious way as he thinks good.

5 As for the translation of the Council to Bonony, indeed the Cardinal de
Monte, President for the Pope, did the Council the honor to let them consult
about it the 10 of March, 1547, as appears by the 8 Session: But this was
after an absolute and peremptory injunction, which ^he same Pope had formerly
made, as appears in his Bull set out in Mar^h, 1544. Where he speaks in this
manner; Of our ^wn proper motion, certain kn^^ledge, and full power
Apostolical, with advice and consent correspondent, we give you full and
absolute power by authority Apostolic, by the tenure of these Presents (he
speaks to his Legates) to transfer and remove the said Council from Trent to
some such other City, as you shall think fit; and to suppress and dissolve it
in the said City of Trent; and to prohibit the Prelates and other persons of
the said Council to proceed any further at the said Trent, upon pain of
Ecclesiastical censures and punishments; and to cite the said Pr^lates, and
other persons of the Council unto that city whither it shall be transferred,
upon pain of perjury, and other punishments expressed in the letters of
Convocation.

6 See here, good weighty words which in a most extraordinary way do crush the
authority of the Council, yea even inslave and subject it to the Pope. And yet
the Council is so far from complaining, that on the contrary it professes
that it consented to this translation, in consideration that it was done by the
Popes command: For hark how they speak of it in the beginning of the ninth
Session holden the 21 of Aprile 1548; This holy Oecumenicall Council, etc.
considering that upon the 11 of March this present year, in a general
public Session holden in the said city of Trent, at the accustomed place, all
things requisite to be done being first done after the usual fashion, upon
some earnest, urgent and lawful reasons, and by the intervening authority of
the Holy Apostolic See, granted in special manner to the said right Reverend
Presidents, decreed and ordained, etc. They express it as well as they can,
for fear least some body should be so far mistaken, as to think the
translation was made upon the Councels own motion; to the prejudice of the
Popes authority; for they would have taken that in dudgeon. Counc^ls lawfully
called and not by the Pope.


7 Let us now see whether the Pope challenges this right^ which is confirmed
unto him by this Council, by usurpation only, or whether it do indeed justly
belong unto him. If we will take the Popes own word for it, the question will
be quickly decided; for they affirm that to make such a Convocation belongs
to none but them. Ca^. 1,2, 4,5, 6. did. 17^
Their Doctors and Disciples have so fortified this proposition, that they
have stopped all passages, and not left so much as one hole open, whereby there
is any possibility of surprising it. Some few have been so reasonable as that
they have made some exceptions; as in case the Pope refuse to call the
Council, or in case he be an heretic, or in case the question be about some
fact of his own, or about his condemnation: Some are of opinion that then the
Emperor is to undertake it; others, that it belongs to the Cardinals; others,
to the Council. But those who were more deeply engaged, or spurred on by
fairer hopes and goodly benefices, do not leave ought open, not one chinke;
yea they come so far as to say that those Councels which were not called by
the Pope are bastards, and illegitimate, void and of no effect: condemning by
this opinion those four General Councels which Gregory the Great did
reverence as the four Gospels; besides, a great many more which were either
holden without the Pope, or at least which were not of his calling, or where he
was not President.

8 True it is, that some others which are more subtle, to wave this objection
put in this alternative [ Or consented unto, and approved by him] whereby they
give us to understand, that without this approbation all those ancient Councels
should be either heretical or without effect; always putting the Popes
authority above a Councels. I know very well that all learned men and truly
religious souls do abhor this: But seeing our Sophisters nowadayes do here
bring their own dreams and fancies to make a clear cas^ seem doubtful; and
seeing they cannot deny but the Emperors called those Councels, they run to
the Popes consent or authority, maintaining that it was ever interposed. I
shall prove the contrary by the Acts of ancient Councels^ by the testimony of
Histories, and by the Popes own confessions, or their Decrees.

9 The Council of Nice was called by the Emperor Constantine, Eusebius de
vlta Constant. l. 3 c 6.

Theodoret. l. 1. c. 7.

Ruffin l 10. c 1^

Hist tripartit. l. 1. c ult l. 3. c. 9. 13. l. 10. cap 2^3.

Zonaras to. 3. V. Tom. 1. Con^il.

V. Isidori d^cret. Parisus impress. ann. 1524. p. 79. Et ann. 1535. p. 74.

Et confer cum collectione Concilior^m Generalium Edit. Colon. 1537. p. 314. Et
an^ 155^


by virtue of his Edict; as is set down in the beginning of the Acts thereof,
Chapter the 5^ The Emperor seeing there was some trouble in the Church, called
a General Council, exhorting by his letters all Bishops to repair unto Nice,
a City of Bithynia: The same is affirmed by Eusebi^^, Theodoret, Socrates,
Zonaras, Ruffin and many others. Whence we discover his forgery that framed
the Epilogue of the second Council of Rome; In the time (says he) of Pope
Sylvester and Constantine the Emperor, there was a great Council holden at
Nice in Bithynia, where three hundred and eighteen Catholic Bishops were
regularly assembled by the call and command of Pope Sylvester. If this be
true^ the Acts of that Council are false, and so many ancient Authors all
liars which ascribe the Convocation of it to Constantine.

10 And yet this goodly Epilogue is foisted in among the Councels, as if it
were an ancient piece, whereas the author of it is but a modern man: for he
has enlarged Isidores prefaces, putting in many things of his own head^ as in
that of the Council of Ephesus: For Isidore having said simply, At which
Council the most happy Cyril Bishop of Alexandria was president: This fellow
puts in of his own, Instead of Pope Celestine: Which is detected by comparing
Isidores Decree printed at Paris ann. 1524, and 1537, with the collection of
General Councels printed at Cullen ann. 1537, and 1551. Bellarmine gives us
ground enough to know it also, inasmuch as he never makes use of it. It is
true, he maintains that that Council was called by the Popes consent: which
he strives to prove by the testimony of the Pope himself, Councels called by
the Empe^our Constantine.
namely of Damasus in his pontificale. Wherein he behaves himself so mildely,
that he may justly be accused of prevarication, seeing that some copies have
it praecepto, and not consensu: so that he might maintain by the authority of
Damasus, that Constantine called it by the Popes command: But seeing he is not
willing to undertake so much, let us rest content with what he proposes us

11 The Nicene Council (says Damasus) was holden in Sylvesters time with his
consent. So was it with the consent of other Bishops either tacit or express.
But if Bellarmin will refer this to such a consent as was necessary for the
calling, he had need of another proof. He has recourse unto the Acts of the
sixth General Council holden at Constantinople, where it is said in the tenth
action, That Constantine the Emperor and Pope Sylvester assembled the Nicene
Synod. But these words which are spoken only upon the by, and by some men which
treat about another matter, ought not to have more force than the authority of
so many Historians, some of which lived at the same time; yea than the very
Acts of the Council it self, where it is plainly said that it was called by
Constantine, without any mention of Sylvester. The testimony of Ruffin will not
avail him ought, when he says that Constantine called it by the advice of
the Clergy: for suppose the Pope gave his advice amongst the rest, yet for all
that there is nothing that concerns him in particular; and to limit those
words to the Popes advice alone, were to make that author speak what he
never thought; they should rather be referred to the Bishop of Alexandria, who
entreated of the Emperor, and obtained the calling of that Council, as
Epiphanius witnesses.

Theodoret. l. 5. c. 6
12 The second General Council was called by Theodosius in the City of
Constantinople: Being come to the Empire (says Theodoret, speaking of him) he
purposed in his mind above all things to provide for the unity of the Church,
and to that end commanded all Bishops, of what Bishoprique soever, to repair
to Constantinople. The letters of that Council written to the same Emperor
are sufficient proof hereof; for after they have thanked God for giving them
Theodosius for their Emperor, they add, Since the time of our assembly at
Constantinople by your command etc. And afterward follow the Canons of the
Council, with this inscription, ^xtat. haec epist. in libello constitut^onum
Synodalium. Tom. 1. Council.
These are the things which were decreed by the Bishops that came to
Constantinople out of diverse Co^ntries, being called thither by Theodosius ^he
Emperor. Zonaras confirms it, By the Emperors command (says he) was the
second Council proclaimed, and the holy Fathers assembled at Constantinople,
etc.

13 In all these places there is no talking of the Popes consent. Bellarmine
opposes the letters which the Fathers of this Council have writ to Pope
Damasus, where they say themselves that they were assembled at Constantinople,
by command of those letters which he sent to the Emperor: but for this point
he has not well understood it. We shall make it appear by the very text of
that Epistle, how the sense which he puts upon it, is far from the words and
contrary to the truth. First see here the inscription of it, To our most
honored Lords, most reverend and most devout Fathers and associats, Damasus,
Ambrose, Britton, Valerian, Ascholius, Anemius, Basil, and other holy Bishops
assembled in the great City Rome, the holy Senate of Orthodoxe Bishops
assembled in the great City Constantinople, send greeting in the Lord, And a
little after the beginning of the Epistle, it is said, But after that you,
proceeding by the will of God, to the calling of the Synod of Rome, of your
brotherly charity called us thither as your fellow members, by virtue of the
letters of the most devout Emperor, that we alone having endured the
afflictions, you might not now r^igne without us under the peace of the most
pious Emp^rour, but receive us rather into the society of such a Kingdome^
according to the word of the Apostl^, Councels called by the Emperor
Th^odosius.
we have all earnestly desir^d (if it were possible) to apply our selves to
your desire, or rather to the present exigency, leaving our own Churches; but
considering how by this means those that were restored again would be
abandoned, and many of us could not do it, by reason that we resorted to
Constantinopl^, upon those letters sent the last year, by your Reverences, to
the most holy Emperor Theodosius, after the holding the Council of Aquil^ia,
etc. for this reason and others such like, seeing we cannot all come, we have
entreated our brethren and companions Syriacus, Eusebius and Priscian Bishops,
to take so much pains as to come unto you, to let you understand the desire
we have of the union. This Epistle is extant at large, in Theodoret, Theod. l.
5. c. ^^
and the Acts of the Council of Constantinople.

14 Now we must observe diverse things which will serve us for an answer.
First, that these letters of the Synod of Constantinople are not directed to
the Pope alone, but to the whole Council assembled at Rome, as is plain from
the inscription and tenure of them. Secondly, that those other letters which
they mention, were not sent by Pope Damasus to the Emperor Theodosiu^ (as
Bellarmine would have it) but by the Council of Aquil^ia, where the Pope was
not present. Thirdly, that by those letters they neither enjoyne nor command
the calling of a Council, as he dreams, but only they acquaint the Emperor
Theodosius, as also the Emperors Gratia^ and Valentinian, with the resolution
which they had taken in their Council, about condemning the doctrine of two
old men Palladius and Secundianus, and some other points. It is very true that
they entreat them to cause them proceed to judgment and condemnation of them,
and some other of the same sect, which gave occasion to the Emperor Theodosius
to call the Council of Constantinople.

15 For full proof of all this, you need but read it in the letters which the
Council of Aquileia sent to the said Emperors; Extat inter Acta Council.
Aquileiensis Tom 1. Concit
the inscription whereof is this. To the most mild Christian Emper^urs, and
most happy Princes, Gratian, Valentinian and Theodosius, the holy Council
assembled at Aquileia sends greeting. After the narration of the proceedings
therein, and the designs which the Arrian Bishops had there, they say in fine,
We do abhor (most mild Princes) such execrable sacriledges, and such wicked
doctrines; and to the end that they may deceive people no more, we have
thought good that they be degraded from their Priesthood, and beseech your
majesty's to cause such patrons of impiety be driven out of the Church, and
make them be summoned before competent Judges. They further entreat them to
hinder and forbid the followers of Photius from making of assemblies.

16 Any man may now judge whether these letters contain any command to the
Emperor for calling a Council, and whether the Pope made any such command,
who was not present in that Council, neither in person nor by proxy.
Bellarmine has taken up the error of one of the Latin translators of
Theodoret who renders these words [(...)] mandat^ vestrarum literarum, [ by
command of your letters] in stead of, per vestras literas, [ by reason of your
letters] in as much as these letters gave occasion to the Emperor Theodosius to
call the Council of Constantinople, bu^ not by the Popes command: Yea the
Council of Constantinople was so far from being called by the Emperor upon
the Popes command, that on the contrary the Pope summons the Eastern Bishops
to the Council of Ro^^, by virtue of the Emperors letters, as the forecited
letters of the Council of Constantinopl^ run.

17 Bellarmine brings also the authority of the sixth General Cou^^ell but,
under correction, he has foisted in a little too much of his own; ^or it is
said simply, The third General Council not called by the Pope.
Macedonius denied the divinity of the Holy Ghost, but Theodosius and Damasus
opposed him stoutly^ Bellarmine adds, by the second Synod. He might well have
opposed him before the Synod, yea, in the Synod, by means of his Legates, as
some other Bishops did; he is named only as the foreman of them; but it
follows not, therefore that the Council was called by him or by his authority.

18 The third General Council was called at Ephesus by the Emperor
Theodosius: the Historians that speak of it make no mention at all of the Popes
consent. I will set down the places, Socrates l. 7. c. 34.
The Bishops (says Socrates) came together from all parts, and met at Ephesus
by the Emperors command. Nestorius (says Evagrius) would not submit to the advice of Cyrill and Celestine Bishops of old Rome, Evagrius l. 1. c. 3.
but belched out his venom against the Church, and demanded that a Council
might be assembled at Ephesus by the authority of Theodosius the younger, who
at that time governed the Eastern Empire: Wherefore letter^ were dispatched from
the Emperor unto Cyrill and the rest of the Bishops.

Niceph. l. 14. ^. ^4.
19 Theodosius (says Nicephorus) commanded by his letters Imperial the Bishops
of all places to come to Ephesus, setting them a day against the feast of
Pentecost. This Council of Ephesus put this inscription to a letter written to
the Synod of Pamphylia, The holy Synod assembled at Ephesus by the grace of God
and good pleasure of the most devout Kings, to the holy Synod of Pamphylia,
greeting. V. Libel. Constitut. Synodal. Tom. 1. Council. Et Acta Council.
Ephe^ini.
And in another Act afterward. The Synod by the grace of God, and by virtue of
the Edict of our most devout Kings, lovers of Christ, assembled in the
Metropolitan City of Ephesus, etc. The Kings which these Acts speak of are the
Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian.

20 But there is no need of these authorities, considering that we have the
Acts of that Council yet extant, which may clear the doubt that might be
raised. If there be one single word in them whence it may appear that
Theodosius required ^ope Celestines consent to the calling of that Council,
then Bellarmi^e shall win the day; but withal if there be nothing spoken of
it, however the Acts are very large, he shall give us leave not to believe it.
Those Acts speak in diverse places of the convocation, but so as it is always
ascribed to the Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian without any mention of the
Pope.

21 The 25 Chapter of the first Tome contains letters of the same Emperors
sent unto Cyrill to command him to come, but no news of the Pope. In the first
Chapter of the second Tome, it is said, The Synod wa assembled in the
Metropolitan City of Ephesus, by virtue of the Emperors Decree: Not a word of
the Pope. In the same Chapter it is commanded, Let the Edict which was sent by
the most pious and most Christian Emperors be read, and give light like a
torch unto such things as we now begin to treat of. The 17 Chapter of the
second Tome contains those letters which the Fathers of that Council writ
unto the said Emperors, whereby they certify them of the coming of the Popes
Legates; and mentioning the Council they add, Which your majesty's commanded
to meet at Ephesus. In the 18 Chapter of the second Tome Cyrill says, in an
Epistle of his to certain Bishops, The time for holding the Synod was
appointed by the most devout Emperors, to be upon the day of Pentecost; so
did their first letters, by which we are summoned thither, command. The 19
Chapter of the same Tome contains a certain writing of the Clergy of
Constantinople, which begins thus; The sacred Synod assembled at Ephesus by
virtue of the Edict of the most devout, and most Christian Emperors, having
found that the enemy of Christ continues obstinate in his perverse opinion,
has deprived him of his orders, and degraded him. There are many other places
in those same Acts, where that convocation is spoken of without ever ascribing
it to the Pope; nor part, nor quart, (as they say,) and yet the contrary is
debated amongst us.

22 But (says Bellarmine) Cyrill was in that Council as the Popes Legate;
Bellarmines p^^-offs refuted
a certain argument that it was not called without his consent. We deny both
the one and the other: For you must know that the Nestorian heresy was
condemned in a Council holden at Rome by Pope Celestine; and forasmuch as
Cyrill Patriarch of Alexandria, the professed enemy of Nestorius Patriarch of
Constantinople, had formerly written unto Pope Celestine about it; the said
Celestine certified him of the resolution which had past upon it, and entreated
him withal that he would be pleased in his stead, to cause the sentence of
the Synod of Rome to be put in execution.

23 All this was done before there was any speech of the Council of Ephesus,
as i^ plain out of the letters of that Council, written to the Emperors, the
words are these; Celestine the most holy Bishop of Great Rome, had signified
the judgment which was past by him and his before any Synod was assembled at
Ephesus, and entrusted in his stead Cyrill the most holy and religious Bishop
of Alexandria, with the putting of that in execution which was determined at
Rome. So then he was not sent by the Pope to supply his place at the Council
of Ephesus, which is properly to be a Legate. Nor had he any express charge
from the Pope to supply his place in that Council, for there is no mention at
all of any such command. We conclude therefore that it cannot be inferred
from thence, that there was any particular consent of the Pope in the calling
of that Council. We do not yet meddle with the Presidency of Cyrill, that we
reserve for another place.

14 This notwithstanding Bellarmine urges some authors for proof of his
assertion, namely Evagrius, Photius, and Celestine himself in his Epistle.
They all say that Celestine by his letters did substitute Cyrill in his place.
It is true; but it is true withal, that when those letters were written he
spoke not of the Council of Ephesus, but of that of Alexandria, which was
holden by Cyrill. Besides, the Pope sent his Legates to Ephesus, in number three
to supply his place; which he would never have done if he had taken Cyrill to
have been there in his stead. It is true moreover, that Cyrill, who would have
^ad it so in opposition to Nestorius, to gain himself the more authority at
Ephesus, during the time of that Council, did serve himself of that
substitution which had been formerly granted unto him. But this makes nothing
at all for the Popes consent to the calling of the Council, which is the point
now in question.

25 Bellarmine flies to the authority of a Chronicler to prove the Popes
consent. Prosper (says he) shows in his Chronicle, Prosper in Chron.
that the Council of Ephesus was holden by the industry of Cyrill, and the
authority of Celestine. Under correction he never thought so; The year 431
speaking of the heresy of Nest^rius, who taught that our Savior Christ was
borne of the Virgin Mary, not God^ but mere man. This impiety (says he) was
principally opposed by the industry of Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria, and the
authority of Pope Celestine. There is no mention of the Council of Ephesus.
But at the year 434 in these words, The Synod being assembled at Ephesus, of
above 200 Bishops, Nestorius was there condemned, and that heresy which took
the name from him. There is nothing there for the Popes consent. Martinus
Polonus in Celestino sub ann. 42^.
Martinus Polonus would have afforded him a more favorable testimony, for he
says that the Synod of Ephesus was assembled by the commandment of Pope
Celestine and Theodosius the younger. But what can an upstart Historian, who
writ not till 250 years afterward, testify against so many Acts? Bellarmine
knew that well enough.

26 Nor do we find that the Emperors Valentinian and Martian asked the
consent of Pope Leo for the calling of the Council of Chalcedon. Act. 1.
Council. Chalc. Tom. 1. Council.
In the first Act whereof it is said, That a Synod was held in Chalcedon, the
Metropolitan of Bithinia, The Counsel of Chalcedon not called by the Po^e.
by the Decree of the most devout and faithful Emperors, Valentinian and
Martian. The Emperor Martian witnesses as much himself in his constitution
for the confirmation of the Council; L. 3. C de sum. t^^m.
For (says he) whosoever dare call in question, and publicly dispute those
things which have been once judged and well determined, he wrongs the
reverend Synod: forasmuch as those things which were agreed upon concerning the
Christian faith, by the Clergy assembled in Chalcedon, by our command were
determined according to Apostolical expositions, etc. And Martinus Polonus
says, The fourth Synod of Chalcedon, consisting of six hundred and thirty
Bishops, was holden by the industry of Pope Leo, and the command of the
Emperor Martian. No body denies but that Council was assembled by the
industry of Leo, who was a solliciter for it; but those Emperors were so far
from desiring his authority and consent, that on the contrary he used earnest
prayers to Theodosius for the obtaining of the Council; bestowing tears to
that end, which he said were shed for his Clergy: using withal another man's
favor in his suit.

27 After the death of Theodosius, Valentinian and Martian were more favorable
unto him: they granted him a Council after they were petitioned by his
Ambassadors. Martian writ a very honest letter unto him, whereof Bellarmine now
serves himself to prove that the Popes consent is requisite to the calling of
Councels, Extat haec epist inter epist praeambulares Council. Chal ced. Tom. 2.
Council. p. 126.
The Emperor (says he) entreats the Pope to come and hold the Council.
There is no such entreaty, but only these words, It remains, that, if it
please your Holiness to come into those parts to celebrate the Council, you
would be pleased to do so out of religious affection. The Pope by his letters,
and by his Legates desired two things; that a Council might be kept, and that
it might be in Italy: the first he obtained, the second was denied him. True
it is that Martian qualified the denial with fair words, as that, If he
would not be present at it, he would tell them so, to the end that they might
call the Bishops unto that place which should be pitched upon, to provide for
the Christian religion, and the Catholic faith, by their decision; as your
Holiness shall determine according to Ecclesiastical constitutions. I find
no other consent to the calling of it, but such as stands with a petitioner.
Indeed seeing he desired it, and that in such manner as we have said, it
follows that he consented unto it; but diverse other Bishops have the same plea
that he has, in as much as diverse times they became petitioners to the
Emperors for the holding of Councels.

28 Bellarmine urges a letter written by certain Bishops of Bursia, wherein
they say, That many holy Bishops are assembled in Chalcedon, by the command of
Pope Leo. But it is a hard case that he would rather trust those poor
ignoramus's whom the distance of place and inexperience of affairs does in
some sort excuse, than the truth of the Acts. Considering withal that these
Bishops speak more in this point than he would have them; for he stands
only for the Popes consent, and they ascribe unto him the command. Why does not
he speak as they do? If they be mistaken in the command why should we
believe them about the consent? especially seeing they never speak of it?

29 Afterward he descends to domestique testimonies; as to Pope Gelasius his
Epistle to the Dardan Bishops: where he says, That the Apostolic See by her
sole authority, decreed that the Council of Chalcedon should be holden.
Decreed it indeed, but with prayers, entreaties, and tears, with much
passionate importunity to the Emperors. See wherein that authority consists:
see how the Popes would make us believe it!

30 The same question is concerning the Council of Sardis; to the convocation
whereof Bellarmine pretends that the Popes consent was required, and that by
Emperors themselves: He takes a great deal of pains to fight against the
truth, which he has obscured, but not extinguished. Councels called by
Emperors.
We can easily evidence to the contrary; Then (says Socrates) there was a
General Council appointed, that all should repair to Sardis, a City in
Illyri^m, and that by the will and pleasure of the two Emperors; the one by
his letters requiring it; the other, who governed in the East^ freely
condescending unto it. The Bishops of the same Council in their letters to all
the Churches speak on this manner; At last by the grace of God, the most mild
Emperors have assembled this holy Synod out of diverse Cities and Provinces,
and have suffered it to be kept in the City of ^ardis. Extat h^c epistola in
libello Constitution^ Synodalium to. 2. Council.

Et in fragmentis Pithoeani^. Et apud Theodorat l. 2. c. 8. Et apud athanas.
apolog. 2.


Let us hear wh^t Bellarmine urges to the contrary: he brings a passage out
of Socrates, where he says, That the Eastern Bishops lay the blame of their
absence from the Council of Sardis upon Pope Julius, because the time allotted
them for their coming was too short. Whence it follows (says he) that the
Council was not called by the Emperor alone, but by Pope Julius also, yea and
that principally by him. But he mistakes himself in his inference; Pope
Julius was deeply engaged for Athanasius, he had written in his behalf
certain angry letters to the Oriental Bishops assembled at Antioch; gaining
nothing at their hands, he addressed himself to the Emperor Constans, and
persuaded him to write to his brother Constantius, to send certain Bishops to
Rome to answer for their rejection of Paul and Athanasius: Lastly, after some
other accidents which befell about that point, it was decreed by the will and
pleasure of the two Emperors, that the Bishops of both sides should meet at a
day appointed in Sardis, a City of Illyrium. Sozomen l. 3^ cap. 9 and. 10.
All that we say is related by Sozomen, without any intermixing of ought of
our own. So that it is not without good reason that the Eastern Bishops
imputed the shortness of the time unto the Pope, seeing they had occasion to
believe that he had prosecuted and obtained the holding of that Council
without allowing them sufficient space to come thither.

CHAP. II. Other examples to prove that the Popes consent was not required to
the calling of Councels.
1 HEre Bellarmine stops, and speaks not of other Councels which were holden
afterward: it is true that he seems to dissipate and dispell all that we have
replied concerning the former Councels with one puff: that is, that for four
or five Councels which the Emperors called, the Popes have called a dozen. He
puts us upon the necessity of urging other examples over and above the former.
If any of those with whom Bellarmine bickets, had delivered a thing so
exorbitant, and remote from all truth, he would have given them the ly, and
hooted at them. Let us show the contrary without passion, without calumny: for
these are things mis-beseeming learned men, and especially those that meddle in
these matters.

2 The fifth General Council holden at Constantinople, under the Emperor
Justinian, was called by him without the Popes consent. This is proved out of
his own letters, Eight General Councels called by Empep^rou^s.
We have summoned you (says he) unto the royal City, exhorting you in
general, that when you are come thither, you would declare your opinion and
your minds about these matters. Nicephorus witnesses as much, Justinian. in
epist ad Episcopos Synodi Constantin. Tom. 3. Council.

Niceph l. 17. c. 17.

Zomaras Tom. 3 in Constantino 4.

Martinus Poton^^ in Constantino 4. Et Iustin^a^o 2. Et in Agathone and sub
ann. 670, 678, 687.

Canone Habeo horum did. 19. Canone, Sexta Synodus. did. ^adem.


The Emperor Justinian (says he) called the fifth Oecumenicall Council, and
cited the Bishops of all Churches unto it upon this occasion.

3 The sixth General Council was called at Constantinople by the Emperor
Constantine the 4, as Zonaras testifies; Constantine (says he) being an
Orthodox Prince, labored to unite the Churches, that were at odds by reason
of the heresy of the Monothelites, who sprang up after the reign of
Heraclius, his great Grandfather: whereupon he called a Council at
Constantinople. Martinus Polonus ascribes the Convocation of that Council to
the Emperor Constantine; and speaking of Pope Agatho, he says nothing of
him, but only that the sixth Synod was holden in his time.

4 He says as much of the first Nicene, when he speaks of Constantine the
Great, and Pope Sylvester. But for the Popes consent there is no news at all.
The Popes themselves witness this truth in their Decree compiled by Gratian.
For it is said in the sixth distinction; The 6 holy Synod after the publication
of the sentence against the Monothelites, the Emperor that called it dying
presently after, etc. And in another place, The sixth General Council was
holden at Constantinople, in the time of Pope Agatho, by the care and diligence
of the Emperor Constantine who was there in person. The Popes verily have done
themselves a great deal of wrong, that they declared not that Convocation to
be made by their authority; for it is not their fashion to forfeit their right
for want of demanding, or of publishing it.

Synodus Nic. 2. in princ. Tom. 3. Council p. 452. Tarasiu^ in Epist. ad Ioannem
presbyt. tom. 3. Council. p 549.

Zonaras tom. 3.


5 The Acts of the second Nicene, which is the seventh General Council, tell
how it was called by Constantine, and his Mother Irene. The holy and General
Synod assembled by the pious Decree of those Emperors, in the most famous City
of Nice, the Metropolis of Bithinia. And this is confirmed by that letter which
Tarasius Patriarch of Constantinople, writ unto a certain Priest, inserted in
the Acts of the Council; and by that which Zonaras speaks of it.

6 The eighth General Council, which is the sixth of Constantinople, was
called also by the Emperor Basil, witness Zonaras: Zonaras tom. 3. in Basilio
Imp.
Basil (says he) come into the great Church upon a festival day, to receive
the unbloudy sacrifice, was hindered by Photius the Patriarch, who called him
murderer: but he being incensed with this repulse, calling a Council, cast
Photius out of the Church.

7 Cardinal Cusan freely confesses that the Emperors had anciently this
right of calling Councels: Nicolau^ Cusanus, de Concordia Cath. l. 2. cap. 2.
Yea he affirms that the eighth General (whereof we have spoken) were called
by them, Howbeit (says he) we read that the General Councels were ofttimes
called by the Emperors, yea all the eight, as may be proved out of their
Acts; yet notwithstanding in those Councels the Pope had always the authority
of presiding. So then in his opinion the Pope had no share in the calling;
that is all which we demand for the present. As for the presidence that is
another matter^ we will speak of it anon.

8 This is no small thing that all the eight General Councels were called by
the Emperors. I say the eight General, which are acknowledged to be such by
the Pope: But we will find more yet: Theodoret speaking of Athanasius's
adversaries says; Theodoret. l. 1. c. 28.
He persuaded Constantine the Emperor to call a Council at Cesarea in
Palestine; and to command that Athanasius should be arraigned: but St.
Athanasius knowing the malice of his Judges, went not to the Council. He
afterward adds, He suspecting that Athanasius would not appear in Cesarea,
by reason, I suppose, of the Bishop of that place, commanded that the Council
should meet at Tire. Popes pe^itioners for Counc^ls.
Eusebius in the life of Constantine, speaking of the same Synod of Tire says,
The Emperor called together a great company of Bishops out of Egypt, Africa,
Asia, and Europe, and opposed them as an army of God against that enemy of
mankind. Eusebius in vita Constable. l. 4. c. ^ 1.

V Concii. Carthag. ^ an princ. tom. 1. Council. p. 6^2.




9 The Acts of the first Council of Carthage te^tifie, that it was called by
Constantine, where Crates the Bishop of that City, speaks thus: Let us thank
God that he has inspired the religious Emperor Constantine, with a desire of
the union of the Church, and to send Paul and Macarius, servants of God, as his
ministers in this holy work: to the end that we may hol^ Councels in diverse
Provinces.

10 Theodoret, speaking of the Council of Antioch; Theodoret. l. 2. c 21.
About that time (says he) Constantine making his abode at Antioch, called and
assembled the Bishops together again.

11 The Council of Aquileia writes thus unto the Emperors, V. Gesta Conc.
Aquil. eiensi^ to. 1. Council. p. 717.
Gratian and Valentinian; We give you thanks^ most mild Princes, that, for
the taking away of all quarrels, you have taken the pains to assemble an
Ecclesiastical Council, and of your bounty have done this honor unto the
Bishops, that such as would might come, and no man be compelled.

12 About the year 413, The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius the younger,
called a Council at Carthage, consisting of 313 Bishops, for the condemning of
the Pelagians; so Martinu^ Polonu^. Martinus Polonus in Honori^^ sub ann. 412
And speaking of Pope Innocent the first, who lived at the same time, he says
indeed that he condemned Pelagiu^, but it was not in that Council; whereto he
neither gave consent for the calling of it, nor had voice in the decision.

13 Under the same Emperors there was a disputation and conference holden in
the same City betwixt the Catholic Bishops and the Donatists, where St.
Austin was present, and where all the Bishops of Africa, both on the one side
and the other were summoned to appear. Flavius Marcellinus one of the
Emperors officers, was made Judge there; to whom those who appointed the place
of meeting direct these words, V. Gesta Collat. Carthag. circa princip.
Your greatness has sent us through the Provinces according to the Emperors
command, and has dispatched his edicts and injunctions through all Africa; to
the intent that all Bishops, as well Catholics as Donatists, should come unto
this conference within four months.

14 The Fathers of the General Council at Constantinople in Trullo, speak
thus unto the Emperor Justinian the second, V. Acta sext^ Synodi, in Trullo
apud. Bal^amon.
You ordained that this holy General Council, elected by the divine
providence, should be called together. And anon, Upon this occasion we have
written these holy Canons, being assembled together in this Imperial, and
religious City by your pieties special command.

15 The Acts of the fourth Council at Rome assembled under Pope Symmachu^, In
prin. Romanae Synodi 4. to. 2. Con. p. 472.
show that it was called by the command of King Theodoric, then ruler in Italy.
Th^^ holy Synod assembled at Rome out of diverse Nations by the command of King
Theodoric, etc.

16 Those of the Synod of Aix the Chapel in Germany, holden under the
Emperor Jews in the year 816, speak in this sort^ To. 3 Council. p. 820.

Author. appendicis ad Eutrop.


Whereas the most Christian and glorious Emperor Jews has called a holy and
General Council at Aix, etc. He that writ the continuation of the History of
Eutropius, speaking of the Emperor Jews the second, the son of Lotharius,
saith^ The royal Majesty opposed the Apostolical dignity, objecting to the
Pope the ancient decrees of Fathers, whereby^ it is not lawful for a Prelate
to excommunicate a Bishop without a Synod: which Council ought not to be
called by the Pope, but by the Emperor. All this is spoken in favor of John
Archbishop of Ravenna whom Pope Nicholas the first had excommunicated.

Councels called by the Emperor.
17 The Emperor Otho the Great, after he had admonished Pope John the 12, and
saw that he would not amend his scandalous life, Called a Council (says
Platina) making all the Bishops of Italy meet to condemn that wicked person.
The Emperor Henry the 3 (says the same Platina) having called a Council
after he had there compelled Bennet the 9, Platina in Ioanne 12. Idem in
Gregorio 6.
Sylvester the 3, and Gregory the 6, as three most hideous monsters to renounce
the Popedom, he created Sindegerus Bishop of Bamberg Pope, who was afterward
called Clement the 2. This was done in the year 1047, The Emperor Henry the
3, having called a Council at Worms, Martinus Polonus sub ann. 1067.
consisting of 24 Bishops, and diverse noble men commanded that all the decrees
of Pope Gregory the 7 should be cassed and cancelled.

18 Radenicus speaking of the Emperor Frederick the first, Supposing (says
he) that after the example of the ancient Emperors, Radenicus l. 2. de gestis
Fred. c. 54.

Idem lib. 2. c. 64.

Iean le Maire en la second party du schism.


as Justinian, Theodosius, Charles, etc. the power of calling a Council
belonged unto himself. And elsewhere he makes Frederick speak in the same
tone, in that oration which he delivered to the Council. The Council of
Constance (says John le Maire) was assembled by the command of the Emperor
Sigismond, and by the common consent of the five principal Nations of
Christendom, namely the German, French, English, Spanish and Italian for
noting out of schisms.

19 The Bishops thus called by the Emperors (that we may note this by the
way) were bound to go to the Councels; which is sufficiently verified out of
those places we have formerly alleged: for the Emperors summons being
legitimate, it must needs follow that the parties summoned were bound to make
their appearance. But it is requisite we prove it out of the Acts themselves,
for there are some of the Popes Advocates which run to this lurking hole.
Constantine the Great, without any prejudice to those honors which he had
granted unto the Bishops of the Nicene Council, writ thus to that of Tire;
Theodoret. l. 1. c. 24.
If there be any (as I hope there are not) who cunningly goes about to slight
our command, and refuses to come unto the Council, we will send some from
hence who shall dismiss him of his dignity; to teach him that no man may
contradict Imperial ordinances made in behalf of the truth. So the Emperor
Theodosius, when he called that of Ephesus, which was the third General
Council. Nicephorus says he added thus much unto his letters. Niceph. hist.
l. 14 c. 34.
That he would not hold him excused neither before God nor man, who should not
make his appearance at Ephesus upon the day of Pentecost appointed: For (says
he) he who after citation to a holy assembly of Bishops, does not run with
cheerfulness, he gives us to understand that he has no good conscience.
There is yet this clause more; So then we, being diligently employed about
this business which we have set our mind upon, V. Tom. 1. Act. Council.
Ephesians. c. 25.
will not suffer any man to be absent, without punishing him.

20 Let us now return to our former discourse. We suppose our adversaries are
so reasonable that they will content themselves with these many examples which
we have urged; and I believe they will suffer themselves to be persuaded
hereafter, that the Councels we speak o^ ^ere not called by the Popes
authority, or consent. If so, those Historians which write of them do grossly
abuse us, considering they never speak a word of it: the Acts of those
Councels which are yet extant amongst us for the most part, must be accused of
falsity, which are silent in a matter of such moment. The Popes themselves have
prevaricated in their own cause, who have never mentioned their pretended
consent, when they speak of the convocation made by Emperors; as when they
make mention of the sixth General, and the four first so much renowned
Councels. Hearken w^^t Pope Gelasius says to it in his Council holden at Rome,
As for the four first General all Councels, three of them were called by the
Christian Emperors; Can. Sancta ^omana. did 15
to wit, the Nicene by Constantine, that of Constantinople by Theodosius the
elder, and that of Chalcedon by the Emperor Martian. He might have added the
fourth at Ephesus, Councels c^lled by the Empe^our.
which was called by the Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian. Hearken what is
said hereof in another place of the Decretes concerning the Council of
Millain; The Emperor Valentinian desiring to put a Catholic Bishop in the
City of Millain, after the death of Auxentius the Arrian, Can. Valentinianus.
did. 63.
having called the Bishops together, spoke unto them in this manner; You know
very well, as being versed in Scripture, what manner of man a Bishop should
be, etc. And afterward. The Synod desired him to make choice and nominate one
himself. So that St. Hierome ought to have used another phrase, when he said
in his Apology against Ruffine, Hieron. l. 2. apolog. contra Ruffin

Iacobatius l. 3. de Conc. art. 1. Bellarm. l. 1. de Council c. 12. circa
princip.


Tell me by what Emperors command that Synod was called? He who was a
Clergyman should rather have said, Tell me what Pope consented to the Synod?
For our Sophisters hold, that the Popes authority is the sovereign plaster,
which salves all: and that it is no matter who call them, so that his authority
come in any way, either in the beginning, the middle, or the end. But what will
they say when we shall make it appear, that the Popes themselves became
supplicants to the Emperors to entreat them to call Councels? That they became
the Emperors servants in calling them at their command? That they were
summoned unto Councels as well as other Bishops? Yea that the Emperors have
holden Councels sometimes without them, sometimes against them? It is necessary
that we treat a little at large of all these Articles, to take away all means
of shifting, and evasions from such as will not yield to reason.

CHAP. III. That the Popes have been suitors to the Emperors to get leave of
them for the holding of Councels.
WE descend to the proof of this point not without good reason; considering
that some have ventred so far, as to affirm that the Emperors called
Councels only by commission from the Popes. Cardinalis I^cobatius lib. 3. de
Council art. 1. V. etiam Bellarmin. l. 1. de Council. c. 13. ubi de Concilio
Constantinop. 1.
Alleging to this effect a misconceived passage out of the epistle sent by the
first Council of Constantinople to the Council at Rome, which we have
expounded in the first chapter of this third Book. We therefore maintain
this assertion to be so far from truth, that on the contrary the Popes have
become humble suitors to the Emperors, to desire of them that they would call
Councels.

2 Pope Liberius, upon the instance made unto him by Constantius an Arrian
Emperor, to abandon Athanasius, considering how he stood condemned for a
heretic by a Synod, makes this reply, Theodoret. l. ^. c. 16.
That in proceeding to Ecclesiastical censu^es, great ^quity ought to be
used, and therefore if it please your Holiness command that an assembly be
called to sit upon him to the end that if he be to be condemned^ sentence may
pass upon him in manner and form Ecclesiastical. By which words he means
nothing else but the calling of a lawful Council. Which may be collected from
the sequel of that discourse betwixt Constantius and Liberius about the
Council of Tire, wherein Athanasius had been condemned: As also from that
which Ruffin delivers concerning this particular in the sixteenth chapter of
his Ecclesiastical History.

O^he^ ^oun^els ^^lled by E^p^^^u^s.
3 Pope Celestine with his fellow Patriarchs were petitioners to Theodosius the
Emperor for the Council of Ephesus. These things were no sooner known to the
other Patriarchs (says Zonaras, Zonaras tom. 3.
speaking of Nestorius Patriarch of Constantinople) but Celestine Pope of Rome,
Cyrill Patriarch of Alexandria, John of Antioch, and Iuvenal of Jerusalem
opened the cause to the Emperor Theodosius and Pulcheria the Empress, humbly
entreating them to cause the opinions of Nestorius to be examined in a
Council.

4 Sozomen reports, Sozomen. l. 8. c. 2^.
(in his eighth book, and 28 Chapter) how Pope Innocent sent five Bishops and
two Priests to the Emperors Honorius and Arcadius, to entreat a Synod of them,
together with the time and place for the calling of it.

5 Pope Leo, together with the whole Synod assembled at Rome, earnestly
entreats the Emperor Theodosius in his 23 Epistle, Leo epist. 23. et 31 et. 24.
that he would command a General Council to be holden in Italy. He repeats
the same request to the same Emperor in his thirty first Epistle: and withal
makes use of the favor of the Empress Pulcheria in his twenty fourth Epistle:
As also of the Empress Eudoxia, as appears by her letter to the Emperor, and
his answer; which are recorded in the Acts of the Council of Chalcedon;
Zonaras l. 3. p. ^8.
and further confirmed by the testimony of Zonaras.

6 Pope Gregory exhorts one of our Kings to command a Council to be called,
for the punishing of the vices and abuses of the Clergy within his Realm;
Gregorius in registro c. 273.
We are urgent upon you by our second exhortation, that for the reward which
you shall thence reap, you would command a Synod to be assembled, and (as we
have long since writ unto you) cause the corporal vices of the Priests, and
the foul heresy of Simony to be condemned by the joint sentence of all the
Bishops; and to be utterly rooted out of all the confines of your dominions.
This passage is the more remarkable, in as much as it is put into the Canon by
some of those that collected the Canons and Decrees of the ancient Fathers:
Burchard l. 15 decret. c. 20.
and also this his request is often repeated in his several Epistles to King
Theodoric, King Theodebert, Gregorius in Registro l. 7. indict. 2. c. 110. et
112. l. 9. indict. 4 c. 53.
and Queen Brunechilde.

7 Nor did the Popes herein any thing but what was the common practice of other
Bishops; who when just occasion was offered became supplicants to their Princes
for the keeping of Councels. Athanasius reports how himself and some others,
Athanasius in epist. ad Solitarios.
finding themselves aggrieved by the Arrians, petitioned the Emperor Constans
for the calling of a Council; and how upon their entreaty it was called at
Sardis, whither the Bishops repaired from above five and thirty Provinces: The
list of whose names you may find in Theodoret. T^eodoret. l. 2. c. 8.


8 The Arrian Bishops prevailed with the Emperor Constuntius, for the calling
a Council at Milan; Theodoret l. 2. c. 15.
They persuaded him (says Theodoret) to call a Council at Milan a City of
Italy; and compel all the Bishops to subscribe to the abdication of the injust
judges of Tire; and to set out a new Creed, and cast Athanasius out of the
Church. Thither the Bishops came in obedience to the Emperors royal command.
Eusebius with his partisans, that were of the same sect, Socrates. l 2. c. 8.

Sozomen. l. 4. c 22.

Idem lib. 4. c. 16


desired the Emperor to have it at Antioch: who by the cunning of the Arrians
was wrought at last to proclaim two Councels, one at Seleucia for those of the
East, and another at Ariminum for them of the Western Church.

9 Besides^ that at other times also they called Councels by virtue of the
Emperors authority, is plain from that passage of the letter which was sent
by the General Council at Constantinople to Pope Damasus, and the Synod at
Rome; where they mention how the Pope and his Council had convoked the Eastern
Bishops, by virtue of a commission granted by the Emperor Theodosius; But (say
they) whereas you^ proceeding to the holding of a Council at Rome, have out of
your brotherly charity summoned us thither, by virtue of the Emperors letters,
as your fellow members, etc. Popes summoned to Councels.
So then we are already at a great deal of odds with those people that put
the Cart before the horse.

CHAP. IV. That the Popes have been summoned to Councels by the Emperors, as
well as other Bishops.
1 Emperors when they intended to call Councels, were wont to write unto all
the Bishops, that they should make their appearance at such places as they
appointed; but more especially to the Patriarchs and Metropolitans. Thus much
we collect out of Eusebius in the life of Constantine; Eusebius lib. 3^ de
vita Constantini cap. 6.
of whom he says, That he called a General Council, as if he had mustered
an army of God; and thither he summoned the Bishops from all parts, by his
letters conceived in respective and honorable terms, to make them appear
with the more alacrity.

2 The Emperor Theodosius and Valentinian in their letters to Cyrill, tell
him, how they had writ to all the Metropolitan Bishops, to make their
appearance at Ephesus. Cap. 23. tom. 1. Act. Council. Ephesians.
As for the proclaiming of the most holy Council our clemency has given out
our letters to all the Metropolitan Bishops.

3 In the Acts of the Council of Chalcedon, John the Priest, and chief
Secretary says; It is the pleasure of our most Christian, and most devout
Emperors, to ordain that this your holy and reverend Synod should be here
assembled: We have now in our hands their honorable letters, which we do but
intimate to your Holynesses. Dioscorus the Reverend Bishop of Alexandria adds
further. That the most holy and religious letters sent by the most Christian
Emperors to every Metropolitan in particular were publicly read, and
inserted in the Acts of the Council.

4 And to prove that the Bishop of Romes case is no whit different from other
Bishops, but just of the same rank and quality^ Hark what follows immediately
in the same Acts; Bishop Julius ( who was Deputy for his Holiness the
Archbishop of Rome, and used Florens Bishop of Lydia for his interpreter) said
that the most holy Bishop of Rome Pope Leo had been summoned by the most
Christian Emperors, by their letters of the same tenure.

5 We may observe by the way, that at that time the Greek tongue was so well
understood at Rome, and the Latin in Greece, that the Bishops of both
Countries were glad to speak by interpreters. Yea in the very same Council of
Chalcedon, Act. 16. Concil^ Chalced.
the Emperor Marcian made one oration in Greek for the one part, and another
in Latin for the other; the matter of both being but one and the same. The
Council of Jerusalem made certain Creeds both in Greek and Latin. Sozomen.
l. 4. c. 5
The Popes Legates at the Council of Ephesus had their interpreter to expound
their words: Cap. 13. tom. 2. Act. Council. Ephesians.
and when Celestines letters were there read, the Acts tell us how the Bishops
desired they should be translated into Greek, and read over again: Insomuch
that the Romish Legates had almost made a controversy of it, fearing lest they
should prejudice the Papal dignity by such an Act; and alleging therefore how
it was the ancient custom to propose the Bulls of the Sea Apostolic in Latin
only, The Popes ignorance of the Greek tongue.
and that might now suffice. Whereupon these poor Greek Bishops were in danger
not to have understood the Popes Latin. But the Legates were at last content
with reason, when it was evidenced unto them that the major part could not
understand a word of Latin.

Ca. 17. tom. 1. Act. Council. Ephesians.
6 But the prettiest of all is Pope Celestines excuse to Nestorius for his so
long delaying to answer his letters, the ground being this, that he could not
by any means get his Greek construed any sooner. Pope Gregory the first
ingenuously confesses to the Bishop of Thessaly, that he understood not a jot
of his Greek. It is very probable that the proverb of honest Accursius was even
then in use; Gregor^ in reg^s^ro indict. 4. l. 9 epist. 64.
Graecum est, non legitur. The Popes were very capable in those days, of
having omnia jura in scrinio pectoris, all laws in their breasts, but not all
languages in their mouths.

7 To return to the point in hand: Tarasius Patriarch of Constantinople,
speaking in a certain letter of his to a Priest, of the calling of the second
Council of Nice, says; I suppose you have heard how there was a Synod called
at Nice, Tarasiu^ in ep. ^^ Joan presb tom. 3. Council.
whither we are gone, as also all true Priests: namely the Delegates as well of
the Pope of old Rome, as of the great Bishops of the East, and diverse other
holy Bishops according to the letters of the most devout Emperors. Yea the
Pope himself was summoned thither by virtue of those letters as well as others.
Zonaras is more full in the relation where he speaks of that Synod; When all
were agreed upon is, holy Tarasius being elected Patriarch, he and the
Emperors sent to old Rome, where Adrian was then Pope, and to all other
Patriarchs, requiring them to send some in their place to assist at the
Council. If the Pope had had an hand in these summons with the Emperors, as
Tarasius had, some would surely think they had won the day. But lo here you
see the Pope summoned, as well as others, by the Patriarch and the Emperors, to
make his appearance at a Council; even he that bragges that he is above them
all.

8 We may observe in the last place how Bellarmine, after he has maintained
that Emperors could call no Councels till they had first required and obtained
the Popes consent, forgetting what he said, confesses afterward that the
Popes were called unto Councels by the said Emperors, which cannot consist
without a downright contradiction: For if Councels were called only by leave
and direction from the Pope, there was no need that he should be summoned
himself, seeing it was he that summoned others. But there is yet a better jest
behind: For, says he, Bellarm. l. 1. de Council. c. 19.
The Emperors when they called Councels, summoned all other Bishops by way of
Edict and command: but for the Pope they entreated him, that if he pleased,
he would vouchsafe to come thither. I never saw so many fine devises. The
prealledged passages do plainly show that all this is naught but wind and
smoke. Those letters of the Emperor Martian, which he urges for these
pretended terms of honor and respect, are no more but the responsories to
Pope Leo's own letters, which he had sent by his Legates, as is expressly
affirmed in the letters themselves. Leo had a long time been tampering with the
Emperors for the calling of a Synod, and at last obtained one: not in Italy,
where he desired it should be, but in the East, whither he is by these
letters entreated to come: So that these are not the ordinary copy of the
Edict, for the Convocation of the Council.

CHAP. V. That diverse Councels have been called either without the Popes, or
against them.
1 WE said before that Councels have been called without the Popes consent,
yea even against them. Councels called against Popes
As for such as have been holden without the Popes, we have presidents in
store; the Councels of Aquileia, Africa, France and Spain. Those which are
reckoned in the Canon, prima adnotatio, and others of like nature; Vid Can.
prima adnotatio did. 16.
whereof though some were national, some General, (that is, consisting of
Bishops out of diverse Countries) yet notwithstanding they were holden without
the knowledge or consent of the Popes.

2 It may be said peradventure that the Popes slighted these petty Councels,
and that they only stand for their authority over such as are General. But
there is no such matter; for the very same prerogative which they pretend to
have over General and Ecumenical Councels, they stickle for it over others
also. Pope Symmachus tells us ^o very roundly. The Councels of Priest^, which by
the Ecclesiastical Canons ought to be holden every year through the
Provinces, C^^. Concii. did. 17.
have lost their force and power, inasmuch as the Pope is no longer present
with them. It is true indeed that Gregory the thirteenth, when he purged
Gratians Decrets, puts those words upon Damasus's adversaries, Can. nec lichit.
et Can. multis cadem did.

Lu^tprandus de ^. bus per Europam gestis lib: 6. c. 6. et seq.

M. Adamus in hist. Eccles c 55 Plat^n^ in. Ioanne 1^. ^n Benedicto 9. in
Sylves^ro 3. in Clement 2.

Otho F^i^ingensis lib 1. de gestis Fred rici. Et Radenicus in appendice. Benno
de vita et gestis Hildebrand.

Platina. in Gregorio 12. V. Acta Conc^l^ Pisani 2.

Et Arnoldum ^^rronium in I^^dov co 12. N^ucl^rum to. 2. g^n^rat. 47.


and (to help them for a shift) the ensuing words upon him, Silly fools that
you are, did you ever read of ought that was determined in them but by
appointment from the Sea Apostolic, and without having constant recourse to
that See to consult when any matter of importance was in hand?

3 Yet still this makes the validity of these Councels to depend upon the Popes
authority: And Pope Gelasius is in the same tune, saying, That it is not
lawful to assemble any particular Council; nor was it ever permitted so to
do: but when any question was to be resolved either touching some doubtful
passages in General Councels, or touching salvation, recourse was wont to be
had unto the Sea Apostolic. The several Acts of Councels both Provincial,
national, and General holden in diverse Countries, may easily convince these
domestique testimonies of falsity: in as much as it is plainly evident from them
that those Councels were holden without the presence, authority, or consent of
the Popes; and yet withal they made some Canons whereof the Popes afterward
served themselves; and were well content they should be enrolled in their books.

4 We have also diverse presidents of sundry Councels holden against the the
Popes: as that of Rome called by Otho the Emperor against Pope John the 12,
about the year 956: Another called about 1040 by the Emperor Henry the 3,
against the Popes, Bennet the 9, Sylvester the 3, and Gregory the 6. That at
Sutoy a town in Tuscany, called by Henry the 4 Emperor, against Bennet the 10,
ann. 1058: That at Brixine called by the same Emperor against Gregory the 7.
about the year 1083: As also the first and second at Pisa, the one against
Gregory the 12, and Bennet the 13, the other against Julius the second. There
is not one of all these which was either called or consented unto by them at
first; The Popes authorities answered.
and I am much deceived if ever they were confirmed by them after.

CHAP. VI. That notwithstanding all these authorities, the Popes do arrogate
unto themselves the power of calling Councels: and how long it is since they
usurped it.
1 IT is not without good reason that we have produced so many passages, to
prove by the testimony of all antiquity, that the right of calling Councels
belongs to the Emperors, and not to the Popes; and that their consent or
advise was never required thereunto; considering that, if we give ear to them,
there is no man how great soever he be in place, that may interpose himself
in this business but themselves. And if we must stand to their words, it is a
judged case. Observe, I pray you, how they speak of it; Pelagius 2. ep. 1. ad
Orientales.
The power of calling General Councels (says Pelagius the second) was by
special privilege devolved upon the Sea Apostolic by Saint Peter. And Leo
the first, that so belabored the Emperors Theodosius, Valentinian, and
Marcian, to obtain leave of them that a General Council might be called,
says in a certain epistle of his directed to a Spanish Bishop, Leo Papa in
ep. ad Turbium 91 c. 17.

Sixtus Papa 3. in epist ad Orientales.

V. epist. Marcel. ad Episc^ Anti^chen.

Et rescriptum Iulii contra Orientales in decret. Isidori p. 54. et. 163.


We have sent out our letters to our brother-Bishops, and summoned them to a
General Council. Sixtus the third says, Valentinian the Emperor has called
a Council by authority from us. So Pope Marcellus and Julius the first affirm,
That Councels cannot be holden without the authority of the Sea of Rome.

2 As for Pelagius we must tell him by his good leave, that it is not true
which he says; and desire him to answer all the forecited authorities. And
for Pope Leo, if the will may pass for the deed, it was he that called the
Council indeed: for I doubt not but he was as greedy of arrogating this to
himself, as the presidency, for which he was at daggers drawing with
Dioscorus, who, as he said, had cozened him of it underhand. But it may be he
goes not so far as some would bear us in hand: for he means only of a
General Council of all the Bishops of Spain, but not of all Christendom.
The entire passage, which is mangled and cited by Bellarmine, is (as we have
formerly alleged it) conceived in these terms, We have sent out our letters
to our brethren and fellow-Bishops of Tarraco, Carthagena, Portugal, and
Gallicia, and have summoned them to a General Council. And it seems he much
distrusted his own power; for he adds, But if any thing hinder the
celebration of a General Council, (which God forbid) yet at least let the
Clergy of Gallicia assemble themselves. Now he that should grant the Pope this
power of calling a Council of the Bishops of Spain, should give him only the
authority of a Patriarch in the West: but not in Africa, nor in the East. So
that there is nothing gotten by this place for the calling of General
Councels: and for others we shall speak of them anon.

3 Now for Sixtus we will demurre upon an answer for him, till such time as he
has proved unto us that the Emperor called that Council which he speaks of
by authority from him. And for the saying of Mar^^llus and Julius, it is
capable of a tolerable construction; All Pa^riar^hs should be present at
General Councels.
for they speak not of the calling, but of the holding of Councels. It Is true
indeed, that for the holding of them, they take too much upon them by the word
Authority: they should have used another term, for that is too imperious to
express what they intend. For all the authority they pretend to, comes but to
this; That a General Council cannot be holden, unless they be called to it.
Which we grant to be true. And this is the meaning of that old Ecclesiastical
Canon mentioned by some authors, Socrates. l. 2. c. 5.

Nicephorus l. 9 c. 5.


Which forbids the making of Decrees in the Church, or (as Bellarmine expounds
it) the celebration of Councels, without the opinion and advise of the Bishops
of Rome. The application which Pope Julius the first makes of it, clearly
proves as much; when he complains that he was not called to the Council of
Antioch, where Athanasius was condemned, charging them for that with the breach
of that Canon. Julius (says Socrates) in his letters to the Bishops of the
Council of Antioch, Socrat. l. 2 c. 13
tells them they had offended against the Canons of the Church, in that they
called not him to the Council: Forasmuch as the Ecclesiastical Canon forbids
the making of any Decrees in the Church without the opinion and advise of the
Bishop of Rome.

4 And Sozomen says; Sozom. l. 3. ^. 9.
Julius writ to the Bishops which were assembled at Antioch, accusing them for
seeking after novelties, contrary to the faith and belief of the Nicene
Council, and contrary to the laws of the Church^ for not calling him to the
Council: Forasmuch as, by virtue of a law made in behalf of the dignity of
Priests, all Decrees are invalid which are enacted without the opinion and
advise of the Pope of Rome. Hence Bellarmine infers, that Councels cannot be
held, unless they be called by the Pope; and yet Pope Julius does not
complain that he did not call the Council, but that it was kept and he never
called unto it. Whereof he had just occasion to complain, considering that a
Council cannot be termed General, nor any Decrees and Canons made to bind
the whole Church Catholic, unless all those which ought to be present,
especially the Patriarchs, be lawfully called thereunto.

5 Nor is this any special privilege to the Bishop of Rome, but a right
common to him with all other Patriarchs; who ought of necessity to be
summoned to all General Councels. And this is the reason why the second
Council of Constantinople is not accounted properly General, because all the
Patriarchs were not there. B^l^amo in comment. ad Synod. Constant. 1. ad finem.
However (says Balsamon) the Synod of Constantinople be no General Council,
because the other Patriarchs were not there; yet is it greater than all other
Synods, and the Archbishop of that See is styled, Universal Patriarch.

6 For this cause also, Nestorius, when he was summoned to appear at the
Council of Ephesus, Socrat l. 7. c. 33
answered, that he would, so as soon as John the Patriarch of Antioch was
come thither: for all the rest were there already; to wit, he of Rome, and he
of Alexandria in the person of Cyrill, as also he of Jerusalem: and for the
other of Constantinople he was the man whose case was then in question. And
this was the reason why the Patriarch of Antioch was so highly offended with
Cyrill, (who would not vouchsafe to stay for him) that being come after the
sentence of deposition against Nestorius, he bandyed with his own Bishops
against Cyrill, and excommunicated him.

7 The eigh^h General Council, after the arrival of the Patriarch of
Alexandria's deputy, who came somewhat tardy^ Actio 9 g^neralis^ 8 Synod. to.
^. Con^il. in fine ejusdem Synodi.

Zonara^ to 3.


Gave thanks to God at his coming, because he supplied what was wanting to a
General Council, and made it most complete. And Basil the Emperor calls
those five Patriarchs, The five Architects of the Ecclesiastical tabernacle.
Zonaras calls the same Patriarchs constantly, The Keys or Princes of the
Council: as when he speaks of the General Councels of Ephesus, H^w long
since the Popes first called Counc^ls.
the first of Constantinople and Chalcedon: we shall urge the words when we
come to speak of the presidency.

8 The author of the book entitled, The explanation of Councels^ does the
like. Nay they were not only called to General Councels, but the custom was,
for honors sake, Author explanationis Sanctor^m et venera^ Council c 18 Tom. 2.
Actor. Council. Ephesians.
to wait for them certain days, when they did not come at the day appointed.
So they stayed sixteen days after the time was expired, for the Patriarch of
Antioch at the Council of Ephesus. It were good reason to give the like
respect to him of Rome; and so they should do, yet not so as that they should
forthwith break up the Council, or totally defer it till his coming; or
pronounce all things null and invalid which were concluded upon without him. It
should suffice that he was duly summoned as the rest of the Patriarchs.

9 Hereupon Talasius Bishop of Cesarea in Cappadocia, upon a report which was
current in the Council of Ephesus, that Pope Leo's Legates had been summoned,
and yet disdained to appear, said, Action 1 Concilii Chalced.
Seeing so much has been done as was decent and convenient for the Holy
Council to do, I hold it no way necessary to delay the time any longer. It
will be answered that this Synod is rejected by the Pope. It is true; yet for
all that the beginning of it was lawful, and the calling of it duly
performed; so that it is neither impertinencie nor contradiction to affirm,
That the saying of that Bishop was true, and yet the Synod was rejected.

10 The eight General Council having expected the Popes Legates for certain
days, and seeing they came not, took this ensuing resolution, V. Acta 8
Synodi in definitio^e Concilii ante adventum v^carii sen. Romans To 4. Council.
Considering the deputies for the Sea of old Rome have bee^e a long time
expected, and that it is against all reason to wait for them any longer, we
hold it an unbeseeming thing to slight and endanger the tottering Church of our
Savior Jesus Christ by such delays.

11 We are only put to the pinch to find out when this Ecclesiastical Canon
whereof we speak, was made, and who are the author of it. Bellarmine holds it
is one of the Canons of the Apostles, Bellar. l. 1. de Council. ^ 12^ Marcellus
in epist. decretali. 1. ad episc. ^ntio^h. Prove. to 1 Conc.

Can Sexaginta. Can. Clement. Can. Placuit. did. 16.

Bellar. l 1. de Council. c. 12. Synod^s Alexand^ina in epist. ad Feli^em. in
de^reto Isiodori p. 167. V. Can 51. Concilii Carthag. et Balsamon. in laud.


and urges Pope Marcellus's authority to prove it. But Marcellus only fathers
it upon the Apostles, or their successors, so that for all him the author might
as well be a Pope as an Apostle. Besides, if so, then we should find it
amongst the Canons of the Apostles, whose greatest number is determined by the
Synod at Constantinople^ in Trullo, but to be fourscore and five; howbeit
others reckon fewer, some fifty, some sixty, some seventy. Bellarmine, upon the
testimony of Pope Julius the first, and the Council of Alexandria, says, this
Canon was renewed by the Nicene Council. But we find no such matter in the
Acts and Decrees of the Council of Nice. Nor is it likely it should herein
give any advantage to the Pope, seeing that in the sixth and seventh Canons, by
limiting his power and jurisdiction, it makes him equal to other Patriarchs.
A^ for the Council; Councels sometimes equivocate in their quotations. It is
said in the Synod of Carthage, that Priests are enjoined by the Nicene Council
to make their oblations fasting; and yet Balsamon assures us that there is no
such thing determined in the Council; nor indeed can we find ought of it in
the Acts which are extant among us at this day. So likewise the Pope did
equivocate, who would have made the Council of Carthage believe that there was
a reservation in the Council of Nice, for appeals to him.

12 It may be answered that we have not at this day all the Canons and
Decrees of the Nicene Council extant: V. Interpretem. Concilii Nicen^ in suis
anno t^^.
But I reply, That it is not pretended that there were any more than twenty
Decrees, touching Ecclesiastical Discipline: Now all those we have; and the
power of calling Councels, which is the point in question, is a matter of
discipline. As for those which concern points of faith, it skils not for the
present whether there be more or fewer of them. Yet I suspect somewhat which is
not improbable; namely, The Canon in favor of the Popes when made.
that the confirmation of that Ecclesiastical Canon, which he af^irmeth to
have been made by the Council of Nice, must be referred to that which is
ordained in the sixth Canon: Where it is said, That it is a plain case, that
if any be ordained Bishop without the opinion and advise of the Metropolitan,
he ought not to be acknowledged for such. For this ought to be extended to
all things which are treated of by an assembly of Bishops: So Balsamon expounds
it, who after he had said, Forasmuch as the Bishop of Rome is Patriarch of the
Western Provinces, he adds, The Canons mean that Patriarchs should be
above Metropolitans, and Metropolitans above Bishops; to the intent that no
matter of moment and importance be done by the Bishops without them. Now the
Pope gains nothing by all this, for any Patriarch may serve himself of this
Canon, and apply it to his own cause. So likewise it is probable that the old
Canon which was made hereabout, spoke not of the Bishop of Rome in particular,
but had reference to all the other Patriarchs and Metropolitans; and that Pope
Julius, being the first that complained of the breach of it, alleged that
Canon as if it had been particularly in favor of himself, howbeit it was
conceived in general terms. And indeed he is the speaker both in Socrates
and Sozomen; Socrat. l. 2. c 13. et Sozomen. l. 3 c. 9.
and those who afterward mentioned the complaint or accusation which he
commenced against the Bishops in the Council of Antioch, in imitation of his
words, have also restrained the Canon to particular terms, howbeit at the
first it ran in general.

13 If this exposition will not give all the world content, we may say that
that Canon being made, as it is probable, by the Bishops of the East, they
ordained that they should not set out any general Decrees, nor hold any
Synodicall assemblies, without calling in the Bishop of Rome unto them, by that
means to preserve the union of the Churches: Decreeing thus much in favor of
him, rather than any other in consideration of his remoteness: as also, for
the same reason, they allowed him to nominate some Greek Bishops for his
Legates: Balsamo in 6 Synodum Constant^ in Trullo. p. 194.
A way was invented (says Balsamon) because of the length of the way, that the
Pope should have Legates out of our quarters, yet were they not therefore under
him. For all this we will never deny but by the Sea of Rome was always held
in honorable esteem, both for the glory of the City, which was the head of
the Empire, and the sanctity of the Bishops in those days; nor that much
reverence and respect was ever given unto it; though not such and so much as
they now take upon them. And hence it is that the Bishops in the Council of
Rome, writing to the Bishops of Illyrium, amongst other reasons which they urge
for the rejection of the Council of Ariminum, bring this for one, because
certain Bishops, whom they there mention, never consented unto it, and amongst
others the Bishop of Rome; Theodoret. l. 2. c. 22.
Of whose opinion and advise special regard ought to be had above all others.

14 It may furthermore be said, and that not unlikely, that this Canon was
first made at that Council, Martinus Polonus in Victore su^ ann 203.

Platina in Victore Eusebi^^ hist. l. 5. c. 22.


which some say was holden at Alexandria in Palestine, about the grand
controversy concerning the keeping of Easter day; if so be it be true, which
is reported, that Pope Victor was present there in person^ together with
Narcissus Patriarch of Jerusalem, Theophilus Bishop of Cesarea, and Ireneus
Bishop of Lions: considering that (as Eusebius relates) about the same time
there were sundry Canons and Decrees made in sundry Councels concerning that
controversy: which might very well give occasion to all those Patriarchs and
Bishops there met together, to ordain, for the better avoiding of such
difference for the future, and preserving the union of the Church, that from
thenceforth no universal Decrees should be made, unless all the Patriarchs
or Metropolitans were first called.

15 Yet for all this I do much suspect that Council of Alexandria, especially
in that form wherein it is presented to us; Spu^^ous Canons i^posed by the
Pop^s.
it being very improbable that both Victor and Ireneus should be there in
person^ and without question it is a mistake of our later Historians, who
misconceived the words of Eusebius, Eu^ebius hist. Eccles. l 5. c. 22.
telling us that about the same time there were diverse Councels holden upon
occasion of that diverse celebration of Easter, (which some kept upon the
fourteenth day of the moon, the same day upon which the Passover was kept,
others upon the sunday after) as in Palestine by Theophilus and Narcissus, at
Rome by Victor, in France by Ireneus, and by others in other places. And indeed
that quarrel was not then accorded, but continued till the Council of Nice;
so that we are yet to seek for the authors of that Canon, nor is there any
body that can tell us any news of them. But be he who he will, it may suffice
that we have set down the true meaning of it.

16 Let not then Bellarmine and Baronius, and all those that speak of it, give
any more right to the Pope by virtue of that Canon, than he himself pretended
to have. For Julius never complained that the Council was called by another,
and not by himself: nor yet that the design of holding the Council was
concluded upon without acquainting him with it, but only because he was not
called unto it. V^ Epist. decretales M^rcelli Papae 1^ ad Episc Antioch. and ad
Maxentium tyrannum in decreto Isiodori page 54,55.
I know very well that the Popes afterward have been taught to speak another
language. Did I say afterward? nay even before too, even those that lived
before the Nicene Councell^ who tell us wonders of the authority of their See;
who (as they say) command the Pagan Emperors, and make laws and rules against
them; who arrogate unto themselves the appeals from other Bishops, and the
jurisdiction of making all causes of their cognizance; who foist in other
Canons and D^crees of the Nicene Council upon us, than those which were
approved of, and for their own advantage: who in case of appeal from other
Bishops, go beyond the bastard Canon of Nice, which the Popes, to their own
shame and confusion, would have had legitimated by the Councels of Afric: who
would persuade us also that it belongs to them to call Councels, to preside in
them, to ratify and confirm them, although in those days there was no such
matter. Those good Bishops (I say) who never thought of ought but martyrdom
and tortures, have been made to speak after their death, what their life
disavowed and gave the lie unto.

17 But seeing that the rude and ignorant style of those Decrees betrayeth the
ass unto us by the ears; that this new plant could never yet take root in the
understanding of the learned; that the Popes own Canons give us just cause of
suspicion against them, inasmuch as they inform us that the most ancient
Decrees in this kind are those of Sylvester and Siricius, Can de lib^ll^s
did. 21.

Can. Si Romanorum did. 19.

Gra^ian^ in versic. quomodo: and Can. vigi^t did. 17.


so that our predecessors long ago rejected all those other which were said to
be more ancient, upon this ground, because they were no where to be ^ound in
that Codex Canonum which they used in their days; and besides that our Gratian
assures us, that, excepting the twenty Decrees which we have of the Council
of Nice, all the rest (if yet there be any other) are out of use and practice,
and not admitted in the Church of Rome; we will therefore forbear that long
discourse which we had prepared upon this subject, and refuming our former
thread will only add what was afterward observed and practiced, which plainly
proves our exposition to be true.

Hermoge^ianu^ in le. Si de interpetatione D. de leg^b.
18 Our Lawyers tell us that when there is any controversy about the sense and
meaning of a law, special regard ought to be had of that sense which practice
has put upon it. Let us observe this rule in the exposition of our Canon. The
question is, Whether the Pope ought to call Councels, or no: we find by
practice that the Popes did not call them, but the Emperors; and that they did
so constantly, the Popes seeing and knowing as much; that they themselves have
been petitioners to the Emperors to get them called; that they have appeared
at the Councels upon command from them; The Ppopes usurpation how ancient.
therefore we may well conclude, they have no right at all, by this Canon, to
call Councels.

19 We will add furthermore, that the Popes never complained of the Emperors
for taking upon them that power of Convocation; which doubtless they would
have done, if it had belonged to them of right; for they have always observed
that rule to a hair. De vigilantibus non dor^ientibus. So as, to say the
truth, no man can accuse them of negligence in preserving St. Peter's patrimony,
which they have husbanded so well, that their successors for the future need
make no scruple of receiving it without an inventary.

20 We say moreover, that it is but a little while ago since they usurped this
authority: for we do not find that ever they used it till the year 1123^
what time the first Council of Lateran was holden, Calixt the second being
Pope, and Henry the fifth Emperor. Platina in Calisto 2.
Platina says that Pope held a Council of nine hundred Bishops to consult
about the sending of succors into the holy Land. Howsoever we must observe
that this usurpation, which they continued from thence forwards, was not
without all interruption; for the Emperors always kept a hanke of their right,
though it was but extrema quasi lacinia. They called diverse Councels after that
time, as that of Pavy, which was assembled by the Emperor Frederick the
first, to determine the schism between Victor and Alexander the third, about
the year 1163 or 64: but it is not amiss to hear what language he uses in
his letters of Convocation.

21 And for the prescribing of a remedy pleasing to God, Radericus de rebus
gestis Friderici l. 2. c. 55.
and proper for this disease, we have resolved, upon the advice of certain
godly and religious men, to hold a general Councell^ which we appoint to be at
Pavie. The author that relates these letters, speaks thus of them. Idem. lib.
2. c. 54
The Emperor supposing that the authority of calling a Council appertained
unto him, after the example of Justinian, Theodosius, and Charles; and that the
controversy could not be determined by any lawful judgment, unless both
parties were summ^ned thereunto, sent Bishops both to the one and the other to
summon them. Idem lib. 2. c. 64.
The same Emperor uses the same terms in his speech made at the opening of
the Council. He was also the man that called the Council of Dijon about 1165.
Platin. in Alex. 3.
It is true that Pope Alexander the third would not be seen there, Because
(says Platina) he did not call it himself. But he raised that quarrel too
soon, considering that his right was not yet well caulked.

22 So likewise the Councels of Pisa and Constance were called by the
Emperors. Now if the possession was afterward lost by the negligence of the
Emperors, yet this is sufficient to bring a writ of Right, and make an entry:
for which trial the Emperors are better furnished of evidence than the Popes;
and besides they who should breathe naught but justice and honesty, will
voluntarily surrender unto Ces^r what of right belongs unto him.

23 What we here speak is concerning General Councels, for as for
Provincial, we deny not but the Popes have h^d authority to call them within
the bounds of their own territories, as have also other Patriarchs and
Metropolitans. See this question largely and le^rnedly canvassed by Salmasius
and Sirmondus, (and others) in their diverse late tracts de Suburbicariis
regionibus.
And yet those bounds are but very narrow: for we do not find that they were
extended over all the West: and what Balsamo in can 6. conc. Nic.
Balsamon says, that the Bishop of Rome is the president of the Western
provinces, must be restrained unto Italy. And for matter of fact, the Pope was
neither seen nor heard, in person nor by proxy, at the Council of Synod.
Agrip. to. 4. Council. p. 17.
Cullen, which consisted of the French and German Bishops, and was assembled by
the authority of the Emperor Charles the third, Anno Dom. 887.

24 Nor was he at that of V. Histor B. Servat^^ and Synod. Aquilei^^ (...). 1.
Council. p. 7^^.
Aquileia, called by the Emperors Valentinian and Theodosius, consisting of
the Bishops of France, Afric, and other Provinces, at which Saint Ambrose
Bishop of Milan was present.

25 The like may be said of such as have been holden in France, Spain, and
other Kingdoms or Provinces of the West; Wh^^her a G^ne^all Council be n^w
possible.
the calling whereof b^longed either to the Primates and Metropolitanes, or to
the Kings and Princes.

26 So Maximus Patriarch of Jerusalem assembled the Bishops of Syria and
Palestine to receive Athanasius into the communion of the Church, and restore
him to his former dignity. Theodoret l. 4. c. 2. and 3.

Sozomen l. 5 c. 16. and l 6. c. 7.

B^sil. epist. ^0.

Ambros epist. 44.


So Athanasius himself after he was called home out of exile by Iovinian the
Emperor, assembled a Council of Bishops. But it would be tedious to hear all
the examples which are extant about this subject. As for the calling by Kings
and Princes we shall speak of that anon.

27 For the present we must answer an absurdity which Bellarmine presses,
that in these days it would be impossible for any one to call a General
Council but the Pope: for as for the Emperor, (to whom we said it of right
belongs) he cannot do it, (says he) because he has no authority over
Kings and Princes; but, on the other side, the Pope has over all Christendom.
Bellarmine is deceived; for the Pope in that respect has scarce any more
authority at this day than the Emperor. Let him cast up his count of those
Kingdoms and Provinces which have withdrawn their obedience from him, and he
will find that he has misreckoned himself. All that Bellarmine can infer is
this, that we must talk no more of General Councels in these days, seeing
there is no man to call them with convenience and authority. We answer, that
he that should now undertake of his own absolute power to call any, should
much deceive himself, even the Pope not excepted. But that every one out of
courtesy would be willing to hearken unto it. There is not a Prince in
Christendom but yields the first degree of honor to the Emperor, and would
take in good part any gentle and kind summons which should come from him, for
the holding of a Council. Radenicus l. 2. cap. 55.70.
The Emperor Fred^ricke the first found a way to assemble that of Pavy,
whereunto he summoned the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, and other
Ecclesiastical persons, as well in all his Empire, as in other kingdoms; to
wit of England, France, Hungary, Denmark. And it is probable, that when he
made this convocation, he writ of it in particular to those Christian Princes
which were no subjects to the Empire: Idem ibid.
for the Acts of the Council say in express terms. That the Kings of
England, Hungary, Bohemia, and Denmark consented thereunto. So likewise the
Emperor Sigismund called that of Constance: the Emperor Maximilian that of
Pisa.

27 Although the Popes Primacy be not acknowledged by the Gre^k church, yet he
assembled the Council of Ferrara, where were present the Emperor of Greece,
the Patriarch of Constantinople, and a great number of Greek Bishops. Let us
never then make it a matter impossible; it is fesable enough, if we give our
minds to it. When the Pope called the Council of Trent^ he communicated it
first and foremost with Christian Princes, and required their advice about it.
Having asked the advice (says Paul the third in his Bull of Convocation) and
sounded the minds of Christian Princes, whose consent in the first place we
thought useful and convenient, and finding them not averse from this our
design, we have thereupou denounced the Council. So King Charles the ninth
became a suitor to the Pope and Princes of Christendom for the renewall of
that Council: for mark how he speaks of it in his letters directed to the
Prelates of France to cause them go thither. Although the present troubles of
the Church have moved as to desire and procure by all means possible, the
holding of a General and Oecumenicall Council, and that our holy father the
Pope, the Emperor, and other Christian Kings and Princes, by their several
answers made upon our instant request and suit unto them thereabout, do make a
fair show of being willing to hearken thereunto, etc.

Guiliel Neu^ ^rigens. rerum Anglicarum ^. 4.^.1.
28 He did no more in this but imitate the pattern of other Kings his
predecessors. Charles the sixth, to make up the schism betwixt Pope Boniface
and Pope Bennet, sent his Ambassadors to the Emperor, the Kings of England,
Bohemia and Hungary, The Council of Trent gives the right of Kings to the Pope.
to entreat them to have a regard to what concerned the public good and
quiet. The same King went so far that he persuaded Wenceslaus the Emperor to
come to Rhemes, where there was a General Council holden upon that occasion,
where the Ambassadors of the King of England, and diverse other nations, were
present.

CHAP. VII. That the authority of calling Councels belongs also to Kings and
Princes.
1 THese examples invite us to look a little further into France, and speak
more fully concerning this point of calling Councels. And the rather because
both our Kings and all other Princes of Christendom, are deprived of this
royal prerogative by the Council of Trent; and that in such sort that the Pope
thereby enhanseth his own greatness, to whom all such Councels are bound to
swear obedience, and not to depend upon any but upon him. The Decree runs
thus; Conc Trid. Sess. 24 c^ 2. [ et in aliis Sess. 8 Can. 9.]
Provincial Councels if they have been any where disused, let them, for
reformation of manners, correction of abuses, composing of Controversies, and
such other ends as are allowed by holy Canons, be brought up again. Wherefore
let the Metropolitans themselves, or, if there be any lawful impediment why
they cannot, the senior Bishop^ within a year at the furthest, after the end
of this present Council, and after that once every three years at least, after
the octaves of the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, or at some other more
convenient time, according to the custom of the Country, not fail to call a
Synod in their several Provinces.

2 And in anoth^r Session there is a strict injunction laid upon them, Sess.
25. c. 2. [ et in aliis Sess. 9. Can. 2.]
That at the first Provincial Synod which shall be holden after the end of
this present Council, they publicly receive all and singular such things as
have been determined and ordained by this holy Synod, and withal promise and
profess true obedience to the Bishop of Rome. It remains that we prove this
right of calling Councels to belong to our Kings within their own Kingdom. In
the collection of the liberties of the Gallicane Church, there is this Article;
The most Christian Kings have always, as occasion and the necessities of their
Country required, assembled, or caused to assemble, Synods or Councels
Provincial and National: Who among other things concerning the preservation
of their State, have also treated of such matters as concerned the order and
Ecclesiastical discipline of their Country: touching which they have caused
rules, Chapters, laws, ordinances, and Pragmaticall Sanctions to be made and
set out under their name, and by their authority. We read another Article of
this strain in the third Chapter of the Remonstrance made by the Parliament of
Paris to Jews the eleventh.

3 Nor is there ought in all this but is well backed by such examples and
authorities as shall be pro^uced. We begin then with Clovis our first
Christian King, by whose command the first Council at Orleans was assembled
about the year 506. So say the Bishops that met there in the letters which they
sent unto him. Council. Aurel. c. 2. to. 2. Con^.
To their Lord, the most illustrious King Clovis, the son of the Catholic
Church. All the Clergy whom you commanded to come unto the Council. Cou^^^ls
called by the F^ench Kings.
So likewise the second Council of Orleans was holden in the year 533. by
command from King Childebert; which is mentioned in the subscription of the
Bishop of Bruges: and it is said in the Preface, Council. Aurelian^ ^ in princ^
and in ^ine. to. 2. Con p. 551 552.

Conc. Aurelian. 5 to. 2. Conc. p. 574.

Council. Paris. 2 in princ. to. 2. Council p. 8^3.


We are here assembled in the city of Orleans, by the command of our most
illustrious Kings. The fifth of Orleans was called by King Cherebert, the year
549. Wherefore the most mild and invincible Prince Cherebert, having assembled
the Clergy in the city of Orleans, etc. The second of Paris was called by King
Childebert, ann. 558. Being met in the city of Paris, (they are the words of
the fathers of it) by the command of our most illustrious King Childebert. The
first of Mascon by King Guntrand, in the year 576. We being assembled in the
town of Mascon, by the command of our most illustrious King Guntrand.

Conc. Matisc. in princ. ^o. 2. Con. p. 840.

Conc. Valentin. Gall. 2 in princ. to. 2. Conc. p. 853.

Edictum Regis Guntrandi ad ^inem 2. Conc. Matisc. to. 2. Conc. p 854

Cabilonense Conc. in princ. to 3. Conc. p. 208.


4 The second of Valencia was called by him also in the year 588, and it has
the same Preface. He called also the 2 of Mascon the same year 588; and
afterward by his Edict confirmed the Decrees thereof, as made by his
commandment. Wherefore (says he) we will and command, that whatsoever is
contained in this our Edict, be for ever observed and kept, forasmuch as we
have taken pains to cause it to be so determined at the holy Synod of Mascon.
That of Cavallon in Provence, or (as others fancy) of Ch^alons upon the Saon,
was holden in the y^er 658, By the call and appointment of the Illustrious King
Clovis. The Synod which was held in France, ann. 742, was called by C^^loman,
as he himself witnesses in the Preface thereunto; I Carloman, Duke and
Prince of the French, with the advice of the servants of God, and the chief
Lords of the Land, have assembled in a Council all the Bishops of my Kingdom,
together with the Priests, in the 742 year of Christ's incarnation.

Synod. Francica in Princ. tom. 3. Conc. p. 437.

Synod. Suessionens. in princ. to. 3. Conc. p. ^38.


5 In the time of King Childeric, Pepin, who then ruled all the roast, called a
Council at Soissons, in the year 744^ where he assisted in person, together
with the greatest Peers of the Land. In the second year of Childeric the
French King, I Pepin Duke and Prince of France, with the consent of the Bishops
and Clergy, after I had consulted thereabout with the chi^fe Lords of France,
determined to hold a Synod or Council at Soissons; which we have also done.
The Decrees of that Council are all conceived in his name; for the constant
form of them is, We ordain with the consent and advice of the Bishops, and
chief Lords of the Land. Now these Decrees are concerning the confirmation of
the Nicene Creed, the keeping of yearly Synods, the ordination of Bishops^ the
obedience due unto them, the life and manners of the Clergy, and such like
matters.

6 The same Pepin being afterward King of France, in the year 755, caused
almost all the Gallican Bishops to meet at the Council of Vernes the Palace^
so says the Preface to it. Conc apud Palatium Vernis in princ. to. 3. Con. p.
439.

Libel. Sacro^yl. in Actis Conc. Franco^s^h to. 3. Conc. p. 232.


Charles the Great called the Council of Frankford, where the heresy of Felix
was condemned, and the seventh General Council, as it is confessed in the
Acts thereof. A great number of Bishops out of all the Provinces under the
dominion of the most mild and Illustrious King Charles, assembled themselves
with especial care, by virtue of his ordinance and command. Charles the Great
says as much himself in an Epistle which he writ to Elipend Archbishop of
Toledo, which is inserted amongst those Acts. To accomplish that joy, being
incited thereunto by a fraternal Charity, we have commanded that a Synodicall
Council be assembled, out of all the Churches of our Dominions. Which is
further confirmed by the authority of the old Chronicle; The King in the
beginning of harvest (what time ^ee called also a general meeting of the
States) caused a Council of Bishops, out of all the Provinces of his
Do^inions, to meet in the same citie^ to condemn the heresy of the Felicians;
Annals rerum gest^a ^^rolo Magno. sub ann. ^94.
where the Legates of the Pope of Rome were present also.

7 The Bishop of Aquileia in a speech which he made at the Council of Friuli,
holden likewise under Charles the Great, and Pepin his son, gives us to
understand that he had been in diverse Councels called by the command of Kings
and Princes. Councels called by the French Kings.
For it having oftentimes befalne the humility of my meannesse, to be present
at the General assembly of a Council, very famous for reverend fathers, being
thereunto summoned by the sacred commands of our Princes. Council Foro. juliense
versus Princ. to 3.1 Conc p. 665. Synod. Arelat. 4. sub Princ. to 3. Conc. p.
679.

Turonens. Synod. 3. in Princ. to 3. Conc. p. 682. Council Moguntin. 1. to. 2.
Con. p. 630.

Synod. Rhemens. in Princ. to. 2. Conc. p. ^00.

Annals incerti authoria inter S^riptores ^^^^aneos Pith^^

Matthew. West^^^^^^. ^. 1 sub ann. 813.


The fourth Council of Arles was holden also in the time of Charles the Great,
and called by him in the year 813; the Bishops thereof make this prayer for
him, That he (God) would confirm in his faith the Emperor Charles our
Sovereign, by whose commandment we are here assembled. So likewise the third
of Tours, the same year 813; The time and place being appointed when and where
the assembly should be, we are come to the place appointed, according to the
injunction which was laid upon us by so great a Prince. There was another
holden the same year 813. under the same Emperor at Mentz, at the beginning
whereof they speak thus unto him; We are come to the city of Mentz, according
to your command. So likewise at Rhemes the same year 813^ at the beginning
whereof it is said, This is the order of those Chapters which were made in the
year 813^ at the Council of the Metropolitan See of Rhemes, called by the most
devout Emperor Charles, after the custom and fashion of the ancient
Emperors. There was also another holden under him, and by his command at
Chalons, mentioned by diverse ancient Historians, who speak also of those
others which were holden under him, whereof we have spoken already. For say
they, He commanded the Bishops also to keep diverse Councels for the reforming
of the state of the Church: one whereof was holden at Mentz, another at Rhemes,
a third at Tours, a fourth at Chalons, and a fifth at Arles. We have the Acts
of that of Chalons extant, wherein, although Charles the Great be mentioned,
yet it is not said that the Council was holden by his command: And we may
observe the case to be just the same in diverse other Councels holden in
France. The same King and Emperor held many other Councels, the Acts whereof
we have not now extant; yet thus much is testified by Regino, V. Regino in
Chronicis, sub annis 770.771. 772 775. 776.779.787. 788.704.

Council. ^qui. in Princ. to. 2. Conc. p. 703. Matthew Westminster. l 1 sub ann. 870.


that he called them; who has reckoned us up nine or ten after the year 770,
till 994. King Jews the 6 called the Council of Aix in Germany, in the year
816. Seeing that (say the Acts) the most Christian and most Illustrious
Emperor, Jews by the grace of God, Victorious, Augustus, had called a holy
and General Council at Aix, in the year of Christ's incarnation 816.

8 There is an old Chronicler that says it was in 819; and another puts it in
820. There was a Council holden at Paris too, by the command of him and his
son Lotharius, in the year of grace 829; and three others at the same time
in other places; as is collected from those words in the preface: Conc. Paris.
in princ. to. 3. Conc. p. 764. Epist Episc. ad Imperat. in Actis Concilli
Paris. to. 3.

Conc p^ 769. Council. Aqui. gran in princ. to 3. Conc. p. 820.


Hereupon they ordained that Synods should be assembled at the same time in
four several convenient places of their Empire. Besides, this is the very
title of the preface, Here begins the preface of the Synod which was holden
at Paris by the command of the most Illustrious Emperors Jews and Lotharius
his son. And again in letters sent by the Synod to those Emperors, We the
most loyal and most dev^u^ sollicitours of your salvation, according to the
meannesse of our understanding, in obedience to your desire and command, have
observed and set down in these precedent papers such things as concern
Christian religion; which we present unto your clemency to be perused and
approved of by you.

9 There was another Council holden at Aix by his command in the year 338.
Council M^gunt. in princ. to. 3. Council p^ 832.

Synod Aquensis to. 3 Conc. p. 840.


Whereas we Bishops were assembled together by a Synodicall convocation, the
most Illustrious and most orthodox Emperor Jews, the most invincible
Augustus, having summoned us thereunto. And yet another at Mentz, anno 834. We^
are come to Mentz (say the Bishops of it) according to your commendment. And
another at the same place, anno 837. whither the Bishops say they were
assembled By a seasonable and most wholesome order and command from the
Emperor Jews. (...) ^^lled by ^h^ kings of France
And this is a Synod of which an ancient French Historian speaks, saying,
Rhabanus was created Bishop of Mentz in 847, who by command from King Jews
held a Synod at Mentz the same year. Annals incerti authoris apud scriptores
co^tancos Pithoei.
The title of this Synod says that this same Rhabanus was president of it, and
not unlikely; but we must understand that this was by authority from King
Jews, who, as we have said already, commended him to hold that Synod. There
was yet another Council holden at Mentz under him, and by his command, in 852;
where the same Rhabanus was president, the same Emperor being willing to have
it so. There was likewise (says an old French Historian) by the will and
command of the same most mild Prince, a Synod holden at Mentz a
Metropoliticall City of Germany, where Rhabanus, the reverend Archbishop of
the place, was president.

Council Valent. in princ to. 3. conc. p. ^89.
10 There was afterward a Council holden at Valentia under King Lotharius, in
the year 855, the Acts whereof speak in this manner: The most reverend
Bishops of three provinces being, by the command of King Lotharius, assembled
together in one body at the City of Valentia, upon occasion of the Bishop
thereof, who had been cited and impeached of diver^ crimes. Histoire de Reins
^. 2. c. 5.
The History of Rhemes mentions a Council at Paris called by the same King:
That the Canons concluded and agreed upon at the General Council assembled in
S. Peter's Church in Paris, by the diligence of King Lotharius, be inviolably
observed. It mentions also another called by Charles the Bald: Histoire de
Reins l 1. c. 1.
In the year 845 Charles called the Bishops of his Realm to a Synod at
Beavis, summoned forth of the Province of Rhemes. Conc. Ticin in princ to 3.
Conc. p. 894.
King Jews the second (as we have elsewhere observed) prescribed to the
Council of Pavy, holden 855, what points they should consult upon: whence it
follows that that Council was called by his command as well as the rest. The
Council of Worms was called by the same King Jews the second, anno 868: Conc
Wormat. in princip. to. 3. conc. p. 977.
We being assembled in the City of Worms, in the year of grace 868, by the
command of our most excellent and Illustrious Sovereign King Jews, to treat
of certain points concerning the good of the Church.

Annals incerti authoris inter scriptores cooe^aneos pithoei Iean le Maire en
la 2 part. de la difference de schisms.

Council. Tribur. in princip. to 3. conc. p. 26.


11 An old French author tells us that the same King caused another to be
assembled at Cullen, anno 870. There was a Synod holden at Cullen (says he) by
the command of King Jews. John le Maire tells us that Jews the Smatterer
called another at Vienna in the time of Pope Formosus, anno 892.

12 King Arnold held another at Tribur, anno 895, which consisted of a great
many both Ecclesiastical and lay men. In the year of our Lord 895, the eighth
of his reign, the thirteenth Indiction, in the month of May, the King came by
the instinct of the holy Ghost, and the advice of his Princes to the royal
City of Triburia, seated within the French dominions, accompanied with the
precited Bishops, Abbats, and all the Princes of his kingdom, and a great
number both of Ecclesiastical and Secular persons repairing thither, etc. Now
if the King held the Council, I suppose none will deny but he called it.

Iean le Marie au second trait^ des schisms and des Conciles.
13 Hugh Capet who lately reigned in France (says John le Maire) called a
Council at Rhemes in Champaigne, consisting of the Prelates of the Gallican
Church; where he caused Arnalt Archbishop of Rhemes to be deposed.

Robertus de Monte in appendice ad Si^ gibert. sub anno 1140.
14 In the year 1140, by authority from King Jews the younger, there was a
Synod held at Sens, of the Bishops, Abbats, and other religious, against Peter
Abelard, who scandalized the Church by a profane novelty both of words and
sense.

Rigordus de gestis Philippi Augusti. Idem ibid.
15 Philip Augustus (says an ancient Frenchman) called a General Council at
Paris, anno 1179, of all the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, as also all the
Princes and Lords of the Realm of France. He called another likewise in the
same City, anno 1184, to entertain the Patriarch of Jerusalem, and consult
about sending aid against the Saracens. He commanded (says the same Author)
that a General Council should be called of all the Archbishops, Bishops, and
Princes of his Realm. Coun^^l^ called by the kings of England.

Ivo Carnotensis epist. 28.

Iean le Maire au mesme trait^


The Bishop of Chartres tells us there was another called at Troyes by his
commandment.

16 Pope Eugenius the third of that name (says Le Maire) being come into
France, as well to avoid the tumultuous fury of the Romans as to animate
Christian Princes to the beyond sea voyage, King Jews the younger, son of
Jews the Fat, caused a Council to be assembled in the town of Vezelay in
Burgundy, of all the Prelates and Princes of France, to whom he purposed to
declare, by the mouth of Saint Bernard Abbat of Clerevale, all the misfortunes
that had befalne in the holy Land. Idem ibid.
There was another called at Paris by the command of Charles the sixth, where
he was in person attended by the Nobility of his Princes and Barons.

17 So likewise Jews the eleventh called one at Orleans. Jews the 12. one at
Tours, Idem ibid.
another at Lions. King Charles the ninth summoned the Bishops and other
Prelates of the Churches within his Realm, by his letters patents of the tenth
of September 1560. Lettres du Roy Charles impr^mees a Paris par Michel Vas.
cosan^ an 1560.
By whose advice we have concluded and agreed that a general Assembly of the
Prelates and other members of the Churches within our dominions, be held the
20. of January next ensuing, to confer, consult, and advise what they shall
think fit to be proposed at the said General Council, if so be it be
holden shortly. And in the mean time resolve amongst themselves
notwithstanding of all things which may, upon our part, any way concern the
reformation of the said Churches. In a word, it is a thing without all
peradventure: so that we may now conclude, that the calling of N^tionall
Councels belongs unto the King of France within his own kingdom. And as often
as we find that any Council was holden in France, if there be no particular
mention of the calling of it, we must always presume it was by the authority
of our Kings.

18 Sometimes indeed it was not by their command, but by their bare consent and
approbation: as that of Arvergne, Arvernense conc in princip, tom. 2. conc.
Council Turon. 2. ibid.

Council. Meldense tom. 3. Conc. Synodas apud divum Medatdum^ in princ. tom. ^.
Conc. Synodus Colon. in princip. tom. 3^ Conc. in post. edit.

Iean le Maire en la 2. part. de la differ. des s^hismes.

Idem en la 2. part. d^ schism. Idem au second trait^ des schisms.

Rigord de gestis ^hilipp^ Augusti. Matthaeus Westminst. t. 1. sub anno 905.
Florentius W^gorniensis in Chronicis sub anno 1070.


which was held by the consent of King Theodebert. The second of Tours, by
consent of King Charibert. That of Meaux by consent of Jews the younger, anno
846. That of St. Medard of Soissons by consent of Charles, son to Jews the
Emperor, in the year 853. One at Cullen under Charles the Gross, anno 887.
and another in France by the approbation of Jews the father of St. Jews in
the year 1222. And this must be understood of all those Councels which we
read were called in France by the Popes, their Legates, or other Prelates: for
this was always done either by the express consent of our Kings, or else by
their toleration; as has been particularly expressed of two, to wit that of
Cleremont, and another of Rhemes. Which (as John le Maire says) were holden by
the approbation and consent of King Jews the Gross, and whereat Pope Innocent
the second was present. Unless perhaps it be some few which were holden
against them: as that of Compeigne called by the Prelates of France against
Jews the Gentle: that of Rhemes by Benedict the seventh against Hugh Capet:
that of Dijon by one of the Popes Legates against Philip Augustus: that of
Cleremont in Arvergne by Urban the second against Philip, and such like. But
for such as these we may call them spurious and illegitimate Councels,
unlawful Conventicles, and Monopolies; for so John le Maire calls that of
Compeigne, although it was called by the consent of Pope Gregory the fourth.

19 Let us now pass over into England, which will furnish us also with
variety of examples, and show us this right annexed to the Crown of their
Kings, to use it when they please. In the year 905 King Edward the elder,
together with Plegmond Archbishop of Canterbury, called a famous Council of
Bishops, Abbats, and other persons. In the year 1070 (says an English Monk)
there was a great Council holden at W^nchester.
Silchester upon the Octaves of Easter, by the command, and in the presence of
King William, the Pope consenting thereunto. and contributing his authority by
his Legates. Coun^^ls called by the Kings of ^p^ine.

Matthew. Westminster. l. 2 a^ ann. 1301.


In the year 1301 Edward the first called a Council at Lincoln. Sometimes
the Kings let either the Archbishops of Canterbury call them, or some other of
the Clergy who proceeded thereunto only so far as they had their leave and
consent. So Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury under Henry the first, by his will
and pleasure called a Council at London in the year 1102. Guilielm.
Malmesbur. de gesti^ pontif. Anglor. l. 1 page 129.

Poly or Vergil. Angl. hist. l. 13. in Hen. 2.


Pope Alexander the third (says another English historian) assisted by the
favor of the Princes (he means the Kings of England and France) held a
General Council at Tours, in the year of grace 1163. King Henry the second of
England having quieted the state of Ireland, caused diverse abuses, not
sufficiently purged out of the Church, to be reformed and corrected, according
to the doctrine of Christianity; and by a Council by his means holden at
Casselles. Idem lib. 13. in Hen. 2 page 239.

Idem. lib. 16 in Hen. 2. page 316


The same King caused a Council, consisting of Bishops and other Princes, to
be called at Northampton. King Henry made all his adversaries be pronounced
enemies of their Country by a Council which he caused to be holden at
Winchester, which others call Silchester. He that will be curious to enquire
into their histories may find diverse other presidents: and yet it may be said
that this Kingdom of all others has been most subject to the papal power.

20 As for Spain the Acts of almost all those Councels which we have in the
great collection of them, do plainly show us that the Kings had the whole
stroke in this matter. For the Preface of the first which was holden at Braque,
Bracarense Conc. in princ. Tom. 2. Conc. page 823.
in the year 572, runs thus, Whereas the Bishops of Gallicia were met
together in the Metropolitan Church of the Province, by the command of the most
Illustrious King Aramirus. And a little below, Now then seeing our most glorious
and most devout son, has by virtue of his command royal, granted unto us
this day, so much desired of our Congregation for us, to assemble our selves
all together, let us in the first place treat of the state of the Catholic
faith. In the year 573 there was another Council holden in the same place By
the command of the same King. Bracarense Conc. 2. in Princ. Tom. 2 Conc. page
828.

Council. ^olet. 2. in Princ. To. 2. Conc. page 859.


In some copies Miriclias is named in stead of Ariamirus, but that imports not
the point in hand. The third Council of Toledo, where the Arrian heresy was
condemned ann. 589, was called by King Recharedus, as is set down in express
terms, both in the Acts thereof, and by diverse Sigthertus in Chron. sub. ann.
592.

Matthew Westmonast. l. 1. sub ann. 595. Franciscus Tarapha de regibus Hisp. in
Recharedo.


Historians. The Council. Tolet. 4 in princ. Tom. 3. Council. p. 67. Francis.
Tarapha Barcinonensis in Sismando.
fourth of Toledo was called by the command of King Sismand. The Council. Tolet.
^. et. 6. in princ. Tom. 3. page 7. 80. et 83. Tarapha in Suintilla.
fifth and sixth by King Suintilla: for besides that it may be proved out of
the Acts of them, there is a Prebend of Barcelona which affirms it downright;
This King (says he) called the fifth and sixth Synod in the city of Toledo.
The Council. Tolet. 7. in princ. Tom. 3. Council. page 81. Taraph. in Sindasundo.
seventh of Toledo was called by King Sindasund. The Idem Tarapha in Ri^isundo
Council Tolet. 8. in princ. item 9. in princ. item 10. in princ. Omnia habentur
Tom. 3. Council. page 184. 201. et 204.
eighth, ninth, and tenth by King Risisund. After he was received into the
Kingdom, (says the same Prebend of Barcelona) he commanded three several
Councels to be held in the City of Toledo, under Archbishop Eugenius. But we
have no need of his testimony, for the Acts themselves plainly say as much of
those Councels, at least of two of them. The Council Tolet. 11. Tom. 3. Council.
page 216. 223. Tarapha in Bamba.
eleventh of Toledo was commanded by King Bamba, in the year 674. The Acts do
obscurely intimate so, but Tarafa clears it: Bamba (says he) after his
victory over Paul, and the Gauls, returned to Toledo, where he commanded the
celebration of the eleventh Council. So likewise the third of Council
Bracarense 3. in fine Tom. 3. Council. page 227.
Braque was called by him the same year, as we have it set down in the end of
the Acts. The Council. Tolet. 12. in principio. item Tolet. 13. in principio.
habentur Tom. 3. Council. page 374. et 383. Tarapha in Eringio.
twelfth, thirteenth, and fourteenth of Toledo were called by the command of
King Eringius. The Acts of the first testify as much directly: those of the
second intimate so: and for those of the third we have them not, Councels
called by the Kings of Spain.
but the same Prebend of Barcelona relates it in this manner; This Eringius in
the second year of his reign caused the twelfth Council of Toledo to be
holden, which consisted of thirty six Bishops: in his fourth year he made the
thirteenth be holden, consisting of forty eight Bishops: and the foureteenth
in his fifth year, wherein were twelve Bishops: all three under Julian
Archbishop of Toledo. The other four following Councels of Toledo, King Egytas
assembled: Vid. annotat. positam in fine Concilii. Tolet. 13.

Tom. 3. Council. page 38^.

Franciscu^ Taraphai^ Egyta.


the Acts of two whereof were carried to Rome to help to correct Gratians
Decret's by; as is mentioned in a note put at the end of the Acts of the
thirteenth of Toledo: but waiting till they be put out in print, we shall
content our selves for the present with what is delivered concerning this point
by the forementioned Canon of Barcelona; King Egyta (says he) in the first
year of his reign (which was the year of our Lord 693) caused the fifteenth
Council to be celebrated, under Julian Archbishop of Toledo, consisting of
sixty one Bishops: the sixteenth Council in his third year, and the
seventeenth in his fourth, under Philip Archbishop of the same Church. We
shall observe by the way, that these Councels of Spain consisted partly of the
Bishops of Languedoc a Province of France^ Vid. Council. Tolet. 3. in
subscriptionibus tom 2. Council. page 78.

Et Tolet. 8. in subscriptionibus page 194.

Et Tolet. 11. page 223 tom. 3 Council. Johannes Vaseus in Chron. Hisp. page
446. Vid. Annals incerti authoris inter scriptores coaetaneos Pithai sub ann.
732. 736. et 793. Testamentum Ca^oli Magni apud eundem. Aimonum lib. 5. cap.
17. 35. et 38.


for there are named in the subscriptions of some of them, the Bishops of
Carcasson, Narbo, Beziers, Lodeu^, Agde, Maguelone (who is now Bishop of
Montpelier) Nismes, and others in the same Province: and this because the
greater part of it was then under the dominion of the Goths, who held it
together with Spain; wherefore it is sometimes by our French Historians called
Gothia, Gottica Provincia, and Gothica regio.

CHAP. VIII. That it belongs to the Emperor and Kings to appoint the time and
place when and where Councels shall be held, and not to the Pope.
1 HAving proved already that the calling of Councels belongs unto the Emperor
and Kings, and not unto the Pope: it follows then that it is for them also to
appoint the time and place. Yet notwithstanding we will further confirm it by
some examples. It is storied by Sozomen, that Constantine the Emperor resolved
to hold a Council at Nice, upon occasion of the new doctrines of Antiochus,
and the heresy of Aetius, and how by the persuasion of Basil he changed his
purpose, and would have removed it to Nicomedia; but by reason that city was
ruined by an earthquake, by the advice of the same Basil he made choice of
Nice again; and how, when there happened another earthquake there too, he
resolved upon the persuasion of one or other, to have two Councels holden at
the same time, one at Seleucia for the Eastern Churches, and another at
Ariminum for the Western, which was accordingly put in execution.

The place of the ^ou^cell chosen ^y P^inces.
2 The same Emperor notwithstanding would have left it to the choice of the
Bishops to appoint the place where it should be held, after that misfortune
which befell at Nice; but when they could not agree about it, he resolved upon
that course which we have already spoken of. And to see that the nomination of
the place belongs not to the Pope, Leoni^ Papae epist. ^3.
we need no more but read Pope Leo's Epistles, wherein he makes earnest suit
to the Emperor Theodosius, that the General Council which he entreated for,
might be appointed in some city of Italy. The like he did to the Emperor
Valentinian, and to the two Empresses Pulcheria and Eudoxia, who all interceded
for him to the Emperor Theodosius, V. epist. Leoni^ 24.

Et epist The^dosi^ ad Valentin ad Eudoxia^, ad Pulcheriam. Item epist.
Valentin. et Martiani, et altera^ Martiani ad Leon^m inter ^pist. Praeambul.
Synod.

Chalced. to. 1. Council.

Council. Aurelianense 2. et 5. to. 2. Conc.

Conc. Matisconense to. 2. Con.


both for the calling of a Council, and the having of it in some city of
Italy: but he would never hea^ken unto it: and howbeit that after his decease,
the Pope made the like instance to the Emperors Valentinian and Martian; yet
he could not prevail to have it in Italy; but it was first called to Nice,
and afterward to Chalcedon.

3 And as for our Realm of France, when it is said in the Acts of the Councels
holden there, We are met together in the City of Orleans, by the commandment
of the King, as they speak in the second of Orleans; or, The King having
assembled the Clergy in the city of Orleans, as they in the fifth of Orleans
say, and so of the rest, it must necessarily be inferred, that the designation
of the place was our Princes doing. But the second Council of Mascon puts it
out of all doubt which might be raised; for having decreed to hold Councels in
France every third year, it addes^ And this to be done with the good will of
the Prince, who shall appoint a convenient place in the midst of the Country
for the holding of it.

4 As for the time without doubt the designing and prescribing of it belongs
unto them likewise. This is collected from a place of Nicephorus formerly
cited, where he says that the Emperor Theodosius when he had called the
Council in the city of Ephesus against the day of Pentecost, Niceph. Eccles.
hist. l. 14. c. 34. Cap. ^5. to. 2. Actor. Conc. Ephesians.

V. eorum epist. in 1 action Conc. Chalced. Ivo Carnot^nsis ep. 28.


Declared by his letters that he would not hold him excused that should not
appear there at the day appointed. Theodosius and Valentinian appointed that
the first Council of Ephesus should be at Pentecost. The second of Ephesus
upon the first of August. The Bishop of Chartres in a letter of his to Pope
Urban the second, speaks in this wise of a Council of Troy held under Philip
the first, King of France; By command from the King, the Archbishops of Rhemes,
Sens, and Tours have warned their suffragan Bishops to appear at Troy, after
your answer shall come, the first sunday after All Saints day.

5 King Charles the 9 by his letters patents of the 10 of September 1560,
commanded in like manner the Prelates of his Realm to repair toward Paris
about the beginning of January, so as they might be all there upon the 20 of
that month, To meet and confer together in the said city, or some other
place near adjoining thereunto, such as shall be appointed for them. This was
for the conference which was at Poissy. It vexes us to insist upon things
which are so evident. Let those that deny them bear the blame of it.

CHAP. IX. That it belongs to the Emperor and Kings to adjourne or prorogue
Councels, and not to the Pope.
1 IT is certain that to whom the convocation belongs, Councels adjourned b^
Empe^ours.
to him belongs also the prorogation, translation, or dissolution of Councels.
Yet howsoever it is expedient to make it appear by some examples, that this
belongs of right to the Emperor and Kings. Pope Leo having obtained by his
instances that a Council should be called, not in Italy, as he desired, but
in the East, he afterward besought the Emperors Valentinian and Martian to
put it off for a time, Leo Papa ep 47
but he could not entreat so much. We will set down what he says himself
about that matter; We well hoped (says he, writing to the Emperor Martian)
that your Clemency might have condescended so far to our desire, considering
the present necessity, as to defer the Council till a better opportunity: but
seeing it is your pleasure that it be holden forthwith, I have sent
Paschasinus thither.

2 The same Emperors having caused that Council which Leo so desired, to be
assembled in the City of Nice, they adjourned it afterward to the City of
Chalcedon. That alteration was in very deed made in favor of the Pope: for
having earnestly entreated the Emperors, that they would be pleased to honor
the Council with their presence, they caused it to remove to Chalcedon^ where
they then were, V. epist. Valent. et Marciani ad ad Nicaenam Syno^. inter
praeambu^. epist. Con^. Chalced. tom. 1. Conc.

Theodoret. l. 2. c 21.

V. libellum constitutionum Synodalium qui extat in to. 1. Conc.

Extat haec relatio inter Constitutiones Synod. to. 1. Conc.


as appears by two several letters written by those Emperors unto the
Council while it was yet at Nice.

3 Constantine the Great had in like manner formerly transferred the Council
of Tire unto Jerusalem. After this (says Theodoret, speaking of the Synod of
Tire) they went to Jerusalem: for the Emperor had commanded that all the
Council assembled at Tire should be transported thither.

4 The Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian did likewise transfer one to
Constantinople, which was held at Ephesus. This is gathered from a relation in
the letters writ by the Synod of Ephesus to certain deputies whom they had sent
to Constantinople before, to decide a certain case. Forasmuch (say those
fathers) as we who were summoned to this City of Ephesus for the good of the
Church, are now, by the Edict of our Kings, cited over to Constantinople, as
you very well know. The same Synod of Ephesus put this superscription to their
letters written to the Emperors, To the most devout Emperors Theodosius and
Valentinian, the Synod assembled at Ephesus according to your Edict.

5 They proceeded yet further when they sent to seek whole Synods in gross,
making them come unto them out of one Province into another, to give an account
of their actions: as the Emperor Constantine did, Socr. l 1. c. 22. Zonaras to
3.
who made that of Jerusalem come to Constantinople to justify the deposall of
Athanasius. Theodosius did the like to that of Ephesus.

6 Charles the fifth made the Pope know at the Council of Trent, that he was
not well catechized in the Article of the Popes omnipotency, nor that power of
Councels, Wh^ P^e^id^nis in ^he Ch^lc^d^n Co^n^^ll.
which consists in the translation and removing of them; insomuch that he
caused some rude protestations to be made by his ambassadors after the
translation of the Council from Trent to Bonony, both against the Pope and
that Council: for he made them tell them amongst other things, Sleidan l. 19.
versus finem not con^^dicted b^ Surius no^ Portanus. Rove^us Pontanus lib. 4.
rerum memorabilium sub anno 1547. page 374. Iean le Maire en la ^ part. de la
di^^er. des schism.
That they could not remove it, or alter the place, but with the consent of the
Emperor, who has the tutorage and protection of all Councels: that they had
no authority to transfer the Council: that seeing they made no reckoning of
the common salvation, the Emperor therefore as the protector of the Church,
would take the charge of it.

7 As for our Kings we need not doubt but they had the same authority,
considering they had power to dissolve Councels after they had assembled them.
So Jews the 11 was used to do, witness John le Maire; Upon a time (says he)
King Jews the 11 assembled the Gallican Church, and all the Universities
together in a Council in the City of Orleans; as well the better to understand
the substance of the said Pragmatique Sanction; as also to take order for the
Annates of Church livings. By which exaction the extreme greediness of the
Court of Rome, did vex and impove^ish the Realm of France, by raking up every
year a mavelous great sum of money. The President of this Council was the
late Monsieur Peter de Bourbon Lord of Beajeu. But as soon as ever the points
were brought in question, in came the King, who had altered his resolution, and
ere any other conclusion was determined, he gave every man leave to depart.
Saying that he would call them to Lions hereafter. Which was never done.

CHAP. X. That it belongs to Emperors and Kings to prescribe the form to
Councels, both for persons and matters, and other circumstances.
Vid eorum Imp. epist. in 1 tom. Act Council. Ephesians cap. 25. Extat eorum Epist.
in 1. Act. Council. Chalc.
1 THe Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian writ to Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria,
to bring with him unto the first Council of Ephesus certain other Bishops out
of his Province; namely, such as he should think fit and able men. The same
Emperors enjoined Dioscoru^ Bishop of Alexandria by virtue of their letters to
take unto him to the number of twenty Bishops, eminent for their faith and
learning, and to bring them along to the second Council of Ephesus, which they
had called to be holden upon the first of August. Sozomen. lib. 4. cap. 15.
It pleased the Emperor Constantius (says Sozomen) to call a Council at
Nicomedia, a City of Bithynia, and to cause such Bishops of every nation as
should there be found fittest to consider of things wisely, and sufficient to
apprehend and argue subtley and learnedly, to repair thither with all
diligence upon a day prefixed; who might represent unto the Synod the whole
Clergy of their several provinces.

2 They allowed also whom they pleased to go into Synods. So by the Emperor
Martians command there were certain Priests and Monks of Egypt brought into
the Council of Chalcedon. Princes propos^d the matter of Councels.
Notwithstanding all opposition to the contrary, they proposed what points
should be disputed, and prescribed what matters should be treated of. The
Emperors Constans and Constantius gave the Council of Sardis leave to dispute
questions, Actio 4. Council. Chalced. tom. 1. Council.
and examine things anew, without standing to what had been therein already
determined by former Councels. So the Bishops of that very Council assure us
in those letters which they sent to Pope Julius. There were three things to be
handled, Extat haec Epist. in fragmentis D. Hil^rii.
for the most religious Emperors gave us leave to dispute anew of all that had
been formerly determined: and especially of the holy faith, and integrity of
that truth which they had violated.

3 Justinian did the like at the fifth General, holden at Chalcedon. Martian
forbade that of Chalcedon to dispute any otherwise about the nativitie of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, than according to the determination of the
Council of Nice. V. Marti^n^ oration. in 1. act. Conc Chalced.

Cap. ult to. 1. Actor. ^onc. Ephe^^n.

Cap. 72. tom. 4. Act. Council. Eph^sin.


The Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian writ to the first Council of
Ephesus, how they had sent Candidianus their Ambassador to the Council, to
whom amongst other things they had given this in charge, to see that no other
question were proposed till such time as the controversies then a foot were
first decided. An^ accordingly do the Bishops of that Council speak in their
letters to those Emperors: We being assembled at Ephesus for no other cause
than to consult and treat of the faith, according to your holy Edict.

4 Our French Councels afford us very pregnant proofs and presidents hereof;
for in the most of them our Kings caused them to consult about such points as
they proposed; and did often call them together of purpose to take then advice
in doubtful cases King Clovys sent certain heads or chapters unto the first
Council of Orleans, ^^ncil. A^relianense tom. 1. Conc page 1045.
which himself had called, there to be discussed. Which being put in
execution accordingly by that Synod, the resolutions were sent unto him by the
Synod, and submitted unto his judgment.

5 King Guntrand called a Synod at Mascon, chiefly to make a decree against
those that travel upon the Sunday; which he confirmed afterward by his Edict
directed unto the same Synod. Council. Matisc. 2. tom. 2^ Conc.
We will and command (says he) that what we here enjoyne by virtue of this
Edict be from henceforth inviolably observed: inasmuch as we have caused those
things which we now publish, to be determined (as you know) and ju^ged at the
Council of Mascon.

6 Carloman, who is called Duke and Prince of the French, Synodus Francica tom.
2. council. p. 456.
assembled a Council in France, anno 742, (the place we know not) to take
advice of it, How he might reestablish the law of God and religion, which had
been trodden under foot and overturned in the time of his predecessors: and by
what means Christian people might compass their salvation, and not suffer
themselves to be seduced by false Priests.

7 The Emperor Jews the Gentle made an exhortation at the Council of Aix in
Germany, (which he had there assembled) when he came into it; V. Council.
Aquisgranense in princip. tom. 2. Conc. p. 638.
wherein he advised the Bishops to take a course with some things which he
then proposed, and which stood in need of reformation: he prescribed also a
certain form unto them, which they were to follow, and which was applauded by
the whole Council.

8 The same Emperor having by his authority caused a Council to be assembled
at Pavy, he sent certain points unto them, commanding them to deliberate upon
them, and that with this clause: We send these chapters unto you, to consult
upon them, and let us know your advice: Council. Ticinen. in princip. tom. 2.
Council.
for some things of lesser moment which concern the general (yet so as they
touch upon some men's particular) and stand in need of reformation, we will
that you pas^e your sentence upon them, and send it to us afterward.

Pre^^dents proposed the matter of Councels.
9 The Emperors Jews and Lotharius called a Synod at Paris, anno 824, to
deliberate upon the point of images. So say the Bishops there, About the
business which your Piety commanded us, namely about the case of Images.

Synodus Parisiensan princip.
10 The same Jews and Lotharius his son proposed likewise certain heads or
Chapters to another Council by them assembled at Paris, in the Acts whereof
the Bishops, addressing their speech to the Emperors, do say, Council. Paris.
tom. 3. Conc. in noviss edit.
Your Serenitie has collected all that seemed worthy of correction at this
present, into certain heads. Upon which heads they did deliberate.

Sugerius Abba^ in vita Ludovice Crassi.
11 Jews the Gross having called a Council at Estampes, he made them consult
whether he should acknowledge Pope Innocent, who was fled into his Realm, or
no. And upon the advice there taken, he approved of his election, and did
acknowledge him.

Iacobus Meieru^ in annalibu^ verum Flandricor. sub anno 1398.
12 Charles the sixth having called a Council at Paris, the year 1398. to
consult about the schism which then was betwixt Boniface the ninth and
Benedict the thirteenth, He would not suffer the Archbishops and Bishops of
Rhemes, Roan, Sens, Paris, Beauvis, and some others to assist there, because
they were Benedicts partisans, by reason of the great courtesies they had
received either from him, or his predecessor.

Council. Toletanum 4. in princ. tom. 3. Council. page 67.
13 The Bishops of the fourth Council of Toledo use this preface which is very
remarkable: We being assembled in the City of Toledo by the care and
diligence of King Sisenand, to treat in common of certain points of Church
discipline, according to his injunctions and commands. We will conclude this
Chapter with a passage of Marsilius: Marsilius Patavinu^ in defens. pac. 2.
part. cap. 20.
Humane lawgivers (says he) are bound to choose out fit men for the keeping of
Councels, and provide necessaries for the defraying of their charges: to
compel such as refuse, to come thither, provided they be able men, and have
been chosen, whether they be Clergymen or others.

CHAP. XI. That the presidence in Councels belongs to the Emperor and Kings,
as also the judgment.
1 THe calling of Councels does not only belong to Emperors and Kings, but
also the presidence and judgment in them. Princes Presidents in Councels.
Constantine the Great was president in that of Nice. So Pope Miltiades
testifies in Gratians Decrees. Valentinian, Theodosius and Arcadius the
Emperors do confirm it in the same Decrees. Can ^uturam 12. q 1.

Can. Continu^. 11. q. 1.


Constantine the Emperor (say they) presided in the holy Council of Nice,
etc. The reasons which are urged to the contrary are too weak to disprove
these authorities: as when it is objected that Constantine would have sit upon
a low seat in token of humility: that he would not be judge among the Bishops,
Bellarm. de Con^ lib. 1. cap. 19. tom. 1.
but professed that he ought to be judged by them: that he would needs
subscribe unto the Acts in the last place. It is not good to use so many
complements with Popes: that which is given unto them of courtesy, is taken as
of necessity. This yielding has made them soar so high, that if this Council
be received, we must talk of greater m^tters than kissing their pantofle. If
they who defend the Popes cause so stoutly refuse to believe their Canons, at
least without a dispensation, what others will do, judge you. St. Ambrose his
authority which is further added, is of no more force than the rest.
Constantine (says he) would not make himself judge, but left the judgment
free to the Clergy. We must distinguish betwixt the function of a Judge, and
of a President. They would have made him Judge of the Bishops crimes, that he
would not do: this is nothing to the Presidence: we shall speak of it
elsewhere. The saying of Athanasius is the most pressing of all, in that
complaint which he makes against the Emperor Constantius, who would have been
President and Judge against him in the Council of Milan; yea and that so as to
condemn him. The condemnation was indeed injust; but O how passion blinds us
in our own cause! the good man to prove the nullity of the judgment, urges
amongst other things, that it cannot be a lawful Council wherein a Prince,
Athanas apol. 2 Idem in ep. ad solitariam vitam agentes.
or any other Lay man is President. For (says he) if it be a judgment of
Bishops, what has the Emperor to do there? He exclaimes mightily against
such Presidence, but all because he was condemned there. If he had been
acquitted, he would have been sure not to have said mum to it. He condemns
in this what he approves in a like case; Socr. l 1 c. 22.
for when he was deposed by the Council of Tire, he had recourse to
Constantine; he presents himself before him to make his complaint, and was a
means that the Emperor sent to seek all the Council to render a reason of
that action of theirs. If a man should have said then, If it be a judgment of
Bishops, what has the Emperor to do with it? Socr. ibid. Gest. Collation^^
Carthag inter Cath. et Donatistas.
What would Athanasius have answered?

2 The grand controversy in point of religion betwixt the Catholic Bishops
and the Donatists, which was spread over all Africa, was decided at Carthage by
Marcelline, one of Honorius the Emperors Officers, after a long dispute in his
presence. Read all the books and you shall never find that ever they
complained of him. Nay on the contrary St. Austine, who was one of the
disputants, to testify his gratitude for his just sentence, Princes Pre^id^nts
in Councels.
dedicated his books De civitate Dei unto him. Pope Nicholas admittes them unto
Councels, when points of faith are there handled: yea and all other Lay men too
without distinction, Can. Vbinam. did. 96.
whether it be to judge or to preside there.

3 If a man will suppose me here an ignorant Prince, it would be a very great
indecorum for him to engage himself in such matters as these, and he had
better forbear: yea and just so had a Bishop too. But if the Prince have
learning and ability, what reason is there to exclude him? It would indeed suit
better with the dignity of his person to let disputing alone to the Bishops,
yea and the ordering of the whole action to some one of them or other, such as
he shall think fit; always reserving to himself the Presidency, with the
determination, confirmation, and putting in execution the Decrees, after he
has seen and considered of them. It is no jesting matter when salvation is in
question: a Prince has as deep an interest in this as a priest. But let us
hold on our course.

4 Zonaras testifies that the Emperor Theodosius assisted at the first
Council of Constantinople; Zonaras annal. tom. ^.

Nicolaus Papa 1. in ep ad Michaelem Imper. Cap. 32. tom. 1. Actorum Conc.


and therefore we may infer that he was president of it, for we read of no
other that took that place upon him, as we shall say elsewhere. As for that of
Ephesus, Theodosius the younger sent Candidianus, one of his Officers, to
preside there: but with a limited commission, having first charged him not to
intermeddle with questions and controversies of divinity. And this is the
reason why Cyrill, the chief in dignity of all the Patriarchs who were there
in person, is by some authors called the President of that Council.

5 Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria did preside at the second Council of
Ephesus, by authority from the Emperor Theodosius. This we collect out of the
first Action of the Council of Chalcedon, where the Judges that were presidents
say, How the Right reverend Bishops, to whom at that time, (that is, at the
time of the Council of Ephesus) by the Emperors clemency, authority was given
over such things as should be there treated of, give a reason why the letters
of the most holy Archbishop Leo were not read; yea and when it was interposed,
that they ought to be read. Dioscorus the Right reverend Bishop of Alexandria
made answer, Evagrius l. 1. ^. 10.
The Acts themselves bear witness how I did twice interpose that they might
be read. This is further confirmed by Evagrius in his Ecclesiastical History.

6 Bellarmine thinks he has given us very good content, by saying, that
against all equity he extorted this Presidence from the Emperor: and he
thereupon urges the authorities of Zonaras and Evagrius: But by his Graces
leave he imposes upon them both: For see what the former says; Eutyches went
to seek Chrysaphius the Eunuch, whom he had brought over to his side, and led
him in a string, who being in great credit with the Emperor, obtained of him,
that Dioscorus, who governed the Church of Alexandria after the death of Cyril,
might be called to Ephesus with other Bishops, and the opinion of Eutyches
there examined. The other in his first book and tenth Chapter, says,
Dioscorus, who succeeded in the Bishoprique of Alexandria after the death of
Cyril, was appointed President of the Council For to kindle more hatred against
Flavianus, Chrysaphius, the governor of the Palace, had laid this plot very
politiquely. These authors in their discourses blame the carriage of the
business, and the plot which was laid for the approbation of Eutyches his
doctrine, and the condemnation of Flavianu^: but they never say, nor ever meant
to say, that the Emperor was to blame in taking of the Presidence from the
Pope, and conferring it upon another. It may be said furthermore, that Pope
Leo rejected this Council; but it was because of the unlawful proceedings of
it, just as we condemn this of Trent: But for the calling of it, that was so
far from being unlawful, that the Pope himself had his Legates there. Councels
adjourned by Kings.


7 The Emperor Martian did preside at the General Council of Chalcedon, both
at the beginning, and the sixth Action thereof: and at the opening of it he
made an oration himself to the Congregation, as Constantine the Great had done
at that of Nice, wherein amongst other things he forbid them to dispute of the
nativity of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST, V. Acta Conc. Chalced. tom. ^.
Conc.
otherwise then according to the determination of the Council of Nice. And
that Because (says he) we will assist at the Council for confirmation of the
faith, not for ostentation of our virtue. Which words Bellarmin has made a
nose of wax, affirming that the Emperor does thereby protest he would not
assist there as a Judge. And passing from better to worse, he further adds,
that in the su^ceding actions, there were indeed some secular Judges that
presided in the Emperors name, but it was only to see there were no tumult or
disorder, and not as Judges of faith. If the Acts of that Council were locked
up in the Archives at Rome, as many other monuments are, then we might hold
our peace: But being exposed to the view of all the world, I am constrained to
say, that this is to deal too saucily with the truth. It is plain from those
Acts that seven O^ficers of the Empire, and eleven Senators were not only
Presidents, but, which is more, Judges of all controversies, which were handled
and determined there. They put interrogatories both to one and other: they
pressed arguments against such as held any erroneous opinions: they threatened
to condemn them: they told Pope Leo's Legates, when they desired that Dioscorus
Patriarch of Alexandria might be cast out of the Council, that if they would
become his accusers, they must depose the person of Judges: they commanded that
such Acts should be read as were exhibited to the Synod: they caused men to
give their suffrages: they pronounced the sentence. In brief, as o^t as the
Popes Legates are named in the Council of Trent, so often and oftener are these
Judges and Senators mentioned in that of Chalcedon. Shall we now then aver
with confidence that they were not Judges? What do they mean then who ascribe
the Presidence and judgment in this Council to the Popes Legates? They sit in
the highest place, (so they say) they speak the first, they subscribed the
first, they pronounced the sentence against Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria in
the name of the Pope and the whole Council. Here is enough to pierce to the
quick, here is an ergo well shod with frost-nailes. But let us take one piece
after another.

8 They sit in the first place. Yes, after the Judges and Senators; and they
sit not as Presidents, but as deputies for the chief Primate or Patriarch.
They speak first. Yes, at the beginning when they exhi^ite a libell against
Dioscorus, and when the Judges and Senators told them, that seeing they made
themselves parties against him, they could not assist at the judgment; and at
the end too when they put up a complaint against the whole Council, for giving
the Patriarch of Constantinople the next degree of honor after him of Rome,
for setting bounds and limits to either of them. As also in the third Action,
whereof we shall speak anon. They subscribe the foremost. Yes, in the same
third Action, but not elsewhere, They pronounce the sentence against Dioscorus.
This is it that presses hardest. But hearken to the answer; Of all the Actions
of that Council, (which are sixteen in number) there were two at which the
Emperor himself was President, thirteen at which the ^udges and Senators whom
the Emperor had deputed, and one wherein one of the Popes Legates presided.
Observe how that came to pass. There was neither Judge nor Senator present in
that Action: whereupon when there was a controversy about speaking. Paschasin
the Popes primier Legate, gave the company to understand, that he had
commission from his master to preside in that assembly: for, says he, He has
commanded our ^^annesse to preside in the Council in his stead: and therefore
it is necessary that what ever be proposed it be determined by our
interlocution. Po^^sh ^^gum^n^s a^swe^^d.
He never durst speak of this presidency in any manner, so long as the
Emperor or his officers were there. In the ensuing Actions he never proceeded
to any act of a President.

9 All this makes against the Pope: for from hence we conclude, that where the
Emperor or his Officers are, there the Pope nor his Legates have no right to
preside. In case they be absent, it stands with good reason that some one of
them that are of prime rank and quality manage the affairs; or else that they
proceed in this case by election. Which they would never condescend unto, so
much as for one day: and yet it is an ordinary thing in all societies. Now for
priority of honor and dignity, there is no question but it belonged to the
Bishop of Rome^ as being Patriarch of the chief city in the Empire. This is
evident from the very Acts of this Council of Chalcedon, in the sixteenth
Session, whereof they say, The Fathers have granted certain privileges and
prerogatives to the Sea of old Rome, because it is the imperial city. Nor did
the Pope dispute this title of presidence against the Emperor and his
officers, but only against the other Archbishops and Bishops For behold the
very clause inserted in his instructions to his Legates: Conc Chalc^d Act. 16
tom. 1. Conc. p 938.
By all means preserve the dignity of our person, considering that we send
you in our place and stead: And if there be any that undertake to usurp any
thing, relying upon the luster of their cities, (this aims especially at the
Patriarch of Constantinople) repel all such enterprises with that courage
which is requisite.

10 It is an easy matter now to answer all the objections of this great
Disputer. The pronouncing of the sentence against Dioscorus, was done in this
third Session. The Judges and Senators tell us so in the next action, yea and
that by way of complaint; Your Reverence (say they, speaking to the Council)
must give account before God for the case of Dioscorus^ whom you have condemned
without the Emperors knowledge and ours. The Synod says in their letters to
the Pope, That he is in that Council as the head to the members. That is
either in respect of the Presidency in that one Action; or in respect of other
Bishops; but not in reference to the Emperor and his officers: with whom these
Popes Legates never once contested, but ever gave place to them with all
willingness; taking it for a great honor to supply their place and execute
their charge in their absence.

11 Some of our age have left upon record, that Pope Leo had an aim at this
Presidence, and that he required it at the Emperors hands. But in good time,
the Doctor himself gives them the lie. For Leo himself, in one of his
letters to the Emperor Martian, says in plain terms, Leo papa epist 47 ad^
Martian. Imperat Idem ep. 24. 25 26.
But forasmuch as some of our brethren (we speak not this without grief of
hear^) have not had the means of expressing a Catholic constancy against the
storm of falsehood, it is fitting that Bishop Paschasin, whom I send, preside
in my place. And in very deed he complained both to the Emperors and Empress
of Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria his being president at the Council of
Ephesus.

12 But here is that which seems to be more pressing than all the rest:
namely that the Emperor and his officers were not Judges of controversies of
faith, nor pronounced any sentence in those points, but submitted themselves to
the sentence of the Bishops: in short, that they were only to guard the action
from troubles and tumults. Bellarmin is the man that affirms it, and one of
the Presidents of the Council of Trent before him. Stanis^^us Hosiu^^ ^^
adversu Prolegom. Brent^ Acto 2. Conc. Chalced.
All this is pointblanke against the truth of the Acts. When the question was
about debating some point of faith, the Officers of the Empire (who are
constantly called ^udges throughout all the Acts of that Council) and the
Senators caused that to be rehearsed which had formerly been determined at
the Councels of Nice and Constantinople concerning that particular; and withal
Pope Leo's Epistle which he writ to Flavian Archbishop of that city.
Presidents in the Chalcedon Council.
And because there were some Bishops which doubted of that faith, the Judges
and Senators decreed that the matter should be put off for five days; during
which time Anatolius Archbishop of Constantinople, should make choice of some
few of the most learned, to instruct them that were not fully resolved, so as
the whole Synod should not need to trouble themselves about it. Hereupon there
being a diversity of opinions; some approving of that Decree, and others not,
the Judges pronounced, To. 1. p. 879.
That which we interposed, shall be put in execution.

13 In the fifth Action they caused every Bishop to make rehearsal of his
Creed, and the rule of faith to be read; and ordained further that certain
Bishops should be chosen and shut up in St. Euphemia's Oratory with Anatolius
the Archbishop, and the Popes Legates, To 1. Conc. pagg. 879.8^0.
in the presence of the same Judges. Some of the Bishops falling at variance
hereabouts, the Judges ordained that it should be referred to the Emperor:
who, being perfectly informed of all, confirmed the Decree of the Judges, which
was afterward put in execution. The Bishops elect being assembled together
with the Judges, to treat of matters of faith, after they had all agreed upon
them, went to the Synod to acquaint them with their resolution. But it is
requisite to set down the very words. First it is said, And the Judges being
entreated thereunto by all the rest, went into the Oratory of St. Euphemia^
with Anatolius the Reverend Archbishop of Constantinople, Paschasin and
Lucentius Right Reve^end Bishops, Boniface the Priest, and Julian the Reverend
Bishop of Cos, deputies for the Sea Apostolic of the great city of Rome^
etc. And after they had treated of the holy faith, they came forth and all sat
down. The most magnificent, and most glorious Judges said, The holy Synod is
pleas^d peaceably to hear what things have been determined by the holy fathers
assembled together in our presence, who have also expounded the rule of faith.
Afterward the determination concluded upon and put in writing was read; which
contained a ratification of what had been formerly determined by the Councels
of Nice and Constantinople in that behalf. In the next Action the Emperor
being come himself in person, confirmed that very Creed, and enacted that from
thenceforth it should be embraced.

14 See here a discourse somewhat of the longest indeed, which yet was no less
than necessary, to convince such as will believe nothing without good warrant.
I will further observe, to do them a courtesy, that Paschasin the Popes
Legate, in his subscription to that Creed^ uses this form; Paschasin Bishop,
in stead of the most honorable Leo Pope of the Catholic and Apostolic
Church of the city of Rome, who presided at the Synod, has ordained,
consented, and subscribed hereunto. Which must be imputed to the vanity of the
man; for the truth is, he presided not in that Action wherein this rule and
Creed was made, but the Judges; as has been said. And which is more, when
they are spoken of that were nominated to make it in the presence of the Lay
Judges, Act. 4^ Conc. Chalced. tom. 1. pagg. 987.880.
the Popes Legates are thrice put after the Patriarch of Constantinople.

15 Now I demand further yet, if the Popes Legates had presided in all these
Actions, what would they have done more than these Imperial Judges did? They
would have made the proposals, they would have chosen a certain number of
Bishops to draw the form of confession; they would have caused their
resolution to be read, which is all one with the pronouncing of the sentence:
they would have interposed their authority, as the Emperor did in person, that
the matter might carry the more weight with it. If they will say that they
would have given voices, which the Lay Judges did not do; we answer. It
cannot be collected from the Acts of the Council, that the Judges did not give
their opinions too^ for whereas they say, The determination was made in their
presence, President of the Council of Chalcedon.
they do not deny that that they had any voice in it. But I will grant they
did not give their own opinions: yet they were the Judges of others opinions,
and might reject what was resolved upon by the Synod, in case they found it to
be injust; this is far more than to give a voice. And indeed when the Synod
cried with one voice, That they would stand to that definition of faith which
had been rehearsed, the Judges contradicted it, saying, that it was defective,
and that it was requisite to add something to it^ which was the cause why they
met in the Oratory of St. Euphemia, where the form of faith was drawn, as
has been said. I will transcribe the whole passage:

16 The Bishops cried with a loud voice, Let the definition stand, or else let
us dye. The most magnificent and Right honorable Judges said, Dioscorus did
say, I admit that of two natures. The most holy Archbishop Leo did say, There
are two living natures inconfusibly, inconvertibly, indivisibly, in the one and
only Son of God JESUS CHRIST our Savior. Which of the two do you follow?
Whether holy Leo, or Dioscorus? The right reverend Bishops shouted, We believe
as Leo believed, those that do otherwise are Eutychians. Leo has well
expounded it. The most magnificent and Right honorable Judges said. So then
you add to the rule of faith, according to our holy father Leo's opinion, that
there are two living natures in Christ, inconvertibly, inseparably, and
inconfusedly. And these Right honorable Judges, being entreated thereunto by
all the rest, went into the Oratory of St. Euphemia, together with Anatolius,
etc. And after they had treated of the holy faith, they came forth, and all
sat down. And the copy of their determination was read by the appointment of
the Judges, as we said before.

17 Now if we shall make it yet appear that the Judges opinion was followed,
and that addition which they insisted upon was admitted. What can be said more?
Now mark what it contains amongst other matters; So then ^onsenting to the
holy Fathers, we teach all with one accord to confess one and the same Son
JESUS CHRIST our Savior, to be one in two natures, inconfusedly, immutably,
indivisibly, inseparably. If this may not be called judging of matters of
faith, then I may put up my pipes.

18 Yet for the further clearing of the point in hand, we will compare the
Presidence of the Popes Legates in one Action, with that of the ^udges; to see
if they wrought any greater wonders than the Judges. See first the power which
they assumed, Act. 3. Council. Chalced. in. pr. ^0.1. Con p 83^
That such things as should be proposed might be judged by their
interlocution. The Judges had the very same power of interlocution: For at the
end of the second Action thus they speak, That which we interposed by
interlocution takes effect. And at the beginning of the seventh, The Right
honorable Judges said, We have thought it necessary to give notice of these
things before the holy Synod, to the intent that what shall be resolved
hereupon, may be confirmed by our sentence and interlocution. The Legates
pronounced the sentence of condemnation against Dioscorus: So did the Judges
the sentence of absolution for Theodoret in the eighth Action: The words are
these; The Right honorable Judges, according to the decree of the holy
Council, said, The most holy Bishop Theodoret shall receive the Church of
Cyrrha.

Bellar. l. 1. de Conc. c. 19. Conc. Chalced. Act. 3. in sin. to. 1. p. 847. et
545 Leo ep. 47. Con. Chalced. Act. 6. to. 1. Con. p. 835 858.889.
19 It must be further observed that Bellarmin was a little too hasty when he
read the Council of Chalcedon: else he might have found that what he calls the
pronouncing of the sentence, was no more but a bare proposal made by the Popes
Legates unto the Council, to cause the assembly to consult upon it: and that
this is true, see here their conclusion: So as this great and holy Synod
ordain what shall seem good unto it in the case of Dioscorus. And afterward
follows the giving of voices. Besides, by his account all the Popes Legates that
were present at the Council, should have been Presidents; Presidents of the
Council of Constant^nople.
which is not true; for none but Paschasin was: As appears by Pope Leo's
request to the Emperor Martian in that behalf; and that of Paschasin, then
when he officiated as President; and by the subscriptions both of himself and
his fellows; for he only and none else takes upon him the quality of
President.

20 Let us now come to other Councels. Justinian the Emperor did not preside
himself in the Council of Constantinople, V Synod. Constantinop. sub Iustini.
to. 2. Conc. p. 579.
holden under him in the time of the Patriarch Mena; but he determined of the
Presidence: that is, he chose and nominated the Presidents of it; to wit, the
Patriarch of Constantinople, with whom he joined as assistants those whom the
Pope sent. Hear what the very Acts of that Council say concerning this point;
After the Consulship of Belisarius the most holy and most happy Oecumenicall
Archbishop and Patriarch Mena being President in the city of Constantinople,
the most excellent and most holy Bishops Sabinus and Epiphanius, sent out of
Italy by the Sea Apostolic, sitting upon his right hand as coadjutors by the
command of Justinian the Emperor.

21 It is objected that this Council was not Universal. I grant it; but so as
it be granted me withal, that neither was the Pope universal; and that it
belonged not unto him to preside in all Councels. If he had any right to
preside in General Councels, much more had he in national; especially then
when he was called unto them, or was present at them upon any occasion.

22 As for the fifth General Council, which is the second of Constantinople,
holden under the same Justinian by his command, we shall make it appear ^non
that all things were carried there by him and his authority; although himself
were not present at it, no more than Pope Vigilius, who having travailed from
Rome to Constantinople, and being there at that time the Council was holden,
yet had never the courage to go unto it.

22 The Emperor Constantine the fourth was President of the sixth General
Council of Constantinople, Sexta Synod. Cons^an. tom. 3. Conc p. 237.
and diverse of his Officers assisted there by his command; whose names and
qualities are registered in the Acts of it. Lo here the words; The same
Emperor Constantine being President, in a place of the Palace which is called
Trullus: there being present there as auditour Nicetas Exconsul and a
Patrician, and master of the Offices Imperial, Theodorus exconsul and
Patrician, etc. Which is repeated in every Action of it. And as for the Popes
Legates, they are indeed marshalled in the first place amongst the Patriarchs
and Archbishops, but not as Presidents, but because the priority of honor
amongst the Clergy belonged to the Pope. Where it is to be observed that in
Councels ordinarily, the Legates and Vicegerents took the same place of honor
that belonged unto him that sent them. And of a truth in the Acts of this same
Council, there is one Peter a Priest and Monk, the Patriarch of Alexandria's
Legate, placed betwixt the Patriarchs of Constantinople and Antioch: and
another Priest and Monk called George, the Patriarch of Ierusalem's Legate, put
between the same Patriarch of Antioch and the other Bishops. The like may be
seen also in the Acts of the second Council of Nice.

23 This Council is wholly approved by the Pope. And it is yet further
observable in it, that the five Patriarchs were all there in person, or by
proxey; which was not so in any of the rest. Bent. tom. 1. Contr. 4. l. 1. c.
19.
All this is out of question but here is the doubt: Bellarmine pretends that
Pope Agatho by his Legates presided there. He urges Zonaras for proof of his
assertion, who makes nothing for him, but indeed against him. See here the
passage entire. Constantine called a Council at Constantinople, Zonard^ Annal.
to. 3. in ul^a Cons^a^^i^ 4.
the chief whereof were Pope Agatho's Legates, George Patriarch of
Constantinople, and Theophanes Patriarch of Antioch: for Alexandria and
Jerusalem had no Patriarchs at that time, being then taken by the Saracens. Who
presiden^ in the Council of Constantinople.
When he says ( Chief, or Princes) he does not mean ( Presidents) for so
all the Patriarchs should have been Presidents there, seeing the word relates
unto all: which yet Bellarmine denies to be so. If we would express it in
plain English, we should say chief and principal, for that is the genuine
sense of the author.

24 If we should admit of other Presidents over the Clergy besides the
Emperor, it would not be the Pope, but the Patriarchs of Constantinopl^ and
Antioch: Lambertus Schasnaburgensis De rebus Germanicis. p. 151.
for hark what Lambert an old Dutch Historian says of it; Constantine called
the sixth Synod, at whose request Pope Agatho sent his Legates to the royal
City, amongst whom was John, then Deacon of the Church of Rome. This sixth
Council was holden at Constantinople, where there were present one hundred and
fifty Bishops, George Patriarch of the Imperial City, and Macarius of Antioch
being Presidents. He calls them Presidents because either of those two
Patriarchs were there in person, and the rest only by their deputies.

25 In the next place Bellarmine says, they are named first in all the Acts.
He should have said, they are named first after the Emperor, and all his
Officers that assisted there. That is, first among the Clergy; this is the
honor which belonged to Rome. But he adds further that they speak first. I
know not where he learned that, but I dare believe he never read it. I desire
no more for proof of what I say, but the Acts of the Council themselves. For
of all the eighteen Actions of that Council, Act. 2.4. 5. 9. 11.12 et aliis.
in most of them the Popes Legates do preside so honorably, that they speak
never a word. In the first they put up a complaint: in some others they deliver
their opinion as other men do, sometimes in the first place, sometimes in the
last, sometimes after a good many. Besides, this order is observed, the
Secretary always proposes, and the Emperor determines in the eleven first
Actions and last; and in all the rest, the two Patricians and two Exconsuls,
whom he sent and substituted in his place. And in pronouncing their Decrees,
both the Emperor and the Judges by him delegated, do always say, The
Emperor and the holy Council, or The Judges and the Holy Council, said,
appointed, commanded, ordained, etc. No such matter with the Popes Legates.
Nothing passes without the Emperor and his Officers, be it they treat of
points of faith, or what else so ever: they discuss controversies in divinity
as well as the Bishops. To be sho^t, a man cannot collect ought out of the
whole story of this Council, but that the Emperor and his Officers were
Judges and Presidents of it. Bellarm. de Council. l. 1. c. 19.
And yet some dare say, that the Emperor was no Judge nor formal President of
it; that he pronounced no sentence there: And for subscription, all the Clergy
signed first, and the Emperor last of all. His Officers did not subscribe at
all; it was not the fashion: their masters subscription was sufficient. And for
his subscribing first or last, it is neither here nor there to the cause. If
the Popes Legates had presided but in one Action only, as at the Council of
Chalcedon, they would have been careful not to forget that title of honor in
their subscription. It is a strong argument to prove they had not the
Presidence neither in show nor substance; for otherwise they would surely have
told us some news of it.

Sexta Synod. in Trullo. in praesat. apud Balsamon. p. 192.
26 As for the other sixth General Council of Constantinople, in Trullo, the
Emperor Justinian the second did not only call it, but presided in it. The
Bishops thereof address these words unto him in their preface; Our Savior
Christ has given us in you a wise governor, a pious Emperor, and a true
President. We know very well this Council is rejected, but we are yet to
learn the just reasons of this repulse; Balsam in Comment. ad 6. Synod in
Trullo circa princip.
for Balsamon, Patriarch of Antioch, assures u^ the Popes Legates assisted there.

27 We have formerly by the way made mention of the Conference at Carthage,
Emperors presidents in Councels.
betwixt all the African Bishops both Catholics and Donatists, called by the
command of the Emperor Honorius: who were summoned thither by the Imperial
Officers, who disputed all along before Marcellinus, the President and Judge
delegated by the Emperor; Gest. Collationis Carthag. habit^ Honor^^ ^ussi^,
inter Cat^^licos et Donatist. Lambe^tus Scha^naburg. de rebus Germ. sub ann 963.

Add Reginon, in Chron sub. ann. 963.


who in fine passed his sentence of condemnation upon them.

28 Otho the first surnamed the Great, called a Council at Rome, the year
963. and presided in it. There was a great Council held at Rome (says
Lambert) ( wherein the Emperor Otho did preside) with a great multitude of
Bishops, Abbats, Priests, Clerks. and Monks, by whose determination Bennet was
deposed from the Sea Apostolic. This was Bennet the fifth, in whose stead Leo
the eighth was created Pope.

29 Otho the second son to the former, being arrived at Ravenna in the year
967, (says Regino) and having there kept his Easter with Pope John the third,
he there assembled diverse Bishops of Italy, and Romania, and himself keeping
the Council, he invented many things to the profit and behoof of holy Church.
Therefore he was President and Judge in the Council.

30 The Emperor Henry, the son of Conrade, being beyond all patience
displeased with the excessive Simony, which had got foot amongst the C^ergy,
called an assembly of all the Archbishops and Bishops of his Empire: so says
Glaber Monk of Cluny in the last chapter of the fifth book of his History.
After he had made remonstrance unto them of diverse things concerning that
point, he set out an Edict over all his Empire, (says the same author) That
no degree or Order of the Clergy or Ecclesiastical Ministry should be
purchased for money: and whosoever should be found to have given or taken any
thing, should be deprived of all his honor, and be accursed. You see then he
was Judge and President of the Council. We shall then conclude for hereafter,
that not only the Presidence in Councels, but the judgment also belongs unto
the Emperors.

31 Whereunto we will add, as touching this last point, That from the
beginning to the end of the Councels, all matter of action was performed by the
Emperors, or those to whom they committed that charge. The Convocation was
made by them: the place was appointed by them: the form of meeting and
treating was prescribed by them: the number of persons, both Clergy and Layty
was stinted by them: they forbad some and commanded others to come there:
ofttimes they proposed the points which they would have consulted of; and
prohibited the mentioning of any other: they guided the action, caused the rest
to give voices, disputed cases, passed their sentences, approved the
determinations which were agreed upon, whether they were absent or present: and
many such like things they did.

32 And yet for all this some would bear us in hand that they were no more but
spectatours, without contributing any thing thereunto besides their authority:
or to speak more properly, that they were but the porters and doorekeepers of
Councels; the executers of their decrees. Which honor is preserved unto them
by the Council of Trent; for hark how they speak of them in the 22 Canon of
the last Session; Con. Trid. ss. 25. cap. 22.
The holy Council also exhorts all Kings, Princes, Commonwealths and
Magistrates, and by virtue of holy obedience commands them to interpose their
aid and authority for the assisting of the foresaid Bishops, Abbats, Generals,
and others that have the charge and superintendance of putting the said
reformation in execution, every time, and as often as they shall be required so
to do. And at the end of the same Session; Conc. Trid. Sess. 25 c 21. de
recipiendis decretis.
It remains now that it exhort in the Lord ( as it does) all Princes, so to
empl^y their pains, that they suffer not such things a^ are decreed by ^t to
be depraved and violated by heretics; but that they and all others devoutly
receive them, and faithfully observe them. Good God! where is now the time that
Councels ent^eated the Emperor with so much honor and submission and
humbleness of spirit to confirm their decrees? Who Pr^si^^^ of the Nicene
Coun^ell
yea when they came in corpse from one Province to another to find him out, to
acquaint him with them, to entreat him to assent unto them, and to authorize
them?

CHAP. XII. That the Pope did not preside in General Councels.
1 HAving proved already that the Presidence in Councels belongs to Emperors
and Kings, it is good to infer, therefore there is no reason the Pope should
arrogate it unto himself exclusively to all others: and that the Council of
Trent is by good right rejected in France, because he took upon him to
authorize it. The Pope may yet pretend that this right belongs unto him, at
least by way of concurrence with others. He would make us believe upon
Bellarmines word, that by means of his Legates he always presided in General
Councels. We have made it appear that it is not so. He may say perchance
that at least he presided in many of them. Let us now prove the contrary;
which will be an easy matter to do. We have already showed that Constantine
was President in that of Nice. Bellarmine says it was the Popes Legates, who
were in number three, and amongst them Hosius the Spanish Bishop was one. Mark
his reasons: They all three (says he) subscribed first. True, but not in the
quality of Presidents, (they never say so) but as supplying his place to whom
the first rank of honor amongst the rest of the Patriarchs does belong. And
to prevent a reply, Bellarmine, says the same Hosius, was President of the
Council of Sardis; Conc. Sardicens. ad sin.
and yet we find one and twenty, or more that subscribed before him. This is
ordinary in all the ancient Councels, that he who was most eminent in
Ecclesiastical dignity subscribed first, not he that presided. There needs no
more to prove this, but to perufe the subscriptions, which we have for the
most part at the end of the Acts.

2 In the next place he says. Cedrenus and Photius affirm, That Pope
Sylvester by his Legates gave authority to the Council of Nice. I grant it;
but so did the other Patriarchs as well as he, for without them a Council
cannot be called General. And further, there is none denies but the Sea of Rome
carried always a great luster, and that in consideration that the City was
the head of the Empire; but the conclusion is not worth a rush, to say,
therefore he was President there.

Athanas. in ep. ad solitariam vitam agentes.
3 For a thir^ reason he serves himself of the authority of Athanasius, who
writes, That Hosius was the Prince in that Council, and that he was the man
that compiled the Creed. But we must consider that the word Princeps in that
place does not signify President: But when Athanasius uses it, or Zonaras the
verb (...), or another the verb (...), they mean those that were the
principal in the Council for dignity or knowledge. Zonar. to. 3. annal.
So when Zonaras speaks of those Patriarchs that were present at a Council,
he calls them all Princes of the Council. And speaking of the second General,
he says, that The Great Bishop Gregory Nyssen, and St. Amphilochius were the
Princes in that dispute. And for Hosius he was the Bishop, that by reason of
his learning over-top'd all the rest, not only in this Council but in all
others wheresoever he was present. The Pope not President in the second
General.
And this is the reason why the same Athanasius in his second apology says,
What Council is there where he was not Prince? Or who is he that was able to
withstand his Orthodox opinion? What Church is there that has not the most
excellent monuments of his defenses? So then here is the point: He drew all the
world to his opinion, he was admired for his learning and discourse, and for
that reason he was as the Prince, or chief above all the rest, Ergo he was
President. We deny that argument.

4 It is also agreed upon that the Pope did not preside at the second General
Council, which was holden at Constantinople, neither in person, nor by his
Legates. It is true, Bellarmine observes one thing which he thinks very
advantageous for him; which is, That the Emperor sent ^uto the Bishops the
Popes letters, whereby they were summoned to the Council: But we have already
made it appear that Bellarmines wits were a wool-gathering when he made this
exposition, seeing the Popes letters to the Emperor do not decree that
convocation; but on the contrary the Pope summons the Eastern Bishops by
virtue of the Emperors letters; as we have showed elsewhere at large. He
excuses the Pope for not being present at that Council of Constantinople. We
admit of his excuse, but we entreat him withal to believe, that though he had
been there he should not have presided, unless it had been the Emperors
pleasure. For whereas he says, the Bishops of that Council do by their
letters acknowledge the Pope for their head, and call themselves his members;
we deny that it is ought so. They do not direct their letters to the Pope, but
to the Council of Rome, which had writ unto them, and whereto they return an
answer. Afterward they call themselves members of the Council, but do not
speak a syllable of the head. What can he gather thence for the Pope?

5 Bellarmine concludes, that Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople did preside in
the Popes absence. But I doubt of that, for I have read in Theodoret, Theod. l.
5. c. 8. Zona. to. 3. annal.
that the Council of Constantinople begun before this Nectarius was admitted
Patriarch; who was formerly a Patrician and Senator, and by consequent a Lay
man. Which is further confirmed by the letters of the same Synod of
Constantinople to that at Rome, where it is said, Extat in Act. Conc. Constan.
to. 1. Con. p. 407.
We have created Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople, in the open face of the
General Council with unanimous consent, before the Emperor Theodosius, and all
the Clergy, the City likewise consenting thereunto. This being so, I am afraid
we must be forced to seek the presidence in some other than Nectarius. And
without doubt the Emperor was the man, let Bellarmine say what he will, who
removes him far from the Council; telling us how he sent the Popes letters
thither, which contained the convocation of it. Bellar. l. 1. de Conc. c. 19.
The Council has already informed us by their letters which they sent to
Rome, that the Emperor was present at the election of Nectarius. And Zonaras
testifies that he assisted at the Council after the creation of Nectarius.
Zonar. tom. 3. annal. p. 90.
Great Amphilochius (says he) desired the Emperor, that the Arrians, who
spoke ill of the son of God, might be banished the City, or at least
prohibited from having any assemblies: but perceiving that Theodosius set light
by it, having taken a time of purpose when Arcadius the Emperors son sat in
the Council with his father, he did unto Theodosius both in word and gesture
that honor which was due unto him as Emperor: but unto Arcadius, he said no
more but, God save you my son. Whereat the Emperor being offended, this holy
man told him; You, who are but a man, take it ^einously out that your son
should be slighted, do you think that God is not offended also that his only
son should be evil spoken of?

6 Come we now to the third General Council which was holden at Ephesus. It
has been said above, that Theodosius the younger sent one Candidianus thither
for his part to preside there, Presidents of the Council of Ephesus.
but with a limited power, not to intermeddle with points of divinity. This
limitation was a reason why there was another to manage the action; to wit,
Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria, namely for such matters as Candidianus had no
commission to deal in. Now the question is, whether Cyrill was chosen by the
Emperor, or by the Council, or assumed the presidence as of right belonging
to himself. And it is further questionable, whether he presided in the quality
of the Patriarch of Alexandria, or of the Popes Legate. We cannot well resolve
either one or other of these questions for want of authorities, for the
ancients do not specify whether he had this Presidence by election, or
intrusion, or toleration. And for the other query, we have nothing to say to
it for certain. He was president, it is true; he was the Popes Legate, it is
true too. But for all this it will not follow that the Presidence was granted
unto him as the Popes Legate, for so the rest of the Popes Legates should have
been Presidents as well as he, which no ancient author ever yet affirmed. So
all the places which are brought to prove the Popes Presidence in that
Council, in the person of his Legates speak but of Cyrill only: whence it
follows that they exclude the rest from it.

7 There is yet a very notable reason, which is, that before there was any
talk of this council of Ephesus, V. to. 1. Act. Conc. Ephesians. c. 16.
the Pope had sent Cyril in his stead to put the sentence in execution, which
was by him pronounced in his Council at Rome against Nestorius Patriarch of
Constantinople, in case he did not relinquish his heresy within ten days
after admonition. For behold what the same Council says of it in their letters
writ to the Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian; Celestine the most holy
Bishop of Great Rome, Act. Conc. Ephesians. ^o. ^. c. 17.
signified by his letters the sentence passed by him and his Council at Rome,
before any Synod was assembled at Ephesus, and had delegated Cyrill to put in
execution what had been adjudged by him at Rome, and sent him in his place and
stead. And in deed the Pope, thinking no more of that delegation, sent
afterward other Legates for the Council of Ephesus, which yet did not preside
there. Which plainly shows that Cyrill was president in some other quality
than of the Roman Legate: A^tor. Conc. Ephesians. to. 2.
seeing they who had particular and express charge from the Pope to assist at
that Council for him, and who came in fresh in his behalf, had more right so to
do, than he who had been only delegated by him to put a sentence in
execution.

8 For the fourth General Council which was that of Chalcedon, it i^ plain
from what we have said of it already, that one of the Popes Legates presided
only in one Action, and that in the absence of the Emperor and his Officers,
and not as a true President neither, but as one who found himself to be the
most worthy person in degree of honor; neither the Emperor nor the Council
having made other election: besides, that the Pope strongly affected this
presidence, that he writ to the Emperor about it; that he complained to all
the world of it; that he had given instructions to his Legates that they should
be sure to take the place without suffering themselves to be prayed to it, yea
without being invited to it. Nor can there be any advantage for the Pope taken
from that which Zonaras says in the third Tome of his History, That the Pope
was Prince of that Council: for that signifies he was one of the heads: for
Zonaras speaks as much of the other Patriarchs, calling them Princes or prime
men of the Council. The Princes of this Council were (says he) Leo Pope of
Rome, Anathalius Patriarch of Constantinople, and Iuvenal of Jerusalem.

9 For the fifth General, which is the second of Constantinople, Bellarmine
grants that Eutychius Patriarch of Constantinople presided at it, Photius in
lib. de septem. Synodis.
and not Pope Vigilius: but he adds that Vigilius might have been president
if he would. He proves his assertion by the authority of Zonaras, who makes
against him if we read the passage entire, and not by halves, as he cites it:
for (says he) Under Eutychius (that is the Patriarch of Constantinople) the
fifth Council was assembled, Princep Concili^ what it means.
consisting of 165^ Fathers, of whom Vigilius Pope of Rome was Prince, and
Eutychius, of whom we have spoken already, and Apollinaris (Patriarch) of
Alexandria^ See here, the Pope was not president himself alone, but had his
associates, which he will not allow. And therefore we must have recourse to
what we have said before, that the word Prince is taken for the principal
among the Clergy, whether for learning or dignity: and this is the reason why
all the Patriarchs (amongst whom he of Rome is chief) are called Heads or
Princes of the Council; but there can nothing be inferred from thence for the
presidence. And to the end that we may put this exposition out of all question,
(which is in it self most true) over and above those passages of Zonaras^
whereof we have spoke already, we will yet produce some to that purpos^ out of
the book entitled, An explanation of the holy and venerable Synods, printed at
Paris the year 1553 out of the Kings library. Libellus ita inscriptus,
Sanctorum and venerabilium conciliorum ex habitabili orb convocat^rum
explanatio. Excusa Parisits apud Martin^^ Iuvenem ann. 1553.
Where it is said of the first Nicene Council, At which Council Sylvester
Bishop of Rome, Alexander of Constantinople, Alexander of Alexandria,
Eustachius of Antioch, and Macarius of Jerusalem were heads or presidents.
Those were the five Patriarchs which were present there, either in person, or
by their Legates. Where notwithstanding (to give notice of it by the way) we
may observe a mistake in the author, who by way of anticipation reckons the
Bishop of Constantinople amongst the Patriarchs, not remembering that he
obtained that degree of honor at the second general Council holden at
Constantinople: and hither also must that other passage of the same author be
referred, The Presidents of this Council were Damasus Bishop of Rome,
Nectarius of Constantinople, Timothy of Alexandria, Cyrill of Jerusalem,
Meletius of Antioch, Gregory the Great the Divine, Gregory Nyssen, and
Amphilochius of Iconiu^. He reckons the five first as Patriarchs, and the
three last as great Doctors, famous for their learning. Zonaras says, Zonaras.
^o. 3^ p 30.
they were chief in the dispute, using the word (...), which the Latin
translation renders Principes fuere. For the third General holden at Ephesus,
he speaks thus of it: In this Council Celestine Bishop of Rome, Cyril of
Alexandria, Iuvenal of Jerusalem, and Memnon of Ephesus were Presidents. This
last is ranked also amongst the chiefest, by reason of his worth and learning.
Of the fourth General holden at Chalcedon, he says, At which Council Leo
Bishop of Rome, Anatolius of Constantinople, Iuvenal of Jerusalem, and Maximus
of Antioch were chiefs and Presidents. Of the fifth General at Constantinople,
The heads of which Council were Vigilius Pope of Rome^ Eutychius Bishop of
Constantinople, Apollinaris of Alexandria, Domnus of Antioch, and Damianus of
Jerusalem. Of the sixth General holden at Constantinople, The chiefs of which
Council were Agatho Bishop of Rome, George of Constantinople, Peter the Monk,
deputy for the Bishop of Alexandria, and Theophanes of Antioch. Of the seventh
General held at Nice, The Presidents of which Council were Hadrianus Pope of
Rome, Tarasius Bishop of Constantinople, Politian of Alexandria, Theodoret
Bishop of Antioch, Elias of Jerusalem. In all which passages it is in the Greek
(...): and in the Latin translation, Cui Concilio praefuerunt. You see then
the Pope is well accompanied in his pretended Presidence. He is continually
named first for his degree of honor before, not for his superexcellence above
the rest. And besides he is reckoned first only amongst the Clergy, for as for
the Emperors and their Officers, they took place of all in Councels, as is
evident from the Acts: But let us come back to Bellarmine again.

10 That other passage which he alleges out of Eutychius the Patriarch of
Constantinople's letter to Pope Vigiliu^ seems to be more pressing, where he
says, Wherefore we desire to treat and confer upon these points with joint
forces, Praesidente nobis vestr^ beatitudine, under your pr^sidence. These
words might be spoke by way of complement, in manner of a kisse-your-hand, or
proffer of service: Pre^idens in the 6 General Counsel.
But however we must of necessity confess two things: First, that the
Emperor Justinian, however he was not present at the Council, had authority
there notwithstanding, for he called it; he sent the points which they were to
deliberate upon; he commanded them to appear at the Synod with the rest of the
Bishops. Justinian. in ep. ad Episc. Syn Constable. 5 in Act. Council. Constant. to.
2. ^onc p. 496 Ibid p. 500.
We have commanded him (says he) by our Judges, and by some among you, to
meet you, and treat in common with you of the points aforesaid. It is true the
Pope excused himself, saying, He could not come, (these are his very words)
because there were a great many Eastern Bishops at the Council, and he
should have but a few Western with him there. And this he always insisted
upon, saying, that he would only give his advice upon three points which had
been proposed by the Emperor; and that in such sort, that the Bishops of the
Council were offended with him: for see here what they say of him at last^ And
whereas he proffered to give his advice by himself alone, after he had been
diverse times invited by us all to come hither, and by the right honorable
Judges sent unto him on the behalf of the most devout Emperor after he had
notice of that answer: having the Apostles admonition in mind, That every one
shall give account to God for himself; and also fearing that judgment which
is laid up for those that offend one of the little ones, much more when they
offend the most Christian Emperor, whole Nations and Churches; and that which
the Lord said to St. Paul, Fear not, but speak, and be not silent, for I am
with thee, and no body shall do thee harm, We therefore being assembled
together, have acknowledged in the first place, etc. 2 The n^xt is that the
Pope would never condescend to assist at that Council, though (as it follows
from these very passages) he was entreated thereunto both by the Emperor and
all the Bishops therein. In brief, he desired always to act his pageant
apart, and would not entermedle himself among the Eastern Bishops. Wherefore
nothing can be collected hence which makes for the Popes advantage. But on the
contrary, whosoever shall read all the acts of that Council, will find it is
a thing much redounding to his disgrace; that he should be resident in the
same City after a Council was there assembled, and being requested to go to
it to treat of points of great importance, that he should refuse to
communicate with his brethren and fellow-Bishops, as it is related in the very
Acts. And without doubt this is a mighty breach in his universality; especially
seeing he excuses himself for not coming into the Council, because he had
but a few Western Bishops with him: for he thereby confesses he had no great
authority over the rest: Yea it is one of the strongest arguments that can be
brought to prove that the presidence in Councels belonged not to him; it being
very probable that if so, he would have forborne coming thither: Which
Bellarmine in his works does not greatly dissemble.

11 The Acts of the sixth General Council, which was the third of
Constantinople, Sexta Syn. Constable in princip to. 2. Con^. p. 282.
tell us in downright terms, that Constantine the Emperor was President of
it, and not the Popes Legates.

12 As for the second Nicene, which is counted the seventh, it is not said in
the Acts thereof, that the Emperors assisted at it, for they were absent.
There are indeed certain Officers and Senators which were present through all
the Acts, h^t not in the quality of Presidents or Judges. As for the Popes
Legates they are named first in every action, and subscribed in the first
place; but nothing can be concluded thence for the Presidence. This was only
granted unto the Pope, because he was chief in Ecclesiastical dignity. It is
a hard matter to know who had the Presidence in that Council, because when the
question is of decreeing, or pronouncing any thing, the Council is made to
speak in corpse, as on this manner, The Council says. The Council ordains.
Yet is not this carried so closely but it may appear that Tarasius Patriarch
of Constantinople managed the action; Presidents in the ^ight General Councels.
seeing for the most part he proposes and decrees: yea, and when the question
is of giving voices, the Popes Legates come in the first place, and he in the
last to make the conclusion, as in the third Action. And besides those Legates
show themselves so seldom, that he that shall read all the Acts will never
take them for Presidents. But o^serve I pray that which gives a shrewd blow to
the Popes Presidence. When the Council was finished, Zonar. tom. 3. in
Constantino and Irene.
Those which had celebrated it (says Zonaras) repaired to Constantinople,
where the Acts of the Council were read in the Palace royal, the Emperor
presiding there, and upon the audience of every Action, they were approved and
subscribed unto by them.

13 As for the eighth General holden at Constantinople, I profess the Popes
Legates presided there: only I entreat the reader to observe in his perusal of
the Acts, in what manner they make their Presidence pass for good; they take
good heed of not forgetting that title as in the former; and it is credible
they would have been as careful then, if it had been in their power. In the
first place they produce their commissions and instructions, whereby they are
charged by the Pope to preside there: they met with such Emperors as they
desired, that is, so honest and respective, that they not only yielded the
Presidence to them, but (which is worse) they would not sign the Acts till
after the Bishops and Delegates; as is testified in their subscriptions.
Certain Princes and Lords, which assisted at that Synod by the Emperors
command, were also so mild and courteous, in imitating their masters example,
that the Popes Legates having requested them to put some interrogatories to
certain men who were come into the Council concerning a petition pref^rred by
them, they replied, In obedience to your request, and upon your command we
will examine them, not of our own power, for this power belongs to you. To be
short, it cannot be denied but the Pope was truly the President of that
Council. So that we need not marvel that he did such an ill office to Charles
the Great, as to condemn his Council of Francfort, considering he did not
vouchsafe to devolve the presidence upon him.

14 Now we affirm yet for all this that this courtesy ought not to be drawn
into an argument: that the Emperors might well prejudice themselves thus, but
not their successors. Yea it may be said that what they did in this case is a
nullity, seeing that by the very Decrees of Pope Alexander the third, no man
can forfeit a privilege which is granted to his order, rank and dignity.
Cap. Si diligent^. Extra de foro Compet.
That because a man has presided in one Council, he must not therefore
pretend that the whole presidence belongs unto him, and that the Emperor who
was wont to preside in all, has no more right ever after.

15 All this then being proved to be true, That the Emperors called Councels;
That they, and not the Popes, presided in them; That when they pleased, they
had the whole stroke and authority in them: who will not henceforth startle to
hear the language of Pope Nicholas to the Emperor Michael? Where did you ever
read (says he) that your predecessors had ought to do in any Council, Ca^.
Vhinam. Did. 96.
unless perchance in some one, wherein matters of faith were handled? We ask
him on the contrary, where did he ever read, that they had not to do? Yet we
are much beholding to him for that exception, unless in some one. The language
of Leo the tenth and his Council of Lateran is yet more frightfull: Vid. Conc.
Lateranense ultimum sub Leone 10.
The Pope of Rome alone, as having authority over all Councels, has full power
and right to call, transfer, and dissolve Councels.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Presidence of Kings and Princes, in Councels.
Kings of France Presid^nts in Councels.
1 HAving spoken of the Presidence of the Emperor and the Pope: it remains we
speak of that of Kings in the Councels and Synods of their own realms. And
for France we shall here marshal the examples of Charles the Great, Jews the
Gentle, and other French Emperors, howbeit they might have been disposed
amongst the former. It is reported in the life of Charles the Great, Apud
authorem De vita Caroli Magni Et Annals incerti author. inter scriptores
co^e^ancos Pit^^rt.
At that time King Charles held a Synod at Valentia. And Apud eundem auth. De
vita Caroli Magni.
again in the life of the same Prince; He, together with the French in
general, held a Synod at Gennes; and there dividing his army, he marched
toward mount Senis. So says Regino sub ^nnis 77^.771. 772.775.776. 779.
Regino diverse times when he speaks of Charles the Great, The King held a
Synod: the words in Latin are habuit, tenuit, which signify, both his
presence and his presidence. The Acts of the Synod. Francofurt. in epist. ad
^raesules Hispan tom. 2. Con^ p 655.
Synod of Francfort say in plain terms that he presided there; for hark how
they speak of him in their letters to the Bishops of Spain; We have all met
together by the command of the most pious, and most glorious King Charles, who
presided amongst us, to repair the state of the Church. Yea, which is more, he
disputed there about matters of faith, and therefore it is probable he
delivered his opinion concerning them. Synod Francofurt. in libello
Sacrosyllabo. to. 2. Con p. 640
Upon a day (say the Acts) being all at the Palace, the Priests, Deacons, and
all the Clergy being seated circular-wise, in the presence of the said Prince,
there was a letter brought in, sent by Elipend, Bishop of Toledo, who had
committed a most enormous crime, and being read aloud by the Kings command;
that reverend Prince rising up on a sudden from his chair of State,
continued standing, and discoursed of matters of faith for a long time
together; adding at the close, What think you of it? And the Canons and
Decrees of that very Council inform us of much more: namely that Charles the
Great was the author of them, for he is the speaker. The fourth begins thus,
The most pious King our Lord ordains with the consent of the Synod. At the
sixth, seventh, and eleventh, the King and the Council both speak, It is
decreed by the King our Lord, and the holy Synod. And at the tenth, It is
decreed by the King our Lord, or by the Synod, etc.

Con^. Aquisgr. 1. in princip. to. 2. Conc. p. 638. et 639.
2 Jews the Gentle at his entrance into the Council of Aix, made an
exhortatory speech, wherein he warnes the Bishops to provide for some things by
him specified, which stood in need of reformation: he prescribed unto them a
set form which they were to follow; which was highly commended by all the
Synod; yea, and approved in all points: besides, he furnished them with
divinity books which they might make use of. All this is related in the Preface
of that Council, whence it may be inferred that he presided there.

3 We read in an old French Historian, that Rhabanus Archbishop of Mentz,
presided in two several Councels holden in that City by the command of Jews
the Gentle. Annals incerti author. inter scriptores cooetancos Pithoe^.
But the same author tells us plainly, that it was the same Emperors
pleasure, and in his absence: seeing that in the Acts of those Councels, at
least of the first (for the rest we have not) the same Rhabanus and all the
Synod speak continually of the Emperor with a great deal of humility, French
Kings Presidents.
even referring all to his judgment. But hark what the forecited author says
of it; Orgarius Bishop of Mentz, dyed in the year 847, and Rhabanus succeeded
in his place, who by command from King Jews held a Synod at Mentz the same
year. The title of that Synod imports, that Rhabanus presided in it; whence it
follows that it was by virtue of the Emperors command. The same author says,
In the year 852, there was a Council holden at Mentz, the Metropolitan City
of Germany, by the will and command of the said most renowned Prince, Rhabanus
Archbishop of that City being President of it. A little after he adds further,
that at the same time while they treated of Ecclesiastical matters, the King
was employed in public affairs, and that they sent their Decrees unto him to
be confirmed: a certain testimony that the presidence was conferred upon
Rhabanus by the Prince.

4 King Charles the Bald was present at the Council ^olden at Pi^tis upon
Sein, in the year 863. He is named first: Conc. in loco qui dicitur Pisti^.
to. 3. Con. p. 900
the Decrees are conceived in his name; whence it follows that he presided
there. We may make the like inference of all those other Councels which run in
the name of our Kings, or to speak more properly, where our Kings speak and
decree such things as are proposed, with the advice of the Clergy; of which
kind we find good store: for without doubt either they themselves presided in
them, or others for them.

5 King Arnold after he had called the Council of Tribur^ Conc. Triburiense
to^ 4. Conc. p. 26.
in the year 895. presided there himself, as may be collected from that
epistle which cont^ines the Preface: which is likewise avouched in plain
terms at the end; In this holy Council, the devout Prince, and most renowned
King Arnold being President, and employing himself about it, the holy fathers
and Reverend Pastors of the Church, which came thither, were all seated.

6 Philip Augustus called a Council at Paris, ann. 1^84, at which he presided,
as is collected from the words of the author, who speaks thus of it; He
commanded a General Council to be called at Paris, of all the Archbishops,
Bishops, and Princes of his Realm; which he having kept with them by common
advice, Rigordus in lib. de gestis Philippi August sub ann. 1184.
by his authority royal he enjoined the Archbishops, Bishops, and all the
rest of the Ecclesiastical Prelates, by their frequent Sermons and
exhortations, to persuade the people committed to their charge, to go to
Jerusalem to defend the Christian faith, against the enemies of the cross of
Christ.

7 When King Jews, the father of St. Jews reigned in France, (says John le
Maire) and Gregory the ninth of that name sat in the Sea Apostolic, in the
year one thousand two hundred twenty six^ Iean le Maire ^ en la 2. Party des
schisms.
Romanus the said Popes Legate came into France; by the will of the King there
was a Council of the Gallicane Church assembled, whereat the King and the said
Legate did preside.

8 In the year 1286 there was a Council holden, consisting of all the Prelates
and Barons of France, Against Pope Boniface the eighth, Idem ibid.
where King Philip was present in person, and presided at it, reckoning up all
the outrages and injuries which he had received from that Pope Boniface,
Constitutio Caroli 6 quam alii Arrestum Curiae Parliamenti appellant.

Extat in libello de statu Eccles. Gallic. in schismate p. 4.

Et inter Regias Constitutiones. Et in Catalogo testium veritatis. p. 472.


says the same author.

9 The Ordinance of Charles the sixth in the year 1408, makes mention of
certain Presidents by him established at a Council holden at Paris; Not long
ago (says he) it was proposed and demanded by our Attorney General at a
Council holden at Paris, consisting of the Bishops and Clergy of the Churches
within our Kingdom, and Dauphiny, where our cosen Jews King of Sicily, our
eldest son Duke of Aquitain and Viennois, the Duke of Bourges our uncle by
the fathers side, the Duke of Burgundy our cosen, and the Duke of Bourbon our
uncle by the mothers side, did preside for us, that the Popes exactions and
other grievances formerly rehearsed, might be utterly abolished.

Ki^gs of England Presid^n^s.
10 King Jews the eleventh caused a Council Of the Gallicane Church, and all
the Vniversites to be assembled in the City of Orleans, to be more fully
informed in the business of the Pragmatique Sanction: at which Peter Duke of
Bourbon Lord of Beavieu presided in steed of the King.

Iean le Maire en la 2. party de^ schisms. Matthew. Westmonast. l. 2. sub ann.
1073.


11 There are Presidents in store for England too. William the first presided in
a Council holden at Roan, in the year 1073. It was judged (says an English
author) at a Council holden in that City, where William King of England was
President, that the Monks which were guilty of the crime, should be kept in
close prison during the Bishops pleasure. The same King presided also at
another holden before that at Win^hester. Florentius Wigorniensis sub ann. 1070.

Matthew. West. ^. 2. sub. ann. 1107.

Wilhelm Malmesb. de gestis pontis. Anglor. p. 129^6


Silchester in the year 1070, whereof we have spoken elsewhere. In the year
1102, or (as others have it) 1070, Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury, called a
General Council of the Churches of England to London, and presided at it (but
it was with the consent and good will of Henry the first) where some
Ecclesiastical affairs of great importance were treated of.

12 We could also produce some examples for Spain: for he that shall read
the Councels holden in that Country, ^ill easily acknowledge that the Kings
had all the authority in them whenever they were pleased to use it.

13 All the discourse which we have made upon this point, is in a manner
superfluous; for having proved by so many examples, that Kings and Princes
called Councels, it follows that they had also authority to preside in them:
which yet they did not always use, being for the most part more apt to weild
the sword than to manage an Ecclesiastical action, to give their opinions or
cause others to opine in spiritual matters, to pronounce the sentence of
judgment, and such like. Demetrius Comatenus Ar^chiepisc. Bulga^iae in
respons. ad Constantinum Ar^hiepiscopum Dirrachii. To. 1. Iuris Gr^co-romani p.
1317.
For this reason ofttimes they left all to the Clergy without intermedling
themselves: but when they were pleased to interpose, they were so far from
being censured for taking too much upon them, that on the contrary they were
highly extolled and commended for it. And what was spoken to the Emperor by an
Archbishop of Bulgaria is applyable to all Princes within their own Realms
and Dominions; The Emperor, (says he) as the common-skilfull Monarch of the
Churches, is President of the Decrees of Councels, and makes them be in force;
he ordains Ecclesiastical orders; he sets laws to the life and policy of
those that serve at the Altar, etc.

CHAP. XIV. Of the approbation and authorisation of Councels.
1 IT remains now that we speak of the authorizing of Councels, Confirmation
of Counsels ascribed to the Pop^.
which the Popes in their books arrogate unto themselves, exclusively to all
others; which is also confirmed by this Council of Trent: The words of the
Decree, as they are in the French translation by Gentian Hervet, Canon of
Rhemes, are very remarkable; It pleased all the fathers to make an end of this
holy Council, and that his Holiness should be desired to confirm it, saving
only three who said the confirmation needed not be required. Wherefore we the
Legates and Presidents conclude this holy Councell^ and desire the confirmation
of it from our holy father, in as earnest manner as is possible. That which is
spoken here of those three is razed out of all the Latin copies which were
printed since. It is a loss that the names of those honest men who were of
that sound judgment, are not known.

2 See here a Decree which does not a little enhanse the power of Rome. The
Popes heretofore cried most stoutly, that it belonged to them to authorize and
confirm Councels: yet for all that no body believed them. This Council states
the question, and will not have any to make a scruple of it hereafter. So that
if the pope think good, it is a thing done to his hand, there needs no more
talking of it. As for the Emperor and Kings and Princes, and all other persons
whatsoever, no matter for them: they have no more to do but receive what shall
be sent them, to execute what shall be enjoined them, without making any bones
of it, referring themselves in all things wholly to another man's trust.

3 And the worst of all is, that by assembling this power of confirmation, the
Pope pretends to be above the Council. Bella^m to 1. cont^overs. 4. lib. 2.
c. 17. arg. 5.
For amongst other arguments which the Romish Doctors use to prove the Popes
power to be above the Councels, this is one, that he conformes and rejects the
determinations of Councels. To repel this error we shall prove three things.
1 That in the approving of Councels the Popes have no more authority than other
men. 2 That the approbation of them made by them in times past, has not won
them any supreme authority over Councels. 3 That for point of approbation
Emperors and Kings had anciently more power than they.

4 For proof of the first, we say that anciently after the celebration of
Councels, the Synodicall fathers, as also the Emperors were wont to give
notice unto those that were absent, and to the Provinces, of such things as had
bin determined in them, to the end that they might conform and give their
consent unto them; yet so as there can be nothing observed which makes for the Sea of Rome in particular. This course the Council of Nice uses toward the
Church of Alexandria, and the Bishops of Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis, Theod.
l. 1. c. 9. Marius Victor^ l. 2 contr. Art.
as is apparent from that Epistle in Theodoret. Victorius testifies that the
Nicene Creed was sent over all the world, almost approved of all. The first
Council of Ephesus writ in general to all the Provinces, and sent their
Canons and Decrees unto them: The Acts of the Council it self do witness
it, wherein the letters directed to them upon that occasion are inserted. The
Council of Sardis did the like to the Bishops of the whole Church Catholic,
whose letters to that effect we may read at this day. C^^^^^ls ^pp^ov^d by
C^u^^^ls.
The Emperors kept that authority to themselves, principally of sending abroad
what had been determined in those Oecumenicall Councels, The^^ l. ^. c. 8. Et
^^^^ment. D^i^^lar^^. Th^^^oret.
to the intent that every man might become conformable thereunto. The letters
of Constantine the Great, directed to all the Provinces of his Empire to that
effect, do fully testify as much. And in stead of doing it by their own
authority, the Popes will needs say they did it only as executers of their and
the Councels Decrees: wherein they have grossly abused those that have been
too credulous toward them.

5 Provincial Councels took the same course of proceeding, and gave notice
one to another of their determinations, and of the Canons and Decrees which
they made, to the intent that they might mutually conform one to another. So
the Council of In pro^^^tio C^n^ G^ngrensis to. 1 Con^. p. 607.
Gangra in Cappadocia did to the Bishops of Armenia; So that of In ges^is Conc.
A(...) p^in^ip. tom. 1. ^^n^ p. 7^^.
Aquileia to the Bishops of the Provinces of Arles and Narbon: So that of In
^^^tis ^o^c. (...) to. 2. Co^^.
Valentia to the rest of the Bishops of Gaul, and the Clergy and people of
Friuli: So the third of In g^^tis Con. (...) to. 1. (...).
Carthage to the Bishops of Numidia, Mauritania, and Tripoly. Pope (...). ^
Syri^i^ P^p^^ (...) res^r^p^. ^^isc. Sy^^d. T^ll^ns. qu^ ex^^nt in Act eju^dem.
Syn^d. to. 1. Con. p. 745.
Syricius after he had held a Council at Rome of eighty Bishops, took the
very same course, in acquainting the Bishops of Africa, with the resolutions of
it, as also another Council holden at the same time at Telense, formerly a
city of Italy. Pope Damasus with other Bishops Synodically assembled at Rome
Theo^. l. 2. c. 22 C^nc. ^^rel^ten 1. to. C^n^. p. ^^^.

Pr^sper in ^hro. ann. 420.


acquaint the Bishops of Illyrium with the resolution they had taken for
rejection of the Council of Ariminum.

6 On the other side, the Council of Arles holden under Constantine the Great
does the like to Pope Sylvester. But to the end that such as ascribe unto him
authority over Councels, may not wrest it to their advantage: I will set down
the very words as they are recorded at the beginning of the Council, To their
holy brother Sylvester, Marinus, or the assembly of Bishops that was in the
City of Arles, greeting. We signify unto you of our charity, what we by
common counsel have decreed, to the end that all men may know what they ought
to observe for the future. There is an ancient Chronicler that relates how when
there was a Council holden at Carthage of two hundred and sixteen Bishops, the
Synodicall Decrees thereof were brought to Pope Zozimus, where being approved,
the Pelagian heresy was condemned all the world over. The Pope has not yet
gained any thing by all this. There is nothing for him in particular; but
here is it which is presupposed, namely that the authorizing of the Canons and
Decrees belongs unto him alone, exclusively to all others. Let us evidence the
contrary.

M^rius Victor. l ^ a^versus A^ri^n.
7 Victorinus testifies, that when the determination of the Council of Nice was
sent every where, it was approved of by an infinite number of Bishops. The
Council of Nice was approved by the third of Carthage, Con^. ^a^thag. ^. l. 1
Conc. p. 749.
in the Acts whereof it is said That the confession of faith made by the
Council of Nice, was rehearsed and confirmed. The same was done at the second
of Constantinople, In princip. Con. Constant 2. l. 2. Con^il. p. 669.
Afterward they confirmed the Council of Nice: So the Acts. The first of
Toledo used the like confirmation; as did also the sixth of Carthage; as
appears by the first and seventh chapters of it. Athanasius speaking of the
Council of Sardis, says, In prin^ip. Conc. 1. T^letan^ to. 1. Conc. Athanas.
apol 2
These things being set down in writing, the holy Council of Sardis sent them
unto those which could not be there present, who by their suffrages also
approved the Decrees of the Synod. It is good reason the Pope should contribute
his authority as well as others, and that he be not in a worse state than
others. Pope Sylvester the first in his Synod at Rome, In princip. Con^ Romans 1.
to. 1. Co^^ ^. 543.
confirmed and approved all that was decreed at the Council of Nice. Pope
Hilary used the like approbation in another Council holden under him at Rome.
Con^ R^m. 3. in prin^. to 2. Con^^ 412.
Yea further, he approved the holy Scriptures and commandments contained in
them. Councels confirmed by Emperors.
Nay which is more, all the Popes were wont at that time presently upon their
creation to publish a profession of their faith, and say their Creed according
to a certain form composed for them, a piece whereof we yet read in Gratians
Decree, wherein they approved the eight General Councels, Can. Sancta^ Did.
16.
and promised to keep and observe them. There were other articles in that
form, as the addition made by the authority of Gregory the thirteenth, does
show. And it is probable they spoke of the Scriptures contained in the Old and
New Testament: yet will we not affirm though, that they took their authority
from that approbation. We shall observe by the way, as a privilege of our
Kings, that the Popes, presently after their preferment to the Popedom, were
anciently accustomed to send that profession of their faith unto them: V.
^artic. 2. des libertes de ^egglis Gallic.
and it is to be had to this day amongst the records of the Kings Treasurer
under the name Benedictus, as some of our French authors do affirm.

8 From all these passages we conclude, that the confirmation of the Canons and
Decrees of Councels, which the Pope pretends to belong to him, is of no more
force and energy than that of other Bishops; unless they will ple^^ this
reason, that the Pope had power to reject them, and that those which he
rejected were accounted for illegitimate. Theod. l. 2. c. 22.
So Damasus reprobated the Council of Ariminum, and gave the Bishops of
Illyrium notice of that his rejection, to which they conformed themselves: but
here it must be observed, that this reprobation was made by the Council of
Rome, and not by the Pope alone: and that the Council of Ariminum was
generally condemned by all, forasmuch as it confirmed Arrianisme

9 I shall willingly grant that the Pope, upon good grounds, might disallow a
Council, and reject it of himself alone; ^ut it must be granted unto me
likewise that it was lawful for others to do the like. The Council of Tire
having unjustly condemned Athanasius, the Emperor Constantine writ some sharp
letters to them, and commanded the Bishops of that Council (who were then
removed to Jerusalem) to come to Constantinople, to render a reason of their
fact, and to justify their sentence. Sozomen. l. 2. c. 27.
Saint Hilary rejected the Council of Milan, and writ against it. Athanasius
writes of the Emperor Constantius that he served himself with the color of
a Council to condemn him, but that in very deed it was himself that gave the
judgment against him. He condemns such a Council as unlawful and unjust.
This very reason do we urge against the Council of Trent. We say it was but
a Pope dressed up in mummerie, and which carried the name of a Council: that he
has taken too much power upon him in making the validity of Councels to depend
merely upon his authority. Nay we say yet further, that Emperors and Kings
have far more authority than he in the confirmation and approbation of
Councels, which we shall make evident by some examples.

10 Eusebius in the life of Constantine witnesses that he confirmed the
Council of Nice. Extat haec Epist. in libello ^ynodat. Consti^.
The Bishops of the second General Council write to the Emperor Theodosius
on this wise: We desire your clemency that you by your letters would confirm
the Decrees of the Council, and command that it be ratified and established.
In the first Action of that of Chalcedon it is said, V. Conc. Chalc. Act. 1.
and 3. to. 2. Conc.
The Emperor Theodosius confirmed all that was decreed by the holy and
General Council. And in the third Action the Emperor Martian said, We
confirm the reverend Synod by the sacred Edict of our serenity. Pope Leo
acknowledged that this kind of approbation belonged to the Emperor; for being
displeased with the second Council of Ephesus, to take order that it might not
be approved by the Emperor Theodosius, he and all his Synod of Rome writ to
him about it. Epist. 23. ad Theodosium Impera^.
Both I and all the rest of the Bishop my Colleagues do beseech you (most
Christian and venerable Emperor) to command that all things remain in the same
state they were in before the holding of the Council, Counc^ls confi^med by
Empe^ou^s.
and the judgment there passed to be suspended, till such time as a great
number of Clergymen may be assembled from all parts of the world. And in
another place, Idem in cadem epist. ubi de cadem ^yn^d. Ephesians 2. Vt. etiam
epist. 24. ad P^^^her. Augu^^am. ^eo Epist. 58.
All the Clergy entreat you with sighs and tears, that, considering those
who were sent thither by us did faithfully oppose themselves against it, and
that Bishop Flavianus put in his appeal from it, you would command a General
Council to be kept in Italy. The same Leo writ to the rest of the Bishops in
commendation of the Council of Chalcedon, to the end that they should receive
it as legitimate; but it was, as he himself confesses, by command from the
Emperor Martian.

11 The Emperor Constantius prescribed the form which they should go by, and
the points which they should treat upon, to the Councels of Ariminum and
Seleucia, and commanded them by his letters. ^ozom. l. 4 c. 16.
That so soon as they had passed sentence commanded them that ten of each
Council should come to the Court to inform him of their proceedings. Wherein
he was obeyed by them. Theodosius and Valentinian commanded the Oecumenicall
Council of Ephesus to send some of the Bishops unto them to acquaint them with
the causes and motives of their deliberations, which was done accordingly, as
appears by the letters of the Council to those Emperors. ^elatio Synodi
Ephesinae quae extat to. 1. Conc.
Your piety being moved by our prayers (say those good Fathers) has commanded
that this General Council should send unto you some of the Bishops and
Religious, to lay open all the causes and motives in your presence: whereupon,
after thanks to God, we have chosen out Arcadius, luvenal, Flavian, Firmus,
Theodotus, and Acatius Bishops, Euoptius and Philippicus Priests and delegates
for Celestine Bishop of the Sea Apostolic of great Rome, whom we commend unto
your sanctity, desiring you to hear them graciously.

12 After the second Council of Nice, called the seventh General, was ended,
Those who had been at the celebration of it (says Zonaras in the third Tome
of his Annals) repairing to the City of Constantinople, they rehearsed the
Acts of the Council in the Imperial Palace, the Emperors presiding there in
the face of the whole world, which were approved and subscribed by the same
Emperors. Theod. l. 5. c. 8.
We read also that the Emperors did publish and promulgate the Canons and
Decrees of Councels: that they sent out proclamations concerning them: that
they dispersed them through the provinces to cause them to be observed, with
commination of penalties: yea they directed them to the Popes themselves. Act.
3. Council. Chalced to. 1. Council.
There are two several Edicts of the Emperors Valentinian and Martian extant
in the third Act of the Council of Chalcedon, whereby that Council is
confirmed.

13 We have some pregnant examples in our Realm of France in case of such
confirmations, such were constantly reserved to our Princes by the Councels
there kept. The first of Orleans address their Decrees to King Clovis, with
this recommendation, Conc. Aurelian. ^. to. ^. Conc. pa. 510.
If the things which we have ordained be approved and found good by your
judgment, the resolution of so many reverend Bishops as are here, is, that the
authority and consent of so great a King as you are be preserved. The fourth
of Arles holden under Charles the great, breaks off with this conclusion:
Conc. Arelat. 4. To. 3. Council. p. 679.
We have briefly touched what we thought worthy of reformation, with a purpose
of presenting unto the Emperor what we have done about it; desiring his
clemency that if ought be found defective it may be supplied by his wisdom;
and what shall be amiss may be amended by his judgment, and what shall be
found to be well done may be confirmed and perfected by his assistance.

14 The third of Tours, holden under the same Emperor in the same year makes
this preface: ^oncil. Turon. ^ ^o 3. Conc. page 682.
We have distinctly divided into chapters certain points which we thought
pertinent to so great a work, and to stand in need of reformation; following
therein the canonical order, that we might show them to our most renowned
Emperor. Emper^u^^s and Kings confirm Councels.
The second of Cavaillon holden under the same Emperor, says in the preface.
We have observed certain points and chapters to be presented to the Emperor
himself, and referred to his most sacred judgment; Conc Cabillonens in prin.
To. 3. Conc pa. 686.
to the intent that by his pru^ent examination those things may be confirmed,
which we with good reason have determined. The first of Mentz says to the same
Emperor, That your Imperial dignity would command such things to be
corrected as stand in need of correction. And they had said before, Council.
^ogunt. 1 To. ^. Conc. in prae^at p. 694. Synod M^gunt. 2^ in fin. To. ^.
Council. p 838.
That the chapters by us collected may be confirmed by your authority. The
second of Mentz, holden in the year eight hundred thirty four, concludes
with these words directed to Jews the Gentle, We desire that these resolutions
which are sent unto you, may be confirmed by your authority. An ancient
Historian gives this testimony of the third of Mentz, holden under the same
Prince, Annals incerti author. ^pud scriptores cooetaneos Pithoei.
They treated of Ecclesiastical questions (says he, speaking of the Bishops
of that Council) but the King being employed in public affaires^ and
composing differences among the Princes and Governors of Provinces, returned
to Bavaria, after he had approved the Syno^icall acts, which were referred to
his judgment.

15 In all this it is to be observed, that in none of these Councels was it
ever consulted about requiring of the Popes approbation, nor his consent in any
thing whatsoever; which is much different from the manner of proceeding in that
Council which we reject. Histoire de Rheins l. 3. c. 9.
Only we read that a certain Bishop of Rhemes sent the acts of a Synod
holden at Soissons to be confirmed by Pope Bennet, who succeeded Leo. But
withal that he did not do it by any decree of the Council: and this example
is not so much worth against so many to the contrary. And it is so far from
truth, that the Popes confirmation was ever required to the Ecclesiastical
laws of France, that on the contrary the Popes themselves have received them,
as we prove elsewhere. Conc. Aquisgr. in sine to. 3. council. p. 864.
The Council of Aix holden in the year 837, entreat King Pepin To take their
act in good part. There are diverse others which do the like.

16 There are some also extant whose decrees are conceived in the name of our
Kings, whom the Councels bring in speaking, that they may be of more force:
which denotes the great authority of our Kings over Councels. Such are the
decrees of the Council of Soissons, holden under Pepin in the year 744. Such
those of Francfort under Charles the Great, about the condemnation of images,
and the Felician heresy. Such are those of the Synod of Pistis upon the Seyne,
holden by Charles the Bald. Such the Pragmatique Sanction of Charles the
seventh, which is nothing else but the Decrees and Determinations of the
Council of Bourges, and diverse others.

A REVIEW OF THE COUNCIL OF TRENT. BOOK IV.
CHAP. I. That the Council of Trent advances the Popes authority above the
authority of Councels.
IT is not said in express terms by the Decrees of the Council of Trent,
That the Pope is above a Council; yet it is such an easy matter to see that
this was the intention of those fathers, that there is no reason to make any
scruple of it. So they which now adays plead the Popes cause, build their
maine arguments upon it; to whom by the way we shall take leave to make some
resistance, in defense of the Gallicane Church, and indeed of the liberty of
all Christians. See here is then the means whereby the Pope is a^thorized by
them to be above a Council.

2 First of all, inasmuch as the Bishops there present suffered and approved
the Pope to use absolute prohibitions against them, and that with commination
of punishments and penalties; and that of his own authority he commanded his
Legates to remove the Council, without ever making any mention in his Bulls of
asking their advice, but rather of mulcting them in case they should refuse so
to do. Tren^ C^^^c^l ^i^^s Popes ^uthori^y ^bove Co^^^^l^.
We have already transcribed in the chapter of the convocation of Councels,
that passage wherein these things are contained.

3 In next place, Because the authority of the Pope is by this Council in all
things reserved: which is as much as to say, is preferred above the Decrees of
the Council, so as he may change and alter them at his pleasure. In the
second Decree of the sixth Session, it is said, The same holy Council, the
same Legates there presiding, intending to prosecute the business in hand
touching reformation and residence, has resolved that it be ordained as
follows, saving always in all things the authority of the holy See
Apostolic. And in the 21 chapter of the last Session; Finally the holy
Council declares, that in all and every thing which has been ordained in this
holy Council touching reformation of manners, and Ecclesiastical discipline,
under what clauses and words soever expressed, as w^ll under Pope Paul the third,
and Julius the third, as under the most blessed Pius the fourth, they were so
ordained and decreed, as that the authority of the holy See Apostolic is and
must always be understood to be reserved.

S^ss. ul^. c. 5.
4 In the third place, Because they give unto him power to declare, interpret,
and resolve all doubts, and difficulties, which shall arise about the Canons
and D^crees of the Council in such manner as he shall think good.

Sess. ult. c. ult.
5 Fourthly, Because in the conclusion of the Council they desire a
confirmation from the Pope of all and every such things as were there by them
ordained an^ determined.

S^ss ult ^. 2.
6 Fift^ly, Because they decreed that Provincial Councels shall promise and make
protestation of true obedience to the Pope.

7 Sixthly, Because the Pope, during the time of the Council, did and
exercised what of right belonged to the Council, and not to him: as the
creation of Cardinals, the according of Princes, and other things of like nature

8 Seventhly, Because the Pope took authority upon him in the very Council:
As when the question was about the controversy betwixt the Kings of France and
Spain.

9 Eighthly, Because they permitted, yea approved the ordinance of Pius the
fourth: That if the Pope chance to die during the time of the Council, the
election of another belongs to the Cardinals.

10 Ninthly, Because it confirmed all Papal constitutions in general; and
cons^quently that of Leo the tenth, wherein he disalloweth the Pragmatique
Sanction, and declares the Pope to be above a Council.

11 Tenthly, Because they suffered, that the Popes which reigned during the
time that they were assembled together in Council, inserted in the faculties
of their Legates; namely the power of derogating from General Councels.

12 And lastly, Because they treated and resolved upon nothing in that
Council, till such time as they had sent to seek the the holy Ghost at Rome,
and had consulted the Popes oracle, as we said already in another place. Hence
then we with good consequence conclude, that they gave the Popes authority over
Councels: which was never done before, save only in the Lateran Conventicle:
and it will never appear that the former Councels gave any such advantages to
the Popes in any of these cases here specified.

13 For the first, it was never heard of before, that Popes took upon them to
mulct Councels: to command them in an imperious way. Eugenius the fou^^h
commanded indeed the translation of the Council of Basil, but in milder terms,
and yet he was not obeyed in it. This was one of the questions discussed and
resolved at the Council of Basil, That the Pope of his own authority cannot
dissolve, nor transfer, nor protract o General Council lawfully assembled,
without its consent. Popes have no right to transfer Counc^ls.
This very resolution was received and approved in France by the confirmation
of the Council of Basil, made at the Synod of Bo^rges; as may be seen in the
Pragmatique Sanction of King Charles the seventh, wherein that Decree is
inserted word for word. If we look up to the ancient times, it is certain
that the translation, prorogation, and dissolution of Councels belonged to the
same to whom the Convocation: Now the Convocation (as we have showed) was made
by Emperors an^ Princes; therefore it belonged to them also to translate them
when they thought sit, without any injunction from any man in this matter.

14 It will be said perhaps that the transl^tion of this Council from Trent
to Bonony, by virtue of the Popes Bull, was avowed by the Council. It is true;
but here we must take notice of two things: First, that when the Pope commanded
that removal, he did not put into it any saving or reservation of the good
will of the Councell^ which ought to have been done according to the Council
of Basil. The second, that the Bishops indeed which were there did deliberate
upon this translation, but it was to conform themselves to the Popes command:
for say they, ^ess^o 9.
The Authority also of the holy See Apostolique^ unto the said most reverend
Presidents in more special manner granted intervening. They were very fearful
of doing otherwise, and swarving the least jot from his pleasure, considering
those comminations whereof we have spoken already. Nay besides all this, in
bringing of it back again from Bonony to Trent by the only authority of Julius
the third, there was not any deliberation at all about it in the Council;
howbeit that Bull contains some as peremptory clauses as the former; as for
example this which follows; Julius the ^hi^d^ Bull pu^ (...) ^he end of the
tenth Session.
Decreeing notwithstanding that if ought be attempted to the contrary hereof
by any person whatsoever, by any authority whatsoever, it to be void and of no
effect. Let it not therefore be lawful for any man to infringe, or in a
temerarious boldness to oppose this Chart of these our present exhortation,
desire, admonition, ordinance, declaration, innovation, will and decrees. By
virtue of this Bull those Reverend fathers returned from Bonony to Trent,
without ever finding fault with that clause which aimed directly at them: yea
without ever giving their voices, or consulting about this second translation;
but only about the resumption and continuation of the Council after they were
returned to Trent: add hereto that the Pope says in that Bull, that he
decrees this translation of his full power, and with the advice of the
Cardinals, making no mention at all of the Fathers of the Council in this
respect.

15 Shall we now say this was a free Council, and that it had authority over
the Pope, being so rudely curbed and checked by him, and that in such harsh
terms? All which (as this is it betrays the naked truth of their intention)
are registered in the Acts of the Council. Now all these forementioned clauses
deserve to be paralleld with those in the Bull of Eugenius the fourth, whereby
he decreed the translation of the Council of Basil, and which raised such a
deal of tragedies, to the confusion of that great Pope, to see if there be any
thing in it, wherewith those fathers of Basil might be more justly offended
than ours of Trent were. That Pope had ordained that the Council should be
transferred from Basil to Bonony, and afterward that it should continue at
Basil, with all respect and reverence unto it, and without any haughty
speeches; as appears by his Bull of the year one thousand four hundred
thirty one, which is extant in the Acts of that Council, Session the first.
Notwithstanding that translation, and without any regard of it the Council
held on at Basil: yea and meddled with business without waiting for the
arrival of the Popes Legate. And (to the intent the Pope might have no stomach
to transfer, or dissolve the Council at his pleasure) it confirmed the
Decree of the Council of Constance, Eugenius paralleld with Trent-Popes.
wherein it is said in downright terms, That a Council is above the Pope; and
this was done in the second Session. The next year after when the Council had
notice of the Popes intention, which was to dissolve the Council by means of
this translation, they sent to entreat him that he would not do it, and at the
very same time fixed upon this resolution, not to suffer it: this was consulted
upon the same year, one thousand four hundred thirty two, as the Acts relate
it in the fourth Session. Upon this reason Eugenius by his Bull dated in
August, one thousand four hundred thirty three, after he has told how he
translated the Council from Basil to Bonony, and how he afterward ordained
that it should be continued in the same City of Basil under the Presidence of
his Legate, and also of the disrespect of that Council toward him, who had
held their Session without his Legate, and in contempt of the translation;
hereupon he sent out a Bull, which is not in any thing more presumptuous than
those of Julius the third, and Pius the fourth, about the translation of the
Council of Trent. We will here set down the very words, that so the
comparison may be more easy.

16 Of our full power Apostolical we abrogate and anull, and decree that
whatsoever has been enacted, declared and ordained by the Council of Basil
against us our Laws and liberties, and of the Sea Apostolic, be invalid and
of no effect. Forbidding all Christians to obey or give ear to such decrees,
ordinances, commandments and proceedings: declaring that no man is tied by any
bond of oath, promise, or compact made with them, of what estate, degree, or
eminen^e soever he be: and whether he be of dignity Imperial, Royal,
Cardinal, or whatsoever else Ecclesiastical or Civil. Let it not then be
lawful for any person to infringe, or in a temerarious boldness to oppose this
our declaration, ordinance, will, command, cassation, abrogation, and
prohibition.

17 Let us now examine all these clauses. I. First of all he declares that he
proceeds therein with full power Apostolic. Paul the third says in his Bull
dated in March 1544, Out of our own proper motion and full power Apostolic.
II. Secondly, he casseth and declares, that what was done by the Council of
Basil in prejudice of his authority, is a nullity. Pope Julius the third^ in
his Bull of the 15 of December, says, We decree notwithstanding that if any
person whatsoever by any authoritiy whatsoever, do attempt any thing to the
contrary, it shall be void and of no effect. III. He forbids all persons to
oppose his Bull out of temerarious boldness. Hear Julius in his upon that
point, Let it not therefore be lawful for any man in the world to infringe
this present Chart, or out of a temerarious boldness to oppose it. And here is
all that can be said out of Pope Eugenius his Bull to the Council of Basil.
But this is not all of Pope Paul's to the Council of Trent. For behold he has
yet more, inasmuch as he commands his Legates, To remove the Council of Trent
to what other place they please; to suppress and dissolve it in the said City
of Trent: and to forbid the Prelates and other persons of that Council to
proceed any further at the said Trent, upon pain of Ecclesiastical censures
and punishments. This might well have sufficed, but to make up the upshot, see
yet more: To summon the said Prelates and other persons of that Council unto
that City whither it shall he adjourned, upon pain of perjury, and other
punishments expressed in the letters of Convocation. This clause is so
newfangle, that the Popes never used it to any Council before. Yet
nevertheless poor Eugenius because he conceived such an enterprise was
declared an heretic by the Council of Basil, and deposed from his Popedom.
Whereas these on the contrary have won the day, and triumphed over the
Council, over Emperors, and Princes, yea indeed over all Christendom. These
denouncings of punishments are formally against the Decrees of the Councels of
Constance, Basil, and Pisa, whereby it is said, That the Pope has no power to
transfer a Council without its approbation. Which notwithstanding the
foresaid Popes did by their Bulls abovementioned. Council of B^^^ above the
P^^^s autho^^^y.


18 It is said another decree of the Council of Basil, That the Pope has no
presidence either coercitive or authoritative above a Council, as they phra^^
it, Sess 17. Conc. Basil.
that is, none which gives him any authority over it. Which Decree was made
with great and mature deliberation, after they had spent a long time in the
search of books and some Canons, and had employed the most learned men about it.

19 The Cardinals that called the second Council of Pisa made a complaint to
the other Cardinals that were near to Julius the second, because they had
consented that they should be summoned with Ecclesiastical censur^s to another
place to keep the Council. Vid. Responsionem da^am Epis^ po Al^^and. N^nc^o
Collegi^ Cardina^^^^^ Roma ex^slentis ^ Card^^^libus Conci ium Pisanum
indicentibus, apud Acta C^ncilii Pisani 2.
We were highly displeased that you should yield your consent, or give your
advice (if that be so) to such grievous admonitions and censures as are said to
be pronounced against us, and that namely summoning us by censures to a place
which is notoriously suspected to us. Yet nothing was done for all this, for
they let the Pope hold his Council of Lateran at Rome, while they celebrated
their other at Pisa.

20 The Council of Basil used another manner of language to Eugenius the
fourth. Let us hear what Platina says of it. Pl^ti^^ in Eugenio ^.
Then the Pope being distracted with a doubtful care because he was pressed
with wars on every side^ and saw the Council of Basil, which was formerly
begun by Pope Martins Decree, to increase every day, the Kings of Spain,
France, Germany, and Poland s^ocking thither, as r^ferring the common cause of
the Christian Commonwealth to the Councels arbitrament resolving with himself
to break off the Council, he transferred it first from Basil to Bonony with
the consent of all the Cardinals that were with him. But the Emperor and the
rest of the Princes and Prelates then at Basil did not only disobey him, but
admonished him two or three times to come with the Cardinals to Basil, the
proper place for the holding of the Council, and which had been pitched upon
by Pope Martin, otherwise they would proceed against him as a prevaricator and
contumacious person. Eugenius being moved with these words, confirmed the
Council of Basil by his Apostolical letters, giving every one leave to go
thither. But all this which he relates does appear yet more plainly by the
reading of the Acts of that Council, to which I refer the Reader.

21 As for the Popes authority, which is always reserved in all the Decrees of
this Council, it is as extraordinary a clause as can be imagined. I confess
there was always a great deal of honor given to this See of Rome in
consideration it was the chief City of the Empire: but to make such a
reservation of his authority was a thing unusual and unknown.

22 When the question was about condemning the Felician heresy, Ai^oniu^ lib.
5.
because the author of it had been formerly sent to Adrian the first, and
convicted in his presence, therefore the Council of Francford being to
excommunicate the Bishops of Spain, did him so much honor as to make an
express reservation of Pope Adrians privilege. Which is no general
privilege comprehending any authority over Councels: but only a prerogative
in that point which concerned the Bishops condemnation, to the intent that the
process might be revised by his authority, according to the Decree of the
Council of Sardis. So likewise the first Council of Ephesus did Pope
Celestine the honor to refer John Bishop of Antioch his cause to his
judgment, and that for the reason which we elsewhere relate. But all this was
done out of a prerogative of honor, not out of any acknowledgement of the
Popes superiority over a Council: for it can never be found that other
Councels reserved the Popes authority over their Decrees.

23 Besides, this is a way to bring a tyranny into the Church, seeing he that
should have such an unlimited power not subject to any control or reproof,
Trent Council subject themselves to the Pope unjustly.
might alter and change all things concerning manners and Ecclesiastical
discipline, might lead all the world in a string, and have them under his lash;
might hook into his own hands the election, deposition, and judgment of all
Clergymen: in a word, this is put all in his hands. There was no need of
staying such a while at Trent to make up so many Decrees, if they must
afterward send them to the Pope to cancel. For it is well known he
dispenses with them sufficiently himself, so as there is no necessity of
enlarging his power any further. They might have done better to have referred
all to his discretion at first, to clip and stitch them up at his pleasure. The
expenses of so many armies might have been spared. But see here a thing worth
your observation: All the Princes and people of Christendom groan after a
reformation of the Church: cry out that it must begin at the head, and from
thence descend to the members: The instructions given to the Ambassadors of
the Emperor, the King of France, and all Germany are charged with it. Pope
Adrian confesses it by his Legate in the Diet of Noremberg. And yet for all
this in stead of a pastoral staff which he had before, they give him a club,
a two edged sword. In stead of reforming the abuses, they foment them: in stead
of extirpating them, they increase them. Let us now prosecute the other points.

24 The Council referres the exposition and declaration of such doubts and
controversies as may arise about it solely and wholly to the Pope. Whereupon we
reply, that if they be petty doubts they should as well be resolved by other
Bishops as by him, seeing they are all expositours of Gods law, which has at
least as much authority as the Council of Trent. And therefore by consequent
the Council of Trent derogates from their authority, in ascribing that to the
Pope alone which belongs unto them all. But if there be some great
controversy in question, the definition of it belongs to a Council. These
Fathers knew it well enough, when they said that the Pope might provide for it
by holding of a Council: Con^il. Constan^ien. Sess. 39.
but the sting and venom is in the tail, or by any other way as shall seem
to him to be most convenient. The Councels of Constance and Basil did not use
the matter so, but piously ordained that from thence forwards General Councels
should be holden from ten years to ten years. In which they were approved by
the Pragmatique Sanction of Bourges. This is the true means of expounding
doubts, of weeding out heresies, of tilling the Lords field, as it is said in
those Councels.

25 This keeping of Councels every ten years was found so necessary, that the
Pope was forbid to prolong the time, howbeit power was given him upon just
cause to abridge it. Our Trent Fathers were of another opinion: having this
conceit that the Popes are much enamored of Councels, in these times
especially when it is lawful for them to do any thing, they have l^ft it to
their discretion to call them when they shall think good. What I pray? give a
child a rod to whip himself when he list with. They have no lust to procure
them, although by this of Trent they are declared masters over them, whereas by
others they were but servants to them. They are too apprehensive of the return
of those former times. Let a man but consider the mystery of that of Trent:
five and twenty years must they pause upon the calling of it, and spend
eighteen years in the holding of it. Why all this? if not to choose the times
and seasons of purpose to dispose persons to their desire, to alter their
minds, to break off the good designs of such as labored a reformation, to
employ them upon business, to stir up troubles, and put all things in
commotion, that so they might reign more powerfully, and bring all things
under their Empire?

^ib 3. Cap. 14.
26 As for the approbation of it which was demanded at the Popes hands, we have
spoke so fully of it in another place, that there is no need of adding any more
to it. We shall only say that those Fathers did merely befoole themselves in
their mystery, P^ovinciall ^ynods not subjects to the Pop^.
by ordaining that the Pope should confirm that which himself had made, either
at Rome from whence he sent the Canons and Decrees ready made to their hands;
or at Trent, where he presided by his Legates. But this was to make it appear
to every man that all depends upon him alone, and that the rest of the world is
but his footstool.

27 As for the oath of true obedience to the Pope, to which Provincial Synods
are submitted by this very Council, we say likewise that it is an unusual
thing, yea unknown in former Councels: which were so far from taking an oath
of obedience to the Pope, that on the contrary they opposed him when he
out-rayed from his duty; and made him know that every one of the Bishops, of
whom they consisted, was as good a man as he, saving his Patriarchall dignity,
which is common to him with others of the same Order. Hear what the Bishops of
the Synod of Metz say to Pope Nicholas who had excommunicated them. Annal^^
in^erti auth^^ (...) script^res cooetin^^s (...) Avertin^^ l. 4. ^^st. (...).
We see thine anger and thy swelling power. We do not yield an inch either to
thee or to thy pride; and we will make thee know we are none of thy Clerks,
as thou boastest thy self, and art proud of it; seeing that if thy passion
would suffer thee, thou should acknowledge us for thy brethren and fellow
Bishops. But we shall handle all that can be said to this point in the
gen^rall question, Whether the Pope be above a Council. We will only add
here, that this obedience is of a new stamp: and to be full assured of its
noveltie we need but read the Councels holden in former times, where we shall
find no such thing. That of Basil speaks at large of provincial Synods in
the fifteenth Session, and prescribes them a form which they shall observe,
and sets down what they shall do. But it has quite forgot this clause of
obedience.

28 It is also a thing notorious, that the Popes proceeded to the creation of a
great number of Cardinals during the time of the celebration of the Council.
Onuphrius testifies that Pius the fourth in four elections which he made
created full forty six before the end of this Council. Onuphrius Panu^nus in
addit. ad Pl^^inam. l^ (...) 4.
Now by that of Basil in the fourth Session, the Pope is forbid to create any
Cardinals during the time of the Councell^ The holy Council ordaines by this
irrefragable Decree, that during the time of this sacred Council, the Pope of
Rome, absent in person from the place of this Sacred Council, nor ought nor
can prefer any man of what quality soever to the dignity of Cardinal, by any
means or upon any pretense whatsoever.

29 That which we urge touching the according of Christian Princes is not
causlesse: it is one of the functions belonging to Councels to appease the
quarrels and controversies amongst them. The Council of Basil says it was
assembled For the extirpation of errors and heresies: (...) Basil Sess 2.
for the reformation of manners in the head and members; and for the
pacification of Kings and Kingdoms, and all other Christians. Now it was
evident that during the time of the celebration of this Council, all
Christendom was up in arms: the Popes were observed to make commotions, to
kindle wars and sound an alarm, I say not against those that were departed
from his obedience, but even against Catholic Princes. Henry the second, King
of France, may serve for instance. And when the Pope pleased agreements were
made. All this while our Council never said a word to it, but like a snaile
drew in its horns, and among all these tempests remained close shut up in its
shell, not daring show it self in such dainty affairs: letting all things
pass as if it had no interest in them: as if it had been the blood of
Barbarians which was shed, and not of the members of Christ. When there arose a
controversy in the Council betwixt the Ambassadors of France and Spain
about precedencie, our Council continuing in its accustomed silence, suffered
the Pope to interpose in it, and to negotiate the accord, after he had fomented
the quarrel. In brief, we may fitly say this Council was nothing but a
white wall upon which the Pope might write what he list: Popes elected by
Councels.
that it moved only by him; that it was a Pope Council, that is, a Council in
name, but a Pope in deed.

30 As for the authority which we say the Pope took upon him over the
Council, it appears in that commandment which came from him for censing the
Ambassadors of the two Kings both at once, which was an occasion of
dissension: witness Onuphrius, who says, Onuphrius Panuinus in Pio 4. in
addition. ad Platinam.
There was a great controversy by reason that by command from the Pope the
Ambassadors of the two Princes were both censed at once.

31 But lo here that which outgoes all the rest I namely, that Pius the 4
ordained by a Bull of his, Onuphriu^ in P^^ ^.
That if the Pope happened to dye during the time of the celebration of a
Council, the election of a new Pope shall belong to the Cardinals only, and
not to the Council. Which Bull (says the same Onuphrius) was confirmed and
approved by all the Fathers of this Council. Besides, if they had not done so
in express terms, the general Decree would have been sufficient for it^
whereby they have authorized all the Popes Canons and Decrees, and besides have
in express words advanced the Pope above the Council in all things, and to
all effects and purposes. Now the Pope having made this Decree during the time
the Council sat, and the Council having admitted of it, we may well
conclude that it has resigned its power to the Pope, and has advanced him
above it self.

32 Now that the Election of the Pope belongs to the Council, is clear by
that of Constance in the fourteenth Session. The holy General Council of
Constance ordains that the next election of a Pope of Rome shall be
performed in such manner, form, place and time as shall be appointed by the
sacred Synod: and that the said Council may for the future qualify, receive
and depute such persons as it shall think good, of what estate and condition
soever, to make such election active and passive. This Decree was after
confirmed by the Council of Basil in the 37 Session. The holy Synod ordaines
that if the Sea Apostolic happen to be void while this holy General Council
sits, the election of the Pope shall be in this place, forbidding it to be done
in any other.

33 It is true the Council of Constance gives the Cardinals leave to proceed
to the election: but that was always with authority from the Council. So
says the Abbat of Panormo in express terms. In capit. licet. De electione.
disput. 2.
To avoid dissension it was obtained of the Council of Constance that the said
Council should for that time transfer their right upon the College of
Cardinals. The same Council of Constance speaks thus of it in the forty
fifth Session^ The holy General Council of Constance, in execution of their
Ordinance, Decree, and Constitution, touching the form of electing the Pope of
Rome for this turn, to proceed to the said election, has joined to the right
Reverend Cardinals, with their express will and consent, the Reverend
Patriarchs of Constantinople, etc, There are thirty there nominated to proceed
to the said election with the Cardinals. Which was done at that time with their
consent, to avoid trouble, by reason of their great power. And that this was
the reason does plainly appear by that which was done afterward in the like
case at the Council of Basil, which gave the Cardinals no such power, but made
choice of other persons to proceed to the same election without their consent.
For see what they say of it in the thirty seventh Session. The said Co^ncell
does ordain and de^lare that the election of a Pope shall for this turn be
executed and performed by this Sacred Council of Basil, or at least by its
authority, according to the form already set down. Now the form was this:
that the Cardinals which are or shall be may assist accidentally at the said
election, with two and thirty other Ecclesiastiques of all Orders, always
provided that they be Subdeacons at least: Not by their own proper authority,
but by that of the Council, as it is said in these words, Popes elected by
Councels.
That they have free power to choose a Pope by the authority of this Council.

34 Besides, it was not ques^ion'd in the Council there, Whether the power of
choosing a Pope belonged to the Council during the time of its celebration: but
only whether the Council could depose the Pope, as we find it in the Acts
of that Council, collected by AEneas Sylvius, afterward called Pope Pius the
second: which teaches us further,, that the consent of the Cardinals was no
way necessary, but only granted to them in a complement. The Fathers thought
it requisite (says he) to take the election of a Pope into consideration, ^^d
the chief of them having consulted about the manner of proceeding, it was
proposed and at last agreed upon in full assmbly, that two and thirty Fathers,
who had taken the Orders of Deacon should be selected out of the body of the
Council, who having first taken their oaths, should enter into the Conclave
with the Cardinal of Arles to choose the Pope. This being thus determined by
these two Councels, it is needless to urge the authority of Doctors and
Devines; as of James Almain in his lecture De potestate Ecclesiastica: Mr. John
Gerson Chancelour of the University of Paris, in his tract De potestate
Ecclesiae, and his other De substractione Papae erga Ecclesiam: and others
which hold in terminis, that during the celebration of a Council it belongs to
it, and not to the Cardinals, to proceed to the election of a new Pope, in case
the Sea become void. We shall only say that this is so, because it is the
Council which gave the Cardinals this power of choosing the Pope; to wit that
of Lyo^s and that other of Vienna: and therefore if there be one assembled
when the Sea falls void, it belongs to it only to proceed to the election, or
to depute such a^ they shall think good to do so. Now the Council of Trent
having diverse times suffered them to usurp this right of election, it must
needs be confessed that it had not the force and authority of an O^cumenicall
Council.

35 Pope Leo's Constitution made at the Council of Lateran, whereby he
derogates from the Council of Basil and the Pragmatique Sanction (as
concerning the authority of a Council above the Pope) is also notoriously
known to every body: whereof we shall speak toward the end of this Treatise.

36 And for the faculties of the Popes Legates to dispense with Councels, this
is proved by those granted by Julius the third to Cardinal Saint Marti^ de
Montibus, in the year 1551. and to Cardinal Saint George de Vitulo aureo, the
year 1553. by Paul the third to Cardinal Caraffa, the year 1556. and to
Cardinal Trivultio, the year 1558. by Pius the fourth to the Cardinal of
Ferrara in the year 1561, all Legates in France. We find this clause in all
these faculties, To oppose the gainsayings of General Councels, and to
derogate from them.

CHAP. II. That Popes are not above Councels.
The Pope is not the Church
1 TO make some of the injustice of this usurpation and ascribing too much to
the Pope appear more plainly, we will make it evident by authentic proofs
that the Pope has no power over a Council. We shall content our selves with
touching upon the most pregnant reasons, yea and to omit such of them too as
would draw us into over long discourses. Though we had no authoriti^ at all to
prove that the Pope has not any jurisdi^tion nor command over a Councell^
reason alone were sufficient to lead us to this persuasion. Granting that to be
true which is disputed by some, that the Pope is the ministerial Head of the
Chu^c^; it is an unusual thing in all companies and congregations (supreme
Monarchies only excepted) that the Head should have more power than all the
body. He may do much when he is joined with it: but by himself if he do
ought which does not proceed well, it belongs to his body to take order with
it, to take him under their cognizance, to judge of his proceedings, and of
appeals from him, and such like matters. Otherwise the inconveniences are too
great when a ministerial Head has absolute authority. If he be unjust,
perfidious, wicked, corrupt, abominable, impious, tyrannical, inhumane: we
must have patience and submit our selves to all, there being no other remedy,
but prayers and tears, to which alone these honest Doctors bid us have
recourse.

2 For another reason; what good will it do us to have Councels hereafter, to
what end shall we use them, if they depend entirely upon the Popes authority?
if he alone may alter all in an instant, make new Canons and Decrees, and no
body can say to him, Why do thou so?

3 Lastly, what a misery, or rather what an abuse is this, that the name of the
Church should be confined to one man? that so many goodly qualities and
prerogatives as are ascribed to it, should agree properly to the Pope^ Yea that
he himself should be both the bridegroom and the bride? And I desire all
good Catholics to take notice of this, and to open their eyes that from
henceforth they may discern these illusions. They ascribe unto the Pope both
the nature of the Head, and the nature of the Body: they say he is the
Bridegroom, and they will have him to be the Bride too. Hear the testimony
of Bellarmine concerning this: Bellar. l. 2. de Council. author. C. 17.
All the names (says he) which are given to Christ in holy Scripture, whereby
he is set above the Church, the same are all ascribed to the Pope too. He is
called the Head of the body of the Church: He is styled the husband or speuse.
See here what he says in one place^ Hear also how he speaks in another
place, treating of the same subject, and expounding that passage, out of the
eighteenth of St. Matthew, If thy brother have offended thee, tell it unto the
Church: being not able to disintangle himself from that which is objected,
that those words are directed to St. Peter, and by consequent to the Pope.
Bellar^ l 2. De Council. ^uthor. (...) 19^
I add (says he) that the Pope may fulfill this command by a way of his own:
first he must reprove him that has offended, in private; then afterward
before witnesses: lastly, the telling o^ it to the Church; that is, the telling
of it to himself as President. Pope Gregory confess^th himself inf^^^o^ to
Councels.
O terrible id est! which like a magic spell, showing us the Pope sometimes
like a man, sometimes like a woman, makes him an Hermaphrodite. One of the
prime expositours of the Canon Law expounded those words thus, Tell it to the
Church, that is, to a Council. Archia^iaconus in Ca. Praecipne 11 ^. 3.
But that opinion is now cashiered. We do not live in those times wherein they
spoke on that fashion: these are the nowadayes terms of heretics; and such
as are more dangerous.

4 I know very well the word Church has reference sometimes to the Pastors of
it; and that St. Chrysostom expounded the place thus, Tell it to the Church,
that is, to those that preside in the Church. And we are content to understand
it so: but this were to call the Pope in question upon the same controversy
which we have now in hand: for St. Peter, and by consequent the Pope, being
commanded to tell it to those which preside in the Church, that is, to his
brethren and fellow-Bishops; this is to make some haile-fellowes with him, and
to hold the authority of a whole Council of more force than his alone, which
we will not allow of. Here you see the reason why it was necessary to turn
that word Plural into a singular, and to understand that passage in such a way
as the Pope may propound a question to himself, and presently make answer to
himself, and so play Martin the Priest; both Priest and Clerk.

5 Hereafter we must gloss that gloss upon the Decree, where it says, Gl^s
in Canon N^^^ 9 q. 3. In^u^^a al^a in C^^. St papa. dis^^n^. 41.
If the Pope chance to offend, his fault may be told unto the Church, if so be
it be lawful to accuse him. To the Church then, that is, to the Pope; to
himself and no other. We must also make Pope Gregory speak a most fearful
language^ and say in spite of his t^eth what he never so much as thought on,
Pope though he were: for in an epistle of his writ against the Patriarch of
Constantinople, who styled himself Universal Bishop, We (says St. Gregory,
speaking of himself) to whose prejudice such and so great a fault, by a bad
attempt, G^e^ l. 4. Regis^^^ ep. 92.
has been committed, do observe that rule which Truth it self commanded,
saying, If thy brother has offended thee, etc. I have therefore endeavored,
by means of those whom I sent in my behalf with gentle words once or twice,
to correct the fault which is committed in the whole Church: and now I write my
self. I have left nothing undone which I ought to do with humility: but if I
be slighted in this my correction: it remains that I must add the Church.
That is, according to Bellarmines opinion. It remains that I tell it to my
self. An^ Pope Nicholas the first will be in the same taking, who uses the
same threatening to one of our Kings, namely Lotharius, Canon Praecip^e 11 l. 3.
in case he would not forgo his concubine Gualdrada.

6 But see here a greater mystery yet! for by this reckoning we shall find
that the Pope is greater than St. Peter. Hear what the same St. Gregory saith^
G^eg Magnus. ibid
in the same epistle; Peter (says he) the chief of the Apostles, is a member
of of the holy Catholic Church. Paul, Andrew, John, what are they else but
heads of particular persons? and yet all members of the Church under one head?
and to bind up all in the compass of a brief manner of expression^ the Saints
were before the law, they are under the law, they are under grace too, and yet
all three making up the body of the Lord, are made members of the Church. Now
say we to make our argument good, But the Pope is the Church, therefore he is
greater than St. Peter, yea than God himself: For it is said in this passage,
that all these Saints which are members of the Church, make up the body of the
Lord. But the Pope is the head of the Church^ nay he is the Church it self,
ergo he is greater than any of the Saints; yea than Christ himself. Besides,
all the world is spoken of in that passage except the Pope, and yet he was a
Pope that spoke it. But there is nothing lost by this, if this exposition be
admitted. Only I find my self a little troubled to make sense of those words,
spoken to St. Peter in the same place of St. Matthew, Po^^s c^nfesse themselves
inferior to Councels.
If he will not obey the Church, let him be unto thee as a heathen or publican.
For it should seem by these words that the Church and St. Peter are two
things. But I am out: for is it all one as when we speak to a King, to whom we
sometimes say ( You) and sometimes ( Your Majesty.) Good God what absurdities
be these! what impieties! what monsters in an age so enlightened, so well
weeded! You see here the testimony of one Pope, behold yet another:

Damas. apud Ambros. ep. 79.
7 Pope Damasus making answer to the Judges, deputed by the Synod of Capua in
the case of Bonosus, who did him the honor to ask his advice; I received your
letters (says he) whereby either in truth or in modesty you have been pleased
to ask our opinion. But it being adjudg'd by the Council of Capua, that
Bishops next adjoining should be assigned for Judges to Bonosus and his
accusers: we are of opinion that the form of judgment cannot stand with us:
for if the Synod were at this day unbroken up, we should happily ordain the very
same which is contained in your commission. It is your part therefore, who have
undertaken the charge of the judgemen^, to proceed unto it, and pronounce your
sentence upon all that concerns it^ against which nothing must be attempted.
And anon after, Wherefore it is necessary in the first place, that they pass
judgment of it to whom the power of judgeing is committed. For us, it were not
sitting that we should judge, as having no commission so to do by authority
from the Synod. To this it is said in the Popes defense, that if he would have
judged of this case, he might have done so. That Is true, he being so fairly
invited to it. But it must be granted too, that if he had not been entreated
to it by those to whom that charge was committed by the Council, he could not
have done it. Now it was wisely done of him not to meddle in it, being he had
no commission, for in case either the defendant, or the plaintives should have
complained to the Council of his judgment, he could not have stood to it. He
adds that he would have been willing to have passed his sentence of it, if
the Council had been then assembled. Which must be understood in case he
had been required, or appointed by the Synod so to do. For otherwise what
greater power could he have during the sitting of the Council then afterward.
To say that he would not meddle with it, for fear lest he might seem to
wrong the Council, by reason of that deputation of Judges by it already made:
the wrong had been far greater if he should have bearded the Council, and
undertaken to do it without being appointed thereunto.

8 Pope Symmachus, who lived at that time when Odoacer was King of Rome,
fearing least there might be some trouble about the Election of his successor,
entreated Basilius the Kings Lieutenant in that City, that he would assist at
the election: which was the reason that he made a Decree about it. But
Symmachus, perceiving the displeasure which the rest of the Clergy conceived
against it, caused a Council to be assembled, to consult upon the matter:
which declared that the writing containing that Decree^ was of no force^ adding
further, that although it were valid and might stand, Yet it was the Popes
duty to repeal and cancel it in a Synodicall assembly.

9 Here are two or three things remarkable in this matter. 1 One, that it was a
Provincial Synod of the Bishops of Italy, as appears by the subscriptions,
where the Pope has the maine authority as being the head of it, according to
the sixth and seventh Canons of the Council of Nice, in the commentary upon
which Balsamon says, it was decreed by the sixth and seventh Canons, Balsamo.
in Can. 6. et 7. Synod. Nicen.
That the four Patriarchs should be honored according to the ancient
custom: to wit, he of Rome, Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem. For the
^atriarch of Constantinople was created by the following Council. And speaking
of the three last, he assigns to every one of them their several Churches and
Provinces. In as much (says he) as the Bishop of Rome, has also under him the
Western Provinces. Provincial Councels above the Pope.
2 Another, that Symmachus caused that to be abrogated by a Council, whereof
himself was the author, as appears by his own relation extant in the Acts
of the Council. 3 Thirdly, that the Council says it belonged to him to
cancel that Decree, not of himself alone, but together with the body of a
Council. See now what we infer from hence: If the Pope had recourse to a
Provincial Council for the abrogating of a Decree whereof himself was the
author: if the Council did abrogate it: if it said that the Pope could not
repeal it himself, but together with the assembly of a Council: then it
follows that the Pope has no authority of himself, at least not so much as
he pretends to: and less yet over a provincial Council, seeing in matters
of consequence he can do nothing without it; and least of all over an
Universal and Oecumenicall Council. Nor ought we to be moved at that which
we read in the same Acts: That the Pope was wont to make Synodicall Decrees
valid: Seeing it will not follow from thence, that therefore he is above a
Council: but only that Councels (that is, General ones) cannot be holden
unless he be called to them: which is not peculiar to the Pope, but common
to him with the rest of the Patriarchs, as we show in another place.

10 And as for particular Councels, the Pope has nothing to do with those
which fall not to his share, but are held within the Provinces of other
Patriarchs and Metropolitans, unless it be to look upon them. And to this
purpose that passage of Balsamon is remarkable; B^lsamo in 6. and 7 Can
Concilii Nicaeni.
The meaning of the Canons is (says he) that the Patriarchs should be above
their Metropolitans, and the Metropolitans above their Bishops. He says not
that the Patriarchs and Metropolitans may do all without the Bishops, as our
Council would have it.

11 Pope Hilary gives us plainly to understand that what is ordained by a
Synod, though it be but a Provincial one, is of more force by a great deal
than what is done by authority of a Pope alone. V. Conc. Romanu^ sub Hilario.
to. 2. Et Can. Quod quis. 35. q. 9.
For being desirous to reform certain abuses which were current in his time,
he proposed the matter to the Synod which he had assembled in the City of Rome:
and says afterward, And to the intent this may be the better looked to for
the future, if you please, give us your advice, and set your hands to it, that
so the gate to things unlawful may be shut up by the judgment of a Synod. V.
dictum Conc. Can. 4.
To which it was answered by the Synod, We confirm it and declare it so to
be. And from this very clause it follows, that if the confirmation give any
authority to the party confirming above that which is confirmed, as Bellarmine
pretends, a mere Provincial Council shall be above the Pope.

12 Pope John the eight having excommunicated Count Lambert and Count Adalb^rt,
and some others which had evil entreated him in Italy, A^moniv^l. 5. c. 37.
he came into France the year 870, where he called a Synod at Troyes,
consisting of the Bishops of that Kingdom and the Low Countries, to desire
their consent to that excommunication, which they accordingly granted him. This
he would never have done if his authority had been greater than the
authority of Councels.

13 The Pope otherwhiles at his creation was wont to take an oath to observe
General Councels. Can. Confidi^u^ 25 q 1. Epist. Gelas^i Papae ad Episc.
Dardan. to. 1. Conc.
Pope Gelasius says there is never an Episcopal See which is more bound to
keep the Canons of General Councels than that of Rome. Howbeit at the end of
his Epistle he falls into the Popes disease. The Dardan Bishops complain of
him for condemning Achatius by his own authority, without calling a Council.

14 Gregory the Great says, that he reverenceth the four first General
Councels as the four Gospels: and that he holds the fifth also in great
esteem; Can si^ut. did. 15.
and presently adds, Whosoever presumes to loose those whom these Councels
bind, or bind those whom they loose, he destroys himself and not the
Councels. Ie^^^s esteem o^ the Pope.


15 The saying of St. Ierom, which has been inserted in Gratians Decree, and
therefore must be received at this day as one of the Popes sentences, is of no
mean consequence: who being of opinion that Deacons are inferior to Priests,
which he proves by many reasons, to that objection made against him, that it
is otherwise observed at Rome, he answers. Can Legimus. Si authoritas. did. 93.
If we must come to authorities, the world is wider than one City; let the
Bishop be in what part of it soever, be he at Rome, be he at Eugubium, be he
at Constantinople, be he at Rhegium, be he at Thebes, he is still of the same
merit and like priesthood. The power or riches and the humility or poverty does
not make a Bishop greater or lesser. Lastly, they are all the Apostles
successors. But you will say unto me, How comes it to pass then that at Rome a
Priest is received into Orders by the testimony of a Deacon? Why do you object
the custom of one City against me? See here is enough to prove that the Pope
is inferior to a Council, seeing that which is practiced in his Church cannot
be a law to others: seeing the meanest among the other Bishops has as much
authority as he. For if he be above a Council, then all the rest are so: and
if he deny it them, he makes a law against himself too. What were the Popes a
thinking of when they undertook to pronounce out of their own mouth that which
Saint Ierom spoke to their discredit? The Glossatour (it seems) took this for
current money, when he collected from thence, That the Decrees of a Council
prejudice the Decrees of a Pope, when they are repugnant.

16 All that is brought to stop this gutter is but lanternes and
cresset-lights. As namely, that the Pope is Lord of the world: that the
question is there about a custom not ordained by the Pope: that a Council is
not all the world. To puff away all this dust there needs no more but to
compare what they say with the words of the produced passage. He is Lord of the
world (say they:) And yet for all that Saint Ierom gives no more a^thoritie to
him than to the sorriest Bishop: Yes, he is so; but it is in spirit, just as
the Patriarchs of Constantinople and Alexandria, and other such like which are
nowadayes created by him. He speaks (say they) of a custom not authorized by
the Pope: then Saint Ierom is beside the cushion, when he quarrels with the
Pope himself about it. But a Council is not all the world: Surely no, not
with the Pope to boot, seeing he is but of the same size with another Bishop.

Can Haec est ^ides. 24. q. 1.
17 I will help them to a better cudgel, to beat Saint Ierom with Saint Ierom.
For (as it seems) not remembering himself what he now says to Pope Evagrius,
speaking to Pope Damasus he says, This is the faith, most blessed Pope, which
we have learned in the Catholic Church, and which we have always
maintained. But if perchance there be ought amiss in it, we desire it may be
corrected by you, who hold the Sea and faith of Saint Peter. But if this my
confession shall be approved by the judgment of your Apostleship, whosoever
shall reprove me, will but show himself an ignorant or malicious person, or
somewhat besides a Catholic, to wit a heretic. V Novam Decreti ed^^
authoritate Gregorii 13. expurgat. in d. Can. Haec est fides. 24. q. 1.
I will not here set down what was patched to it afterward, seeing Gregory
the thirteenth in his new edition has confessed that it was a Pope that spoke
it, and not Saint Ierom. Besides that the passage there added, taken all
together, plainly shows that what is there spoken of this point is no more but
a bare wish.

18 See here now a many blows laid on all at once! St. Ierom acknowledges the
Pope for his superior, in exhibiting his Creed unto him: he has recourse
unto him as to an Oracle: submits himself to his judgment, which he extols
above all. So then it must be one of these two, either he is a flatterer, or
he is a liar, seeing in another place he has ranked the Pope so low: But it
may be well maintained that he is neither so nor so. The Bishops and others
of the Clergy had a laudable custom in ancient time, Popes faith sent to
others to ^pprove.
one of them to communicate with another by letters or otherwise; and mutually
to declare the faith they were of, and the doctrine they fellowe^. We could
produce diverse instances, hereof; but we shall content our selves with one,
which gives full satisfaction to all that can be collected from the former
passages: It is Pope Liberius's epistle written to Athanasius, containing a
rehearsal of his faith, with a request that he would approve it, that so he
might be more assured of it; Epist. Liberii Papae ad Athanasium.
Wherefore (says he) I beseech you brother Athanasius to subscribe to this
confession, that I may be more assur^d of it, and may fulfill your commands
without delay. He that shall take this passage in the strictest sense will
make brave stuff of it. That a Pope, who is the universal head of all the
Church, and for whom it is not possible to err, (as Bellarmine says) would
be further assured in his faith by the approbation of a Bishop: that he
submits himself to do his commands. This is too much. Say we then that they are
words of complement as well in the one as the other. Those which St. Ierom
uses, are more respective indeed^ but we must consider withal, that it was a
mere Priest which spoke to the Pope. Besides, it was the part of a good
Orator to extol the Pope and his authority, that so he might gain his
consent, and bring him to approve of that his confession.

19 Nor will I ever deny but that the Sea of Rome had always a great deal of
luster; and much honor was always given unto it: but never so much as to make
it a sovereign Judge, and state it above a Council. We might further confirm
this by diverse other testimonies of Popes. They themselves have granted that
they may be judged when there is a schism amongst them, Can. Si duo. did. 79.

Can. Si papa. did. 40.

Glos in did. Si Papa.


and the election is not rightly performed; as also when they err from the
faith. This is enough to prove that they are inferior to a Council. The
glossatour goes yet further, when he says, That a Simoniacall Pope, or an
adulterer, or he that scandalizeth the Church by any other notorious crime, and
is grown incorrigible, may be accused. Now in all these cases they must be
judged by a Council, as the same Glossatour expounds it; whence it follows that
they are inferior to it.

CHAP. III. Popes judged by Councels.
Councels and Emperors d^pose Popes.
1 THe Council of Sinnesse in Italy condemned Pope Marcelline because he had
sacrificed to Idols. Marcelline fell upon the ground before the Synod, and
lying prostrate all along in that manner, he was condemned by the Synod. These
Acts are more to be credited than Pope Nicholas, Nicholaus 1. epist. ad
Imperat. M^^h. Bellarm l. 2. de authorit. Conc. c. 19.
who says that never a Bishop durst pronounce the sentence of condemnation
against him; or Bellarmine, who says that Marcelline first condemned himself.

2 These answers cannot serve in Pope Honorius his ca^e, who was condemned of
heresy by the sixth General Council holden at Constantinople. Synod. 6.
Constant. Act. 13.
Together with these (say the Acts) we have cast Honorius, who was Pope of old
Rome, out of the holy Catholic Church of God, and have anathematized him:
because we find by his writings directed to Sergius, that he has followed
his opinion in all things. Here they apply another plaster: this is, say they,
for the crime of heresy: Gloss. in Can. Si Papa. did. 40
and it is the Glossatours pleasure to comprehend symonie, adultery, and other
crimes whereby a man may fall into contempt, under this of symonie. This will
prove anon all one with the times of some Emperors, under whom there was but
one crime, namely that of treason, but that included all others. For to piss
in his hose (as they say) or at least against a wall was treason.

Platina in vita Joan. 13.
3 The Emperor Otho called a Council of the Italian Bishops, By whose
judgment (says Platina) the life of this so lewd a person (he speaks of
Pope John the thirteenth) was to be judged: but he being afraid of the
judgment of honest men, fled away. This Pope durst not rely too much upon his
letters of Tonsure, I mean upon the Popes privilege, which is that he cannot
be condemned by any but God himself. He chose rather to dye miserably, being
stricken by the Devil (as Platina says) than submit himself to that
judgment. We must here observe that Platina relates but half the story, as in
many other things, for fear of prejudicing the Popes prerogatives: but
Luitprand a Clergyman, one employed in affairs, and who lived at the same
time, tells us all the business from one end to the other: Namely that he was
informed of to the Emperor by the Bishops, Luitprandus de rebus per Europam
ges^is l 6. ^. 6 and seq.
the Clergy, and Citizens of Rome for diverse crimes: that the Emperor called a
Council consisting of the Cardinals, Patriarchs, and Bishops of Italy,
Germany, France, and the prime Citizens of Rome, in St. Peter's Church in Rome:
that the Pope was commanded to appear by the Emperors letters: that he
disdaining to make appearance, the Bishops of the Council, after they had
understood the heads of the accusation, and the crimes wherewith he was
charged, were all of one opinion, that John ought to be degraded and deposed
from the Papal dignity; desiring the Emper^ur to depose him and put another in
his place. Which was done accordingly. M Adamus in hist. eccles. c. 55
Another Historian says almost as much of him: at least he speaks of his
condemnation by the Council. The King having assembled a Council (he speaks
of the Emperor Otho) caused Pope John (whose name was Octavian) to be deposed
though he were absent, being accused of diverse crimes, (for he had declined the
judgment by flight) and caused Leo to be put in his place. Otho Emperor
deposes and electeth Popes.
We must here observe that this Pope John was not accused of heresy, but of
fornication, and symony, and leading a scandalous life; as appears by the
rehearsal of the crimes objected against him, set down by Luitprand.

4 Which we will further confirm by the testimony of Theoderic a Nihem, V.
E^^am Anton. de Ro^elli^ in cap. Contraria p. 14.

The^d^i^us a N^hem l. ^ de schism. c. 9.


who has some remarkable passages to this purpose. Now that the Emperor
(says he) has power over the Pope, especially if he be wicked and
incorrigible, and such a one as scandalizeth the Church, does sufficiently
appear from the acts and exploits of the Emperors or Kings of the Romans.
For Pope John the twelfth (others call him the thirteenth) was sans
controversy or dispute, the alone Pope, who before his Papacy was called
Octavian, descended of a noble and potent family; who after he was admitted
into the Popedom, gave himself sometimes to the hunting of wild beasts: and
leading a loose and volu^^uous life, addicted himself to suspected women;
evil entreating some of his Cardinals, and maiming them in their limbs
because they had reproved him for it Afterward he relates how the Emperor
Otho went to Rome: how he reproved him for his vices: how the Pope standing in
awe of him promised to behave himself well: how he did the clean contrary:
how, when he understood the Emperor was coming again, he fled away into the
Country of Campania. Lastly, he adds, That the Emperor, not spending the
time, called a Council of the Roman Clergy in the City of Rome against that
Pope. Where the said Pope being deposed by the unanimous suffrages of them all,
another called Leo the ^ight of that name, a man of great renown, of a
laudable life and holy conversation, was surrogated in his room.

5 The same Emperor (says the same author) Id^m lib 3. c. 10
seeing a schism risen in the Church, returned back into the City, and having
understood the difference between the two competitours, quickly called the
Clergy together in Council, and so caused the one of them to be declared Pope,
and sent the other, to wit Benedict the second, into exile into Saxony. He
adds afterward in commendation of the same Emperor: Idem lib. 5. ^. 1^
Who would then have disputed with this great Otho about his judgment of the
competitours for the Popedom, and of one vicious and perverse Pope by
himself? Who durst have told him that they could not be judged but by God
alone? I wish with all my heart there would come such an Emperor in our days,
that would cancel the many writings in this labyrinth, which have increased so
fast by reason of the multitude of writers, that a hundred Camels would scarce
serve to bear them.

6 Yet the Emperor Henry (says Platina) having called a Council, Platina in
vita Ben^ l 9 ^ylve^tr 3 and Cle^. 2.
compelled three Popes to renounce the Popedom; namely Bennet the ninth,
Sylvester the third, and Gregory the sixth. Popes were otherwhiles deposed by
the Councels of Pisa, Constance and Basil. I know very well there are salves
invented for all these sores; that the crimes of heresy and schism are
excepted out of the rule. But still it stands good that the Council is above
the Pope, inasmuch as it is his judge in certain cases. Besides, among these
examples there were some that were condemned for other crimes.

7 They say further, that when a Pope becomes an heretic, he is longer Pope.
As if any man lost his honor before he were condemned. And for schism, they
hold that they that are unlawfully preferred are not accounted Popes. Yet still
they are condemned and judged by the Councels as such. And besides, some have
been deposed that were lawfully elected. They hold that the Pope is reserved
to the judgment of God alone. It was the courtesy of Constantine the Great
which first brought in this maxim; which the Popes have appropriated to
themselves, and have excluded their fellow-Bishops from it, howbeit he spoke of
all. And see here how well they knew to make their advantage of things! But the
worst is, that though they have been always harping upon their privilege and
exemption, Pop^s in fact have yielded to Councels.
yet they have not always been believed: but diverse of them have been
accused, judged and condemned; as appears by the former instances. So that in
truth, setting aside the testimonies of the Popes, which depose as witnesses in
their own cause, we find no good ground to build this pretended privilege
upon, unless it be in certain particular Synods, composed of Italian Bishops
which depended upon the Popes: as the fourth of Rome holden in the time of King
Theoderic for the condemnation of Pope Symmachu^: where the Bishops set down
these two maxims. One, that a Council ought to be called by the Pope and not
by the King. The Other, that he ought to be reserved to the judgment of God.
The falsity of the first is apparent from that proof which we have made of it
elsewhere. As for the second, we must persuade our selves that these good
Fathers would have us to believe so, who were opposed herein by Theoderic, and
the Senate of Rome: who notwithstanding when all came to all let go their hold,
referring all entirely to the will of the Synod; which used in this matter
rather a kind of arbitrament and composition, than a judiciary process:
putting thus much howsoever in their subscription (for fear lest they should
seen to have quitted a guilty person) That they left the whole judgment of it
to God. Now I am content their opinion be so, that the Pope could not be judged
by them: for this must always be understood of a particular Synod, (such as
this fourth of Rome was) not of a General; seeing there can be no example
urged in that kind. And even for particulars, there have been diverse which
have proceeded to such condemnations; the precedents whereof have been already
observed: whereto we shall add that the Popes themselves have practiced it.

8 As for example, Stephen the fourth, Who (says Marianus Scotus in his
Chronicles) so soon as he was elected desired the Emperor Pepin, to cause
the most expert and understanding Bishops to judge of Pope Constantine in a
Synod. The Council then being assembled at Rome, caused all his Priest^ (...)
be burnt, and Constantine himself to be buffeted, compelling him to make a
resignation: and he was afterward burned. Stephen the sixth in the year 898
Having assembled a Council, he caused the corpse of Formosus his predecessor,
to be apparelled in man's attire: and after he had made him to be divested of
his pontifical garments, he caused him to be thrown into the Tyber, after he
had made two of his fingers to be cut off: So says Martinus Polonus in his
Chronicle; and Platina after him in the life of Formosus. John the ninth in the
year 900, taking Formosu^'s part, Held a Synod at Ravenna of seventy four
Bishops, where that was condemned which had been done by Pope Stephen, says
the same Martin in his Chronicle. See you now how the Popes themselves have
proved by their own practices that they may be judged by particular Councels.

9 As for General Councels they never so much as thought of exempting the Pope
from their jurisdiction: On the contrary we read that Pope Leo the fourth
being accused of treason, AEnaeas Sylvius epist. 25.

Can. Nos Si incompetenter. 2 q. 7.


that is, of going about to transfer the Empire upon the Grecians, he
submitted himself to the judgment of Jews the second, Emperor, and King of
France, as we read in the Decree. See now how that excessive greatness finds
some superiors, yea and acknowledges them too, not abating ought of its
right, but applying it self to its duty. We have made mention already of the
condemnation of Formosus at the sixth General Council. We know also what was
determined concerning this point at the eighth General Council of
Constantinople, one of the most favorable to the Popes that ever was holden:
considering that the Legates commanded there according to their desire, with all
the honor done unto them, which he and his predecessors had a long time
longed for. If, when the General Council is assembled, Pope Leo judgd and
cast at Chalcedon.
(says the 21 Canon) there be any controversie^ or complaint against the holy
Church of Rome^ enquiry ought to be made upon the question proposed with
convenient reverence and respect, and to admit of satisfaction, and to proceed,
or cause to be proceeded therein: yet not andaciously to pass sentence against
the supreme Bishops of old Rome. Whence we collect that it was the intention of
the Council that process should be made against the Bishop of Rome^ with all
honor and reverence indeed, then when he was accused in some sort, yet still
that process should go on against him.

10 The Council held formerly by Photius Patriarch of Constantinople, had
condemned Pope Nicholas. This anathematizeth Photius, not because he venter'd
to proceed to that reformation, (as some would make us believe) but because he
had laid a false accusation against him, and for certain other causes; as the
sixth Canon declares; We anathematize Photius for his intrusion into the Church
of Constantinople: for his subornation of false vicars: for his adventuring to
hold a Council of vanity: and for the crimes which he falsely objected
against Pope Nicholas,

11 The General Council of Chalcedon was Judge in Pope Leo the first his cause
against the Patriarch of Constantinople, Conc. Chalced. Act. 16.
touching point of honor: which was thus; The Council of Nice had tacitly
assigned the first place of honor to the Patriarch of Rome, the second to him
of Alexandria, the third to him of Antioch, and the fourth to him of Jerusalem:
and because that Constantinople was then scarce borne, there was no talk of it:
but at the second Council of Constantinople the question was canvassed, where
it was ^etermined that the Bishop of that City should be honored as the next
Primat to the Bishop of Rome^ because it was new Rome. The Pope complaine^ of
this Decree to the Council of Ephesus, pretending that the Council of Nice was
disparaged: the other on the contrary stood for the D^cree of the Council of
Constantinople; the Council gave sentence that what had been there determined
concerning this point, should stand; The reverend Bishops said, This sentence
is just: We all say so: It pleases us all likewise: The Decree is just. See
here how they pronounced against the Pope: whose Legates the next day desired
the retractation of that Decree, or at least that their protestation might be
registered; and that they might know what to inform the Pope of, to the end
(say they) that he might pass his sentence upon the injury done to his See,
or of the subversion of the Canons. Hereupon the Judges pronounced, Our
interlocution was approved by all the Synod.

12 Pope Leo was much displeased with this sentence, Epist Leoni^ 57.58.59 et 60
which he did not dissemble in his letters written to the Emperor Martian,
Pulcheria the Empress, the Patriarchs of Constantinople and Antioch, and
others. Yet for all that he durst not withstand the Councels resolution, nor
proceed any further than only to complain against it. Howbeit, speaking to the
two last, who were interested in the cause as well as himself, he tells them
that he will not consent to that sentence. He had reason, for his consent to
it wa^ never demanded. But he never complains of the Council for confirming
the definition and rule of faith which he sent thither; Leo Papa epis^. 61.

Evag^ius l. 2. c. 13.

Conc. Chalce^. in allocutione ad Mariam ad finem.


but bragges of it in his letter to Theodoret Bishop of Cyprus; which
notwithstanding was strictly examined in this Council, which gave every man
leave to impugn it. If it be not (say they) consonant to holy Scripture, let
any man disprove it. As also they reprove, yet very nimblely, and by way of
exposition, that saying of his, That it belonged to none to expound matters of
faith, saving the Fathers of the Nicene Council; and they show how it belongs
to others also, not so as to derogate from ought that had been there
determined, but to explain the controversies which arise about it.

13 Bellarmine seeing that this is prejudicial to the Soveraignety of his
Patriarch, says that Leo's epistle did not contain any definitive sentence,
Decisions of Popes judged by others.
but only his advice: and we on the contrary affirm, it was his determination
and resolution. Let us hear what he him self says of it, What God had first
determined by our ministry, he has now confirmed by the irretractable consent
of all our brethren. And for the last course, if it may be said, this Leo was
one of the most ambitious Bishops that ever wore Mitre. He that shall peruse
his epistles without passion, will ever pass this judgment upon him.

14 The Emperor Constantius, having banished Liberius, another whose name was
Felix was elected in his stead. Sozomen. l. 4. c. 10. et 14.
The Emperor having recalled Liberius some time after, the Council which was
then at Sirmium a city in Hungary writ to Felix, and the Clergy of Rome, to
receive him in such sort as both of them might continue Popes, and might
execute that function with one common consent: Bellar. De Conc. authorit. l^ ^.
c. 19.
Which was done accordingly. Bellarmine answers two things. First that the
Council does not command so, but only send some exhortatory letters: But this
is but a shift: for Sozomen says, the Council ordained so: Next, that this
Council was composed of Arrians for the most part. This consideration were to
the purpose if the question were about their doctrines: but here the
controversy is about a thing which was never in dispute with them. And
besides, both the Popes were Orthodox. But be that as it will be, we collect
from hence all that we desire, namely that the Council passed sentence in the
Popes case.

17 Pope Miltiades was by the Emperor made Judge between the Catholics and
the Donatists, and after him the Bishop of Arles, as St. Austin testifies: at
which judgment the Donatists being displeased, St. Austin adds, Augustine. ep.
162.
But suppose the Bishops which judged at Rome, did not judge aright: recourse
may yet be had to a Council of the Church Catholic: where both the cause and
the Judges themselves may yet be tried: that so if they be convinced to have
judged amiss, their sentence may be repealed. Bellarmine quits himself but
poorly from this argument. Bellar. l. 2. de Conc. author. c. 19.
First of all he affirms that thi^ cause was judged again by the Bishop of
Arles, not (says he) because there was any reason why it should be so, but
because it was the Emperors pleasure: this I do not deny to be true. But in
the second place he says, that a cause judged by the Pope in a particular
Council, may afterward be judged by him again in a General Council. This is
nothing to the purpose; for St. Austine says not that the Pope ought to assist
in this General Council as Judge, but only to defend his own sentence; being
in danger to see it repealed if it were found to be injust.

16 Besides, if the Pope hold his greatness only by St. Paul's sword, and St.
Peter's keys, and if he be above all; then he ought to be esteemed as great
and gross in a particular Council as in a General; seeing that by his
reckoning, all Councels whatsoever, are but petty accessories which bring no
great advantage to the principal. But if he grant that a General Council
where the Pope is, has no more power than a particular where the Pope is also,
he plainly confesses that the principal authority of Councels is not
derived from their heads.

CHAP. IV. Of Appeals from Popes to Councels.
1 THat which Saint Austin proposes in the place above cited, Appeals by
Emperors, Duk^s, Friars, etc.
touching judgment of a Council after the Popes sentence, is a kind of
Appeal. This gives us occasion of here setting down certain precedents of
such as have been put in from Popes to Councels. The Emperor Ludovicus
Bavarus, the fifth of that name, releeved himself by this means against Pope
John the twenty second, who had excommunicated him for taking upon him the
name of Emperor before he was confirmed by him. German. Chron. l^ 24 p. 227.

Vide etiam Albertum Argentin^ns. in C^ronic. p. 123.


He appealed (says the German Chronicle) to a General Council, and to the
Pope (who was now misinformed in the matter) when he should be better
informed. Yet notwithstanding he charged his Ambassadors whom he sent to
John, to use all kind of humility toward him, to see if he could pacify
him before he proceeded to this remedy. Which being done they got no other
answer but this, That it was not lawful for him to demean himself as
Emperor, and be called by that title, unless he had by way of preamble been
confirmed by him after his election: and he appointed him a day to make his
appearance at Rome to excuse himself, and make satisfaction for his faults,
upon condition that in the mean time he leave off the name and administration
of Emperor. And upon his refusal to do thus he thundered out his
excommunications against him. Whereupon (say the same Chronicles) Jews did
appeal from him. And that which follows is worth the noting. The process of
the Sea of Rome had at that time a great deal of force; for it was a crime
inexpiable to be of a different opinion from the Pope. But Jews had some
Doctors in both laws which held the Popes sentence to be invalid; which
opinion of the Doctors was a cause that many stood firm to the Emperors party.

2 The States of Germany assembled at Francford the year 1338 went yet
further, Nau^ler generat 4^.

Add Albericum de Rosate in l Been a Zenone C. de quad^^en. praescrip. Et
Avent^n. l. 7. annal Boiorum

Paulus Langiu^ in Chron. Citizensi sub ann. 1328.


for they cassed the sentence of the Pope, and of his conventicle held at
Avinion. By the council and advice of all the Prelates and Princes of Germany
met together in the City of Francford, we declare and ordain that all such
proceedings are of no power, force, nor efficacy. But of this we have spoken
sufficiently in the first Chapter of our first Book.

3 In the year 1328 (says a German Monk) Pope John in full Consistory
condemned the letter of the general Chapter of the Friars Minorites holden at
Peruse: whereupon Michael de Cesano, General of the Order for that year, made
an appeal against the Pope; affirming that the Popes determination touching
the poverty of CHRIST JESUS was heretical.

4 In the year 1460 Sigismund Duke of Austria pleaded an Appeal from Pope
Pius the second to a General Council, in these terms: Considering then that
his Holiness has bereft us of all hopes of possibility of obtaining justice
at his hand^; by reason whereof we cannot appeal to the Pope better informed^
seeing that his ears are grown deaf toward us, and his indignation is
inflamed after his desire. We appeal unto the Pope which shall succeed him,
to judge of his predecessors actions: A^p^^ls t^ in the Po^^ m^^^ by the F^^^c^:
and to the General Council which shall be assembled. The cause of this
appeal grew from Pope Pius his excommunicating of Sigismond: and the ground of
the excommunication was because that Sigismond had kept back Cardinal Cusan
from the Bishoprique of Brixen, which was within his dominions, being highly
offended that it was given unto him in commendam by the Pope. And because the
act of this appeal was drawn by Gregory Haymb^urg^ a learned Lawyer in his
time, and that he had made it be sixth upon the gates of the Church of Florence,
A^n^eas Sylviu^ epist. 14.
the Pope fell a quarrelling with him too, thundering out another
excommunication at his head: of which, as also of the former, he makes mention
in one of his Epistles. But our Doctor was so little amused with it, that he
put up another appeal in his own name, from the Pope to a ^uture Council;
which he set out with many pretty reasons: the copy whereof we may read to
this day.

5 We have often releeved our selves in France against the abuses and usurpations
of Popes by this course. Innocent the third caused this Kingdom to be
interdicted by his Legate which was come hither: and that because of the
marriage which Philippus Augustus had contracted with I^geberge sister to Came
the King of Dalmatia. But the King (says John le Maire) armed himself with an
appeal to a future Council. Howbeit it is recor^ed by another author, that the
appeal was put in by the Kings Agents from the Legate to the Sea of Rome; but
they may be both true. For the appeal might b^e first made from the Legate to
the Pope, and, because that appeal was not admitted, then from the Pope to the
Council. And I believe it was so; considering that we read at this day the
Decretall Epistle of Innocent which he sent to Philip; where he maintains that
his Legates ought not to admit of the Appeal: ( seeing (says he) an Appeal
cannot be made from a Minister:) and that his Legate had done nothing of his
own proper motion, but by command from him.

Platina in Boni^. 8.

V. les libertez. de l'Eglise Gal^^cane, versus ^^n.


6 So likewise Philip the Fair appealed from the usurpations and insolences of
Boniface the eight, to the Sea Apostolic then vacant (as he said) and to a
fu^ure Council, says Platina in his life. This likewise was the means which
M. ^ohn de Nanterie the Kings Attorney General used against the Bulls of
Cardinal de Balice, appealing from them to the Pope better informed, or unto
those to whom the Appeal did of right appertain. These are the very words as
they are in the Collection of the liberties of the Gallicane Church.

Iean l^ Maire en la ^ part. des schi^mes. Robert. Gaguin lib. 10. in Ludovico
11

Du T^llet en son advi^ sur les libertez de l'Eglise G^llicane.


7 The famous University of Paris, perceiving the eager pursuit which Pope Pius
the second made, by his Legate sent into France to Jews the eleventh, to get
him to cancel the Pragmatique Sanction, appealed from all the Popes attempts to
a ^uture Council, says the same John le Maire and Robert Gaguin, who lived at
that time. And the same King Jews in the year 1463, to secure himself from
the censures of the said Pope, with the advice of his Parliament, caused an
Appeal to be put in by his Attorney General from the said Pope to ^ future
Council: and ordained by an arrest that the Cardinal of Constance should be
punished^ because he had resisted the authorities and rights of the King; says
Mr. John de T^llet.

8 The same University put in an Appeal to a future Council touching the
condemnation of the Council of Basil made by Leo the tenth, in a conventicle
assembled by him at the Lateran, and also touching the abrogation of the
Pragmatique Sanction wherein that Council was confirmed. But it is expedient
to hear the truly pious words of that generous University. Pope Leo the tenth
in a certain assembly holden at Rome, App^llatio Vnive^sitatis Parisiens. quam
vide in ^^sci^^lo rerum ex^^^endarum
(we know not how, but surely not in the name of the Holy Ghost; for where he
is nothing can be consulted upon or determined against the law of God and the
Sacred Councels,) has resolved, we know not upon what advice, to abrogate the
said so useful Decrees, transgressing herein against the Catholic faith and
authority of sacred General Councels, and therefore has condemned the holy
Council of Basil: Appeals to Councels against the Pope.
making certain other Decrees at his pleasure (under correction be it spoken)
to the prejudice of the Realm and of Daulphine, and to the detriment of the
subjects of our most illustrious King of France. And afterward, Having made
such novel decrees, he has constrained our most renowned King Francis, by the
persuasion of some body or other, to give his consent unto them, while he was
in Italy employed there in business of war. Wherewith we the Rectour and
University do find our selves grieved, wronged, and oppressed, and do
provoke and appeal from the Pope ill-advised as concerning the abrogation of
the Ordinances and Decrees of the said holy Council of Basil, and the
Pragmatique Sanction thereunto adhering, to a future Council lawfully
assembled in some safe and free place, etc. Given at Paris in our general
Congregation solemnly holden at Saint Bernards May the 27. 1517. A German Monk
speaking of this Appeal^ says, Not without cause did the University of Paris
become appellants to a General Council against Pope Leo, for the good and
preservation of the Churches of the whole Kingdom, and especially for that the
same Pope Leo had undertaken to condemn and disanull the Council of Basil, in
a certain assembly or conventicle of Cardinals holden a^ Rome.

9 Some of the Commentators among the Canonists have said in express terms,
Ludovicus Romanus Cons. 321.

Abbas Siculus in allegationibus quae incip^^ant Quoniam ve^^a^ in 10. r^tione.
Et in disputat quae in^ipit. Episco put.

(...) Recueil des ^il ert^s de l' Eglise Gallicane v^^s^s fin. Sozomen lib. 3.
^ap. ^.


that an Appeal may lie from the Pope to a Council, amongst whom are Ludovicus
Romanus and Abbas Siculus in his allegations. Such Appeals to a future Council
are not to be stranged at; for in France they go further than so, insomuch
that it is lawful to appeal to the Parliaments from the execution of the
Popes abusive Bulls.

10 But Bellarmine urges some examples to the contrary against us, to wit of
Appeals made from Councels to Popes: the first is of Athanasius Bishop of
Alexandria, and Paul Bishop of Constantinople; who (says he) being deposed by
a Council, appealed to Pope Julius, and were by him restored to their Sees
again. This he takes out of the Ecclesiastical history of So^^^en which makes
against him. First, he does not any way speak of appealing ^^om the Council
to the Pope, for that was not then in use. He says indeed that Athanasius and
some other Bishops being deprived of their Sees, and pers^cucuted by the Arrian
Bishops which were in the East, fled to Rome as to a haven of re^uge: that the
Pope having heard their confession conformable to the Nicene Creed, received
them into communion, restored them to their Churches, and writ to the Eastern
Bishops, whom he rebuked for deposing them: but we must always remember that
they were Arrians and persecuters, and that the controversy was not between
par^ie and party. If Bellarmine deny it, or if he answer that we must look
here only to the form of proceeding which was ordinary, we will take him at
his word, and presently oppose unto him the authority of his own author; who
says that these Bishops so soon as they had received the Popes letters,
framed him an answer full of ironyes and threats. That they confessed, as he
said, Sozomen ubi supra:
that the Church of Rome was the principal, as that which was the prime of the
Apostles, and the Metropolitan for piety ever since the beginning, (howbeit
tho^^ which planted Christian religion there came first out of the East) but
they were displeased that he should think they were inferior to himself,
because his Church was of a greater luster; though they excelled him in virtue
and sanctity of life. They objected also against him as a crime, that he had
communicated with Athanasius and the other Bishops: and that they could not
endure to see their sentence made invalid by him as if it were by a Council.
So that what he did was by way of abuse and usurpation, and not by right.

11 The second example is of that Appeal which he says was made to Pope Leo
the first, P^^^^nded appeals to Popes^ answered.
from the second Council of Ephesus by Flavian Bishop of Constantinople, and
Theodoret Bishop of Quars. It is easy to make it appear th^^ t^is was not so.
For first it is plain from the Acts that the Appeal was put in ^imply by the
word (Appello) without mentioning whither. Act 1. Council. Chalced.

Evagrius l 2. c. 2 Action. 3. Conc. Chalc.


Secondly, the appellants presented a petition to the Emperors, tending to
this effect^ that they would be pleased to refer the cause unto a Council.
Thirdly^ the Council passes the judgment upon the case of the Appeal. And
fourthly, the Pope himself was condemned by that Synod. He was one of the
plain^ifes against Dioscorus the Head of it. Whereupon it was said to his
Legates by the Presidents of the Council of Chalcedon^ Act. 1. ejusdem Council.

Nicolau^ 1. in epist. ad Michaelem Imperat.


That they being accusers could not be judges. Pope Nicholas the first
testifies that Dioscor^^ was not so much condemned for his heresy, as for
daring to pass sentence against the Pope. To what purpose then had it been to
appeal to him, seeing he himself was condemned and was a plaintiff?

12 The third example is of an Appeal made to Pope I^nocent the first by John
Chrysostom, who was deposed by a Council, as it is testified by Pope
Gelasius. But he makes us sometimes believe that they, as other men, will be
sure to let us have the best in the pack, when their own greatness is in
question. Sozomen. lib. 8. cap. 26.
Sozomen is more to be credited in this point than he, who relating the fact,
says not a word that comes near to any such Appeal. Only he tells us that
Chrysostom was deposed by a Council of Chalcedon, (not the General, but
another) that Pope Innocent having notice of the fact, condemned it: that is,
was displeased at it, and disallowed of it. That which follows confirms this
exposition: that he took pains to get a General Council called: that he
writ some consolatorie letters to Chrysostom, and the Clergy of
Constantinople, where he was Bishop. Amongst other things he says, But what
remedy can we apply to it for the present? There must of necessity be a
Synodicall judgment. So I have said a long time that we must assemble one.
And accordingly he sent five Bishops and two Priests of the Church of Rome to
the Emperors H^norius and Arcadius to entreat a Synod of them with the
appointment of the time and place.

CHAP. V. This maxim, Tha^ a Council is above the Pope, proved in express
terms.
1 WHerefore notwithstanding these examples objected to the contrary, The case
desided by Councels.
considering the weakness of them, we may justly infer that the a^cient:
Popes having confessed and acknowledged the authority of Councels to be greater
than their own; having been judged and condemned by them, both in matters
civil and criminal; as also appeals from their sentence unto Councels, having
been allowed; therefore they are inferior to them, and ought at this day to
acknowledge their power and authority. But we must yet undertake a greater
task, and show that this maxim, That a Council is above the Pope, is in
express terms in the Decrees of Councels, the Constitutions of Pope^^ the
decisions of Doctors, the opinions of Universities, and the approbations of
Princes and Provinces.

2 We can scarce bring ought from them any higher than since the Council of
Constance, Platina in vita Alexandri. 5.
by reason that the question was not yet on foot, and they never thought of
resolving i^ in express terms. Yet this was the opinion of the first Council
of Pisa, which was holden before that of Constance, which deposed two Popes at
one time, and created another in ^^ed of those two, who was acknowledged for a
true Pope, namely Alexander the fifth^ And for the fact, hear what Naucler^^
says of it; Nau^ler to. 2. Generat. 47.
It was disputed a long time at the Council of Pisa about the pretended
deposition of the Popes: principally by Lawrence de Rodul^is, Doctor in both
Laws, and Professor at Florence: to wit, whether, supposing it for true that
the two Popes scandalized the Church by the open violation of their oaths, and
of the vow which they had made for the union of the Church, considering they
had no regard of it, but by mutual collusion did dissemble it, and that a most
wicked schism is very harmefull to the Church: Whether (I say) the Cardinals
might call a Councell^ and both Popes, being cited to the Council and not
appearing, but persisting in their contum^^y, might be deposed; and whether
they might proceed to the election of another. Whereupon after a long dispute,
in the presence of many Doctors of Divinity and both the Laws, it was at last
resolved without contradiction, they all being of the same mind, that it might
be lawfully and Canonically done.

3 As for that of Constance the formal Decrees of it are extant in the fourth
and fifth Sessions; Conc. Constan. Sess 4. et 5.
The holy and General Council of Constance, does ordai^^ and declare, that a
Synod lawfully called in the name of the holy Ghost, making a General
Council, and repre^enting the Catholic Church militant, h^^h it^ power
immediately from Christ, to which every one is bound to obey in what estate or
dignity soever he be set, though it be in the Papal, forasmuch as concerne^
faith^ the extirpation of Schism, the general reformation of the Church of
God both in the Head and members. This i^ the former Decree, but the s^^ond is
yet more express; Item, it declares that whosoever shall neglect to obey the
commands, statutes, ordinances, or decrees of this ^acred Synod^ or of any
other General Council lawfully assembled, in the things aforesaid, (...)
others t^^^^to appertaining, made or to be made; Counc^ls by their Decrees
above Popes.
if he do not repent of it, he shall undergo a condign penance, and shall
be severally punished; yea and that with recourse, if need requ^^e, to other
remedies of law against him, (...) estate, or dignity soever he be, though he
be Pope. These Decrees were confirmed by the Council of Basil, and inserted
lord for word in the second Session held in the year 1431, and again in the
sixteenth and eighteenth Sessions, in the year 1434, and in the thirty third
Session, holden 1439. The Council holden at Bourges in our Realm of France,
under (...) the seve^^^, in the yea^e 1438, confirmed the same Decree and
transcribed it verbatim^ into the Pragmatique Sanction.

4 There was another General Council holden at the City of Lausanne, in the
year 1449, where Pope Felix ab^ured the Popedome^ and Pope Nicholas the fifth
was confirmed in his place. The Acts of that Council, which was a General
one, contain only four pieces, to wit^ the renouncing of the Popedom by Pope
Felix^ a general absolution of excommunication, the new creation of Pope
Nicholas the fifth, and the dissolving of the Council: Whence I have extracted
these ensuing places, which serve for this purpose. In the first Act; Wherefore
there is need of strong and ready succors, forasmuch as the authority of
sacred General Councels, now more stirred than ever, does not only shake, but
is already borne down to the ground. For the decision of the Sacred Council of
Constance, which ought never to be forgotten, is not yet quite o^t of memory,
to wit; ^o wit, that a holy Synod lawfully called in the name of the Holy
Ghost, making a General Councell^ and repre^enting the Catholic Church
militant, has its power immediately from Christ, to which every one is bound
to obey in what estate or dignity soever he be set, though it be the Pope;
for as much (...) concerns faith, the extirp^tion of Schism, and the general
reformation of the Church of God, both in the Head and the members. ^o the
creation of Pope Nicholas it is said, To set the holy Church of God a^ peace and
union, we have directed our petition to the person of Thomas, the welbeloved
son of the Church, called Nicholas the fifth in his obedience hopeing that he
will do what on^ that is to be Pope ought to do, having understood by credible
information, that he believes and follows that which is truth, for the
preservation and upholding of the authority of Sacred Councels, so as it was
determined and declared at the most sacred Synod of Constance, and renewed at
the holy Council of Basil^ and received, preached and dogmatically delivered by
the Prelates, Kings, Princes, and Universities of the earth: to wit, that a
general Synod lawfully called in the name of the Holy Ghost, making a General
Council, etc. Which is the Decree of the Council of Constance at large, as it
was above rehearsed.

5 In the year 1512 there was another General Council holden in the city of
Pisa, afterward removed t^ Milan, where these same Decrees of the Councels of
Basil and Constance were afterward confirmed^ So says King Jews the twelfth
in his letters paten^s dated the 16 of June 1512. verified in the Court of
Parliament, containing an approbation of the said Council; together with his
letters written to the University of Paris, containing an exhortation and
injunction to them to examine the book of Thomas de Vi^ Cajetano, entitled De
comparatione authoritatis Papae and Concilii, which he had writ against the
Councels of Constance, Basil, and the second of Pisa: and likewise against John
Gerson Chancelour of Paris. But there is no need of seeking proofs abroad,
considering that the very Acts of the Council it self do sufficiently prove
it. See here the Decrees of it contained in the third Se^^ion; The holy
General Synod of Pisa lawfully assembled in the name of the Holy Ghost, making
the Council General, and representing the Church Catholic, does ordain and
declare as follows; First that his holy Synod, nor shall, nor can be
dissolved, till such time as the Church Universal be reformed in faith and
manners, as well the Head as the members: The Counc^ll of Pis^ against the Pope.
and till the heresies and schisms which are a growing be extinguished: till
the warres^ which are a preparing amongst Christians, be accorded. Yet
notwithstanding for the continuation of it, it may be removed to a place of
safety by the common consent of the fathers; especially with our most holy
Father the Pope, if he can be got to agree thereunto^ always provided that it
be not to Rome, it being notorious that it cannot be in safety there. It
further ordaines that the Canons of the holy Council of Constance here
underwritten, contained in the fifth Session thereof, shall be strictly
obs^rved and kept in the same manner that they lie, and that the contents of
them shall be inserted into this Decree, and shall be holden by all men as most
true, as they here follow. First the holy Synod lawfully assembled, making a
General Council, etc. Item, in the second place it declares that if any man,
of what condition, estate, and dignity soever he be, though it be the Pope
himself, shall with contumacy neglect to obey the edicts, ordinances, and
commands of this sacred S^nod, etc. These two Decre^s are there inserted at
large, but we have here cut them short because they are set down before.

6 And forasmuch as our adversaries in this point make such a great matter of
the Popes authority and confirmation, and place the true validity of Councels
in that, we shall make it appear that it came in at these General Councels,
either in the convocation, or the presi^ence, or the approbation. As for the
first of Pisa where the roots and foundation of this maxim were laid^ hear
what Pope Alexand^r the fifth said of it a little before ^is death: Pl^t^na in
Alex^n^r. 5.
That he^ thought and beleev^d that all that was ordained at the Council of
Pisa was just and right, and void of all fraud and deceit. Naucleru^ reports
the same words. Pope Al^xand^r the fifth (says h^) tow^rd^ the end of the first
year of his Pope^ship, N^^^l ^us tom. 2 G^^erat ^7.
began to find himself very ill; and perceiving death to draw n^are he
called the Cardinals, protesting unto them by that death which he saw b^^or^
^is eyes, which he did no way fear, as being confident of his good life, that
he verily thought and believed that at the Council of Pisa all things were
well de^reed, and with integrity of heart, without any fraud or deceit.

7 That of Constance was called by John the twenty third, a lawful Pope, as it
is agreed on all sid^s. His Bull of Convocation is inserted at large in the
first Session of the Acts of the Council: he himself also di^ preside the^e^
as it is said in the Preface. It is true that by reason of the accusation which
was a brewing against him, he took him to his heels without bidding adie^:
and being cond^mn'd and deposed by the Council for many crimes by him
committed, himself approved this condemnation, (...)

(...) Sess. ^^^


as it is to be seen in the A^ts of the Council, and confirmed by the
testimony of Platina. Martin the fifth being cr^at^d in his stead, confirmed the
Decrees and Determinations of that same Council, as it is avouch'd in the last
Session.

8 The Council of Basil was called by Pope Martin the fifth, (...) B^sil. ^^ss.
^.
as it is apparent by his Bull, and being not able to go thither himself by
reason of his age, he sent his procuration to Cardinal Julian to preside in
his place: which was afterward continued by Martins successor Eugenius the
fourth. The same Eugenius confirmed the foresaid Decree of the Councels of
Constance and Basil in express terms, as is clear from the sixteenth and
eighteenth Sessions. Extat post ult. Session. ^on^il. Basilie^sis.
Pope Nicholas the fifth confirmed also the said Councels of Basil and Lausanne,
as appears by his Bull. Thus much of Popes.

9 As for Doctors and Commentators both in Divinity and in either Law, there
are abundance which, either in expectation of some Bishoprique or Benefice, or
because they were the Popes mercenaries, have ascribed as much power unto them
in their writings as ever they desired, yea more than ever they durst arrogace
unto themselves: but yet there are others beside that have refuted their
errors, and have taught the pure tr^th, maintaining the libe^ty of Councels,
Authors for Councels superiority.
and their authority over Popes. Such are the Petrus de Alliaco in tract. de
potestate Ecclesiae.
Cardinal of Cambray, Cardinal Nicholaus Cusanus lib. 2. de concord. Cathol.
cap. ult.
Cusan, the Cardinal of Cardinalis Florentin. in repetit. cap. licet de
election.
Florence, the Bishop of Episcopus Gadicensi^ in allegation. contra Eugenium.
Calis, the Bishop of Panormitanus de Concilio Basiliensi. in disputatione
Episcopus. in cap. significasti de electionib.
Panormo, Mr. John Gerson Chancelour of the University of Paris, Ioannes Gerson
in tract. de potestate Ecclesiae. con^id. 4, 8, 10, 12. In sermon^ pro viagio
Regis Romani. in Tractat. de au^eri^ilitat. Pap.
James Iacobu^ Almain magister Parisiens. adversus Thomam de Vio Cajetano.
Almain Doctor of the Sorbon, William Guilielmus Okkam^^ 6. lib. 1. part.
Okkam, Marsilius Patavin^^ in defens. paci^. part. 2. cap. 21. and 24.
Marsilius of Padua, Hermannus Monachus in lib. de potestate Papae and Concilii.
Herman the Monk, Iacobus de Paradiso in lib. de septem statib^^ Ecclesiae.
James Paradise of Chartres, Ioannes de Parisiis in tract. de potestate Regali
and Papali cap. 21. in fine.
Ioannes of Paris Doctor of Divinity of the Order of Predicants, Immol^ in cap.
Cum in^erior. De majoritate and obedientia. Et in cap. Quant^. De translatione
Praelatorum
Immola, Ludovicus Romanus cons. 181. and 421. Et in tribus ultimis Conci^iis.
Ludovicus Romanus, Grego^ius Heimburgensis in Schedulis appellationum pro se
and pro Sigismundo Austriae Duce. Et in confutatione primat^s Pap.
Gregory of Heimburg, Guilielmus de Montserrat^ in Commentar. supra Pragm^t.
Sanction. part. 1.
William of Montferrat, Vincentius in allegationibus cap. 13.
Vincentius in his allegations, and many more.

CHAP. VI. The opinions of Universities touching the authority of Councels, and
the approbation of Princes and Provinces.
1 THe most famous Universities of Germany and Poland have also given their
opinions upon this point, consonant to the Decrees of the foresaid Councels:
and that at the very time when the Princes of Germany for the good will they
bore to Eugenius, resolved to carry themselves neuters, as in conclusion they
did. The said Universities withstood this neutrality stoutly and strongly;
laying this for a ground, that a Council is above the Pope: which they prove by
many reasons and authorities: and therefore seeing Pope Eugenius was deposed by
the Council of Basil, and Felix the fifth elected in his place, that therefore
the first must be rejected as schismatic, and the last obeyed as legitimate.
King Charles the seventh favored Eugenius likewise, but so as that he
professes he will stand to the Decrees of the Council of Basil above all, (as
Nicholas Clemangiis tells us) as did also the Princes of Germany. But let us
hear what the Universities say of the power of Councels, as for the other
heads of their answers, we shall forbear from relating of them by reason of
their prolixity.

2 The University of Cullen, being required by Theodorus Archbishop of that
City, to let him know what they thought of it, made a little tract, some pieces
whereof we will here set down. The first proposition is, The Church Synodically
assembled, has supreme jurisdiction upon earth, to which every member thereof
ought to obey, of what dignity soever he be, though it be Papal: which no man
can dissolve or remove without their Synodicall consent. This is proved by the
Decrees of the Council of Constance and Basil. The first part is grounded upon
that in the 18 of St. Matthews Gospel; Tell it unto the Church. Where (as it is
collected from that which follows) is signified the power of jurisdiction given
to the Church Synodically assembled. The University of Colons opinion.
And there are many good writings upon that subject, and diverse ^estimonies of
Scripture, whereby that truth of the Councels of Constance and Basil is
confirmed. There have been infinite books and treatises writ of it already. The
second part is clear, inasmuch as the son, the servant, the Scholar, is
bound to obey his mother, his maist^r, his schoolmaister: but the Church is the
mother, the mistress, and the pedagogue of all the faithful in Christ, of
which number the Pope is one, though he be the eldest son, and the chief
servant: styling himself, not in a feigned humility, but in a Catholic verity
Christ's Servants Servant, and the principal among all the other disciples of
the faith. So then he is set as the rectour, pastor, and Doctor of the rest
of the faithful of Christ, in Christ's corporal absence, who is always
mystically and spiritually present: and by Christ the spouse of the Church, the
father, lord, and master of the faithful, by the authority of Christ, and of
the Church his wife and Spouse; which is another new Eve, sacramentally taken
out of the side of the new Adam sleeping upon the cross, and joined in
mar^iage with him, as The Apostle witnesses. This is a great sacrament, betwixt
Christ and the Church, not betwixt Christ and the Pope. Whence it is easy to
show that the Church Synodically assembled is a judicial consistory, and
supreme over all the faithful of Christ. And from hence also the third part of
the conclusion is evident; inasmuch as no party can transfer or dissolve the
Judges Seat at his pleasure. For if the Pope had this power, he should be
above not under the Church, using not a mere borrowed power of the Apostolic
keys, but an absolute free Princedome, a jurisdiction belonging to himself.
And he should not be only the Pastor and steward over the sheep and lambs
of Christ, but the King and Pastor of his own sheep, against that which is
said in the last of St. John's Gospel, Feed my sheep: he ^aith not feed, thine
own. Besides, if the part had power over the whole, the thing contained over
the continent, the particular badnesse of the Pope might oversway the
universal good of the Churches intention, and the Popes pleasure should be a
law to the whole Church. And that Church, which in one of the Articles of our
Creed we believe to be holy, built upon the immovable rock of our Christian
faith, should be made subject to a moving, to a moveable and erring Prince;
against which (says Saint. Ierom) neither vices nor heresies, which are meant
by the gates of Hell, shall ever prevail.

3 The University of Erford was of the same opinion, and gave the same advice
concerning the receiving and approbation of the Council of Basil, which they
directed to Theodorus Archbishop of Mentz in the year 1440: we will here set
down some passages of it; Now it is fitting to set which of the two ought to
be obeyed, whether Eugenius or the holy Council: having showed the validity
and subs^stence of the Council of Basil, the superiority and preeminence of the
Council is proved thus. Although the Pope or supreme Bishop be so the
principal part of the Church, or in the Church, that there is no one member of
the said Church or particular council, greater or more principal than he, nor
indeed so great as he is avowed and acknowledged to be by all those that have
treated of the power of the Pope. Yet no Catholic, that will understand the
ma^ter, can ever doubt but that the whole Church, or a firm and subsistant
General Council, (...) greater than he, and his superior in matters that
concern faith, or the extirpation of schisms, or the general reformation of
manners. For this was determined by the authority of the Church Catholic at
the sacred Council of Constance, and confirmed at the holy Synod of Sens and
of Basil, in these words; That a Synod lawfully assembled, in the name of the
holy Ghost, making a General Council, and representing the Church militant,
The University of E^fords opinion.
has its power immediately from Christ, to which every one is bound to obey, of
what estate or dignity soever he be, though he be Pope, in matters which
concern, etc. And although this declaration of the Catholic Church might
suffice alone to prove the supreme authority of sacred Councels upon earth: yet
notwithstanding, for the greater confirmation of what has been spoken, That
the rest of the body of the Church (excluding the Pope, if he be contrary to
it) has this authority, there may be brought both reason, and experience, and
authority. In the first place, reason teaches us, etc. After they have proved
this in manner aforesaid, at last they conclude in this sort. Considering then
that all General Councels are grounded upon such authority, that if they be
assembled about faith and reformation of manners, and that which belongs
thereunto, every man from the least to the greatest is bound to obey them: as
also considering they cannot err, and that the sacred Council of Basil
continues firm and undoubted until this day, as has been proved. From hence
three things are inferred: First, That if a General Council and the Pope,
though he be truly and reallie Pope, be at variance, and command contrary
things, the most illustrious Princes Electours, and all other Christians ought
and are bound to obey the Council and leave the Pope. The second, that the
sacred Council of Basil and Pope Eugenius that was, commanding contrary
things, they are bound to yield obedience to that sacred Council and not to
Eugenius: Yea to account him no Pope, seeing the Council had power to proceed
to the deposing of him for his disobedience. The third, that they are bound to
obey the most holy Pope Felix, who was chosen by the Council.

4 The counsel and advice which the University of Vienna gave to the
Archbishop and Metropolitan of Salizburg, upon his request made unto them, is
conformable to the former. To the second, namely whether the holy Council of
Basil had full power to proceed against Eugenius, and to depose him and create
another, it is answered; That the holy Ghost has openly declared by the Organ
of the sacred Council of Constance, that the Church, and a holy Council which
represents it, has such a power over any man whatsoever he be, although he be
placed in Papal dignity. Afterward they add the Decree of the said Council
which has been here alleged already; together with another of the same
Council, made against those that do not obey the commandments thereof,
though they be placed in dignity Papal. And in another place it is said, It
follows then that the Holy Ghost is there, (at the General Council) but not as
a subject, but as a supreme President, from whom it is not lawful for any of
the faithful to make appeal, and by consequent not from the Council neither,
forasmuch as concerns the Articles, wherein it is certain the Council is
governed by him, and that he presides there by a special grace and luster: to
wit, in what concerns faith, the extirpation of schisms, and the reformation
of the Head and the members. How can it be otherwise but an open contempt of
the majesty of God, and almost a piece of Idolatry to appeal from a Council
to the Pope in such cases? what is it else but to appeal from God himself,
who is confessed to preside in a sacred Council for such things, unto a mere
man? and to take the power of judging from God the Creator, and devolve it upon
a man? what is it else but to prefer a man before God as a more just Judge
than he?

5 The University of Cracovia gave also their advice and counsel concerning
this point unto Ladislaus King of Poland and Hungary, consonant unto the
former, but far more large, containing some very pretty reasons to prove that
the Pope is inferior to a Council; out of which we shall bring only some
passages to make it appear what their resolution was. First of all it is said,
That a General Council representing the Church Catholic, is a rule directed
by the Holy Ghost, and given by Christ Jesus, which every one is bound to hear
and obey, Councels urged to prove the Pope infe^iour to Councels.
of what estate and condition soever he be, although he be a Pope. And in
another place. Whence it follows, that the Pope is not head of the Catholic
Church nor of a General Council which represents it; but he is head in
respect of particular Churches and particular members in the Church. In
reference to whom he is supposed to have full power as the Vicar of Christ. And
elsewhere. Wherefore let this be the third conclusion concerning this point.
That every General Council lawfully assembled in the name of the Holy Ghost,
does represent the Catholic Church, and has its power immediately from
Christ. This proposition has no need of proof, considering that it has its
proof and foundation from the decree of the General Council at Constance.
See here the very words of it, that we may not be put to repeat them
hereafter. These are the two Decrees of the said Council, which we have
inserted here before. After which it is said, Behold the Constitution of the
sacred Council of Constance, which may suffice to make any man content unto
this conclusion, considering it is the assertion of the Catholic Church.
After the proof of the said conclusion, they proceed unto the fourth in this
manner. And forasmuch as the Catholic Church and the General Council which
represents it, has its power immediately from Christ by the fo^mer conclusion,
let this now be the fourth. The power of the Church Catholic, as also of
every General Council lawfully assembled, which does represent it, is above
the power of the Pope, and all other power whatsoever upon earth, to which
every one of what estate, condition or dignity soever he be, though it be
Papal, is bound to obey and submit himself. And if he will not obey he may be
punished with condign punishment. This conclusion they prove by many reasons
and authorities, which it would be long to set down in this place. We shall
only say how that, serving themselves with the authority of the Council of
Constance, and having related at large all that passed in that respect, they
add, All which facts of that Council are and will be a perpetual memorial
unto succeeding generations. Whence it plainly appears whether a ^enerall
Council have any jurisdiction over the Pope or no. Which every body that has
any judgment may easily know. Where it is to be observed that the authority
of the Council of Constance was not any way doubted of in those days, but
continued generally approved by all in this respect. In another place it is
said, Whence it may be inferred, that, although it be convenient the Pope in
some sort should be called the head of the Church, yet ought he not therefore
to prefer himself before the Church. Yea it might perhaps be inferred from
hence, that, eo ipso, because he quarrels with the Church for superiority,
either in his actions or affection, he not only is not superior, but also
that he is no member of the Church; as one that is ill opinion'd of the
authority of the holy Mother the Church, and deficient in the true faith. It
is further said toward the end of that conclusion: Whatsoever has been
heretofore delivered in this point by the Glosses and Doctors sometimes for the
affirmative, sometimes for the negative part, we must now stand to the decision
of it made by the sacred Council of Constance, for as much as concerns those
cases expressed in their Decree: to wit when the question is about faith, or
the extirpation of schisms, or the reformation of the Church in the Head and
members, and in cases thereunto belonging: as when the controversy is about a
notorious scandal, and so of others. In all these the Pope is inferior to a
General Council. And if any man be strongly confident of the contrary^ he
ought to be esteemed a heretic. I could yet extract some other passages, but
see here is more than needs for them that hold the contrary.

6 Now we come to our Universities of France, which have all approved this
opinion; That the Pope is inferior to a Council. Councels of Constance and
B^sil app^ov^d by Pr^nc^s.
Which they did not by their several counsel and advice, as those of Germany
and Poland, but being all Synodically assembled at the Council of Bourges,
together with all the Prelates and chief Lords of the Land, as it is affirmed
in express terms in the narrative of the Pragmatique Sanction, whose words
we have set down in another place.

7 And for that of Paris, as she excels all the rest in dignity and knowledge,
so has she performed the bravest exploits in this regard. For she not only
approved the Decrees of the Councels of Constance and Basil at that time; but
even after that, when she saw that Pope Leo the tenth went about to repeal
them in the Pragmatique Sanction by the Council of Lateran, and by the
Concordats made with King Francis, she put in an Appeal to a future Counc^ll,
with such masculine and generous terms as the honor of France might require:
as appears by certain passages which we have drawn out of them b^fo^e when
we spoke of Appeals from the Pope to a Council.

8 Besides, the second Council of Pisa, holden in prosecution of those of
Constance and Basil, did her the honor to desire her to write against Cajetans
book, wherein he maintains that the Pope has authority over a Council. See
here the letters which were writ unto her upon that occasion. The holy Council
of Pisa lawfully assembled in the name of the Holy Ghost, representing the
Church Catholic, and by way of continuation, removed to Milan for a time, to
our beloved sons the Rectours, Doctors, Masters, and Regents of the mother
nurse the University of Paris, health and blessing from God Almighty. Our
beloved son Ieffrey Boussard Chancelour of Paris, will by our direction
deliver unto you a certain suspected book full of injuries against the
Councels of Constance and Basil, and against ours, and against John Gerson the
maine defender of the Church, made by a certain Friar Cajerane, a bold fellow,
and a dangerous: who we desire may be corrected according to his desert.
Wherefore we desire you in the name of the Lord to examine and diligently to
sift that book, and speedily to send us ^^ur resolution and opinion of it, to
the end that we may proceed with your sage advice according to the merit of his
boldness. See here their most respective letters, and withal those which were
writ unto a company which has always been reputed in effect the eye and
light of the world.

9 Let us now speak of the approbation of Princes and Provinces. First, it is
to be observed that the Deputies of the chief nations in Christendom were
present at the Council of Constance: to wit, of England, France, Germany,
Spain and Italy: As is apparent from the Acts of it, and from the testimony of
Platina, who speaks thus of it; Platina in vita Ioannis.
The affairs of the Council (says he) were managed by the votes and
suffrages of five nations; to wit, of England^ Italy, France, Germany and
Spain. All that was decreed and resolved upon by suffrages of these nations
continued firm and strong, and was proclaimed and publicly declared by a
crier or public notarie: insomuch that it was afterward confirmed by the
general consent of all.

10 The Ambassadors of diverse Princes were at the Council of Basil, namely, of
the Emperor, the King of France, the King of Spain, and others. The Decrees
thereof were also approved in the diet of Mentz in Germany by the Electours of
the Empire, and the Orators of the Princes of Germany: witness AEnaeas
Sylvius, AEnea^ Sylviu^ lib. 1. de gestis Council. Basil.
afterward Pope Pius the second: witness also the University of Erford in
Germany^ which speaks to the Council aforesaid in this manner; The Princes
without all doubt or hesitation whatsoever have taken their oaths, and yielded
obedience, by themselves or their Ambassadors and lawful Atturneys, unto that
sacred Council, as also after that in the Diet of Mentz. The pretended
abrogation of this sacred Council being already decreed, admitting of it with
certain qualifications, they make no scruple about the power of it, ^he
Prag^atique ^^^ction yet in fo^^^.
as it is contained at large in the letters set out touching the acceptance of
it, in these words; We accept and receive presently, and without delay, with
all devotion and reverence, the foresaid Decrees of the holy Council of Basil,
with convenient caution, as touching the correction and reformation of the
things aforesaid, some simply, as they ly, others with certain forms and
modifications. Not that we doubt of the power of that sacred Council which made
them, but to the intent that they may stand with the convenience of the times
and manners of the said Country of Germany, as it is hereafter specified. The
University of Vienna says likewise to the same Council, That all Christian
people called it a Council lawfully assembled, and received it with all
reverence.

11 Our Kings of France have approved all these three Councels of Constance,
Basil, and Pisa: to wit, the two former in the Pragmatique Sanction, with
certain forms and qualifications, V. Pragmatic. Sanct. in prooem^o.
which concern especially the liberties of the Gallicane Church, and do not
any ways derogate from the power of the Council over the Pope: for the Decrees
which were made in that kind are inserted there by name. And the last, together
with the two former, by the letters patents of King Jews the ^welfth, of the
16 of June 1512. And although Pope Eugenius the fourth was very earnest with
King Charles the seventh, to get him to repeal the Pragmatique Sanction, and
reject the Counsel of Basil, after the translation of it to Ferrara: yet for
all that he could not obtain it, but answer was made to his Ambassadors,
That the King had acknowledged the Council of Basil for a true Council; V.
Nicolaun de Clemangiis in ^as^iculo ^erum exp^^end.

Cons^i^utio Ludo^i^^ 12. ann. 1499. art. 1. quam vi^e in tit D^s Pragmat^
S^nction. in (...) Constitut.

Franciscus 1. in Constitut. ^a^ta super B^ll^ ^^^onis 10 de Valor
Benesi^iorum.


that he had sent his Ambassadors thither: that diverse good things had been
there ordained concerning faith and manners, which he approved of; and that he
never accounted that assembled at Ferrara for a Council: That for the
Pragmatique Sanction his pleasure was it should be inviolablie observed and
kept. The same Pragmatique Sanction, which is nothing else but the substance of
the Councels of Constance and Basil, was afterward confirmed by King Jews the
twelfth, after it had escaped shipwreck under Jews the eleventh, together with
the Council of Basil aforesaid, by an Ordinance made in the year 1499.

12 Since that time there was a Concordat made betwixt King Francis and Pope
Leo the 10; which derogates from it concerning the point of Elections,
Presentations, and such like things, but not in that which concerns the power
of a Council. For see here what the same Prince says of it; to wit, that, To
avoid the great dangers which may happen hereafter about the recalling of the
Pragmatique, whether such revocation be obeyed or it be not, (which may be
foreseen by all such as are well affected) he has made certain Concordats
with the holy See Apostolic. Now in these agreements there is nothing
expressed either for the confirmation or abrogation of these decrees concerning
the power of Councels: although that was the maine cause that stirred up the
Popes hatred against that poor Pragmatique. And if so, it is yet further to be
observed that the University of Paris has put in an Appeal from such
Concordats to a future Council.

CHAP. VII. A confutation of their reasons that maintain that the Pope is
above a Council.
Councels of Constance and Basil decree Councels to be above Ppes.
THe Popes are in default who have endeavored to obscure this truth; yea desired
to overthrow it in the suit, either by their proceedings, or by their Decrees
and their Conventicles; or by the writings of their hireling Doctors, whom it
is now my task to answer, but very briefly, because it is none of my proper
design: beside, that which I have touched upon above may suffice abundantly.

2 Their maine encounter is with the Councels of Constance and Basil, yet so as
they cannot agree amongst themselves about them. For some of them say, It was
not absolutely determined by them that General Councels have power over Popes,
but only in one case, to wit, when there is a schism, and it is doubted who
is the true Pope. But the very words of the two Decrees which we produced in
the former chapter, do sufficiently refell them, so that we need say no more
of that. They do not only give the Council power over Popes in case of
schism, but in all that concerns the faith, in all that concerns the
reformation of the head and members, and all things that depend thereupon.

3 What would a man desire more? Bellarmine knew well enough that this reason
is but of base aloy, for contenting himself with the bare mention of it, and
quoting of the authors, for his part he has recourse unto others, but such as
are no whit stronger. He says then, for the Council of Constance, that when
it made these Decrees it was not such as had power to determine controversies
of faith, inasmuch as it was not then General; that it had but the third part
of the Church, to wit, only so many Prelates as obeyed Pope John the three and
twentieth, and not those which obeyed Gregory the twelfth, and Bennet the
thirteenth. And mark here how he would enervate what was done by a General
Council, because of the absence of some schismatic Prelates. By this reason
all the Council should be a nullitie, from the beginning till the end, and not
a part of it only, as he would have it. For the Prelates which acknowledged
Gregory for Pope, Platinain Eugenio 4.
never assisted at it but persisted with their Pope in that schism, even til
the end. And yet Bellarmine affirms that this Council is legitimate and
approved: only for the reason aforesaid, he excepts that Session wherein these
Decrees were enacted. It was not then such (says he) that it had power to make
these decisions in matters of faith. But, I beseech you, a Council consisting
of two hundred Fathers then when it made these Decrees, where the Emperor and
many other Princes were present in person; the Ambassadors of all the Kings
and Princes of Christendom, except two, the Proctours and Syndiques of all the
Nations and Universities in Christendom, and so many persons of another
quality in such abundauce that above thirty thousand horse were seen to arrive
there at the beginning, as Nauelerus testifies. This Council, I say,
(according to Bellarmine) could not ordain any thing concerning the power of
the Pope and of a Council, The Council of Constance asserted against the Pope.
by reason of the absence of some schismatic Prelates. Now let any man be
judge, if any thing firm and strong can be expected from Councels. Now that
all those whom we mentioned were at the enacting of those Decrees, is apparent
from the very text of the fourth Session: the words are these; The thirtith of
March there was holden a General Session in the Cathedral Church of
Constance, in which there were two hundred Fathers, etc. There was also the
King of the Romans, with the habit and formalities belonging to the King of the
Romans. After mass was done the Cardinal of Florence read certain
constitutions which should be observed by the Council, the tenure whereof is
set down hereafter: which being read and approved by the General Council,
Henry de Piro, Proctour and Syndic for the German nation, did desire in behalf
of that Nation, that a copy of those ordinances (that is, the Decrees
mentioned) might be given unto him: The like was required by the Proctours and
Syndi^s of all the countries subject to the King of the Romans, of the
Universities, the Schools, and Ambassadors: there being present at the same
time the most illustrious Princes, Frederic Burgrave of Noremberg, Ralf Duke of
Saxony, the Count Madesburg, Count Bertold de Vrsinis, the Ambassadors of the
Kings of England, France, Poland, Norwey, Cyprus, Navarre, and also John
Vicount of Milan, the Marquess of Montferrat, and diverse other nobles, and
reverent Fathers in great abundance. Shall two schismatic Popes with their
Prelates of the same stuff have more authority than all this great multitude?

4 Now that these Fathers were Schismatic (and consequently those of their
faction) before those Decrees were ma^e, is apparent from the testimony of
Platina himself, who speaking of the first Council of Pisa, where their
deposition was decreed before that of Constance, By mutual consent (says he)
they deprived Gregory and Benet of the Papal dignity, Pl^tina in Gr^gorio 12.
all nations assenting to that so hard sentence, except the nether Spain, the
King of Scotland, and the Earl of Armaniac, who favored Pope Benet. Now this
deposition, together with all the Decrees of this Council of Pisa, Plati^^ in
Al^xan. ^.
was confirmed by Alexander the fifth, who was accounted lawful Pope. And yet
Bellarmine will have these two Popes with their Prelates to make two parts of
the Church. For see what he says of the Council of Constance; B^ll^rmin. l
2. de Con^. au^hor. cap. 19
It was not then a General Council because there was only the third part of
the Church there; to wit, only those Prelates which obeyed John. For those which
obeyed Gregory and Benet did oppose that which was done by the Council. He
says further, That there was no certain Pope in the Church, without whom
controversies in faith cannot be determined. So that he does not acknowledge
John for Pope, who was then acknowledged by all, and was so ever after until
his condemnation. Pla^ina in Ioanne 24.
Platina testifies that he was created at Bononia with the consent of all. It
is he that called the Council of Constance: it is he that assisted in some
Sessions of it. He was not indeed at the fourth and fifth, where these Decrees
were made, by reason of his flight. But he was lawful Pope tho, and continued
so still till he was deposed and condemned; which was occasioned by his lewd
life, and those crimes committed by him. As also on the other side he
acknowledged it for a lawful Council. For upon the very day of the fourth
Session, came the Archbishop of Rhemes with letters of credence from him, the
contents whereof were, Con^. Constanc. Sess. 4.
That his sudden departure was not for fear or cowardice, but by reason of
the bad air; and that he offered to fulfill all that he had promised to the
Council: and when they proceeded to his condemnation, approved of all ^ adding
that in all things he conformed himself to every ordinance, deliberation, and
determination of the said sacred Council: Conc. Constant. Sess. 11.
and that he ratified the process made against himself, affirming the
Council of Constance is most holy: that it cannot err: that it is a
continuation of that of Pisa: and that he would never contradict the sacred
Council of Constance.

The Council of Constance confi^med by the Pope.
5 But suppose there was no Pope certain, what follows upon that? That the
Council (says Bellarmine) could not deliberate upon matters of faith. This is
ever to return to the place whence we came: it is as much as to say, The Pope
alone is more than all the body of the Council. He has more authority than
it. The council has not its power from Christ immediately. But see here that
which strikes the stroke! Pope Martin the fifth accounted legitimate by all,
and confessed (God be thanked) even by Bellarmine himself, has approved the
Acts of this Council in the last Session of it. Bellarmine slyes to his
distinctions, saying, He confirmed only such Decrees as concern the faith;
such as were made Conciliariter, that is, (says he) according to the use in
other Councels, after the thing had been diligently examined. And it is
apparent (says he) that this Decree was made at the Council of Constance,
without any examination. How does that appear? does not the passage above
recited show the contrary? It is not said there were any disputes or
controversies about it: nor that any man did stand out against it: nor that
there were diversities of opinions about it. What, is it therefore less valid
because it was agreed upon by the common consent of two hundred Fathers? by so
many Cardinals, Conc. Cons^ant. Session^ 4. et 5.
so many men of note? and decreed at two several times, and at two several
Sessions? which is a sufficient testimony that it was maturelie consulted and
deliberated upon. Besides, it is thought sufficient to register the Decrees and
resolutions in the Acts, but not the disputes. For example, AEnaeas Sylvius
tells us at large of very deep and difficult disputes that were controverted at
the Council of Basil about this very point; Conc. Basil. Session. 2. et. 3.
to wit, concerning the power of a Council in relation to the Pope. And yet
he that shall read the Acts of that Council will find nothing there but the
bare Decrees, without any mention made of the discussion which was of them.

6 When Eugenius his Legates were arrived at Basil, to preside at the Council in
stead of the Pope, by virtue of his letters: They were not forthwith admitted
(says the University of Cracovia) but a greater number of the most learned
Doctors in the world were deputed, that having searched the Scriptures and the
sacred Canons, they might advise whether these Presidents ought to be admitted
to a coercitive Presidence and full authority, such as they demanded, or no.
Who having continued a long time upon that deliberation, they were of opinion
that this coercitive Presidence ought not to be granted them. And the thing
being afterward consulted upon, it was concluded according to their opinion.
Read now the seventeenth Session of that Council, you shall find nothing
there but the bare resolution, without a word of this above. So that we believe
that this Council of Constance, which consisted of the most learned Devines and
Lawyers that were then alive, did not pass these two Decrees till they had
thoroughly examined them: especially considering the thing was put to the trial
again.

7 Bellarmine wrongs them to believe otherwise of them; but we shall not wrong
him by retorting his exposition upon himself and his Council of Trent; and
rejecting all the Canons and Decrees of it, as not made Conciliariter. For
there is not a syllable to that effect in the Acts of the Council: but on the
contrary we have showed by diverse testimonies, that they did nothing but suppe
up the porredge which was sent them from Rome. But it is strange that in his
exposition by the word Conciliariter, he would exempt those Decrees from Pope
Martins approbation. The word to an understanding man signifies no more but
Synodaliter, that is, in a Synodicall assembly. Now it is certain these
Decrees were made in full assembly, and in two several Sessions. What would he
more?

8 But I desire all men to observe this one thing; that the Council of
Constance was not questioned or controverted of old in this respect, as
appears from those passages which we have produced in the former chapter out
of the Opinions and Advices of the Universities of Germany and Poland; Council
of Ba^il approved by Eugenius.
who hold the authority of the Council of Constance for undoubted, and argue
from it as from a received and irreproveable authority. Pope Martin did
su^ficiently approve it, when he took an oath at his coronation. Council.
Constable. Sess. 39.
To believe and maintain the holy Catholic faith, according to the
traditions of the Apostles and holy General Councels. Conc Basil. Sess. 1.
When he called the Council of Basil by virtue of the Decree of the same
Council of Constance: considering that that Decree puts a cavesson upon the
Popes nose, and subjects him to a Council, by prescribing a law unto him for
the calling of Councels^ Conc. Cons^ant. Sess. 39.
limiting him the time and form of convocation, and all with the approbation
of the Synod; debar^ing him of the power of delaying the convocation. Add
hereunto that the Council of Basil approved that of Constance in all things
and to all in^ents, and in particular those Decrees which are now in question.

9 We add that Pope Felix did likewise approve of it in full and express
terms, Council. Basil. Sess. ^.17.18. and 39.
setting down the first Decree of that Council word for word. Wherein is
contained the power of it over the Pope. Yet Bellarmine calls it into question
again, and says it was not approved in that point. It was (says he)
lawfully begun, but unlawfully ended. We on the contrary affirm, that it was
also lawfully continued and ended: this we prove by the approbation of three
Popes. To wit of Eugenius the fourth; First, because Cardinal Julian his Legate
was present there when those Decrees concerning the power of a Council over
the Pope were made, Council. Basil. Sess^ 1.
with full power on the Popes behalf. Secondly by his Bull extant among the
Acts of the Council, in the sixteenth Session. Behold here the very words.
Council. Basil Sess 16.
We denounce and decree that the said General Council of Basil was and is
lawfully continued ever since the time it first begun: and that it has had a
continual succession: and that it ought to be continued and prosecuted about
the things aforesaid, and others belonging thereunto, as well as if it had
never been dissolved. By those words, the things aforesaid, he means the
reformation of the head and the members^ and others specified before. Platina
witnesses as much in his life. At the beginning of his Popedom (says he)
guiding himself by bad counsel, he put all things both divine and humane in
confusion For he stirred up the people of Rome to arms: and authorized the
Council of Basil, which was a cause of infinite evils, by reason of his
approving the Decrees of it by his Apostolical letters. This testimony cannot
^ee rejected, as proceeding from an historian passionately affected toward
E^genius.

10 Nauclerus gives the like testimony. Nau^ler gen^^at. 48.
Eugenius (says he) endeavored to remove the Council of Basil to Bonony: but
the Emperor and the rest of the Princes and Prelates which were then at Basil,
did not only disobey him; but, which is more, they warned him two or three
times to come to Basil with his Cardinals: the proper place, and which was
chosen by Pope Martin: otherwise they would proceed against him as a
prevaricator and contumacious person. Eugenius being moved with their language,
confirmed the Council of Basil by his letters Apostolical, giving every man
leave to go thither. When the Legates whom he sent to preside there, Council.
B^sil. Sess. 17. and 18
were received with great solemnity in the presence of the Emperor Sigismond,
who assisted there in his Imperial robes, and of some other Princes: the
foresaid Decrees concerning the Councels authority over the Pope were renewed
in the next Session following: Ibid Sess 16. and 17.
yea at the very time of their admittance and incorporation they swore to
maintain the said Decrees. And yet there was no coercitive presidence granted
unto them, but with submission to the Council, as appears by those Decrees.
Whereto the University of Cracovia adds in the forementioned Advice, That
neither the Legates, nor any other on the Popes behalf, nor he himself did
complain of it.

The Council of B^sil approved by Popes.
11 The second Pope is Felix the fifth, who was lawfully created by the Council
of Constance with great solemnity, and who some years afterward did resign
the Popedom for quietness sake. He declared at the time of his resignation
that he approved the Decree of the Council of Constance, concerning the
authority of a Council over the Pope, setting it down at large in the
instrument which was drawn of his resignation: and consequently that of Basil
which has the same thing. We have quoted the whole passage in the precedent
Chapter.

12 The third is Nicholas the fifth, who in general terms confirmed and
authorized all and every the Acts of the Council of Basil; and likewise all
that was done by Felix in that behalf. Bellarmine denies it, restraining that
confirmation to that which the Council had ordained touching Benefices and
Ecclesiastical censures But he took no notice of that general clause in the
Bull: Extat in Actis Concilii Basil. post ultimam Sessionem.
We approve, ratify, and confirm all and every the Acts, deeds, grants,
gifts, indults, dispositions, and ordinances (although they be greater and
weightier, or of another nature than the former; and although they require a
special declaration, which we will have to be accounted as expressed) which
have been made or done as well by those that obe^ed that Council of Basil and
Amedeus, called in his obedience Felix the fifth, as by those that continued
together under the name of a General Council at the Cities of Basil, and
Lausanne. As also when he was admitted and approved Pope by the Council of
Lausanne, he had formerly made evidence that he was thus resolved, to
acknowledge the authority of the Council over him, and to approve their
Decrees: as it is said in the Act of his confirmation, which passage we urged
in the former Chapter.

13 Lastly, Bellarmine in stead of a buckler uses the authority of such Popes
and Councels as have condemned this of Basil. Bellar l. 3 d^ Ecclesia
militante. cap. 19.
He puts Eugenius in the first place, whose hap it was with all speed to
confirm the Decrees which are now in question, and all that was done at the
Council of Basil till the sixteenth Se^sion: whose hap it was to send his
Legates thither to preside there; which they did, afterward confirming those
same Decrees. With Eugenius he joines his Council of Ferrara, saying that it
was holden at the same time with that of Basil, and that there were a greater
number of Bishops there: that the Emperor of Greece was there in person, with
many other Bishops of that nation; and the Emperor of Germany's ambassador:
and that the Pope presided there. V. principium Concilii Flo^entini.
I will grant him all this; but withal he must know he has gained nothing by
it in the question which we have now in hand: Inasmuch as the Council of
Florence or Ferrara began not before the year 1438, at which time, yea a
long time before, those Decrees of the Council of Basil which we speak of
were made, to wit in the year 1431. And therefore though there might be some
doubt about the last Acts of it, yet there can be none about the first.

14 He says further that all the Church rejected that which the Council of
Basil decreed concerning the authority of a Council over the Pope, inasmuch as
notwithstanding Eugenius was deposed by that Council, yet she acknowledged him
still for a true Pope. The truth is, that Eugenius was taken for Pope by some
few Princes and Nations, after his deposition: but the consequence is false,
that therefore the Church rejected those Decrees touching the authority of a
Council over the Pope. For many approved the one who disliked the other, by
reason of their particular affection which they bore to Eugenius. And in deed
King Charles the seventh declares in plain terms, Nicholaus de Clemangiis.
That he held the Council of Basil for a true Council: that he never
approved that of Ferrara: that for the deposition of Eugenius and election of
Felix, he never yet did approve of them, nor does he now approve them. The
Bishop of Panormo says, That all the Ambassadors of the Emperor, Kings and
Princes, The Council of Basil approved.
which were at the Council of Basil before, stayed there, notwithstanding the
pretended translation of it to Ferrara: and which is more (says he) the King
of France did expressly forbid any of his subjects to go to Ferrara to
celebrate the holy Oecumenicall Council upon pain of great penalties, always
acknowledging the General Council of Basil. Vid. Naucler. generat. ^8^
AEnaeam Sylvium in ^onc. Basil.

Et Panor^^ in tract. de Con^. Bas^l.


This author is irreproveable, considering he was sent to the Council of
Basil by Eugenius, to cause that Council to cease: so far forth that, in
favor of him, he there disputed against his conscience; maintaining some false
opinions which he afterward recanted in his writings.

15 To make it more evident that the pretended rejection of the Council of
Basil concerns only the deposition of Eugenius, and that it was received for
all besides, we will here produce the very words of a protestation made by King
Charles the sixth. The King protests as a most Christian Prince treading in
the footsteps of his predecessors, that he will obey the Church duly and
lawfully assembled. But forasmuch as diverse honest and grave personages doubt
whether the suspension and deprivation (of Eugenius) and the election (of
Felix) made at Basil, be well and canonically performed and celebrated; and
that it is questioned, whether that assembly, then when these things were done,
did sufficiently represent the Church Catholic, to proceed to such great
matters and so important: the King persists and remains in obedience to
Eugenius, in which he is at this present. This protestation was made the
second of September 1440, and is printed with an oration of M^ John Gersons.
All the ^is^ioulus temporum in Imp^^^^. Frederic. ^. sub ann. 143^.

Nav^l^rus ^enera^ ^. P^^lu^ ^angius in ^hronic. (...) sub ann^ 1^^1.

Bergon^ensis l. 15. sup^lementi sub ann 1438.


Historians that have writ of this Council do highly comm^nd the beginning of
it, and find no fault with it, no not in that which concerns the reformation
of the head and members. But for the end, they say that was shameful

16 Bellarmine says further, that the Fathers of the Council of Basil did
submit themselves to Pope Nicholas the fifth; as also Pope Felix, whom they had
created, did yield to Nicholas the successor of Eugenius. We answer, that for
the quietness sake of the Church, Felix did resign the Popedom, and yielded
to Nicholas; as the act of that Session has it: and that Nicholas was created
Pope anew by the Council of Lausanne, which was nothing else but that of
Basil: and that this very Pope confirmed the Acts of the Council of Basil. Now
in the Act of his creation there is this amongst other things: We have declared
that peace is necessary, yet so as the authority of the Church be always
preserved entire, according to the determination of the holy Council of
Constance. And afterward; The holy Synod lawfully assembled, representing the
Church Catholic, with mature and concordant deliberation, has chosen the
welbeloved son of the Church Thomas for supreme Bishop, calling him by the
name which he is now called, Nicholas the fifth. This was done in the year
1449. In the same Act it is said that the Kings of England, France, Sicily, and
the Dolphin did much further that union.

17 Bellarmine urges Leo the tenth against us also, and the Council of
Lateran, which was continued and ended under him, after it was begun by Julius
the second. For the better judging of the validity of this Council, we must
know the cause of it, as Onuphrius a witness beyond exception does deliver it.
Onuphrius Panu^nus. ad Platinam in Iulio 2.
The French being puffed up with the good success of their affairs summoned
Pope Julius the second to a Council which should be holden at Pisa the first
of September, as it was agreed upon betwixt them and the Emperor, and the
Cardinals that were revolted from the Pope: who having labored to make peace
with the King of France Jews the twelfth, upon condition of recovering Bonony
and dismissing this Council of Pisa: seeing that he was grown insolent after
his victory, and that he obstinately refused to hearken unto him, by the advice
of Anthony de Monte, he called the General Council of Lateran to Rome, to
defeat the Conventicle of Pisa. And besides he excommunicated the King of
France, the Florentines who had received the Council into the City of Pisa,
The occasion of ^he Pisa^ Counc^l.
and all those that were assembled thither. He deprived five Cardinals of all
their honors and dignities, who had been the authors of that Council. He
labors to slight the authority of this Council, by setting down the small
number of Cardinals, yea by minishing of them contrary to truth. For by the
Acts thereof it appears that there were other five besides those whose names
he rehearses. The author of the Dialogue upon the death of Julius reckons
nine. Nine Cardinals (says Julius, who is the speaker) revolt from me,
proclaim a Council; invite me to come to it, desire me to preside at it: when
they cannot obtain that, they call it themselves, and summon all the world
unto it, with the authority of Maximilian as Emperor, and Jews the twelfth,
King of France. But let him make the number as little as he will, it may
suffice our other Frenchmen, yea all good Christians, that this reverend
Council of Lateran was not called out of any zeal to religion, but only to
break that of Pisa, and to hinder the reformation which they would have made
of the head and the members. But it is fitting to show thoroughly the validity
of that of Pisa, and the nullity of the Lateran^ to the honor of our Kings,
and the shame of the Popes.

18 The world had a long time gaped after that so much desired reformation of
the Head and the members: ^ivers Councels had bin holden for that end, but
still in vain, by reason of the Popes craftiness. I will say nothing without
good warrant: that is a thing must be looked to nowadayes. Give ear therefore
to the instructions which the Cardinals that called the Council of Pisa gave
to Ioannes Baptista de Theodorico, and Francis de Treio whom they sent to Rome;
Having not had any General Councels (say they) for so many years, and how^ver
some few were assembled, as we find that there have been five within these
hundred years last past; viz. that of Pisa, Constance, Siena, Basil, and
Florence: yet for all that the Church has not been reformed effectually, by
reason of those impediments and quarrels which have intervened: and the Lords
field in the mean time is overgrowne with briers and thorns, that must of
necessity be purged by a Council. Upon this occasion also it was religiously
ordained by the Councels of Constance and Basil, that Synods should be held
every ten years.

19 But this being neglected by the Popes after the Councels of Lausanne and
Florence, at last the Sea coming to be void in the year 1503, the Cardinals
before they went to a new election, bound themselves by an oath, that he
amongst them upon whom the election should light, should be bound to call a
Council within two years after: and they drew an instrument hereof, whose
inscription runs thus; The things underwritten are the public chapters
ordained betwixt the supreme Bishop that shall be, and the right reverend
Cardinals unanimously, and with common consent for the defense of the liberty
of the faith, and the reformation of the Church in the Head and members. Then
follows the text; We all and every one of the Cardinals of the holy Church of
Rome here underwritten, do swear and vow to God Almighty, to the holy Apostles
Peter and Paul, and promise to all the saints of holy Church^ that if any of us
be chosen Pope, presently after the solemnity of his election, he shall swear
and vow purely, and in all simplicity, and good truth, to keep and cause to be
effectually fulfilled and kept, all and singular the Chapters here
underwritten, and to require all notaries to send out public Bulls of the same.

20 First of all he shall swear and promise, that, in case of necessity of
assisting faithful Christians, etc. There are yet some more Chapters, and then
it is said; Item, forasmuch as it is very important to call a General Council
with all speed, for the peace of Christians, the reformation of the Church, the
abolishing of many exactions^ as also for an expedition against the infidels:
he shall promise, swear, and vow to call it within two years after his
creation, and to begin it effectually in some place of freedom and safety;
Pope Julius his oath, and pe^jury.
which shall be chosen by him and two parts of the right reverend Lord
Cardinals, by Little stones which Electours (...) giving o^ voices.
balots.

The oath and vow made by the Cardinals concerning the things aforesaid.
21 We all and every one of us the Cardinals of the holy Roman Church^
assembled together at Rome in the Palace Apostolic, for the election of a
future Pope of Rome, con^irming the Chapters aforesaid, agreed upon amongst us
with consent and concord, for defense of the Catholic faith^ Ecclesiastical
liberty, reformation of the Church in the Head and members, and for the band of
charity and peace betwixt the supreme Bishop and the Cardinals of the Church of
Rome his brethren; do vow to God, to the glorious Virgin Mary his mother, to
the blessed Apostles, and to all the Court of heaven, swearing upon the holy
Gospels corporally touched, one to another, and also to the public notaries
here unde^written, as legal persons covenanting in the name of the holy mother
Church, and of our sacred College, and of all others that have any interest
therein; that whosoever amongst us shall be chosen Pope, he shall fulfill and
keep all and singular the things contained in the said Chapters, without all
coven, fraud, and treach^ry, and without using any exception: that he shall
not countermand^ny of them directly or indirectly, openly or privately: that
after his election, or before the publication of it, he shall confirm all the
things aforesaid, and shall approve them in authentic form, and s^all make
an absolute promise of them anew; yea and that in manner of a contract, etc.
There are yet some other clauses to restrain him further, which need not be
rehearsed: they being all bound and tied by this vow and solemn oath, Julius
the second was chosen Pope, being one of them that had sworn so religiously;
who to satisfy what was promised, made his Papal oath in this wise.

The subscription, vow, and oath of Pope Julius the se^^nd concerning the
things aforesaid.
22 I Julius the second, Pope, being chosen to the dignity of supreme Bishop,
do promise, swear, and make a vow, to fulfill and keep all the things
aforesaid, and every of them, wholly and entirely, purely, simply, in good
truth, readily and effectually, upon pain of perjury, and anathema; from which
I will neither absolve my self, nor procure my self to be absolved by any
other. So help me God and the holy Gospels. All this was done in the year
1503. Now Julius so little regarded those two oaths so solemnly sworn, that he
let not only two years go, but even six or seven over and above, without ever
taking any great thought of accomplishing his vow. Whereupon the Emperor
Maximilian, King Jews the twelfth, with a number of Cardinals and diverse other
persons being scandalized, especially because Julius, more strongly
representing an Emperor than a Pope, did employ himself in wageing war,
they resolved to take order for it; and to that end those Cardinals, upon
request made unto them by those two Princes, called the General Council of
Pisa, in default of the Pope, the year 1511. Which the Pope perceiving he
called his at Rome, to quash the other, as Onuphrius told us. So that the one
is called upon a lawful cause^ the other to a very bad end.

23 This is not all. The Council of Pisa submitted so far to Pope Julius,
that when they saw he was determined to keep a Council, they desired him to
have it in some free city, and of safe access; Julius the 2. his demanour.
which if so, then they offered to come unto it. For you must take notice by
the way, that this was another Julius Caesar, which made his armor ring all
Italy over, and that even against the Gauls as well as the former whose name he
bore: Yea they came so far as to entreat him to make choice of any one of those
ten free cities which they should nominate in diverse Provinces: or himself to
nominate as many in Italy, which were not under his temporal jurisdiction, nor
under the Venetians, and they would agree of one of them; To the end (say they)
that it may be evident to every one that the holy Council proceeds in all
things with bounty, humility, and peace; and that they do not deny your due
reverence, they have thought good to send their Orators unto you with express
charge and special power, that the cities here mentioned, be presented to your
Holiness in the name of the Synod, which are most of them Imperial cities: to
wit, in Italy, Vercel, Turin, Casal of Montferrat, and Verona: Out of Italy,
Geneva, Constance, Besanzon, Mentz, Avignon, and Lions, to choose which of them
you please: after which choice the Council will remove thither, etc. But if
your Holiness think it not fit to accept of any of these places, for the
greater evidence of the good meaning of the Synod, and to make their reverence
toward the Pope more plainly appear, it is left to his power to nominate as
many Imperial cities in Italy, so they be not within his temporal dominions
nor the Venetian jurisdiction, etc.

24 The Orators of the Synod having sent a messenger from Florence to Rome, to
get a safe conduct of the Pope, they had no list to go any further by reason
of the ill entreating, the injuries and beatings done to him whom they sent;
who was compelled for fear of prison or death, to return without doing any
thing: of which there was an Act and instrument drawn, which is extant amongst
those of the same Council. The Synod being advertised hereof, did resolve to
expect yet thirty days, to see whether the Pope would alter his resolution:
whereof intimation might be made unto him by placards set up in places next
adjoining, because free access thither could not be had. All this is related
in the very Acts. We may do better to set down the very words of them. But
forasmuch as the said Orators, as soon as they were arrived at Florence, sent
a faithful and loyal messenger to the Court of Rome, to procure a safe
conduct from the Pope. Which they not only did not obtain; but, which is
worse, the messenger was so horribly threatened, that he was constrained to
fly for fear of prison or death, and to return again to the said Orators,
(as appears more at large by the instrument made thereupon) the holy Synod
grants and appoints another term of thirty days, etc. And forasmuch as it
is notorious that there is no free access to the Pope, the holy Synod ordaines
that this decree of prefixing this term be published and intimated to his
Holiness, by bills set up (if it may be done) in the neighboring places and
next adjoining; whereby probably it may come to the knowledge of the Pope, or
at least to the Cities of Milan or Florence.

25 The Pope in stead of accepting what was fairly offered him, on the
contrary commanded all those of that Synod to depart from thence, upon pain of
loosing their offices and benefices, say the same Acts. Yea he and his Council
went so far as to excommunicate King Jews the twelfth, and the Cardinals
that were at Pisa, Onuphrius in Iulio 2.
(as says Onuphrius) putting the Realm of France in an interdict, and
stirring up the Kings of Spain and England against our Prince, the one whereof
brought over his armies into France, and the other into the Kingdom of
Navarre, (as the same author has it) a great part whereof he conquered, and
yet holds by that only title. It is further to be observed, in behalf of our
France, that there were a great number of Bishops and other Prelates, and
Ecclesiastical persons of this Kingdom present there at Pisa, and besides the
deputies of the Universities of Paris, Toulouse, and Poictiers, Julius the 2.
his condition^^
as it is recorded in the same Acts. So that whatsoever was there done by Pope
Julius, does principally redound to the discredit of this Nation.

26 But that it may more clearly appear what manner of man this Julius wa^, we
will here set down what the Legend of Flamens says of him, an ancient book
and not to be excepted against in this case. O Pope Julius (says it) who wast
surely the abomination of all desolation, (as a modern author testifies)
durst thou falsify thy faith, desert St. Peter's chair, and usurp the title,
not only of Julius Caesar, (for he never falsified his faith, nor ever went
against his loyalty, as thou) but of Julian the Apostat, whose name thou have
borne for a long time, ( Convenient rebus nomina) and unfold and display the
Apostolical keys, and the three crowns in the field? sleep in the
watchtower? God knows how bravely he made the crosses, crosiers, and mitres
to clash and flourish in the camp. The devil himself durst not have come
there. For benedictions and plenary indulgences a poena and culpa marched so
thick as nothing more. And to prove this true, in the month of August last
past, when I complained to one of the late Pope Leo's Chamberlaines, of the
inconstancy, or rather disloyalty and treason of Pope Leo the tenth, who
against his faith and promise so solemnly sworn at the Parliament of Boloyne
to the most Christian King Francis of France, had declared himself the Kings
enemy, wondering with my self at the little fidelity and loyalty of the modern
Popes; more especially of the two last, Julius the Genoois, and Leo the
Florentine, considering that in former times the Popes would have chosen to
suffer death rather than break their promise; he swore and protested unto me,
that when Ferdinand King of Aragon, came out of his country of Spain, into
the City of Savoy, the same Pope Julius had sent him an absolution from the
treason which was then hatched, and plotted to cozen King Jews of France. He
speaks more of this point than I was aware of: for he joins Leo the tenth with
Julius. And if I were not afraid to be cen^ured that I went about to expose the
personal vices of this Leo, contrary to my protestation, Paulus Langius in
Chron. Citiz^nsi. sub ann. 1^1^
I could here represent him all laden with vices and crimes. It shall suffice
me to refer the reader to those that have spoken of his life, and amongst
others to Langius a German Monk.

27 See here then the two authors of this Council of Lateran, which is now
opposed against the first and second of Pisa, those of Constance, Basil, Siena,
and Lausanne, and against our Pragmatique Sanction. The former called it, and
the latter continued it. The former triumphs victoriously over the Council of
Pisa; and the latter over the Pragmatique Sanction; and together with it over
the Councels of Basil and Constance, if we may believe them in this point, and
let them alone here. We may then affirm that this Council of Pisa was
lawfully called, and upon just and necessary causes: and on the other side that
this of Lateran ought to be reputed schismatic and illegitimate, being it
was assembled by a Pope doubly perjured and contumacious, only to serve his
own passion, to decline a reformation, and live in disorder: to make a mock
of that laudable design of the Princes and Clergy, who dreamed of the good of
Christendom. But the French are unworthy the honor of their nattion, if they
do not for ever detest and abhor this pretended Council, which did so much
mischief and trouble to that great Prince Jews the twelfth: which did
anathematize him, and interdict his kingdom: which raised up armies on all
sides to assassinate him: which made the fields blush with blood: which caused
the towns and kingdoms that did him homage to be invaded: which pronounced a
nullity and flaw against that which was ordained and decreed at the Council of
Pisa by the most famous Prelates and Universities of this Realm.

Counc^l of Lateran but a Conventicle.
28 Signauter dico, which did interdict both the King and Kingdom: for it is
not Julius alone but all his Council. In the third Session whereof was that
thundering Bull of his made, which remains there yet all entire. Out of which
I have collected this piece. Sessio 3. Council. Lateran. ultim. V quoque
Session. 2.
With the approbation of the sacred Council we condemn, reject, detest, and
declare to be void, invalid, and of no effect, all the acts, facts, gests and
writings published and ordained by the children of damnation, Bernardin
Caravaial, William Brizonnet, Renald de Pria, and Frederic de Saint Severin,
heretofore Cardinals, together with their favorers, abettours, and accomplices,
Schismatiques and Heretics: who endeavor to break the union of the holy
mother Church by the Conventicles of Pisa, Milan, and Lions. We do likewise,
with approbation of the same Council which has full cognizance thereof, renew
our letters, whereby we have interdicted the Kingdom of France, because of
the approving, favors, assistance, and adherence of the said King of France,
and other Prelates, Officers, Nobles, and Barons of that Realm, unto those
schismatiques and heretics for the keeping and continuing of that damned and
reprobate Conventicle of Pisa. And we submit unto this interdict, the said
Kingdom, with all the towns, territories, cities, and other places whatsoever.

29 I am not ignorant that after this Pope was dead, the same King Jews, who
had approved the Council of Pisa by his letters patents of the 16. of June
1512, verified in Parliament, came afterward to dissolve and renounce it, that
he might join with that of Lateran which had changed the master; Sess. 8. and
9. Conc. Lat^ran.
and that because of the good affection which Leo the tenth^ the successor of
Julius showed toward him. I know likewise that the Concordat betwixt the same
Leo and King Francis, was afterward made, which is recorded in the eleventh
Session of that Council; and that afterward in the same Session the
abrogation of the Pragmatique Sanction and the Council of Basil, for as much
as concerns the power of a Council over the Pope, was concluded. But I answer
that this Council of Lateran was then but a mere Conventicle, Sess. 11. Conc.
Lateran.
considering it had in all but sixteen Cardinals and what Patriarchs, what the
Popes assistants o^ Orators but eleven, with fifty three Bishops, one Abbat and
four Generals. Of which it was said by the University of Paris in the Act of
Appeal put up by them, That it was not assembled in the name of the holy
Ghost. This we urge of purpose against Bellarmine, who holds that the Council
of Constance was not Oecumenicall, for what concerns the Decrees of the fourth
and fifth Sessions, though there were to the number of two hundred Fathers,
because some schismatic Bishops were absent. Besides, it is certain that
the abrogation of the Pragmatique and the Council of Basil, as touching the
power of Councels over the Pope, was never approved in France no more than in
other places: and this was it was disputed at the time of the Concordat, and
which they would never yield to.

30 For proof hereof there needs no more but the reading of the opinions of
certain Bishops in that Council, which are set down in the eleventh Session
then when that point was canvassed. Sess. 11. Conc. Lateran.
After the reading thereof (say the Acts) their fatherhoods were asked whether
this Concordat pleased them. They said all plainly that it pleased them except
the reverend Father Domenic Bishop of Lucerin, who said the things contained in
the Bull pleased him, always provided that the French accepted the other Bull
containing the repeal of the Pragmatique Sanction. Two other Bishops were of
the same opinion: but all the rest went along so as that our Pragmatique and
the Council of Basil stand good still. Besides, it was abrogated for as much
as concerned the contumacy of Prelates, Chapiters, Parliaments, Laymen, and
other French which stood upon that pragmatique, who had been cited diverse times
in vain. Lo here now a strange manner of proceeding, A Council is above the
pope. Reasons to the contrary answered.
to pronounce a sentence of condemnation after a solemn agreement made, to
compass that means what was denied them by the compact. And as for the
abrogation of it made afterward by the same Session, it is repugnant to this
agreement, which being made only about certain chapters of the Pragmatique
Sanction, the rest that were never touched upon remain still in their full
strength.

31 Besides, the University of Paris put in an Appeal to a future Council
about the abrogation both of the Pragmatique Sanction, Theses Fratri^ Heliae
Beauva^^ Minoris Su^murensis sub praesidio Emundi Richer. Doct. Theol. Sorbon.
anno 1599. die 11. mensis Mat.
and of the Council of Basil; testifying by that very Act that they firmly
believe that a Council is above the Pope: and in very deed there is none but
knows that this University holds the contrary opinion for heretical unto
this very day; and Theses are ordinarily proposed and disputed against it; one
whereof my self have seen, and have it in my custody, conceived in these
terms, Concilium supra summum Pontificem eminet maxim. A Council is
eminently far above the Pope.

CHAP. VIII. A refutation of those reasons which Pope Leo with his Council of
Lateran urges to prove his authority over Councels.
1 IT is not enough to have laid open the lightness of Belmines reasons;
Council Lateran. Se^sion. 10.
we must answer those of the Lateran Council. Leo then and his Conventicle
after they have set down this rule, That the Pope is above a Council, and
that by virtue of this power he may call, change, and dissolve it at his
pleasure, he underprops it with diverse reasons: The first is this; V. Epist
AEgyptiorum ponti^. ad Felicem Papam.
That the Council of Alexandria where Athanasius was present, writ to Felix
Pope of Rome, how the Synod of Nice had decreed that Councels ought not to be
kept without the authority of the Pope of Rome.

2 This authority is taken out of the Epistle of the Egyptian Bishops written
to Pope Felix, which is suspected for supposititious by all those that have any
clear insight, and which know how they can tell to forge things at Rome, where
instead of al other miracles they have kept this of making dead me^ speak. But
granting it be genuine, our answer is, that there can nothing be concluded from
thence, but only that General Councels cannot be valid, unless the Pope of
Rome be summoned thither; seeing he has as much to do in them as other
Patriarchs: which is particularly mentioned of him rather than others, because
of his remoteness; by reason that generally Councels were most commonly holden
in the East. For this very reason he had power to choose for his ordinary Legates
the Bishops of Athens, Corinth, Crete, and others of those Countries,
notwithstanding that they were beyond his bounds, and not subject unto him, as
a Patriarch of Antioch has it. But we have spoke sufficiently of this in
another place. Theodorus Balsam. in praesat. ad 6. Synod. in Trullo.


3 The next reason is, because Pope Leo removed the second Synod of Ephesus to
the City of Chalcedon. We read indeed that Pope Leo complained of the second
Synod of Leo Epist 23.
Ephesus: Po^es ^^moved Councils but with their cons^^^.
that he entreated the Emperor Theodosius to call another in Italy, to have
an account of the former: that he employed Leo Epist 24. vide etiam Epis^ol^s
L^^en^ae and ^acidiae ad Thendos. and Epist Theod^sii ad Valentinian. in
praeambulis epist. ad Synodum Chalced.
Valentinian, the Emperesses, yea all the world to obtain that request of
Theodosius, who played the deaf man, and would not hearken to it ^ Epist.
Valentinian. and Martian^

Et altera ^jus them Martiani a^ L^on^m and al^^ra ^orundem ^mp ad Episc^pos in
praeamb epist.


that after his death the Council was called by Valentinian and Martian, not
in Italy, as he desired, but at Nice in Bithynia: that the same L^o ^pist. 41.
Leo having entreated that it might be deferred, could not obtain so much at
those Emperors hands: ^pist. Imp. Valent. and Ma^^i^n. a^ Council. Ni^en. ^n
pr^eam^.

Epist. Council. Constable. Session. 39.


that they afterward translated that Council from Nice to Chalcedon. But how
should we believe another man that Leo translated it from Ephesus to Chalcedon,
when he himself says the contrary? Who could better know than himself? What
can be more authentic than the very letters of the Emperors that were the
authors of the translation, which are joined with the Acts of the Councels? But
grant that he transferred the Council from one place to another: it is a very
weak consequence to say, therefore he is above it. The Emperors will have as
much authority as he, who transferred them from one place to another; yea and
made them come all in corpse after them from one country to another, to render
a reason for what they had done, as we have proved elsewhere.

4 Let us come to the third reason. Pope Martin the fifth gave his presidents at
the Council of Siena power to remove the Council, without any m^ntion made of
the consent of that Council. If Leo and his Council will make us believe
that, they must abolish the memory of all those other precedent Councels. It
was decreed in the thirty ninth Session of the Council of Constance, That
Councels should be kept from ten years to ten years, in such places as
should be nominated by the Pope within a month before the end of every Counc^l
with the approbation and consent of the Councl, or in case of his default by
the Council it self. It is further said, that the place being once appointed,
it shall not be altered by the Pope without apparent necessity; in which case he
may do it with the consent of the Cardinals, or two parts of them. According to
this Decree, this Pope Martin, of whom we speak before the breaking up of the
Councell^ did nominate the City of Padua for the holding of the next Council
that should be called. Which he did with the consent and approbation of the
said Council, Council. Constant, Sess 44.
as it is affirmed in express terms. When the question was about going to
keep that Council, the same Martin sent forth a Bu^^ containing the creation
of his Presidents to assist there; declared the nomination which he had made
with the consent and approbation of the Council; Extat haec Bulla in 1.
Sessione Conc^l. Basil.
and gave them power upon lawful cause, to translate it from one city to
another, to prorogue it, dissolve it, preside at it, make Decrees, and other
such like things. But with this clause, which relates to all the things
aforesaid, Eodem approbante Concilio, with the approbation of the same Council.

5 But this is not all yet. When the Council was assembled at Siena, he was
earnest with the Fathers thereof to change the place: they consulted upon it,
and resolved to go to Basil: Council. B^sil. Session^ 1.
So say the Acts, The Presidents convoked the Deputies for all the nations of
the present Council of Siena, about choosing the place for the future Council.
And anon after: They did nominate and choose the City of Basil unanimously and
with one common consent. And yet after, it is said, That the Presidents
assented to the nomination which was made by the Deputies. Now how shall we
believe this alteration was made, or that Martin did attempt to do it without
the consent of the Council? He, I say, who approved the Decrees of it, which
is more, as it has been demonstrated in another place.

6 The fourth reason is, That diverse Synods have given a great deal of
reverence to Popes, and have obeyed their injunctions and commands with all
humility. There was no necessity of saying so much for fear it should be
denied. For reverence sake a great deal of honor was ever done to the Sea of
Rome: Popes not ob^yed by Councels.
it was acknowledged to be the first in degree and dignity, but not in power
and authority. Besides, the Pope was put to wrestle for honor with the
Patriarch of Constantinople, and the Archbishop of Ravenna, by reason of the
translation, the one of the Imperial seat, the other of the exarchat into
their Cities, pretended that they had got the prerogative of honor. The other
Patriarchs had scarce any less than he; sometimes more was done unto them,
and sometimes less. The Popes for their part ever made good use of it: they
were never ashamed to proclaim their own praises, and they lost nothing for
want of challenging. They have often turned the fair proffers which were made
unto them into strict obligations; and have monopoliz'd to themselves what was
common to all. But to do them a courtesy, let us grant them some special
favor and prerogative. From all these honors and respects there can be
nothing concluded: as for authority and power, we have no more to do, but set
up our staff there.

7 The last is more pressing, which speaks of the humble obedience which
General Councels have done unto them. Let us therefore examine those examples
which are urged upon us. The first Council of Ephesus granted it to Pope
Celestine in obeying his Decrees. What a ly is this! Pope Celestine in a Synod
which he held at Rome of the Western Bishops, condemned the opinion of
Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople: gave notice of the determination of his
Synod to Cyrill Patriarch of Alexandria: and before he speak of the General
Council of Ephesus, he entreats the same Cyrill to cause that to be put in
execution which had been defined at Rome: from whence an argument for his
presidence is drawn, as much to the purpose as the rest. Being advertised of
the Council of Ephesus, he sends his Legates thither; of a truth they speak
some magnificent things tending to the Popes advancement, but of which they can
make no great booty; saving only that the Council was glad that the definition
of the Western Bishops was found conformable to that which had been made by
the Eastern. V cap. 16. To. ^. Act. Conc. Ephesians.

Vid c 17. ibid.


And to this intent The Synod decreed, Considering the Legates of the Sea of
Rome have spoken such things as are conformable to what had been formerly
determined, they would subscribe to their Acts, that they might continue
constant to their promises. And presently they sent letters to the Emperors,
Theodosius and Valentinian, wherein they say, That God has touched the hearts
of the Western Bishops with a godly zeal^ for although the length of the
journey did not permit all that multitude of Bishops to come to Ephesus,
notwithstanding being all met together in one place. the most holy and most
devout Celestine Bishop of Rome, being present and presiding amongst them, they
have determined in point of faith conformably to what we had defined; and have
declared those that are of a contrary opinion unworthy of Priesthood, and of
all Ecclesiastical honors and degrees. And Celestine the most holy Bishop of
great Rome had signified by his letters this opinion of his, and of those that
were with him, before ever there was any mention of holding a Council at
Ephesus: and had sent to Cyrill the most holy Bishop of Alexandria, and
wel-beloved in the Lord, to prosecute and perform what had been concluded upon
at the Synod of Rome, substituting him in his place. And not content with that,
he has now repeated the same things again by other letters directed to this
Synod assembled here at Ephesus by your command, which he has sent by his
Legates, which do represent at this present his person in the Council. All
this they inform the Emperors of, to let them see that the condemnation of
Nestorius was concluded by the common consent of the Church Universal.

8 Now if they call this obeying the Popes Decree, Conc. Ephesians. To. 1. cap. 14.
et 16.
we may say as well that the Pope obeyed the Decrees of the Council of
Alexandria holden by Cyril, in as much as when he had notice of them from
Cyril, he wholly conformed himself unto them. Councels not v^lid because
confirmed by Popes.
The Council of Chalcedon did strictly examine the confession of faith which
was sent them by Celestine; yea and mended something which did not run well;
gave leave to any that would to contradict it; cast him in the case of honour^
which he took in great disgust. In that answer which was made unto him this
piece is indeed to his advantage, Synod Chalced. in allocut. ad Marcian.

Ib. Act. 16. Ib. Act. 23.


That he was to the Council as the Head to the members in the person of his
Legates. But this is in regard they were as a head to the rest of the Clergy, as
having the first degree of honor, yet without presiding there; as we have
expressed at large in another Chapter. As for the humble obedience in question,
they must seek it elsewhere: for there is no more spoke of it here than is to
Pope Agatho, Hadrian and Nicholas in the sixth and eight Councels.

9 The Council that yielded the most to the Popes was the eight General,
holden at Constantinople, which granted Hadrians Legates the Presidence, (which
the rest never did) and which decreed with a great deal of respect concerning
the accusations of Popes. But it never came so far as to do him humble
obeisance, or to acknowledge him for its superior, as is pretended.

10 The fifth reason is the declaration which the Bishops of Italy made to the
Bishops of Illyrium touching the Council of Ariminum, which they said was
invalid because it wanted the Pope of Romes consent: and Pope Leo's declaration
to the Bishops of Sicily, wherein he pretends the very same reason. We have an
epistle of those Bishops extant at this day, by the means of that learned
French man, to whom all Christendom is so much beholding, which discovers unto
us the Popes cunning to manage their designs. They condemn indeed the Council
of Ariminum: But why? that they tell us, We do justly reject the Decrees and
determinations of the Council of Ariminum, V. F^agmenta D. Hilarii.
with the consent of all the Provinces, as having been corrupted by the
prevarication of some body. We send you the copy hereof, to the intent that
there may be no difference neither in retaining the same says, nor in
rejecting the Council of Ariminum. As for Pope Leo we make no question but he
might have done that which is put upon him, although the letter which he writ
to the Bishops of Sicily make no mention of it. For he only tells them that
they must send every year three Bishops to Rome, to assist at the Synod which
shall be holden there. Which cannot be referred to a General Council. And
for the rest, no body denies but the Pope has the same power in respect of the
Churches which depend upon him, which the other Patriarchs and Metropolitans
have,

11 But let us grant what they say of him. There is nothing got by it; it is a
domestique testimony, and of one that is himself a party. He that has at
other times disputed the presidence of Councels, is now in question himself in
his own cause and his successors. Besides, we have spoken sufficiently
elsewhere of the approbations and subscriptions of the Acts of Councels which
were desired at the Popes hands; that they desired as much of other Bishops to
mantaine the union and intelligence of the Church, from whence no advantage
will accrue to the Pope: and yet^ for all the Council of Lateran makes this a
strong ground: as neither from that which the Council of Constance did, which
our Lateran Fathers have put in the list too, thereby tacitly approving it. Of
whom I demand lastly, Why then do they not observe its decrees touching the
power of a Council, seeing they can find no flaw in them? They take at
nothing but the Council of Basil, and this poor Pragmatique; and that by
reason of the sauciness of them, as they intimate unto us by those words,
Which was likewise observed by the Fathers of Constance: which laudable custom
if those of Bourges and Basil had observed, without doubt we should never have
all this ado. This for the point of approbation which Councels required at the
hands of Popes. Of the Pragmatique Sanction
Let us then leave our Bourgeois and Basilians there, and confess they were to
blame to exempt the Pope from trouble. But what had the Council of Constance to
do with it, that the Decrees thereof must be abrogated for this? Besides, is
it not a fine argument, to conclude that the Pope is above a Council, because
that of Constance demanded the approbation of their Decrees at his hands,
whereas by the same Decrees they make the Pope inferior?

12 See here all their reasons, Extat Ludov^ci 12. Constitutio in Se^sione 4.
Council Lateran.
saving that they urge the abrogation of our Pragmatique made by Jews the
eleventh, and consequently of the Council of Basil. To which we cannot answer
but to the shame of Pius the second, who having wrought wonders against the
Popes at the Council of Basil, having even writ the history of all that passed
there with exceeding approbation thereof, when he came to be Pope urged King
Jews with the performance of a promise which he had extorted from him when he
was Dolphin, of repealing that pragmatique as soon as he should come to the
Crown; and he never gave over soliciting of him by letters and Legates till
he had his desire. So then the pragmatique was repealed by this Prince with
the advice of a few: but was set up again presently after with the consent of
many, having perceived the prejudice done to France by him. We must confirm
all this by good witnesses.

13 M. John le Maire relates many things about this particular; Iean le Maire
en a^ party de la differ. des Schisms.
it is fit we hear him. Forasmuch (says he) as the Popes are not content that
the pragmatique Sanction be in force, although it be founded upon the holy
Canons, and authorized by the Council of Basil: But it derogates from the
insatiable covetousness of the Court of Rome, and therefore they say it is a
pure heresy. Pope Pius the second imagined by all means to persuade and put
it in King Jews his head to abrogate and put all down: under color, as the
Pope pretended, that the said Jews when he was then but Dolphin had promised
the Pope, that when he came to the crown he would abolish the said
Pragmatique. And to bring this about, Vid. etiam Gaguin. lib. 10. hist F^anc.
presently after the Kings coronation Pope Pius sent the Cardinal Monk
D'Arras for his Legate into France. The Legate being arrived in France put the
King in mind of fulfilling his promise: and the King being willing to
condescend to the Popes desire, at least making a show of so doing, dispatched
his letters patents in ample manner, directing them to the Parliament of Paris,
and sent Cardinal Balue thither to have the Decree of the Lords of the
Parliament thereupon. But when the ^ase was discussed, the auditory of the
Court being present, the Kings Attorney, called John de Rome, a sharp man, of
great eloquence and courage, straight opposed himself against it; boldly
affirming and maintaining that a law so holy, so redoubtable, and of so great
benefit to the kingdom, ought not to be repealed. In like manner the
University of Paris joined with the Kings Attorney, and appealed from all the
Popes attempts to a future Council. At which things Cardinal Balue, a wary,
malicious, and stout man, was much offended and used big words: but all this
notwithstanding he returned to the King again without doing any thing. And so
our Pragmatique continues still in force, save that the King did afterward
bestirre himself to cause his letters patents to be verified.

14 Now that he made this repeal without counsel, we prove from Pope Pius,
Pius 2. Epist. 401 ad Ludovicu^.
out of his letters gratulatory which he sent to him thereupon. Mean while we
commend that (says he) that you have determined to disanull this Pragmatique
without the assembly or advice of many, as the same Bishop has given us to
understand. Certes you are wise, and you bewray a great King, to govern and
not to be governed. See here the good counsel of the Pope^ but which did not
thrive very well with him: for this default made all be cancelled. Malum
consilium consultori p^ss^mum. Let (...) hear yet his other elogyes concerning
that repeal. Pius the 2. his inconstancy.
You were reserved till these times to restore her liberty to the Church of
Rome, by abolishing errors, that is, the Pragmatique. And in another passage.
You do what is meet, knowing that the Pragmatique is godless, you have
resolved to abolish it out of your Kingdom. The rest may be seen in the
author himself.

15 But let us here observe the inconstancy of this Pius, who says in his
Commentaries of the Council of Basil, that every one held the conclusion of
the Bishop of Arles (who presided there) in admiration, AEnea^ Sylviu^ l. 1. de
gesti^ Conc. Basil.
concerning the authority upon a Council against the Pope: as undertaken by the
special favor of the Holy Ghost, says he. In another place he extols the
integrity and devotion of those Fathers with exclamation, Idem lib. 2.
O most sincere fraternity! O the true Senate of all the world! What a deal of
beauty, and sweetness, and devotion was there! to hear the Bishops
celebrating in one place; the Abbats at their prayers in another; the Doctors
reading divine Histories in a third: to see one writing by candlelight,
another meditating upon some weighty matter ^ Now our Pragmatique is nothing
else but the marrow and substance of the Council of Basil, yea but the very
Decrees of it. Now we demand of him, Cur tam vary? as our Practitioners speak.
He will give us King Francis his answer, It is not for a King of France to
revenge an injury done to a Duke of Orleance: But rather it is for a Pope to
defend the Popes cause. Quod AEneas laudavit Pius damnavit.
That when he writ that (as well as that which he writ against the Donation of
Constantine) he was but one of the Council of Basils frogs: but this he
pronounces as Pope, that is, as one who is now better advised; having all
wisdom both divine and humane in his pantos^e, and all law in his budget.

16 I will not now spend time upon answering the arguments which Bellarmine
brings out of holy Scripture, to make the Pope above a Council. As Thou art
Peter; Feed my sheep. Ergo the Pope is above a Council. Item, The Pope is the
Head, the Steward, the Shepherd, the husband or spouse of the Church.
Therefore he is above a Council. Part of which have been confuted by the
Council of Basil, in the Acts collected by AEnaeas Sylvius; and part by many
other Doctors which writ since. Besides the solution of them may be gathered
out of those places which we have here above transcribed out of the opinions
of the Universities of Germany and Poland.

17 We have also made answer already to that which is urged of the Councels of
Sinnesse and Rome: That the Primier See, that is, the Pope, cannot be judged
by any man: and we have showed that this is meant of particular persons, or of
Provincial Councels at most. Besides that, we have diverse examples of their
judgments, in which this maxim was never determined. Add further, that we
have made it evident by an infinite number of examples; that diverse Popes have
been judged even for other crimes than heresy.

18 But the most pressing argument of all is that which he collects out of the
letters of certain Eastern Bishops writ to Pope Leo the first, and the
Council of Chalcedon joyntlie, and that during the celebration of that
Council; in the inscription whereof they put the Popes name before the
Councels; and yet the Fathers there assembled, to whom these letters were
presented, never complained of it, says Bellarmine: He had great dearth of
good arguments when he flies to such as these. By the very same reason the
Archbishop of Constantinople must be above the Council, whose name is put
before the name of the Council in the letters of Eusebius Bishop of Doryleum:
To the most holy and most blessed Archbishop Flavian, (says he) and to the
holy Council. See here the Patriarch of Constantinople as good as the Pope;
Conc. Chalced. Action. 1.
and by consequent Pope Leo, who pleaded the contrary in that very Council,
has lost his right by Bellaermines judgment. If he should have said so much
in his time it is a hazard he had never been Cardinal: so highly was the Pope
displeased at the judgment of this Council. Pl^ceing of nam^s, o^ what forc^.
Another Bishop puts the names of the Pope and of the Patriarchs of
Constantinople and Antioch all before the name of the Council in a letter of
^is. The Council of Chalcedon writing to Pope Leo, puts it self before him;
Conc. Chalced. Action. 3.

Lant^r ^la^as^ C de sum. trinitate

V. ep^stolas Leonis.

Item ^pist. ^d^^am ad Taras^um in 2. Acti. Synod. Nic^n. 2.

Epistolas diverso^um Ponti^. Roman. apud Willelm. Malmesbur. lib. 3. de
Pontisic. Anglorum.


and on the contrary writing to the Emperors Valentinian and Marcian puts it
self after them: all in the same Session. Bellarmine knows also very well that
the Emperor Justinian writing to Pope John, puts his name of Emperor before
that of Pope: and that John also puts it before his in his answer. It is true,
the gloss spoils all, which says, This would not be so now adays. We know
Pope Adrian the fourth had a great quarrel with the Emperor Frederic about
it, who had been so bold as to put his own name before the Popes, in the
letters which he writ, whereof we have spoken elsewhere. But our predecessors
went not so precisely, but in writing one to another they put their own names
sometimes before, sometimes after; as we could make it appear by many
examples, if it were worth the while.

19 Bellarmine adds, that the Council of Chalcedon it self has acknowledged
this for true, when they call the Pope their head, and themselves his members.
Yea but they were to blame to put the head under the feet in that inscription
which we urged. We have said before in another place that he is called the
head, because he was the first in degree of honor amongst the Clergy, because
he sat in the first place amongst the Bishops. Others say because he is the
head of particular Churches, but not of the Universal, represented by an
Oecumenicall Council. All the other arguments which he brings are refuted by
us in diverse places, saving only those which are drawn from the authority of
Popes; whom we desire to forbear as well from giving evidence as from passing
sentence, seeing their own cause is in question.

A REVIEW OF THE COUNCIL OF TRENT. BOOK V.
CHAP. I. Of Indulgences.
THe Pope has usurped such an excessive power in point of Indulgences, that
there is not a good Catholic but is sorry for it. I will not here dispute
whether these indulgences be profitable or no, and whether he has power to
grant them or no, I leave that question to Devines. My aim is to show that
this Council did not satisfy the desire and hope of Catholics. The abuse
which the Popes have committed in matter of Indulgences, and which they commit
every day, is notoriously known to every body; as also the complaints that have
been made of it. The Popes have undertaken to pull souls out of Purgatory, by
commanding the Angels to take them forth, and to carry them into Paradise. We
have set down the Bull of it in another place. As for the plenarie pardon of
all sins, with this expression, Id constituit Paulus 2.

Vide Bulla^ Iulii 3 de ann. ^ubil^i.


be they never so heinous, this is ordinary with them: not only at the great
Iubily, (which they reduced from an hundred years to fifty, from fifty to
thirty, from thirty to twenty five, and ere it be long they will abate yet a
little more of the term, to the intent that they may augment their Court,
Pardon of future sins, occasion of much wickedness.
and oblige every body to come thither the oftener) but also in their
particular Bulls which they grant out. That of Sixtus the fifth of the year
1588, granted to the Catholics of this Realm of France makes proose of it;
which gives the Curats and Confessors power, To absolve from all crimes,
sins, and excesses be they never so heinous: Extat Charunti excusi anno 1588.
with many others which I could allege, containing bolder clauses than that:
which not long since have with scandal been presented to open view.

2 But that which is yet more to be condemned in them, is, that the Popes do
not only give remission of sins already committed, but also of such as are to
be committed. Which is a means to oblige all the base raskals in the world
unto him, and to give them occasion to redouble their crimes and misdemeanors;
to rob with four hands, to kill father and mother, to set upon their Lords and
Masters, to violate the authority of their Princes, and usurp their
Dominions. For provided they can make their party stronger, and that they be
devout toward the Holy See, there will be no want of an indulgence: yea even
without that, always provided they pay their rent.

Epist. Leo diens. To. 2. Council. edit. Colon page 809.
3 The Clergy of Liege in their epistle directed to Pope Paschal, tell how they
had read that Pope Gregory the seventh commanded the Marchioness Maud, that as
she would have her sins remitted, she should make war against and destroy
the Emperor Henry the fourth. But we do not conceive by what authority
either he or others could do it justly. And afterward, addressing their
speech to Paschal, O holy mother Church of Rome, hitherto thou observest the
fashion and custom of binding and loosing discreetly; and command us so to
observe it. Whence is then this new authority, whereby impunity of sins
already committed, and liberty of committing for the time to come, is offered
to delinquents without confession and penance? What a gappe have thou hereby
set open to the wickedness of men? O mother, God deliver thee from all evil.

Matthew. Paris. in hist. Anglor. in Henr. 3. page 935.
4 The story which is related by an English Monk is very remarkable. About the
same time (says he; to wit, the year 1258) there came into England a certain
Friar, of the Order of the Minorites, called Mansuetus, sent by the Pope, at
the instance of the King, who trod in the steps of Mr. Herlot, being
instructed with a great power, insomuch, that, changing their vows, he
absolved all the Royalists (as they called them) at his pleasure, or justified
excommunicate, falsifiers, and perjured persons. Whereupon diverse delinquents
took occasion to offend; for the facility of pardon gives occasion to sin:
but wise men made a mock of it. It is a means to induce any man to abandon
himself to all kind of vice and lewdness, to be assured that all the sins
which he can commit shall be forgiven him.

5 We will here set down some passages out of a Bull which came to our hands,
containing the summary of many others, granted by Pope Paul the third, (who
called the Council of Trent in the year 1539) to the brethren of the
Fraternity of the Sacrament of the altar, printed at Chartres by Philip Hotot,
the year 1550, at the request of the Protectours, Proctours, and brethren of
that Fraternity. Lo here the very words; Giving and granting furthermore to
the said faithful Christians, which shall enter into the said Fraternity of
the blessed Sacrament of the body of JESUS CHRIST, upon the day of their
entrance, full pardon of all their sins, they being first confessed, and the
said sacrament of the altar devoutly received. Besides, three times in their
life a like plenary pardon in manner and form of a Iubily. Furthermore, unto
the said brethren such as shall accompany the said blessed Sacrament when it is
administered to sick folks, or to such as by reason of their impediments cannot
do it, and shall cause it to be so accompanied as is above expressed, and
shall assist at Processions and divine service, such as shall be done and
solemnized by the said brethren, as above said, an hundred years of true pardon
for every time they shall so assist. And those that shall visit the said
Church every Friday in the year, P^rdo^s g^an^ed by sev^rall Popes.
ten years of true pardon, and as many quarentains, saying a Pater noster, and
an Ave ^ary, every Friday. Behold yet another Article which goes further, as
we shall understand by the commentary. As also power to use and enjoy all and
every the privileges, indults, exemptions, liberties, immunities, plenary
pardon of sins, and other spiritual graces given and granted to the
brotherhood of the image of St. Savior ad Sancta Sanctorum, of the charity
and great hospital of St. James in Augusta, of St. John Baptist, St. Cosmus
and Damianus. Of the Florentine nation, of our hospital of the Holy Ghost in
Saxia, Of the Order of St. Austin and St. Champ^ Of the fraternities of the
said city, Of the Churches of our Lady De Populo and de verbo^ together with
all the gifts, graces, pardons and indulgences granted by our predecessors to
those which visit the said Churches, or to be granted by our successors, to
have and enjoy for ever.

6 In the sequel of that Bull are set down the indulgences granted to the
Churches, brother-hoods^ and Hospitals mentioned in the former Article, with
the names of the Popes that granted them: amongst whom are named, Sixtus,
Gregory, Innocent, Celestine, Clement the fifth, Boniface the eighth, Innocent
and Sixtus the fourth. But we may do better to transcribe the whole; for it
may be there is now a scarcity of copies. The Statutes and Ordinances of the
worshipful Fraternity of the most blessed body of our Lord Jesus Christ, newly
founded and erected in the Church of St. Hilary of Chartres, together with a
summary of the pardons and indulgences given and granted by our holy Fathers
the Popes, and by our holy Father Pope Paul the third of that name, confirmed
to the said Fraternity, and all others of like denomination, as well at Rome as
out of Rome, erected or to be erected. Which Statutes and Ordinances, by
virtue of the taking out of those Bulls made thereupon, by authority of Pope
Julius the third of that name now reigning, given at Rome the sixth day of May,
in the year one thousand five hundred and fifty, shall be observed and kept
in manner and form f^llowing. The pardons, Indulgences, Iubily, and plenary
remissions granted to such as visit the altar, where the blessed Sacrament and
precious body of Jesus Christ is placed in the said Church of St. Hilary, upon
the days, in the year, and according to the manner and form hereafter
declared and expressed; to the end that every Christian desirous of his
salvation, may purchase and come by them.

7 And first the declaration of the Indulgences given and granted to the
brethren of the said Fraternity found in the Church of St. Hilary of Chartres,
verified, approved, and confirmed for ever, but made valid by our holy father,
Pope Julius the third of that name now reigning.

8 The Indulgences granted to the Hospital of St. James in Augusta.

9 The Indulgences granted to the Church of St. John of Florence, and to the
company and society of the said nation, and of St. Cosinas and Damianus of Rome.

10 The Indulgences granted to the society of the holy Camp of Rome.

11 The Indulgences granted to the brethren and sisters of St. Savior ad
Sancta Sanctorum.

12 The Indulgences granted to the company of the Charity of Rome.

13 The Indulgences of the great Hospital of the Holy Ghost in Saxia, of the
Order of St. Austin of Rome.

14 The Indulgences of our Lady de Populo of Rome.

The catalogue and declaration of the Indulgences aforesaid, with the names of
the Popes that granted them, and the days upon which they may be had.
15 First, our holy Father Pope Leo has granted to all and every one of the
said brethren which shall be present at Processions and other divine service,
Plen^ry pardons g^^nted by Leo and Grego^y, Pop^s.
celebrated upon Corpus Christi day, remission of all their sins, provided
they be confessed and penitent, or have a full resolution to confess
themselves at the times appointed by our holy mother the Church.

Plenary pardon to those of the brethren that shall name the name of Jesus at
the point of death.
16 Item, he has granted a plenary pardon to all such of the brethren of the
said Fraternity, as shall name the name of Jesus at the point of death, and
they shall be partakers of all the good works of the whole Church Catholic.

Plenary pardon upon all the feast days of our Lady, upon All Souls day, and
upon St. Philip and James day.
17 Item, he has granted to every one of the said brothers and sisters, who
upon any of the feasts of our Lady, upon All Souls day, and upon Philip and
James day, from the vespers of the eves until the vespers of the said dayes^
shall, being confessed and penitent, visit the great Altar of St. Hilary, upon
which the most precious blessed Sacrament is set, plenary pardon of all their
sins, upon every one of the said days.

Plenary pardon upon all the second Sundays in June and upon the sixteenth of
July.
18 Item, Pope Sixtus has given and granted to every brother and sister that
shall visit the said altar upon the second Sunday in June, and the sixteenth
day of July every year, for every of the said days a plenary remission of all
their sins.

Plenary pardon to the dead.
19 Item, he has granted to every brother that shall give any alms, or offer
any sacrifice, according to his means and ability, by way of suffrage for the
soul of any one deceased, that he shall obtain plenary pardon for the sins
of him so deceased.

Plenary pardon upon our Ladies day in mid-August, which is the Assumption.
20 Item, Pope Gregory has given and granted to every brother that shall visit
the altar of the blessed Sacrament in the said Church of the said St. Hilary
upon our Ladies day in mid-August, which is the Assumption day, plenary
remission of all his sins.

Plenary pardon upon all the feasts of our Lady, and the Octaves of them, and
upon all the feasts of the Apostles.
21 Item, he has given to all the festivals of our Lady, and the Octaves of
them, and to every feast of the Apostles, plenary pardon of all sins.

Easter day and eight days following.
22 Item, Pope Innocent has granted to the said brothers and sisters, upon
Easter day, and eight days following, four thousand eight hundred years of
Quarantains, and remission of the third part of all their sins. Sever^ll
Pope^ pardons.


Twelfth day, and the octaves of that festival, and the nativity of our Lady.
23 Item, he has granted to the twelfth day, and the octaves thereof, five
thousand years; to the day of the nativity of our Lady, and the octaves of it
thirty thousand years of true pardon.

Ascencion day and the octaves thereof.
24 Item, Pope Clement the fifth has granted to the said brothers and sisters
upon Ascension day, and the octave thereof two thousand years of true pardon.

25 Pope Boniface the eighth has granted to the said brothers and sisters upon
the said Ascension day and the octaves thereof two thousand years of true
pardon.

The day of the Assumption of our Lady.
26 Item, Pope Innocent has granted to the said brothers and sisters upon the
day of the Assumption of our Lady, two thousand eight hundred years, and as
many quarantaines of true pardon.

All Saints day.
27 Item, Pope Bennet the twelfth has granted to the said brothers upon All
Saints day three thousand eight hundred quarantains of true pardon.

Plenary pardon upon all the festivals of our Lady, to those that shall visit
the altar upon which the blessed Sacrament stands in the Church of St. Hilary.
28 Item, Pope Sixtus the fourth has given and granted to the said brothers
and sisters that shall visit the said altar in the Church of St. Hilary, upon
which blessed Sacrament of the Altar stands, upon any of the festivals of our
Lady, from the first Vespers to the second, plenary pardon of all their sins.

All the Satterdayes in Lent.
29 Item, he has granted to the said brothers which shall visit the said Altar
all the Satterdayes in Lent, for every day a thousand eight hundred years of
true pardon.

All days from Thursday in mid-Lent till Low Sunday.
30 Item, he has granted to the said brothers and sisters visiting the said
altar as before, from Thursday in mid-Lent, till Low Sunday, for every day a
thousand eight hundred years, and two thousand quarantains of true pardon.

The day of entrance into the said Fraternity of the venerable and most
precious blessed Sacrament of the Altar.
31 Over and above the said pardons and Indulgences so granted as abov^said,
our holy Father Pope Paul the third of that name, does give and grant, as
appears by his Bull, Pardons gr^n^^d by Pope Paul ^he third.
plenarie indulgence and remission of all their sins in manner of Jubilee to
every one that shall enter into the said Fraternity, and shall be confessed and
penitent for his sins upon the day of his entrance, and shall have received
the most blessed body of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Plenary pardon three times in their life.
32 Item, he gives and grants moreover to every one of the said brothers and
sisters, plenarie pardon and indulgence of all their sins, thrice in their
life, upon what day and hour they please.

An hundred years to all those that accompany the body of our Lord Jesus
Christ, when it is carried to sick folks.
33 Item, he gives and grants an hundred years of pardon to all those that
shall accompany the blessed sacrament of the altar when it shall be carried to
sick folks; and as much to those that cannot go themselves, but shall send one
of their servants with a candle, and to those that can neither go nor send, if
they say one Pater noster, and an Ave Mary, to every one an hundred years of
true pardon.

To those that shall assist at Masses, services, and Processions.
34 Item he gives unto all the Brother and Sisters of the said Fraternity that
shall assist at the Service and Processions made in the said Church of S.
Hila^y in honor of the said blessed Sacrament, to every one a hundred years
of true pardon.

To those that shall visit the Church of Saint Hilary every Friday.
35 Item, he gives and grants to the said brothers and sisters which shall
visit the said Church and the said Altar of Saint Hilary, every Friday, and
shall say devoutly one Pater noster and an Ave Maria, in honor of the most
precious blessed Sacrament of the Altar, ten years and ten quarantains of true
pardon.

Of choosing their Confessor.
36 Item he has given and does give to every one of the said Brothers and
Sisters license and power to choose three times in their life any Priest Secular
or Regular for their Confessor, who shall absolve them from all sins and
offenses, how heinous and enormous soever, yea though they be such as are
reserved to the holy See Apostolic, always excepted such as are contained in
the Bull which is read at Rome upon Maundy Thursday.

For visiting the Altar, upon which the blessed Sacrament stands in the said
Church of Saint Hilary of Chartres, every day in Lent.
37 Item our said holy Father, according to the privileges given and granted
in the Hospital of the Holy Ghost, and other places particularly mentioned, at
which the stations both within the City of Rome, and without the walls of the
said City are appointed to be, does give unto all the Brothers and Sisters
which shall visit the said Altar upon which the blessed Sacrament of the Altar
rests in the Church of the said St. Hilary, upon the days following:
Inprimis. The first day of Lent, three thousand years of true pardon, and
plenary remission of all his sins over and above. Thursday, ten thousand
years. Pardons in Lent.
Friday, ten thousand years. Saturday, ten thousand years.
The first Sunday in Lent, eighteen thousand years of pardon, and remission
of all sins to boot. Monday, ten thousand years, and a plenary indulgence.
Tuesday, twenty eight thousand years, and as many quarantains, and remission
of the third part of their sins, and the delivery of one soul out of
Purgatory. Wednesday^ twenty eight thousand years, and a^ many Quarantaines,
and remission of the third part of their sins. Thursday, ten thousand years
of true pardon, and remission of all their sins. Friday, thirteen thousand
years of true pardon, and plenary remission of all their sins. Saturday,
twenty eight thousand years, and as many quarantaines; and besides, remission
of all their sins.
The second Sunday in Lent, twenty eight thousand years, and as many
Quarantaines. Monday, ten thousand years of pardon, and remission of the third
part of their sins. Tuesdaey, ten thousand years. Wednesday, ten thousand
years. Thursday, ten thousand years. Friday, ten thousand years. Saturday,
ten thousand years; and besides, remission of all their sins, with the
deliverance of one soul from the pains of Purgatory.
The third Sunday in Lent, ten thousand years, and twenty eight quarantains of
true pardon, and deliverance of one soul out of Purgatory. Monday ten thousand
years. Tuesday, ten thousand years. Wednesday, ten thousand years. Thursday
ten thousand years. Friday, ten thousand years. Saturday, ten thousand years,
and plenary remission of all their sins.
The fourth Sunday, remission of all their sins, and deliverance of one soul
from the pains of Purgatory. Monday, ten thousand years. Tuesday, ten
thousand years, and remission of the third part of all their sins.
Wednesday, ten thousand years, and remission of the third part of all their
sins. Thursday, ten thousand years. Friday, ten thousand years. Saturday,
ten thousand years.
The fifth Sunday, which is the passion Sunday of our Lord Jesus Christ, twenty
seven thousand years, and as many Qu^rantains, with remission of the third
part of all their sins: and they may get these pardons twice a day, visiting
the said Altar as is aforesaid. Monday, ten thousand years. Tuesday, ten
thousand years. Pardons after Easter.
Wednesday, ten thousand years. Thursday, ten thousand years. Friday, the
deliverance of one soul from the pains of Purgatory. Saturday, twelve
thousand years of pardon, and deliverance of one soul out of Purgatory.
The sixth Sunday, being Palm Sunday, twenty five thousand years, and forty
eight quarantains of true pardon; and besides, remission of all their sins.

Upon this day they may g^t the said pardons twice, as was said of the former
Sunday.

Monday, twenty five thousand years, and remission of the fourth part of all
their sins; and besides, plenary remission of all sins. Tuesday, twenty eight
thousand years, and plenary remission of all their sins over and above.
Wednesday, eighteen thousand years. Thursday, twelve thousand years, and as
many quarantaines, and remission of all their sins beside. Good Friday, a great
number of pardons and indulgences, and plenary remission of all sins. Saturday
before Easter, two and twenty thousand years, and forty eight quarantains of
pardon, and plenary remission of all sins.
Easter day, twenty eight thousand years, and as many quarantains of pardon,
and plenary remission of all sins. Easter Monday, twenty eight thousand years,
and as many quarantaines of true pardon, and plenary remission of all sins.
Easter Tuesday, ten thousand years. Wednesday, fifteen thousand years, and
as many quarantaines, and the deliverance of one soul out of Purgatory.
Thursday, fifteen thousand years, and plenary remission of all sins. Friday,
fifteen thousand years. Saturday, fifteen thousand years, and plenary
remission of the third part of all their sins. And they may have them twice a
day, as before. Low-Sunday, fifteen thousand years, and plenary remission.
And they may g^t them twice a day.


The Stations after Easter in the said Church of S. Hilary, doing as is set
down before, and visiting the said altar of the blessed Sacrament.
38 Imprimis, St. Marks day, eighteen thousand years, and as many quarantains.

Ascension day, twenty eight thousand years, and as many quarantains.

Whitsun eve, fifteen thousand years, and remission of all sins.

Whitsun Sunday, twenty eight thousand years, and plenary remission of all
their sins.

Whitsun-munday, remission of all sins.

Tuesday, twenty three thousand years.

Wednesday, twenty eight thousand years, and as many quarantains, and remission
of the third part of their sins, and the deliverance of one soul out of
Purgatory besides.

The Stations of Advent in the said Church of St. Hilary.
39 The first Sunday in Advent, twenty eight thousand years, and as many
quarantains, and remi^sion of the third part of all their sins. Popes Bulls for
these Indulgences.


The second Sunday, eleven thousand years, and plenarie remission of all
sins, granted by St. Sylvester.

The third Sunday, twenty eight thousand years, and as many quarantains, and
remission of the third part of their sins.

The Wednesday in Ember week, twenty eight thousand years, and as many
quarantains, and remission of the third part of their sins.

Friday, eleven thousand years, and plenarie remission of all sins.

Saturday, twelve thousand years, and as many quarantains, and plenarie
remission of all sins.

The fourth Sunday, eleven thousand years, and plenarie remission of all
sins.

At the second mass upon Christmas day, which is called the day-breake mass,
twenty eight thousand years, and as many quarantains, and plenarie remission
of all sins.

St. Stephens day, twenty eight thousand years, and as many quarantains, and
plenary remission of all sins.

St. John the Evangelists day, twenty eight thousand years, and as many
quarantains, and plenarie remission of all sins.

Innocents day, fifteen thousand years, and as many quarantains, and
remission of all sins.

The day of Circumcision, which is new years day, twenty five thousand years,
and plenarie remission of all sins.

Twelfth day, twenty eight thousand years, as many quarantains, and plenarie
remission of all their sins.

Septuagesima Sunday, eleven thousand years, and forty eight quarantains, and
the remission of the third part of their sins, with the deliverance of one
soul out of purgatory.

Sexagesima Sunday, thirteen thousand years, and forty seven thousand
quarantains, and remission of the third part of their sins.

Quinquagesima Sunday, twenty eight thousand years, and as many quarantains
of true pardon.

40 And the said pardons and indulgences here above mentioned, are granted
only to the brothers and sisters of the said Fraternity, which shall upon the
days aforesaid every year visit the said altar in that Church of St. Hilary
of Chartres, upon which the blessed Sacrament and precious body of Jesus
Christ is placed.

41 Medard Thiersault, Priest, Licentiat in the Laws, Canon of Chartres,
O^^iciall and Vicar General both in the spiritualty and temporalty of the
reverend Father in God Monsieur Jews, by the grace of God and the holy See
Apostolic Bishop of Chartres, to all and singular the Parsons and Vicars of
the Churches within the City of Chartres, sends greeting ^n our Lord God
everlasting. Pope Paul the third of happy memory, did heretofore, of his own
proper motion, for the honor and reverence of the precious blessed Sacrament,
grant unto the brothers of the fraternity of the blessed body of Jesus Christ,
in the Minerva of Rome, certain indulgences, plenary remission of sins,
immunities, and other graces, the good devotion and upon petition of the
faithful Christian Brothers. Which indulgences and plenary remission of sins,
our holy Father Julius the third by the divine providence Pope, to the end that
all Christians should press more earnestly and devoutly to come and honor the
so admirable blessed Sacrament, of his own authority and dignity has willed
and decreed that they be of perpetual force and efficacy. And these
indulgences and other graces aforesaid, at the instance and request of the most
noble personage Mr. Christopher de Herovard the Lieutenant General of the most
Christian King within the Bailiwicke of Chartres, Reformation in point of
indulgences required.
has communicated and granted them to the Brothers and Sisters of the
Fraternity of the most blessed body of Jesus Christ, heretofore instituted and
erected in the Church of Saint Hilary of Chartres, always provided that like
grace and gift was not formerly granted to any other Church of the said City
of Chartres. And forasmuch as we have viewed the contents of the said
indulgences, in the public instrument out of the copy of Domenic Bishop of
Hostia, Cardinal of the holy Church of Rome, by title Traven, Deane of the
sacred Apostolical College, Protector and Patron of the devout and Catholic
Fraternity of the blessed body of our Lord Jesus Christ, founded in the Church
of our Lady of Minerva, of the Order of Friars predicants in the City of Rome,
in manner of an exemplification, published, drawn, signed and sealed by Genese
Bulter, Secretary to the said Fraternity, given at Rome the sixth of May, one
thousand five hundred and fifty. And furthermore, whereas by a certain
declaration made unto the Court of Rome, by the command and with the leave of
the Reverend Father in God the Lord Bishop of Chartres, and as it seems to us
truly and lawfully made, that it is certain the like grace was never granted to
any other Church in the City of Chartres: Wherefore we command you to publish
and cause to be published in your Churches, the said indulgences and the
exemplifications of the letters aforesaid, according to their form and tenure.
Giving leave to the said Mr. Christopher de Herovard, to cause the said Graces
and Indulgences to be published within the City and Suburbs of Chartres,
whether by Siquis's or otherwise, as the same Herovard shall think good. Given
at Chartres under the seal of the Chamber of the said Reverend Father in God
the Bishop of Chartres, in the year one thousand five hundred and fifty, upon
Thursday being the last of July. Subscribed, P. le Seneux.

42 See here how the Popes play with their indulgences, and amongst the rest
two of them which presided by their Legates at the Council of Trent, to wit,
Paul the third, and Julius the third. The reformation of such abuses was
required heretofore in such General Councels as were then holden; as by the
Bishop of Menda in that of Vienna in Dauphiny; Guil. Durant. de Council. part.
3. Tit. 15.
who amongst other points by him proposed unto the said Council, puts this for
one; It were fit to provide a competent remedy for this, and besides to cause
the fees of the curriers and Nuncio's of the Court of Rome to cease. We have
told you elsewhere upon the testimony of the Bishop of Panormo, Panormit. in
Consil. super Conc. Ba^il.
that by reason of the too hasty breaking up of that Council by Clement the
fifth, that reformation was never meddled with.

Conc. Constant. Sess. 40.
43 Amongst other articles proposed by diverse nations at the Council of
Constance touching the point of reformation, this about Indulgences was one,
upon which they were to deliberate after the creation of the Pope. Platina in
Martino ^.
But Martin the fifth being elected, he referred the case to another time. And
forasmuch as Mr. John Gerson Chancellor of the University of Paris was present
at the same Council, Ioannes Gerson in 2. part. oper. Tract. de Indulg.
and in very much repute and authority, both in behalf of the University,
and as deputy for Charles the sixth, King of France, we will here make him
declare his belief in matter of Indulgences. Behold here his articles.

Consid. 5.
44 The only supreme Pope, Christ, together with the Father and the Holy Ghost,
can by a plenary authority grant a total indulgence, as well from punishment
as fault.

Consid. 6.
45 The only Pope Christ can commute eternal punishment into temporal, or
absolve from punishment, freely, and without any merit besides his own.

46 The only Pope Christ can give indulgence for so many thousand millions of
days and years as we find in diverse grants of Popes and others, Gersons
opi^io^ of Indulg^^ce^.
in diverse times and places, and upon diverse occasions.

47 The granting of Indulgences for so many millions, Consid 8.

Consid. 10.


not only of days but years, seems impossible to be maintained without
great difficulty, after remission of eternal punishment, and commutation into
temporal. For it is certain that no particular man can or ought to be bound
to do penance so many years, forasmuch as he cannot live the thousand part of
those years, and no man is bound to impossibilities. It is also certain that
Purgatory shall cease at the worlds end, and consequently the days of his
penance too.

48 From hell there is no redemption. Consid. 11^
At the end of that Tract he has these verses.

Arbitrio Papa proprio si clavibus uti ^ersus Ge^s^nis super materia
indulgenti^^.

Possit, cur sinit ut poena pios cruciet?
Cur non evacuat loca purgandis animabus
Tradita?
If so the Pope may use the keys a^'s pleasure,
Why does he let good men such pains endure?
Why does he not (too cruel and unkind!)
Empty the place for purging souls designed?
49 Now whereas he believes that the Popes indulgences do not reach so far
as hell, that is heretical as well as the other articles by him set down.
L^ncelotus Conradus in templo omnium judic. lib. 2. cap. 1.

Augustinus Triu^phus de p^t^st. Eccles. qu. 32 art. 3.

V. A^^itione^ Augustini a^ illum 3. arti. Augu^tin. de Anc^na.
For other Doctors hold that the Pope is Lord of the world, that he officiats
in the nature of Christ's Vicar, both in things celestial, terrestrial, and
infernal. Angustin de Ancona, approved by the Popes as well as the former
author, argues thus in the matter of Indulgences. Pope St. Gregory delivered
Trajan from the pains of hell, which are infinite, by his prayers^ therefore
much more may he deliver all those that are in Purgatory from their pains,
which are but finite, by means of Indulgences. Alexander of Hales, one of the
prime Divines, puts a little mystery in it, for he says that Trajan being
raised up again by St. Gregorie's prayers, did penance and was baptized. And
indeed there was good reason he should pass through this formalitie. But let
us return to our plaintives.

50 The Council of Trent was likewise pressed about this reformation, by King
Charles the ninth, and by the German nation, as appears by their demands,
which we have set down elsewhere, to which it was reason that some regard
should have been had. Some will tell me that so there was. If that be so I am
far deceived. Let us see how then. Council Trid. Sess. 25. Decret. de Indulg.
Desiring that the abuses which are crept into them by little and little, and
by occasion whereof the worthy name of Indulgences is abused by heretics,
may be corrected and amended, the Council does by this present Decree ordain
in general, that all wicked gains for the purchasing of them, whence the main
cause of these abuses amongst Christian people first sprang, be utterly
abolished. But for the rest which proceeded from ignorance, superstition,
irreverence, or other occasion whatsoever, seeing they cannot conveniently be
prohibited in particular, by reason of the diverse corruptions of the places and
provinces where they are committed, the Synod commands all Bishops, that every
one of them diligently observe the abuses of his Church, and give notice of
them at the first Provincial Synod; to the end that being known by the other
Bishops also, they may forthwith be presented to the Pope: by whose authority
and wisdom that shall be ordained which is expedient for the Church
universal.

Fraternities enemies to the State.
51 See here process is made against those under-rogues of Wallet-bearers and
beggars, which undertook to sell these false spices in behalf of the Bishops
and other inferior Officers. But for the Pope his authority is preserved safe
and sound, as well in this as in all the rest. His penitentiary tax i^ neither
dead nor sick for all this; for they abolished only all wicked gains which
arise from them. Who dare be so bold as to refer that to the Pope! He should
be damned for it a thousand times for want of Indulgences. Judge what
reformation they will make of this matter, which are the authors of this
disorder; which reap profit by it; which build their greatness upon it^ and
who by that means make themselves omnipotent over weak and fearful souls.

CHAP. II. Of Fraternities.
1 ANd forasmuch as these large Indulgences whereof we have spoke, are most
commonly granted to Fraternities, as appears by the Bulls of them which have
been produced, it is good reason we speak a word of them too. King Charles
the ninth in his demands required a reformation of the abuses of such
Fraternities. The Council found nothing to be corrected in them; but tacitly
confirmed them, Council. Trident. Sess. 22. cap. 9.
by ordaining that the administratours of them shall give account of their
administration every year unto the Ordinary. They were wary enough not to
touch upon that point, seeing it directly concerns the Popes authority. By
means of these indulgences and the superstition which he uses in them, he
gains millions of men unto himself, who devote themselves so much unto him,
for the especial favor which they suppose they receive by means of these
indulgences, that they do not acknowledge any other superior.

2 Former times have instructed us, that leagues, and monopolies, and
conspiracies against the State, have been hatched in such Fraternities as
these, and that disorders and other unlawful things have been committed among
them. They have been prohibited in all well policied Kingdoms and
Commonwealths, and particularly in our France: where we must observe that as
they have been instruments of trouble and dissoluteness; so they have been
judged hurtful to peace and concord. And for that reason they are condemned by
the Edicts and Declarations of our Kings, as the mothers, or at least the
companions of conspiracies; for they are so joined together by the same
Ordinances: as in that of Henry the third, of September 1577. And all leagues,
associations, and fraternities, made or to be made, under any pretense
whatsoever, to the prejudice of this our Edict, shall be utterly void and of
no effect. And in that of the same Prince, given the 20 of December in the same
year. We expressly forbid all our said subjects, of what quality soever they
be, to begin, make, or prosecute any league, association or fraternity amongst
themselves, to the prejudice of our said Edict of pacification. The 44 Article
of the conference of Flex says in express terms, All the foresaid (to wit,
Provosts, Majors, Consuls, Sherifes of towns, etc. mentioned in the former
Article) and other Subjects whatsoever of this Realm, of what condition
soever, shall depart from and renounce all leagues, associ^tions^ fraternities
and intelligences, as well within the Realm as without. The Order of Penitent^.


3 Durant Bishop of M^nde in the reformation which he presented to the Council
of Vienna, Guil Durant. Epis^. Mi^at^ns. de modo celebr. Concilii. part. 2. tit
35.
holden in the year 1311. persuaded the abolition of these fraternities for
two reasons: for their dissoluteness, and ^or conspiracy against their
superiors. It would be also useful (says he) that fraternities, wherein
both Clergy and Lay do nothing but soul themselves with delicates, live in
dissoluteness and drunkenness, and busy themselves in diverse plots against
their superio^rs, were abolished. There is at this day one in request in this
Kingdom, which we may and must believe to be both seditious and heretical; to
wit that of the Recommendati to the blessed Virgin Mary, otherwise called
Confalonesi at Rome; and in France, The Order or Fraternity of the Chaplet, the
Order of Penitents, the Order of Battu's: all these are but one thing. There
are some poor innocents that enroll themselves among them, thinking to find
the salvation of their souls there, and to enjoy the virtue of so many goodly
indulgences. Some of them pride themselves in going in a masque as it were, and
walking about the town in a white, or black, or gray garment, or of some other
color: some with their white sandals, and their sweetmeats in their pockets
to throw at a sweetheart as they pass along, after they have cast many a
pitiful amorous glance at her. Another with a whip in his hand full set with
pricks, lancing himself and drawing blood of his back, who goes from street
to street, and Church to Church begging for mercy; serving for a spectacle and
an offense to all those that behold these antiques. But the most part of them
are Statesmen, fine, cunning, delighting in troubles, and enemi^s of peace.
Which make use of such assemblies to cast their plots, to build their designs,
and to put them in execution.

4 This Order was cried down in the City of Paris by the late King Henry the
third, because he was certified of the conspiracies which they made against the
State. It is notoriously known to many that the League was sworn in Toulouse
by the black Penitents; and that as many of these Orders as are in France did
all conspire to the like ends. And yet notwithstanding we see them now adays
spring up again in diverse Cities. This Society and Fraternity was renewed by
Gregory the thirteenth, the year 1576, as appears by his Bull of the fourth
of October. What time, a little after the arrival of the Bishop of Paris, that
consultation about the League was held at Rome, which was found in the Advocate
David's coffer. Now the penance which Gregory says he renewes unto them, is
this: Gregory the 13 his B^ll of the 12 of O^^ober, print^d at Paris by Michael
Julian 1583.
That the said Brothers, in stead of those which we call Canonical hours,
shall not fail to say the Lords prayer five and twenty times, Pater noster,
etc. and the Angels salutation as many times, Ave Maria, etc. Adding at the
close, Gloria Patri, etc. which is said after every Psalm in the Church. And
also they shall say the said Orisons and Salutations, Pater and Ave, seven
times; with the versicle Requiem aeternam, etc. and the responce, Et lux
perpetua, etc.

5 All these Pater nosters, Ave Maria's, and Requiems, are comprehended in a
Crown or Chaplet, spoken of in the same Bull, the form whereof is represented
at the end of the Bull, which they must hold in their hands, and say over in
order in such a measure as is there expressed. And this being so done, We release
them (says the same Gregory) twenty years, the sundays and festivals and
other holidayes ten years, of the penance which shall or ought to be enjoined
them upon the day that they shall be acquitted from the said Crown. Besides,
we grant unto the said Brothers plenary indulgence and pardon of their sins,
such as being contrite and confessed shall say over the said Crown or Chaplet
upon the days of Christmas, Easter, and Whit sunday; as also upon those other
days which the Catholic Church does celebrate in honor of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and of our Lady.

Of the Sect of Flag^llants.
6 There are yet other Indulgences in the same Bull, both for the quick and the
dead, which we omit. It was printed at Paris by Michel Julian the year 1583,
with the picture of our Lady stretching out her veil over two of these Battu's
or Penitents, dressed in their proper habits and hoods, which cover all the
head except the eyes, and their whips in their hands; which made me call them
heretics; for they are the successors of those Flagellators that were
condemned as such. We will here set down some passages out of such authors as
speak of them.

Naucler. volum. 2. generat. 45.
7 And first out of Nauclerus Provost of Tubinge. In the same year 1346, the
Flagellators came into Germany, men of diverse conditions, who begun to whip
themselves, travailing from place to place. Two hundred of them came out of
Suevia into Spire, having among them one head and two masters, whose command
they obeyed. These setting themselves in a ring before the Monastery of Spire,
about an hour after dinner, and putting off their garments, having shirts on
after the fashion of breeches, which went from the wast down to the heels, they
cast themselves down upon the ground in form of a Crucifix; all of them
whipping themselves, singing, and calling upon God, turning themselves upon
their faces, praying for themselves and for their benefactors and malefactors.
There were amongst them some Priests, and lettered men, both noble and ignoble,
women and children. The good will of every one of the inhabitants of Spire was
so great toward them that being all presently invited, there were not enough of
them for those that desired them. For they took no alms, but if they were
invited to any man's table they went with the leave of their masters. They whipped
themselves twice a day, and every one once a night privately. They never spoke
to women. They wore all crosses upon their garments before and behind, and
upon their bonnets: having whips hanging at their garments: and they staid not
above one night in one parish: into this society they admitted above an
hundred people of the City of Spire. But none was admitted until he had first
promised to observe all things aforesaid: and that he was able de proprio to
spend eight pieces of silver a day called Hallenses, that he needed not beg:
and that he was certain he had been confessed, contrite, and had forgiven
his enemies all manner of injuries; and besides it was requisite he should
have his wifes leave. There came such a multitude of them to Strasbourg as it
was impossible for any man to number them. But there they were compelled to
forbear, by the Emperor Charles the fourth, and by the Friars mendicant and
the Priests. At last they went on devotion to Avinion, where the Popes Court
was. And after they had whipped themselves in St. Peter's Church, Clement the sixth
would have imprisoned them, but some of the Cardinals excused them. Then the
Pope forbad both them and all other Christians to use any such public
whipping from thence forwards upon pain of excommunication by that his
sentence; and yet that a penitent might whip himself in private
notwithstanding. Albertus Argentinensis has the very same story in the same
words. Albertu^. Argentin in Chronic. sub anno 1349.


Chronicum Chronic. sub ann. 1273.
8 The author of the book entitled Chronicum Chronicorum, speaks thus of them,
The Sect of the Flagellantes had their original in Italy, and from thence it
was spread into Germany and France. They whipped themselves out of ostentation
with knotted whips, whereto were fastened certain pricks: from this Sect many
grievous errors arose in diverse places, about the faith and sacraments of the
Church. At last it was utterly rooted out, partly by fire and partly by sword.
Albertus Crantzius has a long discourse of them, Albert Krantz. Wandalic lib.
8. cap. 29.
much like to that of Nauclerus; About this time (says he, meaning about the
year 1300) the Sect of the Flagellants did strangely increase in many
Provinces. It is uncertain who was the first author of it, unless it was he
that sowes tares while other men sleep, as the Gospel speaks. Hereupon they
were called Acephali, Gerson against the Flagellants.
that is, headless. Clownish fellows, that tore their bodies with the lashes
of their whips through the fields in Germany. They wore crosses upon their
garments: They marched in troops through the country, in an orderly
Procession: having their head and face covered all but the eyes; and their
countenance cast down upon the ground: they always looked sad and discontent.
Their whips were made of three cords; every one of which had a knot, and every
knot his piece of iron sticking out in fashion of a cross. They had their
backs and shoulders all putrified with great blows and wounds. As soon as
they were entered into a Church^ they put off their clothes, and appareld
themselves in linen breches, which went from the navill downwards, etc.

9 This Sect sprung up presently after the Council of Constance; not as the
former, but a little more hand somely, with more pretense and color of
devotion. The Clergy whipped themselves in the Churches; and also many Lay men
of all sorts, without running abroad in the world, as the other did: in short,
a man cannot tell what to compare them to better than to the Battu's of our
times. What I shall speak shall be proved by the testimony of Mr. John Gerson
Chancelour of Paris, who writ a treatise against these Battu's, what time he
was resident at the Council of Constance; which he sent, together with a
letter to one Vincentius, a favourer of theirs, of the Order of Predicants. But
I am to blame to say so much of it: Let us hear that great Devine speak
himself, out of whom we shall select the principal passages:

10 The law of Christ (says he) ought no less to eschew the superstitions of
the Gentiles and Idolaters (especially such as are horrid and cruel) in the
service of God, I^ann^s ^ers^n in 1. part. ope^^m

Tractat Cont^ae. Sectam Flagellantium se. p. ^^


than the old law. Now in that there is an express prohibition in the 14 of
Deuteronomie, where it is said, Ye are the children of the Lord your God, ye
shall not cut your selves. The gloss says; You ought not to make your selves
like Idolaters: and it is in the Hebrew, You shall not rent your selves. Now so
did the Idolaters, as it is written in the 2 of Kings Chap. 18. Where it is
said that they cut themselves, according to the custom, with knives and
lances, till the blood gushed out. Surely it is a known thing, and has been
left unto us upon record in writing, that these murtherous and Apostate Devils
do long after the effusion of blood, especially man's blood. A law the more
injust it is, and more pleasing to the Devil, the more cruel it is found to
be. This is evident from the example of such as sacrificed their sons and
daughters. And therefore the Lord said by his Prophet, You shall serve strange
Gods which shall not give you any rest. But Christ by his grace has bin
pleased to save us mercifully by the shedding of his blood; whereby he has
made us toward God wisdom, and justice, and sanctification and redemption. A
little after, Christ's law does straightly forbid to impose any public penance
upon Clergy men, Priests, and Prelates, for reverence to their spiritual
profession. How much less ought such persons submit themselves to such
public penance, as many of the Flagellants do? who though they seem to hide
themselves, yet are they sufficiently known. The same may be said of noted
persons of both sexs. And regard should also be had of the modesty of young
children and damsels, which are seen to divest themselves. A little after he
says, The law of Christ declared by the Church, has always disallowed the
Sect of such as whip themselves, having observed that it began to spread in
diverse parts of the world. This has been seen within the memory of some men
yet alive, both in Lorraine, Germany, France, and many other places, as both
the men and Chronicles of France do testify, and other writings of good
credit. Item, no evil could subsist if it had not some show of good: Wherefore
it is a Sophistical argument, much good redounds from this Sect of
Flagellants, therefore it ought not to be abolished and disallowed.
Flagellan^s condemned by Gerson.
The law of Christ made by men, does not only respect God, but our neighbor
also, and the Prince, and his Prelates. And therefore it is not lawful for the
people to set up all kind of fashions, which may be occasion of sedition,
faction, or superstition, etc. Item, The law of Christ is sufficiently set
forth unto us in the precepts of the decalogue, the observation whereof if it be
performed with an honest simplicity, and (that I may so say) with a gross
faith, is sufficient to salvation; especially in respect of the Laity and
common people, without any new imposition of such hard tasks. Item, The law of
Christ, as it is sufficiently explained by his Apostles and the sacred
Doctors, has not invented any such novelties of Flagellants, either by
sermons or otherwise: but has represented them rather as most suspect and
dangerous. Item, The law of Christ teaches by the ways aforesaid, and many
other such like, that the Prelates of the Church, the Pastors and Doctors, yea
even Princes ought to labor and endeavor to distract and disperse such a
bloody Sect as this; both by preachings and good persuasions, and by censures
not only Ecclesiastical but temporal too, as our predecessors did:
considering that under this cloak and pretense of penance, a number of
wickedness is committed; as those testi^ie that have made trial of it. And a
little after this he adds, This Sect of them that whip themselves has been
diverse times condemned heretofore a long time ago; and therefore seeing it
begins to sprout again and to increase, it ought to be utterlie extirpated and
beaten down. In conclusion he says, Lastly, if this famous Doctor Mr.
Vincent think perhaps he cannot convenientlie and effectually provide for the
premises with profit^ it may seem to be the safer way for him to absent
himself for a time, by forbearing that society: which he may do by visiting
the sacred Council, or some other way. Writ in the time of the Council of
Constance, the year 1417.

11 The epistle which he sent to this Mr. Vincent is put after this treatise,
where he says amongst other things; Believe me, great and ancient Doctor,
diverse men speak diversely of your sermons, especially of this Sect of those
that whip themselves; which, as it is evident, has been condemned heretofore
many times, and in many places. Which you do not approve indeed, as those that
know you do affirm; but withal you do not sufficiently disprove it, etc. At
the end there is this addition of Peter de Alliaco Cardinal of Cambray:
Reverend Sir, and most dear father, I have been persuaded to exhort you in a
charitable way concerning the premises, together with my beloved brother and
companion the Chancelour of Paris. He that is

Yours in all things, P. Cardinal of Cambray.

CHAP. III. Of Dispensations.
1 IT was expected from this Council, that there should be some great
reformation in point of dispensations, considering they generally condemned an
unlawful power which the Pope assumes unto himself by reason of them; Popes
presume to dispense with Gods law.
the great abuses committed in them, and the great complaints that were made of
them. But behold, all our hopes are dashed! there must be no more talk of
them if this Council be admitted. That the Pope arrogates unto himself an
immense and unlawful power in this behalf, Cause. 25. q. 1. ^in. did. 13. in
p^.
is out of all question. He pretends that he can dispense above all law. For
humane, that is taken for granted: but for divine laws Gratian restraines these
dispensations to certain cases. But Innocent the third sets no bounds to them;
In^^cent. in cap. proposuit. extra. de Con^^ss P^^b. Baldus.
but tells us in general terms, That he can dispense with the law, above the
law, by reason of his plenitude of power. This ^ext will be always understood
according to the exposition of the Doctors and Practitioners, who hold that
the Pope may dispense above the law, beside the law, and against the law: that
he has sovereign power in all and above all.

2 But though he should challenge no more but the dispensing with humane laws,
in all those cases specified by Gratian, Gratian. in cause. 25 q^ 1. Can. ^deo.
it were no light matter. Our laws would henceforth scarce serve our turns,
neither the Decrees, nor the Canons. For, according to his opinion, the Pope is
no way subject to them, but may dispense with them, and make new laws. Our
Glossatour upon the Canon law, avowed by the Rota of Rome, goes far further;
as that^ Gloss. in Canon. Lec^or. did. 39. and in cap. Proposuit. de Concess.
Praebend. in Can ^ nobis in verb. exemplis de de^imis. Gloss in 6. cap.
proposuit.
The Pope may dispense against the Apostle; against the old Testament; against
the four Evangelists; against the law of God. When they come so far in this,
I leave you to imagine what they will do in the rest; at this day especially
when the controversy betwixt the Pope and the Council shall be decided. It
will not need to put in that exception of the gloss, That the Pope cannot
dispense against the general state of the Church. For he being above it, and
having full soveraigntie, when he shall make use of it, who will tell him, You
are to blame? Especially considering our Sophisters maintain now adays, that
all he does is well done, and that he cannot err in that regard. Popes are not
content to dispense only in their books, but they do it far better in their
practice; and that always to their own advantage. For these dispensations
aim at two things, their profit and their greatness. Germany will tell us
news of them. As for the first, I do not speak of the Protestants, but the
Catholics assembled ^t an Imperial Diet at Noremberg, the year 1522: when
they say;

3 Many things are forbid by humane constitutions, and many things also are
commanded, which are neither commanded nor prohibited by the laws of God: V.
Centum gravamina cap. 1. and 2. in ^ascicrerum expetendarum.
such are diverse impediments of marriage by reason of affinity, common
honesty, spiritual and legal kindred^ and consanguinitie in many diverse
degrees. Besides, the use of some meats is forbidden, which yet God created for
the necessity of men. These and many other such like humane constitutions bind
men, so long till they can by their money purchase a dispensation from such
laws, of those that made them. The Popes ab^se of dispens^^ions.
So money makes that lawful to the rich, which the poor cannot compass^
gratis. And by such unlawful bands of humane constitutions, there is not only
a^ huge mass of money drained out of Germany, and transported beyond the
Alpes^ but a great deal of iniquity is raised amongst Christians themselves,
many offenses and quarrels, when the poor perceive themselves caught in these
nets, for no other reason but because they want the thorns of the Gospel; for
so are riche^ ^alled^ there. This complaint was presented to Pope Adrian the 6,
when he talked of calling that General Conncell which was afterward holden
at Trent.

4 The same nation of Germany had drawn up a summarie of other grievances some
years before, and presented them to the Emperor Maximilian. The first was
this; Vid Fasciculum rerum expetend. p. 167.6.
As for the observance of Bulls, compacts, privileges, and letters granted by
their Predecessors without any limitations, the later Popes think they are
not bound to them: but on the contrary they transgress them by frequent
dispensations, suspensions, and repeals upon any man's entreaty, yea even o^
some base fellow.

5 A certain Archbishop of Germany, Legate for the Sea of Rome, asked Pope
Zachary what he should do about a dispensation which a German assured him he
had got of Pope Gregory his predecessor, Bonifac. in ep. ad Zachar. Pap. 2.
Tom. Conc. de quo fit mentio in Synodo. Francica^
to marry a woman that had first been married to his uncle, and afterward to
a Cozen of his, from whom she was divorced, and who was yet alive; besides,
she was his kinswoman in the third degree, and had been a Nun. We know not
what answer he had; nor do we here consider any thing but the injustnesse of
the dispensation.

6 Saint Bernard, who lived in the year 1150, writing to Eugenius the third,
complains bitterly of these dispensations. What? (you will say unto me) do
you forbid me to dispense? Bernard l. 2 de considerat. ad Eugen. Pap.
No, (says he) but only to d^ssipate. I am not so ignorant, but I know you
are placed there to be a dispenser, but to edification, not to destruction.

7 The States of England being all assembled together in corpse, in the year
1246, under Henry the third, put up diverse grievances against the Pope, in a
bill of complaint drawn by them, which we read entire in the History of an
English Monk, Mathaeus Paris. in hist. Anglor. in Henrico 3. p. 677^
amongst which this is one; England is further aggrieved by the frequent
coming of that infamous Nuncio, (non obstante) whereby the religion of oaths,
the ancient customs, the validity of writings, the authority of grants, the
Statutes, laws, and privileges are weakened and disanull'd. Insomuch that
infinite numbers of Englishmen are grieved and afflicted thereby. The Pope does
not carry himself so legally and moderately toward the Realm of England, in
revoking the plenitude of his power, as he promised by word of mouth to the
Proctours at Rome.

8 The Bishop of M^nda in Gevaudan, being commanded by Clement the fifth to go
to the General Council holden at Vienna in the time of Philip the Fair,
Guil. Durand. in tract. de modo celebrandi Conc^ tit. 4. pri. part.
made some pretty notes touching the point of reformation. Where speaking of
dispensations he says, That the very nerves of the Canons and Decrees are
broken by the dispensations which are made according to the style of the Court
of Rome; that they are against the common good. And citing the authority of
Saint Ierom writing to Rusticus Bishop of Narbon, he says, Since avarice is
increased in Churches as well as in the Roman Empire, the law is departed from
the Priests, and seeing from the Prophets. We read also in the Decree (sath
he) that Crassus was turned into gold, and that he drank gold. He gives us the
definition of a dispensation according to the Lawyers; which he says is a
provident relaxation of the general law countervailed by commodity or
necessity: that if it be otherwise used it is not a dispensation but a
dissipation: that the question is now about the staining of the state of the
Church: that those who dispense upon unnecessary causes, err. Lastly, for
matter of dispensation he would have that observed which Pope Leo said,
Ref^rm^tion in d^^pens^^^ons desired, but not ob^^^^e^.
to wit, That there are some things which cannot be altered upon any occasion:
others which may be tempered in regard of the necessity of the times, or
consideration of men's age: but always with this resolution, when there is any
doubt or obscurity, to follow that which is not contrary to the Gospel, nor
repugnant to the Decrees of holy Fathers. Can Sicut. did. 14.


9 All the nations of Christendom that were present at the Council of
Constance demanded the like reformation. Conc Constant. Sess. 40.
For amongst other articles of reformation which were reserved for the last
course of the Council, this was one, Of Dispensations. But Martin the fifth
made them take away the table before they had done their dinner, as we have
said elsewhere.

10 Mr. John Gerson in his treatise De potestate ecclesiastica, says; Ioannes
Gerson in tract. de Eccles. potest. Consid. 10.
What think you? what shall we say for the present of that so easy
dispensation as they speak of, granted by the Pope and the Prelates over
lawful oaths, reasonable vows, for the excessive plurality of benefices, the
general non-obstance of Councels, the privileges and exemptions against
common right? Who can number all the ways whereby the force of Ecclesiastical
yea of Evangeliall, discipline is enfeebled, consumed, and quite annihilated?
By my advice the holy Council should provide for all these things. And so it
would have done, but Pope Martin was urged to go to another place. Speaking of
the denial of justice, we have said many things which may be referred to this
place, but we will not repeat them.

11 The Deputies of Paul the third, whom he appointed to advise him concerning
the reformation of himself and his Court, begin with this article as one of
greatest importance. We are of opinion (most blessed Father) that in the first
place this law ought to be observed in all things. That laws be kept as much
as may be; and that we think it not lawful for us to dispense with laws;
unless it be upon urgent and necessary occasion. For there cannot be a more
pernicious custom brought into any Commonwealth than the not observance of
laws; which our ancestors would have to be accounted holy, calling their power
sacred and divine. You know all things, O best of Popes; you have read so in
Philosophers and Devines. There needs no more but to put that knowledge in
practice.

12 He that would fully inform himself of their practice and proceedings in
this regard, let him read the faculties of the Legates which have come into
France and other Countries: as also the Penitentiary tax, whereof we have
spoken elsewhere; and what Doctor Espenseus says of it upon the Epistle to
Titus. The instructions of the Ambassadors and Orators of the Emperor, the
King of France and other Christian Princes, sent to the Council of Trent, had
this in charge also, to complain of these scandalous dispensations, to the end
that an order might be taken with them. See here enough to make them take them
into consideration.

Let us now see the remedies they applied, Council. Trid. Sess. 4 cap. 17. in
aliis Sess. 8. Can. 17.

Council Trid. Sess ^. cap. 5. In aliis Sess. 7. Can. 5.

Sess. 25. cap. 7. de reform. in aliis Sess. 9. Can. 7.

V. Ivonem in Epist.

Sess. 6. cap. 1. de res.

Et Sess. 23 c. 1.


being they were fully informed of the nature of the disease. In the
seventeenth Chapter of the twenty fourth Session they straightly prohibit the
plurality of benefices, and that all unions, all dispensations to the contrary
notwithstanding. But in another place they renew the Decretall of Gregory the
tenth; which binds forsooth such as hold a plurality of benefices to exhibit
their dispensations unto the Ordinary, to make it appear: Now if they be
sufficient, the Ordinaries have no more to say. Yea in case the validity of
them be doubtful, recourse must be had to the Pope, for the manifestation of
his pleasure. In another place having religiously forbid hereditary successions
in Bishopriques, which have been always condemned, at last they admit of them
in certain cases; but with cognizance of the cause, which they attribute to
the Pope. They make one or two fair Decrees concerning the residence of
Bishops; but they give the Pope power to approve the causes of their absence,
and upon that occasion to punish those whom he shall think good, even to
deprive them of their Bishopriques, and put others in their place. Abuse of
dispensations unreform'd by the Council.
In the twentieth Chapter of the last Session, they leave Commendams in their
full force and vigor; howbeit they made semblance that they would abolish them
in the 17 Decree of the twenty fourth Session. They were desired so to do by
our Kings Orators, as we have said in the proper place. But all this was
neither here nor there: Stanislaus Hosius.
For lay men must meddle with other matters, as one of the Presidents of the
Council said. But see here that which makes all fadge! We must set down the
whole Chapter, the better to collect the sense of it. Sess. 6. cap. 1. et Sess.
23. cap. 1. In aliis Sess. 7. Council. 1.
That such dispensations as shall be granted by what authority soever, if they
must be referred from the Court of Rome, let them be referred to the
Ordinaries of them that obtained them: and that such as have bin freely granted
do not take effect, unless the Bishops, as delegats for the Sea Apostolic,
have the cognizance of them, and that it appear unto them presently, and extra
judicium, that the prayers and entreaties therein expressed are not liable to
the fault of subreption or obreption.

14 This Decree has two parts, the one as commendable as the other. The first
speaks in general of all dispensations, and tacitly by necessary consequence
permits the Pope to use them. For it were to no purpose to provide for the
ordering of them, unless they were permitted. Yea from that di^^inction which
is made of them, we collect that the Pope commits the cognizance of them either
in Rome or out of Rome, What is it then which is here decreed? that such as go
out of Rome shall be committed to the Ordinary of those to whom they are
granted. Item, this is all. See now we are well satisfied. Of all those so many
kinds of dispensations as are in the world, an order was taken with those
touching plurality of benefices, touching hereditary succession in them, and
touching the residence of Prelates. And so as we have heard concerning the rest.
This is the law, this is the reformation. So that provided the Ordinary lose
not his right of reference, all the world must rest content, and the Pope as
well as others. But the second part is the prettiest of all. They leave the
Pope power to grant out gracious dispensations, provided that he refer the
cognizance of them to the Bishops. What to do? only, as his Delegates, to try
whether there be any obreption or surreption in them; that is, whether his
Holiness were not cheated by false information. For in this case he may give
way to the impairing of his rights.

15 See then here are three things which we complain of. First, the
approbation of gracious dispensations; and the power of granting them, which is
left to the Pope. The second is the delegation which he must make unto Bishops;
seeing it is a means to draw the inhabitants out of the realm, or at least to
constrain them, in case of suit and controversy, to demand some other
delegates In partibus. The third, that these Delegates may not judge of the
lawfulness or unlawfulness of the dispensation, but only of the cosenage
which the petitioners may have used toward the Pope. Seeing these Sirs have
made such slight enquiry into the means of remedying those evils and
inconveniences which arise from dispensations, we are dispensed with their
inordinate ordinances. And therefore it will concern us to stand to our
liberties, Chap. 3. de la 2. part des libertez de l'Eglise Gallicane.
by virtue whereof the Pope cannot dispense, for any cause whatsoever, with
that which is of the law of God or nature; or with that wherein the holy
Councels do not allow him to dispense. And to that which is set down in this
point by the Ordinances of our Kings; Art. 22. de l'ordon^ des Estats d'Orleans.
which expressly forbid all the Judges of the land to have any regard To
dispensations granted contrary to the Sacred Decrees and Councels, upon pain
of losing their places: and declare furthermore, That such as procure the said
proviso's and dispensations shall not make use of them, unless they get leave
and permission from his Majesty.

CHAP. IV. Of Unions of benefices.
1 THe Council leaves the Unions of the benefices of Popes disposal; Who may
make Unions.
at least such as are perpetual: for having made some rules concerning them,
it adds this clause, Unless it be otherwise declared by the Sea Apostolic.
The like may be said of personal Unions, whereof the Pope may dispose at his
pleasure, by virtue of that clause, Saving the Popes authority in what
concerns manners and Ecclesiastical discipline. So then he may make them at
his will and pleasure, and no abuse which he can use therein be subject to
censure: For from what hand can it come? In the mean time see here a notable
prejudice to all Christendom, and which continually tends to the augmentation
of this Papal power, in attributing unto him the power of other Bishops, to
the end that all may depend upon him.

2 In the Canon law it is said that Bishops may unite Churches. Seeing then it
belongs to their ordinary juris^iction, Gloss. in Can. and temporis in verbo,
Vnire. Cause. 16. q. 1. Et cap. Vnire. extra de excess. Pr^lat.
it is a wrong to them to take this power and faculty from them, to bestow it
upon the Pope. To whom, it is true, so much honor has been yielded in
France, as to receive his Bulls, whereby they proceed to the union of
benefices, provided they be not personal; and for the other, that they be
granted after full cognizance of the cause, and upon very just and lawful
reasons. And which is more, it is not sufficient that those causes be known
to the Pope alone, that they be declared in his Bulls, but he is bound to
send out his writs of delegation In partibus, for the effecting of the said
unions, with cognizance of the cause, and consent of the Patron, and such as
are any way interested in them. Which is as much as to give the power and
authority to the Bishops, reserving the honor to the Poep: as appears by the
Collection of the liberties of the Gallicane Church. See here the very words of
it, The Pope cannot make any unions or annexions, of the livings of this
Kingdom, during the life of the Incumbents, nor at other times: but he may
grant out writs of delegation concerning unions; which is conceived to be done
according to the form prescribed in the Council of Constance, and not
otherwise: and this with the consent of the Patron, and such as have any
interest in them.

3 In the forty third Session of the Council of Constance, it is said that
those unions shall be void which are not made, ex veris and rationalibus
causis, upon true and reasonable causes. This is the form which the former
Article speaks of. If they be made otherwise, an appeal is put up to the
Parliaments of this Kingdom to stop the execution; who have ofttimes cassed
and disanull'd such like Bulls upon such occasions; and that without any regard
of the lapse of time, or any other prescription; as appears by the testimony of
our common Lawyers of France, and by the Arrests which have been granted out.
Renatus Choppin^^ de sacr^ Politia. lib. 2. tit. 6. nu. 7.

Papon. l. 3. tit. 8. art. 4.


So by an Arrest of Paris of the 17 of February 1547, the union made by the
Bulls of Pope Clement the sixth, with the counsel of his Cardinals, and a
Commandery of St. Lazarus, and another Commanderie of St. John of Jerusalem,
was cassed and declared to be void, upon the Appeal as from abuse, exhibited
by the master of the Order of St. Lazarus a hundred years after; (...) gran^^d
by Popes, anull'd by Pa^li^m^nts.
and that because it had been made without any just cause.

4 The union of the benefice of St. Savior, with the Church of St. German
Lauxerrois in Paris, Idem Choppinus ibid.
made in the year 1456, by virtue of the Bulls of Pope Calixt the third, was
likewise disanulled by an Arrest of the Parliament of Paris, of the first of
April 1560, and so above an hundred years after. Although by the said Bulls
there was a commission In partibus, directed to a certain Counselor Clerk of
that court of Parliament. And this because it appeared to the Court that that
union had not been grounded upon any sufficiciently just and necessary cause.

5 Another union of diverse livings, with the Church of Tulles in Limosin, made
by virtue of the Bull of Pope Leo the tenth, Choppinus ibid.
in the year 1513, was declared to be abusive by an Arrest of the Court of
Parliament of Paris. And another besides, of diverse benefices with the Priorie
of Limoges, by an Arr^st of the grand Council, of the 13 of March 1559. Pope
Innocent the eight had united the parish Church of Blonu, with the Chapter of
the Cathedral Church of Limoges, by his Bulls of the 19 of March 1488, upon
very colorable and apparent grounds, as appears by the Bull, which a learned
person of our times has inserted in his works entire. But notwithstanding all
his fair narration, it was anulled fourscore years after by an Arrest of
Paris of the last of April 1575, upon the Appeal as from abuse, which was
exhibited against the execution of it, for defect of a Commission upon the
place.

6 Another Bull had been granted by Pope Alexander the sixth, in the year 1500,
for the union of the Parish Church of Doway, with the Chapter of the Cathedral
Church of the same place, which is quoted by the same author. But the
Parliament of Paris upon the Appeal as from abuse, exhibited by the Curat of
Doway to stop the execution of it, disanulled the union by an Arrest of the 1
of May 1575, because there wanted a writ for a Commi^sion In partibus. Diverse
other unions besides have been declared to be abusive, Rebuffus in praxi
benefic. de union benef. number. 28.
because they were made without the consent of the Lay Patrons; and the Bulls
have been annulled as well by the Parliaments, as by the Grand Council.

Papon lib. 3. tit. 8. art. 2. Council. Trid. Sess. 7. cap. 6.
7 Now the Council of Trent has derogated from all these Arrests and others of
the like kind: first, whereas abusive unions may be disanulled without any
regard to prescription or tract of time; by this Council prescription of
forty years is approved, unless it be in case the Bulls were obreptitious,
or subreptitious, that is, unless the Pope had false information; whereas by
the foresaid Arrests no prescription is considerable. As for the other which
have been made within forty years, it is said indeed that they ought not to
be valid, unless they were made upon just cause, and those whom it concerned
were called before the Ordinary of the place; but it is presently added,
Unless it be otherwise declared by the Sea Apostolic. Council. Trid. Sess. 7.
cap. 6.
So that by this means all depends upon the Popes pleasure.

CHAP. V. Of the residence of Bishops, and approbation of the causes of their
absence.
1 IT was usefully ordained by this Council that Bishops and other Prelates
should reside upon their Bishopriques and prelacies: Popes unlawfully dispense
with Bishops non-residence.
But yet when all comes to all, there is a dash with the pen that spoils all;
for the judgment to be passed upon non-residents, is reserved to the Pope. It
is he too that must dispense with their absence, and approve the causes of it.
Council Trent. Sess. 6. cap. 1. and 2 and Sess. 23. cap. 1.
These three points are specified in the Decrees of the Council: so that the
authority both of Metropolitans and Princes is devolved upon the Pope. And he
that considers all shall find that Kings and Princes suffer a mighty prejudice
by this means. They shall not have the power to aid themselves with so much as
one Bishop for the affairs of their State^ and have them near their person to
take their counsel and good advice, unless the Pope please.

2 This is not all. The Popes will take order well enough, that there be ever
some to depend upon them, and such as may be their creatures; so that as many
Bishops as are near to Princes, so many enemies to them. They will bestow whom
they think fit in other places, to contrive plots and projects; get them to
Rome, to make their abode there so long as their business requires; traverse the
Provinces; reside where they shall think expedient. Council. Trid. Sess. 6.
cap. 1.
And in case that either upon the Princes command, or upon any other occasion,
one of these Bishops shall venture to absent himself, by virtue of this
Council the Popes shall have power to deprive him of his Bishoprique, and put
another in his place; for that is said in express terms.

3 By the laws of the ancient Emperors, a Bishop might not absent himself
from his Bishoprique, without the leave of his Metropolitan, or the command of
his Prince. Justinian decrees thus, Novell. Iust^nian. 123. De Sanctiss.
Episcop. c. 9.
We forbid Bishops to leave their own Churches and go into other Provinces.
But if so be there be any necessity of so doing, they shall not go without
the Patriarch or Metropolitans letters, or without the command of the Emperor.

4 Our Kings of France have always reserved this authority and prerogative
unto themselves, to determine of the residence of Bishops; to compel, or cause
them to be compelled by their officers, to feed their flocks, and wait upon
their Churches when need required; and that by seasing upon their temporals: to
call them from Rome, to return into France: to dispense with them and approve
the causes of their absence. We will quote some passages to thi^ purpose.

5 Jews the eleventh in an Ordinance of the eight of January 1475, makes this
narration. Voyez le rec^eil du Fantanon les grandes Ordonnance^ Tom 4. tit. 2.
ca. 1.
When any questions or differences come upon us, as well concerning the state
of the Church of our Kingdom, as other our affairs, we that ought to have
recourse to them, cannot be assisted, aided, or advised therein by reason of
their absence, where we and the Common wealth are ofttimes much interessed.
Then after he ordaines in this manner; We will, ordain, and declare by these
presents, that all Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Prelates, and others, that hold
any dignities within our Kingdom, P^inces to d^termine of residence.
and do dwell and reside out of the bounds and limits thereof, and out of our
obedience, do repair and return within five months after the publication of
these presents, unto their benefices within our said realm, or unto some one
of them if they have any more; and there make continual residence, there to
celebrate and continue divine service, as belongs unto them, and as they are
bound to do. As also to the end that they may serve and assist us in our
Councels and otherwise, to the behoof of us and the Common wealth of our said
Kingdom when need shall be. And this upon pain of being deprived of the
temporals of their said benefices.

6 Henry the second in an Ordinance of the first of May 1557, directed to the
Court of Parliament of Paris. Ibid cap. 2. tit. eod.
We command, charge, and enjoyne you by these presents, that in our name you
enjoyne all Archbishops Bishops, Prelates, Curats, and others that have cure of
souls within our jurisdiction, to retire every one to his Archbishoprique,
Bishoprique, Cures, and other livings, and to make personal residence upon
them, and to preach and declare, or cause to be preached and declared the word
of God, etc. And where they shall refuse so to do, that you cause the fruits,
profits, and emoluments of the said Benefices to be distrained and seized into
our hands. Ibid. tit. eod. cap. 3.


7 Charles the ninth by his Ordinance of the first of April 1560, ordained the
very same thing, both for residence and for the disseisin of temporals, but
with this exception: Saving and excepting the Archbishops and Bishops that are
of our Privy Counsel, and others employed in our service out of the Realm for
the weal public thereof, during the time that we shall make use of them:
whereof our Bailifs and Stewards or their Lieutenants of that jurisdiction
where the said Archbishopriques and Bishopriques do lie, shall give us notice
presently after. The same Prince in the fifth Article of the Ordinance of
Orleans does enact, concerning Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats and Curats, that
have many benefices, Ordonnan. d'Or^leans de l'an 1560. art. 5.
That residing upon one of their benefices, and doing actual service there,
whereof they shall make good proof, they shall be excused from residing upon
their other livings.

8 But see here a thing to be observed! namely^ that the States of Blois holden
in the year 1579, knowing the prejudice which this Council had done to the
liberties of France in this regard, thought it reasonable to provide otherwise
for the approving of the causes of non-residence than it had set down. For it
is enacted in the fourteenth Article of the Ordinance made by King Henry the
third, upon the complaint of the said States, Ordonnance de Blois de l'an 1579.
art. 14.
That all Archbishops and Bishops shall be bound to reside upon their Churches
and Diocesses, and according to their ability to discharge their duties in
person. From which residence they shall not be excused but upon just and
reasonable causes, approved by law, and such as shall be certified by the
Metropolitan or senior Bishop of the province. Otherwise if this be not done,
besides the penalties ordained by Councels, they shall be deprived of all the
fruits issuing in the time of their absence. Which shall be seized and taken
into our hands, to be employed in the reparation of ruinous Churches, alms to
the poor of the places, and other charitable uses. By this Ordinance the
Metropolitan gives the certification, and the Kings officers the judgment in
causes of absence, without reserving any thing to the Pope. Nor is this law
peculiar to our Kings, but common to them with all other Princes, as it shall
appear by what we shall speak of it in another place.

CHAP. VI. Of the frequency of Councels.
1 IT is a great advantage which the Pope has got, Councels to be held every
ten years.
that there must be no more General Councels but when he pleases. For lo
here the Decree of our Council! Council. Trid. Sess. 2^. verse. fi^em.
If it chance that there be any things (which it thinks there are not) that
require further declaration or determination, besides other remedies appointed
in this Counsel, the holy Synod trusts that the most blessed Bishop of Rome,
either by calling forth those whom he shall think most fit to treat about such
a business, out of those Provinces especially where such difficulty shall
arise, or by the celebration of a General Council, if he think it needful,
or by any other more commodious way as he shall think good, will take care that
the necessities of the Provinces be provided for, for Gods glory and the
Churches peace,

2 This is all one as to make the Pope past breeching, past tutoring and
correction: to take away that frequent celebration of Cou^^els, and leave the
convocation of them to their courtesy is as much to give the rod wherewith the
master has whipped him, into the Scholars hand, to do what he please with it.
The Popes when they were monstrously debauched in a monstrous fashion, and
given over to all manner of vices, abominations, and impieties, were curbed and
brought under to some discipline by the Councels of Pisa, Constance, Siena,
Basil, Lausanne, and the second of Pisa. Where many of their Popes were
deposed: where many good rules were made for the holding of Councels, tending
principally to the reformation of the abuses of the Pope and Court of Rome:
where it was religiously ordained that General Councels should be called and
celebrated every ten years: and that in such sort as the Popes might not
prolong the term, but might abridge it if need required. See here the very
words of the Decree of the Council of Constance. Conc. Constant. Sess. 39.
We ordain and decree by this perpetual Edict, that from this time forwards
General Councels shall be holden in this manner. The first that shall be held
after this shall be within five years next following, and the next after that
within seven years immediately, reckoning from the end of the former; and
always after from ten years to ten years for ever. And afterward. Which
term the supreme Bishop may abridge upon some occasions which may come to
pass, with the advice of his brethren the Cardinals of the holy Church of
Rome, but he may not protract it in any wise.

3 This same Decree is set down word for word in the first Session of the
Council of Basil, and confirmed by it. Council. Basil. Sess. 1. and 11.
And in the eleventh Session is added this exposition of it. This holy Synod
does further declare that these words of the Decree (That it cannot be
prolonged in any wise) ought to be understood by way of forbiddance or
prohibition, in such sort as it cannot be prolonged even by the Pope himself.
It is the third time repeated and confirmed in the sixteenth Session. Conc.
Basil. ^ess. 16.

Conc. Pisan. 1. in princip


These same Decrees of these two Councels are transcribed word for word into
the second of Pisa at the beginning, and confirmed by it. Antiquity shows us
plainly that after the Christians were at liberty, General Councels were very
frequent. The b^nefits of Councels.


Conc. Constant. Sess. 39.

Idem in aliis supra relatis.


4 The fruit that springs from the frequency of these Councels is recommended
unto us by the Decrees abovementioned, where it is said, that it is the
principal tillage of the Lords field: that it extirpates heresies, schisms,
errors: corrects excesses: reformes what is amiss: makes the vineyard of the
Lord fertile. Whereas the cessation of them on the other side produces quite
contrary effects; as it is there delivered, with this addition, That the memory
of times past, and the consideration of the present, made them eyewitnesses of
it. Whereunto we will add the testimony of Mr. John Gerson. Johan. Gerson de
eccles. potest. Considerat. 10.
There never was heretofore, nor ever will be hereafter a more pernicious
plague in the Church, than the omission of General Councels, whether in the
matter or in the authority. And in another place. Idem in sermon. pro viagro
Regis Romanorum in fine.
If so great and such enormous dangers have befalne the Church of God, since
the celebration of General Councels has been intermitted, it is easy to see
how useful and commodious the frequent celebration of them would be.

5 He is a very novice in the history of later times, which knows not the
shifts and evasions which the Popes have used about the holding of General
Councels, even after they have by solemn oaths bound themselves to hold them;
and the wiles they have used to disanull and dissolve them; the bickerings and
disputes they have had with Councels themselves about that matter; whereof we
make mention in diverse parts of this discourse. The same Gerson witnesses as
much, in saying that the Popes abuse the plenitude of their power, in that they
will not celebrate General Councels.

6 Everard Bishop of Salisburg in an Imperial Diet of Germany holden about two
hundred ^^ares ago, speaks thus of this matter. Aventin. lib. 7. Annal.
Boiorum
He that is the servant of servants desires to be the Lord of Lords, as if he
were a God: he sleights sacred assemblies, and the advice of his brethren, yea
of his masters: he is afraid lest he should be constrained to give account of
those things which he commits daily more and more against the laws.

Franciscus Zabarella in tract. de Schismate.
7 Zabarel Cardinal of Florence, who writ a little before the Council of Pisa,
says: The ancient custom was that all difficult cases should be determined
by a Council, the convocation whereof was frequent. But in after times certain
Popes, that have governed the Church rather like earthly Princes than like
Apostles, never took any great care to call them. From which neglect has
sprung much mischief.

8 Iacobus de Paradiso says, Jacob. de Paradis. Carthusan lib de septem
statib. Ecclesia.
They tremble to hear any man speak of the calling of a General Council:
knowing by experience that Councels do not deal gently, but correct and amend
without respect of persons. And indeed the Emperors and Princes, who in these
later times had quite let go the reins of Ecclesiastical discipline, through
ignorance of their right, were forced to resume their authority, and proceed to
the convocation of Councels against the Popes will.

9 So that it is but a cheating of Christendom above board to leave the
judgment of the necessity of General Councels to the Popes will and pleasure;
abolishing by this means the good order established by the Councels aforesaid,
which was received and confirmed by our Pragmatique Sanction; where the said
Decrees are transcribed word for word. Which gave occasion to King Charles the
ninth to require by his Ambassadors at Trent the celebration of General
Councels every ten years, as appears by his demands^ to which no regard was
had, because this intrencht upon the Popes authority, who by this kind of
suppression of General Councels hooks all the power of them unto himself.

CHAP. VII. Of the Jesuits.
1 THe Order of Jesuits, instituted by the two Popes Paul and Julius the third,
Jesuits the Popes vassals.
the authors of this Council, is confirmed and authorized by the Council it
self: which tends wholly to the exaltation of their authority, and
strengthening of their power; as shall appear by such reasons as we shall
urge, taken out of their own writings. The maine vow whereunto they are bound
by their institution is that of obedience. Hark what Loiola their founder
says of it in a letter of his which he writ in Italian to the Fathers of
Portugal; We easily endure to be outdone by all other Orders, in fastings,
watchings, and other hardnesses, which they use in a holy manner, according to
their institution: but in purity and perfection of obedience, I earnestly
desire that you would surpass all the rest; with a true resignation of your
own will, and a denial of your own judgment. Now this vow looks full upon
the Pope, to whom they commit themselves both soul and body, to be no more
their own; not to believe their own sense, their judgment, their
understanding, their prudence, and counsel: but to dispose of, and submit
themselves totally to him, to go, come, do, say, execute upon all and against
all, whatsoever he shall command them. The form of their vow, which I am
about to insert, shall serve for proof of my assertion.

2 As many as shall make profession in this Societie^ Haec ex Bulla Iulii 3.
qua confirm^tur institutio and statuta Iesuitaru^, quae extat in cap. 21. lib.
3. de vita Ignatii Loiolae novite^ excusa Lu^ duni apud Iacobum Roussin. Ann.
1594.
let them not only know before they make it, but remember as long as they live,
that all this Society in general, and more particularly those that are
professed in it, serve God under a faithful obedience to the most holy Father
Pope Paul the third, and other Popes of Rome his successors. And although we
be taught by the Gospel, and do know by the Orthodox faith, and firmly hold
that all the faithful people of Christ are subject to the Pope of Rome, as to
the head and Vicar of Jesus Christ: yet notwithstanding for the greater
devotion to the obedience of the Sea Apostolic, and the greater denial of
our own wills, and the more certain direction of the Holy Ghost; we have
judged that it would be very commodious that every one of us, and all those
that shall hereafter follow the same profession, besides the common tie of the
three ordinary vows, be bound hereunto by a more special vow; to wit, that
whatsoever the present Pope, and all others hereafter for the time being shall
command, for the good of souls, and the propagation of the faith, into what
country soever they shall please to send us, that we be bound to perform
their pleasure immediately, without any tergiversation or excuse, for as much
as lies in our power: whether they be aminded to send us amongst the Turks, or
other infidels whatsoever, yea though it be even unto those that are called
Indians: or among heretics and schismatiques whosoever they be, or among
Christians. Now these missions and delegations must depend upon the Pope alone,
and next to him upon their General. Ibid page 334.
And to the end that no ambition nor refusal may take place amongst us by
occasion of these deputations, and elections of Provinces, let every one know
that he need not trouble either himself or others about it, nor take thought
for it; The Pope defied by Jesuits.
inasmuch as all the ^are thereof must be left to God and the P^pe, as his
Vicar, and to the General of the Society.

3 Being obliged unto the Pope by such a vow as this, they are bound to do
whatsoever he shall command them. And albeit their sense and reason should
dictate unto them that his command is injust, they are bound not to believe
them, but to refer themselves wholly to him. Nay there is yet more; that is,
that it is not lawful for them to imagine that any error or impiety or
injustice can come from the Pope; but all religion, zeal, devotion, equity,
and truth. Behold their maxims! Bellarm. in 3. Controv. de summo Pontif. l. 4.
c. 5.
That the Pope cannot err in matters of faith; nor in precepts of manners
which are commanded to the whole Church, and which consist in things necessary
to salvation, or such as are of themselves good or bad. Item, that it is
probable and may be piously believed, that the Pope cannot err a^ Pope; yea
and that as a particular person he cannot be a heretic, by beleeveing with
obstinacy any error against the faith. See yet a third, Ibid cap. 6. Iesuitae
in censura Coloniensi. fol. 136.
If any man examine the doctrine of the Pope by the rule of Gods Word, and
seeing that it is different, chance to contradict it, let him be rooted out
with fire and sword. Afterward they make a particular inquiry into the life
and doctrine of all the Popes that ever lived; Bellarm. ubi supra. c. 8. et
seq^ Eadem Bulla Iulii 3. quae extat l. 3. de vita Ignatii. c. 21. page 335.
and maintain that not one amongst them ever erred, that they were all holy
and honest men. Besides, it is said in the Articles of their institution,
confirmed by the Popes Bulls and inserted in them, that they are bound to
acknowledge Christum velut praesentem, (Christ as present) not only in the
person of the Pope, but also of their General.

4 Let any man of sound judgment judge now if they can deny it, whether their
souls be their own; whether they can avoid the Popes injunctions and
commands, or excuse themselves from them in any wise; whether they can presume
that he will cast them upon sin, though the thing he command them be a
crime or offense. Whence we must necessarily conclude, that if the Pope be an
honest and peaceable man, such a one as Clement the eight now reigning, to whom
France is so much obliged, is supposed to be, they will be so too. So it is
seen in effect that at this day there are some doves, some maidens, some
sheep: that they help to establish the edict of pacification, that they
peaceably converse with those whom they account to be heretics: that they
admit their children into their Colleges, with protestation to leave them to
the liberty of their consciences. But on the contrary, if a Boniface the
eighth, a Benedict the thirteenth, a Julius the second, a Gregory the
fourteenth, or a Sixtus the fifth should be alive again. What should become
of France that has so many Ianizaries or emissaries upon her hands, so many
enemies within her bosom, so many worms within her bowels, which gnaw her
within, and tear in pieces her noblest members? Can the Prince live secure if
that saying of an ancient be true, that he which cares not for his own life is
the master of another man's? Can he escape a dismal blow, having in all parts
of his Kingdom some persons that upon the least whistle will run some to their
knives, some to their swords? which will arm themselves with fraud, and
treachery, and perfidiousnesse? which will make underhand plots and projects?
which will seduce his subjects, and draw them from his obedience? will
pronounce him a tyrant, an heretic, a schismatique, how good, how religious,
how Catholic soever he be? Let not my words be credited, but the examples
which have been seen of it: let a man fancy to himself France all covered
with blood, and fire, and flames; let him remember how the Popes opened the
vein, how they lighted the candle, how they sung the Te Deum at the murder of
our Kings: how they would have turned our state tops^e turvie; that they gave
the greatest blows to it: that the champions we speak of did wonders there
and made their names immortal.

5 Great Prince, Jesuits doctrine against Kings.
your Majesty needs not fear any of this, being protected by the particular
care and extraordinary favor of God, which overshadowes it, and makes it
redoubtable to all your enemies, for your valor, your power, and your
trophies, being cherished by a Clement truly ^lement. He speaks to Henry the 4.
But Sir, what shall become of your poor posterity? what hope of safety do
you leave to them? what means of refuge, having the rat in the bag, the
serpent in the bosom, the powder in the pistol, or, to speak more properly,
in the four corners of France, to which an Inclement will easily give fire?
But I come to their maxims. They being servants and slaves to the Pope, cannot
be good subjects to their Princes: for they profess themselves exempt from
their subjection, and avouch as much of all other Clergiemen to make their
party the stronger.

6 See here an Aphorism which Emanuel Sa the Jesuit sets down in his book
entitled Aphorismi Confessariorum, Emanuel Sa in verbo Cle^ic^^.
printed at Anvers the year 1599, and afterward at Paris this present year
1600, after he had studied the point forty years, as he professes in the
preface. The rebellion of a Clergyman against the King is no treason, because
he is no subject. For as much as they make profession of this rebellion, they
provide for themselves beforehand by such like axioms as these. They make
maxims in State affairs, even such as respect the persons of Princes, and
occasion their subjects to make conspiracies and enterprise upon their lives.
Lo here one. Idem in verbo tyrannus.
He that governes the Realm or Dominion, which he has justly got, in a
tyrannical way, cannot be deprived of it but by a public judgment. But the
sentence being once past, any man may be the executioner of it. He may be
deposed even by the people that have sworn perpetual allegiance to him, if he
do not amend after he has been admonished. But he that tyrannically usurpes
the government, may be killed by any of the people, if there be no other
remedy, for he is a public enemy. See here another of the like strain. Idem
in verb^ privilegium.
The Prince may be deprived of his dominion by the common wealth, either for
his tyranny, or if he do not do his duty, or if there be any other just
cause, and another may be chosen in his stead by the major part of the people.

7 Let every man bethink himself whether these Maxims have not been
practiced in our France: and let him add to all this the excommunication of a
Pope incensed against some Prince whom he will declare by his Bulls to be a
tyrant, or heretic, and he will easily judge whether he that shall be
pronounced such ought hereafter to think of any thing but the sepulcher of his
ancestors, to procure that he may obtain it at least. In my opinion if our
Jesuits deny to speak roundly, and say it is a meritorious work to kill him,
it is lawful for any man to execute the sentence: Yet this is the doctrine
which they teach their disciples; confessed by John Chastel, registered in the
Arrest of this venerable Parliament of the 29 of December 1594. the words are
these. He said at the same examination that it is permitted to kill Kings, and
that King Henry the fourth now reigning, is not in the Church till such time as
he has got the Popes approbation. Confessed likewise by William Parry
executed in England. Confessed by Peter Pan, the Jesuits of D^wayes emissarie
to assassinate Prince Maurice, giving unto the Governor or Rectour of that
College the honor of that doctrine which he had learned from him. Maintained
in a public writing made by Mr. Allen Principal of the College of the
Seminary at Rhemes: declaimed in their ordinary talk, in their solemn
orations: whispered in the ears of those that come to them for absolution, and
infused into their souls; as it is declared by those true discourses made upon
that subject by the finest wits of France.

8 Let us run over the other maxims which concern the present state of this
Kingdom, and judge whether they tend to peace and quiet. If Luther (say they
in their Cullen censure) had been rooted out by fire and sword forty years
ago, I^suites doc^rine pe^nicious to the State.
or if others had been so dealt with, peace might by this means be restored
to the Church.

Censura Coloniensis Iesui^arum fol. 136.
9 Father Emond, in a book of his printed at Paris by Sebastian Nivelle the
year 1568, and by him dedicated to King Charles the ninth, with this
inscription, The Pedagogue of Arms, To instruct a Christian Prince to
undertake a good war well, and accomplish it with success, to be victorious
over all the enemies of his State, and of the Catholic Church, gives us other
rules which have been put in practice. See here some of them.

Le Pedagogue d' Arms
10 That wars have been always accounted not only profitable, but necessary.

Chap. 8.
11 That the Pope is bound to take arms against heretics.

Chap. 9.
12 That to a Monarchy undertaking such a war, a man cannot urge any of his
former Edicts or Ordinances.

Chap. 4.
13 That no man how potent soever he be, can contract with an infidel, or one
that has revolted from his conscience. He gives this reason; Fol. 13
For what King is there, how redoubted soever he be, that can (without
villainously falsifying and breaking his oath made to God) permit and give
leave to the enemies of all truth, and condemned by the general sentence of
all the world, to so^ heresies in his countries, and allure souls? He adds
further, Fol. 1^
That what conditions of peace so ever he can grant unto his rebels in this
case, will not endure long: But it will behove him not to awake such strong and
potent enemies; that to make a peace with them at last, he must resolve to
make a good war. And anon, As often as by the Articles of peace, license is
granted to every man to adhere to which of the two opposite parties he please,
without being offended at it, it is all one in my opinion, as if one should
cast a man into the fire and forbid him to burn himself.

14 In the seventh Chapter he says, Chap. 7. Fol. 24.
If such persons were infidels or heretics, I would never excuse the Monarch,
that, having sufficient means in his own hands, should not essay by all ways,
even of fact, to reclaim such a kennell, or drive them far out of his
country, out of the territories of Catholics. And so much the more roughly
ought he to proceed against them as he knows them perverse in all respects,
and of the Huguenots stamp, which should be accounted the most pernicious, most
devilish upholders of lies that ever rose up against the Church.

15 After he has put weapons in the Princes hands to destroy his subjects, he
suggests reasons unto him, Chap. 9. Fol. 31.
whereby he may repel all such as would make him alter his design. This
being well and piously considered, the Prince will find in his heart
sufficient reason to assure him of the holiness of the enterprise: without
resting upon the remonstrances of those seditious rebels, grounded it may be
upon some Edicts, which by the policy and subtlety of bad counselors, they
have obtained of his Majesty to let them live at liberty. But he must answer
them with a deliberate and resolved gravitie, that if a man by reason of the
hardness of the times have committed one fault against his will, there is no
reason he should commit two. But that they which are the cause that makes him
take arms, should dearly buy the folly of their rashness. And a little
below, Fol. 32.
But if they grow frantic, and obstinate in their wickedness, they must
resolve to endure from him such violence and roughness, as shall be seen
upon them and their posterity for ever: they must blame themselves as guilty
of the persecution which he has raised. But if he do not cleanse his realm
from such an infection and stench, Jesuits banish^d France. Fol. 33.
let him not think ever to see the face of his sovereign Lord God. He has
sufficient authority to correct a sacrilegious Ordinance, and pernicious to all
the world, by a good and just law. We could yet bring more of this kind, but
here is enough.

16 It will be answered, It is but one or two of the Jesuits that have said
thus: that the whole Order should not be blamed for it: that there are some
among them that preach peace. But observe here a very pat reply; That none of
them intermedles any thing with such matters, but by command from their
Gen^rall, which prescribes each of them his function, and the General commands
nothing but what is enjoined him by the Pope, whose oracles he receives at
Rome without budging a foot from him. It is one of the rules of their
institution. For lest any might use zeal, but not according to knowledge, In
eadem constitutione Iulii 3 quae extat in ca. 21. li. 3. (...) vita Ignat^^
Loiolae.
let the judging of what degree every man shall be, and the de^igning and
distrib^tion of offices, be wholly in the power of the General, or Prelat,
which shall be appoint^d by us any time whatsoever, or of those whom he shall
su^stitute with such authority.

17 Let us yet set down one most true maxim, but which is as much or more
verified in fact as in writing, and then an end. That the Jesuits apply all
their divinity to overthrow the States of Kingdoms and Principalities, to
make them change their masters. The Arrest of Paris, given by the great
Chamber and the T^urnelle in full assembly, calls them Enemies to the King and
State. Such a company as does not judge upon the ticket of a sack. There must
have been great matters, and very concluding proofs to declare them such: to
confiscate all their goods, and banish them out of France. Du Steurs D' Arnalt.
Pasquier. Versoris.
He that shall read the pleadings upon that subject, and the inscription of
the Piramid, will understand some part of it. The examples of other States, the
blows which they have struck, which are but too well known to all
Christendom, their achievements and ^onquests, do but too much bewray the
inside of their stomach; and make us believe it was not without a mystery that
they professed themselves unto Princes for Pedagogues of Arms.

CHAP. VIII. Of the election and nomination to the investitures of
Bishopriques, Abbeyes, and other Prelacies appertaining to the Emperors. And
first of the election of Popes.
All elections ascribed to the Pope by this Council.
1 THis Council gives the Pope the power of election and nomination to all
Bishopriques, Abbeyes, and other Prelacies in all the Kingdoms and Provinces
of Christendom. For in the first Chapter of the seventh Session, the Popes
authority is reserved for as much as concerns Bishops, their residence, and
other points of reformation. This being so it must be at his disposal to
ordain what he shall think good: to draw unto himself and his Court all
manner of nominations and elections: to put out some, and put in others: to set
up a trading and traffic in that behalf, as he has done at other times,
and does at this present: to make a common mart and a famous fare of his Court:
to rob Princes of the right which belong^ unto them in point of nominations,
elections, investitures and such like. For if the Pope intermeddle, as he may
lawfully do, they can no way complain of him, nor debate their right against
him, nor say that he deprives them o^ what belongs unto them. And indeed the
same Council has decreed it downright: For it is said in the eighth Canon of
the twenty third Session, If any one affirm the Bishops that are created by
the authority of our Holy Father the Pope of Rome, to be no true and lawful
Bishops, but a humane fiction^ let him be anathema.

2 In the first Decree of the twenty fourth Session, the election, nomination,
and entire disposal of Bishopriques and Prelacies is given unto him without
any more dissembling: See here the form which is there set down; 1 That at
the Provincial Synod which shall be holden by the Metropolitan, a certain
form of examination, inquisition, or instruction proper to every Province, be
prescribed to all places. 2 That it be approved of by the judgment of our
holy Father the Pope of Rome. 3 That as soon as this examination or
inquisition of the party to be preferred is finished, it be drawn into a
public instrumen^, with all the attestations, and testimonials, and
profession of faith by him made. 4 That all be sent forthwith to our most holy
Father the Pope of Rome, that having full intelligence of the whole business,
and of the persons, if by the examination and inquisition they be found fit
men, for the good of the Lords flock, he may profitably furnish the Churches
with them.

3 It may be said that all this may be well understood without entrenching
upon the right of others, especially of Kings and Princes who have the
disposal of them. But that is provided for by another Decree, in such sort
that they are not indeed quite right excluded, but a gappe is opened to their
exclusion, by inventing a way to make them yield unto them. For in case the
preferment be done without them, Council. Trid. Sess. 23. cap. 4. de Sacramento
Ordini^.
they declare it to be valid and good. And God knows whether such a course
will not be taken that they shall have no hand in it at all. The holy Synod
further teaches, that in the Ordination of Bishops, Priests, and other Orders,
neither the consent, The ^ight of Princes in elections.
vocation nor authority of the people, or any other Secular power or Magistrate
is so required, that the Ordination should be frustrate without it: But rather
it decrees that those who rise up to exercise these functions, being called
and ordained only by the people or Secular power and Magistrate, or by their
own rashness take them upon them, ought all of them to be reputed, not
Ministers, but thieves and robbers that came not in by the door.

4 It may be made to appear yet more particularly, that this Councels
intention was to put into the Popes hands all that concerns the election of
Bishopriques and other Ecclesiastical dignities and offices, and to deprive
others that might claim any right to them. For by the first Chapter of the
sixth Session, the care and charge of preferring or causing to be preferred
unto the government of Churches, such as shall be most worthy, and the power
of providing for Bishopriques in stead of the Bishops that do not reside,
belongs unto him: which will be a means for him to revenge himself of such
Princes as would desire to retain trusty Prelates in their Counsel. For if
they do so without the Popes license, they shall be deprived of them: if with
his consent, they shall be but ill served by them. Besides, the Pope will keep
them continually in awe by other means afforded him by this Council; as
namely, by the oath which they are bound to swear unto him at their
Provincial Councels and Synods within their Dioces; by the censure of their
life and manners, their errors and offenses; which is also granted unto him,
with supreme jurisdiction to punish them. Can. nullus. C^n. Adrian 1. (...)
por^o.

Can. si pe^ ord^nat^o. ^an non est ex dicto Gratian in his verbis

Ex co^^^itutionibus did. 6^. Gloss. ad regul. 29. in ^e^b. quod Omnes. regul.
^uris in 6.

V. sacraescriptur^ testimonia apud Marsilium Pa^avin. in desens. pa^. ^art. 2.
cap. 17

Can. quarto. Can plebs. Can. no^se. Can. Episcopos. Can literas. Can.
Metropolitano.

Can. si in plebib.

Can. Cler. Can. vota civium.

^an. Sacrorum. did. 61.

Ivo Episcopus Carnotensis Epist. 3.

Idem Ivo epist. 2. and 3.




5 And as for lesser dignities, the Pope is entreated at the twenty first
Chapter of the last Session, that the Monasteries, Abbeyes, Priories and
Provostships be bestowed for the future upon regular men, of tried virtue and
sanctity. If these authorities be not sufficient, we add further; That this
Council gives the Pope authority over all; that by this means he may
derogate, abrogate, change, make, unmake, any thing that he pleases; the
clause of Clave non errante, and the exception, Curita facis? being now
abolished. We say more, that this Council confirms all the Canons and Decrees
of Popes, and that by them elections now adays belong neither to the people,
nor to Kings and Princes^ that they have neither part nor quart in them, nor
can they meddle with them in any sort. In all this the interest of Kings and
Princes and of the people likewise is concerned. If we make this right and
interest appear by their own testimonies, by the very Canons and Decrees of
Popes and Councels, by the authority of all antiquity, by the credit of
Histories; what will remain more, but that we conclude, that that is by
usurpation taken from them, which in justice ought to be restored unto them?
The Glossatour upon the Canon Law confesses this usurpation in down right
terms. For speaking of the consecration of Archbishops, The Archbishop (says
he) of right ought to be consecrated by all his ^uffragans; yet
notwithstanding the Pope usurpes this power to himself. With greater reason
may it be said that he usurps the consecration of Bishops and others that are
of inferior dignity.

6 Now that the people has a share in the election of their Bishops and
Pastors, besides the express places of holy Scripture, which may and ought to
suffice, I urge their own Canons and the sayings of former Popes, who testify
the use and custom of the ancient Church in matter of elections; and tell us
in plain terms that they were made by the Clergy and people jointly, and by
one common advice, without the one usurping upon the others authority. Amongst
the Epistles of Ivo Bishop of Chartres we read the very form which the Popes
used at the consecration of Bishops; where mention is made of the election of
the Clergy and people, which begins thus. Forasmuch as we believe that
being called by the will of God, the Clergy and people of such a City have with
one consent chosen you their Rectour and Bishop, Popes chosen or confirmed by
Emperors.
brought unto us to desire consecration, etc. The very same form did Pope
Urban use at the consecration of the said Bishop of Chartres; for it is upon
that occasion Ivo relates it.

Can in Synodo. Can. quia sancta Can. Cum Adrianus.

Can. Ego Ludovicus. did. 63. Vid. Justinian. Constit. 137. de ordinat. Episc.
and Cleric. lib. 1. Capitul Caroli Magnica. 84. Glabrum Rodulph. lib. 5 hist.
cap. 5.


7 This was also observed even in the election of the Pope of Rome, which was
performed by the Clergy and people, as their own books testify. To all
which they proceeded in such sort as the Princes authority was above all. For
whether he made the election himself alone, and by his own proper authority,
(which is condemned by this Council) or he gave and granted it sometimes to
the Pope (this I learn from their own writings) sometimes to the Clergy and
people; yet still so as his consent and the confirmation was reserved unto
himself. The Emperors and Princes themselves made the laws and Ordinances
concerning it: they prescribed the order and form which should be observed in
it. All this is testified unto us by the Popes and Councels themselves; yea
approved and followed by them; yea with all humility received: and they thought
this right to belong to Kings and Princes so far, that they never made any
bones of acknowledging in them a power to choose Popes and all other Bishops: of
declaring in their Synods that this of right belonged unto them: of confirming
it unto them as far as they were able.

Can. Adrianus. did. 63.
8 Pope Adrian with his whole Synod (which consis^ed of one hundred fifty three
Bishops, Religious persons and Abbats) gave the right and power of electing the
Pope unto Charles the Great: the power and right of choosing: and further
ordained that the Archbishops and Bishops of all the Provinces should receive
their investiture from him: in such sort as no Bishops can be consecrated by
any man unless he be approved and invested by the King, pronouncing and
anathema against such as shall do otherwise, as is said in express terms in
the Canon Adrianus.

Can. Synodo. did. 63.
9 Pope Leo the seventh following this example made this Constitution. I Leo
Bishop, servant of servants, with all the Clergy and people of Rome, do
ordain, confirm, corroborate, and grant by our authority Apostolic unto
Otho the first, our Lord, King of the Germans, and his successors, the power
from hence forwards of electing the successors and ordaining the Pope of the
high See Apostolic: as also to the Archbishops and Bishops, to receive their
investiture from him, and their consecration where they ought. And a little
after. That the Bishop being elected by the Clergy and people, cannot be
consecrated till he be first allowed and invested by the King. See here how
every one had his share in it: the Clergy and People, the election: the
Prince, the approbation and investiture: the Archbishop or Metropolitan, or the
Council it self, the consecration.

10 Nor can it be said that this right was first granted to the Emperors in
the person of Charlemaigne: it was no more but confirmed: for other Emperors
of old were anciently accustomed so to do; as it is affirmed in express
terms in the Canon Agatho, Can. Agatho did. 63.
very remarkable to this purpose. Where Pope Agatho, who lived in the year six
hundred eighty eight, obtained of Constantine the fourth their Emperor an
immunitie and release from that sum of money which the Popes were wont to pay
the Emperors for their Ordination. Yet so (these are the very words) as he
that is elected shall not be consecrated till the General Decree be first
brought unto the Royal City (of Constantinople) according to the ancient
custom; to the end that the said consecration may be performed with his
consent and command. The words ( according to the ancient custom) are worth
the noting, to show that this was no new established thing: for the Emperor
had both the right of the one and the other, so says the Gloss; that is, both
of receiving something at the election, and of granting the confirmation of it.
But the example of Pope Vitalianus who is spoken of in the same Canon, makes
the point clearer. Whether the Emperors h^ve lost their right.
Vitalianus according to the custom s^nt his Legates with a Synodicall epistle
toward the royal City to the most pious Emperors, to give them notice of his
institution. Now this Vitalianus was promoted to the Sea in the year 1657,
under the Emperor Constantine the third, who reigned together with his brother
Heracleon, Martinus Polonus in Vitaliano sub ann. 657.
as the Archbishop of Cos^^^^ tells us, who relates the very same story.

11 Boniface the first entreated the Emperor Honorius by his letters and
Ambassadors, to see that after his death the ele^tion of the Popedom were
made without contentions and corruptions. See here the inscription of the
letter which he sent unto him, which we read at this day in Isidores Decree
printed at Paris, both in a great and lesser volume, the year 15^4, and 1535^
and afterward at Cullen in 1567. Vid. Decreta Bonfaci^ 1. in Isidori Decreto
Luteti^ excuso ann. 1524. page 129. and ann. 1535. p. 196.
Here begin the Decrees of Pope Boniface^ The epistle wherein he entreats
the Emperor Honorius, to see that hereafter after the election of the Pope be
not carried by canvassing at Rome. After this letter of Boniface, follows the
Emperors answer with this inscriptio^; The Constitution of the Emperor
Honorius sent to Pope Boniface, wherein he ordaines, that if hereafter two
Bishops be created at Rome, the one or other of them shall be driven out of
the City. And the text says thus; Let every man know that these canvassings
must be left off. But if peradventure by reason of the remeritie of the
factions, there be two chosen against the law; we will not that either of
those two be the man: but that he alone shall enjoy the Sea Apostolic whom
the judgment of God, and the consent of the world shall choose.

12 We will urge the examples of Pope Symmachus, and Gregori^ the Great out of
Marsilius, though we could take them out of the authors whence he had them.
The like we read (says he) of Symmachus, borne in Sardinia: for he being
elected by discord, together with one Laurentius, was confirmed Pope of Rome by
the judgment of King Theodoric. Hear what Martin says also of St. Gregory;
Walteramus episc^p. Naumberg. in lib de inves^l^^ epis^.
He was chosen Pope, (says he) and the Emperor Maurice gave his consent by
his Imperial letters. Others say that St. Gregory would not receive the
consecration, till such time as he had the Emperor Maurice his consent.

13 There are two things especially objected against all this. First, the
disclaim which is said to be made by Jews the Gentle, King of France, and
Emperor of Rome, by an express compact made betwixt him and Pope Paschal:
whereby he promises, That none of his Kingdom, French man, or Lombard, or of
any other nation within his dominions, shall have any power or leave to do
against the Romans, privately or publicly, or to proceed to any elections,
suffering them to consecrate him whom they have elected with concord and common
advice, sending Legates unto him and his successors, the Kings of France, after
the consecration, to make peace and amity with him. In the second place is
objected the constitution of the Emperor Henry the first, where it is said,
That none sent by us shall be any impediment to the election of the Pope of
Rome. Which makes Gratian conclude that, From these Ordinances, and from the
compact of the Emperor Jews, Vnum instrumentum extat in Can. Ego Ludovicus.
did. 63.
it appears that the Emperors have renounced those privileges which Pope
Adrian granted to the Emperor Charlemag^e, and in imitation of him Pope Leo to
Otho the first, as touching the election of the Pope of Rome, And this is now
adays taken for Oracle, and followed, yea practiced.

14 There is nothing more easy than to discover here errors and falsities
both at on^e. Alterum apud Volaterrarum Geograp lib. 3. cap. de genere and
gestis Pepini and ^aroli.
Diverse, learned men of this age have undertaken to prove that this pretended
compact of Jews is spurious, as well as the Donation of Constantine. And one
of the maine arguments is, because there are two evidences of this imaginary
agreement produced, the one different from the other both in words and
substance, yea even in matters of greater moment. Jews his compa^^
supposititious.
In one place it contains a donation of the City of Rome, and many more in
Italy, unto the Pope. Whereas notwithstanding all Histories teach us, that
they never pretended to the dominion of it, nor became Lords of it, til^ in
later times they took it into their hands by usurpation. Add hereunto that
ancient Historians, some whereof were contempora^ies and familiar with this
Emperor, speak not a word of it, though they set down his life even to the
smallest particulars. But let us grant them this, that this instrument is true,
be it never so false: What do they gain by it, for the election of Pope Leo
the seventh, by whom the power granted to the Emperor Otho the first, and his
successors, of instituting the Pope and all other Archbishops, and Bishops, is
much younger? and it is a common rule, That the latter laws derogate from the
former. Which will serve also for an answer to the constitution of Henry the
first, inasmuch as the fore cited Synod was after it too. For this Emperor
reigned about the year 920; and the forementioned Synod was holden about the
year 937.

15 But see yet more law! After all this Pope Stephen the ninth, who lived
about the year 1057, Can quia sancta. did. 63.
under the Emperor Henry the second, ordained that there should be no
consecration of the Pope^ unless it were in the presence of the Emperors
Ambassadors, according to the custom and form set down by the Canons. And
after that yet Pope Nicholas the second, having caused a form of the Popes
election to be prescribed by a Council of Lateran holden the year 1059, in
such sort as that it must be done by the Cardinal ^ishops, and Cardinal
Clerks, (so they called them in those days) with the consent of the rest of
the Clergy and people; he adds, Can. in nomine did. 23. Hildebert in Panorm.
l. 3. c. 1
Saving the honor and reverence due to our welbeloved son Henry, King at
this present, and who will be^ Emperor ere long.

16 And this is so true that even his successors used to do so till Pope
Gregory the seventh, who came to the Popedom in the year 1073, who received
also his confirmation from the Emperor Henry the fourth: witness Pl^tina,
Platina in Gregorio 7.
In fine, (says he) after diverse embussyes, both upon one side and other; the
Emperor was reconciled to Gregory, and confirmed him Pope, as was then the
custom of Emperors to do.

17 The same Platina says in the life of Alexander the second, that a certain
Archbishop delegated on behalf of the Emperor Henry the fourth, Platina in
Alex. 2.
reproved him very sharply, for usurping the Sea of Rome without the
Emperour^ command, contrary to law and custom. It is true he adds that
Archdeacon Hildebrand, who was Pope after him, and was called Gregory the
seventh, defending the Popes cause, said, That if he would consent with law
and ancient custom, the election of him belonged to the Clergy. And by these
reasons brought over the Archbishop to his opinion. So that this was out of
faint-heartednes, and not by the truth of his reasons: for he himself that
urged them, when he was made Pope, received his own confirmation from the
Emperor, as we have said.

18 The right of the Emperors in the election and confirmation of Popes being
such, there can be nothing now alleged against these authorities but mere
usurpation and violence, which the succeeding Popes have used toward the
Emperors to deprive them of it. For after all these there was no more neither
contracts nor agreements about this subject.

CHAP. IX. Of the election and investiture of other Bishops.
1 LEt us speak now of other Bishops. Election of Bishops belongs to Emperors.
The Patriarchs were created also by the Emperor, or at least by his consent
and approbation. Balsamon the Patriarch of Antioch gives testimony of it.
Theodorus Balsamo in comment. ad Can. 69. Syno^. in Trullo.
The Orthodox Emperors, who by the invocation of the blessed Trinity,
prefer the Patriarchs, and are the anointed of the Lord, go in to the sacred
altar when they will. As for other Bishops, we have learned from the Canons
before alleged, that the approbation and investiture of them belongs to the
Emperors, and they were wont so to use them even with the consent of the Popes
and Synods.

2 The authority which the Council of Trent gives to the Pope at this day, to
dispose of dignities and Prelacies, belonged anciently to the Emperors; yea
and that in such sort as the Popes themselves never came in competition with
them for it; but all the power which they had in that respect proceeded from
the commission, delegation, or grant of the Emperors. They are the Popes own
Canons which say so. Leo the fourth, Can Reatinae. did. 63.
in Gratians Decrees, entreats the Emperors Jews and Lotharius, that they
would bestow the Bishoprique of Riete upon a certain Deacon called Colonus,
and to be pleased that with their leave and permission he might consecrate him
Bishop. Which was granted him, as appears by the letter which the Pope writ to
the Countess of Riete about it: Can. nobis did. 63.
The Emperor and Emperesse (says he) enjoined me by their letters to make
Colonus Bishop of Riete, which I have done accordingly.

3 Guido Earl of the same City, by his letter entreated Pope Stephen, that
he would consecrate a Bishop that had been chosen by the Clergy and people;
that so the Church might not continue any long space without a Pastor. To whom
he made answer, Can lectis did. 63.
We could not consecrate him so soon as you desired, because he brought us
not the Emperors letters containing his pleasure therein, as the custom is,
by reason whereof we are perplexed. But we advise you, seeing we can do no
otherwise in this case, to procure the Emperors license, as the ancient custom
is, and his letters directed unto us: so shall we not fail to satisfy your
desire, and to consecrate him that was elected.

4 St. Gregory, in the same Decret of Gratian makes his complaint to the
Empress Constantia, how the Bishop of Salona, which some call Spalato at this
day, had been consecrated by another than himself, and how upon that occasion
he had suspended him from celebrating Mass, Can. Salonitan^ quaest. 63.
till such time (says he) as I shall have understood from my most Illustrio^s
Lords, whether they commanded him so to do. He afterward adds, For all this
he does not forbear celebrating of masses, and that he would not come unto
him, according to the Emperors command.

5 In the Canon Principali, Can. Princip. did. 63.
Pope Pelagius the first or second writes to the Bishop of Forcella, how he had
received a letter or commission from the Emperor, called Sacra, whereby he was
commanded to create a Priest, a Deacon, and a Subdeacon in that City: in
obedience whereunto he commanded the said Bishop to proceed to the ordination.
When Popes begun to usu^p elections.
Gregory the thirteenth in his new purgation of the Canon law, says that the
consecration spoken of in this Canon was made upon the Emperors demand. He
should have said by the Emperors command. For it is in the text praecepit, and
not petiit.

Can. Quiaigitur. did. 63.
6 Gregory the Great speake^ in another place of a Bishop of Locri elected by
common consent of a Council, and assisted by the Emperors pleasure, in the
year of the Lord 1046. Gregory the sixth created Odilo Abbat of Cluny,
Archbishop of Lions by his own proper authority, sending him the Pall and the
Ring, which he received; yet without accepting of the Dignity, saying he would
reserve it for him that should be chosen Archbishop. At the same time the
Emperor Henry the third, Glaber Rodulphus lib. 5. hist. cap 4.
to whom Lions then belonged as an Imperial City, was persuaded as well by
the Bishops as by all the people, to ordain Odolricus Archbishop thereof, who
was Archdeacon of Langres^ a man worthy such a charge: which he did.

Idem Glaber lib. 5. cap. 5.
7 The same Emperor made an Edict against Simoniacall persons, where he urges
this reason: As God has freely given me the Crown of the Empire, so will I
freely bestow that which belongs unto his religion, and will have you also to
do the like, says he, speaking unto the Bishops whom he had assembled in a
Council to provide against that contagion which was so rife in those days;
and having found them all almost spotted with that disease, having pity on
them he gave them this comfort. Idem ibid.
Go your ways (says he) and endeavor honestly to distribute what you have
unlawfully received: and pray to God for my fathers soul, who is guilty of
this fault as well as you. Therefore the Emperor Conrade, his father, created
those Bishops, though it were by Simony.

8 All the rest of the Emperors that lived both before and after him had the
same power of choosing or confirming Bishops and other Ecclesiastical Prelates,
Helmod in chronic. Slavor. cap. 70.

Waltramus Episc. Naumburg. in lib. de invest. Episcop.


or of approving them by putting them in possession of such dignities, by
granting them investitures into them. Helmodius a Priest and historian makes
Vicelin Bishop of Aldembourg speak thus. To invest Bishops belongs only to
the Imperial Majesty. He puts the same language in the mouth of the Archbishop
and Clergy of Breme: The investiture of Bishops is permitted only to the
Imperial dignity. A certain Bishop of Germany in a treatise made by him of
the Investiture of Bishops, the year 1109, says amongst other things, That
Gregory the great writ to Theodorick, Theodebert, and Brunedulde ( Kings and
Queen of France) to make their investitures of Bishops without Simony. He
says also that Pope John confirmed the investiture of the Bishoprique of Liege
which King Charles had granted to an Abbat whose name was Richard.

9 An infinite number of Sigebert. in Chron. sub ann. 1111.

Martin. Polon. in Henr. 4 sub ann. 1110.

Matthew. Westminster. l. 2. sub an ^112 Helmod. in hist. Slavor. cap. 32. and 70.

Petr. de Ferrariis in forma libelli quae agit ex substit. in verb. ex suo
corpore. number. 3. Lambert. Schafnaburg. derebus German. sub an. 1071. et passim.
Author continuationis ad Bedae hist. lib. 2. ^ap. 21.


Historians and other ancient Authors besides do testify that the Emperors
bestowed Bishopriques and Abbeyes, and gave the investitures of them. I shall
content my self with putting down some of the^^ in the margent, without
relating what they say of it, considering it is a thing sufficiently known.

10 The Emperors enjoyed this right peaceably without any controversi^ till
the time of Gregory the seventh, who though himself had received his
confirmation from the hands of Henry the fourth, as we have said, yet with the
advice of a Synod, he thundered out an Can si quis deinceps. and sequentib.
Cause. 16. q. 4.
excommunication against all Em^perours, Kings, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, and
other secular powers or person who should adventure to confer investitures of
Bishopriques and other Ec^clesiasticall dignities; and against such as should
receive them at their hands^ Which Decree serves now adays for an inviolable
law unto his successors being enrolled in their books. And we may truly say
this was the flame tha^ gave fire to those seditions, wars, and other
bickerings betwixt the Pope and Emperors, which have consumed all
Christendom, and which engen^dred naught since but disorder and confusion.

11 I will not stay to relate the histories of all that has passed concerning
this subject, Henry the ^ and the Popes quarrel about investitures.
because they are sufficiently known to every body: save only what passed
betwixt Pope Paschall the second and the Emperor Henry the fifth, whom they
hold to have renounced this right to the prejudice of his successors. This
Pope made an obligation to this Emperor about investitures, in these terms.
Pope Paschal grants unto the Emperor Henry and to his kingdom as his
privilege, inviolable, and in the person of the Bishop or Abbat elected freely
without Simony, the same will corroborate and confirm, with consent of the
said Emperor, that it shall belong unto the said Emperor to invest them by
giving of a ring and crosier staff: and that the Bishop or Abbat thus invested
shall freely receive consecration from that Bishop to whom it shall belong to
give it. But if any be elected by the Clergy and people, unless he be invested
by the Emperor, he shall not be consecrated by any man: and the Archbishops
and Bishops shall freely consecrate those that are invested by the Emperor.
He set out another Bull and constitution besides, pretty large, containing for
substance the same with the former script, which we read in histories entire.

12 All this is now condemned as a nullitie, and accused of force and violence;
being made by a prisoner and captive Pope. Besides, the repeal thereof is
alleged, which was made presently after by the Councels of Lateran and Vienna
under the same Pope, and almost at the same time. That of Lateran calls this
privilege granted unto Henry a praviledge, playing upon the word, condemns
it, casseth, and declares it a nullitie; yea and excommunicates it. We condemn
it (say they) we judge it null, and utterly cashiere it, and for fear lest it
should have any authority and e^f^cacy, we absolutely excommunicate it. That
of Vienna uses the like condemnation, and goes yet further, declaring
investitures to be heretical. Behold the words. Following the authority of the
Church of Rome, we judge investitures of Bishopriques, Abbeyes and other
Churches to be a heresy. It pronounces also the same Emperor accursed. We
excommunicate him (says it) we anathematize him, and cast him out of the
bosom of the holy mother Church.

13 Such was the fury of the Sea of Rome against this poor Emperor, that the
Legates trotted over all parts of Christendom to cause the like
excommunications to proceed against him, as an ancient writing testifies which
Mr. Francis Iuret has inserted in his notes upon the Epistles of Ivo Bishop of
Chartres. The year one thousand one hundred and fourteen Cono Bishop of
Pilastrine and Legate of the Sea Apostolic, did anathematize the said King
Henry at Beauvais at a Council by him there holden, and at the next Lent. He
condemned the same Henry in a Council holden at Rhemes. Conon condemned King
Henry at Cullen in the Church of St. Gereon. Conon condemned the same King in a
fourth Council holden by him at Chalons.

14 See here is enough to put him in a fright, Matthew. Westminster. lib. 2. sub ann.
1102. page 23.
but they must trouble England too about it. For Anselme Bishop of Canterbury
having received the decree of the Council of Lateran, did his endeavor to
make it be observed, by degrading certain Abbats and Priours, who had taken
their investitures from lay hands.

15 This poor Emperor, abandoned almost by all the world, and combated even
by his own subjects, especially by the Clergy, was constrained to renounce
the right of his predecessors, and to quit claim the investitures to the Pope,
by a goodly declaration which he made concerning it; see here the words. Abbas
Vsperg. in Chron.

Willelm. Malmesb. de gestis Reg. Angl. lib. 5. fol. 9.


I Henry by the grace of God Emperor of Rome, for the love of God, of the holy
Roman Church, and of Pope Calixt, and for the benefit of my soul, do restore
unto God, and to his blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, and to the holy
Catholic Church all kind of investiture made by the ring and the staff, and
permit that elections and free consecrations be made in all Churches. The Pope
on the other side made this declaration unto him. Henry's renunci^tion invalid.
Calixt, servant of the servants of God, to his welbeloved son Henry, by the
grace of God Emperor of the Romans. I grant that the elections of the Bishops
and Abbats of Germany, Idem Vsperg. Et Malm^b. ib.
which belong to the Empire, be made in your presence without Symony and
violence; to the end that if any discord chance to arise betwixt the parties,
you may give your consent and assistance to the sounder side, by the Counsel,
or judgment of the Metropolitan and Provincials. And that he who shall be
elected may receive from you the Royalties by the Scepter, excepting all such
as belong to the Church of Rome, and that he do unto you all which he is bound
by right to do. And he that shall be consecrated in other parts of the
Empire, shall be bound to receive the Royalties of you by the Scepter within
six months. He calls the fiefs and other rights which the Bishops hold of the
Empire, Royalties.

16 The question is now whether this renunciation be valid, and whether it
could prejudice his successors. No good lawyer will ever pronounce for it.
First, in as much as the Councels aforesaid cancelled the obligation of Pope
Paschal as made by impression and violence, this renunciation of the Empire
stands void by the same reason; considering he was brought to that extremity
by the noise of those thunderbolts hurled by the Sea of Rome in all parts of
the world, and by the revolt of his subjects seduced by the abuse of these
spiritual remedies, and by the war which was stirred up against him, to
preserve and defend himself from an ignominious authoration, and to procure
the repeal of those anathema's which vexed his soul, how ever unjust, he was
compeld to disclaim his rights.

17 Now this force and necessity appears by that testimony of Otho Bishop of
Freisinger. Wherefore (says he) the Empire being dismembered, and broken many
ways, the Emperor perceiving that the King revolted from him, because of the
anathema pronounced against him, and fearing his fathers example, having called
a great assembly of Princes together at Worms, he resigned the investiture of
Bishops to Lampert Legate of the Sea Apostolic. The revolt against him was
such, that his own nephews did abandon him (says the Abbat of Vsperge) who
adds these words, the true tokens of this violence. Abbas Vsperg. in Chron.
sub ann. 1122.
He surrendered Ecclesiastical investitures unto the Church, and all other
spiritual matters, which the Emp^rours of Germany had so long managed, and
which he had purposed, for the not impairing the honor of the Empire, never
to forgo so long as he lived. No man can say but an injust anathema is an
unlawful force, a violent impression; and what is done by occasion thereof is
liable to restitution.

18 The terms of this surrender do elsewhere show it to be personal, and
that it lays no obligation upon his successors. It is the exposition which was
put upon it in those days: witness the same Bishop of Freisinger. Otho
Frisingens Chron. lib. 7. cap. 16.
This privilege therefore is set down in writing for the Church, and it is
granted to him by way of exchange by the Pope, that those who shall be elected
as well on this side as you side the mountains, shall not be consecrated
Bishops till they have received the Royalties from his hands, and by the
Scepter. Which the Romans say was granted for quietness sake, and to him
only, not to his successors. Seeing by their confession the compact is no more
but personal, for as much as concerns what was granted to the Emperor, by
the same reason they must acknowledge it is just so in regard of what was
granted to the Pope.

19 So the Emperors which reigned after him complained of injustice, even
Lotharius the fourth, the successor of the same Henry against Innocent the
second, witness the Abbat of Vsperge, Abbas Vsperg. sub an. 1126.
At this time (says he) the Pope went to find the Emperor at Leiege,
demanding assistance and favor of him against, the said Peter and his
abettors; but the Emperor having taken advice what he should answer, begun
to redemand of the Pope the investitures of Bishopriques, which the Emperors
had enjoyed for a long time before. The same was done by Otho the fourth.
Bish^p at Char^res his opinion
Which a German Historian signifies unto us by these words, speaking of the
dissension of that Emperor and Pope Innocent the third; Albert. Crantz. l. 7.
Saxon. c. 3^
As for the Pope (says he) the reason of it might be, because the Emperor
redemanded the ancient imperial rights over Italy; some whereof had been
lately transferred unto the Church. Marsil. Patavi. in de^ens. pac. part. 2. c.
25. page 174.
But Marsilius of Padua affirms it more clearly, speaking also of the Emperor
Frederick the second^ Otho the fourth^ (says he) and Frederick the second,
when they would have repealed, it may be for lawful causes, these grants and
privileges, (he speaks of Investitures) or indeed repealing them absolutely,
or in part, they endured many plots, persecutions, and impediments from the
Clergy and Bishops of Rome.

20 As for those Councels which were the cause of this renunciation, and
pronounced the Emperor anathema, depriving him of Investitures, it must be
observed, upon what grounds they stand. They deprive an Emperor of the right
of Investitures without hearing him, without summoning him. See here an
injustice! They condemn Investitures as heretical; they condemn then Pope
Adrian the first, and all his Council, of heresy, who granted them to Charles
the Great; Leo the eight and his Council, who granted them to Otho; as also
all other Popes who tolerated them, yea even those who approved them, of whom
we have spoken already.

21 And upon this point we must hear what our good Bishop of Chartres, that
great Pope-Monk says, who is much troubled to defend this condemnation of
heresie^ and implication of horrible contradictions. For in his epistles making
answer to John Archbishop of Lions, who reprehended herein the fathers of this
Council of Vienna: Whereas (says he) you reprehend those that rank the
investitures of Ecclesiastical dignities made by Lay men amongst the number of
heresies, it seems there is no great force in your reprehension For although
heretical error lodge in the heart, as well as Catholic faith: yet
notwithstanding as we know a Catholic by his Catholic works, so we know an
heretic by his heretical works. God has said, by their fruits ye shall
know them: and every tree is known by his fruit. And although external
investitures made by Lay men, cannot be properly judged heresies: yet to be of
opinion, and to maintain that they are lawful, is an undoubted heresy. This is
not said with sufficient reason. For the Council says, Investiture is an
heresy, and he makes no answer to that. If it be an heresy, then it follows
as we said, that those precedent Popes and Councels that authorized them; yea,
(to take in all that is in Ivo's answer) that were of opinion they might and
ought to be given by the Emperors, were truly heretics.

22 This Bishop makes us behold this heresy of another color, (so much pains
does he take to defend a bad cause!) for he judges it an heresy in case the
Lay man which performs it, do think it to be a Sacrament. If any Lay man
(says he) fall into this folly, that he thinks he can administer a Sacrament
or a thing belonging to a Sacrament of the Church, by the giving and taking of
a rod; we judge him an absolute heretic; not for his manual investiture,
but for hi^ diabolical opinion. Verily so should a Priest be too, that should
believe his ^urre, his surple^^e, or his square cap to be a Sacrament. And yet
he must not therefore be divested of them. In that epistle he notes no other
heresy in investitures, but urges many reasons to prove they are not so; yet
notwithstanding he concludes that Princes must be deprived of them; Because
(says he) being performed by Lay men, it is an usurpation upon another man's
right, a sacrilegious presumption. He speaks thus to maintain the cause of
the Pope and the Council, right or wrong.

23 But let us hear what he says of it formerly, when he was in cold blood, in
an Epistle of his written to Hugh Archbishops of Lions; As for that which you
writ unto me, Kings may confer Bishopriques, etc. The Emperor Henry's right
vindicated.
how the said party elect received Investiture into his Bishoprique from the
Kings hands, we knew nothing of it, nor was it told unto us by any body. But
although it were so, yet considering that has no force of a sacrament, to make
a Bishop whether it be done or not done, I do not see wherein it can be
hurtful to faith and religion: yea we do not find that by Apostolical
authority Kings are forbidden to grant Bishopriques after Canonical election.
Ivo Ep. 65.
For we read that some Popes of good fame have become intercessours to Kings
for those who had been elected unto Churches, to get them to give them the
Bishopriques: and that others have deferred the consecration, because they had
not yet received the Princes consent. I would have set down the examples
hereof, were it not that I desire to avoid prolixitie in my letter. So Pope
Urban, as we understand, excludes Kings only from the corporal investiture,
but not from the election, for as much as they are heads of the people, or of
the grant: although the eight Synod forbids them only to assist at the
election, but not at the deliverie; which whether it be done by the hand, or
by seal, or by word of mouth, or by the rod, what matters it? Seeing Kings do
not pretend to confer any thing that is spiritual in it, but only to consent
unto the will of those that require them; or to grant unto them Ecclesiastical
possessions and other external goods which Churches hold by the liberality of
Kings. As for the Sacrament of which he has spoken now twice, there was no
question of that, seeing that by former Councels the investiture was granted to
Emperors and the consecration to Bishops.

24 What can be alleged more in defense of these later Councels? If any man
will say that the Emperor Henry was justly deprived of this right, because he
had violated the holy See, and had put Pope Paschal in prison: We will give
two or three very pat answers to this objection. One, that he did no more but
repel the injury which was done unto himself. For even in the Church, and
while he received the Eucharist from the Popes hands, he was like to have
been traitorously killed. Hear what the German Chronicles say of it; While
the Emperor received the Sacrament from the Popes hands, behold one of the
principal of the Clergy, who was offended with that purpose which the Emperor
had put on, that he would maintain the constitutions of his Predecessors,
stirred up a sedition and tumult in the temple, beat off the guard of the
Emperors body, and went about to seize upon him: who with much ado saved
himself, repelling the force with his own hands. And speaking of the same
Emperor he afterward adds, He got him presently into the City, killed a
great multitude of citizens and Clergymen, took the Pope prisoner. Elsewhere
the Pope and Emperor were very good friends, by means of the agreement made
betwixt them, of which we have spoken already: yea in such sort that the Pope
sealed it, by delivering the body of Christ unto the Emperor, Sigebert. in
Chron. sub ann. 1111.

Add Matthaeu^ Westmonast. lib. 2. sub Ann. 1111.


By giving unto him (says Sigebert) the body and blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ in the celebration of the mass. We give you this body (said he) O
Emperor, in confirmation of the true peace betwixt me and you. And for a third
answer, his personal and particular fault could not prejudice the Empire and
his Successors. But we have said enough of this point. It only remains that
some that can well manage it enter upon this inheritance. There will want no
right, if he want no forces.

CHAP. X. Of elections, nominations, and Investitures belonging to other Kings
and Princes.
1 WE come now to other Princedomes, Kings of England choose Bish^ps.
reserving France to be spoken of in the last place. The Conc. Tolet. 12 cap.
6.
twelfth Council of Toledo grants election of Bishops to the King of Spain,
which our Popes have registered in their Can. Cum long did. 63.
books. It was decreed by all the Bishops of Spain and Gallicia, that without
any prejudice to the privileges of every particular Province, it shall be
lawful hereafter for the Bishop of Toledo, to receive and consecrate all such
Bishops as the Royal power shall elect, and that every such Bishop shall be
approved by his judgment. Which, as Lan^. ^onrad. in templo amnium judic. l.
1. c. 2.. 3 nu. 10. and l ^. ^^p. 1. 4. ver^ 4.
Lancelot Conrad witnesses, is observed and kept even at this day.

2 As for the Kings of England, though they have often quarrelled with the
Popes, and the Clergy of the Kingdom about this point, yet so it is that from
age to age we always find them possessed of this right. For to go no higher,
about the year one thousand King Wil^elm. M^lm^^bur. l 1. d^ gestis ponti^.
^ngl p. 116.

Idem lib. 3. p. 1^7. Idem lib. 1. ^e^sus in. Idem lib. 2. p. 147. Idem lib. 3.
p. 155.

Matthew. Wes^^n. lib. 2 sub. ann. 1878.

Florent. Wig^^n sub ann. 107^.

Matthew. West^n. lib 2 sub ann. 1092.

Malmesb. l 4. Idem l. 1. p. 116 Idem ^. 2. sub. ann 1101.

Malmes. l. 4. Idem p. 161. Westmonast. l. 2 sub ann 11^2.


Etheldred created one Robert A^chbi^shop of London, and one Edmund Bishop of
Luiddifarne, otherwise called Holyland, at the entreaty of the Monks of that
Bishoprique. King Edward made one Robert first Bishop of London, etc. and
afterward Archbishop of Canterbury, whose successor he made one William. He
gave also the Bishoprique of Shyrburne to one Herman. In the year one thousand
one hundundred and seventie, King William the first of that name, bestowed the
Archbishoprique of York upon a Canon called Thomas. In the year one thousand
seventie eight he bestowed three Bishopriques upon three of his Chaplains,
and many others upon diverse Ecclesiastiques.

3 In the year one thousand ninety two King William the second bestowed the
Bishoprique of Lincoln upon Robert Blunt his Chancelour; he bestowed also that
of Worcester upon a Canon called Sampson. One of the two bestowed also the
Bishoprique of Silchester upon Lanfranke.

4 The year one thousand one hundred and one, King Henry the first bestowed
the Bishoprique of Hereford upon Kemelin, and gave him the investiture of it.
The same King gave the bishoprique of Winchester to a Canon called Thuilphus,
and afterward to the Chaplain of Queen Adalida.

5 The year one thousand one hundred and two, Anselme Archbishop of
Canterbury would have made the Council of Lateran to be received in England,
holden against Henry the fifth about the point of Investitures. And in
obedience thereto, he made a difficulty of consecrating certain Bishops, who
had been invested by Henry the first, who was much incensed against him upon
that occasion; And forasmuch (says Matthew Westminster) as he would not
consecrate certain Bishops, who had been instituted by the King, obeying his
pleasure, nor so much as communicate with them, the King was thereupon moved
with choler against him.

6 The year one thousand, one hundred and seven, Idem Westmon l. 2. (...) 1^0^.
there was a Council holden at London, where it was ordained, That from thence
forward no man should be invested in England by the King, or any other Lay man
into any Bishoprique, or Abbey, Kings of Engl^nd bestow Bishopr^qu^s.
by the donation of the Pastoral staff, or ring, always reserving the homage
due to the King. But Henry the first did not forbear to use his right for all
that, which this Council could not take from him. And indeed in the year one
thousand, one hundred and nine, Idem Westmon. l. 2. sub ann. 1109.
he erected the Abbey of Ely into an Episcopal See, and caused one Herveus to
be ordained over it, and having assembled diverse Bishops at London in the same
year, he made them consecrate one Thomas, who had been chosen Bishop of
York. In the year one thousand, one hundred and thirteen, Idem lib. 2. sub
ann. 1113.

Idem Westmon. l. 2. sub ann. 1125

William Neubrigensis rerum Angl. l 4. c. 2.


The same King Henry bestowed the Archbishoprique of Canterbury upon Richard
Bishop of London, and invested him in it, by giving him the crosier, staff and
ring. In the year one thousand one hundred twenty five, he bestowed four
Bishopriques more.

7 William of Newburie both Doctor of Divinity and an Historian, proves in
like manner of King Richard the son of Henry the second, who reigned about
the year one thousand one hundred, eighty nine. First of all (says he) this
new King was so affected, that by his means many Churches which were vacant of
England, were provided of Pastors. Richard of Ely the Kings treasurer, was
preferred to the Sea of Lincoln, Godfrey Lucy to the chair of Silchester.
William Longchampe the Kings Chancelour to the Bishoprique of Ely. Hubert Deane
of York to the Church of Salisbury: he bestowed also the Metropolitan See of
York upon his brother Ieffrey.

8 The year one thousand two hundred and seven Pope Innocent the third would
have persuaded the Monks of Canterbury to choose one Stephen Langton for their
Bishop, but they replied, that it was not lawful for them to do so without
the Kings consent. But the Pope having enjoined them under the pain of
Anathema, they were compelled to consent unto him so and so, though with a
great deal of murmuring. Which being done, the Pope writ unto King John a
soothing letter to get him to approve of it. But he being offended thereat,
Idem Westmon. l. 2. sub ann. 1204.
Commanded that all the Monks should be drawn out of the Monastery of
Canterbury, as guilty of high treason, yea, and that they should be chased
out of his Kingdom.

9 In the year one thousand two hundred, forty, and five Henry the third
King of England, Idem Westmon. sub ann. 1245. Vid eundem.
Having received a foul injury, done, as he thought both to him and his,
forasmuch as many Bishops were created in England without his consent, he sent
Mr. Lawrence de St. Martins his Proctour to the Court of Rome, to make
complaint of it, and plead the right which he had thereunto from all
antiquity.

Malmesb lib. 2. in sin. p. 146. lib 4. p. 163. and 165.

Et Wigornens. sub ann. 1070. page 435, 436. sub ann. 1103. page 475.

Matthew Paris. and alios.


10 One Mr. Richard de Witz having been elected Bishop of Chichester by
Innocent the fourth, who was then at Lions, To the intent that such an injury
done to the King, might not pass unpunished, (says an English Historian) he
was justly deprived of a Baronrie which belonged to the Bishoprique. It Is true,
it was restored a long time after by means of the earnest intercessions which
were made thereupon. There are infinite examples of this nature, both in these
authors from whence we have taken the former, and diverse others.

Anton Corset^s in tract. de reg. pot^ q. 11. nu. 11 vide antiquas collectiones
decret. Antonii Augustini Iterdae excusas ann. 1576. collect. 1 c. ex
diligenti. Tit. de jure patronatus.
11 We will here observe that our Popes have elsewhere testified in their own
books, how the right of bestowing benefices, and Prebends, which belongs unto
the Kings of England in capite during the vacancie of the Bishoprique. This we
read in a Decretall of Alexander the third in these words; The said Bishop
being deceased, and the revenues of the Bishoprique being come unto the
Exchequer, a certain Prebend chancing to be void, our wel-beloved son in
Christ, Henry the illustrious King of England, has bestowed upon Thomas his
Clerk. This Decretall was extant in the title, De jure Patronatus, after the
chapter Praeterea, in the third book of the Decretals, as I have seen in an
ancient Manuscript, which is in my custody. One of our Doctors witnesses
also that it was anciently there, and afterward expunged. Several Kings
confer Bishop^iques.
A learned Spanish Bishop published it since by adventure, without ever thinking
upon it, for he had no intention to harm the Pope.

12 Our Doctor of the Civil law bear witness of the rings of England,
affirming^ that this eight belongs unto them; Alexand. Consil. 174. nu^ 8. Tom.
4.
and determining also, that it is a thing which may be done. They say as much
for the King of Hungary, the King of Apulia, and also for the King of France.
See here the very words of Alexander in his counsels; Baldus said well in the
law, descripta de precib. imperat. offerend. that Kings and secular Princes,
who by ancient custom, time out of mind, have power to confer Prebends and
Benefices within their dominions, may do it because such a custom gives them
a privilege. And he sets down a president of the King of Hungary, and the
King of England. The King of Apulia might be added also, according to that
remarkable gloss in the summarie of the seventh Quaestion causa 16. Another
might be urged of the King of France, as says John the Monk upon the first
chapter De Praebendis in sexto.

13 See here many authorities together, whereunto we will add that of
Lancelot Conrade Lawyer of Millaine, L^ncelot Conrad in templo omnium judic.
lib. 1. cap. 2.. ^ nu. 10.

Wal^ramus Epis^. N^umburgens in tract. de inves^it. Episc.


and the King of Spain his subject, who will furnish us with some others. So
some Kings and Princes (says he) may confer the benefices of their Kingdom
when they have got this right either by custom time out of mind, or by
Apostolical privilege, as Alexander has counseled in his 74. Counsel, number.
8. volum. 4. Baldus in the law Rescript. C. de precibus imperat. offerend.
Martin Lawrence de Privil. and Rescript. Quaest. 2. Following Alexander he
urges the examples of the Kings of France, England, Hungary, and Apulia, and
add^s also the King of Spain: he says ^urther, that the King of France
seems herein to have a greater power and a larger right than the Emperor.

14 A German Bishop who writ in the year one thousand one hundred and nine,
adds also the King of Scotland, and proves the same of him which has been
said of the rest. We read (says he) of the Bishops of Spain, Scotland,
England, and Hungary, that by ancient institution, till this upstart novelty
came in, were put into their Bishopriques by the Kings, with purity and
integrity, and with peace and quietness for temporal matters. Ammonius de reb
gest France l 34. Rhegmo in chron sub an. 860. hist. Rhemens. l. 3. c. 1. 9.
Frod^ard. in chron sub ann. 96^ Ivo Carnat. Episc ep. 36 44.48.49.67. 121.16^
169. 352. Hildebert. Turon Archiep. ep. 3. Lup. Abb. Ferrar. ep. 6. 1. ^0 79.
81. 84. 89. 2. Capitul. Carol. magn. l. 1. c. 84. vid etiam lib leg. Francic.
c. 78.^. Can Sacror. did. 63. Capitul. Carol. Mag lib. 1 c 84. Vid. etiam lib.
legum Fran^^ ^arum cap. ^^.
Afterward he speaks of our Kings of France on this manner. A long time
before the decree of Adrian and his successors, the anointed Kings and the
Majors of the Palace invested Bishops, Dagobert, Sigebert, Theodorick,
Hilderick, Pepin Mayor of the Palace, and Theodoret, who established Remachus,
Andomarus, Amandus, Antpertus, Eligiu^, Lampertus, and other Bishops of most
holy life.

15 Let us now see what this right of France is. It is certain that from the
very infancy of this Realm our Kings have begun, and continued, through
all their three lines, to elect Churchmen, to bestow Bishopriques, Abbeyes, and
other Ecclesiastical dignities upon them, to give these elections to such as
they thought good, always reserving unto themselves their consent or
approbation, and to proceed therein such other ways as they thought fit. The
examples hereof are so plentiful, that we should be afraid to tire the
reader by reciting them; and therefore we will content our selves with quoting
them in the G^eg. Turon. in hist Franc. l. 3. ca. 16. 17. and 26. l. 4. c. 6 7.
15. 18. l 5 c 4. 46. l. 6. c. ^. 7. 915 ^9. l. 7 c. 17. Idem in vit. sanct Gall.
margent, especially considering that there are so many other ways to prove
it, that we care for nothing but curtailing our discourse.

16 Whosoever shall seriously consider these examples, he shall find that our
Kings have always dealt herein as they pleased: that sometimes they have made
elections and nominations themselves: sometimes they have given leave to the
Clergy to make them, either alone, or with the people; and have been content
to give only their consent, or to confirm them, or to give the investiture^
The Emperor Charles the Great ordained by his Capitularie Laws that the
Bishops should be chosen by the Clergy and people of the same Dioces. Can.
sacror. did. 63.
Our Popes have not forgot it in their own books, Councels decr^e Bishops and
Pastors to be chosen by Clergy and people.
thinking that they had gained thereby some advantage upon France. But our
Kings by this remitted nothing of their authority; but reserved unto
themselves their consent and approbation, and investiture, which they used ever
after; even Charles the Great himself the author of that law. But howere it
be, he that made the law may unmake it; he may change it at his pleasure. If
there were any thing in it to their disadvantage, which there is not.

17 They would also make a law against our Princes from a certain pretended
prohibition which Nicholas the first set out against King Lotharius, that he
should not permit any to be chosen Bishop of Treves or of Cullen without first
consulting with the Sea Apostolic; Can. porro. did. 63.
declaring unto him, he was not pleased that he should meddle in such
elections, to prefer such persons as were his favorites. And they have
labored all that they could to gain this authority over our Kings, which
they for their parts have always stoutly defended, even by making fair
decrees to debar them from meddling.

18 Possibly it will be said unto us, that all this is done by usurpation,
abuse, and unlawful attempt. There then we must strain to root this false
opinion out of their brains. We will therefore justify their right by the
authority of Councels, and first by that of Orleans, which is accounted the
fifth, holden in the time of Pope Vigilius the first, and of King Childebert,
the year five hundred forty nine, where this decree was made. Cap. 10. Conc.
Aurelian. 5 quod extat in tom. 2. Council. pa. 575.
That it shall not be lawful to obtain any Bishopriques by presents, or by
means of any such like purchase, but with the kings consent, according to the
election of the Clergy and people, as it is written in the ancient Canons.

Synod Francic. Tom. 3. Conc. page 473.
19 Carloman Duke, and Prince of the French, speaks thus in the Synod of France
holden in the year seven hundred forty two. By the Council of the Clergy and
chief men of the kingdom, we have ordained Bishops over the Cities. Pepin
Duke and Prince of the French uses the same terms at the Council of
Soissons, holden in the year seven hundred forty four: Synod. Suession. to.
3. Conc. page 438.
Wherefore (says he) we have instituted and ordained lawful Bishops over the
Cities, with the advice of the Clergy and Princes of France, Now this is spoke
by them with the approbation of those Councels, yea they are the very Acts of
the Council, which speak so.

Conc. Paris. lib. 3. c. 22. to. 3. Conc page 817.
20 The Council of Paris, addressing their words to the Emperors Jews and
Lotharius, under whom it was holden in the year eight hundred twenty nine: We
entreat your Majesty's to use great diligence and most exact care in the
institution of Rectours and Pastors in the Church. This petition presupposes
that such right belonged unto them, and that the Council thought so, otherwise
they would rather have entreated them to forbear.

Conc. Valent. tom. 3. Council. page 890.
21 The Council of Valentia, holden in the year eight hundred fifty five,
entreats the Emperor Lotharius, that as soon as certain Bishopriques shall
come to be void, he would leave the Canonical election unto the Clergy and
people of that City. And as for such as should be sent from the Princes Court,
if upon examination any default were found in him either for manners or
learning, or any thing else, that he would be entreated to choose another.
Whence we collect that the Council consents unto this, that the Prince may
elect any of his Court, such as he shall think good; provided they be of
quality requisite to Ecclesiastical dignities: and for the rest entreats him
to leave the election to the Clergy and people. It shows us that this was in
their power, and withal that the Council intends this election shall be made
by the Clergy and people, saving the consent and approbation of the Prince.
Let us proceed to other testimonies.

22 There is a very remarkable one in Marsilius of Padua his Defensor Pacis.
And as for the proposition about the institution of Ecclesiastical Ministers,
Investitures proved to belong to the Kings of Fr^nce.
and the distribution and collation of temporal benefices, I will show by the
authority of the Catholic Kings of France some things which are not to be
contemned, but ought rather to be considered: for they assure us that the
authority of instituting and bestowing of certain Ecclesiastical offices,
benefices, and temporal means belongs unto them by right; Mar^ilius P^vinus
in defens. pac part. 2. cap 17 page 290.
which de facto they have caused to be inviolably observed to this very day; in
such sort that this authority is not derived from them either upon any
particular person, or upon any College of what condition soever: So neither is
the lawgiver nor Prince prohibited by the law of God to make such
institutions, collations, and distributions.

23 Our expositors upon the Civil Law say the same, and testify by their
writings that this faculty of conferring dignities and Ecclesiastical
benefices belongs unto our Kings of France: determining further that it is a
thing which may be done: and amongst others, Johannes Monachus, Ioannes
Monachus in c 1 de Prebend in 6.
Alexander, Alexand. consil. 74. number 8. volun 4.
Lancelot Conrade, Lancelot Conrad. in templ^ omnium judicum lib. 1 cap. ^. 3.
number. 10. and 11.

Lup^s epist. 81.


all which speak both for matter of right and fact. Lupus Abbot of the Abbey
of Saint Peter's of Ferrieres, who lived in the time of Charles the Bald, about
the year 870, writing to Amulus Archbishop of Lions, says, That it is no new
nor rash thing that the King should furnish the most honorable Churches with
his Courtiers; considering that Pepin ( from whom he is descended by Charles
the Great, and the most devout Jews, both Emperors) having given Pope
Zachary to understand in a certain Synod the necessity of the Realm, he got
his consent, to furnish the Churches with good Pastors, after the decease of
the Incumbents: remedying by that means the badnesse of the times.

24 Hildebert Archbishop of Tours, Hild^bert. Turonens. Ar^hiep. epist. 3.
who lived about the year 1080, under Philip the first, King of France,
approves the presentation made by the King to a certain Bishoprique of his
realm, commending him on this manner. I congratulate with virtue that has her
reward under our King. He has found that the power of a King shines more
bright by gifts and liberality^ than by the Scepter; and that it is not
sufficient for a Prince to stir up his subjects to well-doing by examples,
unless they be also provoked by rewards. Hence it is that your good manners
were honored by a great Priesthood. The disposition of the King was sound and
prudent, considering it could not better provide for the Church, than by
placing you in it.

25 Ivo Bishop of Chartres, after he was elected by the Clergy, was presented
to the same King Philip the first, Ivo Episc^pus Carnotensis Epist. 1,2,8, 12.
and received his investiture and Pastoral staff from him: upon the refusal
of the Archbishop of Sens he was consecrated by the Pope, whereat the said
Archbishop was highly offended, in so much that he with other Bishops at the
Synod of Estampes, were upon the point of revoking the said consecration made
by the Pope, as prejudicial to the authority Royal. See here what the same
Bishop says of it in a letter to Pope Urban. Moreover I give your Holiness to
wit, that the Archbishop of Sens, Idem Ivo. epist. 12.
being infatuated by the counsel of the Bishop of Paris, having summoned the
said Bishop of Paris, and two others of the same humor, to wit he of Meaux, and
he of Troyes, did very indiscreetly accuse me this present year, because of the
consecration which I had received from you; saying that I had offended against
the Kings Majesty, by attempting to receive my consecration from the Sea
Apostolic. We have heard before what this same Bishop said of Investitures,
Idem Ivo epist. 65.
speaking of the King of France.

26 We may now conclude, that elections, nominations and approbations in point
of benefices, have always belonged unto our Kings, and have been at their
free disposal. By their last ordinances they have been pleased, as well to
disburthen themselves of that charge, as also to prevent the enterprises of the
Popes, to decree that elective dignities should be conferred by elections, and
benefices which were not elective by the collations and presentations of the
Collators and Patrons: And this according to the Council of Basil^ which has
tied the Popes hands in this respect, Bishops ought to t^ke the oath of
all^geance, and be chosen by Kings^ etc.
and the Pragmatique Sanctions of St. Jews and Charles the seventh. Yet this
was still with two conditions: one that the Kings Conge d'elire should be
required by way of preamble, at least in respect of Bishopriques and Abbeyes,
otherwise the election should be accounted a nullitie. Which is verified by the
letters of our Kings as far as King Jews the eleventh, containing the said
license, which may yet be found in the treasury of Chartres in a great box
quoted xxv. Which right was declared to belong to King Philip the Fair, when
the question was about Saint Maglairs Abbey, as some report.

27 The other, that the said Prelates before they could be called such should
be bound to take the oath of allegiance according to the ancient custom, as it
was determined by the Arrests of the Parliament of Paris against the Archbishop
of Anx and the Bishop of Mantes. Which was observed in the time of Philip the
first, according to the testimony of the Bishop of Chartres: who in his
epistles addressed to Pope Paschal, speaking of the Archbishop of Rhemes, who
had been deprived of his dignity, and for whose reestablishment the said
Bishop had interceded to the Kings Council. Ivo epist. 206. Vid Matthew:

Westmonast. l^ 2 sub ann. 1136. 1171.

Extat haec juramenti formula inter scriptores co^etaneos Pithoei page 509
editionis Wechelian.


The Princes Court (says he) inclining to the contrary, we could not obtain
an entire peace unless the said Metropolitan would make unto the King such an
oath of allegiance as other Archbishops of Rhemes, together with all the rest
of the Bishops of this Realm of France, how holy and religious soever they
were, made to the Kings his predecessors. Diverse authors bear witness of this
oath of allegiance made by Bishops to their kings and princes both in England
and France, and other places, some of them set down the very form.

28 Since this time our kings have been compelled to divide their rights with
the Popes, (to give them content, and be at peace with them) by taking away
elections, and reserving unto themselves in stead thereof the nominations, and
allowing unto Popes the confirmations. L' Ordonnance D' Orleans ^rt. 1.
By the ordinance of Orleans King Charles would have taken the Clergy and
people in to his share, by decreeing that, when Bishopriques fell void, the
Archbishop and Bishops of the Province, and the Canons of the Cathedral Church
should meet togther, with twelve gentlemen chosen by the Nobility of the
Dioces, and twelve B^rgesses chosen in the Guildhal of the Archiepiscopal or
Episcopal City, to make he a nomination of three persons, of which the King
should choose one, whom he pleased to name. Which notwithstanding we never yet
saw observed.

29 We will say for conclusion, that it is no small advantage to the Pope to
have the confirmation of the Bishops of France, which was granted him by the
Concordat: but it will be far greater yet, if he keep that authority which
is given him by this Council. For by it he will quickly bring all these
Concordats to nothing, and will resume the extravagancies of his predecessors;
who had got all the elections and collations of the Bishopriques, and benefices
of this Kingdom into their Churches, to the utter ruin and destruction of it:
draining the Realm of moneys, and filling it with strangers, and bringing it
to an extreme misery, as we say else where.

30 We shall only here observe the particular interest of Kings and Princes for
as much as concerns their power and authority, whereof they ought to be very
jealous if they mark it. There is nothing which fortifies it so much as that
right which they have to choose and elect Churchmen; nor which weakneth it so
much, as when the Pope has an hand in it, either in whole or in part. Ivo
Pishop of Chartres, although he had received his Investiture from Philip the
first, Ivo epist. 8.12.20.28. 43.44 48.49. 50.58.116. 271.272.
yet in as much as he had got his confirmation from Pope Urban, he was always
affectionate to him and the Sea Apostolic, even to the prejudice of the King
and Kingdom; to whom he did sometimes very ill offices: as we collect from
some of his epistles. On the contrary, because Lupus had got the Abbey of
Saint Peter de Ferriers in the Dioces of Sens, Popes election of Bish^ps
prejudicial ^o Kings.
by the donation of Charles the Bald, he was always loyal, and he even brags
of it in one of his Epistles.

31 An English Historian, though he be a Monk, yet he knew well how to set
out this interest of Princes. Lupus ep. 40. Idem ep. 98.
For speaking of the consecration of certain Bishops of England, made by
Innocent the fourth when he was at Lions, he says, They were consecrated by
the Pope, not without great damage and danger to the Realm of England. Matthew.
Westminster. l 2 sub ann. 1245. p. 192.
For the Pope having so engaged the Bishops unto him, they found themselves
more obliged unto him; and despising the King, they were more inclined to do
mischief to the Kingdom.

32 The Bishop of Chartres continuing his devotion to Pope Urban, Ivo epist.
116.
gave him notice of this point, upon the election of an Archbishop of Rhemes,
who he assured the Pope was very zealous for the Sea Apostolic, adding
afterward, Now how necessary it is for the Church of Rome to place in that
See a minister which is devout and affectionate unto her, it is not for me to
inform your wisdom, which knows very well that this See wears the Royal
Diadem, and serves for a pattern almost to all other Churches of France,
either of ruin or Resurrection.

33 Not without cause did Pope Nicholas the first stomach at Lotharius, because
he would not suffer any Bishop to be chosen in his Kingdom, C^n. Porto did.
63.
unless he were faithful and well inclined to him. King William the first of
England in the beginning of his reign, which was about the year 1070, knowing
this very well, deposed some part of the Bishops and Abbats from their
dignities and Prelacies, and put others in their places, whose fidelity was
known unto him.

34 Another Monk and English Historian says, the Popes upon this occasion
invented another way to oblige such Prelates unto them as held their dignities
from Kings and Princes. Florentius Wigor^iensis Monachus in Chron. sub ann^
1070.
Which was by making them renounce them, and resign them into their hands, as
faulty and nullities, and taking them with one hand, they gave them again
with the other. Ivo touches upon this trick in his epistles. Ivo ep 238.
For amongst other reasons to prove that investiture is no heresy, he puts
this; If Investiture were an heresy, he that renounceth it could not be
restored without blemish to himself. Now we see many honest men, both in
Germany and France^ give up their Pastoral staffes to wash away that stain by
some show of satisfaction, and resume those Investitures which they had
renounced, from the Apostolic hand. Guilielmus Neubrigensis rerum Anglic. l.
2. c. 16.
So did Thomas the Archbishop of Canterbury, who put Henry the second, King of
England, to so much trouble. For being at the Council of Tours, He secretly
resigned that Archbishoprique into the Popes hands which he had received from
the Kings hand, and it was afterward restored him again at the same instant
from the Popes hand. It was Alexander the third who held this Council at Tours
in the year 1163.

A REVIEW OF THE COUNCIL OF TRENT. BOOK VI.
CHAP. I. Of things attributed to the Pope by this Council in matter of
justice. And first of criminal causes of Bishops.
1 WE will treat in this Book of Justice and Jurisdiction, Kings robbed of
their jurisdiction.
and will make it clearly appear that this Council has, as far as it was able,
robbed Kings and Princes and other Clergy men of them to bestow them upon the
Pope. It is a most true Maxim that all Jurisdictions do spring from secular
Princes; that the source and fountain of them is hereditarie to them, whence
the rivulets are derived upon their officers, and upon Ecclesiastical persons,
and others whom they think good: Clergy men from the greatest to the least
have no coactive jurisdictions, but such as spring from thence. Kings and
Emperors have parted with it, and have honored them with it, but in such sort
as some of them both did and do abuse it daily. They are come so far as to
contest with their officers, to attempt against them, to make laws for
extending the train of their robes further; yea even to subdue unto themselves
those from whom they received that power; and by a most unsufferable
ingratitude, to declare and pretend them subject to their jurisdiction. Council
of Trent unj^st^i^ exempts Bishops from the jurisdiction of Kings.
All this is proved by us elsewhere. We will only say here that this Council
^^^h gone about as it were to lay at the Popes feet all the spoils and
conquests which all other Bishops have got from those victories obtained by
them ^t diverse times over the temporal Jurisdiction, and over those to whom it
belongs, and to pair also that which is left unto them, making it almonst
unserviceable and invalid, at least for as much as concerns the Pope and his
Clergy, whom it totally exempts from their Jurisdiction.

2 We shall make it appear plainly that this Council has dealt very
liberally with the Pope in this respect, and that it has strained it self to
confirm his usurpations, yea even to augment them without sparing any thing.
First of all it attributes to the Pope the cognizance and judgment of all
criminal causes of Bishops, except petty ones. Conc. Trid. Sess. 24 cap. 5.
That the Pope only have the cognizance and decision of all criminal causes
which are more haino^s objected against Bishops, and even of heresy, which God
forbid. But if the cause be such as it must necessarily be tried out of the
Court of Rome, let it not be committed to any persons excepting such
Metropolitans or Bishops as the Pope shall choose. That this commission be in
special, and sealed with the Popes hand, and that he never give them any
greater power but only to receive the bare instruction for matter of fact, and
to make the process, which they shall forthwith send to the Pope: the
definitive sentence being always reserved unto the Pope.

3 In another decree it is ordained, That the causes of Bishops, when by reason
of the quality of the crime which is objected unto them, they ought to make
appearance, be brought before our holy Father the Pope, and be determined by
him. Conc. Trid. Sess. 13. cap. 8.
It is also decreed against Bishops that keep concubines, Conc. Trid Sess. 25.
cap. 14.
That if they do not abstain from that crime after they have been admonished
by the Provincial Council, they shall be complained of to the Pope by the
same Council, who shall punish them according to the quality of their offense,
even by deprivation, if need require. So that a Provincial Council has no
power to condemn a Bishop for criminal matters, save only for Peccadillo's;
such as we may say for playing at ball, for getting up late in a morning, and
such like things.

4 Now we say on the contrary, that the cognizance of such crimes belongs to
Emperors and Kings: That they themselves ofttimes have proceeded to judgment:
That they have assembled Councels for that end, and have assisted and presided
there: That sometimes they have committed the same judgment to the said
Councels, or their Judges: That Popes themselves have become petitioners unto
them, yea plaintives before them, and which is more, have themselves been
judged by them.

5 The Bishops of the Nicen^ Council, acknowledge Constantine for their Judge;
when they presented their Libels unto him, wherein they accused one another;
he blushed at that in their behalf, and would have covered their shame by
suppressing such Investitures, using this honest shi^t to them, that they could
not be judged by any man. In which the Pope alone took him at his word;
although he were absent, and has made good use of it afterward. Now that
Constantine said this by way of complement, and to suppress those dishonorable
quarrels, appears from hence, that upon other occasions he either took the
judgment upon himself in the causes of Bishops, or committed it to his
Officers. He made the Bishops of the Synod of Tire to come unto him, to render
a reason of their ^act in the condemnation of Athanasius. And after he had
heard them, confirmed their sentence, Sozomen. l. 2. cap. 27.
being moved so to do by the testimony of false witnesses which were
subborn'd; and sent Athanasius unto banishments into Tryer a city in Gallia
Belgica

6 The same Emperor, after he had twice ordained Ecclesiastical judges to
determine the cause of Cecilianus an Orthodox Bishop; Emperors and their
^ffic^^s j^^ge the Clergy.
at last he himself took it into his cognizance, and gave the final
sentence. So say the Clergy of Hippo in Africa, in that epistle which St.
Augustine made upon the same occasion, and sent to Ianuarius: Being so stricken
in age as you are, we suppose you know very well, how the partisans of
Donatus, August. epist. 68. and 162.
of their own proper motion, accused Cecilian, then Bishop of Carthage, before
that ancient Emperor Constantine. And he afterward adds, that the Emperor
made an end of that Episcopal cause after he had the hearing of it.

7 The Emperor Constantius, having judged of the great impiety of Actius.
Theodoret. l. 2. cap. 27.
sent him presently into banishment, and commanded that he should be carried
un^o a certain place of Phrygia, says Theodoret. The form of procee^ings is
set down by Sozomen a little more at large, from whence we learn how
Honoratus governor of Constantinople, was first elected and deputed to proceed
to the judgment of that Deacon, and how the Emper^ur himself took it
afterward into his own hand. Sozomen. lib. 4. cap 22.
While these twenty Bishops sent from both Councels were at Constantinople,
together with some others who met there occasionally, power was first given to
Honoratus, whom the Emperor had appointed governor of Constantinople, to
judge the cause of Aetius, in the presence of the Counselors of the great
Counsel. But Constantius afterward having taken the same cause into his
cognizance, together with the Magistrates, Aetius was found to think amiss of
the faith, insomuch that both the Emperor and the rest were greatly offended
with his words full of blasphemy.

8 Saint Augustine entreats Apringius proconsull of Africa and Marcellinus the
tribune, August. ep. 159^ 160.
to condemn certain Clerks, partisans of Donatus, to a more gentle punishment
than they had deserved, acknowledging them for Judges in E^clesiasticall
causes. He speaks thus unto the Proconsul, interceding for his enemies. Why
will you not mitigate your sentence, seeing it is lawful for Judges so to do,
even in other causes which do not concern the Church? And a little after,
When their enemies are too mildly proceeded against, men are wont to appeal a
Minori. We love our enemies so well, that if we had not a good opinion of your
Christian obedience, we would appeal from the severitie of your sentence. This
is spoken by a man which approved their jurisdiction, otherwise he would have
said they had nothing to do to judge of the controversy.

9 The Emperor Gratian granted a commission to Sapor, one of his chief
officers, to eject the Arrian Bishops out of their Churches, T^^o^o^et. l. 5.
cap. 5.
and replace the Orthodox in them, according to the law which he had made. By
virtue of this commission Sapor judged of the difference which was betwixt
Paulinus, Apollinaris, and Meletius in point of Religion, deposing the o^e and
establishing the other. Sapor (says Theodoret) being appointed Judge of those
matters which were urged on either side, adjudged the Churches unto great
Meletius. Idem Theod. l. 5 cap. 2. and 3.
Paulinus remained Bishop and Pastor of those sheep whom he had formerlie
separated from the rest, and Apollinaris being rejected from the government of
the Churches begun openly to publish that doctrine which he had lately
invented, and declare himself the head of that sect.

10 Maximus the Emperor of the Gauls, received the appeal which was put in
by Priscillian Bishop of Spain, from the Council of Bordeaux, S Sulpitius
Sacrae hist. l. 2.
to whom he had committed the judgment of him. He deputed Euodius one of the
governors of his Provinces, Who after he had heard Priscillian in two
judgments, he being convinced of the crime, was by him pronounced guilty, and
sent to prison again, till such time as he had certified the Prince of him.
The process being related at Court, the Emperor was aminded that Priscillian
and his accomplices should be condemned to death.

Bishops judged by Emperors.
11 Sometimes the Emperors themselves, or their Officers, proceed to the
judgments and condemnations of Clergymen, with Councels called for this
purpose, by the authority of the same Emperors. So Elpidius, and Eulogius,
Magistrates and Officers, were commanded by Theodosius to assist at the second
Council of Ephesus, where the condemnation of Eutiches was controverted. Their
Commission runs thus; To be present at the judgment, and to take order that
a speedy and pertinent proof be made by the Synod, and sent to the Emperor.
Commonitorium Imperatoris ad Elpidium.
Those who had been Eutiches his Judges before, being now present, but not
Judges.

Act. 1. Synod. Chalced. to. 2. Conc. p. 137.
12 We read in the Acts of the Council of Chalcedon, of a petition put up by
Eusebius Bishop of Dorylea, directed to the Emperors Valentinian and Martian,
where he entreats them that they would grant the cognizance of the injury
which had been done unto him by Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria, unto the
second Council of Ephesus, and of the death of Flavianus Bishop of
Constantinople, whereof the same Dioscorus was accused at the Synod of
Chalcedon. Conc. Chalced. Act. 1. tom. 2. Conc. p. 135.
To the intent that it may hear us (these are the very words) and also
Dioscorus, and report unto your piety all that passes, that you may do in
it, as it shall please your clemency. We read there also another petition of
Savinian, Bishop of Lesina, Conc. Chalced. Act. 14. tom. 2. Conc. p. 315.
exhibited unto the same Emperors whereby they are entreated To command that
his cause may be examined in their presence: it was so in the presence of the
Officers and Magistrates, who passed sentence upon it in full Council:
ordai^ing that Savinian should continue in his Bishoprique, Eadem Action 14.
p. 325.
yet with a Proviso. Which was agreed unto by the whole Council. Where it is to
be observed, that these Magistrates first judged of the cause, and pronounced
the sentence, and afterward asked the Fathers of the Council whether they
liked it or no. The holy Synod (say they) having heard what sentence we have
past, let them say whether they decree the same, or whether they be of another
opinion. The holy Synod said, There is nothing more just nor more upright.

13 In the third book Iuris Graeco-Romani, in the first tome, we read this
Decree concerning the deposition of a Bishop. V. Tom. 1. Iuris Graeco Romani l.
3. Sentent. Synod. c. 5 p. 223.
John Amathunt, Bishop, having been deposed by John Archbishop of Cyrus, and
the Decree of that deposition having been read at the Emperors tribunal,
having found that he was deposed by fifteen Bishops, and one Archbishop, the
most holy Patriarch Luke, with the assistance of his Synod, and the Senate
there present, ordained that such deposition was invalid, and of no account,
because the whole Synod of the Church of Cyprus was not assembled.

14 Sometimes the Emperors confirmed the sentence of the Synods containing
such condemnations. As Justinian did that of Anthemius Archbishop of
Constantinople, and of some others, deposed by a Synod of Constantinople. And
that because those condemnations were found to be invalid, if they were not
fortified by the Emperors, to whom such jurisdiction did properly appertain.
Justinian after he had made the confirmation aforesaid, says, Justinian.
Novell. 24. De depositione Anthemii.

V. Euagrium l. 4. c. 11.


If there be any other thing contained in the sentence of the most holy
Bishops, which deposes, and anathematizeth the persons aforesaid, we also
ordain the like more firmly, and with more continuance, and we make it of
force by our Imperial laws, just as if it had been a thing done by our own
command.

15 The Popes have so far believed and holden for certain this juris^diction
of Emperors over Bishops and other Ecclesiastiques, that they them^selves have
been intercessours unto them, to get them to proceed unto such judgments. Pope
Liberius entreated the Emperor Constantius, that he would make the cause of
Athanasius be judged, Theod. l. 2. c. 15
If your clemency think good (says he) that you would let him be judged.
Sozom. l. 3. c. 9
Pope Julius had recourse to the Emperor Constans in behalf of the same
Athanasius, and of Paul, who presented him with letters directed to his brother
Constantius upon the same occasion. Kings jurisdiction confes'd by Popes.


16 Gregory the Great entreats the Kings of France Theodoric, and Theodebert to
do justice to Vrsicius Bishop of Turin, To make justice in all things be
observed toward him, and the truth being known, Gregorius in Registro l. 7.
ep. 116. Indict. 2.
to make that be amended which has been unlawfully committed against him; and
to cause that to be restored with equity which was taken from him by
violence. This Bishop had been deposed, and another put in his place. The same
Pope after he had diverse times entreated the same Kings of France to call a
Council in their Realm, for restraining of the crime of Simonie, which was at
that time very rife, writ at last to Queen Brunchaut in these terms; Idem
Greg. l. 9. ep. 64. In dict. 4.
Let your letters be directed unto us, and if you command us with your consent
and authority, we will send you some on our behalfe^ to inquire straightly into
th^se things, together with the rest of the Clergy, and to make such
reformation thereof as shall be acceptable to God. For these things ought not
to be dissembled: inasmuch as he that has power to correct them, and
notwithstanding neglects to do it, makes himself a sha^er in the fault.

17 Gratians Decret gives further credit unto this Imperial jurisdiction over
Bishops in criminal causes: considering that there a certain Pope, whether it
be Gregory or Pelagins, speaks on this manner; Can. istud. cause. 11. q. 1.
Behold what we demand and require further, that you would send unto the most
gentle Prince, Paulinus that false Bishop of Aquileia, and that other of
Millaine, under good and sufficient guard; to the intent that he who can no
ways be a Bishop (inasmuch as he^ was created contrary to all canonical
custom) destroy not others; and he who has attempted to ordain against the
ancient custom, may be submitted unto the punishment of the Canons. He that
collected the summarie of this Canon conceives some policy in it, when he
says, That those should be corrected by Princes, who cannot be corrected by
the Church; making the rule by this means no more than an exception, as he
ofttimes makes rules of exceptions. But it may be he meant that these Bishops
could not by right be corrected by the Church, because she has no such power.
If this be his meaning, we take him at his word. There is yet more in it, for
the Popes themselves have undergone this jurisdiction, have been judged,
condemned, and deposed by the Emperors. We have given examples of it when we
treated of ^he power of a Council above the Pope which we will not now repeat.

18 By the law of the Emperors Valens, Valentinian, and Gratian the cognizance
of crimes committed by Ecclesiastical persons, L. qui mos. 23. C. Theod. de
episcop eccles. and Cleric.

L. ^. ^od. Th. (...) Episc Iudic.

L. Clericos C. Theod de episc. eccles. and Cler. Novell. Justinian. 83. ut
Cleric. apud prop. Episcop.

Novell. Justin. 123. c. 8.


is reserved to the Magistrates. Arcadius, Honorius, and Theodosius declare the
judgments passed by Episcopal Synods upon the crimes of Priests to be valid,
so as they cannot be disanull'd by themselves. Honorius and Theodosius will
have Clerks to be accused before their Bishops. Justinians Novel gives the
cognizance of civil crimes by them committed unto the Lay Judges; and of
Ecclesiastical to the Bishops^ so that this cannot be understood but of the
meaner sort of Clergy men, such as are inferior to Bishops. And of these it is
spoken in another constitution which forbids the Civil and Military Judges
and Magistrates to call them before them for civil and criminal matters,
unless they have the Princes command for it. Where two things are to be
considered; one, that it is an Emperor which ordaines it, and therefore he
has the disposal of it; the other, that he reserves unto himself the
cognizance or authority.

19 The Council of Milevis, holden in the year four hundred and two,
confesses and avoweth this Imperial jurisdiction; Cap. 19. Con^. Milevitan.
tom. 1. Con^. p. ^07.
It pleases us (say the fathers of it) that whosoever shall demand of the
Emperor the cogni^ance of public judgments, be deprived of his dignity.
But if he desire of the Emperor only the exercise of Episcopal judgment,
that can no way hurt him. The judgment over Lay men in public crimes, Kings
judge B^sh^ps.
was thought to suit ill with Bishops: and therefore it is condemned in this
Council: the other is permitted, but so as they took it from the hands of the
Emperor. It is strange that in all these places there is no mention of Popes,
no more than if there had been no such men in the world.

Can. 6. Council. Constantin. 1. apud Balsamon.
20 The sixth Canon of the first Council of Constantinople, disposes somewhat
boldly of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, to the prejudice of the Imperial
right, in attributing the judgment of crimes committed by Bishops unto
provincial Synods; and forbidding them to have recourse either to the Emperor,
or other secular Princes for judgment, or to a General Council, despising
that Decree, and neglecting the Bishops of particular Dioceses. It was a little
too much entrenched upon the Emperor. Howsoever we draw from hence this
advantage, that in the making of this Order about Episcopal judgments in
criminal matters, the Pope was never reckoned of. And yet the Council of
Trent gives to him alone the criminal and supreme jurisdiction in the first
place over all other Bishops in the world: in such sort as neither the
Emperor, nor Kings and Princes, nor their Officers, nor Synods either
Provincial or General can intermeddle.

21 Let us now speak of our France, and show the prejudice done unto it by this
Decree. In the time of our ancient Kings, the Bishops upon any crime
whatsoever, were accused in a Synod of the Churches of the Realm. So Guntrand
King of Burgundy caused a Synod to assemble at Lions, where two Bishops,
Gregor. Turonensis l. 5. c. 20. Aimonius l. 3. cap. 28.
Salonius and Sagittarius, were accused, convinced, and condemned, and put out
of their Bishopriques, for some crimes by them commi^ted. It is true, that by
their flatteries they prevailed so far with the King afterward, that he gave
them leave to have recourse to Pope John^ to whom also he writ in their
behalf: yea upon the request afterward made unto him by the Pope, he
restored them to their Bishopriques. But all this was done only by way of
courtesy and complement; an^ because the King himself sought a fair way to
restore them to their charge and dignities without offending the Synod.

Aimonius l 3. capp. 26. and 64
22 King Chilperic having called an assembly of Bishops and Prelates in his City
of Paris, brought Pretextatus, Bishop of Roan before them, saying these words
unto them; Although the royal power may by the laws condemn one that is
guilty of high treason; notwithstanding that I may not oppose the ancient
Canons, I present this man unto you, who has falsely usurped the name of
Pastor, the author of the conspiracy made against me. At last he was
condemned to banishment, and afterward recalled and restored to his city and
Bishoprique by the King himself. Chilperic assembled another Synod to try the
accusation of high treason objected against Gregory Bishop of Tours, grounded
upon this surmise, Aimonius l. 3. cap. 43.
that he would have delivered the City of Tours to King Guntrand: where he was
acquitted as not guilty, and Leudastus his accus^r excommunicated. Chilperic
also upon an accusation brought by one Su^nigisilus against Giles Bishop of
Rhemes, as guilty of a conspiracy against King Childebert, caused him to be
apprehended and carried to the City of Mentz: where he assembled some Bishops,
who proceeding to judgment upon him, deposed him from his Bishoprique, and
confined him to Strasbourg. Didier Archbishop of Guien was deposed at a
Provincial Council assembled by the same King at Chaalons in Burgundy.

23 Childebert and ^untrand made certain Bishops assemble^ to proceed in
judgment upon the Abbess and her Religious of Poictiers. Greg. Turone^s. l.
10. c. 16^
We are met together (say those Bishops) by the command directed unto us, by
virtue of your power. Bishop Adlabert was condemned of heresy by three and
twenty Bishops at the Council of Soissons, with the consent of King Pepin,
and of the people and the Counsel of the greatest Peers in France. Bishops
judged by Princes, not Popes.
The like was done unto three Bishops accused of conspiracy against King Jews
the Piteous, by the sentence of a Synod assembled to that end by his command.
So King Charles the Bald assembled some Bishops to condemn his son Carloman,
Synod. Suession. To. 3. Council. p. 438.

Aimonius l. 4. cap. 106.

Idem lib 5. c. 17

Aimonius l. 3. c. 49.

Greg Turon. l. 6. c. 22.

Greg. Turon. l 6 c. 11.

Greg. Turon. l 6. c. 14.

Aimoniu^ l. 4. c. 83.


who was a Clergy man, and his accomplices of the same profession.

24 Sometimes our Kings proceeded to judgment by their own sole authority,
without ever assembling the Clergy. So Chartier Bishop of Perigord was accused
before King Chilperic, upon occasion of some letters writ against him, and was
acquitted because it could not be proved. One Theodorus Bishop of Marseilles,
was also brought and accused before King Childebert; but in conclusion,
absolved as not guilty: and accused after that, together with another Bishop
called Epiphanius, that they had received into Marseilles, Gundebaldus, who
said he was the son of Lotharius: who after they were heard, examined, and
found not guilty, were notwithstanding kept in prison.

25 We read notwithstanding that King Charles the Great called an assembly of
Bishops, to hear Felix Bishop of Orgelle, who was accused of heresy, and
being convinced, he was sent to Rome to Pope Adrian, before whom he abjured
his heresy, and was sent back to his Bishoprique. But it may be answered
that this was not properly an accusation, but only a dispute; and that when the
Bishops of France had heard and convinced him of error, they would do Pope
Adrian that honor as to send him to him, that he might have the hearing of
him afterward. So his heresy was condemned yet after that at the Council of
Francfort, as appears by the Acts of it.

26 The Popes were anciently so stanch in this regard, that they took not upon
them upon their own accord to judge of the crimes of other Bishops, save only
such as were of their own Diocese; but suffered those to proceed upon them to
whom of right it appertained. So the Clergy of Valentia having accused Maximus
their Bishop, Epist 2. Bonif. 1. To. 1. C^nc. Et Can. Decernimus. 3. q. 10. Can
Si qui^ episcopu^. 7 q. 4. Can. 1.7. q 4.
to Pope Boniface the first, of many grievous and heinous crimes, he would not
meddle in it, but returned the judgment to the Bishops of France. They would
not take the cognizance of them, neither in the first place nor by appeall, not
even then when the Bishops of a Province were divided (which yet was a fair
pretense) but in that case they were called in judgment before the Metropolitan
and other Bishops of the next Province; according to the fourteenth Canon of
the Council of Antioch inserted in the Decret: Can ^lt. 7. q. 4.
From which the Canon Hosius inserted in the same Decret does no way derogate,
which speaks of civil controversies amongst Bishops, and not of criminal
causes; as appears by the fourth Canon of the Council of Sardis from whence it
was taken. In which case it was granted as an honor to Saint Peter's chair,
that if either of the two Bishops be not content with the judgments given by
some of their fellow Bishops, that they shall write thereof to the Bishop of
Rome, to the intent that if he think good they should proceed to judgment
again, his advice may be followed and and that Judges may be assigned unto
them by him.

27 But to return to criminal matters. Such process was ancientlie used
concerning them in this Kingdom, as we have said already. That jurisdiction
at this present is divided betwixt the Kings Officers and the Clergy of
France. The Judges Royal have the cognizance of privileged causes, such as
are high treasons, tumults, seditions, ambushes, bearing of arms,
assassinations, and such like: in respect of which they may proceed and
pronounce against all kind of Clergy men, yea even against Bishops and
Archbishops. As for other crimes which are called common, such as are actions
of trespass, battery, concubinages, murders, forgeries, and such like, the
official and other Ecclesiastical Judges have the cognizance of them. If I
should make these expositions in the Palace, In vvh^t case^ the ^^y Iudg^s h^th
power over the French Clergy.
I should be afraid that all the Proctours would cast their caps at me, to
whom this is sufficiently known. But considering the foundations of our
practice are shaken, and are like to be cut up by the root, it is requisite
that I make this rehearsal, and that I bring authorities for proof of my
assertion, for fear I be accused of ignorance in a matter which every one
knows.

28 This distinction of crimes in the person of Clergy men, is approved by the
Ordinances of our Kings, mention is made hereof in that of King Francis, of the
year 1540^ Article the eleventh made at Castle-Briant the year 1551. And that
of Henry the third made at Paris the year 1580. Article the twenty one. Come
we now to the practice of our Courts. This distinction has always been
observed by all the Courts of France, who have set down the very form which
must be observed in such proceedings; who have decreed Papon de jurisdict
temporali art. 34.
That the process shall be made, and finished by the Judge Royal, upon a
priviledg'd case, before it be remitted to the Ecclesiastical Judge,
notwithstanding the declinatory. Papon ibid. art. 35.
That for trial of the case Royal, it shall be lawful to proceed even unto
torture inclusively. Idem tit de adult. art. 17.
That for the crime of Adultery, committed with notorious fornication a Bishop
or other Clergy man is under the jurisdiction Royal. Idem tit. de jurisd temp.
art. 43. and 44.
As also for the accusation of forgerie by him committed. Idem ibid. art 37.
That a Lay Judge upon just cause may make the process made by the Official
upon a common offense be brought before him. Idem ibid. art. 46.
And notwithstanding the absolution from the common offense, condemn the party
accused upon the privileged case. Papon ibid. art. 33, 34. 38, 39,41, 45,^7.
And an infinite number of other rules, which it would be tedious to rehearse.
To urge the testimony of our common Lawyers, as of Mr. Giles Burdi^ upon the
Ordinances of the year 1539. Mr. John Imbert in his institutions of common law.
Mr. Choppin in his treatise Du Domaine, and many others, would be a thing
superfluous.

CHAP. II. Of Delegations, and Evocations.
1 THe Popes jurisdiction and authority is greatly augmented, and inhaunsed in
this, that the Bishops and other Ecclesiastiques are made his commissaries and
Delegates in diverse cases, which are of their own proper and natural
jurisdiction. It is said in the first chapter of the fifth Session. That in the
Monasteries of Monks, where it may be conveniently done, there shall be a
lecture read out of holy Scripture: And that in case the Abbats be negligent,
^he Bishops of that place, must compel them by convenient remedies, as
delegates for the Sea Apostolic. Now there is no doubt or difficulty, Can.
Si qui^ 18. quaest. 2.

Can. Si quis Abbas, 18. q. 2.

Can. Cognovimus 18 q 2.

Can. in venditionibus.

Cause. 17. q 4.


but it belongs to Bishops to provide herein by their own proper authority, in
case of the negligence of Abbats. For the Abbats^ Monks, and Monasteries are
subject to the Bishop of the Diocese where such Abbey^ stand, and they are
under his power and jurisdiction by the 21 chapter of the Council of Orleans
Canonized in the Decret. They may depose the Abbats upon sufficient cause. They
must take care for the profit and advantage of the Monasteries and Abbeys. See
that no alienation be made by the Abbats without their consent.

2 As for that which is decreed, Ordinaries by this Council made the Popes
Commissaries.
that the Abbats shall cause a lecture in divinity to be read, it is a thing
which they are bound to do in France, by virtue of the 20 Article of the
Ordinance of Orleans, whereby the Superiors and heads of the Orders are
enjoined to take care of, and diligently to proceed to a full reformation of
Monasteries. And it is further said, That in every one of the said Monasteries,
there shall be maintained a good and able man to teach holy Scripture, and a
stipend allowed him at the charges of the Abbat, or Prior. Now the word
Superiors may be as well referred to Bishops as to Abbats and Priors, in case
these be negligent. Howsoever this power is not given unto Abbats and Priors as
Delegats, or by way of privile^ge, but belongs unto them by common right. It
ought also to agree unto Bishops by the same right, where the privilege of
exemption cease.

3 In the second Chapter of the same Session, where Curats are enjoined to
preach upon Sundays and Holydaies, or to provide some to preach in case of
lawful impediment, it is added, That if there be any Parish Churches under
such Monasteries as are not s^tuate in any Diocese, the Prelates regular being
negligent in the premises, they shall be compelled unto it by the
Metropolitans of those ^rovinces where the Dioceses lie, as Delegats herein for
the Sea Apostolic. Now it is certain that Metropolitans have power over the
Clergy within their Province, even over the Bishops themselves, according to
the honor prescribed by the ancient Canons under the one in the first, and the
other in the second place. If an Abbey be subject to the Bishop, the
Metropolitan shall have nothing to do with it, save in case of appeal. If it
belong to no Diocese, and consequently to the Jurisdiction of no Bishop, then
it must have the Metropolitan for Superior; unless it be of the number of
such as are exempt, which have no other superior but the Pope, and which are
spoken of in the eight chapter of the 25 Session: But the question is not now
of such. And suppose they were now in controversy by the eleventh Article of
the Ordinance of Orleans, all Abbats and Priors must be subject to the
Archbishop, or Bishop of the Diocese, notwithstanding their privilege of
exemption.

4 In the second Chapter of the sixth Session, Bishops are enjoined as Delegates
for the Pope, to provide that there be able Vicars in stead of such Clergy men
under their jurisdiction, as are dispensed with for non residence: To which
Vicars they must assign a competent portion of the fruits. Now it is too
apparent, that this provision belongs to the ordinary jurisdiction of Bishops,
and therefore such Delegation is abusive, and made as well against the ancient
Canons, as against the Ordinances of this Kingdom. Cap cum ex eo, De elect.
and elect. potestat. in 6.
This is delivered in express terms by the constitution of Boniface the
eighth, who after he has given way that such as are preferred to Parish
Churches, may stay seven years before they be ordained Priests, to the intent
that they may have occasion to apply their studies, he ordaines^ That during
these seven years, the Bishops and Superiors shall carefully provide that the
cure of souls be diligently discharged, and that such benefices be served with
good and able Vicars, who shall be deputed by them; and to whom, in
consideration thereof, a competent portion of the fruits shall be by them
assigned for their maintenance. In all this there is no delegation from the
Pope: but this is given to Bishops as depending upon their Ordinary
jurisdiction.

5 The fifth Article of the Ordinance of Orleans says in plain termes^
Ordonnance det Estats d' Orleans ^^ an. 1560. Art. 5.
That the Abbats and Curats who hold many benefices by dispensation, or reside
upon one of their benefices, requiring actual service and residence, shall be
excused from residence upon their other livings. Always provided that they
depute sufficient men for their Vicars, of a good life and conversation: to
every of whom they shall assign such a portion of the revenue of the benefice
as may suffice for their maintenance. Bishops made Popes Delegats in matters of
their own jurisdiction.
Otherwise, in default hereof, we admonish and enjoyne the Archbishop, or
Bishop of the Diocese to take order for it, and most expressly command our
Judges and Proctours to assist them therein: to cause the temporalities of such
Abbeys or other benefices to be seized upon without dissembling a month after
they shall have warned and required the Prelates, and other Titulars to reside,
or cause some to reside upon their benefices, and fulfill the contents of this
present Ordinance. From hence we collect that the forementioned case belongs to
the jurisdiction regal within this Kingdom, and that the Council having given
it up to the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and that even to the Pope, has
infringed the rights of France.

6 In the third Chapter of the sixth Session, the Council gives power to the
Ordinaries of the place, as Delegates for the Pope, to visit, punish, and
correct Clerks, both Seculars and Regulars that live out of the Monastery. No
Secular Priest, nor Regular, of what Order soever, living out of his Monastery,
must think himself so sure upon pretense of the privilege of his Order, that
he cannot be visited, punished, and corrected according to Canonical
Constitutions, in case he offend, by the Ordinary of the place, as Delegate
for the Sea Apostolic. By the General Council of Lions, holden under
Innocent the fourth, ann 1246, Cap. 1. de privilegii^ in 6.
and approved by the Popes themselves, all deli^quents contracting or
committing any fault out of the Monastery, shall not in that case enjoy their
privilege of exemption, but shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the
Ordinaries^ without any commission or delegation from the Pope. We ordain by an
irrefragable Decree, that howsoever exempted persons enjoy their liberty, yet
upon any offense, contract, or such thing for which a man may have a s^te
against them, they may be convented before the Ordinary of the place. And the
Gloss upon it; This is true if the contract were made, or the crime committed
in a place not exempted, and if the thing in controversy be not exempt.
Ordon. du Roy Loys 12. de l' an. 1513. confirmee par Arrest du Parliament de
Paris^ du feburier 1542. Voyez le r^cucil des Ordo^nances de Fontanon Tom. 4.
Tit. 11. de l' Vniversie du Paris c. 6.
So Scholars not residing in the Universities do not enjoy the privileges
granted unto them: So a Hos^iensis. Abbas. Andr^^^s. Anthon. Butrigarius in
can. perpendim^s de sentent excom. extra. Petrus de Anchorano in ca. ea quae.
de regulis juris in 6. Glos. in ca. transivisse. de Election. cap. quoniam de
vita et honest^ Cleric. Can. Penult. did. 23. ca. unic. de cleric. conjugat.
in 6. cum ibi notat.
Clerk taken in a crime, having not his Clericall habit on, is subject to the
jurisdiction of the Secular Judge.

7 In the third Chapter of the twenty first Session, Bishops are allowed, as
Delegates for the Sea Apostolic, to assign unto all such Cathedral and
Collegiat Churches, as have no ordinary distributions, the third part of the
fruits and revenues to be employed in the said distributions. Which is
repeated in the third Chapter of the twenty second Session. This derogates from
the power and jurisdiction of Bishops, to whom the right of providing for the
necessities of the Churches subject unto them does belong. As Capit. 1. and ibi
gloss. de rebus Eccles. non alienand. in 6.
to adjudge the tenth to an Archdeaconrie which has but little means. To Cap.
exposuisti^ extra de Praebend. and dignit.
join and unite Chapels to a Cathedral Church upon evident necessity or
commodity. To Capit. 1. and Cap. Pastoral^^ extra. de his quae f^nt a
Praelato. Vid. gloss. in ca. de reb^^ Eccles. non alienandis in 6.
alter and give away the means of the Church upon just and honest reason, with
the consent of the Chapter. Therefore by the same reason they may convert some
part of the revenues of livings to ordinary distributions, upon just and
lawful cause, with consent of the Chapter, without authority from the Pope,
or without any necessity of his commission. Which is valid in this Realm of
France, especially where the Popes power is regulated according to the ancient
Canons and Decrees.

8 By the fourth Chapter of the twenty first Session, the Bishops are
Delegates for the Sea Apostolic, to compel the Rectours of Churches within
their Dioceses, to take Priests to assist them at the administration of the
Sacrament, in case they be not able to do it themselves. B^sh^ps made the
Po^es Commissaries.
And by the sixth chapter of the same Session, they are also made commissaries
and Delegates to assign substitutes and assistants, to unlearned and ignorant
Rectors of Churches. Which is also decreed to the prejudice of the ordinary
jurisdiction of Bishops, to whom of common right it appertains to appoint such
assistants even according to the Decretals of Lucius the third, and Honorius
the third; Cap. de Retoribus and

Cap. consultationibus extra. de Clericis aegrotant.


whereby they declare that Bishops have power and authority to appoint
coadjutours to Rectours of Churches in such cases.

9 In the fifth Chapter of the same twenty first Session, power is given to
Bishops, as Delegates for the Pope, to unite Churches and benefices in case of
poverty, and such like permitted by the law. And yet this is a thing which
agrees unto them by their own proper right, even by the confession of
Celestine the third; Cap. St^ut unire extra. de excessib. praelat. Gloss. in
Can. and temporis 16 q. 1.
It belongs unto the Bishop (says he) to unite the Churches of his Diocese,
and to set one over another. Which is elsewhere repeated by the Gloss upon the
Canon law. And it is confirmed unto them by the sixth A^ticle of the Ordinance
of Orleans. See here the words; And to the end that Curats may employ
themselves in their Charges without all excuse, we enjoyne Prelates to proceed
to the union of benefices, distribution of tithes, and other Ecclesiastical
revenues.

10 By the seventh Chapter of the same Session, power is also granted them, as
Delegates for the Pope, to transfer the simple livings belonging to ruinated
Churches, which cannot be repaired by reason of their poverty, upon the mother
Churches, or others in the Diocese, having called unto them such as are
interested in them: howbeit by the same Decretall of Celestine Bishops may
submit one Church to another, with consent of the Chapter, by their own
authority, without any intervening of the Popes.

11 The same Council in the eighth Chapter of the seventh Session, makes
Bishops the Popes Delegates, for the visitation and reparation of exempted
Churches. The Ordinaries of the place shall be bound every year to visit all
the Churches, even such as are exempted in what kind soever, by authority
Apostolic; and to take order by such remedies as are according to law, that
those which stand in need be repaired; and that they be not unprovided of the
cure of souls, if any have it over them, nor of other duties, such as shall
be found due. It ordaines the like for the Churches which are not within any
Diocese, in the ninth Chapter of the twenty fourth Session. All this derogates
from the eleventh Article of the Ordinance of Orleans, where it is said; That
all Abbats, Abbesses, Priours, Prioresses, not being heads of the Order,
together with all Canons and Chapters, as well Secular as Regular, whether of
Cathedral or Collegiate Churches, shall be equally subject to the Archbishop,
or Bishop of the Diocese, so as they cannot help themselves by any privilege
of exemption, in regard of the visitation and punishment of their crimes. By
this Ordinance the visitation belongs to the Ordinary Jurisdiction of Bishops.
By the Council it belongs to the Pope, and is conferred upon the Prelates as
his Commissaries.

12 There is yet more; which is that by the same Council the Archbishops, and
Bishops cannot visit the Churches and Benefices of their Dioceses, and take
order for the reparation of other things necessary, but by virtue of the same
Delegation. For behold what is ordained concerning it in the eight chapter of
the twenty first Session; It is reason that the Ordinary do diligently
provide for all that concerns divine service within the Diocese. Wherefore the
Monasteries in Commendam, the Abbeys, Priories, Provostships not tied to a
regular observance, as also the Benefices, whether they have cure of souls or
no, Secular and Regular, in what kind soever of Commendam they be holden,
even such as are exempted, shall be visited by the same Bishops, as Delegates
for the Sea Apostolic: Visitation of Hospitals.
and the same Bishops shall take care by ^onvenient remedies, even by
sequestration of fruits, that necessary reparations be made and done. By this
Chapter the Bishops are deprived of their ordinary power in case of
visitation, in as much as they are now made Commissaries in that respect: which
is contrary to the ancient custom, and the Decree of the Council of Tarraco
registered in Gratians Decret. Can. Decrevimus. 10. quae. 1. Vid. Conc.
Tarracon. cap. 8. Tom. 2. Conc. page 526.
We ordain that the order of ancient custom be observed, and that Dioceses
be visited by the Bishops every year. And if any Church be found destitute,
that the reparation thereof be enjoined by his Ordinance. Item, against the
Decree of the fourth Council of Toledo, where it is said; That the Bishop
ought every year to go over all the Diocese, and in every Parish to enquire
in what need of reparation the Churches stand.

Can. Episc. 10. q. 1.
13 The Royal jurisdiction in France suffers prejudice hereby, considering it
belongs to the Lay Judges to take order for such reparations, as we shall
prove in another place hereafter. But that which is ordained in the tenth
Chapter of the twenty fourth Session is yet more exorbitant: namely, That the
Bishops as Delegates of the holy See have power to ordain, rule, punish, and
execute according to the determination of the Canons in all things which
concern the visitation and correction of their subjects. Whence it will come
to pass that if a Bishop condemn any of the people under his jurisdiction for
eating an egg in Lent, or any such like thing, he must trudge to Rome to get
his sentence made good.

14 The like here is decreed concerning the visitation of Hospitals,
Fraternities, and all kind of sacred places, Colleges, and Schools: Sess.
22. c. 8.
For it is given unto the said Bishops, as Delegates for the Popes, although it
belong unto them by virtue of their ordinary jurisdiction, by the Decree of
the Council of Vienna, holden under Clement the fifth: Clement. Quia
contingit. de religiosis domibus,

Voyes le recueil des Ordo^nances fait par Fontanon. Tit. du Grand Conc. chapter 7.


at least for as much as concerns Hospitals. And in our France such visitations
belong to the Lay Judges, and especially to the great Almoner, who has the
super-intendence of them. So says King Henry the second in express terms, in
his Ordinance of the year 1552, Our great Almoner (says he) has the
super-intendence and cognizance over the Hospitals and Spittles of our
Kingdom, that they be well and duly maintained, as well for the reparation
of them, as for the employment of the moveable goods thereunto belonging. And
whether the poor sick folks and distressed persons resorting unto the said
Hospitals, be entertained, and lodged, maintained, and fed according to the
revenues of the said Hospitals. As also to compel the masters, and
Administratours of such Hospitals, to make account of the said means and
revenues. See here that which compriseth every part of the visitation, and all
that belongs to the office of him that is to be the visiter.

V. Ibid. Tom. 4. tit. 27. des malad. and Hospit. chapter 4.
15 By another Ordinance of King Francis, dated the fifteenth of January 1546,
the visitation of the said Hospitals, and other charitable places is committed
to the Judges Royal, Ordinaries of the place where such Hospitals are situate.
All Governors and Administratours of Hospitals, or other charitable
foundations shall be compelled by our Judges of the places next adjoining, to
give up their accounts of the revenues and administration of the said
Hospitals, by what titles soever they hold them, together with the charters and
titles of their foundation, if they have any, within two months after the
publication of these Presents. Whom we command and expressly injoyne, every
one respectively within his Precincts and jurisdiction, that immediately after
the publication of these presents, they visit the said Hospitals and charitable
foundations, to enquire of the revenue estate, and reparation of the places,
and the number of beds, and poor people whom they shall find there. It is
true that upon the publication of the said Ordinance, there was some opposition
made by certain Bishops and Abbats of this Kingdom, and by the grand Almoner;
but upon the said opposition there was no more decreed by the Court of
Parliament of Paris, but this, That out any regard thereunto had, they should
proceed to the publication, D^l^g^ti^ns a wrong to w^^^.
ordaining nevertheles That within every one of their Ecclesiastical Precincts,
each Ordinary, Bishop or Abbat, and the grand Almoner might commit and delegate
one or two honest men to assist the Judges who were to execute the said letters
patents^ A ^^st of the Par^^^m^nt of Paris F^br. 4. 1545.
yet without hindering or contradicting the said Judges, in such manner as that
the Kings will and pleasure might be put in execution. This Ordinance was yet
further confirmed by another of the same King Francis dated the sixth of
February 1546. And by another of Henry the second, the twelfth, of February
1553.

16 With better reason may we say that the visitation of Schools erected for
the institution of youth should belong to Lay Judges. Howsoever it be, such
visitations are not cases reserve^ to the Pope, and therefore this Delegation
is against the rules of the Canon law: As is that also which is granted unto
them for the execution of things given to pious uses in such cases as are
allowed by the Law. Can. 8. Sess. 22.
The Bishops (says the Council) as Delegates for the Sea Apostolic, shall
be executours of all pious donations, given as well by last wills and
Testaments, as by those which are yet alive, in such cases as are permitted by
the law. Now by the ancient Decrees they are executours of such donations, Iure
proprio. Witness Gregory the ninth in a ^ecretall of his, Greg. in ^^p tua
e^tra. d^ t^s^am.
Be it that all testaments to pious uses should be taken care for by the
Bishops of ^he places, and that all things should be confirmed according to the
will of the deceased. Howbeit the testatours themselves should have prohibited,
etc. Which he further confirms in another Decretall. (...) Gr^^. in ^^p
^^^nnis ^xtr^ de testa. (...) C de ^^is^^p ^t Cl^r.
The executours appointed by the Testatour, after they have undertaken that
charge ought to be com^ell'd by the Bishop of the Diocese to perform the will
of the Testatour. The like was ord^in^^ by the constitution of the Emperor
Anthemius. If the T^statour (says he) has expressed the sum of the legacy
or Testament in trust given to pious uses without appointing the party (that
shall be executour of his will) the Reverend Bishop of the city where the
testatour was borne, has power to exact what was bequeathed to that end,
executing the holy intention of the deceased without any delay.

17 A man might observe diverse other Articles of this Council where such
delegations are granted to Bishops and Ordinaries which is as much as to
annihilate their entire jurisdiction, and devolve it upon the Pope, that so all
may depend upon him, and his power may be so much the greater. Wherein many men
are prejudiced: to wit, the Bishops who loose that which belongs unto them,
having it only by way of loan, or in a precarious manner: The Metropolitans
who are hereby deprived of the appeals which should come unto them from the
sentence of the Bishops: And the Lawyers as well Ecclesiastical as Lay, who
must be constrained to go to Rome, either to void the appeals which will be
put in, or at least to get new Commissioners, in case he fail to appoint the
judgment In partibus, according to the liberties of France, which will be as
great a foil as can be imagined.

18 We^ will now speak of Evocations: which is another mighty means for the
Pope, to make him absolute Lord of all Ecclesiastical justice: to get the
cognizance of all causes which he shall think good: to make his Court more
frequented than ever it was. This Council after it had decreed that the
judgment of causes cannot be taken from the Ordinaries by any extraordinary
commissions, Evocations, nor Appeals; it adds, Except in such causes as ought
to be tried before the Sea Apostolic by Canonical Constitutions, or such as
the Pope of Rome shall think fit to be committed or removed upon some urgent
and reasonable cause, by special commission from his Holiness, signed with
his own hand. Now he will always find urgent causes enough to draw the
process to Rome: there will never want pretenses; if he get but a hole, that's
enough, The bad consequence of evocations.
how little soever it be, he will find means to enlarge it. And besides,
who will tell the Pope that the cause is not reasonable? That were to make
himself be pronounced a heretic. It is a kind of Sacrilege to dispute of
what he does: yea, it is a mortal sin, Gloss. and addition. in Can. 1. ad
verb. Quis eum. did. 40.
says their Gloss upon the Canon law.

19 We shall here entreat the reader to remember what we discoursed in the
second book, touching the Popes attempts in point of justice, the miseries that
proceed from thence, and the great complaints that have been made of it. We
tumble back into all these miseries again, by receiving of this Council. The
Popes used it formerly by usurpation; now they will do it with some title, and
so with more license. We shall content our selves with setting down here what
was spoken concerning this matter by a whole Council, to wit, by that of
Basil, one of the most famous that has been holden in these later days.
Sess. 32. Conc. Basil.
Diverse abuses and intolerable vexations have grown hithertowards, whiles many
men were very often wont to be cited and called forth to the Court of Rome, and
that sometimes even for petty things, and were so wearied out with expenses
and travail, that they thought it more commodious for them to forgo their
right, or with great loss to redeem themselves from such vexation, rather
than be at the charges of the suit in a country so remote. So it was an easy
matter for slanderers to oppress poor men. So Ecclesiastical livings were
often go^ by wrangling shifts and evasions in the Suit, while their means were
not sufficient for the true owners, or others that had right unto them, to
defray the charges required as well for the journey to Rome^ as the pleading of
the cause there. Hence also proceeds the confusion of Ecclesiastical order,
when the jurisdiction of the Ordinaries is not preserved unto them. The money
and means of Kingdoms and Provinces are not a little impaired by this means,
and (which is a thing acknowledged to be very harmefull to all Ecclesiastical
Orders) those which by reason of their worth were called to the greatest
affairs of Christendom, were made less serviceable in them, being too much
employed in the multitude of such causes. Such evils and disorders as these,
gave occasion to the Fathers of that Council to prohibit all evocations in
that kind Which was confirmed by the Pragmatique Sanction of Bourges in the
title Of Causes, where the same things are rehearsed.

CHAP. III. Of giving temporal jurisdiction to Ecclesiastical persons.
1 THis Council uses such mavelous good husbandry, The Council
entrencheth upon the Civil jurisdiction.
and carries all things so handsomely to its proposed end, that at the last
reckoning all the world is well appaid, except Kings and Princes for whom the
spring was set. We have seen the Bishops already stripped of their jurisdiction,
and turned into their bare shirts. Now we shall make it appear that what is
taken from them on the one side, is restored to them on the other, all to the
prejudice of Secular powers, whose jurisdiction is invaded, and usurped upon,
to the advantage of the Bishop of Rome, into whom as into a vast Ocean, all
these petty rivers empty themselves.

2 It is a Papal maxim, holden for a certain and undoubted truth. Bellarm.
To. ^ C^ntrovers. 3. l 4. cap. 14.
That all Bishops receive their jurisdiction from the Pope. They take an oath
unto him else where^ and that a very strict one, and they are bound by this
Conc. Trid. Sess. 25. c. 2.
Council, to promise true obedience unto him at the Synods of the Diocese. So
that there can be nothing ascribed unto Bishops in point of jurisdiction, but
the Pope has a share in it (as fathers have in the purchases of their
children, and masters of their slaves) but their authority and power will ever
receive some enlargement thereby. This preface will serve as a candle to give
light unto the interests of Kings and Princes in all the particular cases which
shall be hereafter specified.

3 This Council then, to the prejudice of the Secular jurisdiction, gives unto
Bishops the power of punishing the authors of Conc. T^id. Sess. 4. c. ult.
defamatorie Libels, of the printers of them, of Sorcerers, Conjurers, and such
like people, of those that contract Sess. 24. c. 1.
clandestine marriages, or are witnesses, and assistants at them: the Sess. 24.
can. 12.
cognizance of all causes matrimonial without distinction, of all rights of
patronage, both Lay and Ecclesiastical; the Sess. 21. c. 4.
jurisdiction to compel the inhabitants of any parish to allow maintenance to
their Parish Priests; the Sess. 21. ^. 8.
visitation of all benefices, both Regular and Secular: the cognizance of the
reparations of their buildings, as also the power of sequestring the fruits of
the said benefices; the Sess. 22 c. 10.
power of examining the Kings Notaries, and of suspending or depriving them of
their office for some fault or crime by them committed; the doing of Sess. 23.
c. 6.
justice upon married Clerks, which have their tonsu^e, in all causes both
civil and criminal; the Sess. 2^. c. 8.
punishing of concubinage, and adultery both in Lay men and women; the Sess.
25. c. 3.
seizing of men's goods, and arresting of their bodies causes of Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, and that even of the Laity. Besides, this Council in very many
Sess. 7. ^. 5. and 7.

Sess. 21. c. 3. et 6

Sess. 23. c. 18.

Sess. 25. c. 5.

Sess 29. c. 15.


Chapters, prohibited all appeals, and will have that which the Bishops do, to
stand, without any regard of any appeal to the contrary whatsoever. Also it
Sess. 25. c. ^.
allows Ecclesiastical persons to refuse such summons as shall be sent out
by the Parliaments or other of the Kings judges. For the further satisfaction
of such as will not content themselves with this bare proposal, we will
speak somewhat of every one of these heads, for the better clearing of this
incroachment of jurisdiction, Libels of what jurisdiction.
I mean only so far as concerns the right of our Realm of France.

4 Beginning then with the first, which is touching defamatorie Libels; our
civil laws give the cognizance and jurisdiction thereof to the Judges and
Magistrates, not to the Ecclesiastiques. Some, may be, will except such as
concern point of Religion, but this exception is not pertinent; and observe
this one reason, which is sufficient to confute; namely, that those laws of
Constantine the Great, and Constantius, which restrain the license of such
Libels, were made in a time much like this of ours; to wit, when diverse
writings were put out concerning point of Religion, against the honor both of
one and other. Doctor Balduin has very judiciously observed it; Francis.
Balduinus in comment ad leg. de famosis libellis p. 13.
It is behoofefull (says he) to remember what manner of times those were of
Constantine and Constantius, wherein the contentions about Religion, not much
unlike unto ours, gave fire unto the affections of both parties, and which
afterward hatched those unhappie calumnies, and scandalous libels, just as it
is at this present, This he delivers in his Commentary upon the three laws of
the Emperor Constantine, and the two of Constantius, made in this case, which
we read at this day in the Code of Theodosius.

5 Those words of the Emperors Valentinian, and Valens, are also remarkable.
L. 7. Cod. Theod. de famosis libel. l. unica. C Justin eod.
If any man have any care of his devotion, and the public safety, let him
profess his name, and with his own mouth speak what he intended to
prosecute by defamatorie libels. This may well be referred to libels in case
of religion; nor was it ever meant by those Emperors in any other sense. Now
all these forementioned constitutions, with some others of the same
Valentinian, and Valens, Arcadius, Honorius, Vid. totum tit. C. Theod. de
famosis libellis.
and Theodosius lay a punishment upon the authors of such libels, and the
Publishers of them; committing the cognizance and execution of that punishment
unto their Officers and Magistrates, directing those very laws unto them, to
the intent that they might observe them in their judgments.

6 An infinite company of the Ordinances of our Kings speak expresselie of
defamatorie and scandalous libels, which concern matter of religion: they
prescribe what punishment shall be done upon them, what pains the authors,
printers, and publishers shall endure; and in express terms assign this
jurisdiction to the Judges Royal. Of this kind is that of King Henry the
second, of the eleventh of December 1547, made at Fountainbleau, and another of
the same Prince made at Chasteaubriant the year 1551; that of Charles the
ninth made at Mante the tenth of September 1563; that of the States of Molins
in the 77 Article; and an infinite company besides, which stir up the
jurisdiction in this point.

7 I shall content my self with setting down the words of one of them only,
namely that of King Charles the ninth made at Mante the tenth of September
1563, which speaks of defamatorie libels^ placards, pasquils, and such like
things in matter of Religion; and as for the point of jurisdiction ordaines as
follows; Commanding all public Magistrates, Commissaries of the country,
and other our Officers, whom it may concern, to have an eye and regard
hereunto, charging our Proctours, and Advocates in every place to do their
endeavor, and bestirre themselves herein, all other business laid aside, to
the finding out, and punishing such faults as they shall find concerning this
particular. And afterward, they are commanded to observe the said ordinance
punctuallie, and proceed against the breakers hereof by the punishments there
assigned, peremptorily, without observing the ordinary forms of justice.

8 We have also some pretty laws in Justinian about the punishing of Witches
and Sorcerers, which are addressed to the ^ugdes and Magistrates; yea, there is
one of them that commands him that shall catch any of them, to put them into
the Judges hands. Caus^s m^^rimonial, divorce etc. of what jurisd^ction.
That forthwith he bring him out in public, and present him before the eyes
of the Judges. The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius writ to Cecilian one of
their Magistrates, that he should banish them, unless they would consent to
see their own books burnt in the presence of the Bishops. Cod Justin. de males.
and mathemat per tot. ^. qui^unq^e C. eodem

L mathematico ^. de Episc. audient.

No^ell Leonis 65.


Which shows that the Bishops had but little jurisdiction in that regard. Leo
the Emperor writes also to one of his Officers, that he should punish them
with death, as Apostates.

9 The punishing of such as contract clandestine marriages, and those that
conspire with them therein, and those that advise or assist them about the
consummation thereof belongs also to the Judges Royal, by the Ordinance of King
Henry the second, made at Paris in February 1556, in these words; Let them
be liable to such punishments as our Judges shall think fit, according as the
case shall require, to whom the cognizance hereof shall appertain, and
wherewith we charge them upon their honors and consciences. Which Ordinance
was renewed at the States of Blois since this Council was holden. A certain
argument of the rejection thereof by the late King.

10 As for causes matrimonial, those civil Laws which give the cognizance of
them unto Judges and Magistrates, are sufficiently known by every body. We
shall only speak of the law of France, after we have set down the words of
the Council. Sessio^. 24. Can. 12.
If any man say that matrimonial causes belong not to Ecclesiastical Judges,
let him be accursed. See, here is a Canon without either saddle or bridle, which
is able to fear all the Secular Judges in the world, and make them forbear
all judgments whatsoever concerning marriages, or any thing that depends upon
them, for there is nothing excepted.

11 It is the custom in France that when the question is of the rite of the
coupling together in marriage, as for instance, Papon au re^ueil ^ Arrests tit.
de jurisd. eccles. Art. 2 and 3.
Whether marriage be perfect and consummate by words of the future or of the
present, the cognizance belongs to the Ecclesiastical Judge; but if it be a
question of fact, as Whether the contract was made by words of the present, or
of the future, then it falls within the jurisdiction of the Civil Judge. Papon
au mesme lieu art. 3. Papon ibid. art. 3. and 4.

Imbert in enchir. in verbo matrimonii controversi. 1.

Papon au tit^e de la jurisdict. temporelle art. 3 Droict de patronat.


So likewise if separation from the bed, or divorce be barely required, and no
more, then it is for the Ecclesiastical Judge to determine; but if the
question be of any fact, as if divorce be required because one of the married
parties is a thief, then it is for the lay Judge. Further, if the question
about marriage be betwixt any other parties than the husband or the wife, as if
the father and mother be interessed in it, so likewise if the controversy be
about the damages or profits arising from a marriage, about the portion or
gift given in consideration of a marriage, about any transaction in a
matrimonial cause, or other consequences or dependents^ it belongs no more to
the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction; as has been adjudged by diverse arrests of
our high Courts of Parliament.

12 The right of patronage is indeed a thing annexed to somewhat which is truly
spiritual, yet it does not cease for all that to be a temporal right in some
kind. This distinction has ever been current in France, Gloss in ca^llteras.

Extra. de juram. calum c. quanto. Extra. de judic.


that the Ecclesiastical Judge determines of Ecclesiastical patronage when
the question is about the petitorie, but for the possessorie that is for the
Civil Judge. This maxim is most true, that in things spiritual the
cognizance of the petitorie belongs to the spiritual Judge, and of the
possessory to the lay Judges: Accordingly the Parliaments and other Judges of
this kingdom have determined concerning the possessorie in the matter of
tithes, which are as spiritual as patronages can be, Papon tit de jurisd.
eccles. Art. 1.

Papon au titre de la jurisdict. temporelle art. 22.


concerning which there is an Arrest of Paris made 1262 to be seen in the
great collection of them. They have also ever determined of the possessorie of
Benefices, concerning which there is an Arrest of the Parliament at Bourdeaux
of the 19 of July 1524 in the same collection. Pope Martin the fifth has so
agreed upon the case with King Charles the seventh concerning the possessorie
of Churches, Tithes, Benefices, and all other spiritual things, L^y patronage,
of wh^t jurisdiction.
in a certain Bull of his, as the learned Counselor of Grenoble witnesses in
his decisions; and this because the possessorie, which is the thing
controverted, is a temporal thing. G^ido Pape decis. 1. et 352.


13 As for lay patronages they never were of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in
France, neither for the Possessorie nor the Petitorie. And this is so far
true, that whereas the spiritual Judge may have cognizance of tithes as
concerning the petitorie, yet he may not so of those which are appropriated,
that is, holden by a lay hand in fee of the Church, and which are by that
means converted into a right of patronage, as was judged by an Arrest of the
Great days of Poictiers the 26 of September 1531, by another of Paris at All
Hallowes 1289. It is said in an ordinance made by Philip the third, Papon titre
de la jurisdiction temporelle art. 1 Et titre des dismos art. 9.
anno 1274, that if one lay man sell unto another lay man the tithes which he
has bought of a Clerk, and there arise a suit about the price, the cognizance
thereof does not belong to the Ecclesiastical Judge.

14 The form also which is prescribed by this Council for trial of the right
of patronage, is no way receiveable in this kingdom, which ought herein to
follow the common law, especially considering that the rigor concerning this
point is so severe and exact, that the most part of the lords and owners of the
said rights of patronage should be in danger to loose them, if they were
reduced to that necessity of trial. Now it is one of the privileges of our
Gallicane Church. Chap^ 23. des libertez de l'Eglise Gallicane.
That the Pope cannot by any provisoes about Benefices, or otherwise, derogate
from, or prejudice lay foundations, and the rights of the lay patrons of this
Realm.

15 It is also an abuse to give the Bishops power to compel their parishioners
to maintain their Priests, considering that the Bishops in France have no
jurisdiction over lay men in a temporal thing, such as is food, but only in
case of the Sacraments, and other spiritual things, as is said expressly in
an ordinance of king Francis, Articles 1. 2. 3. 4. de l'ordonn. de l'an 1539.
Papon tit. de chooses sacrees Art. 2.

Papon ibid. Art. 3.


made 1539. conformably to the former distinction: by an Arrest of the Court of
Parliament at Paris of the 11 of July of 1531, a certain Priest was judged
capable of suing before a lay Judge against a lay man for the wages of his
calling, in as much as he had said Mass for him. And by another Arrest of the
17 of April 1545 upon an Appeal as from abuse, put in by a lay man against
the proceedings against him before an Official, at the suit of a Priest, who
demanded payment for diverse Masses celebrated for the said lay man and his
predecessors, it was judged that a lay Judge is only competent to condemn a
lay man in such cases.

16 By another Arrest of the tenth of August 1551 the assignation granted to
certain villagers by the Bishop of Angers his Official, Ludovicus de Rambe^g
in constitutionem Francisc. Latam anno 1539. Art. 1.

Idem Lud. Ramberg.


was declared to be a nullitie, in as much as it was done by an incompetent
Judge, and that because it was about the payment of a sum of eight pence,
which the said assigns were bound to pay to the Canons of Angers every year
at Easter, to be bestowed in wine which was given unto them after the
celebration of the blessed Sacrament. By another Arrest of the 22 of April
1532 it was declared that the right of sepulture is not triable before an
Ecclesiastical Judge. There is greater reason that a lay Judge should
determine in case of maintenance demanded by a Priest against his Parishioners.
For in such a case the question is not about a spiritual thing, bu^ a
temporal annexed unto a spiritual, which in matter of jurisdiction must ever
be separated.

17 As for the visitation of benefices, the Parliaments of this Realm have
reserved that authority unto themselves, of ordering of them diverse times, and
causing them to be judged. And to this purpose there is an Arrest of Paris of
the 16 of December 1521, whereby it is determined that the Priorie of Saint
Maurice at Saint Li^ shall be visited and repaired; and besides, that during
the suit of the Priorie, Of visi^^tion and reparation of Churches.
the administration of the sacred things shall be committed to two Clerks, and
of the profane to two lay men. The Monks of the Abbey of Orbais in Champaine
complaining of the Abbat in trust, that monastery was visited by Arrest of the
same Parliament, given out the year 1^68. The power of visiting belongs indeed
to Bishops, but not so as that they may use any coaction to cause the
reparations of the buildings to be made. They may call in unto them the lay
officers of the place to provide altogether for the reparation and maintenance
of Parish Churhes and their buildings. But the putting of this in execution
belongs afterward to the lay Judges; who to that end must compel the
Churchwardens and parishioners to contribute for the necessary charges by all
due and reasonable ways, yea and the Curats themselves, if they be seized of
temporals to bear such a part and share of the said reparations and charges,
as shall be set down by the said Prelates. This is almost word for word the
same with what was decreed in this point by the 25 article of the ordinance of
Orlean. So then the Bishops may arbitrate these reparations, calling the lay
Judges in unto them, but they have no jurisdiction to compel any man to make
them; that belongs to the Civil Judges, exclusively to the Ecclesiastical in
France.

18 It is many years ago since the Parliament of Paris pronounced, Johan.
Gallu^ q. 5 ^7.
that it was good law which was done by a bailiffe of Vermandois, who going
upon a Commission for the King decreed that he would have the cognizance of
assessing of reparations, which were to be done in certain houses which
belonged to the Church of Landune. A certain Bishop of Noyon was also dismissed
of his exception against the jurisdiction of the Court, P. han. Gallu^ q. 225.
in an action entered against him in Parliament, about certain reparations of
the tenements belonging to another Bishoprique which he had formerly had. In
the register of the ancient Decrees of the Parliament of Paris. Folio 114,
there is one of King Charles the sixth, bearing date the sixth of October, 1385:
the words whereof are these; That every of the Judges Royal within his
Province, perceiving the ruin of Church livings by default of allowance of
means to such as do divine service in that place, by the burden of debts, or
the fall of houses, proceeding from the negligence or ill usage of the
inhabitants, that they seize the fruits of them into our hands. By a triple
division whereof they shall provide for the three defaults above mentioned,
deputing certain Commissaries to that end, by the counsel and advise of the
Abbats, Religious, or Ministers of the places at indifferent charges, who shall
give accounts of the remainder, and restore it unto those to whom it shall
appertain.

19 The necessity of repairing and re-edifying of Churches during the time of
these troubles, being referred by our Kings unto the Clergymen, the Ordinances
made in that behalf, are directed to the Courts of Parliament, the baliffes,
and stewards; who are prohibited by virtue thereof to compel them to make the
said reparations, as appears by the Ordinances of Charles the ninth, dated the
10 of September 1568. The eighteenth of September 1571. The third of November
1572. It has been also judged by diverse Arrests of the Parliaments of this
land, which are to be seen in the great collection of them, that the question
touching the reparations of benefices belongs to the Lay Judge, and not to the
Ecclesiastical.

20 As for the sequestration of the fruits which the Council gives unto
Bishops it belongs no more unto them than the other, Papon tit. des chooses
sacrees, art. 12. 14. and 15.

Tit. de la jurisdict. temp. art. 19. and 21.


considering that they cannot put it in execution, nor have any right of
seizure in the goods moveable, or immovable. And herein that Decree of Philip
the third, dated 1274, is worth our observation, who prohibites a Bishop the
granting the seizure of the moveable goods of a certain Clerk condemned in a
personal action, considering that those goods were not within his episcopal
Jurisdiction.

Royal Notaries, and married simple shavelings, of what jurisdiction.
21 But there is nothing more exorbitant than the jurisdiction which is by this
Council given unto Bishops over the Notaries Royal. It is a certain rule,
that Ecclesiastical persons have no jurisdiction within this Realm over Lay
men, save in one case; to wit, when the question is concerning the sacraments
and spiritual things. This is so far true, that an Ecclesiastical Judge
cannot so much as deal in a fault committed by his Lay gaolor for suffering a
prisoner to make an escape, or in any other offense committed in the jail; as
it was judged by an Arrest given in the Great days of Poictires the 18 of
September 1531; nor in any faults committed by the Proctour of his office if
he be a Lay man, although he have trespassed in the exercise thereof,
according to an Arrest of Paris of the 11 of April 1532. Now the Royal
Notaries are so far from being, nay it is so impossible that they should be
under the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, that on the contrary the Judges Royal
have authority over the Apostolical Notaries. This appears by an Edict of
King Henry the second, made at Fountainbleau in September 1547, about the
calling in of the Apostolical Notaries, wherein it is said, That by the
bailiffes, stewards and Presidiall Judges, every one in his own power and
jurisdiction a sufficient number of the said Notaries shall be adjudg'd and
limited. Which calling being so made by them and every of them, his will is
That they make choice of the most able and sufficient within their jurisdiction
to the number by them determined. And for the Notaries Royal, it were a
superfluous thing to allege the Decrees which give the Kings Judges authority
to punish them in case of any offense or crime by them committed.

22 The jurisdiction which is given unto Bishops over such married people as
have only the single tonsure, is not less extraordinary. A married shaveling
has as good as no privilege at all in France, but is reckoned in the rank of
Lay men, because of the great abuses which have been heretofore committed in
this Kingdom. For, to enlarge the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction; the time was
when Prelates bestowed that tonsure upon all sorts of people, even upon some
young infants, some servants, some bastards, and some ignorant and illiterate
married men; yea, and which is more, if the Kings Officers prosecuted any
offender, if he but said he was shaved, though indeed he were not, the
Ecclesiastical Judge would straightwaies hook unto himself the cognizance of
the cause by censures and excommunications. Which was a means of offenders
escaping with impunitie, because that they might get off by their purse from
the Ecclesiastical Judges, upon which occasion all malefactors inclined
rather to this jurisdiction: as it is proved at large in the Articles which
were presented to King Philip, by Mr. Peter de Cugneres against the Clergy of
France.

Cap. exparte de Cleric. Conjugat.
23 A certain Queen of England complained to Pope H^norius the third of that
name, that many married men made use of the tonsure, to cheat her of the right
which belonged unto her, as it is recorded in the Decretals. By an Ordinance of
King Charles the ninth, in the year 1563, it was decreed, that none should be
admitted to sue, by virtue of the privilege of his Clergy, to be sent back
to the Ecclesiastical Judge in any case whatsoever, whether civil or
criminal, unless he were a subdeacon at the least: which is as much as to
exclude all simple shavelings, whether they be married or no, who
notwithstanding shall be admitted by the Council of Trent, yea in such sort,
that privileged cases are not excepted in criminal matters, nor personal
actions depending upon the realitie, and other such like civil matters;
howbeit that such exceptions have ever been in force within this Kingdom, and
that even in all sorts of Ecclesiastical persons.

24 And see here another great prejudice done unto us by this Council, which
we must either take a course to remedy, or else all the regal jurisdiction on
of our Ecclesiastical persons will come to nothing, Adultery, concubinage,
seizure of goods, of what cogniz^nce.
and we must talk no more of those distinctions which were wont to be used
in the palace, time out of mind in this regard. For if privileged cases, and
civil actions which belong to the jurisdiction Royal, be not excepted in the
person of married Clerks, then much more must we admit of this new law in
behalf of other Clergy men, whose privilege is far greater.

25 As for Civil actions the Council confirms the Decree of Boniface the
eighth, whereby Secular Judges cannot condemn married Clerks, neither in
personal causes, nor pecuniary. In Cap uni. de Clerici^ Conjug. in 6.
Which words are of a very large extent, so great that we may comprehend under
them, not only actions which are purely personal, but such also as depend upon
reality, all actions of contract, real, and possessory. For the word
Pecuniariter being divided from Personaliter, and placed before it in the said
Decree, will always be understood generally, and will ^omprehend within its
latitude, by means of that interpretation they will put upon it, whatsoever
concerns our patrimony, and all the actions which we can have, either for the
recoverie or preservation thereof. Which they will confirm even by the
au^horitie of our own law.

26 As for adulteries, the usurpation is very notorious: L. quamvis and se^^.
C. ad legem Iuliam de adult.
it is directly against the Civil laws, whereby the punishing of this crime
belongs to the Magistrates, not only by those of the Pagans, but even by those
also of the Christian Emperors. The Ecclesiastical Judges in France never had
the cognizance of such crimes over Lay men, but this jurisdiction was left in
the possession of the Secular Judges: Yea, which is more, we read two Arrests
of Bourdeaux, one against a Bishop, Papon. tit. de adult.
another against an Abbat, whereby they were condemned unto certain punishments
for the crime of manifest adultery. There are an infinite more Arrests of the
Courts of Parliament of this Kingdom, which testify that they are in
possession of the cognizance of this crime.

27 Leo the tenth acknowledging that this right belongs to the officers
Royal of this Realme^ Concord inter Leonem 10. and Francis. 1. tit. de Public.
Concubin.
where he decrees concerning the punishment of Clerks that keep Concubines,
when he comes to speak of Lay men, he does no more but exhort them to abstain
from adultery and concubinage, as things forbidden by God, without passing any
further. The Ecclesiastical Judges have sometimes attempted to usurp this
jurisdiction over the Laity in case of adultery; In libro composito super
facto praelatorum.
but the complaint which was made of it by Mr. Peter de Cugneres on the behalf
of the Judges Royal, which we may read at this day extant, put an end to that
trouble. And always whenever the Clergy attempted to meddle in such
matters, they have been prohibited by the Parliaments upon appeals, as from
abuse which have been put in against their decrees.

28 So by an Arrest of Paris, of the 28 of June 1534. It was determined that a
married Lay man cannot be cited before an Ecclesiastical Judge, Gil. le
Maistre au t^aitte des appellat. com. d' ab chap. 6.
for deflowring a Virgin. There are two Arrests of that same Court, called, The
Arrests of married whoremongers, which are very remarkable; one dated the 10 of
July 1366, the other the 5 of March 1388, whereby Bishops and Archdeacons are
prohibited to cause Lay men to be cited any more before their officials, in
case of adultery or fornication with other women than their own wives. In
slylo Cur. Parl. part. 3. tit. 29.
There is also an Ordinance of King Saint Jews the year 1254, for the
banishment of common whores out of all cities and towns, which he will have
to be done by his Judges and Officers, and their goods to be seized by them.

29 The like case is about seizure of goods, it being a thing certain in
France, that such executions are prohibited and forbidden to Ecclesiastical
Judges by an Ordinance of King Philip the third, made in the year 1274; which
forbids any Bishop to cause any such execution to be made of the immovable
goods of any Clerk condemned in a personal action; because the immovable
goods are out of his Episcopal jurisdiction. Parliaments d^p^iv^d of appeals.
According hereunto a certain Bishop of Paris was declared not to be admitted
into the Court in a pretendure which he made of the power of arresting certain
moneys belonging to a Clerk inhabiting in certain lands subject to the
jurisdiction Royal, and he was cast for attempting it, by an Arrest of Paris
the second of April 1334. And the reason hereof is, that it is holden for a
ruled case in our law, that Bishops and other Ecclesiastical Judges have no
territory or other right of temporal subjection, Gilles le Mais^re au traicte
des Appellatione comme d'abus. chap. 5.
as is proved by Mr. Giles le Maistre chief President of Paris, by diverse
authorities. And upon the same reason the cognizance of real actions, of debt,
and possessory, is forbidden them. When there is any necessity of doing such
or such like executions, they must implore the aid of the secular arm, which
cannot be denied them. The Judges Royal are enjoined by the 24 Article of the
Ordinance of Melune made 1580, to aid the Ecclesiastical Judges in the
execution of their sentences when they implore the secular arm.

Gilles le Maistre ibid.
30 Much less may they proceed by way of imprisonments or otherwise to the
execution of their sentences. Such Acts are left to the Secular power which
they ought to implore. But if in any criminal case they decree the Arrest of a
man's body against those of their jurisdiction, they cannot proceed to cause
him to be attacht, if he be out of their Court, but must have recourse to the
secular arm. And to this purpose it was determined by an Arrest of Paris of
the tenth of May 1535, That it was ill determined and absurdly proceeded by the
Deane and Chapter of Man's, who judged, upon an accusation commenced against a
Canon of the said Church, that he should be kept prisoner in his Cloister.

31 But one of the greatest wounds which the Kings authority and the Courts of
Parliament can receive, is, that the power of appealing is taken away even
almost in all actions. For as for the Popes Bulls and Decrees we have already
proved that such appeals cannot be put in hereafter, in as much as he is made
to be above a Council, above all Princes and Lords that have any sovereign
dominion; in as much as the confirmation of all the Canons and Decrees of the
Council of Trent was left unto him; the reformation also of all that concerns
Ecclesiastical manners and discipline, and his authority in all things
reserved. As for the Bishop^ and other Prelates of this Kingdom, in all the
beforementioned cases it is said expressly, that no appeal can be had from
their sentences. It is true that the Popes authority is reserved above all so
as not only the Kings inferior Judges are deprived of their ordinary
jurisdiction, but the Parliaments also of Appeals unto them as from abuse,
which have always been put in from the sentences of the Bishops: yea even
from the Canons and Decrees of the Provincial Councels of France, and the
execution of the Popes Bulls and Decrees.

Sess. 7 cap. 5. and 7.
32 But there is yet more, namely, that appeals from abuse made unto the
Parliaments, in diverse other cases is taken away: as where it is decreed that
no appeal shall be made from such sentence of the Ordinaries, whereby they
shall depute a Vicar with an assignement of certain portion of maintenance in
any Cure or Benefice formerly without Cure. Wherein there is a double
grievance: First, that the Judges royal, as Bailiffes, Stewards, and such
like, are deprived of that seizure which they are permitted otherwise to make
of the revenewes of livings ^ine cura, both by the Ordinance of Charles the 6,
Anno 1385, and by that of the States of Orleans holden under Charles the 9.
Anno 1560, in the eight and twenty first Articles; and after that by the Edict
of M^lune made by Henry the third in February 1580, Article the fifth, upon
occasion of the complaints of the Clergy of France, and by another of the same
Prince the tenth of September 1^68. The other that our Parliaments are deprived
of Appeals as from abuse, which have always been used in this kingdom.
Council of Trent deals unjustly about ^chooles and Hospitals.


33 Power is also given unto the Bishops to erect Colleges for the instruction
of youth, with the advice of two of the most ancient Prebends, and to endow
them with the advice of four deputies, two of the Chapter, and two of the
Clergy: as also to order the revenewes of buildings, and of hospitals, tithes
appropriated and belonging to lay men, so as there can be no appeal from what
they shall determine in this respect. Wherein there are diverse good grounds of
complaint. First, that the Council undertakes to erect Colleges in France for
the instruction of youth; for that derogates from the Kings authority, who
has provided for this point by the ninth Article of the Ordinance of Orleans.
Secondly, that the Council gives the power of this erection to the Clergy,
without employing the Majors, Sheriffs, Counselors, Capitons, or other Civil
Magistrates, which the same Ordinance does require: the words whereof are
these. Besides the said Divinity Prebend, another Prebend or the revenewes
thereof shall be assigned for the maintenance of a Schoolmaster, who shall be
bound in the mean time to teach all the youth of the City gratis, without any
wages. Which Schoolmaster shall be chosen by the Archbishop or Bishop of the
place, calling in the Canons of the Church, together with the Majors,
Sheriffs, Counselors, or Capitons of the City, and to be put out by the said
Archbishop or Bishops, with the advice of them aforesaid. And the execution of
the aforesaid Ordinance is committed to the Officers Royal by another
Ordinance of the same Prince given the 22 of November 1563. Voyez le recuell
des Ordonn. de Fonta^on. Tom. 4. tit 10. des pragmatiq. Sanct. chap. 7.
And the reason why the Ecclesiastickes are here joined with the lay in the
election of a Schoolmaster, is, because his maintenance is taken out of the
revenewes of the Church. For otherwise there were no necessity why they should
come in.

34 In the third place, it disposes of other men's goods too freely (as of
building money) employing it to another use, against the will of the founders.
King Henry the third without any regard had to the determination of that
Council, by his Edict of Melune, Anno 1580 Article the eighth, does expressly
forbid both his Judges and all others to divert or apply the goods and
revenewes which have been given for the building of Churches and Chapels, to
any other use than that to which it was ordained. Which shows withal the
little regard the late King had of this Council.

35 It disposes likewise of the revenewes of Hospitals contrary to the
intention of the Founders, and to the prejudice of diverse Ordinances of our
kings which have been made in this behalf, whereby all jurisdiction and
disposal of the goods of hospitals is entirely given to the Judges Royal: who
are commanded to take the accounts of the administration of them, to proceed to
the correction and reformation of such abuses and disorders as are committed in
them, to assign an allowance to their tutelar governors for the charge of
divine Service which they are bound to do, to give the residue entirely unto
the poor, according to the institution of them. This is the sum of King
Francis the first his Edict given at St. Germain in Lay the 15 of January
1545, published at the Parliament of Paris the 4 of February the same year,
confirmed afterward by another of the same Prince made at Rochfort the 26 of
February 1546, and another given at Melune the 20 of June the same year;
another of King Henry the second the 12 of February 1553. of Charles the ninth
1561. of the Ordinance of Moulins of the same Prince, Article 73. And besides
all these by the Edict of Blois by the late King Henry, Article 65. All which
Edicts set down other forms for the administration, preservation, and
distribution of the goods of the said hospitals. Yet so that they must always
be employed to the relief and sustentation of poor people, the reparation of
buildings, and such necessaries.

Infeodated tithes of what jurisdiction.
36 The same Council disposes likewise of infeodated tithes, (that is such as
have by just title been appropriated to lay men, so as now they ret^^^ nothing
of spiritual) giving the Bishops Sovereign power to apply one part of them to
the maintenance of Colleges, and so as there shall be no appeal from them.
Which it ought not to do, because it has no power over the goods and lands of
lay men, no nor over the temporals of Clergy men in the Realm of France. It is
here considerable, that although tithes be reckoned amongst spiritual things
by In cap. literis extra de juram. calum.
Eugenius the third, yet that is improperly spoken, and they are not so truly
spiritual as set aside for the use of the spiritual Ministers of the Church,
as Mr. John In tract. de vita spir^ animae and in prima lectione supra Marc.
Gerson teaches.

37 And this is also the reason that by the Edicts of our Kings the most of the
controversies arising about tithes are of secular jurisdiction: as when the
question is of the possessorie: Ordon. de Hen. 3. faite a Melun en l'ann^e
1580. art. 29.
when the quotitie of tithes is controverted: Ordon. du roy Charles 9 faite au
chafteau de Bologne les Paris le 24. Iuillet 1568. Ordon. de Bloi^ art. 49.
or the removeall of corn or other tithable fruits of the earth out of their
place before the tith be paid; and such like cases: So that there is nothing
left for the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction save only the question of right,
namely, Whether the tith be due. Amongst other Edicts to this purpose, there is
one of C'est la me sine du chafteau de Bologne.
Charles the ninth, whose words are remarkable. All suits concerning tithes and
the right of them we have for the present remitted to the ordinary Judges of
every Province, to whom the cognizance thereof shall appertain, and over which
we have given them full jurisdiction. And another of the same Prince made at
Paris the 18 of April 1571, in the 16 Article of which there is this clause.
We grant unto our Court^ of Parliament the cognizance of such suits as shall
arise hereabout, every one within their own circuit.

38 If these Ecclesiastical tithes are of secular jurisdiction, because they
have in them but a little of the spiritual, much more ought they to be so
which are appropriated. So it is reported as a ruled case in law, Molineu^ in
consuetud. Paris.. 46. c^l. 25
That tithes holden in see belong to the jurisdiction of the secular Judge,
exclusively to the Ecclesiastical. So then the Ecclesiastical Judges cannot
intermeddle with them, nor determine of them without intrenching upon the other
jurisdiction: much less can the Clergy dispose and decree concerning them,
whether assembled in Council or otherwise, to the prejudice and damage of the
lay men that are the owners and possessors of them. And therefore in this
Kingdom we ought not to have any regard to that prohibition made by the
Council of Lateran, Cap. prohibemus extra de decimi^.
whereby lay men that hold tithes in fee are forbidden to make conveyance of
them to other lay men, for that is to make laws about particular men's estates,
and thrust the sickle into another man's harvest. Now the attempt which is made
by the Council of Trent^ the thing now in question, is far greater: for that
of Lateran does only prohibit the alienation of them to lay men, whereas the
Council of Trent gives Bishops power to deprive a lay man of his goods and
estate; of a thing which truly belongs unto him, and which has nothing
spiritual in it: to wit, to take a part of his tithes, that is a part of his
inheritance, from him, and convert it to the maintenance of a School. And
which is worse there must be no appeal made from that order and decree which
the Bishop shall make, what abuse so ever the^e be in it. So that both the
owners and possessors of those tithes shall be deprived of their goods, and the
Judges of their jurisdiction, and that to the prejudice of those ^dicts already
alleged.

39 And after all this yet this Council will have the accounts of Colleges so
erected to be heard and examined yearly by the Bishop, with the two deputies of
the Chapter, and the other two of the Clergy. Which is derogatorie to the
Edicts alleged here before, whereby the making of such accounts of
building-money, and Hospitals, is laid upon the Kings Judges, inasmuch as there
shall no account be made to them hereafter, of that part of the revenues which
shall be taken out of such buildings and Hospitals, to be employed to the use
of those Colleges and Seminaries, but only to the Bishop. Administration and
accounts of Hospitals and Spittles etc. of what jurisdiction.
Wherein there is a very great accumulation of grievances: for they to whom it
formely belonged to make those accounts, ought not to be deprived of it by
means of such application of the revenues to another use. And suppose that
might be admitted, yet it were reasonable that those accounts were still made
before the Kings Officers; at least that the Major and Sherifes of the town
where such houses are, and such like persons were called: considering that the
means of Colleges and Schools is no more spiritual than that of buildings,
Hospitals and Spittles. Especially considering that building-money, Edict de
Mel^^ de l'an 158^. art. 9.

Edict. de Cremien. art. 9.

Edict du moiis de Iuin. de l'an 1559.

Edict de Iuillet de l'an 1578. Ordo^^du 17. May 1^82.


after the buildings are finished, ought to be converted to the reparation of
Churches, and purchasing of ornaments for them, and other works of charity: and
yet there is never any alteration for that of the parties which are to make the
accounts, but it is always left to the Officers Royal; nor is the Clergy
suffered to intermeddle in the accounts of building-money; and in case they
should attempt, there might be put in an appeal as from abuse; as it was judged
by an Arrest in June 1550. And as for the accounts of Hospitals, they are to
be made also before the Kings Officers, notwithstanding that by the will of
the Founder, part of the revenues of those Hospitals be designed and appointed
for divine service, according to an Edict of King Francis ann. 1545. And (which
must be taken notice of) in case the Bishops and other of the Clergy have the
right of overseeing the administration of those Hospitals, yet they retain unto
themselves the hearing of the accounts as well as Lay Patrons do. Howsoever in
such sort that the four, at the least, of the most eminent inhabitants of the
place or Parish must be called unto them; as it is ordered by the sixth article
of the Ordinance of Hospitals, made 1561. From which the tenth article of that
of Melun 1580 does no way derogate, which must be expounded by the former, in
that where it is said, That the Prelates and Clergy shall be maintained in their
right which they have of looking to the administration of Hospitals and
Spittles, and taking the accounts of their revenues: where that must be
repeated which is in the precedent Edict, ( The most eminent inhabitants, etc.
being called thereunto;) forasmuch as this latter a^mes at the preserving and
confirming the right of the Clergy, not at the excluding of the inhabitants of
the place or Parish from the hearing of the accounts.

40 Lastly, the remedy of appeal is not admitted to take place against such
decrees, as the Bishops shall make for the repairing of Cloisters and
Monasteries; but they must be forthwith put in execution without all appeal;
yea and that in such sort that the Secular Magistrates are commanded upon
paine^ of excommunication to assist them. In which there are many grievances.
First, in that the Judges Royal, as also the Bailifs and Stewards are deprived
of that cognizance which belongs unto them before all others in case of such
reparations, as we have made it plain already. Secondly, in that the
Parliaments are deprived of those appeals which would be made unto them from
the inferior Judges. Thirdly, in that no appeal can be made unto them as from
abuse, from the sentence of Bishops. And fourthly, in that the Kings Officers
are made liable to excommunication, contrary to that privilege which has
been granted unto them, and which they have ever enjoyed: whereof we shall
speak in another place. Now if this Council take place, we must make account
that appeals as from abuse, are utterly abolished, as we have said already:
which is a thing that concerns France not a little, inasmuch a^ it is one of
the principal weapons, wherewith our Predecessors have fough^ against the
usurpations of the Popes and other Ecclesiastiques.

CHAP. IV. Of Exemptions.
Ill effects of exemptions.
1 ANother means which the Council uses to hook in to the Pope the
jurisdiction over other men, are the Exemptions granted to Churches, Chapters,
Corpses, Colleges, Abbeyes, and Monasteries, to the prejudice of their lawful
Prelates and Ordinaries, the Bishops and Metropolitans. Our Trent Fathers knew
well enough and confessed that such exemptions are a cause of much evil: for
say they, Cap. 2. Sess. 24. In ali^^ Can. 2. Sess. 8.
They give occasion to the persons exempted to live more dissolutely, and more
at their liberty. This is not all, for we must add, That they take away the
reverence and obedience which the exempted owe unto their Prelates and
Ordinaries; and make them think themselves as good men as the Bishops, and
other their superiors: ^^il. Durant. Tit. 5. prim. part. tract. de modo
celebrandi Conc. General.
That the correction and punishing of faults and excesses, is hereby ^indred
and brought to nothing: That they are prejudicial to the whole Church
Catholic, inasmuch as the exempted cannot be judged but by the Pope, and he
cannot do it by reason of his remoteness from them: That they rob men of the
means of doing many good works in religion: That they are the cause of many
scandals: That those to whom they are granted, abuse their privileges: That
they draw after them the ruin of Monasteries, being rather a burden than an
honor or profit to them. All these reasons were alleged by William Durant
Bishop of Mende in Gevauldan in the time of Clement the fifth, to persuade the
General Council of Vienna to abolish such exemptions. Let us hear what
complaints have been made against them at several times.

2 Saint Bernard spoke very freely of them to Eugenius the third, in those
books which he dedicated unto him. Bernard. lib. 2. de considerat. ad Eugenium.
Abbats (says he) are exempted from the jurisdiction of their Bishops, Bishops
from their Archbishops, Archbishops from their Patriarchs or Primats. Does this
manner of dealing seem good to you? It were strange if it could be excused,
or if there were any need of it. In so doing you show that you have plenitude
of power, but perhaps not of justice. He speaks yet more of it, but this is
sufficient.

3 Cardinal de Alliaco makes a complaint of them likewise, and is of opinion
that a course should be taken with them. Petrus de Alliaco ca. 2. de reform
Eccles.
adding, That many devout zealous men in the Church have a long time complained
of them: as Saint Bernard in a book by him directed to Pope Eugenius, and
others. John of Paris, a devine of the Order of Predicants urges the same
Saint Bernard. Johan. de Paris. in tractat. de potestat. Reg. and Pap. c. 19.
It is also to be considered (says he) that Saint Bernard reproves the Pope
for troubling the state of the Church, by exempting Abbats, and others subject
to Bishops, submitting them to himself immediately.

Guil. Durant. eod. loc.
4 The same Durant maintains, That the Pope has no power to grant such
exemptions, considering that they overthrow the general order of the
Catholic Church which proceeds from God^ the Apostles^ the holy fathers, and
general Councels; and which was approved and confirmed by Popes: that by this
order all the Monasteries, religious places, Abbats, Abbesses, Monks, and
Nuns, and all other religious, and Ecclesiastical persons, are immediately
subject to the government and guidance of Bishops within their Cities and
Dioceses, Exemptions anciently complained of.
as unto their superiours^ the Apostles successors, and such as have power and
authority over them. Which maxim he proves by a great number of authorities
taken out of ancient Fathers, Councels, and the Canon law: part whereof we have
set down in the margent: From whence, and upon diverse other reasons, Can. ult.
and ibi glos. did. 89 Can. ad hoc 16. q. 1. can. lice^, did. 45. can. omnes
Basilicae. 16. q. 7. can. si quis Abbas. can. cognovimu^. can. in nullo. can.
monasteria. can. visitandi. can. non semel 18. q. 2. 10. q. 1. per totam can.
qui vere 16. q. 1. and can. sacrae ^ad. cause. q. 2. can. El^ateriu^. and can
ser^itium 18. q. 2. can. in venditionib. 17. q. 4. can. Abbatib. 12. q^ 2. cap.
de synodoch. ext. de religio. domib. cap. per tuas. cap. omnis cap. quod. super
his. de mayor. and o^ed.
he concludes, that the Pope ought not for the future to grant any such
exemptions, and that those which are granted already ought to be called in.

5 Marsilius of Padua makes a grievous complaint hereof, Marsilius Patavinus in
def. Pac. part^ 2. cap. 24.
setting out the injustice of them to the life: The Pope (says he) absolveth
all the Prelates and superior orders from the power, care, and correction of
their superiors: as Archbishops from the jurisdiction of their Patriarchs.
Bishops from the Archbishops, Chapters or Colleges of Clergy men from their
Bishops, as also Abbats and Priours of Monks, and now of late (I wish it were
without a great deal of mischief) the Religious called of the Order of
Poverty; putting them all, by a kind of subversion of all order, under his
immediate care and correction, without any evident necessity, but rather upon a
notorious greediness of increasing suits: beating his brains to make the fees
run to him wards, to spoil the Prelates, and inslave them unto him so much
the more. No man is ignorant of the insolence which proceeds from hence. For
these exempted persons having not their superiors at hand grow contumacio^^,
disobedient and irreverent toward those to whom they ought of right to be
subject; taking from hence matter and occasion of offending more freely both
against them and others.

6 Nicholas de Clemangiis touches also upon this abuse; Nicol. de Cle^. in
libello de ru^^. et reparat. Eccles. five de corrupto Eccles. statu cap 31.
for speaking of Canons, he says, To the end that they may freely and with
impunitie commit all kind of wickedness which a soul is capable of; they are
exempted from all the correction and discipline of their Prelates, by paying a
great ransom. He makes a particular enumeration of their vices and crimes, and
afterward adds, Having committed all these frauds and rapines, there is no
body to punish them, for the poor can have no access to the Pope, who is the
sole Judge which many of them brag to have.

7 Mr. John Gerson in a certain book of his where he treats of the
reformation of the Church, Johan Gerson 1. part. in declarat. de^ectuum vir^^
Eccles. number. 70.
Consider (says he) whether the too large exemption and privilege of some men
be profitable or no, and whether the avoidance of the correction of the
Ordinaries granted unto them be commodious. The Emperor had also given his
Ambassadors in charge to require at the Council of Trent the reduction of
Monasteries under the jurisdiction of the Bishops of the Dioceses where they
stand. The King of France his Ambassadors stood to their demand, as we have
said elsewhere.

8 Let us now see the goodly reformation herein made by the Council: For that
piece which we have viewed already, promises some goodness for the future.
First, there is no forbiddance, nor prohibition of such exemptions, nor so much
as any restrictions, or limitations, Cap 2. Sess. 24. in aliis can. 2. Sess. 8.
saving only forasmuch as concerns Proto-notaries, Acolyths, Counts
Palatines, Kings Chaplains, and other such like dignities, which challenge a
kind of exemption. Which (says our Council) ought not to be granted, save
upon just, important, and almost necessary causes. As for other exempted
persons, let the Pope make as many as he will, no body says a word to him.
But they have done a great courtesy when they declare that nothing is taken
from the Ordinaries by such privileges of exemption, inasmuch (say they) as
they shall always have the cognizance and jurisdiction over exempted person^,
as Delegates for the Sea Apostolic. Jurisdiction over exempted persons,
unjustly usurped by the Pope.
According to them there is no difference betwixt having a proper jurisdiction
and of a man's own head, and having it by commission.

9 The interest of our France concerning this point is very evident in two
things: first, in the grant of exemption, In as much as from all antiquity they
were not granted, save only by our Kings and Princes, or by the Popes at their
instance, and upon very weighty and important considerations. Next, For as much
as no Monastery, Church, College, or other Ecclesiastical body can be
exempted from their Ordinary, so as to say they depend immediately upon the
holy See, without the Kings leave and permission. These are the very words of
one Article, Of the liberties of the Gallicane Church. They derogate from this
right by the second Chapter of the twenty fourth Session, of which we have
spoke already; Sess. 6. cap. 3.
and the third Chapter of the sixth Session, which gives Prelates power to
visit, punish, and correct all exempted Clerks Secular or Regular so journing
out of the Monastery, as Delegates for the Sea Apostolic.

10 And to show that this abuse of the Popes does still remain, we will give
one instance as good as all. Every man knows how the Jesuits increase both in
number of men, and Colleges, and revenues. It is a wonderful thing to hear
what relations go of them, yea to see as much as we see of them at this
present; that a little poverty should beget so much riches; that ten men in
such a short time should have bred as many of them already as there are
Salvages in the Newfound Land. Now all these are exempt from the jurisdiction
of all Judges both Ecclesiastique and Secular; and a suit cannot be commenced
against them but only before the Pope in person. If any man would plead with
them, he must resolve to go to Rome. For hark what their new Bulls say which
they got from Gregory the thirteenth in the year 1584. To be immediately
subject to this See, and totally exempt from the jurisdiction of all Ordinaries
and Delegates, and all other Judges, as we also by virtue of these presents
exempt them from them. That this is a new privilege may be collected from the
Bull of Julius the third, Petrus Ribadeneira lib. 3. de vita Ignatii cap. 21.
of the year 1550, where after he has reckoned up their privileges, he
adds, We ordain and declare that all these things and every one of them
shall remain firm and stable for ever, and shall be inviolably observed and
kept: and that they shall be so judged, expounded, and decided by all Judges
and Commissaries, by what authority soever established: depriving all and every
one of them of any power of judging and expounding them otherwise. So that
others beside the Pope may be their Judges, always provided that they judge
according to the Bulls which are granted unto them, and observe them.

CHAP. V. Of the Letters of grace, or Pardons for criminal matters.
1 HAving put the Pope above Councels, Council of Trent gives the Pope power
to pardon criminals.
above the Emperor, above Princes, and above all Clergy men whatsoever:
having given him the jurisdiction spiritual and temporal, and in a word the
power of life and death over al creatures, as masters had anciently over their
slaves, it was very good reason to leave his mercy to the liberty of his
conscience, to grant life to such as he shall think good. Hence it is that
these good Fathers leave it to his discretion to grant Letters of grace and
pardon to whom he please: for there is no restriction. They give order indeed
that criminals and offenders shall not cozen his Holiness, or at least that
they reap no profit from their lying. For they command the Bishop that shall
take the cognizance of them, or shall have passed the sentence of condemnation
upon them, to take special knowledge of the subreption or obreption of the
Popes letters, and of the knaverie that any shall use toward his Holiness,
for fear lest they make not a good market for their offenses, and abate
something of those rights which the Pope receives of them for the pardon. He
that purposely laid in wait for a man is more deeply taxed than he that killed
another only by chance; and so of the rest. This is the meaning of that
Decree. And to the intent that all may depend upon the Pope, and it may be
further lawful for him to barter with the delinquent ^or the pardon of his
offense, in case he will give a more reasonable price for it, the cognizance
and judgment of this false information is given unto the Bishop only by
commission from the Pope; to whom consequently it will be ever lawful to have
recourse by way of Appeal or otherwise. We will here set down the Decree at
large, that the truth of our exposition may be better known.

2 And for as much as it happens now and then that upon fained causes, Sess.
13. cap. 5. In aliis Sess. 3^ can. 4. and 5.
which yet seem probable enough, some extort such pardon^ whereby the
punishments inflicted upon them are either totally remitted, or abated: seeing
it is intolerable that a lie, which displeases God so much, should not only
be unpunished it self, but also procure pardon for another offense to the
liar: therefore it determines and decrees as follows, That the Bishop residing
upon his Church, may by himself, as Delegate for the Sea Apos^olique, take the
cognizance even summarily, of any subreption or obreption of pardon obtained by
false petitions for the absolution from any public crime or offense which he
had taken into his inquisition, or remission of the punishment whereunto the
delinquent was by him condemned^ and the said pardon not admit, after it shall
appear that it was procured either by false information, or concealment of the
truth.

3 Our ancient Canons never yet spoke of such Graces: Vid. titulos de
poenitentiis and (...) lib. 5. D^c^etal. in extravagant^ Cap. super literis
extra. de rescrip^.
they talk indeed of pardoning of sins as Priests; but not of remission of
crimes as Kings and Princes. And that which Innocent the third speaks of
subreption o^ obreption of the Popes letters, holds only in civil matters.
The gloss upon it, which expresses diverse cases of subreption and obreption
assigns none e^^e. The referen^^ made by Gratian to the constitution of the
Emperors Theodo^^a^ and Val^^tinian tends to another purpose; as namely to
show that the Pope has no intention to take away another man's right by his
dispensations. The Pope has not power to pardon criminals.
It is a thing never heard of in France before this present that Popes should
intermeddle with granting of pardons. The very faculties of the Legates sent
heretofore into this kingdom make not any mention of it, but only of the
remission of sins proceeding from crimes. And though there should be any
such thing, yet they are still curbed in with this bridle, Le^ rescrip. C. de
precib^ Imp. offer. Gratian. cause. 25. q. 1. in fin.
To use it in such things as are not contrary, derogatory, nor prejudicial to
the rights and prerogatives of the King and Kingdom, nor against the sacred
Councels, the laws of the Universities, the liberties of the Gallicane Church,
and the Ordinances royal.

Bellarm. Tom. 1 controvers. 2. lib. 4. cap. 24.
4 The Clergy of France do not hold their Ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the
Pope, but of the King alone; howsoever the Jesuits teach the contrary. When
they do not use it as they ought, when they connive at the punishment of
crimes whereof they have the cognizance, the Courts of Parliament may
interpose, by means of an Appeal as from abuse; especi^lly considering it is
it that grants them jurisdiction over spirituals. And if the question be of
granting pardon to a Priest or other Ecclesiastique, Benedict. in cap.
Raynutius in verb. et uxor nom Adilus. Papon tit. de grac. art.
not only in a privileged case, but also upon a common crime by him
committed; it belongs to the King only to grant it, not to the Pope nor the
Bishop. And so it has been always accustomed to be done in France, as our
Practitioners both ancient and modern do assure us.

Chap. 15. et 16. des libertez de l'Eglise Gallic.
5 We go yet further, which is, that the Pope cannot restore Clergy men to
their former state, so as to free them from the infamy which they have
incurred: nor lay men, unless it be to receive them into Orders, Offices, and
Ecclesiastical acts, and not otherwise. As also, that within this Realm he
cannot pardon or remit the honorary amends adjudged by a lay man, albeit the
condemnation were passed by an Ecclesiastical Judge, and that against a
Clerk, as making such honorary condemnation a part of the civil satisfaction.
These are two entire Chapters out of the Collection of the liberties of the
Gallicane Church.

CHAP. VI. Of the Popes Canons and Decrees.
1 THe Emperor Sigismond made a very remarkable demand to this Council, for
as much as concerns the Popes Constitutions and Decrees. It would not be amiss
(says he) that the multitude of humane Statutes and Decrees were lessened, and
many superfluous ones cut off, and that the Prelates would conform their
constitutions to the obligation of the law of God. Hear now the justice which
these Fathers did him. The holy Council has thought good to put secular
Princes in mind of their duty: Conc. Trident. Sess. 25. cap. 20.
trusting that they will not suffer their Officers or inferior Magistrates to
violate the immunity of the Church and Ecclesiastical persons: but that they
together with the Princes themselves, will yield due ob^dience to the sacred
Constitutions of Popes and Councels. Wherefore it decrees and commands that the
sacred Canons, all General Councels, together with other Apostolical
Ordinances made in favor of Ecclesiastical persons and Ecclesiastical
liberty, and against the violators thereof (all which it ^enewes by this
present Decree) be precisely observed by all men. Pop^s decrees ar^
^surp^tions. Many of them no^ received bes^^r^ the Trent Council.


2 See you here that which comprehends all the Canons, Decretals,
Clementines, Extravagants, Bulls, Taxes, and all other Papal Constitutions and
Ordinances of what kind soever they be; even such as concern temporal
matters, as the most of them do, and which contain some notable usurpations
upon Kings and Princes, their Realms and Dominions: for a man shall not find
so much as one of them which is not in favor of the Church. We may justly say
that here is a brave bargain for the Pope, and that ^e could not hope for a
greater advantage from the resolutions of these Fathers.

3 We shall observe in the first place, that there are a very many Decretals
which were never in use before this Council; witness Cardinal Cusan; We see
(says he) an infinite number of Apostolical Ordinances which were never
received, not even then when they were made. Nicholas ^usan. 2. c. 11.
Our France in particular has rejected an infinite company of them; as namely
all those which are prejudicial to the State, to the Edicts of our Sovereign
Princes, and to the liberties of our Gallicane Church. We must now receive
them: and not only those which are contained in Gratians Decret, the Decretals
of Gregory the ninth, Boniface the eight, the Clementines, and Extravagants,
but besides all those that are contained in the book entitled Collectio
diversarum Constitutionum, and literarum Romanorum Pontificum: in another,
called, Epistol^ decretales Summorum Pontificum in three volumes: in another,
entitled, Eclogae Bullarum and motuum propriorum: in that which is called Summa
Pontificum, and in the seventh book of Decretals newly composed: in the rules
of Chancery which are changed and rechanged a thousand times: and in other such
like collections which contain yet three times as many more constitutions as
are extant in the Ordinary books.

4 To this demand of the Emperor, we must join the judgment which our
Predecessors made of the Decrets and Decretals; to the end that the justice
which our Trent Fathers used in this regard may be so much the more clear.
Albericus de Rosate, one of the best of our Commentatours, who lived about
three hundred years ago, unfolds their Cabal in this manner; Alberi^us de
Rosate in l. Bene^a ^enone C. de quad^i^^. praescrip.
The Presidents of the Court of Rome, by means of their cunning and acute
prudence have altered their Statutes and Decrees according to the variety of
the times; sometimes exalting their commands, otherwhiles abasing them from
time to time. But to what end, save only insensibly to inslave and bring under
their feet (as they use to make their brag openly) all things both celestial
and terrestrial, spiritual and temporal?

5 Everard Bishop of Saltzburg said full as much in an Imperial Diet holden in
Germany in the time of the Emperor Ludovicus Bavarus: Aventinus l^ 7. an^al
Bo^orum.
The Pope (says he) casts new projects in his breast, how to establish an
Empire proper to himself. He changes the laws, he sets up his own, he
pollutes, he reaves, he robs, he cheats, yea he kills. Marsilius de Padua
speaks of this in diverse passages of his Defensor Pacis. Marsilius in 2. part
def. pa^. c 5. and 6.
In the sixth Chapter after he has quoted this place of Mark; You make the
commandment of God of no effect through your traditions; he puts this gloss
upon it; Thus they do which teach humane Decretals, which give the Bishop of
Rome the power and lordship over temporal things, and those not Ecclesiastical
only, but even Imperial and Royal, making a mock of the commandment of God.

6 In the twenty third Chapter he reckons up the pedigree and progress of
Papal Decrees: Idem part. ^. cap 23.
which will serve for a comment upon that which Albericus and Everard have
delivered upon this subject; The Bishops of Rome (says he) having arrogated
these things unto themselves, and relying upon the privileges and grants of
Princes, have consequently increased this title, then especially when the
Empire was vacant. By what de g^ees Popes have usurped over Princes, by their
Decrees.
First, they made certain laws about the Ecclesiastical Order, and
concerning Clerks, which they called Decrees. After this they persuaded lay men
to certain Ordinances by way of entreatie and exhortations, as fasting, and
abstaining from certain meats at certain times, to obtain the suffrage and
mercy of God: to remove certain contagions and tempests of the air from
among men; as appears by the legend of Saint Gregory, and some other Saints.
Next, perceiving that the Laity received them willingly, and that they observed
them by reason of their devotion, the custom being now grown ancient in such
matters, they begun to alter those institutions which ran by way of
entreatie, into commands; being so bold as even to strike the transgressors of
them with the terror of an anathema, or verbal excommunication; yet always
under color of devotion and divine service: and this without license from the
humane lawgiver. The desire of domineering increasing yet more and more in
them, and they perceiving withal that devout faithful people were frighted at
such words, by reason of their dulnes and ignorance of the law of God, which
persuaded them they were bound to all that was commanded them by their priests,
upon pain of eternal damnation, the Bishops of Rome, with the assembly of
their Clergy, undertook to enact certain edicts, or oligarchicall and
factious ordinances, concerning civil affairs, whereby they pronounced and
declared themselves, together with all those that receive their order or office
of Clerkship, yea even pure lay men, exempt from all public charge: admitting
even Secular married men to that office, who were easily allured thereunto,
that they might enjoy those immunities from public charges: gaining unto
themselves no small part of the people by that means, whom they freed from the
power of Princes and Magistrates: laboring withal to draw yet a great many
more from their obedience. By other edicts they denounced a curse or anathema
against all such as do any personal injury, whatsoever to those which are
admitted into the number of Clerks; defameing them publicly in Churches by
excommunications, and presenting them nevertheless to get them punished by the
punishments prescribed by humane laws. But the most horrible thing of all, and
which is most exe^rable in the office of Priests, is, that the Bishops both of
Rome, and others to enhanse their jurisdiction, and thereby their most
dishonest gain, to the contempt of God and the open prejudice of Princes, do
excommunicate and debar from the Sacraments of the Church as well Lay men as
Clerks, which neglect to pay certain pecuniarie debts, or indeed which are not
able to do it, to the payment whereof within a set time they were civilly
obliged. And not being yet content with these things, but aiming at the
greatness of Secular Princes, (contrary to the commandment of Christ and his
Apostles) they take license to make laws distinct from those which concern
the generality of the citizens; by declaring all the Clergy exempt from them,
and bringing in a civil division, and a plurality of Sovereign
principalities. For this is the root and original of this contagion of the
Realm of Italy, from whence all scandals grow every day, and as long as it
continues, discords will never be at an end. For the Bishop of Rome has
enjoyed this power a long time already, upon which he entered by a covert
prevarication by little and little; and the boldness of one of them has burst
out so far, that he has declared in his writings, that the Roman Emperor
is bound to him by an oath of allegiance, as subject to him by a coactive
jurisdiction: as may be gathered from the contemptible and ridicu^lous covert
pretenses in their narrations, which they call Decretals. He adds further, The
Bishops of Rome with their Cardinals durst not call these factious Ordinances,
laws; but they have Christened them by the name of Decretals: Pop's Decretals
why called Canon law. Much of them supposititiotis.
howbeit they mean by them to bind men over to punishment, and that
considering the state of the present age, by a coactive power, just as humane
lawgivers. Which at first they durst not express by the name of laws, fearing
the opposition and correction of the lawgiver, considering that therein they
incurred the crime of treason. Afterward they called these their Ordinances,
Canon law; to the intent that under color of the name, though wickedly used,
they might be more authentic; and further to beget in faithful people a
credit and reverence, and obedience to them. He speaks yet more of them in the
twenty first, and twenty fifth Chapters of his second part, and some other
places, but we will content our selves with this.

7 Gregory Haymbourg a German Lawyer, Gregorius Haymburg. in confut p^imat.
Pap. 2. Confi. l. princip,
who lived in the time of Pius the second, about an hundred and fifty years
ago, has a discourse in a certain book of his, which comes near to this of
Marsilius; Their Decret (says he) was publicly composed under Lotharius and
Conrad, to which, howbeit there be much hay and straw of the Pope, mingled with
the authorities of Saints, some notwithstanding give so much reverence, as it
seems the Gospel were contained in it. And from thence carnal Popes have
arrogated to themselves by virtue of this Decree (as an authenthentique book)
not of the Gospel, a plenitude of power. Afterward Innocent the third compiled
the Decretals, for the better defending of their plenitude of power. And
whatsoever they could wrest from factious and schismatic Kings and
Emperors, that they have transcribed into the sixth book of the Decre^als, and
into the Clementines, as rights bestowed upon them by Christ.

8 Our French men also have stoutly rejected these upstart Decrets, and and
have contented themselves with the ancient; with those namely which were
contained in an ancient collection, called Codex Canonum, not willing to
admit of any other, old or new: the one as being supposi^itions, the other as
too presumptuous. There was a great quarrel hereabouts betwixt the Bishops of
France, and Pope Nicholas the first, in the time of Charles the Bald; inasmuch
as Nicholas would have obtruded certain Decrees upon them for current money
which he said were ancient: which the other refused, because they were not
comprehended in their Code. We are informed of this controversy, by one of
the Epistles of the same Pope, writ to the Archbishops and Bishops of France,
where he strains to refute their opinion concerning that point: Nicolaus 1.
In epist ad Archiepise. (...) episcopos Galliae. quoe ext^t To. 3. Biblioth.
Patru^.

Et in Can Si Romanorum did. 19.


Howbeit (says he) some of you have writ that these Decretals of ancient Popes
cannot be found enrolled in all the body of the Code of Canons
(notwithstanding that they use them without distinction when they make for
their purpose,) and maintain that they ought not to be received now so to
impair the power of the Sea Apostolic, and augment their own privileges.
If they say then that the Decretall Epistles of the ancient Popes of Rome ought
not to be admitted, because they are not inserted in the Code of Canon;
neither should any edict or rescript of Saint Gregory be received; nor of any
other either before or after him, because they cannot be found in the Code of
Canons. All this was inserted into Gratians Decret. Where it is to be
observed, that all those goodly Decretals were forged since, which go under
the names of Clement, Anaclet, Evaristus, Alexander, Telesphor^s, and an
infinite number besides, which all men of judgment pronounce false upon the
bare reading: and yet notwithstanding our Council gives the same authority to
them which it does to the holy Scriptures.

9 Now one of the maine arguments of this forgerie is, Vid Can. de libellis
did. 2^.
that in this Code were contained only the Decrees of Sylvester, Syricius,
Innocent, Zo^imus, Celestine, Leo, Gelasius, Hilarie, Symmachus, Hormisdas,
Simplicius, and Gregory the younger. And that Pope Leo the fourth, one of Pope
Nicholas his predecessors, writ to the Bishops of Britain; That these were
the Canons which were received in Ecclesiastical judgments: The injusti^e and
multitude of Popes Decrees, Decre^s, etc.
meaning those which are contained in this Code, as it is said in Gratians
Decrets. Which Gregory the thirteenth in his late purgation expounds thus, He
means (says he) the Canons and rules contained in the Corpus or Codex
Canonum, which the Bishops of Rome were wont especially to use in judgments.
And this very Code was sent by Pope Adrian the first, to the Emperor Charles
the Great; as is gathered out of certain verses which we read at the
beginning of it.

10 The Nobility of France finding themselves grieved with these Decrees of
Rome, complain very bitterly of them about the year ^247, under the reign of
Saint Jews, setting forth a certain writing thereupon, which went even into
foreign Nations, and was inserted at large in the history of England: See
here a piece of it; Matthew Paris. in Henrico 3. p. 798.

Et Matthew. Westmonast. ^n in 2. part. sub ann. 1247. p. 217.


They do so annull the Secular jurisdiction by their laws, that the children
of servants are made Judges of free men and their children; howbeit according
to the ancient and Secular laws, they ought rather to be judged by us: and
they should not derogate from the customs of their predecessors, by their
upstart constitutions; so as they make us in a worse state than God made the
Gentiles, when he said, Give unto Caesar the things which are Cesars, and to God
the things which are Gods.

11 In the time of Charles the fifth, there was a book made in France, called,
The Vergers dream, first made in Latin, then translated into French by his
command. In the seventh and eighth Chapters whereof the Clergy man and the
Knight confer together on this wise; I call (says the Clerk) and account the
Decrees and Decretals of the holy fathers of Rome to be good law, which bind
and oblige every true Christian, as a subject and son of holy Church our
mother. To whom the Knight replies, If the terms of Rome be Decrees, or
Decretals, Ordinances, or Constitutions touching the temporal affairs of
Kings, Princes, or other Secular Lords, you Clerks among your selves shall call
and account them law, if you please. But the truth is, no man can establish nor
ordain any thing where he has no power nor authority. So as the King of
France has no power to make a law or ordinance to bind and tie the Empire: so
neither can the laws of the Emperor bind the King of France nor his
subjects. And a little after, I hold it therefore a frivolous thing, and very
ridiculous, that the holy Father should make any Decree, Decretal, or
Constitution about temporal matters. And yet the greatest part of them were
made about things of that nature.

12 The Cardinal of Cambray in his book of the reformation of the Church,
demands also that these Decretals be corrected. Cordinalis de Alliaco in
tract^ de reformat. Eccles cons^d. 2. p. 205.
For the third grievance (says he, speaking of the Pope) which he imposes
upon other men by the heavy multitude of his Statutes, and Canons, and
Decretals, those mainly which seem to bind over to grievous punishments, and
especially to mortal sins, should be taken order with.

Nicol. de Clem. in l. deruina and reparat. Eccles.
13 Nicholas de Clemangiis has spoke yet more freely of this point: So many new
rules and Constitutions (says he) set out by every Pope, the observance
whereof is enjoined contrary to the ancient laws and ordinances of our
forefathers; what are they else but captious snares, and seeds of law suits,
very fertile, of which those wrangling practicioners of the Court of Rome do
serve themselves, those sophistical curruptours of law, to raise an infinite
number of suits against right and truth, with a thousand arts of doing harm?

Du Tillet en l' advis sur les libertez de l' eglis^ Gallicane p. 5.
14 Philip the Fair was advised by the Princes and French Barons, Not to suffer
the Pope to make any Ordinances about things belonging to his Kingdom, without
the counsel of him and his, nor any new and unwonted thing to be brought in
thither: So says Mr. John du Tullet in his advice concerning the liberties of
the Gallicane Church. The ignorance, e^^o^s, and injust^^ of Popes Decrees, etc.
And it is the very counsel which Eudeas Duke of Burgundy gave him, which is
yet to be seen among the treasury of Charters.

15 That which Mr. Francis Duarenus, one of our most learned Lawyers said
concerning this subject, in the Preface of his book De sacris Ecclesiae
ministeriis, Catalogus testium v^r^t. 1. p. 49^
printed 1551, might have moved the fathers of this Council to a reformation,
Many (says he) are of this opinion, that the Canon law is nothing but a
confused and disorderly mass of decrees and constitutions set out by some
halfe-learned Popes, rather for their own gain than for any commodity that
redounds upon the Commonwealth of Christendom from thence; the knowledge
whereof seems neither commendable nor necessary. And there does not want some
that plainly profess that this law is all full of errors; of which number
Cynus Pistoriensis, a Lawyer of great repute was one. And having spoken of
Gratians Decret, which he says contains some good things, and some errors
withall^ The other volumes (says he) is the Decretals containing the epistles
of diverse Popes of Rome, called Decretals. In which volume of Decretals we
find many things which degenerate much from that ancient discipline delivered
in Gratians Decret; and thence rose that common proverb amongst them, That it
was never a good world since the Decret took wing and flew away. And presently
after, The other book is Boniface the eight's; which, as we understand was
never received in France, because that diverse constitutions therein contained
were made in hatred and despite of King Philip the Fair, and devised for the
commodity of the Court of Rome. He adds yet further, We are enforced to
confess, betide us well, betide us woe, that the manners of the Clergy of Rome
are so degenerate by little and little, that the later constitutions of Popes
fall short of the former: and it seems a man may rightly say of them as Homer
writ; Very few children are like their fathers in virtue, many worse, scarce
any to be found better. Wherefore as it is necessary to reduce the manners of
Clergy men to their ancient religion; so it would be expedient peradventure to
take all that is most true, most pure, and most profitable, in so many diverse
Papal constitutions, and reduce them into one short volume. And we are not
out of hopes that this may one day be brought to pass: even during the life
of Julius the third of present being, who has the bruit and report (I wish it
be not vain) of one that seriously thinks upon repairing the ruins of the
Church, and restoring the ancient Canons. The event has proved that this bruit
was vain; for neither Julius nor any of his Successors ever put his hand to
this reformation: unless a man would ascribe that to Gregory the thirteenth,
who has caused many things to be altered and rased out of those books which
were disadvantageous to the Pope, and favorable to France, and all those whose
rights are usurped by the Pope.

16 We will add for conclusion that which Mr. Philibert Bugnon, Bugnon livr^
1. chap. 4.
in his tract Of abrogated Laws, says upon this subject: Thus the Decretals
were brought in, received and admitted by all Christendom; before which the
Court of Rome never received those bafling disputes which increase from day to
day. Therefore Mr. Francis Rabelais said not without cause in his merry
Pantagruell by way of a common proverb: Since the Decree away did fly
And soldiers knapsackes wore.
Since Monks would need on horseback ride,
The world's worse than before.


17 After all these authorities and testimonies we will observe that right as
the Emperor Justinian gave the force of a law to the Resolutions of our
lawyers, Popes Decrees usu^^e ^ver civil l^wes. The worst Popes authors of the
Decrets. etc.
so our Popes now adays give the very same force to the constitutions of the
Emperors, which are thought weak and feeble if they be not canonized in their
Decrees, or confirmed by them. See what we are come to. They do yet more: for
like that Roman Emperor who caused the heads to be struck off of the statues
of Jupiter that he might substitute his own in the place, so they have
ascribed to diverse Popes many imperial laws out of the Code of Theodosius,
the Books of Justinian, and the very Capitularie of Charles the Great. But see
here that which is utterly intolerable, which is that they make void civil
laws of Emperors and Kings by their Decretals, they add unto them, and
diminish them, they derogate from, yea they quite abrogate them.

18 Alphonsus de Castro in exord. did. 20.

Hostiensis. Ioannes Andr^as.

Cardinalis Florentinus in can. ult.

Extra. de precar.

Albericus in Lexico. in verbo Gratian.

Felin. in. c. 2. de rescript.

Petrus de Ferrariis in tit. forma inquisit. super verb^ hae^ est quaed.

Boerius decis. 109. and alii ci^tati a Tiraquel la in tract. de nobilit, cap.
31. number. ^3.

Francis. Duarenus in prol^ lib. de minist. Eccles.


We let alone an infinite many errors and falsities which have been observed
by diverse learned men either Devines or Lawyers, which nevertheless were
confirmed by this Council, contenting our selves with producing the testimony
of Stanislaus Hosius lib. 2. de legitim. judic.
Stanislaus Hosius, one of the Presidents of our Council, who says that
Gratian relates a fable in his Decree. We do not see (says he) whence it
comes to pass that Gratian has set out this fable, but he that shall read his
works attentively will find that he has pumped more from the rivers and
other compilers than from the fountains. Nor will we urge that which Vid.
Tiraquellem in tract. de nobilit. cap 31. number. 537.

Platina in Greg. 9. Blondus and Platina.


some have recorded, that how ever the Popes have all law within the cabinet of
their own bosom, nevertheless they have forgot it sometimes, not remembering
themselves of some other Constitutions which were formerly made. Which is a
pretty modest Apology. We shall say only for conclusion, that the authors
of these Decrees and Decretals were the most vicious and ambitious Popes of all.

19 Alexander the third, who authorized Gratians Decree, and gave it the force
of a Papal law, was unjustly elected, accounted for an Antipope, and declared
such by a very famous Council lawfully called. He excommunicated Frederick
the first very unjustly, and carried himself so insolently toward him, that
he made him walk bare foot in his chamber, and putting his foot upon his neck
spoke these words, Super Aspidem and Basiliscum, etc. Thou shall go upon the
Lion and the Adder. To absolve King Henry the second of England from that ill
usage which he had shown to Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, he ordained that
Appeals should be allowed to issue out of his kingdom to Rome. Gregory the
ninth, the compiler of the Decretals, took upon him to excommunicate
Frederick the second very unjustly: promised life eternal to such as would
make war upon him: at last sold him his peace and pardon for an inestimable
sum of gold. As for Boniface the eight, the a^thor of the sixth book of the
Decretals, who excommunicated Philip the Fair, and called himself Lord of all
the world, who wore both the swords, and reigned with incredible insolence, he
is so well known that he needs not my commendations. Cap. Roman de jurejur. in
Clementin.
Clement the fifth, the author of those Decretals that bear his name, declares
that the Emperor takes an oath of allegiance to the Pope: that he is not
Emperor till after he have received his consecration and the Crown from his
hand. This Pope caused his Clementines to be published at Montelimar, where he
then was, Martinus Polonus lib 4. in Clemente 5. sub ann. 1513.
and had resolved to entitle them the seventh book of Decretals, but he dying
in the interim at Rochemaure, they hung in suspense till such time as John the
twenty second his successor sent them over the Universities. Mutius German.
Chron. lib. 24. Et Albertus Argentinensis in Chron.
This is that John that excommunicated Ludovicus Bavarus because he had taken
upon him the name and title of Emperor before he was crowned by him: who being
sued unto for peace and amity by that Emperor, would not hearken to it, till
he should first divest himself of the Empire and come to him in the quality
of a private man: whose sentence was pronounced a nullitie by the States of
Germany. I do not speak of the warre^ which were raised by their ambition, to
the great destruction and calamity of Christians: nor of many other vices that
abounded in them. Trent Council unjustly gives the Pope power over all books.
It suffices me to touch upon some few of the most eminent of them. See here
our goodly lawgivers! Let us from henceforth in stead of Oracles receive those
fumes and vanities which they present us with in their books. Nau. ler. tom.
2. Generat. 44.


CHAP. VII. Of the censure of Books.
1 HAving approved and confirmed the Popes Decrees and Decretals, it was
necessary they should condemn those many books that are in the world which
teach a quite contrary doctrine. For they are as so many witnesses of the so
many errors and falsities as are in them, and of the folly of those which
approved them. Our Fathers of Trent thought they could not by this charge upon
any that would better quit himself of it than his Holiness himself,
considering it so nearly concerns his copihold. This is the reason they decree
in this manner. Council. Trid. Sess. 23. sub fin.
The holy Council in the second Session holden under our holy Father Pius the
fourth, made a committee to certain select Fathers that they should consider
what was requisite to be done concerning diverse censures and suspected or
pernicious books, and that they should make report thereof to the holy
Council; hearing now that they have finished th^s work, and seeing that by
reason of the multitude and variety of books it cannot be distinctly examined
by the holy Synod; it therefore commands that whatsoever has been done by
them in this particular be presented to the most holy Pope of Rome, to be
concluded and set out by his judgment and authority.

2 This Canon must be rightly understood with all its ampliations, whereof the
first is, That power is not only given to the Pope to determine and publish
what had been already done, but also to do the like for ever after with all
books wherein should be found any thing that may be offensive to him. The
words of the Decree seem repugnant to this in some kind, when they speak of
that which has been done already; but our Doctors say that Beneficia non
sunt restringenda. Next, it belongs to the Popes to put expositions upon the
Canons and Decrees of this Council; for that power is given unto them in
express terms, at the end of the last Session. Now the Popes have understood
it so, and those which came after have not omitted to do their endeavor in
this kind, so that a man would wrong them to accuse them of negligence. The
last impression of their Index expurgatorius set forth at Paris by Laurence
Sonnius the year 1599 will always serve them for a just defense, which
carries this inscription: The Index of books prohibited, with the rules made
by the Fathers select by the Council of Trent, first published by the
authority of Pius the fourth, afterward augmented by Sixtus the fifth, and now
lastly revised and set forth by the command of our holy Father Clement the
eight. Revised (that no scruple be left) signifies as much as augmented,
afterward. Which is necessary: for those many wicked books must be
excommunicated which say worse than hang'em to our later Popes, the Authors of
our wars, and almost to all the rest, yea (which is more grievous) to the
Popedom it self which they have labored to overthrow. Books condemned writ
in defense of secular Princes tigh^s.
Wherein Catholics have been as busy as any others, if not more; to the
great scandal of the Church. The second ampliation is, That power is given
unto him to condemn all those books as heretical which were made in defense
of the laws, power, and authority of Emperors, Kings, and Princes; and that
so far forth as they cannot be spoken of but as vassals and feudetaries to
Rome, and to bestow any other title, quality, or prerogative upon them, is to
speak blasphemy against the holy Sec.

3 For this reason it was necessary to condemn the Epistles of the Emperor
Frederick the second for heresy, which were collected into one volume by
Peter de Vinei^ his Chancelour, which contain a defense to the Imperial Laws
against the Popes usurpations. The works of William Occam a Franciscan, and
Marsilius of Padua a Devine, who defend the same rights in behalf of the
Emperor Jews the fourth. The book of Antonius de Rosellis of the power and
authority of the Pope, made upon the same occasion in behalf of the Emperor
Frederick the third, and in defense of his rights, being dedicated unto him
for that purpose. The treatise of Zabarell Cardinal of Florence, entitled, Of
schisms which should be taken away by the Emperors authority, made a little
after the first Council of Pisa; where he speaks of the Imperial power in
the Church somewhat too freely, to the prejudice of our Popes. The Monarchy of
Dantes, where he treats that the Emperor depends not upon the Pope, but holds
his Empire from God. The V^rgers dream (and another book entitled A dispute
betwixt the Clerk and the Soldier, which is an abridgement of the former)
containing a defense of the Laws Royal of the Kings of France against the
Popes usurpations, dedicated unto Charles the fifth, and translated into French
by his command. Peter de Ferrariis the Practitioner, who is put in two places
for fear of missing him; in the one he is condemned outright, in the other
they have done him this favor to spare his life, upon condition that he be
gelded, which was afterward put in execution to the purpose. They have not
spared even Pope Pius the second himself, not content with that declaration
which he set forth in his Bull, declaring all that to be heretical which he
had written against the Popes authority when he was called AEneas Sylvius, and
by consequent the book which he entitled De origin and authoritate
Imperatoris Romani, where he speaks of Imperial laws in other terms than
the Popes do, to the prejudice of their Decretals. Our Lawyer Baldwin, for all
he was an enemy to the Hugenots, yet could not escape the fury of Rome, but
was condemned as a Heretic for a book which he made, Of the Ecclesiastical
and Civil Laws of the Emperor Constantine. And because he gives the
Emperors too much power over Ecclesiastical discipline; whereas by the
doctrine of our Popes they are no more but mere executioners of their Decrees
and Constitutions, having no power to intermeddle further.

4 All other books which have treated of the Imperial or Royal power,
whether for temporal matters, exempting them from the power or jurisdiction of
Popes, or for spiritual and ecclesiastical discipline, have undergone the
like condemnation, and amongst others that which bears this title, What manner
of power it is that belongs to Kings. The history of Francis Guicciardine
where he speaks of the usurpation of Popes, and the progress of them. The
lives of the Emperors set out by John Cuspinian, where he speaks of the same
things. The historians of Germany, printed by Wechelius the year 1584, because
they relate in their histories the unjust proceedings of the Popes against the
Emperors, and afford some testimonies for the rights of the Empire. The Flowers
of Histories, with the Author of them Matthew Westminster, an English Monk,
who lived about the year 1375, because he has often time spoken his opinion
concerning such usurpations and unjust dealings. What books prohibited by
Papists, and why.
The Commentaries of Claudius Espenseus, a Sorbon doctor upon the Epistle to
Titus, because he speaks too favorably in behalf of Kings, and gives them too
great authority in the Church, as also because he speaks a little too freely
against our Council, and the beastlynesse of Rome. That great work of
Marguarinus de la Bigne a Sorbon Doctor, entitled, Bibliotheca Sanctorum
patrum, because the Pragmatique of Saint Jews concerning the rights and
liberties of the Gallican Church is there found, and other writings and tracts
which shows the power of our Kings, as the History of Gregory Archbishop of
Tours, Ado Archbishop of Vienna, Sigebert Abbat of Gemelard, who speaks also of
the Imperial authority. That goodly remonstrance of the Court of Parliament
of Paris, exhibited to King Jews, wherein is represented the power and
authority of our Kings in the Church, the opposition which they have made
against those Popes which would have invaded our liberties; which they have put
also in two places, that so an iterated act may be of more force; and many
more which a man may take notice of at leisure.

5 The third ampliation is, That they have power to abolish and condemn all
those books and writings which have been published at diverse times in defense
of Councels, and of the authority of the Church against the usurpations of
Popes. And upon this consideration it is that the book of Zabarel Cardinal of
Florence, concerning schism, was condemned, together with some others whereof
we have spoken already. The counsel of the Abbat of Panormo made in defense of
the Council of Basil: The book of AEneas Sylvius, of the same Council of Basil;
which troubles them infinitely. And it is very credible the author would never
have thought of doing of it, if he had believed that ever he should have been
Pope. The Acts of the second Council of Pisa, which they call a Conventicle,
which tends to the disgrace of us Frenchmen, of whom it did mainely consist.
The book of Duarenus, entitled. De sacris Ecclesi^ ministeriis; because he
limits the Popes power, and many other Authors.

6 The fourth ampliation is, That it is lawful for them to enroll amongst
these the writings of all such as have recorded the vices and abuses of the
Popes Court of Rome, to demand a reformation thereof: Or who have spoke of them
by way of complaint, or otherwise: as Theodoric of Nihem, one of their
Officers, who has told us strange stories of the lives of Popes during their
schism. Cardinal Benno, who has told us wonders of Gregory the seventh, who
was called Hildebrand, and some other Popes that lived before him. Nicholas de
Clemangiis a devine of Paris, who speaks very freely, after the French fashion,
of the abuses of the Court of Rome. The hundred grievances of the German
Nation, put up in the Dict of Noremberg in the year 1522, by the Catholic
Princes, and other States there assembled, to be presented to the future
Council, which was afterward called at Trent: (See what justice was done to
them in this case.) As also all the tracts put together in a book, entitled,
Fasciculus rerum expetendarum and fugiendarum, which concern especially this
reformation; and others in great abundance.

7 Many ampliations yet more might be made, but we will content our selves
with these. This were too much if our Popes could be content with it. It is to
be feared that they will not tho, and that they will increase their roll from
year to year. We shall see them shortly take upon them to abolish the laws,
edicts, constitutions and ordinances ancient and Modern of Emperors and
Kings. To wit, all those that speak of Ecclesiastical discipline; of the
authority of Princes in the Church; in justice; in election, and nomination to
Bishopriques; of their rights and privileges, and the liberties of their
Kingdoms and Empires. It is their meaning that no man shall make any question
of it, but they durst not as yet leap beyond their limits, for fear least the
heaviness of their load should make men kick. They come to it by degrees, as
they have always done. And to make their design appear as clear as the day,
we need but represent two of their pieces, to wit, the Bull De coena domini,
Bull de coena Domini how injurious to lay Magistrates,
which they continually renew. Look the sixteenth Article of that which
Gregory the thirteenth sent into France in the year 1575. and Gregory the
fourteenth during our last troubles. Vid. Collectionem diversarii Constitution.
Romanorum Pontificum, insine.

Et eclogam Bullarum and motuum propriorum. page 316.


We excommunicate and anathematize all and every one, the Magistrates,
Counselors, Presidents, Auditors, and other Judges by what name soever they
be called, the Chancelours, Vicechancelours. Notaries, Registers, and
Executours, their servants and others which have any thing to do, in what sort
or manner soever, with capital or criminal causes against Ecclesiastical
persons, in banishing or arresting them, passing or pronouncing sentence
against them, and putting them in execution, even under pretense of any
privileges granted by the Sea Apostolic, upon what causes, and in whattenor
and form soever, to Kings, Dukes, Princes^ Republiques, Monarchies, Cities,
and other Potentates, by what name and title soever they be called, which we
will not have to be useful for them in any thing, repealing them all from
henceforth, and declaring them to be nullities. See here all the Judges Royal
both superior and inferior, utterly despoyled of the cognizance of criminal
causes!

8 The twelfth Article speaks on this sort; We excommunicate all and every the
Chancelours, Vicechancelours, Counselors, ordinari^ and extraordinary, of
all Kings and Princes, the Presidents of Chanceries, Counsels, and Parliaments,
as also the Atturneyes general of them and other Secular Princes though they be
in dignity Imperial, Royal, Du^all, or any other by what name soever it be
called: and other Judges as well ordinary as by delegation: as also the
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Commendatories, Vicars and Officials, who by
themselves, or by any other, under pretense of Exemptions, letters of grace, or
other Apostolical letters, do summon before them our Auditors, Commissaries,
and other Ecclesiastical Judges, with the causes concerning benefices, tithes
and other spiritual matters, or such as are annexed to them; and hinder the
course of them by any lay authority, and interpose themselves to take
cognizance of them in the quality of Judges.

9 This is not all; for in the following Article he goes yet further, striking
a heavy blow at the Ordinances of our Kings. Those also which under pretense
of their Office, or at the instance of any man whatsoever, draw before them to
their bench, Audience, Chancerie, Counsel or Parliament, Ecclesiastical
persons, Chapters, Covents, and Colleges of all Churches, or cause them to be
brought in question before them, or procure them directly or indirectly, under
what color soever, beyond the appointment of the Canon law. Those also which
ordain and set forth Statutes, Ordinances, Constitutions, Pragmatiques, or
other Decrees whatsoever, in general or in special, for any cause or color
whatsoever, even under pretense of Apostolical letters, not now in practice,
or repe^^ed, or of any custom, or privilege, or any other manner whatsoever:
or that make use of them when they are made and ordained, when by them the
Ecclesiastical liberty is abolished, impaired, depressed, or restrained in
any manner whatsoever; or who do any prejudice to our laws, and those of our
See, directly or indirectly, implicitly, or explicitly.

10 See yet another which follows after this. Those likewise which do any way
hinder the Archbishops, Bishops, and other Prelates superior and inferior, and
all other ordinary Ecclesiastical Judges, in the exercise of their
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction against any person; according as the Canons, the
sacred Constitutions of the Church, the Decretals of general Councels, and
principally that of Trent do ordain. Popes ball injurious to the G^lli^ane
libe^ti^s.
There is further in the same Bull some excommunications against those which
Cap. 2. ejusd. Bullae.
appeal from the Popes sentence, to General Councels: Against Cap. 11 ejusd.
Bullae.
those that hinder Clergy or Lay men from going to plead at Rome, which is a
remarkable thing: Against Kings and Princes which make the fruits of
Ecclesiastical livings be sequestered upon any occasion whatsoever, which
concerns the right of the Crown: Against those which impose any tenths,
subsidies, or other taxes.

11 All this is leveld against the rights of the King, and the liberties of the
Gallican Church. I ask now, seeing our Popes take upon them to excommunicate
our Kings, which make ordinances concerning such matters, their Officers and
Magistrates, and all others which practice them, whether they will make any
conscience of putting forthwith such laws and ordinances into their Index
expurgatorius? Let a man go about to put all the distinctions which he can
devise to save our liberties, upon this Council; will not it be lawful for
the Pope, when he shall please to derogate from them, to come in with a non
obstante? Does not he in the forementioned Bull repeall all the privileges
granted by the Sea Apostolic? His successors shall not they have the same
power that he has?

12 The other piece which we promise^, shall be taken out of the privy
Counsel which was holden at Rome almost at the same time, when the former Bull
was sent, which was found in the Advocat David's trunk, where it is said; That
the successors of Hugh Capet, to undo the Church, brought in that damnable
error, which the French men call the Liberties of the Gallican Church; which
is nothing else but a refuge for the Waldenses, Albigenses, poor of Lions,
Lutherans, and Calvinists at this present. And in another Article it is said;
That all Edicts made within the Kingdom, of what standing soever, if they be
repugnant to Councels, shall be cassed, repealed, and disanull'd. As much as to
say, all the Edicts concerning the rights of our Kings, the good of the
Kingdom, and the liberties of the Gallican Church: which are all abolished and
brought to nothing by the Council of Trent.

A REVIEW OF THE COUNCIL OF TRENT. BOOK VII.
CHAP. I. That the Council of Trent tends to the depression and abasing of the
authority of Christian Princes.
1 THis redoubted greatness, This Council whe^ein d^rog^to^y to Princ^s.
to which the Pope is exalted by this Council, does diminish as much not only
the power of Councels and Clergiemen, but also that of Christian Princes. These
are their spoils, their Scepters, their Crowns, their justice, their
sovereign authority, their honors and preheminences: all this is violently
pulled from them and transferred upon another lord. In the first place they are
deprived outright of that power which they have over Ecclesiastical things and
persons, due unto them both by divine and humane law. The calling of Councels
is taken from them; the presidence in them; the approbation and authorizing of
the determinations made in them; the nomination, election, or investiture to
the Bishopriques within their Empires and Dominions, justice civil and
criminal upon the goods and persons, and discipline Ecclesiastical, and many
other such like things. It tacitly approves, yea in many things expressly,
the unmeasured power and dominion which the Popes have usurped upon Kingdoms
and Empires, upon the election and deposition of Kings and Princes, and upon
all that belongs unto their state. Princes griev^nc^s against the Council of
Trents decrees.
It disanuls their laws and ordinances, and on the contrary establishes
those of the Popes, and condemns all those that have defended their rights. All
this is handled in the former books, and it would be impertinent to use
repetitions. And therefore we send the reader back thither. We will here add
that which remains to be spoke of that subject.

Council. Trid. cap. 15. Sess. 7.
2 They are further grieved inasmuch as the Council takes upon it more than
belongs unto it in point of law concerning temporal matters, which is above
their jurisdiction; for it disposes of the administration of Hospitals and
their revenues: Sess. 21. c. 4.
It ordaines concerning the making up of their accounts: It compels the people
to allow maintenance to their Priests: Sess. 24. c. 13.
Gives power to the Bishops and Ecclesiastical Ordinaries as Delegates for the
Pope, Sess. 22. c. 8.9.
to be the executioners, in cases commanded by law, of all donations to pious
uses, as well by last will and testament, as amongst the living: to visit
Hospitals, Colleges, and Schooles^ to take the accounts of lay men for matter
of buildings, Hospitals, alms, all customs and privileges whatsoever to the
contrary notwithstanding: To examine Notaries elected by the authority Royal
and Imperial, Sess. 22. c. 10.
as Delegates for the Sea Apostolic; and if they find them insu^ficient or
p^ccant in any thing concerning their office, to suspend them for a time, or
deprive them for ever. Sess. 22. c. 11.
It deprives the lay patron of his right of patronage in certain cases: Sess.
24 can. 19.
Gives the entire cognizance of causes Matrimonial to the Church: Imposes a
punishment upon ravishers of women whether lay men or Clergy, Sess. 24. cap. 7.
declaring them to be incapable of any dignity; and condemns them to give a
dowry unto those that they have ravished: Sess. 24. c. 8.
It gives power to the Ecclesiastical Judges to proceed rigorously against lay
men that keep concubines according to the quality of their crime, in case
they make no reckoning of Ecclesiastical censures. And grievously to punish
those women which live openly with their adulterers and concubinaries,
according to the heinousness of their crime, though no man required them to
it: and that they be corrected out of the town or diocese of Ecclesiastical
Ordinaries, calling in to their assistance the secular arm, if need be: Sess.
25. c. 9.
It prescribes a form, and that a very new one, to prove rights of patronage:
Sess. 25. c. 5.
It uses commands to the secular Judges, which they should not receive but
from their Sovereign Princes.

3 But one of their greatest usurpations in that regard is that which was made
concerning duels. Sess. 25. c. 19.
First, in the very prohibition of them, forasmuch as seeing they were allowed
by humane laws, they should have bin prohibited and forbidden by them too;
that so Clergy men entrench not upon lay men, but every one contain himself
within his own bounds. Secondly, in the co^fiscation of Cities and other
places, belonging to the Emperor, Kings, Princes, or any other persons where
such duels shall be fought with their leave. Thirdly, in the forfeiture of all
the goods, as well of those that fight, as of their seconds. To make it appear
that those are notorious usurpations, we will set down this Maxim, That a
Council or the Church has no coactive jurisdiction over Kings and Princes.
And likewise this other. That a Council has no power in temporal matters.
For the first, we affirm that a Council has no power save only over that
which concerns the spiritual, that is, over such things as quicken the
Spirit, or have been given by the Holy Ghost; as namely the word of God, and
the mystery of the kingdom of heaven: as says the gloss of Saint Ambrose
upon that place of the Apostle to the Corinthians, Epist. 1 ad Corinth. c. 9.
v. 11.
If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we shall
reap your carnal things? The reasons hereof are set down in holy Scripture:
John 1. 8.
That the kingdom of Jesus Christ, whose imitators the Clergy men are, is not
of this world: John 6.
That he conveyed himself away when he knew they would have made him king: That
when he was desired to be judge concerning the division of an inheritance, he
said, he was not made Judge nor dividour betwixt them: The Cl^^gy proved to be
under the jurisdict^o^ ^f (...)
That he commanded to give to Caesar the things which are Cesars: That himself
would pay custom money, and cause Saint Peter to pay it likewise: That he
submitted himself to the jurisdiction of Pilate, L^ke 12 M^tth 2^. M^tth. 17.
John 19. L^ke ^2. 2 Ad Timoth. Romans 13.
who was Judge in Judea in stead of the Emperor, and declared that the power
of judging him was given unto him from above: That he said to his Apostles,
That Kings exercise Lordship over them, and they that exercise an authority
upon them are called Benefactors; but ye shall not be so. The Apostles have said
that Clergy men ought not to intermeddle with the affairs of this world; have
commanded that every creature without exception should obey Princes and secular
powers, and honor the Magistrate as ordained by God. Saint Paul appealed to
Caesar, ^ct. 25.
and acknowledged him for his Judge. Saint Ambrose expounding that passage of
the Apostle to Titus, Ambros. vid. Mar^il. page 15^
he admonishes them to be subject to Princes and Magistrates; that is (says
he) Although thou have the spiritual Empire to command in that which is
spiritual, yet notwithstanding he advises them to be subject to Kings,
Princes, heads, and their Magistrates, because the Christian religion deprives
no man of his right.

4 Saint Austin in his commentary upon the same place shows how the Church
does not attempt any thing upon the laws of secular Princes: Gloss. secund.
August, Marsi^. page 150.
For fear (says he) lest the name of God be blasphemed, as invading that
which belongs unto another, and lest it should be thought that the doctrine of
Christianity, as injust, did preach any thing against the civil laws. Saint
Chrysostom says, Ch^ysost. lib. ^. dialog. cap. 3.
That in the Church we should betake our selves to well doing freely and
willingly, not by constraint. Because (as he adds) the laws have not given
us any such power as that we should punish men's offenses by authority ^f a
judicial sentence. Saint Bernard speaking to Pope Eugenius the fourth; Which
power and dignity seems greater to you, that of remitting sins, or dividing
inh^^itance? low and terrestrial matters have Kings and Princes of the earth
for their Judges. Why do you incroach upon another man's bounds?

5 Claudius Espenseus a Sorbon Doctor proves by many good authorities that
Clergy men are subject to secular Princes, and owe all honor unto them as to
their Lords. We will here set down a piece of it. Claudius Esp^^seus Theologus
^arisiens. in ^omment. in ^pis^. ad ^^^um cap 3 dig^es 10
The Apos^le (says he) conforming himself to the pattern and answer of our
Savior, instructs believers to be subject to the powers and privileges of
this world. Thomas Aquinas has observed that such admonitions were necessary
at that time; first to remove the error of the Jews, who believed that they
ought not to obey the commandments of men: In the second place that they might
not make any disturbance in the Church. Which some troublesome fellows not
observing, it is a wonder to see the hubbub^ which they have raised on both
sides, by the controversy which they have moved betwixt the Kingdom and the
Priesthood. There went many hundred years after Saint Paul before this filthy
Camarina; Chrysostom never suspecting that any such thing would come to pass,
did simply expound those words [Every soule] Though (says he) thou be an
Apostle, an Evangelist, a Prophet, a Priest, or a Monk. And his interpretation
was followed by Theodoret, Theophylact, Oecumenius, and other Greek Authors.
Gregory the first, ca^^ed the Great, did freely confess that God had granted
the Emperor the rule not only over the men of war, but also over Clergy
men. And Bernard, who lived a long time after them, in his Epistle written to
Henry Archbishop of Sens, makes this inference. [Every soule] and yours too.
Who has excepted you out of this generality? If any man go about to except
you, he goes about to deceive you. Believe not such counsels, etc.

6 See here a great many testimonies all together which might happily have
made a greater show, if every man's had been brought in by it self: But my
purpose being to apply all this to the present malady, I thought it more
convenient to make all these witnesses be produced by a party not suspected,
and one who very well understood them. Jurisdiction over Clerks various by the
Impe^iall law.
Conclude we from all these authorities, that the coactive jurisdiction and
temporal power does not belong to Ecclesiastiques, but rather that it is a
right Imperial and Royal. But we must expound this last point a little more
plainly: Princes alone having this power and Secular jurisdiction, and all that
depends upon it; sometimes they have used it themselves, sometimes they have
granted the exercise thereof to their Officers and Magistrates, or even unto
their Clergy men; yet without utterly devesting themselves of it; without
making a pure cession from it, and absolute transport: they always reserved
unto themselves the Soveraigntie as Masters and Lords of it: the power of
transferring the exercise of that jurisdiction from one to another, either in
part or in whole: to deprive whom they thought good, without doing them any
wrong: to augment it in the person of their Officers, and abate it in their
Ecclesiastiques; just as they have conferred part of it upon the latter to the
prejudice of the former.

7 We have elsewhere treated of the judgments passed by Emperors and
Princes, and also of the criminal causes of Ecclesiastical persons. Here we
will speak only of the cognizance of civil causes. The Clergy were anciently
under the jurisdiction of Secular Judges; in which there were afterward many
alterations. L. 2. C. de episc. audient.
The Emperors Valentinian and Valens, in a certain constitution directed to
one of their Magistrates ordain, that Clerks be assessed to great damages
for their frivolous appeals. Valens, Gratian, and Valentinian give the
jurisdiction of the civil causes of Clerks and their offenses, L. qui mos. C.
Theod. de episc. Eccles. et Cler.
civilly prosecuted to the Synods of the Diocese, reserving criminal causes to
their Magistrates. Theodosius and Valentinian reserve Clerks to the audience of
their Bishops. L ult. C. Theod. eod.

L ult. C. Theod. de episc judic.

L. cum Clerici^. C. de episc. and Cler.

L. decernimus C. de episc. audi.

L. Omnes C. de episc. audient.

L. jubemus. omes. C. de episc. and.


Valentinian the second, Theodosius the younger, and Arcadius declare that this
is for Ecclesiastical causes. Martian will have the Bishops to be judges over
the Clerks in their Dioceses; and of their civil causes, if the plaintiff have
recourse unto them: so that it was left to the liberty of him that entered the
suit, whether he would make them Judges, or have recourse unto the Magistrate,
as is specified in another law of the same Emperor. Leo and Anthemius give
this jurisdiction over Clerks and Monks, to the Presidents of the Provinces
within their circuit, and to the Praefectus Praetorio at Constantinople. And in
another law they ordain, that the Bishops, Clerks, Monks, and all other
Churchmen of what quality soever, shall answer before the Presidents of the
Provinces, and come before them when they shall be summoned and accused.
Justinian in his seventie ninth novell Constitution, submits Monks to the
jurisdiction of Bishops: Justinian. Novell. 79.

Idem Novell. 83.


In the 83 constitution, he decrees the like for Clerks, as well for matters
civil as for Ecclesiastical crimes, reserving others to his officers. And
furthermore in ca^e the Bishops cannot, or will not take the cognizance of
them, he referres them to his Magistrates. Idem Novell. 123 cap. 8.
In the 123 constitution, he prohibits the conventing of Bishops before his
Magistrates in cases civil or criminal, without his Imperial command. In
other places the Emperors proceeding ^urther, have given jurisdiction to
Bishops, not only over Clerks, but also over Lay men. L. 1. C. Th. de episc.
judi^. Sidonius epist. 8. lib. 5.
Constantine the Great was the first (whose law our Popes ascribe to
Theodosius) having made a very favorable constitution in behalf of Bishops,
whereby he gives them the cognizance of all civil causes betwixt Lay men,
upon the bare demand of one of the parties, albeit the other did not consent
unto it. In such sort as the Magistrates are bound to desist from the
cognizance of it, as soon as one of the parties shall require to be dismissed
and sent thither, whether it be at the beginning, or middle, or end of the
suit.

L. Si quis ex consensu. C. de episc. audient.
8 Arcadius and Honorius derogating from this law, will have it to be by the
joint consent of both parties, and that by way of arbitrament. The same
Emperors, together with Theodosius, Ancient laws do not bind p^esent Princes.
do ordain that there shall be no appeal from this Episcopal judgment, and
that their sentence shall be put in execution by the Sergeants and Officers of
the Judges. This is the law which Justinian would have to be observed; L.
episc. C. eod.
I say those two last constitutions, for as for that of Constantine, he did not
insert it in his books, but the other latter. Which Gratian has confessed in
his Decree. And whereas in the Code of Theodosius, the inscription of the title
runs thus, In. haec si qui^ post Can. omnes. Cause. 11. l 1.
De Episcopali judicio: Justinian in stead of it has put, De Episcopali
audientia, to show that it is not properly any jurisdiction which is bestowed
upon them; but on the contrary, a friendly and arbitrary composition to abridge
the process.

9 After this time the Emperor Charles the Great, in his Capitularie, renewed
the law of Constantine, Carolus Magnus in capitul. lib. ^. cap. 28.

Can. qui^un^ue Can. Omnes. Can. Volumus. Cause. 11, q. 1.


and gave the same jurisdiction therein contained unto all Bishops, repeating
the same law word for word. Which the Popes have not forgot in their Decree,
where they have inserted the Constitution of Constantine, under the name of
Theodosius, and that of Charles the Great; just as Justinian did in his Books,
the responses and commentaries of Lawyers, to give them the strength of a law.
For as for them they think they are not subject to those of Christian Princes.
But they have gone further yet, for by a most disrespectfull ingratitude, they
have gone about to serve themselves of these laws against those very Kings and
Emperors which made them, to take upon them the jurisdiction over them
themselves.

10 Innocent the third served himself hereof against Philip Augustus King of
France, Cap novit de judiciis extra^
he would needs make himself judge betwixt this Prince and King John of
England, by virtue of these constitutions, whereof he makes express mention.
It is all one as if he had urged them against Charles the Great, considering
that he made this law both as Emperor and King of France, for he submits t^^
Frenchmen to it in express terms. These laws, whether of Constantine or of
Charles the Great, should not now be urged, neither against the Emperors nor
the Kings of France, who did not make any law to tie them; not against other
Kings who do not admit the law of the Empire, nor against their vassals and
subjects. First, forasmuch as such laws have been abrogated by contrary
practice, be it in Germany, England, France, or elsewhere. Secondly, forasmuch
as the cause of them ceasing, there is no need to observe them. Now the cause
or reason, which is fully expressed in those two laws, is this; That the
authority of sacred religion, invents and finds out many means of allaying
suits, which the ties and forms of captious pleadings will not admit of. That
the judgments of Bishops are true and uncorrupted. That this is the ch^aking
of those malicious seeds of suits; to the intent that poor men entangled in
the long and lasting snares of tedious actions, may see how to put a speedy end
to those unjust demands which were proposed to them. Now we have made it
appear in the second book, when we treated of the reformation of the Head,
that the Pope, his Decretals, the Court of Rome, and other Ecclesiastical
Courts, are now adays become the source of iniquity and injustice, and of all
the shiftings and tricks that ever could be invented in matter of pleading, and
that all Christendom graones miserably under them at this present. Why then
should a man submit himself to their judgment? this were for escaping the
ashes to throw himself in the fire. Francisc. Duarenus. l. 1. de Sacro Eccl.
minist c. 2.
Duarenus speaking of these two laws, says, That the conditions of the Bishops
being changed, both these constitutions grew out of use, as it is credible.
Thirdly, the Popes have rendered themselves unworthie of them, because they went
about to retort them upon their authors, to urge them against those which are
exempted from them; because they would have made their liberality redound to
their own damage, and have arrogated their power unto themselves, and usurped
their laws. Lastly, those who made those constitutions, have power to unmake
them, to alter, or abolish them at their pleasure. To what purpose then are
they urged against them? There needs be no more talk of them in France, for
they have now been a long time disused. We see no tracts of them in our
Histories, nor in our ancient records. And besides we have at this present
some Ordinances clean contrary to this, which forbid Clergy men all
jurisdiction over lay men, unless it be in spiritual cases, Ordon. de l'an
1539. art. 1.2.
as we have elsewhere expressed.

CHAP. II. That a Council has no power in temporal matters.
The power of Civil Laws.
1 FOr goods and other temporal matters, Saint Austin has passed his sentence,
by which he has submitted them entirely to the jurisdiction of Princes,
although they be in the possession of Clergy men. By what law (says he) do
you except the goods of the Church? by divine law or humane? The divine law we
have in the Scriptures, and the humane in the laws Imperial. That which every
man possesses, does he not possess it by the humane law? Humane laws are the
laws of the Emperors; for God has dispensed humane laws amongst mankind by
the mediation of the Emperors and Kings of this world. And a little after.
Take away the Imperial law, and who dare say this possession is mine? This
servant is mine? This house belongs to me? If the Royal laws have ordained
that these things should be holden and possessed by men, would you have us to
conceal the law, that so you might enjoy them? And after some passages. Let
those laws be read where the Emperors have commanded expressly, that those who
usurp the name of Christians, unless they be within the communion of the
Catholic Church, cannot possess any thing in the name of the Church. But
(say you) what have we to do with the Emperor? I have told you already that
the question is here of the law humane, and the Apostle himself would have all
men to be subject to Kings, and Kings to be honored. And has said, Have
Kings in reverence. Say not you then, What communion is there betwixt me and
the King? otherwise it will be said unto you, What communion is there betwixt
you and your possessions? They are enjoyed by the constitutions of Kings. You
say, What has the King to do with me? do not then call those possessions
yours, for as much as you have renounced humane laws, by virtue whereof such
possessions are enjoyed This pregnant place is inserted into the Decree, Can.
hoc jure did. 8.
all entire as I have related it; so as now it is a Papal law: which plainly
teaches us that Ecclesiastiques have no jurisdiction over the lands and
possessions and other temporal goods which Churchmen are seized of: much less
have they any over those which are in lay men's power; over which
notwithstanding the Council of Trent has stretched their authority.

2 Gregory the thirteenth, it seems, would have voided and rebated the force
of this Canon, by that Item which he gives us, that the word Church is not at
the beginning of the passage, because Saint Austine speaks there of
heretics, namely to the Donatists. Which is very true. But if he will infer
from thence, that Saint Austine would not have said as much of the goods of the
Church, we will deny his argument. These goods whereof he speaks were the
possessions of the Church, before the Donatists fell into their opinions.
Church-goods disposed of by Princes.
They were deprived of them by the Emperors because of their heresy. They
were bestowed upon the Orthodox, as Gregory says in the same place. See how
the Prince and not the Church does always dispose of their goods. See how
Saint Austine, and all the Popes with him, confess that it belongs to the
Emperor to dispose of them, and not to the Church. For even that reason which
he renders is general. It agrees as well to the Church and Clergy as to any
others. Besides, those which made the collections of ancient Canons, as
Anselme, Ivo, and Hildebert, have inserted the word Church in that place; and
Gratian after them, as Gregory confesses, which the former Popes did
authorize. The Emperor Constantine calls those of the Novatians, Churches, and
will have them preserved unto them. L 2. C. Theod. de haeretic.

L. Episc. p. C. Th. de fid Cath.

L ^uncti. C de haeret^^i^.


The Emperors, Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius, call those of other
Heretics, Churches, and cast them out of them, that they may place orthodox
Christians in them. Arcadius and Honorius made a like constitution. Ivo Bishop
of Chartres proves it in his Epistles. For as much (says he) as the guidance
and government of temporal things is given unto Kings, and that they are
called Basilei, that is, the Basis and foundation of the people, if at any time
they abuse their power which is given them they must not be too much
exasperated by us; only when they refuse to obey our admonitions, they must be
let alone to the judgment of God. The Council of Trent does not use them so,
but not content with delivering their bodies up to Satan as far as lies in
their power, it confiscates their goods, and deprives them of their inheritance.

3 Pope Nicholas, howbeit in his Epistle sent to the Emperor Michel he breathe
nothing but wind and smoke, having made a division with the Emperor very
advantageous to himself, without forgetting any of the Ecclesiastical and
Papal pretentions, leaves him nevertheless the guidance and government of
temporal things for his share. Can. quoniam. did. 10.

Et Can. Cum ad verum. did. 96.


When we come to the truth (says he) neither the Emperor invades the rights
of the Popedom, nor the Pope the name of the Emperor; forasmuch as Jesus
Christ has so distinguished the functions and offices of either power, by
their proper acts and several dignities, that Christian Emperors stand in
need of Popes for their eternal life, and Popes make use of the Imperial
laws, yet only in the course of temporal things. This Epistle is canonized
in two places of Gratians Decree.

4 So it is a clear case that Clergy men were anciently very poor: That they
lived in common, even at Rome for a long time: That they got their means and
revenewes by the bounty and liberality of secular Princes. The ancient
Histories, yea even their own books, do witness as much. Abbas Vspergensis
in Chron. sub ann. 1116.
When the donation of Constantine and that of Jews the Gentle shall be proved
true, they will furnish us with a strong argument to convince the Popes that
this was the hand from whence they received their means; and therefore these
are the authors to whom they should acknowledge themselves beholding, and not
ingratefully say (as they do) That such means belonged to them; That the
Emperors ^surp'd them, and did no more but restore them.

5 The ancient Councels have done thus much respect and honor unto Princes, as
to entreat them to remove the abuses, and correct mischiefs for as much as
depended upon them, and as concerned their power; without proceeding to
punishments and corrections, without undertaking to ordain any thing in that
kind themselves, by thrusting their sicle into another man's harvest, as this
of Trent does.

6 The third Council of Toledo, Council. Tolet. 3. ca. 21. tom. 2. conc page
866.

Council. Tolet. 4. tom. 3. Conc. page 68.


holden in the year 589, entreats Reccaved King of Spain to prohibit the
usurpations of his Judges and Officers which troubled the Bishops servants, and
other Ecclesiastical persons by diverse impositions. The fourth of Toledo,
holden in the year 643 under King Sisenand, does indeed admonish those which
have any controversies with potent men, Eccl^si^sticall jurisdiction de^ived
from Princes.
and others which invade their rights, to come and make their complaint to the
Council; but this is to the end that as soon as the wrong done them is
understood, a course may be taken for it by the Officer Royal, as it is said
in express terms.

Synod. Suesson. Tom 3. Council.
7 The Council of Soissons, having made certain Ecclesiastical laws wherein
they speak of lay men too, concludes with this clause: If any man chance to
transgress this Decree, and to break or contemn the law which three and
twenty Bishops, with other Ecclesiastiques and servants of God have enacted,
with the consent of Prince Pepin, or the Counsel of the Peers of France, let
him be judged by the same Prince, or let him compound the matter with the
Bishops o^ Judges so as is prescribed in the same law, every man according to
his order. Synod. Mogunt. sub Rhaban. c. 17. tom 3. Conc. page 836.
The Council of Mentz holden in the year 834 exhorts Jews the Gentle to
restrain the oppression of poor people, but free borne, which was inflicted
upon them by great and potent men, contrary to all justice. Our Council of
Trent in all these cases have proceeded by censures and excommunications, by
confiscations of goods, and deprivations of Empires and Kingdoms.

8 Now Councels are so far from having power to ordain any thing concerning
the temporals which belong to lay men, as they cannot so much as make laws for
the temporals of the Church. The reason is manifest, which is, because that
Clergy men got their possessions by the bounty of Princes, at least for the
most part, that before they had them they were under their Dominion and Empire;
that for all this changing of their master, they do not lose that which
belongs to them. Christian Religion (says Saint Ambrose) deprives no man of
his right. Saint Bernard, D Bernard. lib. 2. de consid. ad Eugen. Pap.
who is quoted and commended by all men in this case, speaking to Eugenius the
third, says, What did the holy Apostle leave you? Such as I have I give you
(says he.) And what is that? one thing I know, that it is neither silver nor
gold; for he himself says, Silver nor gold have I none. If you chance to have
any, use it; not according to your appetite, but for a time. And a little
after. Grant that ye arrogate these things unto your self by some other title,
you can never do it by the Apostolic right, for he could not give what he
never had. What he had he gave, to wit the charge and care over Churches. Did
he leave the Dominion too? hear himself speak, Not bearing rule (says he)
in the Church; but being brought under the form of a flock.

Ioannes de Paris. in tractat. de potest. regia et Papal^ in pro.
9 Friar John of Paris, a Doctor in Divinity of the order of Predicants, who
writ about the year 1280, in his tract Of the Royal and Papal power. I am of
opinion (says he) that truth it self has made a Medium here, namely, that it
is not utterly impossible that Clergy men have dominion and jurisdiction in
temporal matters, but yet it belongs not unto them by reason of their
profession and as Christ's Vicars and the Apostles successors; but is
convenient for them to have it by the grant and permission of Princes, if so be
they have bestowed it upon them out of devotion, or if they have got it by
other means. And in the eight Chapter he sets down this conclusion. Idem
Ioannes de Paris cap. 8.
Whence it appears, that seeing Christ, as man, had no power nor jurisdiction
in temporal matters, the Priest, (be what be will) has not received any power
over them from Christ; in as much as he did not give unto them what he had not
in himself.

Marsilius in de^ensor. pacis ca. 25. part. 2.
10 By reason of this jurisdiction and power which Princes have over
Ecclesiastical goods, they may impose taxes, subsidies, tenths, and other
charges upon them. Marsilius de Padua says, The Bishops of Rome would enjoy
temporal matters immoderately, and without too much right; and yet
notwithstanding they will not be subject to the laws and edicts of Princes and
humane Legislators, contrary to the doctrine and example of Christ and his
Apostles. Howbeit for things which belong not unto them, when they have them in
their power, they should rather relinquish them than contest for them. He adds
further. The Bishops of Rome, Princes may impose t^^bute upon Cl^^ks.
as also all the rest, having but small regard to this, if they find
themselves grieved at any time by the Roman Emperors in t^nths and subsidies,
and other temporal charges for the maintenance of soldiers, then when
necessity forces them to it, in stead of acknowledging the courtesies they
have received in these temporal matters, which these Princes of Rome have
liberally imparted unto them, puffed up with pride and ignorance of their own
condition, more ungrateful than the most ungrateful that ever were, out of an
unbridled presumption they fall into horrible blasphemies and cursings, as well
against the Princes, as against such Christians as are subject to them. The
same author in another passage: Marsilius part^ 2. cap 17.
We must not be ignorant (says he) that the humane lawgiver, or he which
rules by his authority, may lawfully impose any taskes and collections upon the
temporals of Ecclesiastical men, principally upon their lands and immoveables
which we call benefices, etc. Saint Ambrose in one of his Epistles says, If
the Emperor demand his tribute, we do not deny him it. The revenues of the
Church pay tribute. Ambros in Epist. de tradend. Basilio.

Hugo de Sancto Victore in tract. de Sacrament. Marsil part. 2. cap. 21.


Hugo de Sancto Victore speaks expressly of it in his tract of the Sacraments.
Let the Church know (says he) that such possessions cannot be so far
alienated from the Royal power, as that if reason and necessity do require it,
the same power needs not protect them; or that those possessions should not
relieve him in time of necessity. Marsilius again in another place: But if the
supreme Lawgivers or Commanders stand in need of these temporals, they may in
case of necessity make use of all that remains over and above what is bestowed
in the maintenance of the Ministers of the Church and of the poor; and may by
their own authority lawfully seize upon it, according to the divine law;
notwithstanding any contradiction of the Priests Ministers: and that not only
the tenths, but even the fourths and thirds, etc. AEneas Sylvius, AEneas
Sylvi^^ deortu and authorit. Imper. cap. 6.

Barthol. Chassaneus in 4. part. Catalogi.


in his fifth book Of the beginning and authority of the Empire, says, That
the possessions of the Church owe tribute to the Empire. Which he proves by the
testimony of Saint Ambrose, and many others, out of holy Writ. Chassaneus who
was President of the Parliament of Aix in Provence, says, That Prelates are
subject to Kings for their temporal means, though they be not feodall; that
they are bound to obey their Ordinances and Constitutions for as much as
concerns the said goods: that such temporal means of Clergy men, even those
which are infeodated, are liable to the payment of new tasks, in case Kings
should have a mind to impose any for the defense of their kingdoms.

11 But for this matter we need not seek any other testimonies than those
which are extant in the Popes own books. That place of Saint Ambrose, which
was formerly quoted, has been canonized in Gratians Decree. Can. Si tributum.
11. q. 1.
If the Emperor demand tribute, we do not deny him it. The revenues of the
Church pay tribute. If the Emperor desire to have the means, he has power to
take them to himself. In another Canon it is said, Can. magnum. 11. l. 1.
It is a great and spiritual lesson by which we learn that Christians are
subject to secular powers; for fear lest any body should think that the
Ordinance of an earthly King may be violated. For if the Son of God paid
tribute, who art thou that art so great as to think thy self exempted? One
Pope Urban said, That the tribute was found in the fishes mouth as Peter was a
fishing, Can. tributum 23. q. 8.
because the Church pays tribute of things external which lie open to every
man's view.

12 It is true that Gratian, after he has set down these Canons, plants
others by way of battery against them to beat them down, such as are approved
by Popes, in such sort that they pronounce themselves exempt from all subsidies
and tributes, and also all others of their order. Clergy men have exemptions
indeed, and those very fair ones, both for their persons and their goods: they
have privileges which are both honorable and profitable. I confess they
have. But they are very ungrateful if they do not therein acknowledge the
liberality of Kings and Emperors. Clergy how f^r exempted from taxes.
These are the marks of their bounty.

L de iis Clericis. C de Episcop et ^leri^.

L. placet. ^. de sa^r^sanct Ec^l.

L ad ins^ructunes C. eod.

L. ut ^t. L omnis Ecclesiarum. C. Th. de ^pis^^p. Eccles. et Clerie

L sub mus. C. ^odem.

L neminem. C. ^odem.

L ^ubemus C. eodem.

L ^. ^^^d. Cap. 1. de immunitat Eccles. in 6.


13 It cannot be inferred from all this tho, that there is any release from the
power and soveraigntie which belongs unto them, nor from those dues which they
were wont to receive, save only so far as they are pleased to remit them.
The Emperor Constantius does ordain that the Clerks of the Provinces shall
pay the charges due to the Exchequer for their possessions. The Emperors
Honorius and Theodosius grant an immunitie to Churches from sordid payments,
but not from others: and they reserve to themselves the power of laying
impositions upon them in case of necessity. The same Emperors declare in
another place, that they do not exempt them from such taxes as shall be
assessed for the repairing of bridges and high ways. Constantius and Constans
had formerly granted the same immunitie to Ecclesiastical persons, their wives
and children; to wit, from forbid payments, but not from others. The Emperors
Theodosius and Valentinian declare the vassals and tenants of the Church liable
to the same services that others are. They declare likewise that the
possessions of the Church must pay tribute. These are the same Emperors that
prohibited the alienation of Ecclesiastical goods: that gave Councels power to
receive revenues by legacy from dying men.

V. Joan. Ferrant in tract de jurib. and privi. reg Franc. c. 17 ^ancelot.
Conrad in templo omn. judic. lib. 1. cap. 2.. 3. number. 10.
14 If these were anciently the Imperial rights, it would be known at what game
they were lost. The Popes have made laws for the confirming, yea enlarging of
these immunities. Councels have likewise interposed themselves in the same
business, both they and these in such sort as they have forgot their
benefactors: and not remembering that these exemptions are the courtesies of
these very Kings and Emperors, whom they forbid to lay any imposition upon
such goods without their leave. Yet our Kings of France are always excepted by
the testimony of our Doctors, who think that to be his special privilege,
which is indeed the common right of all Princes. Though in very deed it is made
special by reason of the usurpation of Popes, who have got their ends in
others, the French only excepted. And yet they are not out of hopes of them
too. For amongst their Decretals there is one of Alexander the fourth which
expressly forbids the French To impose any taxes, Cap. 1 de immunit. Eccles. in
^^
collections, or exactions upon Churches or Ecclesiastical persons, or to
require them of them for their houses, lands, or other possessions whatsoever,
heretofore got or purchased, or hereafter to be got or purchased by the said
Churches or persons Ecclesiastical. This Decretall, together with all the
rest, is approved by this Council of Trent: V^notas ad d c. 1. de im^^nit.
Ec^les. in 6.
yea (which is worth the observing) Gregory the thirteenth in his late censure
of the Canon Law has made this addition to the said Decretall. Look (says
he) the Council of Trent at the twentieth chapter of the twenty fifth Session,
where the privileges and immunities of Churches and Eclesiasticall persons are
renewed and confirmed. So that we must talk no more of this privilege
hereafter, if our Council be received. And that no man make any further doubt
hereof, let us hear how this and that other Gregory the fourteenth would make
men believe it in their Bulls, De coena Domini, given forth by them afterward
to be thundered out in this kingdom. Vid E^logam Bullarium and motuum
propri^rum page 316.
We excommunicate and anathematize those which impose any collections, tenths,
taxes, payments, or other charges upon Clerks, Prelates, or other
Ecclesiastical persons: or upon the goods of Churches, Monasteries, or other
Ecclesiastical benefices: or upon the fruits, rents, and revenues thereof,
without special and express license from the Pope of Rome.

Cap. Clericis lutcos. de immunit Eccles.
15 These Popes did no more but resume the errors of Boniface the eight, (so
well liked by his successors that they made laws of them) for by his
Decretall he excommunicates all lay men, yea by name all Emperors, Kings,
(...) any collections, taxes, tenths, twentieth or hundred part of
Ecclesiastical goods and revenues, P^ying of te^ths an^ subsidie^ ^rohibi^ed
by Pope.
or other quantity, part, or quotitie of them, by the name of relief, loane^
aid, subsidy, or other title whatsoever; as also all Ecclesiastical persons
which shall pay them without leave from the holy See.

16 Bennet the eleventh, his successor, after he had accorded all things with
Philip the Fair, in courtesy to him made a restraint of that Decretall,
ordaining that it should not take place Inter volentes, wherein he thought he
gratified him much. Hark how one speaks of him that was a writer of the
lives of Popes. Pope Benedict appeased the strife and dissentions that were
begun betwixt Philip King of France and Pope Boniface: and restored unto the
same King the privileges and indulgences of the Sea Apostolic, which had
been taken from him by Boniface his predecessor. Besides, he set out a certain
Constitution at Perusia in favor of the same King and his subjects, which
begins, Quod olim: whereby he restraines the Constitution of his predecessor
Boniface, which begins, Clericis laicos: ordaining that the punishment expressed
in Boniface his Constitution, shall not take place neither in those that pay,
nor in those that receive such paiments as are freely and willingly tendered.
This constitution is among the Extravagants at this present; Cap Quod oli^ de
^^munit. Eccles. lib. 3. Extra.

Aut imposita etia^ a sponte dantibus and concedentibus recipient.

Ioannes P^trus de Ferrariis in ^orma libelli pro haeredit. vel sin^ul re in
verb. omnis communio page ^08.


but so as our Popes hold it for apocryphal, abrogated, and of no force,
witness the foresaid Bulls De coena Domini, sent into France to be thundered out
there, which have these words: We excommunicate and anathematize all those that
receive the said collections, taxes, tenths, etc. even of such as give and
grant them willingly.

17 One of our Practitioners has so far forth acknowledged the power of
Emperors and Kings over the temporals of the Church, that he has advised them
to discharge the Pope and other Ecclesiastiques of that care and trouble, which
the too great abundance begets in them. It will come to pass ere long (says
he) that all lay men's goods will prove to be Clergy men's inheritance, unless
some good Emperor take an order with it, by revoking the donation of
Constantine, and making a law totally to reduce the state of al Clerks to the
state and condition of Friars Mendicants; and unless the Pope and Cardinals
also be reduced to the life of Christ and his Apostles upon earth, whose Vicar
General he is, and therefore ought to follow his example. And in another place.
Idem de Ferrariis in form. libel quo agit ex substitut. in verb ex suo corpore.
Amongst the privileges of the Church, this is one, That the goods of such as
turn religious be applied to their Monasteries. By means of which privilege
an infinite company of Monasteries have been founded and multiplied in all
parts of the world. That which was anciently done out of devotion, is now
practiced out of avarice, and to exercise oppression, in such sort as they have
already quite undone the laity. So that it may well be said that such places
either already erected, or hereafter to be erected, are nothing else but nets
set to catch lay men's goods in. O that a good Emperor would arise therefore,
that all the world might say, Let peace be made by thy virtue, and let
plentifulnesse be within thy Towers!

CHAP. III. That Kings and Princes ought not easily to be excommunicated: and
of the privileges of the Kings of France, and their Officers.
Excommunications abused against Princes.
1 HOwbeit Ecclesiastical persons, as Ecclesiastical, have no power over
temporal matters, but only Kings and Princes, and those upon whom they derive
their power; yet so it is that in these latter days they have taken upon them
a jurisdiction in such matters, applying even excommunications to that purpose.
For by means of them they have disposed of Kingdoms and Empires, Dutchies and
Principalities, Cities, Patrimonies, and other such like things. So our
Council uses them against duells, against Combatants and their Seconds:
depriving them of their Cities and Places where such Duells shall be fought,
and these of their inheritance: and that by virtue of an Excommunication which
shall be thundered out against them. Besides what we have spoke already
concerning the disposal of temporal matters, we have elsewhere proved that
it is an unjust and unlawful thing to extend excommunications to men's goods,
to deprive such men of them to whom of right they appertain. We shall only say
in this place that there ought to be very weighty reasons for proceeding to the
excommunication of Kings and Princes: yea there are some which think they are
totally exempted from it.

2 Ivo Bishop of Chartres says they ought to be borne with in their faults,
not to be exasperated in case they will not do any thing upon fair
admonitions. We have set down the place before. V. Ep. Leodiens. To. 2 Conc.
in edition. Colon. p. 809.
The Clergy of Liege in their epistle to Pope Paschal the second, say the very
same; If any man search the old and new Testament, and the things which have
been acted there, he shall evidently find that Kings and Emperors can no way
be excommunicated, or at least very hardly: according to the Etymology of
their name, and the definition of excommunication. And the question was never
yet determined. They may indeed be admonished, rebuked, reproved by
respectfull and discreet persons, in as much as Christ the King of Kings has
reserved unto himself the condemnation or absolution of those whom he has
left to supply his place upon earth.

3 This Council excommunicates them upon very slight occasions, as namely for
using their authority in contracting of marriages, to the advantage of some
Gentlemen or Officers of their Court; for giving way to a Duel, and the like.
It is requisite to hear what answer a Synod of Rhemes made to an Archbishop of
the same City hereupon, whom Pope Adrian the second had commanded by his
letters to abstain from communicating with Charles the Bald, Emperor and King
of France, which he certified the assembly of. Epist. Hincmari Rhemensis Episc.
ad Adrian. Pap.
They said, and do say, with reproaches touching upon my meannesse, who have
always strived to the utmost of my ability and knowledge, to promote the
privileges of the Sea Apostolic, that such a command as this, was never
given out from that See to any of my Predecessors, even in those times when
(as every man knows) there were wars and seditions betwixt confederate Kings
living under the same Sacraments, betwixt the father and the children; The King
of F^ance his pri^iledge.
yea even betwixt brethren. And that we never read that the Popes of the Sea
Apostolic, nor other Bishops of great authority and holiness did ever
withdraw themselves from the presence, or refused to salute or confer with
heretical or s^hismaticall Emperors, Tyrants, or Kings, how bad soever they
were: as Constantius the Arrian, Julian the Apostat, Maximus the tyrant, when
occasion, place, and the cause required it, etc. And they say that the
scripture of this age holds, that every Kingdom of this world is got by arms,
and enlarged by victories, and cannot be purchased by excommunications from the
Popes, or other Bishops: and they urge that holy Scripture says, that
Kingdoms are from the Lord; by whom Kings reign; and that by the ministry
of men and Angels he confers them upon whom he pleases. See here are things
which without all compare deserve rather to be struck with an Ecclesiastical
thunderclap, than the giving way unto a Duel or interposing their authority
in a matter of marriage.

4 Now, whatsoever others be, our Kings are exempted from such thunders, so as
neither the Bishops of this Kingdom, nor strangers, no nor the Pope himself
have any power over them in this regard. We have hereof diverse testimonies:
our French men do avouch it in an article which was drawn by them in behalf
of King Lotharius, against Pope Nicholas the first, who would have
excommunicated him for his marriage with Waldrada. As he cannot be
excommunicated (say they, speaking of the King) by his Bishops, whatsoever his
fact be, so cannot he be judged by other Bishops.

5 Vincent, in his allegations, after he has set down the good deeds of the
Kings of France toward the Church, says, This is the cause why the Kings of
France, cannot be excommunicated, by reason of their privilege, else their
labor should be fruitless. Likewise their soldiers and their men of war,
and their Captains, inasmuch as they cannot offend by obeying them. These last
words must be understood of an excommunication thundered out against the men of
war, for this reason, because they fight for their Prince.

6 Lancelot Conrade, a Lawyer of Millain, subject to the King of Spain, Lanc.
Conrad^ Lauden^is in templo omnium judic. lib. 1. c. 2.. 3. number. 13^
says as much in express terms; The King of France pretends to have this
pr^viledge, that he cannot be excommunicated neither by the Canons, nor by
men. As the Doctors collect in the division of the chapter, Vbi Periculum in
princip. de elect. in 6. When the Parliament of Paris gave their opinion, and
all the Chambers met together about receiving the Cardinal d' Amboise, and the
qualifications that should be put to his Faculties, (which was upon the
eleventh of December 1501). The laws of the Land, and the liberties of the
Gallicane Church were represented at large, amongst which this was one, That
the King of France cannot be excommunicated, that his Kingdom cannot be put
in interdict, as is collected out of the ancient Registers.

7 Yet notwithstanding always, as often as the Popes have gone about to attempt
any such excommunications, whether by their own proper authority, or jointly
with Councels, they have found strong resistance: and the French have got this
commendation, that they never abandoned their Princes in such conflicts. The
Histories thereof are known to all men; and they have been so canvased in
diverse writings set out during our late troubles, that it will be fitting to
overpasse them, that we renew not the memory of our former miseries. We will
only say that some Popes have in good sincerity acknowledged this right and
prerogative of our Kings: yea, which is more, they have confirmed it by their
Bulls; declaring thereby that the King of France cannot be excommunicated, nor
his Kingdom interdicted: and amongst others, Martin the third and fourth;
Gregory the eighth, ninth, tenth, and eleventh; Alexander the fourth; Clement
the fourth and fifth; Nicholas the third; Urban the fifth; and Boniface the
twelfth, whose Bulls are yet preserved in the treasury of the Kings Charters,
Kings of France not excommunicable.
as diverse testify.

8 Pope Benedict th'eleventh, partly (as it is probable) upon this occasion,
revoked the excommunication which was denounced by Boniface the eight his
predecessor, against Philip the Fair, of his own mere motion, and without
being desired unto it by any man, (as Walsingam witnesses) He absolved (says
he) Philip the Fair King of France, from the sentence of excommunication given
out against him by his predecessor, without being desired to it. We read the
Bull thereof to this day in Mr. Nicholas Gille in his Annals of Aquitain.
Amongst the testimonies of Popes, we will put that of Sylvester the second,
for the judgment which he passed before he was preferred to the Popedom, and
the excommunication which the Pope that then was threatened against the King,
and some Prelates of this Kingdom. See here the place taken out of one of his
Epistles which he writ to the Archbishop of Sens:

9 I say confidently and boldly, that if a Bishop of Rome has offended against
his brother, and will not give ear to the admonitions which should be diverse
times given by the Church, I say that same Bishop of Rome by the commandment
of God, must be accounted as an Heathen and a Publicane: For by how much the
degree is higher, by so much the fall is greater. But if he account us
unworthie of his communion, forasmuch as none of us will consent with him in
that which is against the Gospel, he cannot therefore separate us from the
communion of Christ. And presently after; We should not therefore give this
advantage to our ill-willers, as to make the Priesthood, which is but one in
all places, as the Catholic Church is but one, seem to be subject to one
man only; in such sort, that if he be corrupted by money, or favor, or fear,
or ignorance, no man can be Priest but he that shall be commended unto him by
such virtues as these.

10 Whence we collect, that the Popes have no more power over our Kings, in
matter of excommunications, than other Bishops, whether of their own Kingdom,
or strangers. The Courts of Parliament of this Realm (and especially that of
Paris) have always stood out against such excommunications, and have declared
them to be frivolous, nullities, and abusive: yea and have proceeded with
rigor and severitie against the bearers of them. The Arrests given out against
the Bulls of Benedict the thirteenth, the two Gregory's the thirteenth and
fourteenth, are sufficient witnesses hereof. Now it is not only true that our
Kings cannot be excommunicated: but, which is more, they may absolve such of
their subjects as are excluded from the Communion of the Church: yea they are
accounted to restore them to their former state, by the mere admitting of them
to their table, or into their company. This is a thing which we find upon
record in the Capitularie of Charles the Great, in these words; If the Royal
power do receive any delinquents into favor, or admit them to his table, they
shall be likewise received into the assemblies of the people and Clergy in
Ecclesiastical communion; to the intent that the ministers of God may not
reject what the piety of the Prince does admit. The Prelates of France have
observed this law at other times. Ivo Bishop of Chartres says, he practiced
it toward one Gervase, Ivo ep. 123.
and he sets down the words of this Ordinance. In another epistle he gives us
to wit, that our Kings have this privilege, not only for other men, but for
themselves too: Ivo ep. 195.
Kings (says he) should not be exasperated by us: but in case they will not
rest quiet for all our admonitions, they must be left to the divine judgment.
Hence it is that we read in the Capitularie Royal, concluded upon by the
authority of the Bishops: If the Royal power, etc.

11 Now this privilege that they cannot be excommunicated, is no new thing.
Clement the fourth in one of his Decretals, confirms this privildge granted to
the Kings, Queens, and their children, that they cannot be excommunicate, nor
their lands interdicted. Kings and their ^hild^en ^o^ ^x^ommunic^ble.
Which John Andreas extends to the brethren of Kings, so they be children of
Kings too; but not to such as are only brethren and no more. For example: If
(says he) (...) that is no Kings son should succeed in a Kingdom, where
such a proviso is made; as suppose in the Kingdom of France at this present,
the Kings brethren shall not enjoy this privilege. But when, according to the
ordinary custom, the eldest succeeds in the Kingdom, and has brethren by
the fathers side, they enjoy this privildge, forasmuch as they are children of
the same head. This instanceing in France shows that our Kings are of the
number of those that have this privilege, that they cannot be excommunicated,
nor interdicted a quocunque, as the Decr^tall has it, that is, By any man
whatsoever: Which may be understood as well of the Pope himself as of others.
It Is true the gloss excepts him, as also his Legate a latere: but that does not
take place against our Kings, who by reason of their great deservings, and good
deeds to the Church, are exempt from all such thunderclaps.

CHAP. IV. That the Council uses commanding terms to Kings and Emperors; and
makes them executioners of the Bishops Decrees. Of the honor which was
anciently done unto them by Clergy men.
1 Our Council is not content with clipping the rights, authorities and
prerogatives of Kings^ Princes, and other Lords, to enhanse that of Rome; but
further, it tramples them under foot: makes them but officers and ministers to
Bishops, by commanding them to execute what these ordain. The holy Council
(say they) does further exhort all Kings, Princes, Commonwealths, and
Magistrates, and by virtue of holy Obedience does command them, to interpose
their aid and authority in behalf of the said Bishops, Abbats, Generals, and
others which have the charge and superintendence for the putting of the said
reformation in execution, every time, and as often as they shall be thereunto
required: to the intent that they may without any impediment put in execution
the things aforesaid, to the glory of almighty God.

2 Had there been no more but a bare exhortation it had been well enough: but
this command founds somewhat harsh, however it be mitigated with the sweet
appearance of a holy obedience: for it is well known in what fashion they serve
themselves of these fair words. This Mandamu^ is extraordinary, and was never
vented but from the stomachs of ambitious Popes or their Conventicles. Let a
man but read the Acts of ancient Councels General or Provincial, he shall
find nothing but humble petitions, sweet exhortations, prayers and blessings
for as much as concerns Emperors, Kings, and Princes; commands to them were
not heard of then. They are the men who alone have the fountain and arsenall in
their own hands, both for things temporal and spiritual; Priests preferred
before Princes by this Council.
who impart them to whom they think good. Ecclesiastiques have nothing to do
but by way of petition: they have neither command nor Empire, unless they
cozen the Monarchs of the earth of it: they are Physicians of souls, subject
to secular powers, having no weapons at all but censures and anathema's against
such as are perverse and irregular. This Mandamus therefore is injust both in
regard of those which give it, and those to whom it is given: so it is too in
regard of the subject and reason for which it was made: in as much as by virtue
hereof Princes and Monarchs must be bound to obey the Clergy of their Empires
and Kingdoms, and that even to the meanest of them: They must be bound to
assist them with a strong hand, to put their ordinances in execution every
time, and as often as they shall be required thereunto: and in case they fail
herein there will not want thunderbolts to deprive them of their Empires and
Dominions.

3 In another Decree they sharply rebuke such Bishops as debase themselves too
much to Kings and Princes, and give place and submit to them in point of
honor. It Is true, they speak at first of petty Kings and other Lords; but
the end of the Decree relates also to such as are of greater rank; where it is
said by way of command to Bishops, Council. Trid. Sess. 25. cap. 17
That as well within the Church as without, having before their eyes their
place and order, they should ever remember that they are Fathers and Pastors.
And as for Princes and all others, that they do fatherly honor and due
reverence to them.

4 In the same Decree they renew and confirm all the former Decrees and
Decretals which speak of the honor of Bishops, and put them in course: which
are noted in the margent by the Popes expositors: and amongst others the
Epistle of Innocent the third writ to the Emperor of Constantinople, Cap.
Solitae. extr^. de majorib. and obedient.
whom some think to be Baldwin or his brother Henry, who were Frenchmen,
toward the end whereof it is said, If the Imperial greatness would wisely
consider these things, it would not suffer the Patriarch of Constantinople, who
is in truth a great and honorable member of the Church, to sit over against
his footstool, and upon the left hand: considering that other Kings and
Princes do with reverence stand up, as they should do, before their
Archbishops and Bishops, and allow them a venerable place next after
themselves. Gregory the thirteenth in his new purgation of the Decretalls has
put this note upon it, See here (says he) the Council of Trent, in the twenty
fifth Session, and seventeenth Chapter of reformation. But let us here add the
rest of the places in the margent, that we may better know what honor this
Council would have Kings and Princes do to Bishops.

5 The Canon Valentinianus contains the resolution which the Emperor
Valentinian made concerning the election of Saint Ambrose, and the exhortation
which he made to the Bishops then present when the question was concerning
proceeding to the election, Set such a one (says he) in the Pontifical See,
as we that govern the Empire may sincerely put our heads under his hands, and
receive his admonitions (inasmuch as we shall offend, as men) like medicines
from a necessary Physician. See here words that beseem a Christian Emperor
indeed, who gives Clergy men that reverence which is due unto them as
Physicians of souls. But the Glossatour, conforming himself to the ambition
of Rome, referres all this to worldly honors and vanities. Set here an
argument (says he) to prove that the Emperor is inferior to a Bishop, and
that he may be excommunicated by a Bishop. It Is true that on the other side he
seems to favor the Emperor, by giving him an office in the Church, and
making him Archdeacon: for expounding the word Ordinem, he says, From this
word some have affirmed that the Emperor should have the Order of Subdeacon in
the Church: but it is not true, because he has a military character; yet
howsoever he performs the office of Subdeacon when he serves the Bishop. O
bravely thrust! Popes (by their account) how much greater ^h^n Empe^o^s.


6 Gregory the seventh^ in an Epistle which he sent to the Bishop of Mentz
speaks yet in a more lofty style for point of honor. Who makes question
(says he) but the Priests of Christ are reputed for the Fathers and Masters of
Kings and Princes, and all the faithful? Can. Quis dubit et. did. 96.
Is it not known that it is a miserable madness if the son should go about
to dominere over his father^ or the scholar over his master? and by some
unlawful obligations to bring him under his power by whom he may be bound and
unbound, not only upon earth but in heaven also? The gloss makes an exception:
Yet if the father should grow frantic, the son should be made Tutour over
him, to govern him. He that shall read Cardinal Benno upon the life of this
Pope, and others that have made mention of him, will find that this is not
much beside the cushion.

7 Pope John the eighth says, That it is Gods will the disposal of the Church
should belong to the Clergy, Can. Si Impe^ator. did. 96.
and not to secular Princes: who if they be of the number of the faithful his
will is they should be subject to the Clergy. He adds yet further: That
Christian Emperors ought to submit their executions to Ecclesiastical
Prelates, and not to prefer them. Pope Gelasius writ to the Oriental
Bishops, That Christian Princes were wont to obey the Decrees of the Church,
and not prefer their own power. To submit their own heads to Bishops, not
sit as Judges of theirs. These are the Glosses of the Council of Trent upon
the forecited Decree: all taken out of Gratians Decree; all hammered out and
whetted in the Popes forge.

8 They forgot that Decretall of Clement the third, Cap. Omnis. extra. de
major. et obedient. page 423.
Saint Peter commanded (says he) that all Princes of the earth, and all other
men besides, should obey Bishops. The Glossatour infers: Ergo, The Princes of
the earth are inferior to Bishops. Which is true. But if the King have many
Bishopriques within his Realm, before which of them shall he treat of his
spiritual cases? He shall treat of them before that Bishop in whose
territory he makes his principal residence. Which gloss is approved and
followed by the Canonists that comment upon that place. And we need not wonder
if they would have the King to repair to the Bishop to treat of spiritual
matters. For there are some of them that left it in writing, that if the
Bishops be out of the fiefs or manors which they hold, they are not bound to
call Kings by their names, nor to acknowledge them for Kings, not so much as
for the goods temporal of the Church. It is a Pope that pronounced this
sentence, by name Innocent the third.

9 We forgot to tell how our Canonists are entered upon a profound piece of
Philosopie, to know exactly how much the Sun is bigger than the Moon: for
without the knowledge of this point they cannot resolve how much the Papal
dignity surpasses the Imperial, inasmuch as this is the ell with which they
must be measured; the Pope being by Innocent the third compared to the Sun,
and the Emperor to the Moon. The Gloss upon that Chapter determines the case
thus: Wherefore seeing the Earth is seven times bigger than the Moon, and the
Sun eight times bigger than the Earth, it follows that the Papal dignity
is forty seven times bigger than the Royal. John Andreas observes there is a
fault in this gloss. In other copies (says he) it is ten times four; in
others^ forty times: but neither this nor that can stand with the supputation
of the Gloss. For if the Earth be seven times greater than the Moon, and the
Sun eight times greater than the Earth, the Sun must then be eight times
seven times greater than the Moon, and therefore it is fifty six times
greater. For eight times seven make fifty six. Pope Gregory in his censure upon
this place, takes notice of this diversity of reading, which is more to his
own advantage. In other copies (says he) it is fifty times seven times.
Humility of ancient Popes.
But for the quantity of the Sun and Moon and Earth, and how much greater
one of them is than another, see Ptolomie in hi^ fifth Book and sixth Chapter.
It was requisite to observe that; for by this means the Popes greatness is
ten times greater. But see here another addition yet, which helps well to
augment the score. Here Laurence (says the addition) cites the saying of
Ptolomy; it is evident that the greatness of the Sun contains the
greatness of the Earth one hundred forty seven times and two half parts more.
It is also well known to every body that the greatness of the Sun contains
the greatness of the Moon seven thousand seven hundred forty four times, and
one half more. See here how they write of this point, it being to be feared
they will never disintangle themselves out of these doubts but by the
determination of a Council; and further it will be necessary that they employ
some surveyou^ in the business. And if in the mean time the Sun should happen
to decrease, or the Moon to increase, there would be a great many amazed with
it.

10 Though this be but a sport, yet no man of judgment but will be more
ready to weep than to laugh at it. For this vanity has made men renounce
the simplicity of Christianity, to run after the world, and glut themselves
with vanities. This Ecclesiastical ambition begun to grow up as high as
Origens times. We are in such a taking (says he, speaking of the Prelates of
his times) that we seem to outvie the pride of the Princes of this world;
either because we do not understand, or do not respect the commandment of
Christ: and after the fashion of Kings we desire to have weapons of terror to
march before us. Saint Chrysostom says likewise, That the Princes of this
world are for ruling over such as are inferior to them, for bringing them into
subjection, and spoiling them (when they deserve it) and for serving their
turns of them, to their commodity and for their honor, even to death. But the
Prelates of the Church are ordained to serve such as are inferior to them, and
to minister unto them all that they have received from Christ, etc. It is not
then either just or profitable to desire primacy in the Church. For what wise
man is there that, with his good will, would submit himself to such a servitude,
and undergo such a danger, as to be bound to give account for all the Church,
unless perhaps some that is not afraid of Gods judgment, abusing his
Ecclesiastical primacy in a worldly way, by converting it into a secular
power? And what is this else but turning the Ecclesiastical dignity into a
secular, to dispute so much about honor and place, not against other
Ecclesiastiques (which were more tolerable) but against the Princes of the
earth, the respect and observance of whom was so much recommended unto them? to
declare them their inferiors, their subjects, their vassals, perverting all
order both divine and humane? Where is there any earthly Prince or Monarch that
ever made such a goodly show and boast of their greatnesses and preheminences
as the Popes have done? For what we say here is nothing in comparison of what
we have delivered in the second Book.

11 Pope Leo the first in an epistle of his to the Emperor Martian writes to
him in another manner style than would be used at this day. Forasmuch (says
he) as your piety and most religious pleasure ought in all things to be
obeyed, I have willingly contributed my opinion and advice to the Synodicall
Constitutions, which pleased and liked me well, concerning the confirmation of
the Catholic Faith, and the condemnation of heretics. Your Clemency will be
pleased to take order by your command, that these things may come to the
knowledge of the Clergy and Church. Pope Gregory the Great speaks in like
manner to the Emperor Maurice in one of his epistles. In obedience to the
commands of my Lords I have writ to my said fellow Bishop with all sweetness
and humility. Gregor in regist. indict. 13. lib. 4. Epist. 29.
An ancient Author writes, That when the Emperors by their Ambassadors
commanded the Popes to come to Constantinople, they did not fail to repair
thither, Princes how respected ancien^ly by Popes.
although they were afraid to be sent into banishment.

12 One of our French Monks testifies that the Popes were wont to adore the
Emperors; and that Leo the second did so to Charles the Great. Pope Leo (says
he) set the crown upon his head, all the people of Rome shouting out, Appendix
Eutropii.

Antonius de gestis Francorum lib. 4. c. 10: Guicciardin. lib 2. hist. Ital.


Life and victory to Charles Augustus, crowned by God, the Great, and peaceful
Emperor of the Romans. After which acclamations he was adored by the same
Pope, after the manner of ancient Princes. Francis Guicciardine relates that
about the same time of the same Emperor, The Popes were wont to put these
words in their Bulls, to show the date of them, Imperante Carolo domino nostro.

13 In the Acts of the Council of Meaux holden in the year eight hundred
forty five, under Charles the younger, King of France, we read this Chapter
taken out of another French Council. Synodus Meldensis extat tom 3. Council.
page 870.
If any man out of a swollen and contumacious spirit be so bold, as against all
authority and reason, obstinately to contradict the Royal power, which is
given by God, as the Apostle says: and if he peremptorily refuse to obey his
just and reasonable commands, according to God and Ecclesiastical authority,
and the law Civil, let him be accursed. The ancient Councels, both General
and particular, are full of titles of honor and terms of respect and
reverence toward Kings and Emperors. Miserable age^ That we should be now
put to it to insist upon such discourses as these, to keep within compass the
ambition and vanity of such as cannot ^ee commended but for their holy
humility especially.

CHAP. V. The authority of Kings and Emperors for as much as concerns the
Church and Clergy.
1 WE have seen already the power of Kings and Princes made nothing of, and
enslaved to Churchmen; their honor debased, their place usurped, their majesty
disregarded. Now over and above what has been delivered particularly upon
every point already, we must here show that the authority and dignity which
they have in the Church is but to clear the doubt which our Canonists raise,
Whether the Emperor deserve to have a Subdeacons place. Kings and Princes
being ordained by God, in such sort that all their subjects, even the
Ecclesiastiques themselves, are bound to give honor and obedience to them,
have both the powers in their own hand, the Ecclesiastical and the Civill^
which they exercise either by themselves immediately, or by those upon whom
they bestow them.

2 Marsilius of Padua proves it by many pertinent reasons, Marsil. cap. 21.
part. 2. page 318. Petr^s de Ferrariis in form^ libelli quo agi^ ex substit. in
ver. ex suo co^po^^.
which would be too long to produce, in the fourth, fifth, and ninth Chapters of
the second part of his Defensor pacis. And in another place he says, Whence it
appears to be true what we have already set down; that the coactive
authority, as well over Clergy men as others, belongs to the humane Lawgiver,
or to him that rules in his behalf. And de Ferrariis the Practitioner says,
Thou must know thou Ignoramus, that the Empire had sometimes both the swords,
the temporal and the spiritual. Kings the def^ndours of the Church.
In such sort as the Emperors then bestowed all the Ecclesiastical livings in
the world, and which is more, did elect the Pope. At this present they do make
but little use of this power which has been taken from them by usurpation, as
we have said elsewhere. Yet for all that they do not cease to have a right
unto it, and one day or other may recover it. For in these and such like cases,
prescription has no place. They have such a stroke and authority in the
Church, that they are counted the protectors of it, the patrons, defendors, and
preservers of it, not as executioners of the Ordinances and Injuctions of
Priests, (for this is all the authority which our Council and the Popes
Doctors allows them) but as principal members, as those who have the power in
their own hands over all things.

3 Charles the sixth in an ordinance of his dated the eighteenth of February
1406, made by the Council and assistance of the Lords and Clergy of his
Realm, says, Vid libellum de Eccles Gallic. in schismat p. 15
That the Royal power is ordained by God for the preservation of the Church,
and that the kingdom of heaven increases by means of the earthly Kingdom,
when those which destroy the Church are crushed by the rigor of Princes. That
the sacred Canons will have recourse to be made unto Princes, when such things
are committed by great men in the Church, and that according to the opinion of
holy Doctors the Pope ought not to be obeyed in such things wherein the state
of the Church is notoriously disturbed. And in another of the seventeenth of
April 1410. These things being considered that it belongs unto us who are the
Guardian, Protector, and Defendour of the Churches of our Kingdom, and of
Dauphinie, and who have ratified and approved the Statutes and Ordinances
aforesaid, made in the Council aforesaid, to cause all this and all that
follows upon it to be observed and kept inviolable, etc.

Remonstrance de la Cour de Parliament de Paris art. 3.
4 The Parliament of Paris in the Remonstrance made by Jews the eleventh
touching the defense of the Pragmatique Sanction, has inserted this Article
Item, it belongs to our Sovereign Lord the King who is the principal founder,
guardian, protector and defendour of the liberties of this Church, when she
suffers in her liberties, to assemble and call together the Prelates, and other
Clergiemen, as well within this Realm, as of Dauphiny, and in the same
assembly and congregation of the Gallicane Church so called together, there to
preside and provide a remedy against such attempts as may be prejudicial to
the said liberties, as it shall be said hereafter.

5 The three Estates assembled at Tours the year 1483, in their Remonstrance
presented to the same King Jews th'eleventh, say thus: That the king by reason
of his crown as well of common right, as by the consultation and request of
all the Church of France and Dauphinie, is, as the former Kings his
predecessors were, the protector and defendour of the holy Decrees,
liberties, and franchises of the Church of his Kingdom and Dauphinie.

9 According hereunto every time, and as often as there have been any troubles
or disorders in the Church, or when any question was about proceeding to some
greater reformation, the Emperors and Kings have put their hands unto it, and
have applied the remedy, either upon their own mere motion, or at the
request of others. Which is verified by the example of Kings Hezekias, Who in
the first year of his reign, in the first month, 2 Chronicles. cap. 19. verse.
3,4,5, 12, 15.
opened the doors of the house of the Lord, and repaired them; and he brought
in the Priests and the Levites, and commanded them to sanctify the house of
the Lord, and carry forth the filthiness out of the holy place, and the
Levites rose, and they gathered their brethren and came according to the
commandment of the King, by the words of the Lord, to cleanse the house of the
Lord. The same Hezekiah cast out idolatry which by little and little had crept
into the Temple of God. He removed the high places^ and brake the images, and
cut down the groves, and break in pieces the brason Serpent that Moses had
made, 2 King. 18.4.
for until those days the children of Israel did burn incense to it. The
book of the Law being found after it had been a long time lost, King Josias
commanded Hilkiah the High Priest, Ki^gs su^rem^c^e anciently allowed.
and some others to go to Huldah the Prophetess to enquire concerning this
book. Having heard their report after their return, he went up into the house
of the Lord, 2 King. c.2^^^
and all the men of Judah and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem with him, and
the Priests, and the Prophets, and all the people both small and great, and he
read in their ears all the words of the book of the Covenant which was found
in the house of the Lord. And he made a covenant before the Lord, to walk
after the Lord, and to keep his commandments, and his testimonies, and his
statutes, with all their heart. And he commanded Hilkiah the high Priest, and
the Priests of the second order, and the keepers of the door, to bring forth
out of the Temple of the Lord all the vessels that were made for Baal. And he
put down the idolatrous Priests whom the Kings of Judah had ordained to burn
incense, and destroyed their altars: And did other such like things concerning
the order and discipline of the Church.

7 Let us prove this further by the example and ^estimonies of Popes. The
fourth Council (says Zonaras) was called by reason of the instance which was
made by Leo Pope of Rome, and Anatolius Patriar^h of new Rome, Zonar^s tom^ 3.
page 38.
to the Emperor Martian, that the opinions of Dios^oru^ ^^t^ia^ch of
Alexandria, and Eu^ych^s might not remain unexamined, and that the crime
committed against St. Flavian, might not be slurred over under hand. Pope
Boniface the first entreats the Emperor Honorius in his letters, Vid de^ret.
Bon^f. Papae in dec^eto Isidori.
to take order that they do not proceed to the Creation of the Pope by
corruption; which gave him occasion to make a Decree thereupon. We have
related the passages of it in another place.

8 Pope Gregory the first writ to Aldebert King of England in these terms;
Most glorious Son, Gregor. in Regist. Indict. 4. l. 9. ep. 60.
be diligent to preserve that grace you have received from God: make haste to
extend the Christian faith over all people which are subject to you: multiply
the zeal of your upright^esse by their conversion: take away the service of
Idols, pull down the e^ifices of their temples, exhorting thereunto the minds
of your subjects, in great uprightness and purity of life; edify them by
frighting, by flattering^ by correcting them, that so you may be rewarded in
heaven by him whose name and knowledge you shall have to dilated upon earth.
The same St. Gregory writ to Childebert, King of France in this manner. Idem
Greg. in Regist. Indict. 12. l. 4. ep. 53.
For as much as we have been informed of certain things which do highly
offend Almighty God, and do greatly disgrace the honor and reverence of the
Priesthood, we entreat you to take order that such things may be mended by the
censure of your power. And to King Theodebert thus; Idem Greg. In^dict. 4. l.
9. ep. 54
This would be absolutely profitable for your Kingdom, if that which is
committed against God within your Dominions were corrected by such reformation
as your excellence shall apply unto it.

9 The Acts of a Synod holden at Rome in the year 876, about the Coronation of
Charles the second, son to Jews the Gentle, V Scriptores co^taneos Pithoei p.
499.
contains a certain proposition made by Pope John the eight, where amongst
other things, speaking of Charles the Great, he says of him. That having
raised all the Churches to a mighty greatness, he had always this wish and
desire, of reforming and restoring the holy Roman Church to her first order and
estate. He adds presently after; That he learned the state of Religion out
of holy writ^ which he found to be unhusbanded, and overgrowne with the thorns
of diverse errors and abuses: That he trimmed it up with knowledge both divine
and humane, purged it from errors, and furnished it with sure and certain
doctrines.

10 John of Paris, Joan de Paris. in t^act. de por. Reg^ et Papal. c. 21.
a Friar Predicant, who lived about the year 1280, says, That it is lawful
for a Prince to repel the abuses of the spiritual sword in such sort as he
may proceed by the Material sword: especially when the abuse of the spiritual
sword turns to the prejudice of the commonwealth, P^inces to see t^ the
^^format^on of the Church.
the care whereof belongs unto the Kings; otherwise he should bear the sword
in vain.

11 Claudius Espenseus a Doctor of the Sorbon, Clau. Espens. Th^^l Paris. in
epist. a^ Titu^. ^ap. 3. digress. 10.
in an epistle of his printed 1547, where he treats of the institution of a
Prince, teaches, that it belongs to a Prince to take upon him the reformation
of the Church, then especially when she is full of so great abuses, errors,
and heresies. And upon the Epistle to Titus. I will here add one thing (says
he) for fear lest any body should think that it concerns Princes, only
that profane things succeed well, and not sacred too; as if they were only
keepers of the second table of the Decalogue which concerns our neighbor, and
not of the first also which concerns God and the Church. Secular Princes have
got the higher degree of power in the Church, thereby to fortify
Ecclesiastical discipline, that they may command with terror what the Clergy
cannot do by their bare word; and the heavenly Kingdom may be advanced by
the earthly. According hereunto we may affirm that the great schisms and
divisions, which have dismembered all the Church in these later days, have
been appeased and accorded especially by the authority of Kings and Princes.

12 The Emperor Henry the third, seeing the abuse which was at Rome by means
of the creation of three Popes, Naucler gene. ^ 5. p. 152.
to wit, Bennet the ninth, Sylvester the third, and Gregory the sixth, yea of
a fourth too, namely Gratian who had drawn over the rest by briberie,
presently made thitherwards, and called a Council, and made them be
dismissed, and another substituted in their stead by lawful election.
Frederick the first to remove the schism betwixt the two Popes, Victor, and
Alexander the third. By the counsel and advice of his Princes (says
Radenicus) resolved with himself to take care that neither the state of the
Church, R^deni. l. 2. cap. 43.54.55.64. 65.
nor the Commonwealth of the Empire should receive any damage thereby: And
hearing that both of them had been elected and consecrated Bishops, and that
the one had excommunicated the other, he thought that this difference could not
be determined but by a Council. He therefore called one, after the example
of the ancient Emperors, and summoned both the parties to it, caused one to be
condemned for not appearing, to wit, Alexander, and the other to be confirmed
as lawfully elect. As soon as the Emperor Sigismund was preferred to the
Empire, (says the German Chronicle) he put on this resolution, Germanicor.
Chronic. l. 27 ^. 271. Naucl. genesis 48.
not to spare any pains for the pacifying of the Church, which was then
miserably rent with diverse factions, more like a most confused Chaos, than a
Congregation of faithful men, and Saints of God. He sent certain
Ambassadors to the Popes, and to the Bishops, to compose the affairs of the
Church, and make an agreement betwixt the Popes. Which he did so well, that
notwithstanding the collusion which was between them and all the Legierdemaine,
the Council of Constance was celebrated, where all those Popes which were no
less than three in number were deposed, namely John the 23, Gregory the 12,
and Bennet the 13, and Martin the 5 was chosen in their place.

13 The same Emperor, together with other Christian Princes, did oppose
Eugenius the fourth, Naucler. gener. 48. p. 275.
about a translation of the Council of Basil which he would have made, and
they caused it to continue, in such sort that he himself was there deposed.
The Emperor Maximilian, and King Jews the twelfth proceeded to the
convocation of the second Council of Pisa, to reform such disorders as were
in the Church, Acta Concilii Pisani. 2.
seeing that Julius the second made no reckoning of them. The Emperor in his
command says among other things, That the Pope and Cardinals not performing
their duty in this particular, he would not do as they did, for fear lest
God should accuse him of negligence: inasmuch ^s they behaving themselves
negligently herein, we (says he) as Emperor, Protector, and defender of the
holy mother Church, are bound, forasmuch as lies in our power, to relieve so
great necessities. Princess to see to ^he reformation of ^he Chu^^h.
King Jews sent out a commandment of the like nature, which begins thus; Be
it known unto all and every man present and to come that as our ancestors
have always been not only favorers and assistants, but also most vigilant
champions, most good and constant defenders of the Christian faith, and the
holy Roman Church, in all matters of importance, without sparing any pains or
danger^ we, following the steps of our predecessors, considering what great
profit general Councels have brought to the Christian Commonwealth, and what
damage the Church Catholic has received by the intermission of them, and the
great necessity which there is at this present, to assemble a Council of the
Church Catholic for the rooting out of heresies, schisms and factions in
diverse parts of the world, for the reformation of manners in the Church, and
punishment of crimes which are too notorious, too lasting, and incorrigible
both in the head and members, to establish the peace of Christians, to
discharge our selves of our duty toward God. We have deputed our
well-beloved and trusty Mr. John de Biragua Chancellor of our Exchequer for
the Duchy of Millain, Balthazar Plat another of the Proctour^ of our
Exchequer, to signify and assemble a general Council in our name, or
together with our welbeloved brother Maximilian the most sacr^d Emperor, etc.

14 This is not the first time that our Kings have travailed abo^t the
Convocation of General Councels. Charles the sixth bestirred himself to
remove the schism which was betwixt Bennet the thirteenth, and Boniface the
ninth, and to dispose all the Princes of Christendom for the same design,
according to the testimony of an English Historian; He heard with patience
(says he) the Legates of either Pope: but by the advice of his devines he
would not submit himself, neither to the one nor the other. Guliel.
Neubrigensis l. 4. c. 1.
He rather thought upon a means whereby he might relieve the Church by
removing out of her all matter of dissension. Having therefore sent his
Ambassadors to the Emperor, (whose authority, faith and affection ought to
surpas^e that of other men) as also to the Kings of England, Bohemia and
Hungaria, he conjured them not to be wanting to the public good and
tranquillity. All men of any judgment do well know that the peace of the
Church must come out of this quarter. This may be done when it shall please
the divine bounty to touch the heart of our Sovereign Prince, who has
greater means than any other to acquire this honor. God has made him
peaceable, that so he may procure this good to Christendom. O great Prince
hearken to the complaints which your University of Paris addressed to King
Charles the sixth, one of your Predecessors, and apply them to your self.

15 Endeavor for this peace, Epis^ola Vniversitatis Paris. ad Carolum 6. p. 7.
and for the safety of your foster mother the Church, and employ to that end
(most Christian Prince) all your strength as you have begun to do: cure this
malady: look upon her which is desolate: have pity upon her which is
oppressed: relieve her which is undeservedly dejected: stretch forth your
helping hand to her which is extremely weak, and which is not able to rise
out of her bed: Do not defer any longer to hear her which implores your aid
with continual sighs, and plaints, and groans: Prefer this before all care
of temporal things, how profitable and useful soever they be. This only
business ought to be preferred before all others, inasmuch as all others will
have a more happy success by reason of this, and the honor of your Kingdom,
which you have got by your ancestors shall be preserved unto you and to this
Realm. O that you would remember that you alone do not bear the title of
[most Christian] in vain, but because that your ancestors did ever succor
the Church in all her necessities above all others. Pe^^tions made to Kings for
reformation.
Loose not this privilege, this so noble and magnificent title. Do not suffer
any man to take this honor from you. Do not suffer your self to be outvied
in it: Defend your right, your name, your honor, let the hopes of al
Catholics, and your brethren in Christ move you, which in this matter depends
totally upon your person: for both all Catholic Princes, and all others do
wait upon your hand in this affair, as upon him to whom it does belong most
of right, of custom, of power, and other respects. Let the renowned and
immortal praise of the thing it self move you to erect a perpetual monument
of your name, in the hearts and mouths of all men.

Conrad de Gerlenhusen praepositus Ec^les Wormat. in tract. de S^hismate page
96.
16 A German Devine, Provost of the Church of Worms, made a petition and
exhortation almost like the former, which he exhibited to one of our Kings:
whether it was to the former or no, I know not; but at least thus much we
know, he was of the same name. For in an Epistle which bears this inscription
in the front, De Schismate, epistola Conradi ad Regem Carolum ad faciendam
Synodum, toward the end thereof he bespeaks him in these words; Now I will
address the last part of my rude language to you, most devout and most
Christian King of France. Being such and so great as you are, set your mind, O
Prince, upon such things as belong to Princes, so shall you be above the
Heads. What will you think upon then? surely upon this, that peace may be
made by your Prowess. You think upon this that you are a King: think also
that if you would reig^e long in happiness, it is written of you; The King
which sits upon the seat of justice ^^th disperse all evil. Let no man seduce
you by vain words. Honor and fulfill your ministry. But how? Certes that
such as are far off and such as are near, may both have peace by your
means: that the rents of holy mother Church may be sowed up by you: I say the
common mother both of you and us: who has fed you with her breasts, from whose
mouth you have received the honey of regeneration, and the milk of Christian
doctrine: a stream of blood, springing from the side of her spouse, who was
stretched out for you upon the tree of the cross, has adorned your cheeks.
And therefore her cause is yours; her wrong is your wrong. Arise, O Prince,
arise up against it; build a wall for the house of Israel and fight. And
afterward he adds, Above all things you must strive for this, O glorious
King, and long after it with all your heart, and labor for it with all your
might, that there may be a General Council called, at which without the
effusion of blood, by the grace of God, all things may be reduced to peace and
concord.

17 Now this Prince, whether it was Charles the sixth or the seventh, (for it
must be one of the two) put his hand to the reformation of the Church pretty
handsomely. For under the first there was a kind of neutralitie made, in such
sort that there was no acknowledging of Popes in France: there were also many
goodly Ordinances set out against the abuses of Popes and of the Court of Rome:
the Council of Constance was held also under him; where the power of the Pope,
which was formerly without either beginning or end (as they use to say) was
confined within certain bound^ and limits. To which Council he did contribute
his Ambassadors, and many learned Devines; among the rest the great Cardinal
of Cambray, Mr. John Gerson, as also the University of Paris, which had no
mean authority there, as we collect from the Acts themselves. Nauclerus
generat. 48.
Under the other were holden the Councels of Pavie, Siena, and that famous one
of Basil, which made some strong assaults to moderate that unbridled power of
Popes. The Pragmatique Sanction was then also set out in this Kingdom, the
most useful and most commendable Ordinance that ever was made in France: which
has been since the butt against which the modern Popes have levelled all
their curses; having lopt it so near that there remains nothing but the
trunk, which they never yet knew how to reverse: namely that Decree which
contains the authority of a Council above the Pope, and another concerning
Annats. Church-lawes made by Emp^^ou^s.


18 The Emperor Charles the fifth, and Charles the ninth, King of France, have
sufficiently showed what power they had in the Church; considering that during
the time of the Council of Trent they endeavored to compose the differences
which were in their Empire and Kingdoms concerning point of Religion. They
made things be disputed in diverse Imperial Diets: and at the conference of
Poissy. They made Ecclesiastical laws, as namely that of the Interim for
Germany, the Ordinances of Orleans and Moulins for France, where there are
good rules for Church discipline. And the late King Henry the third did more
yet in establishing Edicts, which derogate from the Decrees of the Council it
self.

CHAP. VI. That Emperors and Kings have in all ages made some Laws concerning
Ecclesiastical polity and discipline: and that they had power so to do.
1 HE should show himself a mere ignorant in law that would deny that
Christian Kings and Emperors have at all times made laws for the polity,
government, and discipline Ecclesiastical. For proof whereof he need but
read the sixteenth book of the Code of Theodosius, the first of Justinians,
the novell Constitutions of Theodosi^^, Valentinian, and other Emperors, which
are put after the same Code of Theodosius: those of Justinian, and his Edicts:
those of Leo and the other Emperors which ruled the Empire after Justinian:
some whereof are added in the late impressions of the body of the Civil Law:
and other some are to be found in the Ius orientale de Benefidius, and in the
book entitled Ius Graeco-Romanum. As also the Capitulary of Charles the Great,
with diverse other Ordinances of our Kings of France made about this particular,
which may be read in the Collections of them. From which it will appear that
there is no part of Ecclesiastical discipline, which has not been managed,
regulated, reformed, and purged by them, as need required.

2 Well fare Doctor Espenseus, Claudiu^ Espenseu^ in commen. in Epist ad Titum
cap. 3. digress. 10.
who when he is speaking of this Royal power, and shaping an answer even to
those that do Princes so much honor as to make them mere executioners of the
Decrees of Clergy men, not having any authority to enter into the cognizance
of the cause. If Princes (says he) must not meddle with sacred things, to what
purpose are there so many laws and Imperial Constitutions about
Ecclesiastical matters in the Code, the Novels, and the Authentiques? Why so
many Royal Edicts and Decrees of Senates extant in the Annals of all
Christians? I know what the matter is; when the fires were kindled over all
France to burn them all alive, Religion was then a case Royal. But when the
question is about a necessary reformation of the Clergy or Monkery, or sending
Pastors home to their flocks, this is a case Synodicall or Papal: For as I
remember I have heard some distinguish so, and those eve^ ^^^hops themselver.
As if Princes were no more but mi^isters of another zeal (ofttimes indiscreet
and without knowledge) that I say not executioners of cruelty: Church
discipline anciently prescribed by Kings.
and not rather Guardians, Protectours, and external defendours of all the
constitutions of the Church, as her children.

3 But let us here show by good examples and sufficient testimonies in what
fashion Secular Princes have meddled with such things as concern the Church. The
first lesson which God gives the King, which would be established over his
people, is this; D^ut. c^p. 17. ve^s. 18,19.
It shall be when he sits upon the throne of his Kingdom, that he shall
write him a copy of this law in a book, out of that which is before the
Priests, and the Levits. And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein
all the days of his life: that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, to
keep all the words of this law, and these Statutes to do them. According
hereunto the Lord speaks thus to Joshua, whom he had chosen to be the governor
of his people after Moses. Josh. 1.8.
This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou shall
meditate therein day and night: that thou may observe to do according to
all that is written therein.

4 Let us now see how these Kings and Governors behaved themselves in the
ancient Church, and the power which they took upon them without rebuke, or to
speak more properly, with approbation. 1 Chronicles. c. 23. verse. 2,4.
David gathered together all the Princes of Israel, with the Priests and the
Levits. Of which twenty and four thousand were chosen to set forward the work
of the house of the Lord: and six thousand were Officers and Judges. Moreover,
four thousand were Porters, Verse. 5.
and four thousand praised the Lord with instruments which he made to praise
therewith. And David divided them into courses among the sons of Levi. And a
little after, Verse. 6. Ve^s. 13.
And Aaron was separated that he should sanctify the most holy things, he and
his sons for ever, to burn incense before the Lord, to minister unto him, and
to bless his name for ever. All this concerns the discipline of the Church:
and yet all was done by the conduct and command of David. King Solomon built
the Temple of the Lord in Jerusalem, by the special appointment of God. 1 Chronicles. c. 22. verse. 9,10.
The son that shall be borne to thee, shall be a man of rest. He shall build
an house for my name. David would have built the temple himself, but he was
forbid by the Lord, because he had shed blood. King Ioash repaired it
afterward. 2 Chronicles. c. 24. verse. 4,5,6,8.
And it came to pass after this, that Ioash was aminded to repair the house
of the Lord. And he gathered together the Priests and the Levites, and
commanded them to go out unto the Cities of Judah, Verse. 7,8.
and gather out of all Israel money to repair the house of the Lord from year
to year. And when the Levites hastened not the King called for Iohoiadah the
chief, and said unto him, Why have thou not required of the Levites to bring
out of Judah, and out of Jerusalem the collection? And at the Kings
commandment they made a chest, into which every man brought his share and
portion that Moses had laid upon them. This money was brought unto the King,
and distributed by him and the high Priest amongst those that wrought about the
temple.

5 The Emperor Charlemaigne, who was as great in Ecclesiastical policy, as
in feats of arms, speaks on this wise to the Clergy of his Empire, in the
preface of his Capitulary, We have sent our Deputies unto you, to the intent
that they by our authority, Capi^ul. Caroli. Magni in praes.
may, together with you, correct what shall stand in need of correction. We
have also added certain Chapters of Canonical ordinances, such as we thought
to be most necessary for you. Let no man I entreat you, think or censure
this pious admonition for presumptuous, whereby we force our selves to correct
what is amiss, to cut off what is superfluous, and briefly to compact what is
good. But rather let every man receive it with a well-willing mind of
charity. For we have read in the book of Kings, how Ioas endeavored to
restore the Kingdom which God had given him, (...) ^he service of the true
God, by going about it, by correcting and admonishing it.

6 We have elsewhere said that he discoursed himself about points of
divinity at the Council of Francfort. P^^nc^s may not preach nor administer
the Sacraments.
Nor do we ever find so many Synods holden as in his reign, and all by his
command: which is a fair pr^si^ent for his successors. Regino sub ann. 81^.
By his command (says Regino) there were Councels celebrated in all parts of
France by the Bishops, about the state of the Church. One was held at Mentz,
another at Rhemes, a third at Tours, a fourth at Cavaillon, a fifth at Arles;
and the several Constitutions which were made in every one of them, were
confirmed by the Emperor. Besides these five which were held in the year 813,
namely but one year before his decease, he called one at Worms, the year 770.
One at Valentia in 771. Another at Worms in 772. Another at Genes the year
773. Another at a place called Duria, in 775. Another at Cullen, 782. A third
at Worms^ 787. Another at a place called Ingeluheym, the year 788. And a
General one consisting of all the Western Churches, at Francfort, the year
794. Besides others which may be observed out of histories.

7 See now then how Kings have a commanding power over the Clergy; how they
make Ordinances about such things as concern Ecclesiastical discipline; how
they engage themselves in such matters above all others; yet not so as to
minister in the Church, to offer incense, or such like. For this belongs
properly to the Church, and cannot be taken from them. This is the reason why
King Hezekiah speaks thus to the Priests and Levites, when he exhorts them to
do their duty. 2 Ch^. 29. 11.
My sons be not now negligent; for the Lord has chosen you to stand before
him, to serve him, and that you should minister unto him, and burn incense.
He calls them sons, or children, (that we may observe so much by the way)
whereas our Canon law on the contrary says, that Bishops are the fathers and
masters of Kings and Princes, as we have ^eene already. It is not lawful for
Princes so much as to touch this mystery: and this is the reason why King
Vzziah was smitten with a leprosy, 2 Ch^on. 26. 16. etc.
because he had taken upon him to offer incense upon the altar: and the
Priests withstood him. From whence our Popes make a wondrous ^^range
consequence, when they conclu^e from hence, that Kings and Emperors cannot in
any sort meddle with any thing that concerns the Church, save only so far
forth as they are commanded by them. Pope Paul the third serves himself of
this instance against the Emperor Charles the fifth; being vexed at some
Decrees which were ma^e concerning Protestants at the Imperial Diet of Spire,
ann. 1544. Sleidan lib. 1^. not con^^^dicted by Surius and Fontanus.
Vzziah (says he) was an excellent King, and yet for all that became a leper,
God so punishing his presumption, because he would have burnt incense upon the
Altar. It is a work well pleasing to God, to have a care of his Churches; but
that is the Priests office, not yours; but it belongs especicially to me, to
whom God has given the power of binding and loosing. The Kings of these days
must ^ot meddle with the administration of the Sacraments, the performing of
Ceremonies, the preaching of the word, nor other such Ecclesiastical offices.
But for the ordaining and making of Ceremonies, for the reformation of abuses,
the extirpation of schisms and heresies, the polity of the Church, and such
like things, they both may and must look to them; and have always done so:
either by having a hand in them themselves, or commanding them to be done, or
by confirming the laws and statutes and ordinances concerning them.

8 We will here observe by the way, that the Emperor, the Kings of England
and France, have a more particular right and privilege in the Church than
others, by reason of their Unction: at least if we take Balsamon the Patriarch
of Antioch his words for it; Balsamo in c. 696 Synod^ in Trullo. p. 238.
who commenting upon the 69 Chapter of the Council in Trullo says, The
Orthodox Emperors that promote the Patriarchs, with invocation of the blessed
Trinity, and are the anointed of the Lord, Kings power in the Church confes'd
by Councels.
go in to the blessed altar when they please, and offer incense, and imprint
the character with a triple wax, as well as Prelates do, yea they teach the
people to instruct them. And he afterward adds, Forasmuch as he that is now
Emperor, is also the Lords anointed by reason of the Chrisme, that is, of the
unction of the Kingdom, and that Christ our God is reckoned for a Priest
as well as others, he is also justly endowed with priestly graces. Some are of
opinion that this is the reason that our King of France receives the holy
communion under both kinds; that he is served by those Clergy men which are
most eminent in dignity, as the Archbishop Cardinals, as when the kiss of
peace is to be given in the Church, they must bring it him, or for saying
grace at his table, and such like. ^ut let us hold on our former course.

9 One of the greatest arguments we have to justify this power, is, that
Councels themselves have confessed it, and have recommended such constitutions
to our observation. The sixth General Synod, called in Trullo, declares, That
they obse^ve the Canon which was made by their predecessors, Sexta Synod. in
Trullo. c. 38. Et Balsamo in candem p. 219.
which says thus, If any city by the Emperors power have been made anew, or
hereafter shall be made, let the order of things Ecclesiastical conform unto
the order of Civil and Politic affairs. Where Balsamon the Patriarch makes
this exposition; This present Canon does ordain that such cities as are
preferred by the Imperial power, or hereafter shall be preferred, be honored
by the Churches in such sort as the Emperors comman^ shall prescribe. That is,
be accounted Episcopal or Metropolitan Sees. For it is fitting the
Ecclesiastical order follow the Civil command. We say likewise, that by this
present Canon the Emperor has power to erect new Bishopriques, and prefer
others to the dignity of Metropolitans; and set a form for the election to
them, and other administration of them, so as he shall think good. According
hereunto the Primacy of the Church was conferred upon Boniface the fourth, by
the Emperor Phocas. Mart. p. 336.
He obtained of the Emperor Phocas (says Martinus Polonus) that the Church of
the Apostle Saint Peter should be the head of all Churches, because that of
Constantinople did pretend to be the chief.

Can Constantin^s.
10 The Popes have been so well pleased to receive this Primacy at the hands of
Princes; that they have even made Constantine the Great speak of it in the
fabulous instrument of his donation. And giving over that they brag, That the
Church of Rome erects Patriarchships, Primacies of Metropolitans, Bishops
Seats, and the dignities of all orders of Churches. Can. Omnes. did. 22.
For these are Pope Nicholas the second his own words, in his Epistle which he
writ to the Milanois, which is recorded in the great Decree. Which the later
Popes k^ew well how to practice; insomuch that Pope John the twenty second,
made horrible alterations in our France within a little time. For he erected the
Church of Toulouse to an Archbishoprique: Appendix ad Martinum Polonum in Joan.
22. sub ann. 1317.
divided the Diocese of Toulouse into six Bishopriques, the Bishops whereof
should be Suffragans to the Archbishop of Toulouse: and turned six Villages
into Cities, to wit, Montauban, Rieux, Lombez Abbey, St. Papoul, Lavaur, and
Mirepoix, lodging the Bishops in them, and erecting the Episcopal Seats there,
assigning to every o^e his proper Diocese. He created two Bishopriques within
the Archbishoprique of Narbon, the first at Limoux, whose seat he translated
to Alet not ^^ng after; the second in the Abbey of Saint Pons, setting out
their Dioceses. He divided also the Bishoprique of Alby into two, and created
one at Castres. He erected diverse others besides, which are reckoned up in
particular ^y the author of the continuation to Martinus Polonus, from whence
I borrowed the former passage verbatim. But let us return to our former
discourse.

11 A certain Council of Paris holden under Jews the Gentle, says, that the
Church approves and observes a constitution made by the Emperor Justinian
concerning excommunication. E^clesi^sticall law^s made by Empe^ou^s.
As concerning unlawful excommunication (says it) the law of the Catholic
Emperor Justinian ( which the Catholic Church does observe and approve) has
ordained, that no Priest shall excommunicate any man, till such time as the
cause be proved for which the Ecclesiastical Canons do command it to be
inflicted. Can. de illicita. cause. 24. q. 3.
This very constitution on Justinian has been followed and allowed by our
Popes, as they themselves do testify in their Books; and the addition made
unto it by the Gloss, is remarkable. So for a long time, about eight hundred
years, the Emperors made laws concerning Ecclesiastical persons, and
affairs; and the Church obeyed them. This Gloss was afterward put out,
because it told too much.

12 At the Council of Meaux held in the year 945, it is said, Conc. Meldens.
Cap. 78. To. 3. Council.

Conc. Meldens. Cap 28. Tom. 3. Con^. p. 872.


That the Capitulary laws concerning the Church, which were made and set out
by the great Emperor Charl^maine, and by the Emperor Jews, be strictly
observed, as it is known that laws should be observed. The same Council
entreats King Charles the younger; To grant the Bishops a freer liberty for
the execution of their ministeries in their Parishes. The same Charles the
Great had ordained in his Capitulary, ^apit Car^li Mag^^, l, 1 c 91
That to every Church there should be given only one entire Manor, without
any other service: and that such Priests as are ordained and established in
them, shall not be tied and boun^ to do any other service but Ecclesiastical,
for and in conside^ation of the tithes, and oblations of faithful people^
houses, base Co^rts, or gardens adjoining to the said Churches, nor for the
Manor aforesaid. Can. secundum^ 23 q. 8.
A certain Council held at Paris, does commend and follow this same
Ordinance, and our Popes have canonized it.

13 The Council of Pavy, holden under the Emperor Jews the second, in the
year 855, addresseth these words unto him; Con^. Ticinens. c. 11. tom. 3.
Conc. page 894.
As for the reparation of Churches, the Chapter which was made by your
Predecessor is su^^icient. But that it may be observed, it stands in need of
your admonition. So likewise forasmuch as concerns places for the entertaining
of strangers, that which is set down in the Capitularie ought to be observed.

14 The Emperor Justinian in one of his Edicts, does excommunicate all
heresies^ and that of Nestorius and Eutyches in particular. L. Cum recta. C. de
summa trinitate.
We anathematize all heresy, and especially that of Eutyches and Nestorius,
as also that of Apollinaris. He further ordaines, that if the followers of
that sect do not return after the warning which should be given unto them,
by virtue of his Edict, That they should not look for any favor or pardon,
commanding that they should be punished with condig^e punishment, as convicted
and denounced heretics. This Edict was commended and approved bp Epiphanius
Patriarch of Constantinople, and by a good number of Bishops, which were then
at Constantinople, as the same Justinian affirms in one of his Constitutions
directed to him: where after he has rehearsed the tenor of the said Edict, L.
Cum velim^^ C. de Sa^^os^ncta Eccles.
These are the things (says he) which by our divine Edict we have condemned in
the persons of heretics; to which all the most holy Bishops and reverend
Abbats, which were then present in this City, have, together with your
Holiness, subscribed. Pope John in the answer which he made to the same
Emperor, has such another confirmation. We have been informed (says he) by
the report of Hypatius and Demetrius, that you, being stirred up by the love of
the faith, for the abolishing of the opinions of heretics, have set out an
Edict; following therein the Apostolical doctrine^ and with the consent of our
brethren and fellow-Bishops: which we by our authority do here confirm, as
conformable to the Apostolical doctrine. Pope John's successor would say now
adays, That it does not concern him to intermeddle so far in divine
matters. He goes further yet, for he prays Justinian that he would mitigate
this his Edict toward such as would repent. Church laws made by Princes,
admitted by Popes.
Forasmuch as the Church does not shut her bosom against those that return
unto her: I entreat your Clemency (says he) that if they will return to the
union of the Church, by forsaking their errors, and casting off their bad
intention, that you would turn the edge and point of your indignation from
them, by receiving them into your communion, and admitting them into your
savor upon our intercession.

Concilium Tribunarium apud Rhab^num.
15 A certain Council held at Tribur under King Arnold, which is extant in a
Book of Rhabanus, has this preface: In the 895 year of the incarnation of
our Lord the glorious King Arnold so journing at Tribur, there were twenty six
Bishops assembled, and to the number of a hundred Abbats of Monasteries; whom
the same King commanded to treat of Ecclesiastical laws, and promised to show
himself a most devout coadjutour for the reestablishing of the Canons and
Decrees; as also the Constitutions of his ancestors, which are contained in
their Capitulary, so far forth as he should find them infeebled. He assisted
also the Bishops and the holy Synod by his authority Royal, against some
secular persons who would have infringed the Episcopal authority: and those
capitulary Laws which are hereafter set down, were published and approved by
him.

Marsili^s Paduanus in defens. pacis. cap. 21. page 318.

Can. de Capitul^^ 19. did. 10.


16 As for the Popes, In former times they did not only not contradict this,
but rather became supplicants to Emperors for the obtaining of such rules and
Ordinances, says Marsilius of Padua. And indeed Leo the fourth writes to the
Emperor Lotharius in this manner: As for the Capitulary Ordinances and
Imperial Constitutions, as well of your self as of your predecessors, we
declare unto you that we will observe and keep them exactly, both at this
present and for ever hereafter, so far forth as we are or shall be able: and
if perchance any man either has or do inform you otherwise, know for
certain that he is a liar. See here a fair promise, which was canonized in
the Decret, but it serves for nothing there but tapestrie.

Can. legem. did. 53.
17 The Emperor Maurice set out a prohibition in one of his Constitutions, That
such as were bound to bear arms, or to other public services, should not be
admitted into any Ecclesiastical habit, nor into any Monasterries, seeing by
that means they thought to secure their affairs. Gregory the Great sent this
Edict to the Bishops of Sicily, recommending the observance of it unto them.
Which was approved by his successors who have canonized this Epistle of his.

18 Pope Gelasius recommends the observance of laws made by secular Princes
about Ecclesiastical matters. Can Quis aut leges. did. 54.
Who dare say (says he) that the laws of Princes, the rules of Fathers, or
the new admonitions may be slighted? And he afterward speaks of two natural
borne slaves who had been made Deacons in the Church contrary to the said
laws. One of the Bonifaces writ thus to the Bishops of France, Can Si inter.
Cause. 6. quaest. 4
If any doubt do arise about Ecclesiastical law or any other matter, betwixt
any two Bishops belonging to the same Council, let the Metropolitan in the
first place judge of it, at the Council with the rest of the Bishops: and if
the parties will not stand to that judgment, then let the Primate of the
Country have the hearing of it, and determine of it according to the
Ecclesiastical Canons, and your own laws; and neither of the parties shall
have power to contradict it. Which is avowed in like manner by his successors.

19 We have elsewhere handled many points which concern the authority of
Kings and Princes; as the calling of Councels, the presidence and judgment in
them the authorizing of them, the election or nomination to Bishopriques, the
jurisdiction over Clergymen, and other things of like nature, which it is not
necessary to reinculcate here. Vid. ^us Graeco-Romanum. to. 1. lib. 5. pag^ 517.
We will add for a close that famous passage of Demetrius Archbishop of
Bulgaria, which contains a great part of all that goes before, and with which
for that reason we will conclude. He therefore in one of his responses to
Constantine Cabasilas Archbishop of Dyrrhachium, says; Spanish and French
quarrel for prec^dence.
The Emperor, being as it were the common knowing Monarque of the Churches,
does preside in Synodicall determina^ions, and makes them be in force; he
prescribes Ecclesiastical Orders: he sets laws to the lives, and polity of
such as serve at the Altar, as also to the judgments of ^ishops and Clerks,
and to the suffrages of vacant Churches: he preferres from a lesser honor to a
greater, as by erecting a Metropolitan Church in stead of a Bishoprique,
thereby adorning either the virtue of the man or the place. And, that I may
speak in a word, save only the administering of the Sacraments, the Emperor
represents all the Pontificiall privileges, when he proceeds in a lawful and
Canonical way.

CHAP. VII. Of other prejudices concerning the King of France and his kingdom
in particular; and first of precedence.
1 ALL the former discourses are interwoven of the rights and liberties of the
Realm of France, Of this point ^^e more in Vignier de Bar. Augustinum
Cravaliz, and other Authors c^^ed by M. Seldom, Tules of honor.

Part. 1. Chap. ^.


and the Gallicane Church. There remains yet some few, which we could not
conveniently rank elsewhere, whereof we shall speak in this place, and show
the prejudice which is done unto them by this Council. The first shall be
about the precedence which belongs unto our Kings before all others; which
notwithstanding was denied unto them before him of Spain, and put in
compromize, not without an apparent blemish to their sacred Majesty's. The
Council indeed did not judge for the King of Spain, but they declared, Ad
finem Sess. 25 December. 4^
That they meant not that any prejudice should accrue to such as had not taken
their place. But inasmuch as they suffered that controversy, without passing
their sentence upon his side, who had both the right and the possession, and to
whom the Church of Rome is so much beholden. This is sufficient cause of
complaint. Thus another man's right is encroached upon by degrees; it is enough
at the first that a doubt is made of it, he may in time gain upon it, seeing
he is already as it were in a parity. The libels which were put in concerning
the precedence of the King of Spain do sufficiently show us, what prejudice
the toleration of a Council has done unto our kings. But it is expedient that
we relate the whole story of what has ensued upon it.

2 The Count de Luna, Ambassador of King Philip of Spain, when he came into
the Council the 21 of May 1563, seeing the Ambassadors of France had taken
their place immediately after the Emperors, went and ^ate down next to the
Secretary of the Council, making this protestation in Spanish. Albeit the
first place after the Emperors Ambassadors belongs unto me as I am such an
Ambassador both in this place and company, V. Historiam Concilii Trid. lib. 8.
and every other, which before all things I do here declare and protest, yet
not to disturb the things which are here handled, nor give occasion to any man
to retire, I take that place which is assigned unto me, using it for the
present, and will use it so long as I shall think fit; yet in such sort, that
I would have every man to know well (which I do here declare and protest) that
this my modesty and the regard which I have to the wholesome consultations of
this sacred Assembly in general, Protestations of the Ambass^dou^s.
can be no prejudice to the dignity, majesty, and right of King Philip my
master, nor his posterity, and that this right shall be no less saved and
entire unto him for the present or upon other occasions; which I would have
reserved unto him both in these actions and all other in all other places, and
at all other times, to the intent that they may always prosecute and maintain
these rights, and this claim as well as if that place which belongs unto me
here and at this time as an Ambassador of such quality had been granted unto
me, disclaiming any thing that shall be objected by any man against this my
asseveration and protestation, so as it be no wrong unto them Which
protestation of mine contained in this libel, I desire the most holy Fathers
may be written and inserted among the Acts of this most sacred Synod, and that
it may not be lawful to publish the Acts without it, and a copy thereof to
be given unto me, signed by the Secretary.

Extat haec protestatio and responsio in Actis Concilii Trid. Lugduni impressis
apud Rovillium ann. 1566. page 285.
3 The French Ambassadors, without being dismayed at this Rodomontado, modestly
answered in these terms, If we should have sat to day in this Council in any
other place than our ancestors formerly did, and even of late in the Council
of Constance, and the last of Lateran, where they sat next after the Emperors
Ambassadors, before the Ambassadors of all other Princes, and if this new
place which the Count de Luna, the most illustrious Ambassador of his
Catholic Majesty, does now go to take, out of the rank of the Ambassadors,
could bring any prejudice to us or other Ambassadors, it were your part (most
holy Fathers) which do here by your noble o^fice represent the Church
Catholic, to cause us to be ranked in our ancient order, or else proceed
against us by Evangelicall de^unciations. But seeing that you are silent in the
matter, and that the illustrious Ambassadors of his Imperial Majesty, to whom
the case is common with us, do not oppose themselves against this innovation,
we, who do this day preserve the possession of their ancient right unto our
Kings, amongst the rank of Ambassadors, being placed next to the Ambassador
of his Imperial Majesty, and who make no doubt of the faith, amity, and
affinity of Philip the most great, and most puissant Catholic King, to
Charles his brother the most Christian King, who is under age; we only desire
of you, that you would so conceive of what has been done, and said this day,
by the most illustrious Count de Luna, that no prejudice may accrue to the
ancient prerogative, and perpetual possession of the most Christian King, and
that you would command, that this also be inserted in the Acts.

4 See here the beginning of the quarrel, which shows a resolution on the
Spaniards part, to change his place, and gain the Prioritie. Wherein he was
backed out by Pope Pius the second; who using all the power he had in this
Council, sent a peremptory command from Rome, that the Ambassadors of both
the Kings should be censed at the same time. Hear what Onuphrius Panuinus
says of it, At the Council of Trent there was a great controversy because
the Ambassadors of the two Kings were censed at the same time by special
command from the Pope. He says truly that there was a great controversy, for
the Lords of Ferriers and Pibrac took the Pope up for it with pretty tart
terms, saying amongst other things, as appears by the Oration delivered
toward the end of September 1563. That in stead of bread he gave his eldest
sons Scorpions; that they laid the blame of all that was done to their Prince
upon him, that he robbed his eldest son of the honor which is due unto him;
that he arrogated unto himself power and authority over the Council; that
he prescribed unto it, what it shall do; that the French will not acknowledge
him for Pope: and see what they did. After that the French Ambassadors had
commanded the Prelates of France, that they should depart from the Council,
they themselves retired to Venice.

5 We will now set down some passages out of the Acts of that Council, (...).
to show how those Fathers are not content to wrong our Kings indeed, but are
further ambitious to make it appear in writi^g. Pope Paul the third in his
Bull of 1542. by which he called the Council, does indeed give that honor
which is due unto the King of France, ^^^king him in this order, in that
exhortation which he makes to Kings and Princes, Praying (says ^e) the
foresaid Emperor, the most Christian, and all other Kings, Dukes, and Princes,
whose presence will be very useful, to come themselves in person to the
celebration of this sacred Council. In the 8 Session ^^^er Paul the third, the
President of the Council speaks in this manner. That they will go on
successively, till it shall seem expedient to our holy Father, ^ho having
communicated his Council and advice with the most vi^torious Emperor, the most
Christian King, and other Kings and Prince^ of Christendom, the Council may
and ought to be assembled in this place.

6 All this goes well yet; but for all that, we do not take it as a courtesy:
there could be then no question of the precedencie, because the King of Spain
was Emperor too; and, as such, took place of the King of France. Now after
that Ferdinand succeeded Charles the fifth, and there was a King of Spain in
several, the Pope and the Council altered their s^ile. Pius the fourth in a
Bull of 15^0, for the continuation of the Council, Having acquainted (says
he) with our purpose our welbeloved son^es in Jesus Christ Ferdinand Emperor,
elect of the Romans, and other Ki^gs and Princes, that they send their
Ambassadors, etc. And the Council it self in the tenth Chapter of the ninth
Se^sion under Pius the fourth, Wherefore it advises the Emperor, Kings,
Commonwealths, Princes, etc. And in the Acclamations at the end of the
Council worst of all. Blessed be the memory (say they) of the Emperor
Charles the fifth, and of those most serene Kings, that promoted and protected
this General Council. Resp. Amen, Amen. Many years to the most Serene
Emperor Ferdinand ever-Augustus, Orthodox and peaceable, and to all other
Kings, Commonwealths and Princes.

7 See here as sad an end for our Kings as the beginning was pleasing. In the
Catalogue of the fathers and Ambassadors they are diversely ranked, but still
to the disadvantage of France. In the edition at Lions in 4, printed by
Rovillius ann. 1566; as also in the French translation by Gentianus Hervetus,
printed 1566, and in the collections of the Orations spoken in the Council,
printed at Paris 1563, this title is put before it, The catalogue of the
Ambassadors whose names are here underwritten, according to their coming to
the City of Trent. And afterward the Ambassadors are so ranked, that the
French come after the Spanish. And in the catalogue of the Council in Latin
printed at Anvers 1596, and another at Lions by the same Rovilliu^ ann. 1584,
the French Ambassadors are placed next after the Emperors; but it is
afterward said. That the King of Spaines Amb^ss^^our, or Orator, sat by
himself, by reason of the controversy which a^ose betwixt him and the
Ambassadors of the most Christian King.

See here a suit for our Kings, which they may thank this Council for. They
can never approve the Acts of it, without doing unto themselves a most gross
prejudice. That will be as much as giving the King of Spain a title, whereby
he will endeavor to make his cause good hereafter. And there is no other way
to ward this blow but by rejecting the Council: considering withal the great
favors done by it unto the King of Spain, not only in this but all other
things. So when there is any occasion of making answer to his Ambassadors,
this Council cannot find words significant enough to express their
commendations, wherein it is too excessive; and on the contrary, too reserved
and sparing when there is any question about them of France. And in stead of
what Pope Gregory said, French took place anciently, as at the Lateran Council.
who compared the faith of our King^ to a great light shining in the dark;
ranking them by that means, above all other Kings, in honor and dignity: The
Council on the other side gives this prerogative to the Kings of Spain, giving
them the honor to be the chief a^^ngst all Catholic Princes. Amongst whom
(says it, Greg. Maguus in registro l. 5. c. 106.

Responsio Conc. Trid ad Marchionem Piscar.


speaking of Kings and Princes) King Philip (Facile Princeps) the prime man,
offers all his studies, industry, means and endeavors both of body and mind.

9 One of the Presidents of that Council, speaking of the Kings of France and
Spain, in a certain book of his, puts the French King behind. For disputing
against Brentius he says, But what a thing will this be if those be not
religious whom the Catholic Church holds for such? Stanislaus Hosius l. 1
de legit. ju^iciis circa Principium.
As for the Kings of the Romans, of Spain, France, England, Portugal,
Hungary, Poland, Bohemia, Scotland, and all other Christian Princes, I doubt
not but they are godly Princes. I know very well that in writing that order is
not always observed which belongs unto the persons spoken of: but for him who
had been President in the Council at that very time when the controversy
arose, he cannot excuse himself from malicious and fraudulent dealing toward
our Kings.

10 Besides, their right was so apparent that there could be no question of
it. In former Councels they had always taken that place without any
controversy. The Acts of them are a sufficient proof of it; and amongst other
of that of Lateran, which begun 1512, and ended 1517, under Julius the second^
and Leo the tenth. Where in the eighth Session the Ambassadors are ranked in
this order.

The magnificent Signiour Jews de Solier, Ambassador of the most Christian
King of France. The magnificent Signiour Ierom de Vic, Ambassador of the
Catholic King Ferdinand of Aragon.
And in the ninth Session. The magnificent Signiour Jews de Solier, Ambassador
of the most Christian King of France. The magnificent Signiour Ierom de Vic,
Ambassador of the most Catholic King of Spain.
The same is again repeated in the tenth Session.

AEneas Sylvius l. 1. commentar. Council. Basil.
11 AEneus Sylvius, who was afterward called Pope Pius the second, in the Acts
of the Council of Basil, ranks the Kings of France and Spain in this order; Of
the Emperors Ambassadors the Bishop of Lubes, the Lord George of the French,
the Archbishop of Tours, the Bishop of Troyes, and others of our Colleagues,
except the Archbishop of Lions Of the Castilians^ only the Archbishop of
Consentia. Of the Aragonians, not a man: howbeit it was afterward said, that
the Bishop of Albigeaune, and Francis Barbarianus, who came for Milan, had
undertaken for the King of Aragon. In the edition of the Councels of Constance
and Basil, printed at Milan by Gotardus Ponticus ann. 1511, there is a picture
at the beginning and end of either of them, where the King of France is placed
next to the Emperor.

12 There is likewise a very ancient book called, The Provincial of all the
Churches, where after it has reckoned up all the Archbishopriques that were at
that time in Christendom, it places the Emperors and Kings in this manner:
Christian Emperors.
The Emperor of Rome. The Emperor of Constantinople.
Christian Kings. Opinions of D^ctours conce^ning p^eceden^i^.

The King of France. The King of England. The King of Castile and Leon. The
King of Sicily. The King of Aragon. The King of Hungary, etc.


13 The French colors (says B^ldus consil. 418.
Baldus) march always foremost; and no other King whatsoever may go before
them. And elsewhere, Idem in commen^. ad librum de feudis tit. de prohibit
feud. alienat p^r Freder. number. 24
The King of France is above all other Kings. Our Doctors marshall the Kings
so that they always put him of France in the fore front; as Alber^^us de Rosat
in rubr. Digest. de stat. ^^^in.
Alberi^us de Rosate, Anton Corset. in tract. de potest reg quaest. 21. and 2^.
Antonius Corsetus, and Guido Pap^ de (...) 239 Nicolaus Boer^u^ in ad li^^on.
ad t^actat. de authorit. Sacr. mag. Council. ^hassanaeus in 5 part Catalogi
Gloriae mundi confid. 31.
others. Some of them tell us, that if he be walking with the Emperor, at the
going in at doors, and other strait places, they enter both together sidewise,
and the one does not go before the other. Boniface Bonifacius de Vitaliani^ in
prefat super Clement.
de Vitalianis witnesses that at Rome in his time he that spoke of a King
without addition, was supposed to mean the King of France. An ancient Greek
Suida^ in verbo (...). ^ancelot. Con^adus Laudens^^ in Templo omnium judicum.
lib. 1. cap. 2.. 3 number. 12.
author says the like for his time. An English Historian says, the King of
France is accounted the chief amongst all Kings. In brief it is the common
opinion of all the Doctors that ever writ of it: to seek no further, even of
the Spaniards themselves.

14 I will content my self with setting down here in this place what has
been spoken of this point by one of the King of Spaines own subjects.
Lancelot Conrade by name, as considering that his testimony is authentic and
void of all suspicion. The Doctors (says he) do sometimes dispute which of
all the Kings is to have the first degree of honor, and who is preferred above
all the rest. But they seem generally to agree, that this honor belongs
entirely to the King of France: for he is styled the most Christian King; and
is above all Kings at this day, and takes place of them: as Baldus teaches Ad.
ult. Colum. ult. tit. De prohibita feudi alienatione per Fridericum. And before
him Johannes Andraeas in cap. 2. De praebend. in 6. Which is followed by Paris
de Puteo in Tract. de duello.. nobilis provocavit. number. 10. lib. 25. And
Nicholas Boerius Tract. de ord. grad. utr. for. in prima part number. 12. And
that by the authority of Albericus de Rosate, in Rubric. Digest. de statu
hominis. De Ripa says likewise in his Tract De peste part. 1. number. 80.
according to Baldus Cons. 217. Ego puto. volum. 3. that no man may pretend any
prerogative of honor against the colors of the King of France. He afterward
comes to speak of the King of Spain, whom he highly extols for his power,
greatness, and titles; yet so as for matter of order he always makes him
inferior to the King of France. And yet for all that he was his Prince, and
Conrade his natural subject, as being a native and inhabitant of the town of
Lauda within the Duchy of Milan. For mark what he says himself of it when
he reckons up the titles of the King of Spain. He is King, Prince, Arch. Duke,
Duke and Lord of diverse towns: and was not long ago made Duke of Milan, our
Lord and our Duke. There is yet more in it: namely, that the saying of this
Doctor was confirmed and authorized by a Decree of the Senate of Milan, that
is, by one of the King of Spains Sovereign Courts. For hear what the same
author says of it in his preface. Petrus Paulus Arigonus third President, and
one of the Kings Counselors in the Province of Milan, and with him Petrus
Antonius Marlianus, Johannes Baptista Raynoldus, Danesius Phili^onus, Marcus
Antonius Caymus, Commissary appointed for this matter by special deputation,
Paulus Alia, Ludovicus Mazanta, Octavianus Bignamus Senator elect by the King
as being of Lauda, Julius Clarus, Polictonius Mediobarba Molineus, Scipio
Symoneta, and Leonardus Herera, famous Lawyers and honorable Senators, have
by a special Decree ordained that this book may be published. Pius the 4. his
double dealing in this point of precedence.
Nay Pope Pius himselfe^ as the same author affirms in the process of that
discourse, confirmed it; (it may be without ever thinking of this.) And
afterward (says he) the great Pope Pius the fourth confirmed, and, as it
were, consecrated this Temple by imposition of hands.

15 And yet for all that, he was the man who would have put the King of Spain
in equipage with ours at the Council of Trent, as Onuphrius testifies.
Onuphrius in Pio 4.
It is true which he adds that the same Pope gave the precedence of honor to
our Kings Ambassador at Rome. Not long after (says he) when there arose a
controversy betwixt the French and Spanish Ambassadors who should have the
more honorable place in public assemblies, which was hatched long before by
means of Francis Varga: the Pope after much dodging at last adjudged the first
place to the French, after he had been long plodding about a form of
agreement, but could find none. For the Spaniard denied the precedence to the
French, and the French would not endure that he should be made equal with him.
But there is always in the Popes exactions as well as in the decrees of our
Councels, somewhat in the fag-end that spoils all. For mark what follows.
Upon this occasion, Ludovicus Requesenius, great commander of Castile, and
Ambassador of Spain, being displeased, departed from Rome, after he had made
his public protestation to the Pope, which the Pope admitted, and promised
him he would judge of it. I know not how he means to proceed in it: for to
judge after he has once determined it himself, to what purpose? seeing there
is ^o new evidence come in, and that he was so long a consulting about that
judgment which he passed. To refer it to a Council, that were as much as to
confess himself inferior to it: he will beware of that blow. So you see we
are put upon the quarrel again.

16 After that there were some Popes that altered the place which the Emperors
Ambassadors and they of other Kings used to have in their Chapel, and made
choice of another altogether inconvenient, to the intent that they not
accepting of it, the Spanish Ambassadors should not lose the precedence, which
fell out accordingly. And from that time forwards there has been a contention
about precedence betwixt the Ambassadors of the two Kings. Which was debated
at Venice when the league was concluded against the Turk betwixt the Pope, the
King of Spain, and the Venetians. For the Spanish Ambassador entreated that
the French might not assist at the Ceremonies. But the Signiory thought it fit
that he should hold that rank of honor which belonged unto him. And so he
did. It is true the Spaniard, who was a Church man, to slip his neck out of
the collar, desired that he might sing Mass: which was granted unto him. As
for the Court of Rome, the King of Spain has, for some late years, had so
much succor and favor there, that nothing could be hoped for from thence but
to the disadvantage of the French. The nonage of King Charles emboldened the
King of Spain to call his honors in question: our bypast follies have made
him attempt upon the State, for his successors. But he that preserved and
restored it, as he surpasses all the Kings of the earth in glorious
achievements, will one day put a period to this dispute.

CHAP. VIII. Of Indults and Excommunications.
1 THis Council repeales the Indults granted to the Chancelour, Coun^^ll of
Trent inj^^^ous to of^c^^s of the Cou^^s ^f P^^li^ment^
Presidents, Masters of Requests, Counselors, and other Officers of the
Courts of Parliament. Sess. 24. c. 19.
The holy Synod does decree that mandates by way of provision, and expectative
graces (as they call them) shall not hereafter be granted to any, not to
Colleges, Universities, Senates, or other particular persons, by the name of
Indult, or for a sum certain, or upon any other pretense: nor shall it be
lawful for them to use such as are already granted. Neither shall mental
reservations, nor any other graces upon the future vacancy of Benefices, nor
Indults for another man's Church or Monastery, be granted to any, not even to
the Cardinals of the holy Roman Church: and such as have been formerly granted
shall be accounted abrogate. And yet for all this it is a very ancient law,
Recueil des libertez de l^glise Galli^ane. chap 31.

V. Molineum in Regal. Cancellar. de infir. resi^n number. 224. and seq.

Le recueil de^ Ordonnances de Fon^anon tom. ^ au titre De l'indul^ Papon au
recueil d' Arrests (...) des mandats and indults. Art. 1.


some footsteps whereof may be found in the times of Pope Sixtus the fourth,
and that even under the reign of Philip the Fair, as it is said in the
liberties of the Gallicane Church. Eugenius the fourth granted also some Bulls
out in this case, which were afterward confirmed by Paul the third, in the
year 1538, the publication whereof is inserted among the great Ordinances. It
is a thing which has been tolerated by our Kings, yea which has been
confirmed by them: whose authority, if there were no other title, may suffice
in this case.

2 I will here transcribe certain proviso's made by King Jews th'eleventh,
taken out of an ancient Register which I have in my custody, for the proof of
my assertion Jews by the grace of God King of France, to our welbeloved and
faithful Counselor the Bishop of Limoges, and to our trusty and welbeloved
the Deane and Chapter of Limoges aforesaid, and to every one of you as well
jointly as severally, sends greeting. Whereas our trusty and beloved the
Chancelours, Presidents, Masters of ordinary requests for our household,
Counselors, Registers, Notaries, together with our Advocates and Attorney
general for our Court of Parliament, every man in his place and office are
appointed and ordained to wait continually upon the employment and
administration of our said court, and the administration of justice supreme and
capital for our said Realm; which is a very laudable thing, commendable and
necessary for us, our subjects, and the whole co^monweal^h of this our
kingdom; in which our Court the rights and liberties of the Church of France,
whereof we are the guardian and protector, are preserved. And for this reason
our said Court does consist in part of Counselors and Officers, which are
Clergy men and Ecclesiastical persons. And in consideration of the great,
laudable, and commendable services of the said Chancelour, Presidents, Masters
of Requests, Counselors, Registers, Notaries, Advocates, and Attorney, they
or others by their nomination by means of the intercession of our
predecessors to the Prelates and other Patrons and Conferrers of benefices^
have been preferred unto and generally provided of Church livings, which the
said Prelates or others the Patrons or b^stowers of the same have freely
conferred upon them, or have presented them unto the said Tatrons in favor and
consideration of us, Pr^s^ntations made by kings.
and their own great and commendable services as aforesaid. Which said
Chancelour, Presidents, Masters of requests, Counselors, Registers, Notaries,
Advocates and Attorney, since our coming to the crown, nor a long time
before, have not had any such pr^ferment upon our entreaty and request to the
said Prelates, Patrons, and Collatours, as formerly they were wont to have. And
for this reason the said Court has, with our leave and license, made a
certain roll wherein every one of them are presented and nominated, or have
presented and nominated others in their stead, each one to some or other
preferment belonging to you, or other the Collatours and Patrons of the
benefices of our said Realm. And whereas our trusty and welbeloved Counselor
Mr. German Chartelier has nominated Mr. German Chartelier his son unto one
of your Collations and presentations, we considering the continual charge and
employment, the great pains and trouble of our said Chancelour, Presidents,
Masters of request, and other Officers who are all noted men, learned and
skillful in the law: following the good and laudable customs of our ancestors,
as also of the conferrers and patrons in our said Realm, we entreat and
require you to give, present, and bestow upon the said Mr. German Chartelier
for and in stead of our said Counselor, whom he for his part has nominated
in his place, the first benefice that shall be void within your disposal,
collation, or presentation, as our said Counselor shall require or cause you
to be required thereunto. Hoping that you will not make any denial or
difficulty of this our request, which is most just and reasonable, but will
obey it: especially considering that our said Chancelour, Presidents, Masters
of requests, Couns^llours, and other Officers of our said Court, are employed
daily and in continual trouble about the maintenance and defense of the rights
and privileges of the Churches of our said Realm, and the administration of
justice to our said subjects; signifying unto you that you shall herein do us
such an acceptable favor, as nothing more: by means whereof we take you and
your affairs into special recommendation. Given at Mascon the eighteenth day
of August in the year of Grace 1503. and of our reign the six^; thus
subscribed, By the King. In the presence of my Lord Cardinal D'Amboise Legate
in France, and others. Robertet. Sealed with yellow wax, with the Kings broad
Seal.

3 There is in the same Book an exemplification of the privy letters which
the Court of Parliament writ to the Prelates about those nominations: the
tenor whereof is this. Reverend father in God, we send greeting to you.
Reverend father in God, it has pleased the king to grant unto the Presidents,
Counselors, and other Officers of this Court, his letters and nomination to
some benefices which are in the hands of some Conferrours and Patrons of this
Realm, and among others to our brother such a Counselor of our said
Sovereign in this Court, to the benefices which are in your gift and
disposal. Wherefore we most earnestly beseech you, that in obedience to the
said letters, and in consideration of the deserts of our said brother, you
would bestow upon him the first benefice that falls in your gift, being by him
required thereunto. And in so doing you shall do us a most acceptable
courtesy, for which we shall take your affairs into special recommendation.
Reverend Father in God, we beseech the blessed Son of God to grant you your
desire. Written at Paris in the Parliament, under the seal thereof, the
seventh day of September, the men celebrating the Kings Parliament. And this
annotation is writ in the margeut, Antiquitus fiebant aliter. All this serves
to show the antiquity and possession of this right, which we could not but
touch upon, considering, as it seems, that this Council was resolved to be
revenged upon that venerable Senate, in hatred of that service which they have
ever done to their Prince and whole Realm as often as there was any danger of
their preservation.

4 This Counncell has also gone about to diminish the power of other
Parliaments and Courts of justice in France for as much as concerns
excommunications, Secular M^gi^^^^tes power i^ excommunications.
ordaining two things which are very prejudicial to the tem^orall justice.
First, That no excommunication nor citation be granted out by the Bishop upon
the request or authority of the Magistrate. The next, That it shall not be
lawful for the secular Magistrate, whosoever he be, to prohibit or forbid the
Ecclesiastical Judge to excommunicate any man, or charge him to revoke the
excommunication by him denounced. And that is, say they, because this
cognizance belongs not to Seculars, but to Ecclesiastiques. This reaches
further than a man would think. It is the robbing of Parliaments of the means
which they have to stop the course of those interdicts and excommunications
which are thundered out against the Realm of France by the Popes when they are
in their fury; to bridle the abuses of the Court of Rome and the Clergy of this
Realm, who have sometime ventured so far in thi^ kind that we could see
nothing but confusion and disorder. But it is requisite we treat of these two
points distinctly; for that which we are about to say concerns properly the
later.

5 It is an ancient practice of our Judges Royal in France upon just occasion
to grant out monitories against the plaintiff or defendant, and to decree that
they be proceeded against by Ecclesiastical censures, and b^ excommunications:
Their sentences were wont to be executed by the Priests and other Churchmen
without any difficulty. This power of the Judges Royal was, since the
celebration of this Council, confirmed by the twenty first article of the
Ordinance of Blois: see here the words of it. For the revelation of which crime
the said Bishops, together with our Offi^ers, may cause monitories to be
published in all the parishes, at such time as they shall think proper and
fit. It is also confirmed by infinite number of Papon ^u re^ue^^d Arrests,
t^t^d excommunications and cens. Eccles.
Arrests of Parliaments sent out at several times; which regulate these
licenses of proceeding by excommunications, granted by under Judges. Besides,
our Imbert. li. 1. des ins^it sorens.
Practitioners set us down the very forms of them. Emperors and Kings have
always had the rule and managing of excommunications; and have sometimes used
it themselves. The laws of Justinian. i^ l. cum recta. in l. cum velimus. C.
de sum. Trinitat. Et in novell. de sanct^ss. Epis^. c. 11.
Justinian, Carolus Magnus Capit. lib. 1. cap. 36.
Charles the Great, Charles 9. e^ l'Ordon. d Orleans art. 18. and en l'Ordon.
de l'an 1571. art. 18. Glaber Radulphus hist. lib. 5. cap. ul^. Papon au
re^u^^l d'arrests tit. d'appellation comme d'abut. art. 4. Recueil des ^^bertez
de l'eglise Gall^^an art. 29.
Charles the ninth, and others, which are received even by the Popes themselves
and other Clergy men, do fully prove it. Now there is no question but the
power which they have in this particular they might derive it upon the person
of their Officers. The Clergy have always suffered the use of this practice.
It is true, that as in other things they have gone about to hook in unto
themselves the whole administration of justice, so have they endeavored to do
the like in this case; not directly, but obliquely. For in proceeding to
censures by virtue of the command of the Judge Royal, they have gone about to
get the cognizance of the revelations made in consequence of those censures, by
that means robbing the Judge of his jurisdiction.

6 As for the other point, where they say that the cognizance of censures
belongs not to Secular Judges, the contrary is evident from those reasons which
have been urged already; whereto we will add use and practice. It is
certain that in all ages, secular Princes, their Officers and Magistrates, or
other their Committees have judged of abuses, befalling in excommunications and
interdicts: have stopped the unjust proceedings of Popes and other
Ecclesiastiques; have bridled their too bold enterprises, their passionate
maledictions. The Courts Royal of this Kingdom were wont to grant the
courtesy of an absolution by way of caution to the appellant as from abuse,
whether Clergy man or lay (without any prejudice to the right of the parties)
and compel the Bishop to endure it even by the seizure of his temporals. It is
one of the liberties of the Gallicane Church. By an Arrest of the twelfth of
December 1468, granted at the instance of the Kings Attorney general, and Mr.
Peter Charres Regent Doctor in Divinity in the University of Paris, Popes
c^nsures injurious to Lay Judges.
it was declared, that notwithstanding the interdict, which was denounced
against the City and Diocese of N^v^rs by virtue of certain Bulls from the
Pope, divine service should be there continued, and the Churchmen should be
compelled to do it by the distraining and seizure of their temporalls. By
another in 1488 the Bull which at the instance of Maximilian of Austria, was
thundered out by the Pope against the inhabitants of Gant and Bruges, (...) l.
2. de (...). 4.
then the King of France his subjects, was declared to be abusive. It was
necessary the secular Judges should take knowledge of such fulminations,
con^idering the abuses were unsufferable.

7 They have played such re^ks with these censures heretofore, that there was no
case in which they were not used, Vide articul^s (...) p^o posit^s per Petrum
de Cu^eriis qui ext^nt. apud ^^scum Post ^ractat. de regal^s.
right or wrong to the great scandal and vexation of good men. By means of
them the Judges Royal were totally stripped of their jurisdiction. For they
were excommunicated, because they would have had the cognizance of possession,
procured by a Lay man for the holding of some of his Lands against a
Clergyman. De Cugnertia art 2.
As also for Idem art. 14.
not admitting of an appeal put in to the Ecclesiastical Judge, from sentence
given betwixt Lay men, in an action real or personal; Art. 15.
nor of an appeal put in from a command of an Arrest granted out against one
Lay man at the suit of another for some pecuniary debt. For not Art. 29.
causing the thing which he had robbed or stolen, to be restored to the
thief, (after sentence was pas^ed upon it, and it adjudg'd to him to whom it
belonged after proof made thereof) under color that he is a Churchman,
standing upon this quality after judgment had passed upon him. For not
surrendering up a malefactor, affirming himself to be a Clergyman, although
he had neither tonsure nor habit appertaining to a Clerk, and has lived as a
Lay man all the days of his life. Art. 30.
For not Art. ^3 et. 35.
desisting from the cognizance of the cause of a Clerk married, or one that
trades in Merchandise, or intermeddles in such like things. For Art. 35.
seizing upon the goods and lands of a Priest, at the suit of a Layman.

8 Moreover they behaved themselves so toward the Lay judges, as to their
Sergeants and Varlets, constraining them by their censures, to execute their
Ordinances and obey their Decrees. For if an Art. 12.
excommunicate person did not readily pay the sums of money expressed in the
excommunication, the Lay-judge was submitted to the same censure, in case he
did not make means for the paiment^ and if so be he found no goods, Art. 13.
he was compelled at his own charges, to go and appear before the Official,
to take an oath of his diligence. And Art. 48.
in case a Clergy man had been committed to prison by the Lay judge, either
out of oversight or ignorance, though he were surrendered to the
Ecclesiastical Judge upon the first demand, yet the Lay Judge notwithstanding
was held by the Canons for as good as excommunicate. They Art. 3.
served themselves also of the same censures against parties in suit,
excommunicating some Lay men, that were summoned before them in causes not
spiritual, Art. 10.
for want of appearance; yea and that even after the default made upon a simple
citation. Item for Art. 4.
refusing to plead before them in causes real, and Art. 5.
actions pr^ceeding from contracts with Ecclesiastical persons. For not Art.
11.
paying the sum set down in a sentence upon the day therein prefixed, although
by reason of his poverty the party were not able to pay it. For Art. 43.
biding judgment in a Lay Court, about the demand of a widow. For Art^ 22.
drawing those into the cause which live in Hospitals, Spittles, and houses
Royal, and conventing them before other Judges: denying them such absolution as
was necessary, till such time as they had set an arbitrary fine upon them.
Using Art. 50.
also the like vexation to such witnesses as were summoned by them in causes
brought before them, even although they were out of their jurisdiction. As also
Art. 28.
to such as dwelt in the same place with him whom they had excommunicated,
sometime causing all the inhabitants of a whole parish or village, Abus^s ^f
(...).
both old and young to be cited before them, to go and purge themselves at
one or two several places, of the participa^ion and commu^ion which they might
have had with him, Ar^. 37.
freeing such as would redeem themselves by money from this labor. All which
abuses and infinite more were represented to King ^^ilip de (...) in the year
1329 by Mr. Peter de Cugnieres the Kings Counselor, in pr^^^nce of the
Prelates of this Realm; who in their answers ^ot only not deny them, but, which
is more, defend them.

9 Conformable hereunto is the complaint made by the States of Germany
assembled at Nor^mberg, the year 1522. ^or they make remo^^^ance, That both at
Rome, and all other places^ Vi^ Centum (...) ^^.
many Christians are ex^^^muni^at^d by the Archbishops and Bishops, or their
Commissaries for profane causes^ and di^hon^st gain. That by this means many
men's consciences are tr^^^led, and th^s^ that are weak in faith are driven to
despair: and at last are br^ught to the (...) of soul, and body, and honor,
and goods, contrary to all la^ ^oth divi^^ and ^umane. And for this cause they
required, That none might (...) excommunicated but for the crime of manifest
and convinced heresy. They co^^ ^i^ed also that to bear one excommunicate
person company, Cap. 25.
the Ecclesias^^^al Iudg^^ would excommunicate ten or twelve of his neighbors,
without any cause or (...) that they constrained his fellow-citizens to pay for
him that was not ^ble to pay for himself: as also for that, if a Priest
happened accidentall^ to ^e killed any where, all the town or City was
interdicted by reason of the ^^rther. Durant Bishop of Menda says, that in his
time, ^^p. 3^.
In many places excommunications were thundered out for a six penny debt.

10 These abuses and such as these, of which we have spoken elsewhere, did
many times constrain Kings and Princes, and their O^^icers, to oppose
themselves against them, and take them into their cognizance to restrain them.
Ludovicus Bavarus was excommunicated by John the twenty second, because he had
behaved himself as Emperor before he was crowned by him. Whereupon his
excommunication was declared to be inj^st by an Imperial Diet at Francfort.
Philip the Fair was interdicted by Boniface the eight: the States of France
disanull'd his excommunication. Bennet the thirteenth hurld his thunderbolt
against Charles the sixth: the Parliament of Paris together with all the Lords
of the land, condemned his Bull, and the bearers of it. Gregory the fourteenth
excommunicated the late King and the King now reigning: the Parliament of
Cha^lons, by an Arrest given out in June, 1591, Th^s^ Arrests h^v^ been of ten
P^^n^ed, and may be found in the fourth Tome^ Du re^u^il de (...) del^^ligue.
did casse, repeal, and nullify his Bulls, processes and excommunications, as
abusive, scandalous, seditious^ full of impostures, and made contrary to the
holy Decrees, Canonical Constitutions, approved Councels, and the rights and
liberties of the Gallicane Church: absolved those that were excommunicated by
virtue thereof, and decreed they should be burned in the market place by the
common hangman. The Parliament sitting at Tours did ordain the like by an
Arrest of the fifth of August 1591. Furthermore declaring the said Gregory, who
calls himself Pope the fourteenth of that name, an en^mie to the peace, to the
union of the Catholic Apostolic and Roman Church, to the King and State.

11 Seeing we are gone so far in this point of Excommunications, we will
speak o^^ word of the demands which were put up at the Council of Trent by
the Emperor Ferdinand, by Charles the ninth, Natalis Comes hist. lib. 14. p.
298.

Idem lib. 13. page 300.

Centum grav^minac. 34. Can Episcop. Et Can m^ll^ ^a^erdotumen 21. l. ^


and the States of Germany. The Emperor demanded that there might be no
proceeding to excommunication, but for mortal sin, or a public offense. The
King of France, That it might not be denounced upon every fault nor for
contumacie, but for some grievous sin, and that after three admonitions. The
States of Germany, That it might be only for ope^^ and convicted heresy.
These demands were conformable to the Decrees of ancient Councels; as namely
that of Agatha, and that of Auvergne, which are Canonized in Gratians Decree:
None to be excommunicate for trivial matters.
by virtue of which no man can be excommunicated upon light occasions: and that
of Rhemes holden under Archbishop Sonnace, where it is said, Let no man be
lightly or rashly excommunicated.

Histoire de Rheins l. 2 c. 5. Guilielm. Durand. de Conc. Tit. 38. part. 2.
12 The like demand was made by Durant Bishop of Mande at the time of the
Council of Vienna, to whom Clement the fifth had given in charge, to observe him
all that stood in need of reformation. That no body (says he) be
excommunicate but for mortal sin; considering that anathema is a
comdemnation to eternal death; which ought not to be inflicted, save only upon
such as are incorrigible, and not for petty light matters. Which is not
observed in the Church of Rome, in which even by the Delegates thereof these
sentences are thundered out against Prelates and other persons for a very small
matter.

13 Marsilius of Padua speaks likewise of them in this wise. Marsil. part. 2.
cap. 23.
But that which is most abominable of all, and very odious in the office of
Church men, is that the Bishops of Rome, and others also, to enlarge their
jurisdiction, and reap some most base gain by it, to the contempt of God, and
prejudice of Princes, do excommunicate as well Lay men as Clerks, and deprive
them of the Sacraments of the Church; because they are either negligent or
insufficient to discharge some pecuniarie debts, to the payment whereof within
a certain time, they stood civilly bound.

14 The Cardinal of Cambray, when he speaks of the reformation of the Church
in the time of the Council of Constance, puts the multitude of
excommunications among the number of such things as stood in need of
reformation: Petrus de Alliaco in tract. de reform. Eccles. c^nfiderat. 2. p.
205.
Which (says he) the Church of Rome has imposed by her penal Constitutions,
and especially by some new Decretals; and have thundered them out by their
Collectours, to the scandal of many men: by whose example other Prelates do
cruelly smite poor people with excommunications, without any consideration;
and that for light matters, as for debts: which must necessarily be provided
for, seeing it is against all right.

15 Nicholas de Clemangiis in his tract of the ruin and reparation of the
Church: Hence (says he)^ those anathema's so often repeated, which were no^ used
in the time of our forefathers, Nicholaus de Clemangiis in lib. de ruina and
reparat. Eccles. p. 46.
but very seldom, and that in criminal causes, and abominable wickedness:
forasmuch as a man is hereby separated from the communion of the faithful, and
given up into the power of Satan. But at this present they have proceeded so
far as to use them ordinarily for very petty matters, yea when there is no
fault at all.

16 The Laws and Constitutions of our Princes are conformable to the ancient
Canons, and to all these demands. In the Capitulary of Charles the Great it is
said, That excommunications be not often used, nor without cause. And in the
Ordinance of Orleans that there be no proceeding to them, but in case of crime
and public scandal. It is true that in another Ordinance made 1571, they are
limited by the form of the ancient Canons. But this is still the same,
considering that by them there is no place for excommunications, Save for
grievous faults. Wherein there is sufficient occasion of complaint against the
Council of Trent, which contrary to all antiquity allows the proceedings to
censures and monitions, for matters of no moment.

CHAP. IX. Disposal of the goods of Religious persons. Purchases made by
Mendicants. Leases of Ecclesiastical means. Commutations of last wills and
testaments.
1 THis Council would furthermore have all the goods which shall be purchased
by religious persons, Whither ^elig^o^^ p^^sons (...)
after they have ma^e their profession, to be taken from them and given to
their superior; that is to the Abbat or A^besse, Con^ll ^ri^. Sess 25. ^. 2.
and 16.
to be incorporated to the Monastery. This derogates from the nineteenth
Article of the O^dinance of Orleans, O^don ^ Orle^ns Art. 19.
where there is one case which ought to have been excepted. Namely when
pro^ession is mad^ before the age of twenty five years by males, or twenty by
mai^s: for then they may dispose of their portion left them by way of
inheritance, already fallen unto them, or hereafter like to fall, either in a
direct line or collateral, to the use and b^hoofe of such of their kindred as
they shall think fit; and not of the Monastery. And to this effect (the
Ordinance adds) we have from henceforth declared them capable of inheriting
and making testaments, the said profession or any rigor of law or custom to
the contrary notwithanding. Benedict. in re^pi^. (...) Raynutius in verb ut
uxorem nom. Adelas. ^. 220. Ordon. de Bloi^ de l'an 1579. Art. 28. Sess. 25. c.
1.
These last words are added by reason of the general custom of France,
whereby all religious persons are incapable of inheriting. Since that time the
Ordinance of Blois altered the time of possession, and reduced it to the age of
sixteen years; yet always retaining the same rule for as much as concerns
successions.

2 The same Council has made two Decrees very unlike one to another. By the
one It commands all Regulars, as well men as women, to compose and conform
their life to the rule whereof they make their profession; as the particular
vow of Obedience, poverty, and chastity. By the other, Sess. 25 c. 2^.
It gives leave to Mendicants ( except the Friars of St. Francis, the
Capuchins, and Friars Minorites) to possess immovable goods, even to such as
are prohibited by their Orders. According hereunto the States holden at Blois
in the year 1576, See the collection ^f all th^^ p^st ^t ^he S^a^e^ of ^l^i^
de l an 1576. p. 19.
Upon the eighteenth of December came a Iacobin to prefer a petition^ that
according to the Council of Trent, Mendicants might be allowed to possess
immoveables; but it was answered they would advise upon his petition by making
a general order for it.

3 It is a long time since they procured Bulls from Rome derogatory to their
first rules and institutions which they call Mare Magnum; Benedict. in cap.
R^ynutius in verb. in eod. test. ^elinq nu. 126.

Ioannes Gallu^ q. 62.

V^yez Papon au recueil de^ Arrests ^it. des Religieux Mendian^^ Art. ^.


but they were never received in France. One of our French Doctors prays to
God that he would take care that this great Sea become not the devils pond.
The goodliest possessions are at this day in the hands of the Clergy; and that
in such abundance that some great Doctors have been of opinion that they
ought to be taken from them. And in very truth if they may be allowed to
purchase, there is no doubt but within a very little time the Clergy will get
all into their hands, and will have all the layitie only for renters and
farmers of their goods. Howsoever notwithstanding all their dispensations they
have in France been always kept to their ancient abstinence. And of this
matter there is an Arrest of the Parliament of Paris in the Collection of
Gallus given out upon the Vigils of our Lady 1385 against the four Orders of
Mendicants, Religious persons incapable of temporal reven^wes.
wherein it was said that the Provost of Paris did ill to judge as he did; who
had condemned the heirs of Isabel de Bolayo to pay twenty pound Paris of
yearly rent to every one of the said Orders, to be received by the said
Mendicants for certain houses in Paris which she had given them, to have and
to hold for them and their successors for ever. Their suit was declared
irreceivable into the Court, and they condemned to pay charges. Gallus gives
this reason, Because such Donation was contrary to the substance of their
Order. I have an ancient copy of the Arrests of this Parliament concerning the
King and the temporal justice, where the fact is related otherwise, yet so as
the substance is much alike. Betwixt the Friars Mendicants plaintiffes, of the
one party, and Isabel de Palais inheretrix of Joan Paumer defendresse, on the
other party. By an Arrest of the Court it was said that the Provost of Paris
had not judged right, and the said Isabel did well to appeal; for as much as
he had condemned her to pay and to deliver to each of the said two orders,
(namely the Predicants and the Carmelites) twenty pound rent, given to them by
legacy, together with the Improvements and arrerages which should be raised of
it, and the charges. And had determined the contrary for the other two Orders,
because they had not exhibited their titles. And it was said by the same Arrest
that the said Mendicants ought not to be admitted in the suit which they
commenced, every one of them for twenty pound rent given unto them by legacy by
the said Joan. And the said Court did reserve unto it self the power of
disposing of the said revenew for the soul of the said Joan deceased.
Pronounced the twenty fourth of March 1385. Amongst the Arrests, number. 28. In
the same Collection I find written; Voyez Papon au recueil d'Arrests tit. Des
Religieux Mendians. art. 5 Recueil des libertez de l'Eglise Gallicane chap. 20.

Papon au recueil des Arrests. tit. de Religieux Mendians art. 6.

V. Ioannem Gallum quaest. 244.


December the fifth 1371, it was said that the Augustine Monks should not
possess any immovable goods. The sixth of April 385 'twas said that the
Mendicants should not possess any temporal goods, in the book of the
Counsel. And as for the privileges granted by the Pope, hark what the
Collection of the liberties of the Gallicane Church says of them: The Pope
cannot allow or dispense with any man for holding and possessing any goods
within this Realm contrary to the laws, statutes, or customs of the places,
without leave and license from the King. This is further confirmed by an Arrest
of Paris made in the year 1391, whereby a certain Carmelite called Gratian
was declared not to be receiveable in a suit which he made for a certain
thing issuing out of an immovable for the holding whereof he was dispensed
with by the Pope. They were also forbid to hold secular benefices and
Ecclesiastical dignities by the letters patents of Charles the sixth, bearing
date the nineteenth of February 1413, notwithstanding the Popes dispensations.

Guil. Benedict. in cap. Raynutius. in verb. and uxor. nom. Adelas^ number. 219.

Voyez aussi les or donn Council Trid. Sess. 25. cap. 2.


4 The Council has made a law concerning the farming out of Ecclesiastical
goods and lands, whereby such leases as are made for many years, and for
payments beforehand, are declared not to be valid, to the prejudice of
successors. Commission is also granted to the Provincial Synods, or those
whom they shall depute, to judge and declare invalid such leases of
Ecclesiastical goods as were made within this thirty years, for a long time,
or (as it is in some places) for nine and twenty years, or twice nine and
twenty years. Whereupon it is urged in the first place, that it belongs to
Kings and Emperors to make laws and Ordinances about the alienation, or
letting out of Ecclesiastical goods, as they have always done, in so much as
all our books are full of examples in this kind. And what Popes and Councels
took upon them in this regard, was by their toleration. In the second place,
it does not belong to a Council to nominate and choose Judges, for the deciding
of controversies arising about such farms and leases. Papon au recueil
d'Arrests tit. d'alienation ^ccles. tit. 5. 6.
Nor does it belong to the Ecclesiastical Judges to take the cognizance of
them, but to the secular. And so it has always been accustomed in France,
whereof there are an infinite number of Arrests given out in such cases.

5 It is ordained by the sixth Chapter of the second Session of the same
Council, Who may convert legacies.
that the commutation of last wills and testaments ought not to be admitted but
upon just and necessary causes. See this is very fair: but put case the Pope
ordain otherwise, then there is no remedy. For it is only said, That the
Bishops, as Delegates for the Sea Apostolic, shall take knowledge summarily,
and extra judicium, whether there have been any error or false information.
They cannot therefore judge whether the cause be lawful or no. See here then
a grievance common to all Christendom: Behold yet another more particular to
France; which is that the Lay Judges are herein deprived of their jurisdiction,
to whom it belongs to judge of the justice of the cause in matter of such
commutations, excepting the case of conscience. See what is said in this point
in the Collection of the liberties of the Gallicane Church, The Pope cannot
convert any Legacies, though they be given to charitable uses, or to any other
use, contrary to the will of the deceased; save only in such cases when the
will cannot be formally observed, or where there is a necessity of making such
commutation: always provided that in such cases it be equivalent to that which
was ordained by the testament, or other disposal made by the last will of the
deceased; the cognizance whereof notwithstanding belongs to the Lay Judge,
except for the case of conscience. Now suppose the Pope chance to make any such
commutations without a substantial and lawful cause, it belongs to the Court
of Parliament to reform them upon appeals as from abuse, which are wont to be
put up in such cases; who must have their hands tied, if this Council be
admitted.

CHAP. X. Of the command laid upon Ecclesiastical persons to receive this
Council: and of other grievances.
1 ANother great prejudice is offered unto the Royal dignity by this
Council, when it commands all Clergy men forthwith to receive in public the
Canons and Decrees thereof, and those to whom the care of Universities does
belong to effect the same, and bring it so about, as that Masters and Doctors,
and others publi^uely teach what is contained in the Canons of it, and bind
themselves by a solemn oath to the observation of this Decree. In this they
take too much upon them, that they would have al things put in execution without
the Princes consent or privitie, and perhaps even against his will. It has
always belonged to Kings and Emperors to approve the Canons and Decrees of
Councels. We have proved it in the third Book by many plain examples taken
out of all antiquity.

2 We we will add in behalf of France, that the Council of Basil used
another manner of respect toward our King, when at two several times it sent
forth Deputies, with express commission into this Kingdom to get their
deliberations ^o be received here: which it could not fully obtain, but some
of them were rejec^ed at that time when the Pragmatique was a making, as
appears by the narration of it. And the Cardinals which came thither the
second time to get him to allow the deposition of Eugenius the fourth, This
Council ^uts off all hopes of union.
and the creation of Felix the fifth, in his place and stead, returned from
thence without effecting any thing; as appears by the act of protestation set
forth by King Charles the seventh, of which we have spoken toward the
beginning of the first Book. We say then that to give out such commands to
Ecclesiastical persons and Universities, is all one as to set up two
Monarchies in France, and other Kingdoms. All this should be referred to
Kings and Princes; and they by their authority, after they have approved and
allowed of the resolutions of a Council, should cause them to be put in
execution and observed. The late king Henry the third, and the States of France
assembled at Blois in the year 1579, knowing this very well, made certain
laws concerning Ecclesiastical discipline, in some sort conformable to these
of the Council of Trent in many matters, without making any mention of it.
Whereby they give us to understand, that the proceedings of it displeased them,
and that they would not receive the Decrees and Constitutions thereof.

3 But the worst is yet, that such as are refractorie must be^ given up to the
Pope; and in the mean time excommunicated. The Provincial Councels also are
always bound to promise true obedience to him. All this tends only to the
infeebling o^ the authority Royal, and the exalting of the Papal. O that God
would unseele the eyes of the Princes and Monarchs of the earth, that they
might see it clearly! Provincial, and also Diocesan Synods are likewise bound
publicly to anathematize and detest all the Heresies which are condemned by
this Council: which may engender troubles in those places where two religions
are tolerated. As as also the prohibition made to Bishops that they shall not
allow any to preach, but ^uch as they know, and to ask Saint Peter's advice
thereupon, that so he may have occasion to send the trumpets of war amongst
them, which sound only such tunes as he has taught them. And there is no
question but after the admission of the Council, suite will be made for the
abolishing of that Religion which is tolerated by the Edicts; considering that
the Council has past the sentence of condemnation upon it, and that after the
pronunciation of a sentence, it is necessary to proceed to the execution of
it. Besides, there is no more hope of agreement and reunion left; for those
that have judgment given for their advantage, will be sure not to remit any
thing of it, and the rest will never stand to such an unjust condemnation.

4 Toward the beginning of the first book we have spoken of the Embassage
sent to King Charles the ninth, in behalf of the Pope, the Emperor, the King
of Spain, and the Duke of Savoy, for the receiving of this Council, and we
have made it appear that the end of it was, they were feign to descend to
entreaties. These were the effects and practices during the celebration of it.
The Canons and Decrees thereof had no other aim but the blood of Christians.
The Lords of Ferriers and Pibrack in the letter which they writ from Venice to
King Charles the 9, dated upon the twenty sixth of November 1563, after they
were retired from the Council, and had protested against it, say amongst other
things, That Pope Pius the fourth would have had the deliberations of the
Council to have been subscribed unto by the Ambassadors of Kings and
Princes, to constrain them to make war upon such as should refuse them. And
in their oration delivered toward the end of September in the same year,
touching the point o^ Precedence against the King of Spain, they say, That the
ancients, as Saint Ambrose, Saint Austin, and Saint Chrysostom did not proceed
by such co^rses as these against the Pelagians and other heretics; that they
did not make Princes take arms against them, but labored to reduce them from
their errors by strength of reason, and holiness of life.

5 Though we should not proceed to the drawing of swords, This Council against
all toleration of Protestant^.
and displaying of our colors, yet must we at least make an underhand war,
and set up the Inquisition, which will prove as fine a piece of husbandry in
France as it has done in Spain; Voyez le remonstrance sur la request
presentee p^r la nobl^sse a Madame de Parm^sur les inconveniens ^rovenus de l'
inquisition imprime^ ^ Anuers. l an 1566.

Vide indicem librorum prohibitorum^ and regulas ibi positas L. Mani^hoeos. L
Arrian. l. quicunque l. cognominis l. quoniam C. de Haeretic. and Manich.


and will not spare even those which were never suspected of Heresy. The
example of the Low Country men may be a lesson to us in this regard, upon whom
after the admission of the Council they would have thrust the Inquisition;
wher^upon there were great bickerings and oppositions even by the Catholics
themselves, as is apparent from those discourses which were then set out about
it. This knife has opened the vein which has shed so much blood, and which
in conclusion was the cause of this great revolt. This Council declares all to
be heretics which follow the doctrine by it condemned, and does anathematize
them.

6 In the rules which were made by authority of this Council concerning
prohibited books, so many words as there are, so often almost is there mention of
the Inquisitours. Which gives us plainly to wit, that they are destined to be
the executioners of this Council. And when the Pope shall establish them, who
shall say unto him, he ought not to do it, being he is made omnipotent?
Besides, Inquisitours are now adays only for Heretics. I say, they would
seem to be for none but them. Where then shall they be rather established than
where they are in the midst of us, namely in the Realm of France? For the
mere admittance of this Council, ipso facto makes all those heretics, which
have hithertowards contended that they are not so, and whom our Kings would not
yet brand with the marks of such; as to be accounted criminalls, and lie open
to public a^cusations, to be intestable, infamous, incapable of honors,
dignities^ successions^ and other such like things: yea which is most dangerous
of all, to be burned. Now this would imply a contradiction to qualify them for
heretics, and not give them this appennage withal. And consider whether
there would be any want of good preachers to strut up upon this occasion, and
cry out, To the fire with the Heretic. Which they dare not now do when they
are taken up with a Sub judice l^^ est. And they live in expectation when a
free and lawful Council shall be celebrated.

7 The same Council confirms all Papal Constitutions, and by consequent
those which establish the Inquisition, whereof we have a great number, some of
them in the Vide Cap. praesidentes and ^a inquisitioni^ de Haeretico in 6.
Clement. 1. 2.3. Extravag. 1. and 3. de Haer.
Decretals, Extravagants, and Clementines; and the rest in the Vide directo.
inquisitori. Nicola^ Eymerici. Item collection. diverse. constitut part. 1. page
351 part. 2. p. 116.
Directorium Inquisitorum, set forth by Nicholas Eymericus new printed at Rome,
the year 1585, and dedicated to Gregory the thirteenth, containing a great many
Bulls in behalf of the Inquisition, published since Innocent the third till
Gregory the thirteenth. As also those which excommunicate all favorers of
heretics, and those which suffer them to live amongst them. And indeed
Gregory the thirteenth made this sense of them, when by his Bull entitled Extat
in collectione diversa^um constitut. and litterar Roman. Pontif. excus Roma
ann. 1517. in tert. part. p. 72. Excommunicamus and anathematizamus quoscunque
Vssitas, Viclevitas, Lutheranos, Zuinglianos, Calvinistas, Vgonotos,
Anabaptistas, Trinit^rios ac omnes, et alios singulos alios h^reticos
ipsorumque receptatores and fautores, e^ generaliter quoslibet defen.
Literae process^s lectae die coenae domini, which was thundered out in the year
1578, in the first Chapter thereof he anathematizeth A^ Hussites, Wiclivites,
Zuinglians, Calvinists, Huguenots, and other heretics, together with their
concealers and favorers, and in general all those which defend them. Which
has been since reiterated in many several Bulls of his successors. So as our
Princes will have very much to do to exempt themselves from their thunders, so
long as they observe the Edicts of pacification, which they have made:
admitting, as they do, their subjects of both religions, to honors and
dignities: taking them into their service, both at their table and in their
chamber: letting them live under their protection and defense. Yea even so long
as they continue in alliance and league with their neighbors, whether
Calvinists or Lutherans.

8 We will say in the last place, That it will be a hard matter to put any
qualifications upon this Council: Seeing that how many Articles, so many
grievances almost; This Council disl^k^d by Papists.
saving some few concerning Ecclesiastical discipline, which (as we have said
elsewhere) have been received in France already. As for the rest, they tend
all of them to the prejudices of Kings and Princes, and their subjects. The
best qualification which can be made of them, would, be to raze them quite
out. As for the Canons, although we never undertook the defense of those that
condemn them, yet we shall say by the way, that though they be indicted upon
them, yet it would trouble a bad Lawyer to cast them by them. The injustice and
iniquity of this Council is such, that even good Catholics themselves do
abhor it.

9 We have showed already that the late King sufficiently condemned it^
inasmuch as he by his edicts decreed otherwise in many particulars than it has
done. And as for the King our Sovereign Prince now reigning; he has passed
his word for the calling of a free Council, to compose the differences in
Religion. by his letters patents of the fourth of Iulie 1591. Furthermore we
declare by these presents, conformably to our former declaration, protesting
before the living God, that we desire nothing so much as the Convocation of a
holy and free Council, or some notable assembly, sufficient to determine the
differences in point of Religion. He therefore tacitlie rejects this Council.
We have not the least doubt that he gives backeere a whi^ from this holy
intention; or that he goes about to choke the hopes of a so much desired
reformation, after which all honest men have gaped so long in vain. He has
no mind to accept what his predecessors have so constantly rejected, and so
justly condemned. Though he would not reject it in consideration of others,
yet he will in regard of his own interest, which cannot otherwise be
preserved entire by any qualifications or restrictions. Nor have we collected
these grievances for any doubt we make of his resolution; but to show the
impertinencie of that demand of admittance of it. And that such a stale and
mustie mess may be no more brought up before our Kings: a dish which has
been baked and boiled so often over, that it would be no less noisome to the
stomach, than distasteful to the palate.

FINIS.

