A Sermon upon part of the Prophecy of Obadiah: Touching the destruction, as
of Idumaeans, so of Papists; and means whereby it must be wrought: Preached at
Saint Mary's in Oxford by John Rainoldes, on the 28. of October last. 1584.

Dan. 9. 17. Hear (O our God) the prayer of thy servant, and his
supplications; and cause thy face to shine upon thy Sanctuary that lies wast:
for the Lords sake. Printed. 1584.

John Rainoldes wishes grace and peace in Jesus Christ to the Christian Reader.
We are commanded by a wise Pro. 3. 27.
Prince, or rather by the Prince of Princes, not to withholde good from the
owners thereof, when it is in the power of our hand to do it. The owners of
any good are they called, who stand in need of it. For God has made men
stewardes of his graces, not all to serve themselves, but each to help others
in whatsoever they may. Wherefore, having taken in hand the exposition of
Obadiah the Prophet, and preached so on part of him, as I thought meetest for
the place and time, since the Parliament was summoned: being requested to pen
and publish that Sermon, by some, who thought it needful for more then were
present, I could not withhold my simple help therein from the owners of it, my
leisure and notes serving me to do it. And I pray God that they for whose
sakes it is chiefly done, withholde not goods neither from the owners of them.
Sure, unless the world do blind the^, they will not: and what shall it avail
them to win the whole world, and lose their own souls? When 2. Chr. 25.
Amasias king of Judah had hired an army of Israel for an A talent is about 18.
hundred sicles. A sicle is half an ounce or somewhat more. So a hundred
talents amount to above twenty thousand pounds.
hundred talents of silver, to go with him against Edom: a man of God warned
him not to let the army of Israel go with him; for the Lord is not with
Israel. How shall we do then for the hundred talents (said Amasias) which I
have given them? The man of God answered: the Lord is able to give thee more
the^ that. The Lord is the same now, that he was ever: as highly offended with
unlawful helps which we seek to gain by; as able to give us more then they
cost us, even whom they cost most. But if he would not: yet in his love is
life. And better is a little with a good conscience, then the richest state of
the wicked and mighty. The time will come when men shall feel it. Farewell good
Christian Reader: and commend the cause of the Church (I beseech thee) to God,
by thy prayers; to Gods Lieuetenants, by such means as he shall bless thee
with: that it may find favor in the eyes of the Parliament, and her gracious
Majesty; to the glory of the highest, the salvation of the chosen, and the
security of the State.

From Corpus Christi College in Oxford. Nouemb. 22. 1584.
It is written in the Prophecy of OBADIAH, the fifth and sixth verses.

5 If thieves had come unto thee, if robbers by night, (how art thou
destroyed?) Would they not have stolen that which were enough for them? If
grapegathers had come unto thee, would they not have left some grapes?

6 How are the things of Esau sought out, his secret things are searched?

THE ruin and destruction of the Idumaeans is set forth by the spirit of God
in this prophecy, for the instruction and comfort of the Israelites: to assure
them, that God will execute justice, and judgment on their enemies, in the day
of his visitation, when he will save them. In the former verses (as I have
showed already) the Prophet declared Verse. 1. and 2.
the sentence of the Lord against the Idumaeans, that they should be
destroyed; the witnesses thereof, himself, and other Prophets, who heard it
from the Lord; the means, that he would work by, the warriors rising up
against the^

(...) S. Peter, aduertising the Jews and the Proselytes, that Acts. 2. 38
they should receive the gift of the holy ghost, if they repented, and turned
to Christ: for to you (says he) is the promise made, and to your children,
and to all the^ that shall be long hereafter, even to as many as the Lord our
God shall call: the same in like sort may I say unto you (fathers and brethren)
touching this promise of bringing your enemies to utter ruin and destruction.
For, Genesis 12. 3
God said to Abraham, I will bless the^ that bless thee, and I will curse them
that curse thee: meaning, that he would make a perfect league with him, and
be at peace with his friends, at war with his enemies. But the league and
covenant which God made with Abraham, Ge. 17. 7
he made with Abraham and his seed. And Gal. 3. 7.
the seed of Abraham are all faithful Christians. To us all therefore is that
promise made, that God will bless our friends, and will curse our enemies.
Moreover, his particular curse and plague ensuing it, upon ye Idumaea^s, is a
pattern of that which shall fall on such as tread in their steps. For 1. Cor.
10 6.
the punishment of the Jews, who lusted after evil things* is threatened to
the Gentiles if they lust as the Jews did: and Re. 18. 4*
if ye be partakers of the sins of Babylon, ye shall receive of her plagues.
Now, amongst the enemies of the faithful Christians, others do more rese^ble
the Philistines, or Ammonites, or Moabites, or Amalekites, or Cananites, or
Assyrians: there are none liker to the Idumaeans, then are the Papists, as it
has been showed. The Idumaeans borne according to the flesh of the seed of
Abraham: the Papists by of spring come of Christian parents. The Idumaeans
circumcised as children of the covenant: the Papists baptized in the same that
we be. The Idumaeans served not the God of their fathers according to the law:
neither do the Papists in spirit and truth after the Gospel. The Idumaeans
persecuted the Israelites to death, and vexed the^ with all cruelty: the
Papists have butchered the godly with massacres, and made themselves dru^ke^
with ye blood of saints. Wherefore the spirit of the Lord assures us that the
Papists shall be consumed in his wrath, when it shall burn sodeinly: and as they
have followed the factes of the Idumaeans, so they shall feel their
punishments. I speak not herein of all that are Papists: as neither did the
Prophet of al Idumaea^s* For the Amos. 9. 12.
remnant of Edom shall inherit with Israel, and Papists with us: as many as
shall Act, 15. 17. 8.
seek him, whose name is called upon them. which God grant they may do by
faith in his mercy, that Papists may live, and papistrie may die. But I speak
of all who flubbornly per sist in the Popish heresies. In who^ shall be
fulfilled the Apostles prophecy touching the man of sin: 2. These. 2. 8.
the Lord shall consume him with the breath of his mouth. And so, that which
is written of Edom by the Prophet, may be said by us to the Romish An tichrist:
If thieves had come unto thee, if robbers by night, (how art thou destroyed?)
would they not have stolle^ that which were enough for them? If Grape gatherers
had come unto thee, would they not have left some grapes? How are the things
of Antichrist sought out, his secret things are searched?

Howbeit, as S. Paul* though Act.. 27. 24.
he were assured that al who sailed with him sheuld escape alive: yet Ver. 31.
said, that they could not escape except the mariners abode in the ship: so,
though it be certain that Antichrist and his members shall be consumed, yet
cannot that be, except they be set upon by warriors. For god does work by
means ordinarily. And this is the means that he has ordained for the
atchieuing of that conquest, as we saw before in Obad. 1.
the Ambassadors message, Arise and let us rise up against her to battle.
The warriors, whose service the Lord does use thereto, are all his servants in
a sort; Psalm. 110. 3.
his people most willing in the day of his army: but specially Preachers and
Ministers of his word. For his word is Esa. 11. 4.
the rod of his* mouth, 2. These. 2. 8.
the breath, Reave. 19 15. Agge. 1. 1.
the sword, whereby he does destroy his enemies: and ministers are soldiers,
by whose hand he weeldeth it. For which cause their function is compared to
warfare, in that it is written by S. Paul, 1* Cor. 9. 7.
Who goes to warrefare any time at his y. 2. Tim. 2*.4
own cost? And, No man that warreth entangleth himself with affairs of life,
that he may please him who has chosen him to be a soldier, And God says of
the^ by the Prophet Esaias: Esaias. 62. 6.
I have set watchme^ upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, which all the day, and all
the night continually shall not cease. The watchmen and warriors therefore of
the Lord, the keepers of his Church, the conquerours of his enemies* the
spoylers of the Idumaeans, the consumers of Antichrist, and Antichristian
impes* are ministers of his word, Pastors and Teachers, who to please him by
who^ they are chosen soldiers, should not be entangled with affairs of
life; to discharge their duty, should be sent forth and kept on public
cost; to preserve their flock, should watch day and* night continually over
it. The less marvel is it, if in our English Churches Antichrist and Edom
be not consumed yet; nay, if they attempt to consume us; if by Popish
policies, by superstitious tokens, by blasphemous writings, by traiterous
libels and conspiracies, they undermine our state; if Psalm. 83. 3
they take crafty counsel against the people of God, and say, ver. 12.
Let us possess his habitations by inheritance; if they look for a day when
they may cry once again, Psalm. 137. 7.
raze it, raze it to the foundation thereof; in a word, if they raunge through
the land like woolues, and suck the blood of sheep and lambs: since the
shepheardes fail, the watchmen are a sleep, the warriors do not fight,
through want, somewhere of will, somewhere of ability. Of will, where they
entangle themselves with such affairs as draw them from their warfare, and are
not content to be watchmen in Jerusalem, but they must have a watchmanship in
Caesarea too; or, if they have one flock alone, yet do not fee^ it, but take
their ease in Sion. Of ability, where there is not sufficient provision for
trayning of men to make them good soldiers; nor maintenance sufficient to
find them being trained: that, setting all other cares of life apart* they may
attend their charge wholly. To them here amongst us, who, through want of will
are backwarde in this service of the Lord God of Hoastes, so much has been
spoken, so often, so earnestly, both out of this and other places: that I am
half ashamed again to solicit them with Esaias. 28. 10.
Precept upon precept, Precept upon Precept. Notwithstanding, as I have read,
that when we had gotten Calice from the Frenchmen, there was one appointed to
put them in remembrance from time to time of Calice, in all their solemn
meetinges for State-consultations, till they had regained it: so* I am
persuaded, that, til the amendment of this fault be woone, it is most
convenient for the Lords remembrancers in all our Church Assemblies to wish it
to be thought of.

Wherefore, to put you in mind even now also of our Spiritual Calice* I
beseech you fathers and brethren (whom it touches) now at length to regard
the state of the Souls, the precious Souls of men committed to your charge:
whose blood, if they perish for lack of that attendaunce, which you ought to
give them, will cry for sharper vengeance then did Ge. 4. 10,
the blood of Abel. Or, if my persuasion cannot prevail with you: yet let his
prevail, whose prayer has prevailed for you; who died himself that you might
live; who said, and all things were created; whose word the winds and seas
obey. Consider the function that he has called you to, the duty laid upon
you, the reward, if you do it; the punishment, if you do it not. Luke 12. 24.
Who is (says he) a faithful and wise Steward, whom his master makes ruler
over his household, to give them their portion of meat in due season? Blessed
is that servant, whom his master when he comes shall find so doing: verily,
I say unto you, he shall make him ruler over all his goods* But if that servant
say in his heart, my master does defer his coming, and begin to smite the
servants and maidens, and to eat and drink, and to be drunken: that servants
master will come in a day when he looks not for him, and in an hour that he
is not ware of, and will cut him in pieces, and give him his portion with the
unbelievers. Our Savior the son of God, the king of kings, and Lord of
Lords, having entertained men and women of all degrees to be his household
servants, is careful to feed them with convenient food, yt they may serve him
in their vocation frutefully. This food is the doctrine of his holy word, which
must be divided in diverse sorts unto his servants, according to their diverse
states: some to be* fed with milk* some with strong meat; some humbled with ye
law, some raised with the gospel; each to have his portion of meat most
wholesome for him. Nor only must they have it, but have it too, in due season,
as often as they need it: which is so often, that ye holy Ghost (to show the
continual necessity thereof) does will it to be given them 2. Tim. 4 2.
in season and out of season. For, as men's bodies should loose their temporal
life, unless, as they decay still, so they were repaired with sustenance of
meat and drink: in like sort men's souls are fainting still also, to their Amos.
8. 11.
hazard of life eternal, unless they be refreshed with the food of Gods word.
Wherefore that his servants and maidens he not famished: the master of the
household has made you his stewards to minister meat unto the^. If you behave
your selves, as wise stewards, and faithful; wise, in discerning what portion
of meat they need each, and when; faithful in giving it to them in due
season: your master shall come, who now is absent as it were and Luke. 19. ^.
gone into a far country, but he shall come again and fill you with
blessedness; he shall make you rulers over al his goods and honor you as
highly as Genesis 41. ^0.
Pharao did Joseph;, yea, he shall reward you with 1. Pet. 5. 4
a crown of glory, an incorruptible crown, and ye shall Dan. 12. ^.
shine as stars for ever and ever. But if ye think his coming to be far
of, and so begin to smite the servants and the maidens; nay, I would to God ye
did smite them only, so that ye taught them too, for that were a benefit; but
if ye famishe them, and play the good fellows your selves with the world, and
eat, and drink, and be drunken: your master will come in a day when ye look
not for him, and in an hour that ye are not ware of, and will (...).
cut you in pieces, and give you your portion with the unbelievers. By the
Roman Tit. de re ^dicata.
laws of the 12. tables, if a man owed money unto sundry creditours, and after
judgment given, did not agree with the^ himself, or others for him: his
creditours might (after certain days respite) cut his body in pieces, and take
them each a part thereof. ^gol. Noct. ^ttic. li. 20. ^ap. 1.
Phauorinus the Philosopher reproved this law as cruel and barbarous. But
Caecilius the Lawier replied well upon him, that so great a punishment was
appointed of purpose, that they might never com unto it. For now we see many
(said he) laid up fast, and cast into fetters, because the pain of fetters is
contemned by lewd persons. But I never read nor heard that of old time any was
cut in pieces: because they could not set light by that punishment. Metius
Fufetius, the Prince of the Albanes, having promised the Roman king Tullus
Hostilius to succor him against his enemies, did treacherously deceive him: by
who^ he was therefore tied to two carts, his hands to the one, his feet to the
other, and so (the horses being driven contrary ways) he was torn in pieces.
Hist. ab V Cond. lib. 1
Liuie misliketh this punishment as over sharp, and says that there was small
regard of humane laws had in it. But Aeneid. lib. 8.
Uirgil weighing better the greatness of the fault, aloweth it with grave
censure, But thou, O Alban Prince, thy promise should have kept.
At tu dictis Albane maneres. Traitors in our days, though they be not torn
with horses as Metius, yet are they rent in pieces, as Metius was, and
quartered. Epist. de persequut. Anglic.
The Papists complain thereof to foreine nations as of outrageous tyra^nie,
when they are put unto it for traitorous factes against our prince. But it is
usual and lawful for the Pope (as Leo the tenthes practice in Hist. Ital. *13.
Guicc^ardin does witness) to quarter men for treason wrought against him.
Now, this severe punishment, which has bin thought fit by mortal Judges to be
laid upon unfaithful debtors, upon treacherous persons, upon rebellious
Traitors, is the same that Christ the immortal judge denounces unto you, if
ye be disloyal to God, your sovereign Lord, if ye break promise with him and
his servants, if ye pay them not the debt which ye owe them, and give them
their portion of meat in due season. A very grievous punishment: yet nothing to
that, which Christ imports by it. For he does import (as the words
following show) that ye shall have your portion with the unbelievers. And ^u.
21. 8.
the unbelievers shall have their portion in the lake that burns with fire
and brimstone, which is the second death. Of Damocles a Heathen man it is
recorded, that when Dionysius the Tyrant entertained him magnificently and
princely, although at the first be thought him self happy, respecting the
train of men, attendant on him, the place of gold and silver, the gorgeous
clothes, the sweet perfumes, the Uiands most delicate, all furniture rich and
royal: yet after, seeing a sword hanging by a thread let down over his head,
he could take no joy of his entertainment, nay he took grief, and desired
earnestly to be dimissed from it. How much less joy should you take in your
eating, your drinking, your pleasures, with which, as worldly baits, the
Prince of this world does pamper your flesh against the day of slaughter: since
there hangs over your necks an axe of vengeance, not that may perhaps, but
that will assuredly; not kill your bodies only, but both bodies and souls;
not with temporal death, but with everlasting into hell fit ^; Matt. 24 51.
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. O consider this, ye that forget
God least he tear you in pieces, and there be none that can deliver you. The
warrior that spoi leth the Idumaeans, shall honor him: and he, that watches
over the Israelites to save the^ shall see the salvation of God. And thus much
to them, who through want of will, search not the secret things of Esau.

As for the defect which this exploite suffers through want of ability,
because such as should do it, are either not trained or not maintained to it
in sufficient sort: that is so much hurtfuller to us then the former, by how
much the contagion of it spreads farther. For soldiers ought to learn and
practice feats of war (as x Veget. de milit. lib. cap. 1.
expert men have noted) before they deal in martial affayeres with their
enemies: and as y Lib. 2. ca. 9. Lib. 3. ca.
they should employ themselves to no business, but to their service only, so
should they be allowed victuals, and other necessaries, that they need not to
do it. Whereupon the Lord appointing Priests and Levites to serve him in this
a Nu. 4. 23. Number. 18.
warfare (as Moses terms it) and ministry, allotted the^ b offerings, first
fruits, and tithes of all the land to live by, with c Number. 35. ^
Cities to dwell in, and grounds annexed thereunto. And, beside the co^uentence
of their abode together in Jerusalem and other Cities that they might the
better betrained from their infancy to skill of the priestly and Leuitical
duties, to teach ye law of Deuteronomy. 33. ^.
God, and offer incense, and Sacrifice: there were also e 1. Sa^. 10. 5. 19.
10. Kin. 2. 3. 6. 1.
Colleges and companies of Prophets, wherein the younger learned under the
elder (as children under fathers) to be me^ of God, to praise his name, and
teach his will. These orders, received by the Church of Israel, should be
followed by ours: though not in all particulars, yet in the general equity.
For 1. Cor. 19* 13.
as they who served about the holy things, did eat of the temple; they, who
waited at the Altar, were partakers with the Altar: so the Lord ordained too,
that they who preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel. And Timothee, who
was chosen to serve in this 1. Ti. 1. 1^ (...)
warfare, as a 2. Tim. 2*
soldier of Christ, did not only 2. Tim. 3. 15.
know the Scriptures from his infancy: but also was Act. 16. 3^
brought up to the ministry by S. Paul, whose 2. Ti. 3. 1^
doctrine and behavior framed him unto it. In which consideration our
Auncetours provided houses, Glebeland, Tithes, and other profits, for the
commodious dwelling and maintenance of Pastors: and endowed Byshoprickes,
Cathedral and Collegiat Churches (as we call them) with lands and revenues,
As appea^ reth by the grounds thereof in (...) Cyprian, Eusebius, Grogor^ the
Councel^ of Toledo, with other Councels* Fathers, and Stories Ecclesiastical:
an M. Bu^r shows in his book, entitled, De reformatione Collegii C^ (...).
that learned godly Teachers being placed there, might instruct others by their
doctrine and behavior, as S. Paul did Timothe. For the fuller perfecting and
finishing of whom to all the Lords work, they founded Uniuersities and
Colleges therein also. But I would to God these nurseries of Pastors and
Teachers of the Church, were husbanded in such sort to the Lords advantage,
that we need not fear his sentence of yt vineyard, Mat. 21.
m that he will let it out to other husbandmen. Then should not so many raw
untrained soldiers receive the Lords pay, who do him small service in the
day of battle. And yet there were less cause to complain hereof, if they,
who be trained, were procured to serve him. But the impressed money and wages
due to the^, the livings (I mean) appointed for their maintenance, are so
impaired and minished: that, being not able therewith to find themselves in
souldiourlike state, they refuse the calling; or if they undertake it, they are
distracted from it, with cares how to supply their need. Whereby it comes to
pass that, Ieh. 13.
n yt Levites flying each into his land for lack of their portions, the house of
God is forsaken. And to fill their rooms, others are taken, who will be hired
for least: not according to the Proverb, Best is best cheap; but to the
common practice, Best cheap is best. Who though not to serve the calves of Dan
and Bethel, yet are made Priests, as those by Jeroboam o king. 12
of pieces of the people, not of the sons of Leui. Who, if they had the
grace, p (...). 13. 5
should say, I am no Prophet, I am a husbandman: and return to that trade
which their friends have taught them. Who are not endued with necessary gifts
for the prophets duty: and therefore, howsoever men have called them to it, God
has not called them. For, whom God calls unto any function, them endueth he
with gifts to perform it: as Exodus 31. 2.
Bezaleel, to make his taberbernacle: Ier. 1. 9,
Jeremy, to do his message; Act. 2. 4.
the Apostles, to preach the Gospel. So the flock of Christ, is desolate of
shepherds; and his camp, of soldiers: while such have the places, as cannot
Ezech. 34 4.
strengthen the weak, heal the sick, bind up the broken; nor destroy his
enemies with the Heb. 4. 12.
two edged sword, and defend his subjects. A great cause here-of are Patrones
of benefices. For whereas the interest of choosing the Pastor belonging of old
time to the Congregation, is now conveyed to them, because their predecessors
did benefit the Church some way, and therefore were put in trust as Patrones of
it: they, a number of them, do deal with the matter as Polymestor did with
Polydore, that is, as evil gardians do with their wards, and turn their
patronage into pillage. The lust of their hearts has defiled their hands with
the sacrilege of Acan: to Ios. 7. 21.
take gold and silver, and Babylonish garments, of the spoils of Jericho Io.
6. 19.
consecrated to God. Or, if not with so foul sacrilege as his was, because
their Predecessors gave some of it perhaps: yet with Acts. 5. 2.
the sacrilege of Ananias and Sapphira; yea, though themselves had given it. If
they think to cover their profane dealing with Ios. 7. 22.
Acans conueyance by hyding the pray, or to Mat. 27. ^4.
wash their hands with Pilates pretense, that they are giltlesse of it, they
gave y^ aduowso^s freely to friends or servants: they deceive themselves. For
Gal. 6. 7.
God is not mocked. And he will find the^ out in a day, when they look not for
him, and in an hour that they are not ware of, Ios. 7. 25.
and bring them to shame with more dreadful punishment, then either he did
Acan, or Acts. 5. 5.
Ananias, and Sapphira. Wherefore I heartily beseech the young Gentlemen that be
here present, and all that are or shall be Patrones hereafter, in a religious
reverence and fear of the Lord, to keep themselves pure from this
abomination. At least, to remember the miserable end of Richard the usurper:
who being made Protector of the King and Realm, got the realm himself, and
robbed the King of it. That, if they deem their patronage to be merely civil,
and the goods of benefices to be as common men's, not sacred to the Lord: yet
being made Protectors thereof, and of y^ Pastors, they follow not his fault
whose end they detest. Though, the very truth is, (which I wish they weigh
too,) that the Churches goods, allotted to the maintenance of Pastors and
teachers, are not profane but sacred: and therefore the sin of them who
purloyne them is sacrilege, not theft: wherein God is spoiled, as himself
pronounces, Mal. 3. 8.
Will a man spoil God* that ye do spoil me? And ye say, wherein do we spoil
thee? in tithes and offerings. Howbeit, if church-liuings were impouerished by
none but by Patrones: the case were not so evil, because it is against the
law. But they are distressed also (beside other pensio^s and inco^brances) by
Appropriatio^s, as ye lawyers term the^; or, as they are named commonly,
impropriations. Whereof the condition is the more grievous, for that in many
parishes there is not a Vicar well and sufficiently endowed to do divine
service, and instruct the people, and keep hospitality: which yet Ann. 4. Henr.
4. cap. 12.
the law co^ma^deth, if it were obeyed. Josias, 2. Chr. 34. 3.
in the^ eighth year of his reign, began to seek the God of his father David;
and in the twelfth year he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem from the hye
places, and the groves, and the graven images, and the molten; and in Verse. 8.
the eyghteenth year he sent Saphan and others, to repair the house of the
Lord his God. Reformations of disorders cannot be made al at once: chiefly,
when the Church has of long time been ouergrowen with them, as then it had
under idolatry, and has with us under Popery. King Henry the eight, a Prince
of noble memory, began to set forth the holy word of God. And his son,
(another Josias, had he lived) began to purge England from Images, and Masses,
and Massing-altars, and superstitions. I doubt not but our gracious Queen and
sovereign Lady desires in the steps of her father and brother, to add this
unto them, that workmen be maintained for repairing of the Church. But it
lies not in her Highness alone to bring it to effect* the Lords and the
Commons have a stroke in it. Wherefore, seeing now a Parliament is su^moned to
be held shortly: let us desire God in humblenes of spirit to incline their
hearts, that, although it be with loss of some part of their own commodities,
yet they will follow ^. Exo. 35. 11.
k the zeal of the Israelites for the tabernacle of assembly. And as the
religious professors of the truth have showed that Churchliuinges appropriated
to others, should in conscience find the Pastors of the Church: so God grant
that they who have the authority may see it with a single eye, and bring it to
pass with an upright hand. Martin Bucer (in De regno Christi lib. ^. cap. 7.
his godly requests and aduises presented to King Edward) treating of skilful
Pastors to be ordained throughout the realm, says; that their maintenance
ought to be required of them who receive the profits of the parishes by
appropriation, or any other way. Bishop Exposit. of Agg. the prophet, chapt. 1.
Pilkinton (upon Aggaeus) complaining that the Pope robbed parishes to feed his
moonkes, wishes, that the Gospel may restore that justly: which he took
wrongfully away, and gave them yet a right name of impropriations, because they
be taken away improperly, and properly belong to the parishes. But what should
I mention Bishops and Divines (of whom there have M. Latimer, in his 1. and 6.
Sermon. preached before King Edward. M. Fox^ in the Acts and mon. lib. 4. All
the Bishops of England (300. years since) misliking in the moonks that they had
gotten benefices to be appropriated to them: as appears by Mat. Westminster. in
Florib. histor, ann. Dom. 126^.
many declared the same mind,) when as Master The perambulat. of Kent: in
Frensbury.
Lambard, a gentleman and Lawier, speaking of a Kentish Benefice converted to
an appropriation, does censure it with these words: One (amongst many) of
those monstrous birthes of covetousness, begotten by the man of Rome in the
dark night of superstition, and yet suffered to live in this day light of the
gospel, to the great hinderaunce of learning, the impouerishment of the
ministry, and the infamy of our profession. Hard may this seem to such as
have the lyuings: and some peradventure will say of these speeches, Amo ^. 7. 10.
The land cannot bear them. But it is harder to suffer the land to stand in
those terms, in which God says to Judah: Mal. 3. 9.
Ye are cursed with a curse for that ye spoil me, eue^ the whole nation. And
if heathen men Philaeni, Codrus, Curtius, have given their lives to benefit
their country with a temporal blessing, and that uncertain too: what should
Christians do to draw that blessing on it, which he, who cannot lie, does
promise, Verse. 10.
Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine
house, and p^oue me now herewith, says the Lord of hosts, if I will not open
the windows of heaven unto you, and power you out a blessing without measure:
and I will re buke the deuourer for your sakes, that he shall not destroy the
fruit of your ground, neither shall your vine be barren in the field, says the
Lord of hosts: and al nations shall call you blessed, for ye shall be a pleasant
land, says the Lord of hosts. Wherefore let us (beloved) of the University,
get our country this blessing, as much as lies in us, by providing that
Pastors, where we have appropriations, may be maintained with their tithes,
that there may be meat in the house of God. I mean not hereby that we should
give away that by which our schools and scholars be maintained. For God has
ordained Ecclesiastical goods to find, not only Priests and Levites, but
their offspring; even them, who are brought up to be Priests and Levites, and
them who bring the^ up; the children of the Prophets, and the Prophets
themselves. That, if there be enough in our appropriatio^s for ye Pastors
maintenance, beside yt which we have for the nurserie of Pastors, as commonly
there is: we may with good conscience receive our own revenue. My meaning is
therefore, that, the rents reserved, we should allow the rest of the liuinges
to Pastors: which I speak not so much for those that publicly our University
has, to be let by Convocation, whereof the greater part has showed well
already them selves to be of this mind: as for those that privately belong to
our Colleges, to be let by the heads thereof and the fellows.

It is of an humane and honest affection, that we sometimes would pleasure
other me^ therewith, our friends, suing for them. But if Job said to Sophar
and his partners Job. 13. 7.
Should you speak wickedly for Gods defense? how much less ought we to do
unrighteously for the favor of men? And may we not look for the plague that
fell on Eli, if, as he did 1. Sam. 2. 29.
honor his children above God, so we do our friends* Leui is commended by
the holy Ghost for Deu. 33. 9.
saying of his father and of his mother, I look not on him; neither does he
acknowledge his brethren, nor know his children: but they observe the word of
God, and keep his covenant All Christians are bound herein to be Levites, Mat.
10. 37.
regarding neither father, nor mother, son, nor daughter, in respect of God,
when his word and covenant comes into question. Wherefore, since this is a
special point thereof, that all the tithes be brought into the storehouse,
that in his house there may be meat: we should observe and keep it, though
with the disfavor of friends whatsoever. And as it behooves us to do it our
selves: so, to wish that others enjoy the blessing with us. In which case, the
duty that we owe to Tim. 2. 2
Kings and all in authority, does bind us to pray for the high court of
Parliament, yt by their ordinance the Church may be repaired, and we may lead
a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. When Neh. 13. ^
Eliasibthe Priest (the high priest of the Jews) had made for his kinseman
Tobias a great chamber, where they before time did lay the meat offering, the
incense and the vessels and the tithes and offeringes, appointed for the
Levites and Priests: as soon as Nehemias (the Priuce of the people)
understood thereof, it grieved him sore. Therefore he cast out the
householde-vessels of Tobias out of the chamber: and brought thither again the
vessels of the house of God, the meatoffering, and the incense. And perceiving
further, that the portions of the Levites were not given them, who therefore
were fled each into his land: he reproved the rulers, and said, Why is the
house of God forsaken? and assembling them, he set the^ in their place again:
and all the Jews brought the tithes into the storehouse* to be divided to
them. The Pope in the iniquity of his high usurped Priesthood over Christians,
endowed his kinsmen the moonks with tithes and livings, by which aforetime the
Pastors were maintained. Whereof it has ensued, that many a Tobias does hold
them until this day. O that it might grieve, that it might grieve sore, our
Nehemias; the Parliament, that they might dispossess Tobias thereof, and again
apply them to maintain Pastors. The Antichristian council assembled at Trent,
took order for ^. Conc. Tride^t. ^ess. 22* de re^rm. cap. 11.
a restoring of the goods of benefices, and Sess. 24. de ^eform. cap. 18.
setting learned Priests in them, with cap. 19.
disanulling of aduowsons, and Sess. 5. de re^orm. cap. 1.
erecting lectures, and mainteining teachers, and Sess. 23. de reform. cap. 1^.
seminaries of scholars in all Cathedral Churches* to set Popery forward, and
build up the houses of Idumaean Idols. Luke 16. 8.
The children of this world are wiser in their generation then the children of
light* and 1. King. ^8. ^9.
Baalites more zealous for their superstition, then Israelites for the truth.
But thou can* O Lord, and wilt (unless our sins provoke thy wrath against
us) cause the light of thy countenance so to shine upon us, that the Christian
Court of our English Parliament shall be as careful to build up thy house,
and advance religion: that 2. Chr. 36. 10.
the vessels of thy temple, which Nabuchodonosor took away, and Dan. 5. 2.
Baltasar did drink in, be E^ra. 1. 7.
restored by Cyrus, to whom they are befa^^en, that Elizabeth thy handmaide 2.
Chr. 31. 4.
command the people too give the portion of the Priests and Levites, that they
may be strong in the law of the Lord, as did thy ^eruant Ezekias, that
pastors may be set again in their places, and all the Tithes be brought into
the storehouse to be divided to them, that none of them want, as Nehemias
provided* and thou commaundest by thy prophet. So shall they by whom this noble
work is wrought, be Neh. 13* 14.
remembered in it, and the kindness, that they* show on the house of god and the
offices thereof, shall not be wiped out. So shall Mal. 3. 10.
the windows of heaven be opened to us, and a blessing poured on us without
measure, a temporal and eternal blessing: for 1. Ti. ^
godliness has promise of them both. So shall the deuourer be rebuked for our
sakes: and Reu. 9. 3.
the Locusts (the Jesuits and Seminarie-Priests) shall not destroy our fruit,
neither shall our vine (our christian Esaias. 5. ^
vine) be barre^. So shall we be called blessed by all nations: for we shall be
a pleasant land: a land that shall flow with the word of God, Psalm. 19. 10.
more to be desired then gold, more sweet then honey. Finally, so shall Israel
triumph over his enemies, and the things of Esau shall be sought out, his
secret things shall be searched: that is, Christ shall reign, and Antichrist
shall be confounded. Which GOD grant for his mercy sake in Jesus Christ*
through the operation of his holy spirit* to whom, three persons, and one God,
be all praise, and honor, and glory, and power, for ever and ever.

Amen.
Imprinted at London by Thomas Dawson. 1584.


