A REFVTATION OF SUNDRY REPREHENSIONS, CAVILS, AND FALSE sleightes, by which M.
Whitaker labors to deface the late English translation, and Catholic
annotations of the new Testament, and the book of Discovery of heretical
corruptions.

By WILLIAM RAINOLDS, Student of Divinity in the English College at Rhemes.

2 Timoth. 3. v. 8, 9. As Iannes and Mambres resisted Moses, so these also
resist the truth, men corrupted in mind, reprobate concerning the faith. But
they shall prosper no further. For their folly shall be manifest to al, as theirs
also was.

Veni and vide. Come and see.

John. 1. v. 46. Printed at PARIS, the year 1583.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
BEING appointed by those under whose government I have put my self, and to
whose direction I have willingly committed whatsoever faculty or ability is
in me, for the benefit of our country and reducing to the fold of Christ's
Catholic church the souls of our poor countrymen so miserably seduced:
appointed I say by such my Superiors to examine and answer M. W. book of
Antichrist, first and principally so far forth as touched this Seminary, that
is, the Translation of the new Testament lately published, with the Annotatio^s
thereof, and M. Martins Discovery of their heretical corruptions, next and
afterward the other argument concerning Antichrist: I confess my self to have
been so loath to take the matter in hand, as either my duty and obedience
suffered, or the love and charity of my countrymen and brethren permitted.

One reason was, because I saw many in this society, for good zeal and
forwardnes, as willing, and for ripe knowledge in divinity more able, to
undertake and dispatch a greater matter then that. An other reason was, because
I thought I could not without some injury done to Catholics, Contra Sand. pa.
5. in fine.
dispute against that savage and barbarous paradox, making sometime the order
and succession of Popes to be Antichrist, as M. Ib. pa. 6. in principio.
VV. does in one page, sometime the whole Catholic and universal Church
whereof the Pope is head, to be Antichrist, M.W. knows not well what that
Antichrist is, against whom he writes.
as he affirms within 5. lines after: either of which in the judgment of any
Catholic, is as notorious and palpable a lie, as any of Lucians True
Histories. So that, as if a man would with sage reasons go about to disprove
some of those toies which he reports, Lucian de vera historia. lib. 1.
As that his ship being taken up with a strong wind, and carried in the air
seven days and seven nights, the^ arrived at an Island in the midst of the
air, where he saw a terrible battle fought, and many a thousand slain, and
yet the field whereon both camps pitched was nothing else but the web or weauing
of spiders, which is not to be marueiled at, spiders being as big there as
pretty Islands are with us here: Cyclades.
that afterward he came to a land where me^ took their eyes out of their heads
at night time, or otherwise when they mea^t not to use them, and put them up in
cases, at other convenient seasons they took them out thence and put them on
again: and such like stuff, of rivers of wine; and seas of milk, and Islands
of cheese etc. as if (I say) a man would go about with sober reasons to refute
these reports, he should thereby note his auditory of small wit and discretion,
who needed help to find out such incredible fables: Lucians historical
verities and the Protestants Euangelical verities are of like nature and
probability.
the very like is to be deemed of this idle invention concerning Antichrist in
the judgment of al Catholics: Lucians fables being no more false,
unreasonable, and improbable against nature and philosophy, then this devise
is peevish, lying, absurd, incredible and impossible, against Christian faith
and divinity.

A greater reason was, Much good time spent in reading or refuting heretical
books.
for that I utterly abhorred in the midst of my course of studies and better
exercises, to spend any good hours either in reading or refuting heretical
books, which never edify to virtue, devotion and salvation, but distract men's
minds from the meditation of al such religious spiritual and heavenly
exercise, and fill their heads only with contentions, disputes, and brawles of
words, 1. Tim. 6.
Pugnis verborum, as the Apostle calls them, Tertul. de praescript.
the end where of (as Tertullian of old noted) is commonly no other, but to
weary our selves, offend the readers, and exasperate the adversary, whose
proud spirit of contempt and contradiction is lightly incorrigible. And of
this I make the more sure reckening, if at this present I write ought against
our English adversaries, because by certain experience of things past, I see
assuredly what must be looked for in time to come. Heretics are generally
proud and ignorant. 2. Timoth. 6. v. 4.
For as they pass other common heretics, in pride, arrogancy, and good
opinion of them selves, and the same joined with intolerable ignorance, even in
the first principles of our religion, so for this reason they bluntly dash into
any kind of absurdity, W. contra Sand. page 250.

See after chap. 7. page 130.131. Whit. contra Camp. page 154. Ibi page 153.


be it never so foul and blasphemous. As, that the image of Christ is as very
an Idol, as the image of Venus or Jupiter: that S. Peter was never at Rome:
that Christ is not begotten of the substance of his father: that he is, not god
of god the father, but god of him self: that he was a Priest and offered
sacrifice to his father according to his divinity. Fulke con. Mart. page 64,
65. in sine. Supra. pa. 4.
whereunto may be added that The succession of popes is Antichrist, or if that
like you not, then that The universal Church is Antichrist. A strange
proposition to say, the church is Antichrist.
such strange articles in our religion, that Christian men ought rathet to stop
their ears and shut up their eyes from hearing them or reading them, then
expect any answer or refutation of them. And who would not be grieved to put
pen to paper, when he knows he shall be troubled with multiplicatio^ of such
unreasonable assertions? of such old, rotten, and execrable heresies? such
propositions, as every Christian man naturally does abhor, al ancient stories
and monuments universally without exception reject and refel, al ancient
churches and councils since the time of Arrius with one uniform consent have
accursed and condemned.

But the chief and maine cause why I most of al lothed this manner of writing,
was, In the Protestants faith there is no cercertaintie.
because I find in our adversaries doctrine no kind of stay or assurance, no
manner of certainty or stedfastnes, their whole faith being like May
flovvers, for some few months or years flourishing and in estimation, which
within a short space after wythereth away, and is of them selves neglected,
changed, and forsaken. And the^ whereas to dispute seriously of any matter,
requires some certain grou^des, fountains, or heads of disputation,
whereunto every man of learning ought to stand, In their writing and disputing
there is no ground.
as we see in all other sciences, of Logike, Philosophy, Law, any kind of
learning humane or divine, these men have quite removed and abolished al such,
and have brought the whole course of their divinity, to an idle, lose, vain,
and fantastical kind of talking, consisting most in denial of principles of
religion, where he is counted best divine, that can maintain talk longest: he
is counted to bear the bell away, that most arrogantly can prefer him self
before al other, be they few or many, old or new, particular Synodes or general
Councels, yea many times and commonly before the universal and Catholic
Church, the holy scriptures, and Spirit of God him self. So that as the first
of these two, that is, their mutability in faith, withdraws me from al
dealing with them, as men altogether irreligious, unchristian and godles, so
the second, that is, the want of al sound arguments of disputation, as much
discourageth me from writing unto them, as men altogether vngrou^ded,
unlearned, and contentious, such as love to maintain an endless talk of al
things, but have no order or form to conclude and resolve of any thing. That
the Protestants have no certain faith.
These two parts I will declare and make manifest by a fevv examples.

The Prince supreme head of the church.
by all means possible more beaten in to the heads of the subjects, then the
Princes supremacy in causes ecclesiastical? for denial whereof so many true
and faithful subjects in our memory have suffered death. Yet on the contrary
side, the subjects of Scotland were well allowed to restrain, The Prince not
supreme head of the church.
or (to speak plainly) to keep in captivity their own Sovereign, for
intermedling in the Churches affairs, as appears by their Justification not
long sithence published in their language, where the author thereof, and the
ministers use these words: The discipline of the kirk was openly impugned
when as the king by the persvvasion of the enemies of the kirk was induced
to make him self and his privy council judges in the cognition of matters mere
ecclesiastical, A declaration of the just etc. Printed by special commandment
and license ^no ^532.
and concerning the doctrine of the preachers, and to take upon him whatsoever
jurisdiction the Pope usurped there in of old, yea and more over to discharge
the general assembly and al pastors within this realm to proceed to the
sentence of excommunication, also to suspe^d the same. At the last some
preachers have been stopped by commandment etc. This is the faith and gospel
in Scotland, and in England how freely the Puritanes inueigh against that
spiritual primacie, let their books commonly printed testify, namely the
great volume of M. Cartewright against D. Whitg. wherein at large he
discourses that that part of the English faith page 411.
carries with it infinite absurdities, Cart. in his second reply.
412.
is against the doctrine of the Apostles, 413.
monstrous in divinity, 414.
injurious to Christ, against the primitive and Apostolic Church, and the
written word of God, Ibi. 419
yea where he pronounces boldly, that whiles the common protestants of
England go about to gratify princes with this spoil of Christ, they leave
the^ no place in the Church of Christ.

Communion book in the form of public baptism.
the Communion books commonly printed commend and allow this faith, That by
that sacrament children be regenerate, and graffed in to the body of Christ's
congregation, Baptism remitteth sins.
and made partakers of the death of our Savior. And the minister charge the
people present not to doubt, but earnestly to believe, that Christ vvil
sauorably receive those present infants with the arms of his mercy, that he
vvil give unto them the blessing of eternal life, and make them partakers of
everlasting joy. Baptism remitteth not sins.

Tower disputation the second day.


Yet co^trarywise in the Tovver disputation the doctors there teach That al
those which are baptized, are not the sons of God, because they have not all the spirit of adoption: and children bapt^sed if they be not gods elect,
baptism can not make them his children, and so many dying immediately after
baptism are notwithstanding assuredly damned.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis, wherein they would seem to notify their
faith to the rest of Christendom, touching private baptism ministered in
houses by lay men or women in case of necessity, wills al men to assure them
selves that a child after that sort is lawfully and perfitly baptized. And
touching the parties ministering that sacrament it says, Private baptism
allowed.
Ego vos certiores facio, quod recte praestitistis officium vestrum in bacre
etc. I assure you, you have well performed your duty in this matter, and kept
a right order in the baptizing of this infant, who being borne in original
sin, and the wrath of God, now by the lauer of regeneration in baptism, is
ascribed into the number of Gods children, Private baptism disallowed.

M. W. contra Sander. page 276.278


and made heir of eternal life. Yet M. Whitaker in this book teaches the
contrary, and says it is the heresy of the Pepusians and Marcionites, to
permit women such authority, even in case of necessity, which he calls
fained and imaginary, Ficta quaedam necessitas.
thereby signifying plainly, that he believes with the Anabaptists that
baptism is not necessary for the washing away of original sin. And the
Communion book also, imprinted three years after, vz, the year 1577 by Richard
Judge printer to the Queen's Majesty Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis, Great
difference and co^trarietie in the Communion books.
drawing near to the doctrine of the Anabaptists and the practice of the
church of Geneua, where such private baptism is utterly disliked and quite
abolished, altogether leaves out that whole Tracte of private baptism.

Confirmatio illis adhibetur qui iam baptizati sunt, The sacrament of
confirmation admitted.
vt per impositionem manuum et orationem, vires et defensionem accipiant contra
omnes insultus peccati, mundi, et diaboli. Confirmation is applied to them
which are now baptized, that by imposition of hands and prayer, they may
receive strength and defense against the invasions of sin, the world, and
the devil. Refused.
In the later Communion book, these words, as likewise the whole Tracte
appertaining to Confirmation is clean omitted. The reason whereof can be no
other, then that the Church of England in this point has altered her faith,
and joins more nearly then heretofore, to the order of Geneua where (as
witnesses M. Cart. T.C. pa. 174, apud Whitg. page 785.
) though it were sometimes allowed, yet afterward upon better advise, M.
Calvin chief Superintendent there, thrust it clean out of the church.

Christ descended into hell.
the Communion book and Creed turned into ryme and sung commonly in their
congregations, bears the word in hand, that they believe as does the Church
catholic: Christ descended not into hell. Carlisle.
yet others by public writing and disputation refelling that article, give us
just occasion to suppose, that they believe with Calvin in that point, Calvin
Instit. aedit. anno. 1553. ca. 7. 28. et in postre. aeditione. l. 2. c 16.. 9.
who acknovvlegeth no other descent of Christ into hell, but his pain upon the
Cross, where yet alive he was damned in soul, or (as he speaks) sustained
the pains of a damned spirit without any difference, but that his torments
were not eternal, as theirs are.

Christ's divinity granted.
That Christ is the only begotten son of God, begotten of his father before
al worlds, God of God, light of light, very God of very God, of one substance
with the father. Christ's divinity denied M. Whit. contra Campian. page
25.2.153.154.
Yet M.W. defending the Autotheisme of Calvin, and affirming Christ to be
begotten not of his fathers substance but of his person, and to be God of him
self* not God of God, besides the abominable heresy which in so sayng he
maintains, he also manifestly gainsaith the public confession which in
their Communion book they seem to hold.

Sleid. Co^^* 17. an. 1546.
and wage battle, and bid defiance, and renounce al obedience to the
Emperor: Rebellion against princes justified and commended.
likewise for the Gewes in Flanders, and the Hugonots in France against their
several princes: and the principal divines, yea Luther him self, that Elias,
Ibidem lib. 8. an. 1531. fol. 124.
Apostle and Evangelist, after long deliberation well liked that the Protestants
should in warlike manner band them selves against the Emperor, Ibid. lib. 22.
an. 1550. fol. 411.
and those that died in such wars were of the chief preachers accounted for
Saints and martirs. And it was resolved by all the states Ecclesiastical and
Temporal of the Lutheran religion against Charles the Emperor, Sleid. li. 18
anno 1546 fol. 320.
that Quia religioni molitur exitium atque libertati, causam praebet, cur ipsum
oppugnemus bona conscientia. Cu^ enim in eum casum res deuenit, licet
resistere, sicut and sacris and prophanis historiis demonstrari potest. Becaue
the Emperor intends the overthrow of religion and liberty, he gives us
cause to war against him with safe conscience. For when the matter comes
to that issue, it is lavvful to resist, as it may be proved both by sacred and
profane stories. Beza ad D. Elizabeth. Angl. Regi. in praefat. noui testament.
aedit. 1565.
And Beza in his epistle to the Queen's majesty, holds those French
Protestants who died in war against their king, for Saints and Martirs, who
by their blood consecrated happily to God the first foundation of Christian
religion, which was then to be restored in France. And what preacher was
there in England of any name, who in public sermons commended not their
cause, as just, agreeable to al laws humane and divine, and therefore in all
respects allowable. Fox Acts and monumentes. pa. 250.255.257
Likewise M. Fox does extolle and magnify the most barbarous and Turkish
factes committed by the Bohemia^ heretics, rebelling against their Prince for
the gospel and religion of John Husse. For whereas the Emperor Sigismund being
then in Germany had said, Ibi. pa. 251.252.
That he would shortly come into Bohemia, and rule the kingdom after the same
order as his father Charles had done before him: the Hussites or Protestants
(I use M. Foxes own words) understanding thereby that their sect and
religion should be utterly banished, which was not begone during the reign
of the said Charles, they rebelled out of hand, a pa. 250. ad 260.
which rebellion in his whole story he much commends. So that the Lutheranes
of Germany may lawfully take arms against their Emperor for defense of
Lutheranisme, and the Caluinistes of France may war against their King to
bring into that realm the religion of Calvin, and the Hussites of Bohem^a may
rebelle against their sovereign Prince for the religion of John Husse and
Hierom of Prage, Vbi supra. page 250.
far more differing from the Protestante then from the Catholic, Ibi. page 260
and by like right and reason every other sect may do the like for furthering
and increasing their several faithes and religions And yet in England, in^ocent
men, who never in fact attempted ought, and never in word approved any such
disloyalty against the Princes estate, being drawn by crafty circumuention
to say, that in certain cases, as if the Prince should fall to profession of
Arrianisme, Turcisme or Atheism, the sub^ecte might withdraw his obedience,
were thereupon defamed for heinous traitors, and the same imagined supposal
published at the time of their death as a matter deserving most extreme
punishment.

Gilbie. Goodman etc.

Women may bear no rule over men in matters temporal.

The bo^kes were p^inted at Geneua, the year 1558.


wherein by manifold textes of scripture both of the old testament and the new,
they excluded women from al regiment and Princely jurisdiction even in matters
temporal, which they accounted and called monstrous, unnatural, against the
law of God and man, and therefore in no wise to be suffered. Yet all this
notwithstanding, the next year following, year 1559.
the same men found it agreeable to al scripture and al laws, Women may bear
rule over men, in all matters temporal and spiritual.
that a woman might have supreme authority, not only in matters temporal and
civil, but also in spiritual and ecclesiastical, and by terrible punishment
even of extreme and exquisite death were content to bind the subjects
generally to this point of belief, yet with this distinction, that the
Nobility and Barons of the realm should be exempted from the same. as though
they might have a faith d^uers from others of the same realm, or one and the
self same faith, might be necessary and not necessary, true and false,
enlarged and restrained, according to the diverse degrees of nobility and
co^munaltie.

The Communion book in the beginning before morning prayer.
in the first Communion book it is thus appointed, that The minister at the
time of the Communion, and at al other times in his ministratio^, Copes and
such like ornaments approved.
shall use such ornaments in the church, as were in use by authority of
Parliament in the second year of the reign of King Edward the sixth. I appeal
now to the knowledge of every man, Condemned.
how well that act of Parliament is observed through out the realm, in how many
Cathedral or parish churches those ornaments are reserved, whether every
private minister by his own authority in the time of his ministration
disdain not such ornaments, using only such apparel as is most vulgar and
profane.

General chaunges and contrarieties in faith.
of crossing in baptism, of communicating the sick etc. in which their
continual alteration is well known by their daily practice, and their very
Communion books printed in diverse years. Only I wish the reader of his own
wisdom and consideration, to mark the general chaunges, which from time to
time our realm has fallen into, For acts and monume^tes page 586.
since this schism first began there. In the later years of king Henry the
eight, we were touch^ng many points Catholics, as the Parliament hold^n the
year 1540 does testify, wherein by authority of Parliament these articles were
accorded and agreed upon.

Real presence.
That there is the real presence of Christ's natural body and blood in the most
blessed sacrament, under the forms of bread and v^yne.

Communion in one kind
That the Communion in both kinds is not necessary ad salutem, by the law of
God, to al persons.

Marriage of priests unlawful.
That priests after the order of priesthod by the law of God may not marry.

Vows of chastity.
That vows of chastity or vvydovvhead made to God advisedly, ought to be
observed by the law of God.

Private mass.
That private Masses are to be continued and admitted in the kings English
church, and congregation, as whereby good christian people do receive both
many and goodly consolations and benefits, and it is agreeable also to Gods
law.

Auricular confession.
That auricular Confession is expedient and necessary to be retained and
continued, used, and frequented, in the church of God. In the same Parliament
and by the same authority Every man sayng, publishing, These articles were
according to the law of God in king Henry's time.
preaching, teaching, affirming, declaring, disputing, arguing or holding
opinion against the first of these articles, is adjudged a manifest heretic.
etc. Ibi. page 587
misbeleuers in the other, are with great rigor corrected and reformed.

This was the state of religion left by king Henry, The same articles were
contrary to the law of God in king Edwards time.
after whose death in the time of his son, upon very ^ight occasion was quite
disanulled all this that the father had by parliament Acts and statutes so
carefully established. Fox vbi su. in historia Cranmeri page 1473.
For straight upon his fathers funerals king Edward (says M. Fox) being but a
child (of nine or ten year) by the instinct of his uncle the Lord protector and
Cranmer, A realm pitifully ordered, where a child of 9 years old may by order
of law overthrow al religion. Change upon change.
by consent of parliament did first abolish these six articles, and then set
forth a second book of Reformation, and after that a third (as the religion
had daily more increase) more perfect then the first, under the title and
authority of his name. After which sort the Zuinglian religion being placed,
with much dissension and alteration held out for the time of that Prince, and
was of the next, with like authority of Parlame^t rejected and abolished. But
being restored again, in the beginning of the Q. Majesty's reign, from that
time hitherto how the body of the realm has more and more degenerated from
that Zuinglianisme to Puritanisme, which (as D. Whitg. D. Whitg. Defens^a pa.
31. vsque ad 51.
well proves) is the very next degree to Anabaptisme, what infinite numbers in
every shyre (as their own writers record) are joined to the Family of love,
which is a mere abnegation of Christianity, what swarms of Atheistes have
sprung up, with which (as D. Ibi. page 178
Whig. tells us) their English congregation is r^plenished, this I leave to
the knowledge, remembrance, experience, and eye sight of the discrete reader.

If I should note the variety and difference between our Protestants,
Infinite difference between our English protestants and those of other nations.
and the Protestants of other nations, as of Germany, Polonia, Zuitzerland,
and France, I should never make an end, because most true it is, there is no
one article of faith, either touching the blessed Trinity, Christ's incarnation
and passion, resurrection, and ascensio^, touching the person of the holy
Ghost, or touching his office: there is no one sacrament, as the Eucharist,
Baptism, Forgeuenes of sins in penance, confession of sins to a priest,
Holy orders: there is no one rite or ceremony either touching government or
di^cipline of the church, wherein they disagree not.

These few examples, which I have brought, containing matters of such weight,
That princes are heads of the church and are not: that baptism remitteth
sins and remitteth not: that private baptism is lawful and unlawful:
Confirmation allowed and disallowed: Christ's descending into hell granted and
denied: that he is God of his father, and yet is God of him self: that al kinds
of Religions may for their conscience sake take arms against their prince, yet
Catholics may not in any case or for any cause make supposal of such a matter:
that women are barred by the law of God from exercising authority over men even
in matters civil, and ag^ine, that women by the law of God have supremacy over
the clergy, bishops and archbishops, eue^ in matters most divine and
spiritual: that copes and such like ornaments are to be used in church
service, and are to be abolished and burned as monumentes of Idolatry: that by
like authority of parlaments, diverse and contrary faithes are confirmed and
ratified: These few examples, I say, al appearing manifestly in the practice
and behavior of one little Island, and in the compass of a few years, al
notoriously to be seen in perusing a few english books and writers, declare
sufficiently how true that is which D. Whit. Def. Tract 1. p. 74
Whiteg. aff^rmeth of the Puritans, and we find as true in all sorts of
Protestants, A rule most assured.
that commonly such as once divide them selves from the Church, fall from error
to error without st^y: they declare sufficiently, how true that is which I
affirm, ^^at these me^ have no certainty or stabili^ie of faith, and therefore
hard it is for us to know, what to ref^^ or dispute a^a^nst, whereas we find
such continu^l change and variety.

Yet all this notwithstanding, albeit they have one faith for Germany, an other
for Eng^and, and in England, one for the South, an other for the North, one for
the fathers reign, an other for the sons, one for the brother, an other for
the sister: and under the ^ame Prince, one for the beginning of her reign, an
other for the time ensuing, one for the nobility, an other for the
commonaltie, one for the public church, another for their private houses, one
in their Communion book, an other in their several writings: although they
have Annuas and menstruas sides as S. Hilary and S. Basil said of the Arrians,
every year and sometimes every month a new faith, yet gladly could we devour
the pain to find out and learn such their yearly and monthly faithes, that
by refelling them we might save those christian sowles, which through the same,
monthly and daily and hourly, perish everlastingly had we not a far greater
d^fficultie in learning out what manner of arguments are of force and allowable
amongst them for refu^ing of the same.

Among Catholics, in all schools and Universities, in all books and writings,
Grounds or heads of disputation
arguments drawn from the scriptures of God, from the Traditions of the
Apostles, from the Authority of the Catholic Church, of general Councels, of
the ancient Doctors and fathers, of the supreme Pastors of the Church giving
sentence definitive in any controversy, these al and singular are of such
weight and estimation, that each one co^uinceth the adversary part, and no
Catholic dare ever resist or oppose him self, if he hear the voice and
sentence of any one of al these, and besides these, other arguments in
divinity we can not poss^bly devise any. Use any of al these in disputation
with the Protestant, In the protestants writing or disputing there is no ground.
he cares not for them, nether will be bound to them farther then it likes his
own lust and fancy.

Scripture denied. Whit. contra Camp. page 17.
they answer, Little care we for the example of Raphael the Angel mentioned in
Tobie, nether acknovvledge we those seven Angels whereof he speaks. As
little account make I of the place of Ecclesiasticus, nether vvil I believe the
freedom of man's vvil, though he affirm it a hundred times. Traditions of the
Apostles denied.
General Councels denied.
who has not a large treatise particularly against them.

T.C. page 16. apud. D. Wh. Tract. 2. p. 95
If this be a sufficient proof to say, such a Counsel decreed so, such a doctor
said so, Of this see more chap. 3.5.7.17. and after in the praeface.
there is almost nothing so true but I can impugn, nothing so false but I can
make true. and well assured I am, that by the^r means the principal grounds
of our faith may be shaken.

Ancient doctors of the Catholic Church denied. Whit. co^tra Sand. pa. 92.
but al together affirming one and the self same thing, they answer, If you
argue from the witness of men, be they never so learned and ancient, we
yield no more to their words in cause of faith and religion, then we
perceive to be agreeable to scripture. then we perceive to be agreeable to
scripture.
Nether think you your self to have proved any thing, although you bring
against us the whole consent and swarm of fathers, Si vel intogrum patru^
Senatum in nos commoueris. D. Whitg. Trac. 2. p. 112
except that which they say, be justified not by the voice of men but of God
himself. And it is their common manner as to make small account of any author
that is against them, so least of al of the old ancient fathers whom some of
them are not ashamed in most despiteful sort to call Pillorie doctors. The
aunci^t fathers pillorie doctors.


But this their behavior toward the ancient fathers and Doctors that be of
our Church may seem in the judgment of many to stand with reason. For why
(may it be said) should they be bound to our Austins, Hiero^s. and Cyprians,
more then we will be New Evangelists Apostles and doctors of their own church
denied.
Caluins and Melanchthons? At the least then (say we) they ought to be ruled by
doctors of their own, such as they call and honor for D Whitg. defens. etc.
Tract. 4 c ^^. p. 230. Vide ibid. pa. 217.
Apostles and Eua^ge^istes of their new church and belief. Yet when the
authority of such is pressed against them, it weighs no deeper, then of
those other, whom they call pillorie doctors. For how freely contemn they
Martin Luther? how freely reject they Hulderike Zuinglius? We receive M. Vbi
supra Tract 2. c. 4. page 111.
Calvin (says T.C.) and weigh of him, as of the notablest instrument that the
lord has st^rred up for the purging of his churches, and restoring of the
plain and sincere interpretation of the scriptures, which has been since the
Apostles time. And yet we do not so read his works, that we believe any
thing to be true, because he says it, but so far as we ca^ esteem, So far as
we ^an esteem
that that which he says does agree with the Canonical scriptures. The very
self same answer gives the contrary part, when the same man's judgment is
objected against him. I reverence M. Calvin (says D.W.) as a singular man,
Ibi. Tract. 3. ca. 7. pa. 201.
and a worthy instrument in Christ's church. But I am not so wholy addicted
unto him that I vvil contemn other men's judgments in diverse points not fully
agreing with him etc. When as in my opinion
when as in my opinion they come nearer to the true meaning and sense of
scripture then he does.

And because the course of this new divinity is now brought to rest most of al
on the credit of these reverend fathers and doctors, A great fall in divinity
from the authority of Saints, to the authority of these Masters.
and in steed of the ancient form of alleging* T. us says S. Chrysostom,
thus S. Augustine, thus S. Basil, the fashion is now to allege, Thus says M.
Ca^uin, thus M. Bucer, thus M. Bullinger: therefore thorough variety somewhat
to avoyde tediousnes, and not grieve to much the ears of their auditors by flat
denial, diverse ways and reasons have they, to pass over when they please the
authority of such their own doctors and masters. One way and the same very
plain is to refuse them, because they were men. As for example. If you press
me with M. Ibid. pa. 291
Martyrs and M. Bucers authority, I first say they were men, and therefore
though otherwise very vvatchful, yet such as slept somtymes. A second way is,
because they had some other error, as, M. Bucer (you say) allows private
baptism, Ibid. Tract. 9 page 522.
and consequently the baptism by women. It may be, that as M. Bucer although
otherwise very learned has other gross absurdities, so he may have that. A
third, because some other doctor of as good credit and estimation, is of a
contratie opinion. Ibi. Tract. 1. page 67.
as, M. Musculus a learned man is of your judgment. and M. Calvin as learned
as he, and diverse other are of that judgment that I have alleged. This is no
great proof on your side, nor reprofe of ours. A fourth and the same most sure,
is to challenge the liberty of the gospel, and therefore not to admit their
verdict but at pleasure. Vbi supra Tract. 10. c 6. page 549.
as, Touching M. Bucers, M. Bullingers and Illyricus allowance of holy days,
if they allow them in such sort as M. Doctor urges, then that good leave
which they give the Churches to dissent from the^ in that point, I do take it
granted unto me being one of the same church. Although as touching M. It is to
observed that protestants seldom abide 35 years in one opinion.
Bullinger, it is to be observed that since the time he wrote so, there are
above 35 years, since which time although he hold stal, that the feasts
dedicated unto the lord, as of the Nativity, Easter and Pentecost may be kept,
yet he denies flatly that it is lavvful to keep holy the days of the
Apostles.

Martyrs of their own faith and gospel denied.
If these serve not the turn, a man would think their martyrs, those who were
so full of the spirit, that they willingly shead their blood and suffered death
by fire for conf^irmation of their faith, these men's testimony should be
irrefragable, for justifying of those points especially for which they lost
their lives. But nether want they their old ordinary means to shift of the
authority of these martyrs were they never so glorious. D. VVhitg. Tract. 21.
c. 1. page 710.
For although they were excellent personages (say they) yet their knowledge
was in part, and although they brought many things to light, yet they being
sent out in the morning, or ever the sun of the gospel was risen so high,
might ouersee many things, which those that are not so sharp of sight as
they were, may see etc. And if they had died for this or that article, Martyrs
may not take from any protestant his liberty to be supreme judge.
yet the authority of their martyrdom could not take away from us this
liberty, that we have to enquire of the cause of their death. Martyrs may not
be said to seal their errors with their blood, or with the glory of their
martyrdom prejudice those which write or speak against their errors. For
this is to oppose the blood of men to the blood of the son of God.

Whole churches of their own religion denied.
but the majesty not of one or other doctor, or of a few martyrs, but of great
and ample reformed churches, as of France of Germany, of Zurike or Geneu^? and
yet even these also, pass with like manner of answer. And they have as general
a rule to reject such, as they have the poorest doctor that comes in their
way. As for example, when other reformed churches are brought to reform the
disorders of the English church, Ibi. Tract. 9. ca. 1. pa. 481.
To which reformed church (says the ansvverer) vvil you have the church of
England framed? or why should not other reformed churches as well frame them
selves unto us? For we are as well assured of our doctrine, Al protestant
churches be they never so contrary are assured of the truth.
and have as good grounds and reasons for our doing as they have, except you
vvil bring in a new Rome, appoint us an other head church, and create a new
Pope, by whom we must be in all things directed. Ibid cap. 2. page 491.
And again. I have told you, and now I tell you again, that there is no
cause, why this church of England, either for truth of doctrine, sincerity of
public divine service, and other policy, should give place to any church in
Christendom. Ib. Tract 20. page 704.
England is not bound to the example of either France or Scotland, I say truly,
that we are not bound to their examples.

These be all the places and corners of arguments, which ^n their divinity by
any search we can find out. For although they have amongst them Popes, I mean
such ministers as affect and usurp Papal and more then Papal authority, as
the Orthod. co^fess. Eccles. Tigur. fol. 105.106.107
Tigurines against Luther, and Call. admonitio. tertia ad Westpha. p. 114. Zuin.
tom 2 in Exegesi ad Luth. fo 327
other Zuinglians against the Lutherans commonly inueigh for such arrogant
behavior, and Histo de la vie de Calu. etc. chap. 12.
the governors of Berna being them selves Sacr^mentaries used to call Calvin
Pope of Geneua for his lordlyn^s and sway which there he bare, and Calu. vbi
supra. page 5.
Calvin writes of Ioachim Westphalus, that in sending forth condemnations and
excommunications against the churches of his sect, he passed all the Popes
officers, Omnes Papae scribas et datar^os superat, and the Collo. Altemburgense
fol. 404.
Germane Lutheranes of one fashion, accuse their fellow Lutherans of an other
fashion, that they play the Popes, and practice over them a new dominion of
Antichrist, Nouum Antichristi dominium. Redolent Papatum. Ibi. fol. 535.
and that al their doings savor of a very Papacy, and the Puritanes commonly
name the Archbishop of Canterbury the perie Pope of England, Apud D.W. Tract.
18. pa. 685.
and Ibi. Tract. 11. page 559.
D. Whitgift shows well, that every Puritan minister labors to have in and
over his own parish more then Papal jurisdiction, yea, Ibi. page 560.
that they seek to transfer the authority both of Pope, Prince, Archbishop,
Instead of one true lawful Pope the protestants have many tirannical popes
and Bishop, to them selves, and bring the prince and nobility into a very
servitude, so as the Protestant churches want no Popes, but have them after an
other sort, and in far more abundance then have the Catholics: yet because
these Popes of theirs differ nothing from the doctors, of whom before I have
spoken, no several or distinct kind of argument can be drawn from their
primacie.

The protestants can never have any general Council.
And as for general Councels, so far are they from ever having any, that I
verily suppose, they can not so much as in their fancy and imagination
conceive how any one should be ever gathered. For having no one head amongst
them who should take order for any such assembly, having no consent and unity
among the members who should labor to the helping forward of such a company,
being divided into so many churches, sects, and congregations, they can never
resolve, either who should be the President in such a Counsel, or who should be
the actors or disputers, or of what strength the Canons should be, or who
should have the execution of them. And when al comes to al, the liberty of
the gospel which makes every man judge of other fathers, doctors, and ancient
Councels, will give like freedom to every particular man, to take like judgment
and control over the fathers of such a Council.

Wherefore these being all the means and ways which we have to reason or write
against them, and these being their fashions of answering, as we find in every
Germane, Zuitzer, or French Protestant, albeit for the readers ease and more
facility of judgment I have exemplified the same by two or three of our
English writers, such as I take to be common in most men's hands, if now a man
list to draw these their answers into a certain method, we shall find that
they contain for every unlearned and bold ^angler, an universal form and art
of rejecting whatsoever Theological argument he may be pressed withal, The
protestants manner of answering, and reducing al to their own singular
arbiterment.
and of reducing the supreme conclusion and resolution to his own singular
fancy and wilfulnes. Against many books of Scripture he is taught to say,
that they are superstitious, and therefore he vvil not believe what they
teach, though it be affirmed in them a hundred times. Against Councils, that
they are not to be admitted, because by them the principal grounds of his
faith are shaken. Nether yet the ancient doctors, unto whom he yeldeth no more
in cause of faith and religion, then him self perceaueth to be agreeable to
scripture. And touching the late doctors and writers of his own church and
gospel, although in courtly and honorable terms he magnify them far above the
other, yet nether to their judgment will he stand, farther then he can esteem
that which they teach, to agree with the canonical scripture, when as in his
opinion they give the true sense and meaning thereof. And whereas to refuse
any, it is sufficient to say, that he was a man, or, he had some other error,
or, some other is of a contrary judgment, which never wants amongst doctors
guided by so contrary spirits, or, they give the churches leave to dissent
from them, which I take granted unto me being one of the same church, who
can be so simple as to be tied to one or other doctor, having so manifold
reasons to refuse them al? And as for their martyrs, whose names should be most
reverend, and judgment most weighty, they also are reduced in to the same
order and obedience with the rest. For their martyrdom may not take away, from
the Protestant, this liberty that he has to enquire of the cause of their
death, or prejudice him in speaking against their errors. for this is to oppose
the blood of men, to the blood of the son of God. And those martyrs being
sent out in the morning before the sun of the Gospel was risen so high, An
apt comparison, declaring that the protestants nether have, nether can have any
stay in their religion.
ouersaw many things, which these men see now, which live as it were at
noonetide, in the most clear beams and light of the same gospel. Which
comparison expressing most ap^ly their continual proceeding and running forward
to new points and articles of faith, al^o before hand instructs their after
co^mers to keep on the like course, which they see these their predecessors to
have bego^ne. For as those Protestants, who lived twenty years since, and
bragged then of the clear light of the gospel, are now cast back by these men
in to a darksome kind of twylight, unto who^ the sun was not yet risen: so
the posterity who shall live ten or twenty years after these, are by like
example informed to turn over this present age, unto that obscurity of the
day dawning, and challenge unto them selves the brightsomnes of the noone light.
And the same may every age and sect say, as it marches farther and farther on
in newnes of heresy. and last of al, the authority of whole Churches and
provinces is as lightly shaken of as any of the rest, for so much as England is
not bound to follow France or Germany, more then France or Germany is bound to
follow England and each Sect of Protestants is as well assured of his doctrine,
and has as good grounds and reasons for it as has any other. and to challenge
such authority to the church of any province, is to bring in plain papistry
and make that Church, Romish and Antichistian.

The protestants of our age, in bold denial of al things far exceed the
heretics of ancient time.
Judge thou now (Christian reader) what hold or stay we have in disputing with
these fellows, whom thou see to cast away and refuse al grounds of
disputation, such as are used either in our church or in their own: and how far
these men be growe^ to a headstro^g desperatnes beyond the manner of all the
ancient heretics. For when S. Austin and the old fathers had to dispute with
such, as Donatistes, Arria^s, Manichees, Pelagians, and others, they urged them
with the authority of Aug. de vtil. cred. ca. 17. contra epis. Fundament. ca.
4 contra Crescon. li 4. cap. 61. and alibi passim
Gods Church, with the judgment of the August. de pec. orig. li. 2. cap.
7.8.9. epist. 90.92.95.106.157. vide Possid. in vita Aug. lib. 1. ca. 18.
Sea Apostolic, the Aug. epist. 165.166. and Psalm. contra partem Donati Tom.
7. in principio
Succession of bishops in the same, with the determination of Aug. co^tra
^ulian. lib. 3 c. 1. con Donatist. lib. 4. cap. 7.
general Councels, finally with the name Aug. cont. epis. Funda. ca. 4* and
Trac. 32. in loan.
Catholic, and that which was so called of al men, and the heretics seemed to
be moved therewith and acknowledge such manner of argument. But the heretics of
our time conte^ning impudently al these, Church, Sea Apostolic, Succession of
bishops, general Councels, and whatsoever else may be invented, are come so far,
that they now despise and tread under foot the name See Beza in praef. test.
noui an. 1565. dicat. princ. Condensi. and Musculus in praefatio. Io little
communium.
Catholic, which the Apostles by divine wisdom found out, and by their Creed
sanctified and appropriated to true Christians, members of Christ's only,
Catholic, and Apostolic Church. in so much that in the sinode holde^ at
Altemburg between the Divines of the Palsgraue of Rhene and the Duke of
VVirtemberg, when one part brought forth a text of Luther against the
adversaries, they perusing the place at large, The protestants at defia^ce with
the name Catholic.
and finding there the word (Catholic) streightwaies reject the whole as
corrupt and counterfaite, because Luther was never wont to use that word.
Ista verba (catholice intellecta) non sapiunt phrasin Lutheri, Colloq. Altemb.
in res. ad excusat. corrup. fol. 154.
say they, and upon this only reason conclude that book not to have been made
by him.

And yet would to God our adversaries could be content to yield to the very
scriptures them selves, The protestants admit not the very scriptures.
such pieces I mean and books as they leave unto us, and hitherto with us
acknowledge for Canonical VVou^d to G^d they could frame them selves humbly to
admit such scriptures, when of the^ selves they are plain for us and against
them. For so surely bu^ld^d is the Catholic cause, that by such help she is
able sufficiently to defend her self and confound the adversaries. But whereas
besides the re^usal of all the forenamed witnesses both of our church and of
their own, as though none ever besides them selves in particular, no Saint or
man either in heaven or earth, had wit, learning, or grace, whereas (I say)
besides all this they expound the same scriptures by plain partiality,
fantasy, and frensye, whereas they make them selves the only arbiters, both
what books are Canonical, what Apocriphal, and which is the true sense of
them, whereas in examining the sense they run sometime from greek to latin,
sometime from l^tin to greek, sometimes urge one or other greek example
against innumerable latin, sometimes prosse one or other fathers reading
against al greek, commonly corrupt the sense both of latin and greek, See
after cha. 13. and 14.
and stick only to certain heretical versions made by their masters in
favor of their several heresies: whereas they are growe^ to such extreme
folly, hardness, and impudency, it may seem nothing else but wast of words to
deal with men* whom contention, pride, ignorance, malice and obstinacy
against the Church and her pastors has so pitifully blinded.

Now if I may with the readers patience descend from this which I speak
generally of the English protestants, to apply the same more specially unto the
party whose book I have to examine, it shall both justify more clearly that
which hitherto has been said touching their irreligion and want of faith, and
withal set forth the practice of those proud and arrogant rules of answering,
which I before have noted, and besides show what stuff is contained in his
book of Antichrist, wherein he so vainly and insolently triumphs.

It has been an old disease of ancient heretics, first of al to invade the
chief pastors of the church, that they being removed from the government, them
selves might more freely spoil the flock, Ciprian epist. 55.
as witnesses S. Cyprian. And for like reason their manner has been more
maliciously to bark at the Sea Apostolic, Aug. de vtilit. cred. cap. 17.
as says S. Austin. In this, as in many other mad parts the heretics of our
age have not only matched, How the protestants fell to call the Pope Antichrist.
but also far surmounted the heretics of ancient time. For when as upon their
first breach from the church, and spreading of this new heresy, they were
reproved by their chief pastor and governor: upon malice, and spite, and
desire of revenge, they brast forth into this railing, to call him Antichrist,
not meaning for all that to call him Antichrist in such a sense, as the church
and faith of Christian men understands, when we speak of Antichrist which
shall come in the end of the world, and of whom S. Paul to the Thessalonians,
2 Thessalonians. 2.
and the scriptures in some other places specially do mean, but in such a
general sense, as S. John intends when he says, 1. John. 2. v. 18. Ibi. 5.
v. 2.3.
that now there are many Antichrists. and who so denies Christ to have come
in flesh, he is Antichrist. But the later Protestants going beyond their
masters (as commonly it fares in every heresy) to make their cause more
plausible, and justify their schismatical departure from the church more
assuredly, have taken up the proposition in the more extreme and desperate
sense, and now hold the Pope of Rome to be that singular Antichrist, of whom S.
Paul and some other of the Apostles foreprophecied. This wicked, and shameless
assertion being refuted at sundry times and of sundry men, namely of D.
Sanders, not only as false and improbable, but also as heathenish and
impossible, M. Whitaker has now taken upon him to make a reply against his
arguments and maintain that former assertion of his brethren: The form and
manner of M. W. answering.
but after such a sort, as partly argues in him want of al religion and
conscience, partly declares him to have deeply impressed in his heart a
wonderful pride and contempt of al others, a principal note and mark of
Antichrist. And to begin with the later, I vvil shortly run over one or
two of the first demonstrations, and M. W. answers framed there unto.

First of al D. Sanders disputes, that the succession of the Roman bishops
can not be Antichrist, because Antichrist is one man, which he confirms by
sundry good testmonies of scripture, whereunto he joins the universal
consent of all the ancient fathers. Page 2.
His words are, Denique omnes sancti patres, All the fathers universally,
following there in the tradition of the Apostles, say that Antichrist is one
certain man.
Graeci, Latini, Syri, quiper tot saecula vel in Orient, vel in Occidente vel
in Aquilone, vel in Meridie vixerunt, secundum fidem and traditionem ab
Apostol^s accepta^, de Antichristo locuti sunt velut de hom^ne vno. Briefly all the holy fathers, Greek, Latin, Syrian, who for so many ages lived either in
the East, or West, or North, or South, according to the faith and tradition
received from the Apostles, have spoken of Antichrist as of one man. What is
M. VV. answer to this? page 21.
After certain cauils made to the places of scripture, thus at a clappe, he
discharges the fathers writing according to the faith which they received of
Apostles. We repose no such confidence in the fathers vvritings, that we take
any certain proof of our religion from them, They al err (...) so sayng.
because we place all our faith and religion, not in humane but in divine
authority. If therefore thou bring us, what some one father has thought,
Patr^^ etia^ simul vniuersi.
or what the fathers universally al together have delivered, the same except
it be approved by testimonies of scriptures, it avails nothing, it gains
nothing, it conuinceth nothing. For the fathers are such vvitnesses, as they
also have need of the scriptures to be their vvitnesses. All the fathers wa^ted
wit and learning, in comparison of the protestants.
If deceived by error they give forth their testimony disagreing from
scriptures, albeit they may be pardoned erring for want of wisdom, we can
not be pardoned, if because they erred, we also vvil err with them. The
fathers for the most part thought that Antichrist should be but one man. but in
that as in many other things they erred, either because they yielded to much to
the common opinion concerning Antichrist, either because they weighed not the
scriptures so diligently as they ought, etc. A special mark of Anchrist.
In these his words (Christian reader) thou may see the very image and
principal part of Antichrist. For preferring him self before the universal
primitive Church of all the fathers then vvriting and expounding the scriptures,
and teaching Antichrist to be one man, According to the faith received of the
Apostles, he manifestly prefers him self before the holy Ghost the ruler and
dir^ctor of the Apostles and that Apostolical Church, according to Christ's
most assured and infallible promise. and what is this else, but to extolle him
self above God, 2 Thessalonians. 2. v. 4.
Super omne quod dicitur Deus, which is one of the special marks of
Antichrist? And yet this Antichristian arrogance in treading under his feet al
fathers, al churches, al antiquity, is the very maine ground of all the rest
of his answers. As for example.

Page 25.
M.D. Sanders second demonstration is this. The Church of Rome can not possibly
be the Seat of Antichrist, The second demonstration, that the succession of
Popes can not be Antichrist.
because it is that Seat, which has most faithfully kept, and diligently
enlarged the faith of Christ, against al Antichrists. This he proves by S
Ignatius, S. Policarpus, S. Ireneus, Tertullian, Origin, SS. Cyprian,
Athanasius, Ambrose, Hierom, Optatus, Austin, Ciril, Prosper, Gregory, etc. by all good and learned vvriters that flourished within the first six hundred
years. That it continued the same faith, and departed not from it in any point
the last nine hundred years, he proves by S. Isidorus, by Theodorus, by S.
Beda, Regino, S. Lanfrancus, Rupertus, S. Bernard, the general Councels of
Laterane, of Lions, of Vienna, of Constance, of Florence, the most sufficient
authority that ca^ be alleged in the world. The a^swere
Now what is M.VV. answer to this? pa. 35.36.37 38.39.40.42.43.
The fathers of the first six hundred years he grants to have spoken truly,
for so much as all this while that Church was very pure and excellent, Mark
this well.

A verity manifest and confessed.


and maintained inuiolably the faith delivered by the Apostles S. Peter, and S.
Paul, and briefly was of al other Churches most notable and flourishing,
omnium ecclesiarum praestantissima florentissimaque. page 4^.
But touching the later nine hundred years he makes so great a difference,
page 32:
as between the house of God and a den of thieves, between a live man, page
33.
and a dead carcas. Thus he speaks. Although the ancient Roman Church
received Christ most of al, and those that were in the society of the Roman
Church defended the Christian faith most valiantly, yet these praises
appertain nothing to the present Roman Church which refuses Christ him
self, and furiously assaulteth the Christian faith. I am vides, Sandere, tuae
deme^strationi securim esse inflictam, quando a prima ecclesia Romana quae fuit
optima et purissima tuam hanc distinguo etc. Now thou see M. Sanders thy
demonstration knocked on the head with a hatchet, whereas from the first
Roman church, A falsitie evident which never was and never will be proved.
which was best and purest, I distinguish this thy Roman church which a man
may truly ca^ the synagoge of Satan.

Now this being in deed the very hatchet of his answer (as he calls it)
and whereby he choppeth of the neck of D. Sanders demonstration, and which
therefore it principally stands him in hand to prove, let the reader
consider, if he bring any probability, any argument, story, father, Council,
authority, any kind of reason other then his own naked and peevish
asseueration. Only he varieth as boys in grammar schools, that his assertion
by many pretty phrases, Beggarly stuff.
as that Rome is degenerated into a bastard faith. page 34. page 35. page 3^.
that our Popes are altogether unlike to the ancient Popes. that now there is
an other form of faith in Rome, an other religion. page 37.
that our Popes possess the same place with those ancient, page 38.
but have lost their faith many hundred years since. that in the Roman church
now nothing remains of old Rome besides the name. that of old, page 40.
sovereign was the authority of the Roman Sea amongst al people, both for
the goodlynes of the city, and purity of religion and constancy of the men.
but now none of these things remains etc. Thus in every page welnye he
affirms, and says, and tells us again and again, that thus it is
departed, and thus it is degenerated, and thus it has altered the faith, and
is become the synagoge of Antichrist. Against which ridiculous and childish
babbling, when his adversary obiecteth those Confessors, Martirs,
Historiographers and Saints, Reason.
that lived since S. Gregory's time, together with the general Councels the
very flovver of Christianity, he with one railing blast turns them al a
side, Railing. page 44.
sayng he admits them not, because they al, more or less received the mark
of the beast. Ask him a reason why he so rayleth, consider what authority he
opposes against these, reason thou find none, authority thou find none.
Only as kings and princes ratify their edictes and Proclamations with their
own only name Test meipso, so this man confirms his answers with the sole
authority of Guilielmus VVhitakerus, which being put in the front of every
answer, is in deed the very pith and effect of all the answers following.

And therefore whereas he says If we shall receive for vvitnesses al those men
(...) to Antichrist, Ibid. pa. 44.
we shall never have end of contending, If other kinds of protestants use the
like liberty, no heresy can ever be repressed.
I say if it may be lawful for every heretic thus to dear, with such wodden
or lea^en hatchers to cut of the synewes of such strong and forcible
demonstrations, thus so answer reason with railing, and grave authority with
Luciferlike arrogance, if the Trin^taria^s, Lutherans, Anabaptists, or
Arria^s, may have like liberty to avoid the whole army of Christ's Catholic
Church: Arrianisme will never be rooted out, Lutheranisme will never have end,
the Anabaptists and Trinitarians can not possibly be maystred, the worst of
these being able to say for him self at the least as much as does the
Zuinglian in defense of his Zuinglianisme.

The third demonstration.
And this is the very form, fashion, manner, and substance of his answer to
the next demonstration. where to S. Ibid. page 54.
Austin and S. Hierome, reaching Peter's chair and succession of Priests in
that Sea to be the very rock which the proud gates of hel^ overcome nor,
which thing they affirm upon manifest warrant of Christ's words, Matthew. 16.
Luc. 22. See the annotations in the new Test. upon these places.
he answers upon warrant of his own word, that that succession of priests
is not the rock, and the gates of hell have prevayled against that church, so
as the faith which sometimes flourished there, now appears no where in it,
Page 61.62.
and long since is departed into other places. Whereas D. S. repl^eth, this to
be false, and and that church ever to have retained the same true faith, and
never to have brought in any heresy or made any change of doctrine, which he
proves by all historiographers that ever lived in the church, Eusebius,
Prosper, Beda, Page 54.
Regino, Marianus Scotus, Schafnaburgensis, Zonaras, Nicephorus, Ced^enus,
Sigebertus, Gotfridus, Viterbiensis, Trithemius and many others, against them
all this only censure he opposes, Historias vestras Sandere non moramur, we
regard not M. page 6^.
Sanders your stories, and yet him self for his own side b^ingeth not so
much as one story. So that against scriptures reason, councels, fathers old and
new, historiographers, al kind of vvriters, him self ever comes in as an
omnipotent and universal Apostl^, Doctor, Father etc. as though in his only
word consisted more pith, then was in all men's that ever lived since Christ's
time.

And now somewhat farther to descrie the incredible vanity, folly, pride and
self love of the man, The impossibility of M. W. paradox, that the Pope is
Antichrist.
let the reader note the gross and barbarous impossibility of that paradox,
which by this his supreme authority he would defend. He grants the Church
of Rome, to have been pure, godly and christian, for six hundred years after
Christ, as before has been declared. When then grew it to be so impure,
wicked; and Antichristian? ten years after. For thus he writes: page 66.
Six hundred and ten years after Christ or there about, Bonifacius the third
governed the Roman church. What was he? to answer truly, very Antichrist.
In which words joined together, thus much he says in effect, That whereas
within the space of ten or twelve years before, the Roman church was religious
and euangelical, in such sense as they understand it, that is, abhorred the
Popes universal jurisdiction as Antichristian, and limited his power within the
precinctes of his own Patriarkship, reverenced every prince as supreme head of
the church within his own dominion, detested the sacrifice of the mass as
injurious to the death of Christ, acknowledged no justification but by only
faith, allowed marriage of priests and religious persons as agreeable to the
liberty of the gospel, held for sacraments none other but Baptism and the
Eucharist, and Baptism an only sign not remitting sins, and the Eucharist a
sole figure, from which the truth of Christ's body was as far distant as heaven
is from earth, and so forth according to the rest of the articles of their
reformed faith: within the decourse of so few years, al these things were
turned vpside down, and the contrary faith planted in steed thereof. That is,
the Roman church of late so sound and perfect, suddenly became most corrupt
and impure. she approved the universal authority of the Roman Bishop, and
appointed no bounds or limits to his jurisdiction, which was mere
Antichristian. she took from Princes their Supremacy, she brought in the
sacrifice of the mass, and highly advanced it against the death and sacrifice
of Christ. she acknowledged justification to proceed not of only faith, but of
works also. she established the single life of priests and votaries, and
condemned their marriages as sacrilegious and execrable. A wonderful change
upon the sudden in all the Christian world* and yet more wonderful that no man
should note it.
for two sacraments she admitted seven. to baptism she attributed remission
of sins, and in the Eucharist she believed the real and substantial verity
of Christ's presence, and so forth according to the articles of Catholic
religion, or papistrie, as these men term it.

Now whereas thus much is comprised in their paradox of making the succession
of the Roman bishops Antichrist, whereas such weight lies in the matter,
which of it self to common intendement is so absurd, unreasonable and in deed
impossible, whereas we also bring forth Fathers, Councels, and Doctors
auouching the contrary gather thou (Christian reader) whether we have not just
cause utterly to discredit them in this so blunt, and sensles assertion, until
we see their Chronicles, their momuments, their a^tiquities, some manner warrant
besides their own in a matter of such importance. Whereas they allow us no
such, and yet challenge to be credited upon their own word, assure they self
(reader) their dealing in this behalf is not only foolish, unlearned, and
ignorant, but also inhumane, furious and diabolical.

Notwithstanding whereas M.W. That the Roman Church of the later thousand
years has not changed the faith which she had the first five hundred.
besides those former profes which to any indifferent man may seem more then
sufficient, requires of us farther declaration, that in these later ages the
Roman church has not departed from that faith, which in her first time she
professed, to content him (if any thing may content him) and make more evident
the invincible equity of the Catholic cause, I will prove the same by such
^istoriographers, as him self (I trust) will allow for upright, and nothing
favorable to our cause. Those witnesses I mean to be, first of al him self,
and then, John Calum, Peter Martyr, Martin Luther, Flacius Illyricus, with such
other pillars and founders of his own congregation. Out of him self this I
gather. That to have been the true and Christian faith, which the Roman church
ma^ntained the first five hundred years, Before page 47.
at what time that church was must pure and excellent, and preserved
inuiolabl^ the faith delivered by S. Peter and S. Paul. This proposition is
commonly found almost in every page of M.W. answer to the second
Demo^stration. Out of the other, Calvin, Luther etc. this I gather, that the
Roman church in her first and primitive purity maintained and believed the
Popes Supremacy, the sacrifice at the mass, the same to be auailable for the
dead, priesthode, the real presence etc. no less then we do now. Chap.
4.7.10.11.
This thou shall find witnessed by their several confessions, and approved at
large hereafter in places convenient. The conclusion hereof rising is this,
first that these are no points of false or Antichristian doctrine, but such as
Peter and Paul taught the primitive Roman church. Next that the later Roman
church has not departed from the former, but has kept inuiolably the self
same faith without change or alteration. And so the false supposal whereupon
this book stands, being by such evidence refuted, the rest of the building
must needs come to ground.

Call. insti. li. 4. c. 18. 18. Omnes reges terrae and populos, a summo vsque ad
nouissimum ^^^briauit.
Now I say farther, that this point which M.W. takes for a most certain and
clear verity, that is, the fall of the universal church (for after the fall of
the Roman church, they can show none that stood, and it is their general both
preaching and writing, that she corrupted the whole world with her errors) and
her apostasy from Christ these later hundred years, To affirm with the
protestants that the universal church has failed, is to deny Christ's
incarnation and al scripture.
upon which (as I have said) depends the very substance of this his book,
is an absurdity in Christian religion, so foul, monstrous, and abominable,
that it can not be defended of any man, except he first of al deny the very
incarnation of Christ, his preaching, his death and passion, his eternal
kingdom and priesthod, the sending of the holy Ghost, the entier sum of all
whatsoever has been written by the Apostles, or foretold by the prophets. For
to what end was Christ's incarnation, Ose. 2. v. 19.20. Ephesians. 5. f. g.
but to join him self unto a Church, from which he would never be separated?
To what end was his preaching but to erect and instruct such a Church? Ioa^ 17.
v. 19. Ephesians. 2. v. 14. etc.
To what end his death and passion, but to redeem and sanctify such a Church,
and leave unto it an everlasting remedy to blot out her sins and offenses?
How is he an eternal king, Ps. 2. v. 6. 1 Timothy 6. v. 15. Hebr. 7.
who has not an eternal people obeyng him and observing his laws? how an
eternal priest, whose priesthod and sacrifice for so many hundred years was
applied to none, and auailed for none? and to what pu^pose was the holy Ghost
sent, Act. 2. Ioa^. 24. v. 16.
but to remain with the church for ever, and lead her into al truth? And
what is the sum of the gospels, but a declaration that Christ by him self,
by the holy Ghost, Mat. ca. 28* v. 20. Marc. 4. v. 32 1. Cor. 11 v. 26. Mat. 5
v 14.15. 1. Tim. 3. v. 15 Luc. 24. v. 47 Act 15. 2. Timoth. 3 v. 9. Ephesians. 4. b
c
by his Apostles, founded such a church, in which his will should evermore be
openly preached, his sacraments rightly evermore ministered, true faith and
religion alvvaies preserved, a certain way for converting infidels to the
faith, for co^futing errors and heresies be continued, and al true Christians
maintained by lawful past^rs in unity of his true faith against al blastes of
vain doctrine, even until his coming to the general judgment. Finally that
such a city and commonwealth it should be, so constant, so strong, so
immovable, Mat. 10. v. 17 Mat. 16 v 18. Apoc. 20. v. 9.
that it should uphold the glory and name of Christ, ^ against Princes,
against Potentates, against Kings and Emperors, against all the force of the
world and the devil, though they al with might and main applied their whole
power to the suppressing and rooting out of it.

And the self same is the effect of all the ancient Prophets, that the
preachers of Christ's catholic church should never cease day nor night to
preach the truth: Esa. 62 v. 6.
that howsoever darkness covered al other nations, Esa. 60 v. 2.3.
yet the light there of should never be extinguished: that the spirit of God
and truth of doctrine should never depart from it, Ibid. v. 20. c. 62. v 4. c.
59. verse. 21.
but remain in it from one generation to an other even for ever: that it
should never be brought in to a narow room, Ibi. c 60. a* b* and ca 2. v 2.
Psalm. 2. v. 8. and psalm. 71. v. 8.11.17.
as was the synagoge of the Jews, but should be diffunded thorough al
proui^ces of the earth: that the course of heaven, of the sun, of day and
night should rather fail, Ierem 33 c. d. e. psalm 88. v. 34.35 etc.
then priests and preachers of the new testament: that albeit other monarchies
had an end and were altered, as the Assyrians, the Persians, the Macedonians,
the Romans, yet this should never suffer any such a teration, Daniel 2. v. 44.
but should stand vnchange^ble for ever. Wherefore to affirm that this Church
has failed, is to affirm, that Christ, his Apostles, and Prophets, are al
liers, that what soever is written in the old and new testament, is all vain
and fabulous.

For touch^ng the strange devise of an invisible church, Tower disputations,
the second day.
which some of them have of late imagined, it is nothing else, The invisible
church a poetical fancy.
but a mere poetical fancy: a fancy which consists only upon their own
word and credit, for proof whereof they never yet brought any scripture,
counsel, father, doctor, chronicler, or writer, nor ever shall be able: a fancy
by which any sect never so horrible, may defend them selves to be a Church as
well as they: a fancy framed and patched together of mere contrarieties and
contradictions: a fantastical opinion which being long since abandoned of the
learned protestants in other countries as most wicked and pestilent, is now
(I know not upon what misery and necessity) received of our English
Divines. Melanch. in locis com. c. de Ecclesia aedit. 1561.
Whensoever we think of the church (says Melanchthon) let us behold the
company of such men as are gathered together, which is the visible church:
nether let us dream, that the elect of God are to be found in any other place,
then in this visible society. For nether vvil God be called upon or
acknowledged, otherwise then he has revealed him self, nether has he
revealed him self else where, save only in the visible church, The scripture
knows no church but the visible.
in which only the voice of the gospel sounds. Nether let us imagine of any
other invisible church, but let us know, that the voice of the gospel must
sound openly amongst men, according as it is written Psalm. 18, Their sound is
gone forth in to all the earth. Let us know, that the ministry of the gospel
must be public, and have public assemblies, as it is said Ephesians. 4. Let us
join our selves to this company, let us be citizens and members of this
visible congregation, as we are commanded in the 25. and 83. Psalm. Which
places and other the like, speak not of Platoes Idea, but of a visible church,
etc. Idem in praefat. lib. Corpus doctrinae Christianae in Ecclesiis Saxon. and
Misnicis principis elector^s Saxon. impress. Lipsiae anno 1561. Vide eunde^ in
Repetit. Confess. August. offerendae Sinodo^ Tridentinae anno. 51. ca. de
ecclesia. Et in resp. ad impios articulos Bauaricae Inquisitio, quest. 3.
And in sundry other places refelling this mad fancy, he ever concludes,
Necesse est fateri esse visibilem Ecclesiam, de qua filius Dei, etc. It is of
necessity that we confess a visible church, whereof the son of God says,
Matthew. 18, Dic ecclesiae, Tell the church, and whereof Paul says 1. Cor. 4,
We are made a spectacle to the whole world, to angels, and to men. What a
spectacle I beseech you is that which is not seen? and whereunto tends this
monstrous speech, which denies the visible church? Delet omnia testimonia
antiquitatis, abolet iudicia, facit (...) infinitam, and illam Cyclopum
politia^, in qua^ (...) vt est apud Euripidem. It abolisheth al testimonies of
antiquity, it takes away al judgments, it causes an endless confusion, The
protestants invisible church
and induces a common wealth of unruly ruffians or Atheists, wherein no one
cares for an other.

Calv. institut. lib. 4. ca. 1. 2. No salvation out ^f the visible church.
And Calvin interprets the article of our creed, Credo Ecclesiam Catholica^,
of the Catholic visible Church. and says furthermore, that the knowledge
thereof is so necessary, that there is no hope of life by grace in this world,
except we be conceived, brought forth, nourished, and ruled by her, so long as
we live. Ibid. 4.
Add quod extra eius gremium nullae est sp^randa peccatoru^ remissio, neque
vlla salus, test Iesai. c. 37. verse. 32. Joel. ca. 2. v. 32. Ezechiel. ca. 13.
v. 9. psalm. 106. v. 4. Add here unto that out of the lap of this (visible
church) no pardon of sins is to be hoped for, nor any salvation, as witness
Isaie, Joel, Ezechiel, and the Prophet David.

Oecola^p. in Isa. c. 2. v. 2.
And Oecola^padius writing upon the Prophet Isaie, and those words, ca. 2.
Fluent ad eum omnes gentes, Create is the dignity (says he) of the Christian
church above the synagoge of the Jews, in that it shall be most populous, and
of al nations, sundry shall join them selves unto it abundantly. Wherefore let
the Jews be ashamed, which think them selves alone to be the sons of
Abraham. Away with the Montanistes, which say that they alone have received
the holy Ghost. Confounded be the Donatistes etc. how much should we
withdraw and take from the church catholic, if we believed these men? Idem
in Ieremiam ca. 33. v. 29.
And again upon Jeremy. God here speaks of the eternity of Christ's
kingdom, and svveareth that as his league is steadfast with the sun and
moon, with summer and vvynter, with day and night, Kings and Priests never
fail in the church.
so also he vvil perform that which he promised to Christ, that he shall have
kings and priests, and that for ever, and that not a fevv, but as the stars
of heaven and the sand of the sea, both for their dignity and purity, and
also for their multitude. The like words he has, and confirms the same by
sundry places of scripture, in Isai. ca. 64 v 13. Daniel. ca. 2. v. 44. Zachar.
ca. 2. v. 1.2.3. et ca. 7. v. 13.14.15. et ca. 12. v. 6.7.

And Illyricus gathers very well out of the first chap. of S. Matthew. Illyr.
glossa in Math. ca. 1. v. 1. Some such stories of the Protestants church, what
state it had 600. or 700 years ago, were worth the seeing.
that the true church in the midst of al persecut^o^s, destructions of
cities. Common welthes, and peoples, is not only preserved miraculously by gods
special aid and protection, but also Ostendit ista series (says he) ecclesiam
et religionem vera^ habere certas historias suae originis et progressus. This
genealogy proves, that the true church and religion has assured historyes of
her beginning and increase. Bre^t. in Luc. c. 17. hom. 19 Lauath. in Ezechiel
ca. 20. v. 39.40. Luth. Tom. 4 in Isa. ca. 9. etc. 52. and 53. and 60. Bull. in
Apo. Concio. 62. and 87.
I pass over very many places of these and other learned Protestants,
Brentius, Lauatherus, Luther, Bullinger, who in their Commentaries upon the
scriptures refel this savage opinion of our english Protestants, by infinite
and the same very evident places of scripture.

And wonder it were (if any thing were wonderful in men forsaken of God, and
given over to their own sense) how these men do not perceive, yea and feel
the most sensible contradiction, which disputing of this question, and of
Christ's real presence in the sacrament, they run into. For here they charge
us, that we take from Christ the truth of his body and deny his incarnation,
Notable forgetfulness and contradiction.
because we say it is invisible and not circumscribed with a certain place,
which they say are proprieties so essential to humane nature, that the very
glorified body of our Savior remains not a body, if it want them. Of this
argument M. VV. insulteth and triumphs in this book, Hoc argumentum (says
he to M, Martin) impetus tuos non pertimescit, See after pa. 177.178
This argument fears not your forces. Yet talking of the Church militant,
which consists of a number of bodies, by nature, mortal, by essential
propriety, visible and bound to a certain place, by Christ's ordinance
dispersed thorough al quarters of the world, After pa. 349.350.
this Church (they say) was a true church, and yet invisible, consisted of
Emperors, Priests, nations and peoples, and yet circumscribed with no certain
place, appearing in no certain city, province, or kingdom: so tying most
ethnically, the glorious, celestial, deified and supernatural body of Christ,
to the base rules of corruptible philosophy, from which they exempt the mortal
bodies of men, which by the law of God and nature are subject thereunto.

But to return to the fall of the universal Church, upon the ruins whereof
M.W. book in particular, Call libel. de necessit. reformandae ecclesiae.
and this new congregation in general is buylt and stands, the issue of that
doctrine is no other, nether possibly can be, but a flat abnegation of Christ
and Christianity, as the writings of our adversaries joined with their
practice declare abundantly to al those, who list to open their eyes and take a
little pains to learn that which so deeply it imports them to know.

To say that the church has failed, is to make Christ a liar and deceauer.
And to this purpose notable is the story of David George the Hollander, who
being expelled from the low countries for the Sacramentarie heresy, and for
the same cause honorably received and entertained by them of Basile being then
of the same religion, ab an. 1544. ad 1556.
and many years well esteemed of in that city, after proceeded so far in the
gospel, that he took to him self the name and office of Christ, and accounted
our Savior for a seducer and deceauer, and secretly drew many to his opinion.
For which cause, three years after his death, Year 1559. The story of David
George set forth by them of Basile.
the rulers of that City took the body out of his grave and burned it, and
withal set out the whole story of his life, faith, and death, and the rest
appertaining to his condemnation and their own defense. This man by what
reason principally was he lead into that Turkish madness? forsooth his chief
reason was this, as in the same book appears. If Christ had been the true
Messiah, his church had never failed.
If that Christ had been the true Christ, then the Church erected by him should
have continued for ever. But now we see, and it is manifest, that the Romish
bishop, that Antichrist, has surpressed and overthrown many hundred years
since the church, which that Christ erected. Hereof it follows, that he was
not the true Messiah, but a lying master and a false prophet.

And Sebastianus Castalio in the preface of his bible dedicated to king Edward,
what does he else, but closely deny Christ to be the true Messiah, when upon
this very ground of the churches fall, he thus discourses. Castalios discourse
that Christ is not the true Messiah.
First he lays for a foundation, the excellencies and prerogatives of the
church which should be established by the Messiah, as her quietness and unity
in religion described by Michaeas, cap. 4. That the earth should be so
replenished with the knowledge of our Lord, as the sea is with waters. Esai
11. And again cap. 60. Whereas thou were forsaken, envied and unfrequented, I
vvil make the (says God) to arise into an everlasting height, so as thou shall
suck the milk of other nations and the breasts of princes, and thou shall
know that I thy God am thy savior and defender. The light of the church shall
never be extinguished.
Thy sun shall no more go down, nor thy moon leese her light, for our lord
shall be thy light which ever shall continue. After this sort much more he has
touching the churches happy estate and continuance, as before has been noted.
Then looking to the effect and accomplishment of these promises according to
Protestants learning and judgment, Quo magis libros sacros considero, eo
minus hactenus praestitum video. vtcumque illa oracula intelligas.
he protests expressly, that this excellency and felicity promised to the
church of Christians by the coming of Messiah, the more he considers the
scriptures, the less he finds the same as yet to have been performed,
howsoever a man understand those places alleged. Whereof he frames this
argument. Equidem aut haec sutura esse fate^dum est, aut iam fuisse, aut deus
accusandus mendacit. Quod si quis fuisse dicet, quaeram ex eo, qua^do fuerint.
Si dicet Apostolorum tempore, quaeram, cur nec vndiquaque perfecta fuerit, et
tam cito ex^leuerit dei cognitio ac pietas, quae et aeterna et marinis vndis
abundantior fuerat promissa. An argument worthy to be considered.
Truly we must confess, either that these things shall be performed hereafter,
or have been already, or God is to be accused of lying. If a man answer me,
that they have been performed, I vvil demand of him, when? If he say, in the
time of the Apostles, I vvil demand how it chances, that nether the^ the
knowledge of God and true religion was altogether perfect, and afterward
in so short a space vanished away, which was promised to be eternal, and
more abundant then the fluddes of the sea.

Which argument of his, if we mark well, and every part thereof, it is easily
perceived, that he concludes those things not to have been performed in the
Church of the new testament, which al prophets foretold should be performed at
the coming of the Messiah. For whereas he drives the sum of al to one of
these three necessary consequentes, either that God is a liar, either that the
Church erected by Christ should ever stand in the sight of the world, and ever
flourish with most abunda^t knowledge of the will of God, or that such a Church
shall be founded hereafter by the Messiah: and then remoueth the first, which
the nature of every man abhors to hear, then denies the second, according
to the general scope of the protestants doctrine, which affirms the Church
for these thousand years passed to have been drowned in palpable darkness,
superstition, and idolatry, what remains but to approve the third, vz, that
the things foretold to be wrought by the Messiah, are not yet accomplished, but
shall be hereafter. which is as much as in evident terms to say, that the
Messiah is not yet come, or Christ is not the true Messiah, who has performed
nothing of that which was his part and office according to the oracles of the
Prophets.

Calvin in Daniel. ca. 2. v. 44. Lut. To. 7. li. de Iudaeis. etc.

The Protestants under pretense of more purity, drive men to Iudaisme and
Turkery.


This if I would prosequute at large by showing into what straightes, and
shameful and miserable shifts some principal Protestants, for example Calvin
and Luther disputing with the Jews have been brought, by reason of this
detestable supposition, that the church so many hundred years has failed, the
reader could not but abhor and detest even to the gates of hell this damnable
heresy, which upon pretense of reforming the church and making al things pure
and perfect, does in deed join with the Turks and Jews, and thrust men
headlong to the very denial of Christ's Incarnation. And most certain it is,
we can never against the Jews maintain Christ to be the true Messiah, if we
put this paradox of the Protestants to be true, that Christ's church within so
few years after his departure was suppressed and trod under foot by the Pope.
And this one reason, to pass by all other, will justify the same to their
eternal confusion: that whereas by the incarnation and coming of Christ the
church of Christians should be enlarged infinitely in all kingdoms, Esa. 49.
per tot. ca. 2. v. 3.4.
provinces, and cities, above the sinagoge of the Jews, Esa. 54. v. 1. call. 4.
v. 27. see before page 59
which after that time should be narrow, contemptible, remaining in a few, and
nothing comparable to that other, by the Protestants faith this is turned
clean contrary. For in any age or time of these later thousand years, it is
easy to show by sufficient authority of cronicles and histories, that the
Jews have had their known and visible sinagoges in the most notable places
and provinces of the world, in Greece, in Constantinople, in Germany, in
Mantua, in Venice, in Paris, in England, in Spain in Portugal: whereas for
many ages they can not name under the cope of heaven any kingdom, province,
city, town, village, house or sheepecote, where the church of christ has
appeared, if we esteem the same according as they now by their preaching and
writing describe it.

And therefore whereas M. W. obiecteth commonly, that Doctor Sanders denying
the Pope to be Antichrist and defending that an other shall come hereafter, The
end of M.W. doctrine touching Antichrist.
withdraws men from consideration of the true Antichrist to a false and
feigned one, on the contrary side let the reader take this for a verity as
certain and sure as the Gospel, that he and his, upon such pretense of a false
and imagined Antichrist, of late days conceived and brought forth in the
fa^tastical brains of a few heretical miscreantes, upon pretense of bringing
men a nearer way to heaven then ever their forefathers went, upon pretense of
framing a church more pure, more sincere, more perfect and Apostolical then was
in the world before, I say, upon these false and lying reasons, they withdraw
men from the only true, ancient, Catholic and Apostolic church, wherein they
were baptized, to their manifold, scattered, and divided apostatical
congregations: they lead men out of the way where only saluarion is to be
looked for, and place them there, where remaining they are most certain and
assured of everlasting damnation of body and soul. Yea as appears by the
course of their doctrine, the drift of their preaching and writing, and
experiment of their brethren, under the veil and shadow of this their
Antichristian doctrine, they induce me^ to believe that al scripture is false,
that the prophets were liars, that the Apostles were deceauers, that Christ
was a false teacher and seducer, and not the Messiah described by the
prophets, that Iudaisme stands upon better grounds then Christianisme:
which conclusion they can never avoyde, except first they abandon and revoke
this their doctrine of Antichrist suppressing the Church, as false and
execrable.

And as for the Popes of Rome, whom this man will needs have to be Antichrist,
If the Pope of Rome be Antichrist, there be many worse Antichrist^ in the world
this I dare say boldly and stand to the arbitrament of any reasonable and
indifferent Protestant that by experience knows Rome, and England, the
demeanure of the bishops who of late have governed there, as for example, Pius
4. Pius 5. and Gregorius 13. and our Superintendents, who in the same time have
ruled in England. Let Antichrist be described in such sort and with such
qualities as the scripture describes him. Afterward let there be laid in equal
balance that which the world knows by public view and experience to have been
in the foresaid bishops, their fear of Gods judgment testified by their whole
order of life, their much prayer, their infinite alms, their justice toward
al, their singular care to remedy the wounds of the Christian world, and
gather into one the scattered flock of Christ, wherein they have spared no
trauail or charges. Lay vvithal the public and known losenes in many of our
English Superinte^dents, the contempt of Gods judgments, so much as may be
gathered by their external behavior and manner of living, their oppression of
the poor, their infinite avarice, their few prayers, their lightness, their
carnalitie, and whatsoever else is better known to the people where they live
then to me: let these things I say be weighed by the judgment of any
reasonable Protestant, and I doubt not but he will conf^sse, that if in the time
of the forenamed Popes, the Sea of Rome was possessed of Antichrist, in the
same season many bishops Seas in England were possessed of double and triple
Antichrists.

I come now to speak of the second part, vz, the want of religion and
conscience which M. W. shows in this his answer, wherein I must be the
shorter, because I have stayed somewhat long in the first. His want of
conscience as in sundry other points, so in this I note especially, that
whereas he pretends to set down M. D. Sanders arguments fully and entierly,
and so to frame his answer accordingly, he in many and the same of best moment
performs nothing less then that which he most pretends.

M. Jewel amongst many false practices, used this as one very apt to beguile
the simple, and whereby I think at this present very many learned men are
deceived. That is, M. Jewels manner of answering D. Harding.
from the discourse of his adversary, he would cut out and remove from the
sight of the reader, the principal strength, were it Scripture, Councels,
Fathers, or reason, whereby the adversary justified his cause, and after shufle
up some od talk and impertinent allegatio^s against the rest. For example let
the Defense of the Apology of the English church serve, where there is no
matter seriously handled, from the first beginning to the last line of the
book, but the very pith and most forcible parts, He leaves out the best part
of D. Hardings book.
as it were the joints and sinevves are thus taken away and left out of the
book: sometime whole and many pages together, sometime half pages, sometime
four or five lines in a side, sometime whole sentences or pieces of
sentences, according as he thought requisite for the bettering of his cause,
and disgracing of his adversary: and yet notvvithstanding, he peeceth and
patcheth up the rest, as though it were the full and perfect discourse of D.
Harding. This is as much as if some bragging Thraso appointed to combat with
his enemy, should at the time of fight, cause his enemy to be tied up in
prison, and shevve his chiualry upon a man made of cloutes. this is in steed
of a body, to fight with a shadovv. I vvil not exemplify this by any
particularitie, because I can assure the reader by certain experience, let him
in that book fall upon what place he list, he shall hardly miss an example.

This very practice has M.W. learned of him, and puts it in ure in this his
answer to D. Sanders demonstrations. For wheresoever D.S. An unconscionable
way of answering.
disputes most firmly out of scriptures and reasons grounded there on, and
multitude of fathers agreing in the exposition of the scriptures, wheresoever
he preue^teth the cauils of the adversaries and forestoppeth the common
arguments which they make for the contrary part, there M. W. diligently and
carefully takes order to cut and leave out al such pieces, that he may have
the more liberty to run at randon, and talk his pleasure of the rest. So
for example, Apud. Sander. pa. 764.
in the seventh demonstration he leaves out in the middle, almost half a side
of D. Sanders, a piece of very good importance for the fortifying of his
argument. In the tenth demonstration where D. Sanders preuenteth and answers
their objections, Sander. pa. 767.
and where in deed he fully co^futeth before hand the substance of M. W.
reply, Ibid. page 770.771.
there a whole page is leaft out. And the self same part he plaieth in the
thirtenth demonstration, leaving out almost two entier pages where in like
manner his reply was before hand thoroughly discharged. So in the sixtenth
demonstration he omitteth almost a side of the argument, ^^g. 774.
where D. Sanders conuinceth the Protestants of contradiction to them selves,
and proves them to play the part of Antichrists for corrupting the very
letter of scripture at their pleasure.

And to pass by the like false demeanure in other places, and to make a little
stay upon one only example, in the 36 demonstration he so wickedly behaueth him
self, as the reader can never otherwise judge of him, then that he is a man
wicked, unconscionable, without al fear, of God. or regard of man, given only
to continue talk and serve the time, without any care to search out the truth.
D. Sanders there disputes thus. Christ instituted a true and real sacrifice at
his last supper. This he proves by scriptures, reasons drawn out of the
scriptures, and fathers interpreting the scriptures. This sacrifice Antichrist
shall abrogate and take away. This he proves also by fathers expou^ding the
scriptures, and gathering so much of Daniels Prophecy. These be the parts of
which he concludes the Pope not to be Antichrist, who takes not away that
sacrifice, Unreasonable mangling. corrupting, and falsifying.
but defends and well allows it. Nowhere wonderful it is to note, what
mangling, and defacing, and peecing, and patching he uses in setting down
this demo^stratio^. In the first paragraph of D. Apud Sander. pa. 785.
Sanders five lines he leaves out, wherein is compared the state of the Jews
and Christians touching the law and sacrifice. Then shufling in four lines, he
furthwith leaves out almost a whole side of a leaf, where D.S. by good
reasons, conference of Scriptures, and fathers, proves the Mass to be the
sacrifice of the new testament. and then putting in one line of S. Ireneus
cited by D.S. and leaving out many lines following of the same author, and
pertaining as much to the matter, omitting withal D.S. discourse thereupon, he
furthwith joins an other place of S. Ireneus cited likewise by D.S. but after
his manner cutting of at the least the one half: and omitting D.S. argument
thereupon, as also a notable place of Hippolitus the Martyr (writing, that in
the time of Antichrist the holy churches shall be like unto poor cottages, and
the precious body and blood of Christ shall not be extant in those days, the
Mass shall be abolished etc. al which he says is nothing to the purpose)
whereas D. S. brings in a large place of S. Hierom, he sets down one
piece of a line, and leaves out ten times as much ensuing, and the same most
to the purpose. And finally using the like treachery toward S. Chrysostom
(cited as the rest by D. S.) from whom he croppeth the greater part and the
most necessary, thus he makes up his answer to the 36. demonstration.

And that the reader imagine not the places of those fathers, S. Ireneus, S.
Hierom, and S. Chrisost. to be idle and needeles, let him know, that they are
such, as whereby D. Sanders proves directly one of his principal propositions,
Apud Sand. page 789.
that Antichrist shall abrogate and take away the sacrifice of the new
testament according to the prophecy of Daniel. Finally in the 38 demonstration
where the argument is framed, that the best princes have always favored the
Sea of Rome, as Constantinus Magnus, Theodosius, Martianus, Carolus Magnus,
Ludouicus Pius, etc. and persecutors, tyrannes, and wicked princes have most
dishonored it, as Constantius, Iulianus, Valens, Anastasius, Theodoricus etc.
the answer is made, by cutting away all this out of the book, and thrusting in
a tale of a tub, that Cardinals and bishops be kings who much honor the Pope.

This manner of answering is not to search out the truth, as becomes Divines,
or to bring men into the right way, as is the duty of Christians, but only to
keep men's heads in musing and expectation of new books, to make them mispend
their time, to keep the printers occupied, and as it were to walk and talk
on a stage for no other purpose but to pass away the time. This is truly to be
Carnifex papiri, A murderer of paper, Illyr.
as Illyricus commonly calls the Zuinglians. this is in deed to be
Miserabilis librifex, Luther.
A miserable bookevvright, as Luther malapertly names king Henry, a learned
prince and of famous memory. This is thoroughly to approve and justify that
which Luther in the beginning, sentenced against Zuinglius and Oecolampadius
the fathers of the Sacramentarie Gospel, and which from the^ (as it may seem)
has descended to their posterity. Luther. To. 7. Defensio etc. contra
fanaticos sacramentariorum spiritus. fo. 381.
Isti boni spiritus (says he) si paru^ admodu^ rethoricantur etc. These good
(sacrame^tarie) sprites if they can a little play the Rhetocians, though they
touch not any one argument, yet think they of them selves that they have
ansvvered the matter passing well and said much to the purpose, et putant
causam suam consistere in scriptione multorum libroru^, et in co^maculatione
pap ri. and they suppose that their cause stands in vvriting of many books
and blotting of much paper.

And no doubt it proceeded of some like craft, that M.W. against us and our
English translation of the Testament, wrote his reprehension in latin, to the
end pardy, that nether our common countrymen understanding only the English,
should know those faults which he reproves in latin, nor strangers
understanding only his latin, know how justly he refelleth that which was
written in English. Whereby notwithstanding he might obtain thus much, that
both sorts should hear tell of some errors noted and refuted, but what they
were, and how well, how truly and substantially the refutation was made, nether
the one nor the other should be able to examine, much less to judge: the rest
that understand both tongues (who only may epsy his unjust accusations,
defaultes, and ignorances) being not so many, nor always so diligent, nor at
any time so free, as to compare his latin pretensed reprofe with the truth set
down in English. For so much as the adversaries now against their old
pretense of honoring and allowing holy scriptures, The Protestants forbid the
reading of scripture.
cruelly punish the readers and keepers of them, and spoil men of the new
Testament it self: the translation and notes whereof they shall never be able
to reprove, as we inuincibly to the eternal shame of heresy have reproved
theirs. And yet these men that vvil not suffer our translation to be read of
such as understand it, See after pa. 459.
with feigned hypocrisy protest that it nothing harmeth their cause, and wish
that strangers could read it also.

These (Christian reader) are the false fleightes, of lying, of dissembling, of
bragging, of removing grounds of disputation, of denying sundry principal
parts of faith, of continual altering their faith, of preferring the^ selves
before al men, of taking to them selves in particular, the supreme judgment
both of al scriptures, and the true sense thereof, these be the difficulties,
which may dissuade and withdraw any man from writing or disputing against such
sophistical wranglers. yet because we may not upon any loath somnes in our own
behalf, or lost labor in respect of the^, omit to do good to others, who^ we
may any way profit, here thou have so much as appertains to the defense of
the Discovery, of the Translation, and Annotations of the new testament. The
rest shall follow hereafter, if those who have the regiment of my life and
studies, shall think the time not evil spent, in refelling so unseemly, so
improbable, and unchristian an argument.

AN ADVERTISMENT TO THE READER.
WHEREAS of late in the Tower disputations we have seen that learned and holy
man F. Campian, so much disgraced both in private speech and public writing,
because in citing a place of Luther touching S. James epistle, he missed the
print wherein the place was to be found, the later editions of his works
differing notably from the former, The heretics alter their works continually.
which chopping and changing is common to the most heretical writers of our
time: for fear of like inconvenience, I have thought it good amongst many, to
note the print of certain books, which in this treatise are often times
alleged. Know thou therefore (Christian reader) that in citing Luther, I
always mean the print of Witte^berg set forth by Melanch. in diverse years,
the second Tome the year 1551. the fifth 1554. the seventh 1557. In citing
Zuinglius I mean his works as they were set forth after his death by his
son in law Rodolphus, without name of place or printer. M. Foxes Acts and
Monumentes, I understand as they were printed the year 1563 by John Day. Bezaes
notes upon the new testament I mean as they were printed at Geneua, the year
1556. Sleidan I cite after the printe of Strasburg the year 1566. Castalios
bible, after the printe of Basile, the year 1556. Caluins Institutions, as he
last of al digested them into books and chapters, and printed them at Geneua.
Thus generally, except I note otherwise in the margent. Other books which have
not so much variety (although some be in more prints then one) be they latin
or english, I commonly note not only according to the chapter, but also
according to the page or leaf, as I do also the forenamed, that thou may
with so much the more facility find out the places quoted, and so better
judge of the matter rreated.

Next, whereas some are offended with us, for that in writing or speaking of
them, Of the name, Protestants and Sacramentaries.
we use the names of Sacramentaries, Zuinglians or Caluinistes, Puritanes, and
Parliament Protestants, which they say are odious nicknames found out of us,
Full. in the Answer to M. Martins preface. pa. 17.
and therefore one of their writers of late charge us in speaking of them to
use no other names then Christians and Catholics: for our discharge herein
thus much I must signify unto thee, that if either truth and learning would
bear us using such terms as they require, or any reader either Catholic or
Protestant understand us, we would most gladly for love of the truth and their
contentation so speak and write. But now consider thou how intolerably such
speeches would sound in the ears of any indifferent reader. I have occasion
sometimes to produce Luther writing Contra fanaticos Sacrame^tarioru^ spiritus,
against the fanatical spirits of the Sacramentaries, sometimes Contra
Zuinglium et discipulos eius, against Zuinglius and his disciples, sometime D.
Whitgift against the Puritanes, (for so he calls them) sometimes the
Puritanes against him and such as maintain the Communion book and religion of
England, in such sort and so far forth as is approved by Act of parliament. Now
citing these writers how can we cite them without a lie, if we cited them in
other words then themselves use? If I said Luther in his book against the
fanatical spirits of the Christians and Catholics, or, D. VVhitg. in his
Defense against the Christians and Catholics, who could either perceive what I
meant, or who would not judge that I did them great injury in making them to
write against Christians, which none do but Jews and Turks, or against
Catholics which none do but heretics and Apostataes. And marueil it is, that
the name of Protesta^tes is now grown into so great dislike, which hitherto
has been so magnified in books, pulpits, and ordinary phrase of talk, and
which M. Page 653. and 1717.
Fox in his huge volume of Acts and Monumentes alvvayes uses as most proper
to their gospel, and makes it opposite sometimes to Papists, sometimes to
Catholics, which he uses for one.

But the truth is, those that profess the English faith and religion, Those
that profess the English religion, are not Catholics.
either have no name at al to be known by but the common name of heretics,
which is to general, and would be to odious, or their most propre name is
Zuinglians or Sacramentaries. For to call them Catholics and Christians,
besides that it is false and ridiculous, and may with like probability be
challenged of every other kind of sect, Lutheran, Brentius et Lutherani passim.
See before. pa. 39.
Brentian, Arrian, Puritan, besides that their greatest vvriters mock and
scorn at the name Catholic as Popish and superstitious, besides this I say,
it expresses not that particular religion, in which they differ from the
rest of the Christian world, for which we write against them, and for
which the Lutheranes oppose the^ selves against them, and which by their name
ought specially to be signified.

Nor Protestants.
The name of Protestants, which commonly they usurp, is wrongfully challenged
of them, as which duly and only belongs to the Lutheranes, Sleidan. li. 6
fol. 102.101.109.
who for opposing them selves against the decrees of the Empire and Emperor
touching Catholic religion, and protesting that they would stand in defense of
their own, according to the Confession exhibited at Auspurg, were first for
their so doing and protesting, named Protestants, as much to say, as men that
stood and protested against the Catholic faith for their private, in such sort
as has been noted. From which Confession of theirs as likewise from al other
communion, Ibid. lib. 7. fol. 110. et 114. et lib. 8. fol. 128.131.
those of the English religion, were by the name of Zuinglians expressly
excluded.

And briefly, that no other name can be duly applied unto them besides the
name of Zuinglians, by this reason it may plainly appear. Those of the
English faith, are most properly called Zuinglians, or Sacramentaries.
When they brake from the rest of the Christian world, which they say was
covered with palpable darkness, and betook them selves to that light of the
gospel, whereof now they so much brag and boast, who was their master,
ringleader, and Apostle therein, but Huldericus Zuinglius? So much they write
most evidently in the Apology of their English church. Apol. Ecclesiae
Anglicanae. d. ^.
In the midst of that darkness (say they) those most excellent men, Martin
Luther, and Hulderike Zuinglius sent from God to illuminate the whole world,
first came to the Gospel. Missi a Deo ad illustrandum terrarum orbem, primu^
accesserunt ad Euangelium. Now whereas them selves and al other, name those
gospellers which follow Luthers sense and interpretation, by the name of
Lutherans, they who prefer Zuinglius before Luther, and profess them selves
to have received the light of the Gospel from him, how should they be called
but Zuinglians? not only for like reason, which has been used in all times and
ages from the first beginning of the primitive Church, where the Sectemaisters
have given appellation to their after-commers, as in Marcion, Valentinus,
Carpocrates, Nouatus and the rest, but much more and especially because them
selves challenge him for their master in their particular faith and religion.
And therefore it can not be avoided, but as Luthers scholars, are called
Lutherans, so Zuinglius disciples ought of like right to be called Zuinglians.

And to end this quarrel, our adversaries them selves who have written of these
matters, shall serve to quite us of al fault. M. Fox in his story when soever
he speaks of that sect which him self best-liked, Protestants Hussites.
Gospellers. See before pa. 16.

Acts and monumentes pa. 901.902.

Ibid pa. 993. aeditionis postremae. Sacramentaries.

Lutherans. Zuinglians. These names them selves use, besides a more general
name used and confirmed by Act of Parliament. see before page 21. Sleid. lib. 8.
fol. 128.131.133. et lib. 9. fol. 150. Ibid. lib. 7. fol. 107. et lib. 20. fol.
368. lib. 21. fol. 382.390 ibid. lib. 5. fol. 75.78.


ordinarily calls them, sometime Protestants, sometime Hussites, sometime at
large, men forward in promoting the proceedings of the gospel, sometime more
briefly, Gospellers. And writing precisely of the division between Luther and
Zuinglius he says, With Luther in the opinion of the Sacrament consented the
Saxons: with the other side of Zuinglius, went the Heluetians and as time did
grow, so the division of these opinions increased in sides, and spread in
farther realms and countries, the one part being called of Luther, Lutherans,
the other having the name of Sacramentaries. So in Sleidan we have very common
the name of Zuinglians and Sacramentaries, as likewise he calls the other
part Lutherans, and their religion Lutheranisme, and even so they termed them
selves. It were tedious to justify this out of Luther, Zuinglius, and
especially al historigraphers of our age. And in truth it is much like, as if a
man should light a candle at noone-tide. Wherefore in this we must desire our
adversaries to bear with us, if we speak not only as al Catholics, but as al
Protestants, as Luther, as Sleidan, as M. Fox, as generally al writers in their
books and volumes are accustomed to speak, and as the world of the^ has
learned, and as the adversaries them selves by all reason induce us to speak,
and as of necessity we must speak, if we will speak and be understood.

Touching any other fault, I shall be ready either to defend it, or to correct
it. to correct it, if it be noted against me justly, to defend it if it be
objected undeservedly. and this I protest not only in words, as commonly do al
Protestants, but in simplicity of truth, as meaning to perform the same. And
therefore willingly I submit what so ever I have written, to the judgment of al
Catholics, symply and with out exception to whom judgment of these matters
appertains. to the judgment of al Protestants, even of M. W. him self, so
far forth as he shall give censure of it and refel it by the written word of
God, expounded according to the analogy of faith.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS.
Chap. I. Of Luthers contemning S. James his Epistle and calling it stramineam.
Page 1. Chap. II. Of the Canonical scriptures, and that the English clergy in
accepting some and refusing others, are lead by no learning or divinity, but
by mere opinion and fantasy. Pa. 19. Chap. III. How M.W. defends Luther
preferring his private judgment before al ancient fathers and Doctors. Page
42. Chap. IIII. Of priesthod, and the sacrifice continued after Christ in the
state of the new testament, and that it derogateth nothing from Christ. Pa. 56.
Chap. V. Of Penance, and the value of good works touching justification and
life eternal. Page 82. Chap. VI. How unreasonably M.W. behaueth him self, in
reproving and approving the ancient fathers, for their doctrine touching good
works. Page 114. Chap. VII. Of M. Jewels challenge renewed by M. W. and the
vanity and falshod thereof. Page 129. Chap. VIII. Of Beza corruptly
tra^slating a place of scripture Act. 3. and of the real presence. Page 169.
Chap. IX. Wherein is refelled M.W. answer to certain places of S. Chrysostom
touching the real presence and sacrifice. Page 203. Chap. X. Of the place in S.
Lukes Gospel cap. 22. corrupted by Beza. Page 231. Chap. XI. M.W. general
answer to the book of Discovery. and of the notable impiety committed by
the translators of the English Bibles. Page 260. Chap. XII. M. W. reasons
against the latin bible are answered: and the same bible is proved to be in
sundry places more pure and sincere then the hebrew now extant. Page 280.
Chap. XIII. Of the purity of our latin testament in respect of the greek
copies now extant. Item a comparison of our translator with other of this age,
with an answer to those objections which M. W. deuiseth against him. Page 360.
Chap. XIIII. That to leave the ordinary translation of the bible appointed by
the Church, and to appeal to the hebrew, greek, and such new diverse
translations as the protestants have made, is the very way to Atheism and
Infidelity. Page 406. Chap. XV. How M.W. inueigheth against the new testament
lately set forth in this college, with a clear refutation of such faults as
he finds in the translation thereof. Page 443. Chap. XVI. A defense of such
faults as are found in the Annotations of the new testament. Page 474. Chap.
XVII. Of certain blasphemies contained in the Annotations. page 527. The
Conclusion. Page 548.
A REFVTATION OF M. WHITAKERS REPREHENSION OF THE LATE ENGLISH Translation and
Catholic Annotations of the new Testament, and of the book of Discovery of
heretical corruptions.
CHAP. 1. Of Luthers contemning S. James his Epistle and calling it STRAMINEAM.
AMONG sundry controversies raised by the Protestants in our days, one and
that of great weight and consequence, is the Canon of holy Scriptures, that
is, what books are to be admitted into divine and supreme authority, and as
certaynlye written by inspiration of the holy Ghost to be received without any
doubt or contradiction. In examininge which question, the behavior of our
adversaries deserves diligent consideration. For as in the beginning, they
much praised the Fathers, Church, and Councels of the first five hundred
years, not for any respect or reverence they bare unto them, The proceeding of
the new gospel.
but by so doing to discountenance and thrust out of credit, the Fathers,
Church and Councels of the later thousand, by whom they saw most evidently
their heresies to have been condemned: so not long after, for like purpose,
they made vau^t of the scriptures, against those very first and most ancient
Fathers, not for any just honor or regard which they had of the scriptures,
but by that means to disgrace the Fathers, and ease them selves of answering
their authority, when soever they should be pressed therewith. For that in
deed they account not of the very scriptures more then of the Fathers, but
turn them over for us to defend no less then the Fathers, time and
experience has showed, their public wrytinges profess (as by that which
hereafter ensues, shall manifestly appear) and M. Whitaker though in word he
would feign dissemble the matter, yet in fact and truth plainly declares so
much. which being so, let the Christian Reader as in other things, so in this
especially note the proceeding of that which these men call the gospel, the
gross impiety whereunto it tends, and in to what open profession of
infidelity in a short space it is likely to break out, which in the compass
of so few years is grown to such a head, that now already they dare as boldly
call in question and deny parts of the holy scriptures, as not long sithence
they made the like quarrels against the wrytings of the ancient Fathers. Let
the Christian Reader note I say, not their words, but their doings, not their
cou^terfeit dissimulatio^ in speech and pulpit sometime used, but their evident
practice, reasons and asseuerations published in books, confirmed by
arguments, deduced by necessary coherence from their doctrine, and many ways
expressed by them selves in sundry their Co^ferences, Institutions, and
disputations, and he shall easily perceive our adversaries after denial of the
Fathers, Councels, Tradition, and the authority of the Church Catholic, now
at this present to stand upon like denial of the written word, the Apostles
and Prophets, so as they leave no one ground whereupon a christian man can rest
his faith, or stay him self. Thus much I gather not only by the writings of
sundry other Protestants whereof some I shall touch hereafter, but even of M.
Whitakers discourse in defense of Luther about S. James Epistle. whose words
and reasons for this purpose and the Readers better intelligence, I will set
down and prosequute somewhat the more at large.

And first of all concerning S. James his Epistle, M. Martin reproves M.
Whitaker for denyinge that Luther called that Epistle stramincam, and in so
clear a case charged Father Campian with a notorius lie. It is easy to guess
(says M.W. In prefat. page 2.
) what a fellovv we shall find you in the rest, who are not ashamed in the
very beginning to lie so egregiously. When F. Campian replied that it was in
some one of Luthers first editions, though otherwise altered in the later: In
respons. ad episto. Campiani.
nether so says M.W. Praefationem illam purgatam esse dixisti, quam tamen
constat nullo vnquam verbo mutatam esse. You say that preface was corrected,
whereas it is certain that there was never any word changed in it. Now
this being the fault which M. Martin lays to M. W. see how well he defends
himself. First, because after he had read over all Luthers prefaces upon the
new Testament (as he says) he found none such, there of he infers: prefa.
page 2.
He is not to be accounted impudent (as you call me,) who denies that to be
true which he knovveth not to be true, but he that to deceive others defends
that as false which he knovveth to be most true. but I am so far from
acknovvledging this to be true, that I never thought it to be more false then I
think it now. I will not wrangle upon the definition of impudency but whether
this dealing be not most shameless and detestable in a Christian, let any man
of indifferency judge.

The Heretics corrupt their own vvryters.
by so many learned men of name, and for ought I could yet read or hear,
never denied by the Lutherans: especially, whereas withal nothing is more
notorious, Melanchton and those of VVittenberge have made in Luthers works,
corrupting, deprauing, putting in, and taking out, so much and so far forth, as
pleased their cha^geable humor: where of the zealous Lutherans in a synod
holden at Altemburg, by procurement of the Duke of Wirtemberg, Anno 1568.
Colloq. Alt. in respo. ad excusa. cor. fol. 227.
and Palsgraue of Rhene, lamentably complain. Electorales (say they) Lutheri
scripta enormiter quam faedissime deprauant, ita vt post obitu^ Lutheri etc.
The Divines of the Prince Elector, do most filthely and beyond all measure
deprave Luthers vvrytings, so as since Luthers death there have not been more
foul corrupters of Luthers books. In the same Council many times they fall
into this argument, and each side in most spiteful terms obiecte to others
this fault, as may be seen, if you list to peruse the pages here noted in
the margent. And in fine there is promise made, 2. Respo^. ad Hipothe. a fol.
284. ad fo. 290. and fo. 353.355.441 442.443.526.
as a matter of great importance, and one of Hercules labors, that the Duke of
Saxony will cause Luthers works to be printed without corruption.
Illustrissimus Dux Saxoniae, Ibi. Saxoni. ad respons. de difcess. fo. 539.540.
curabit tomos Lutheri sine deprauatione typis excudi. which notwithstanding is
perhaps a harder thing the^ the Duke of Saxony can perform, though his power
were much greater then it is. What speak I of the Lutherans, with whom Luthers
words be autenticall and little inferior to scripture, whereas the very
Caluinists, and that in Geneua, where Calvin is all in all, yet notwithstanding
have in their prints corrupted Luthers works. whereof Ioachim. Vvestphalus in
apologia contra calu^. Call. ca. 46. page 458.
VVestphalus a Lutheran thus writes in his Apology against the slanders of
Calvin. I Marueil much (says he) that Calvin keeping such a do about this
one word, could not see the most filthy mutations and corruptions of the
divine commentary of D. The works of Luther corrupted by the Caluinistes in
Geneua.
Luther upon the epistle to the Galatians, and translated into French, and
printed at Geneua. In one place some words are taken away, in an other many
mo, some where whole paragraphs are lopte of. Detruncaeti.
in the exposition of the sixte chapter, two pages and an half are left out.
where Luther does reprove the Sacramentaries, there especially those
falsifiers took to them selves liberty to mutilate, to take away, to blotte
out and change. some where they remove the name of Sacramentaries, at other
times they have put in words such as pleased them. and that this was done at
Geneua without Caluins knowledge, it is not very lykely.

Coclaeus objected it to Bullinger, as now M. Martin did to M. W. he answered,
(not denyinge that which was so publyke and notorious) but, Guperem Lutherum
sobrie magis, modestaus and circumspectius etc. Bull resp. ad Cocle. ca. 3.
I vvoulde to God Luther had judged and given his sentence more soberlye,
discreetelye, and circumspectly of Saint James his Epistle, and the Apocalips
of Saint John; and certain other.

Page 4.
I confess (says he) that Luther has written in a certain place, that James
his Epistle is not to be compared with the Epistles of Peter and Paul, and
that in comparison of them it may be judged an epistle made of straw. Which a
man would think were sufficient to clear M. Martin and M. Campian, and to
condemn Luther and M. Whitaker. For how or in what comparison could Luther so
speak, but only to disgrace that epistle, and in respect of other scripture
to make it light and contemptible: that is, not to make it scripture at all.
For if he thought it to proceed from the holy Ghost as did the books of the
Prophets, the Gospels, and Epistles of Saint Paul, how could he without
intolerable iniurye done to the holy Ghost so debase that writing, which he
believed to proceed from his divine inspiration. Ibid.
But M. Whitaker replyeth: That word albeit I defend not, yet justly may I
say that Luther is iniuried when he is accused to have rejected as made of
straw that epistle, and plainly and simply to have named it so, whereas he
called it so in comparison: especially whereas these words are not found in
the books of later printes. and except I by chance had happened upon a most
ancient edition, I might have sought long enough in the later. Manifest
contradiction.
Confess you then that there has been such choppinge and changinge in Luthers
works, that the one differ so far from the other, and namely in this very
point? How stands this now with your former bold asseueration: It is
certain, there was never any one word changed therein? And what reason have
you better to credit these later printes set forth by Luthers scholars, then
the ancient set forth by the master and author Luther him self.

Duraeus, Duraeus fol. 8.
there shall you be informed in what print and edition of Luther, S. James
epistle denied by the Protestants.
these words are to be read, to wit, not in the later of VVitte^berg
corrected and corrupted by the civil Lutherans, but in the more ancient of
Iena, a City in religion lutherish to, but yet after a more exact and precise
order then are those other. There may you find that Pomerane a great
Evangelist among the lutherans, touching S. James Epistle writes thus. Faith
was reputed to Abraham for justice. by this place thou may note the error
of the epistle of James, Pomeran. ad Romans ca. 8.
wherein thou feast a wicked argument. besides that he concludes
ridiculously, he cites scripture against scripture, which thing the holy
Ghost can not abide: wherefore that epistle may not be numbered amongst other
books, which set forth the justice of faith. There may you find Vitus
Theodorus preacher of Norimberg in hye Germany, In Annot. in ^o. Test. page
v^i.
writing thus. The epistle of James, and Apocalips of John, we have of set
purpose left out, S. James epistle and the Apocalips left out of the
Protestants bibles.
because the epistle of James is not only in certain places reprouable,
where be to much aduaunceth works against faith, but also his doctrine
through out is patched together of diverse pieces, whereof no one agrees with
an other. Unto these you may add for your better satisfaction the judgment of
the Centuries, noted by F. Campian though not touched by you. C^^. 1. li. 2. c.
4. colum. 54.
They say, that the epistle of James much svvarueth from the analogy of the
Apostolical doctrine, whereas it ascribes justification not to only faith
but to works, and calls the law, a law of liberty. And in the next book:
Cent. 2. ca. 4. colum. 71.
Against Paul and against all scriptures, the epistle of James attributes
justice to works, and peruerteth as it were of set purpose, that which
Paul disputes Romans 4. out of Genes. 15. that Abraham was justified by only
faith without works, and affirms, that Abraham obtained justice by
works. Luther. 10.5. in 1. Pc. ca. 1.
You may add Luther him self in his commentary upon S. Peter. ep. 1. ca. 1.
fol. 439.440. in the common edition of Wittemberg, where after he has given
many rules taken from his own licentious doctrine, whereby to discern the true
and canonical scriptures from false and Apocriphal, of them al thus he
concludes. pa. 442. Atque inde etiam facile discitur epistolam D. Iacobi
nomine inscriptam, handquaquam Apostolicam esse epistolam: nullum enim prope
elementum in ea de his rebus legis. Hereby we easily learn, that it is no
Apostolical Epistle, which goes in S. James his name: for there is in it no
letter or title of these matters: that is, of only faith, confidence,
resurrection etc. whereby we must esteem of true and canonical scriptures.
VVolfg. Musculus, a famous writer amongst the Zuinglians, upon like reason
pronounces like sentence. They object unto us (says he) the place of James.
Muscu. in locis co^mu. ca. de lusti. number. 5. page 271.
but he whatsoever he were, though he speak otherwise then S. Paul, yet
may he not prejudice the truth. And after he has at large showed the
disagreemente between those two Apostles, thus he breaks forth into the open
reproach of S. James. Wherefore he (S. James) alleges the example of Abraham
nothing to the purpose, where he says, vvilte thou know o vain man, that
faith without works is dead? Abraham our Father was he not justified by
works when he offered his son Isaak? He confounds the word, faith. how
much better had it been for him, diligently and plainly to have distinguished
the true and properlye Christian faith, which the Apostle ever preaches, from
that which is common to Jews and Christians, Turks and Devils, then to
confound them both, and set down his sentence so different from the
Apostolical doctrine, whereby as concluding he says: you see that a man is
justified by works, and not by faith alone, whereas the Apostle out of the
same place disputes thus etc. And after he has made S. Paul speak as he
thinks best, he infers: Thus says the Apostle of whose doctrine we
doubt not. Compare me now with this argument of the Apostle, the conclusion
of this James: A man therefore is justified by works and not by faith only, and
see how much it differs, whereas he should more rightly have concluded thus
etc. In which discourse the Reader may see that he not only contemptuously
refuses to call him an Apostle, and ever names him as opposite to the
Apostle, but also that he refuteth him as making false arguments, and takes
upon him to be his master, and as it were calling him ad ferulam, checketh and
controwleth him for a corrupter of scripture, misapplying the word of God, and
wickedly pullinge down that which S. Paul had so well built up.

All which being so plain, evident, and manifest, and the word, straminea
found out at length, and acknowleged by M. VV. a man would think all this
matter ended, and that egregious lie fathered upon M. Campian, turned upon M.
VV. head, and withal M. Campians first reason justified, wherein he burdened
the Protestants with denial of the holy scriptures. And yet M. VV. yeldeth
not, but like a valiant soldiar is so far from geuinge over, that he pursues
his adversary still, as though he had the better of him and wh^e so? or how
can he possibly defend him self? forsoothe, because Luther non plane and (...)
stramineam appellauit: page 4.
Luther said not plainly and simplye that it was stravven, or made of
straw, but in comparison of Saint Peter, and Saint Paul's Epistles. I
believe in deed: Nether did F. Campian or M. Martine say so, or any wise man
else for although he were as mad and shameless in his assertions, as ever was
heretic, yet to have termed that epistle (...) stramineam, simplye made of
straw, or any otherwise then to have signified the unworthiness of the same in
respect of holy scriptures, (and in that sort, it is (...) a word of
blasphemous contempt) had been as wonderful, as (...) to have affirmed that is
was made of wood, or mortar.

And here in the very front and beginning, let the reader note in M.VV. the
lively pattern of a perfect wrangler, maintaininge a continual bablinge upon
words, and never drawing nigh to the point. Father Campians and M. Martins
charge upon them being euidente, that they contemn the written word, as is
proved by Luther, M.VV. notable vvranglinge.
M.VV. knowinge not well what to say, runs he knows not whether, up and
down, and about, forward, and backward, now grauntinge, and by and by
recalling: so that in the compass of one leaf, in one plain matter, he has
more contrary windinges and turnings, then a grave and sober man could be
driven unto, in the writing of a large volume. F. Campian lies egregiously.
now him self has found it out. Luther calls it not simpliciter
stramineam, but in respect of S. Paul's epistles, and S. Peter's. arida, tumida,
contentiosa, or else this of straminea is no great matter. yet one fetch more.
Although I vvil not defend this of Luthers, yet you have iniuried him, in
saying that he called it omnino stramineam, altogether made of straw. look
(says M. Martin) in Illyricus and there you shall find the matter granted. I
have so done (says M.VV. page 3.
) and let me be counted impudent, if you find this word there. Thus much I
grant, Illyricus says that Luther rehearses grave causes, why this epistle
ought not to be esteemed for a vvriting of Apostolical authority. This is a
copy of M.VV. vain in writing, first to deny the matter be it never so
evident, and when the matter is confessed the^ to cauil upon syllables, and
when matter, and form, and the very syllables are found, yet to yield to
nothing, but to keep the pen or tongue walking: as though in this point like
verbal grammarians and ridiculous sophisters, we principally hunted after
these syllables stra mi ne am (which nevertheless are found) and not as
students and searchers of truth in diuinitye, sought out first and cheeflie,
whether by these and the like contemptible speeches, the adversary labored to
disgrace and deface that Apostolical writing, and so impiouslie to avoid such
authority, when he should be pressed therewith.

Wherefore to draw to some issue, howsoever Luther (...) called it stramineam
or called it not, or whether he spoke so in respect of the matter of the
epistle, or the form, or by way of comparison with S. Paul, or whatsoever
other quidditie M.W. either now has or hereafter shall devise, if Luther did yt
(...) to deface the epistle, which M.VV. denies not, and to dispossess it of
Canonical authority as the thing it self speaks, if by his example the
Germane Divines and churches altogether contemn it, if upon Luthers sentence
Illyricus pronounce, Illirieus in praefa. Iac.
that Luther in his praeface rendereth great causes, why this epistle ought
in no case to be accounted for a vvriting of Apostolical authority, unto
which reasons I think every godly man and not given to contention ought to
yield, if Pomerane say, the writer thereof makes a wicked argument and
concludes ridiculouslie, if Vitus Theodorus thrust it clean out of the book,
if the Centuries affirm that it svvarueth from the Apostolical doctrine, and
teaches clean contrary to S. Paul and all scriptures, if Luther flatly and
expressly deny it to be Apostolical, and affirm it to conteyne no one title or
letter of such matter as the Apostels are wont to handle, if Wolfga^gus
Musculus use him so contemptuously, as though he were some poor rascal not
worth the naming, and teach him what he should say, and set him to schole:
this being evident, then F. Campions conclusion stands strong, Had it not
been a goodly matter and worthy the labor of such great men in the Tovver
disputations, to discuss whether Luther called S. I^mes Epistle stramine^,
made of straw, simply or only in comparison?
that Luther with his accomplices contemn that part of scripture, howsoever he
calls it (...) or (...) strawen or wodden And therefore either let M. VV. like
a good child confess with Luther, Cont. Campi. page 198.
whom gladly he vvorshippeth as his father, and with the Lutherans, whom he
embraces as his most dear brethren in Christ, that this epistle is no more
worth then his father and brethren make of it, or if he mislike such
consanguinitie (as sure I am they abhor him) let him then detest them as
profane and wicked men, who so impiouslie reiecte the written word of God,
that is, the foundation, as they say. whereon is buylte their new
congregation. and so may the reader note down one more capital and
substantial point of dissension between those two churches lutheran and
zuinglian, then he^herto he has cons^dered. although nether can he so do
precisely, but rather note it as a division among the zuinglians also, for so
much as it appears by Musculus, that the Zuinglians of Suitzerla^d, no less
then the Luthera^s of Germanye, disagree from the English church in their
Canon of scripture, yea the English church within it self, as shall appear in
the next chapter.

CHAP. II. Of the Canonical scriptures, and that the English clergy in
accepting some and refusinge others, are led by no learning or divinity, but
by mere opinion and fantasy.
AFTER S. James follows a question proposed by M. Martin, Page 4.
how it chau^ceth that the English church does admit S. James epistle which
sometime was not admitted, and yet will refuse Tobias, Ecclesiasticus, and the
books of Machabees, which were no farther disproued, then that of S. James. The
reason in truth is, and the same in effect given by M.VV. Whit. cont. Camp.
page 17.1^.19.
because these later contain such proof of the Catholyke religion, as by no
sophisticatio^ can be eluded. S. James they think is not so flat, but shifts
they have to rid their hands of him well enough. So much writes Calvin.
Some there are, that think this epistle not vvorthie of authority, Call. in
argument. ep Ia.
but I because I see no sufficient cause why it should be rejected, The
Heretics sit in judgment upon the scriptures, and allow and disallovve as
they find most fit for their sects.
gladly without controversy embrace it. for whereas the doctrine of free
justification seems to be refuted in the second chapter, in his place I shall
easelie answer that matter. As if he had said, that therefore he admitted it,
because he had found out a quidditie to avoid that hard objection against only
faith. which answer notwithstanding because it is false, peevish, sophistical,
and cannot abide the trial, as well proves Illyricus, Pomerane and Musculus,
they therefore thought the other way more cleanly, rather upon pretense of
some doubt made in the primitive church, clean to shake it of with the rest,
then upon a vain toy which must in fine shame it self, make hazard of their
solifidian justification, which must needs come to the ground, if this
Apostle retain his old credit. This I say in deed is the reason, but because
thus to have spoken plainly, had given a sure demonstration to the reader,
that they make no more account of scriptures then of fathers, no more reckning
of James or Peter, then of Gregory or Austin if they be against their
conceived heresies, therefore M. Whit. seems to shape a more cleanly
answer, and this yt is.

Whit. page 5.
All the church (says he) reproved not the epistle of James, and they that
reproved it were moved so to do by no sure reasons: The reason why the
english clergy admit some books of scripture and refuse others.
but these books which you name, Tobias, Ecclesiasticus, the Machabees, the
whole church of old rejected: nether were they written in the Hebrew
tongue, whereas no books of the old testament were Canonical but only
those, which the lord commended to the old church. Two reasons he seems to
give, the first that no books in the old Testament are Canonical but such as
were written in the Hebrew, the proof whereof consisting only in M.VV.
authority without either reason, or probabilitye, or Doctor, or Council, if I
oppose against him S. Augustine with the catholic church of that age, Aug. de
doct chri. li. 2. c. 8.
I trust the reader will not greatly stagger which side he ought to take. A ca.
2. verse. 4. vsque ad finem 7. ca.
and if this reason hold, I marvel what shall become of Daniel, a great part
whereof is held of them for Canonical, and yet is not written in the Hebrew. His
other argument is of more force, that the whole primitive church refused the
books of Machabees, Page 5.
Judith, and Tobie: but certain onlv, and that upon no good reason refused S.
James. These two parts if he prove, and show this difference, he says
somewhat, and I will be of judgment as he is. if not (whereof I assure my self)
then as before, so here still, lust and fantasy rules them in mangling thus
the scriptures, not reason and diuinytie. let us see how he proves that the
whole church rejected the former. S. Hierom says, the church reads the
books of Judith, Tobias, and the Machabees, but reckeneth the^ not amongst
canonical scriptures. This for them. how may we find now, that not the whole
church but some particular men, and they not upon any good reason refused S.
James? For this part we must credit M.VV. upon his word. for beside his
word, reason or conjecture he yeldeth none, but contrariwise to disprove this
his distinction, and approve that without reason or conscience, he and his
fellows have made choice of the one with condemnation of the other, thus to do
M.VV. him self ministers us mattet abundant. for thus he writes in his first
book in iustifiynge friar Luther against S. Contr. Ca^p. page 9. vide ibi pa.
10.12
James. Luther was not ignorante what the aunciente church judged of James
his epistle. Eusebius doubted not to write of that epistle expresslie, I would
have all men to know, that the epistle which is ascribed to James, is a
bastard epistle. what could be written more plainly? but perhaps Eusebius
pleases you not. give me a reason why. hear then Hierome, whom you know to
have been a Priest of the Roman Church. The epistle of James is avouched to
have been set forth by some other in his name. the one affirms it to be a
counterfeite, the other says, it is supposed to have been published not by the
Apostle, but by some other. why then are you angry with Luther, whom you
see not suddenly or rashly first to have begone to doub^e of that epistle, but
therein to follow the judgment and ^^stimonie of the ancient Church? Let us
now join together these two proofs of M. VV. M. VV. reasons make most against
him self.
with consideration what thence is and must be deduced, to wit, the cause why
the English congregation admittinge S. James, has rejected those other, and
we shall straightwaies find, not only that he overthrows himself (which is a
common trick amongst such good writers) but also concludes the contrary of
that which here he prete^deth. The Church reads the books of Judith, Tobie
and the Machabees, says S. Hierome, but reckeneth them not amongst the
Canonical scriptures. In that the Church at solemn times read them, it is a
great argument that she much honored them, although she admitted them not as
then universally into that highest room of supreme authority. But of S.
James we hear not so much, but contrariwise Eusebius directly affirms (if
M. VV. say true) and judges, and would all other men so to judge, that that
epistle of S. James is a false and bastard epistle. and Hierome, a priest
after the order of the Roman Church, (and not a minister after the fashion of
the English congregation) is brought to prove the same. Who sees not now what
great difference there is between these two verdits given in by these
ancient fathers. the first being read in the Church, had a degree to
Canonical scriptures, the later had no such. Of the first he brings in S.
Hierome saying only that as then it was not acknowledged for Canonical. he
brings in S. Hierome to say as much of the second, and for a surcharge he
joins Eusebius, directly affirming it to be a bastard epistle, and withal
wishinge all men so to judge of it: him self infers that Luther in his
rashness which we condemn, followed the judgment and testimony of the ancient
and primitive Church. he affirms farther as a general principle, and namely
treatinge of this epistle: Quod principio statim non habet diuinam
authoritatem, page 5.
non potest tempore and hominum approbatione fieri diuinum. That which at the
first has not presently divine or canonical authority (as in their opinion
S. James had not) can not be made canonical by the approbation of men. yet now
of these, he would have us learn this distinction, that the primitive Church
universally rejected the books of Judith, Tobie, and the Machabees, and some
only, and those without just cause, refused S. James epistle: and therefore
that the English congregation has done very discreetly, to authorize the
one, and disauthorize the others. let him not play to much the Sophister, but
answer as becomes a Divine, and save him self in this, from open folly and
contradiction, and he shall show more wisdom and learning the^ hitherto he
has given us occasion to deem in him.

And that he may the better way the verity and substance of his answer, The
sum of the Tower disputation touching the scriptures.
and the reader have occasion to consider, what a variable and tottering gospel
these men preach, and how justly we object to them, that at their pleasure
they make havoc of scripture: I will lay to M.VV. reasoning, the effect of
the late disputation had in the Tower with F. Campian touching this point.
This they make the main ground of their whole argame^t. The fourth days
conference.
Those books which old fathers and Councels have not received for canonical,
and books to ground our faith upon, them can not nev^ me^, nor the Tridentine
Council make canonical. This proposition stand^ng for good which they so
confidentlie urge, Whit. pref. page 4. and 5. and con. Camp. Pa. ^0.
and M.VV. thinks y^ most assured, let us see upon this rule what waste
they make of the sacred books. upon that ground thus they build, or rather
pull down. Aug. li. 2. cap. 8. de doct Christiana leaves out Baruch, and the
two last books of Esdras. Hierom in his preface upon the book of Kings,
says, that Sapientia Salomonis, Jesus the son of Sirach, Judith and Tobias,
are not in the Canon. Eusebius in his sic^e book and 18. chapter (it is the
19.) leaves out the third and fourth of Esdras, Tobias, Judith, Baruch,
Sapientia, Ecclesiasticus, and the books of Machabees. and concerning the
epistle to the Hebrews, though him self say plainly it is S. Paul's, yet he
confesses that many have doubted thereof. also concerning the second epistle
of S. Peter, he says it was doubted of many, and so of some, were the last
two epistles of John. The same Eusebius li. 4. ca. 26. (it is 25.) speaks of
Melito bishop of Sardis, who reckening up the volumes of the old testament,
omitteth Esdras, Tobie, Hester, Judith, Baruch, VVisdome, Sirach, the books of
Machabees. And the Counsel of Laodicea omitteth Lukes gospel and the Apocalypse.
you see therefore that these old Fathers, have least these books out of the
canon, and yet were not called heretics nor blasphemers. Thus far they.
Afterward they define those to be not Canonical but Apocriphal, Ibi. A. 2.^.
that are not in the (ancient) Canon received and allowed to have proceeded
undoubtedly from the holy Ghost. and those Apocriphal are forbid to be read.
and though they may be read for moral lessons, yet not for matters of religion.
Afterward the same argument is resumed again, and especially that part urged,
Ibi. 3. b. 8.
that the Council of Laodicea leaves out those former books, in the old
Testament, Tobias, Judith, the book of vvisdome, Ecclesiasticus. and in the
new Testament, Luke, and the Apocalypse. And when F. Campian answered, that
that Council was but particular, reply was made, that the Council was
prouincial, and farther confirmed by the sixte general Council holden in
Trullo, Constantine being president, as Bartholomeus Cara^za vvriteth, fol. 71.
And therefore we may leave out of the canon Tobie, Judith etc. which your
Council of Trent thrust in as autentical. Hitherto your brethren in the fourth
days conference. The first days conference in the Tower. D. 1.2.
In the first day, upon like warrant they reckon amongst Apocryphal books,
that which you labor so much to save, S. James, which there is called a
counterfeit or bastard epistle, by judgment of Eusebius. Item, the epistle of
Jude, the later of Peter, the second and third of John. And against these they
allege Eusebius* Hierome, Epiphanius, and the Council of Laodicea, confirmed
as they say there again, by the general Council holden in Trullo. And yet
(such is their inconstancy) in the same place, some of these, in word they
profess to receive, but only as at pleasure, of courtesy and liberality, not
as of faith, duty, and necessity. For the sum of all comes to this, and
it is the effect of that disputation.

Such books as of old have been doubted of, we are not bound to admit for
Canonical, but may refuse now.

These particular books here named, have been doubted of in old time: ergo
these books we are not bound to admit for Canonical, but may refuse them now.

This being your reason, and the same so manifestly approved by them and you,
out of the same, for our present purpose against you this I note. Sundry
books of the scripture denied by the protestants.


In the old Testament.
Tobias. Judith. Hester. Baruch. The book of Wisdom. Ecclesiasticus. The two
books of the Machabees.
In the new Testament.
S. Lukes Gospel. The Epistle to the Hebrews. The Epistle of Saint James. The
2. of S. Peter. The 2. and 3. of S. John. S. Jude. The Apocalypse.
Unto these, partly your selves in your common bibles, partly your brethren
join certain other pieces, both of the old Testament and of the new: as The
prayer of Manasses. Paralip. lib. 2. The song of the three children. The story
of Bell. Canticum canticorum. and a part of S. John's Gospel. some of these held
for canonical these fiftene hundred years, some these twelve hundred, all
above a thousand.

the whole Church, and some of the Church, were it true, as it is most false,
is utterly refuted by these your own doctors: for by their sentence,
whatsoever has been doubted of not only in the whole Church, but in a part
(for they go not about to prove that these were doubted of in the whole
Church, and least of all S. S. Lukes gospel doubted of.
Lukes Gospel) that may you doubt of, and number amongst the books
Apocriphal: and both you and they prove as substantially that S. James was
doubted of, as you prove the same of Judith, Hester, the Machabees or any
other. saving that they fowly ouerreach them selves when they affirm that S.
Lukes Gospel with those other, was leaft out and not received for Canonical in
the Prouincial Council of Laodicea, and the same confirmed by a general Council
afterward.

M. Campian in defense of Luther. Luther despises S. James his epistle says
M. Campian. Contr Ca^p. page 9,
you answer. Been habet, crimen hoc omne Iacobi epistolam attingit etc. That
goes well. All this fault touches only James epistle. Luther does not in a
word violate Matthew, Mark, Luke, or John, nor Paul, nor Peter: exagitat.
only he somevvhat shakes up James epistle. A deep reason: as though S.
James being canonical scripture were not to be esteemed as honorably, and
violated as little as S. Peter, The open way to deny al scripture.
or any of the other. and as though he in so writing, and you in so defendinge,
do not lay the way open to shake of and violate all the rest as well as that.
For now if a man burden you with the refusal of S. Luke, your defense is
already provided. been habet, al goes well. All this fault touches only S.
Luke. Our doctors do not in a word violate Matthew, Mark, John, nor Paul,
nor Peter, only we somevvhat shake up Lukes Gospel, and so peece-meale til
none be leafte, you may and will shake out one after an other, and still, Been
habet, all goes well, until you fall to open profession of Atheism, in the
broad way whereof, you are far and well gone already.

page 24.
that they have ever vanquished ours, here you put us in mind what forefathers
those are. Aug. de heresi^. heresi. 53. Epiph. here. 75.
Hitherto your forefathers were known to be, Aerius in denying prayer and
sacrifice for the dead, Vigilantius of whom you learned to condemn the
invocation of Saints, Hiero. cont. Vigilanti. and Io^iniat.
and honor done to them in the Church, Iouinian in breaking vows of chastity
deliberatelye made to God, and making the state of matrimonye, touching merit,
equal in the sight of God with the state of virginity and continentie. Which
men notwithstanding were forced to yield to our forefathers, S. Epiphanius, The
protestants as in sundry other parts of their doctrine, so in denying
certain books of scripture, imitate the ancient heretics.
S. Hierom, and S. Augustine as hitherto al Christendom is witness, and
therefore were not such victorious capitaynes as you would make them. In this
place as though your purpose were to ouerbeare us with number, and make your
army so much the more strong, you multiplye and set in rank against us more
fathers. For whereas you so blasphemouslye speak of the book of Judith, The
4. days conference.
that it is far unworthy to be called scripture, and yet match S. Luke and the
Apocalypse with it, whereas you say most plainlye of these and all the forenamed
books, that you are not bound to admit them but may refuse them, that they be
read for moral lessons not for matters of religion, you simplye disallow for
canonical those two books. And who are your fathers herein, but those ancient
Archheretikes Marcion and Cerdon, Epiph. here. 42.
and those other for there brutishnes called Alogi or Bruti.

In which your doing as the reader Brutishe heretics, Epiph. her. 51.
your selves yeald us more abu^da^t reason, the^ our fathers had in calling
them by that name. For your self M.VV. confess and prove your doctors and
masters to be the most sensles and brutishe creatures that ever went on the
earth. For, to avoid direct answeringe to the question proposed you, W.
contra Came. p. 28.
how you know the books which you call scripture, to be heavenly and
penned by divine inspiration, that is, by what testimony you know those
writings to be canonical or holy which be so called, you say, and I with
as good reason will demand of you how you know the sun to be the sun,
or how you assure your self that God is God. for we know as assuredlye that
these are the holy scriptures co^me^ded by God to his Church, written by the
Prophets and Apostles, and delivered by divine authorytie, as we know the
moon to be the moon, or (at a word) any other thing, whatsoever we
comprehend by most certain knowledge: and this answer Calvin also gives
you. And this answer I admit from you and Calvin, Insti. li. 1. ca. 7.. 4
and hereof I conclude that you are more truly called Alogi and brutishe, The
protestants refusing the authority of the church, can never give reason how
they know some books and not other, to be canonical scripture
then were those other ancient heretics. For was there ever in the world,
any so notable a Choraebus or Grillus having the shape of man, that fell at
brawlinge and disputinge with his frie^des, whether the sun which we see,
were the su^ne, or the moon, the moon, as you do against Luther, and your
churches against the Lutheranes, whether S. James epistle be canonical? then if
you think right, (as I trust you will speak well of your self) with the same
breath you condemn your father Luther, and your brethren the Lutheranes, for
the veriest sottes and stocks that ever lived: for they know not the moon,
they know not the sun, which to you shines so bright and clear. And to
oppose your self unto your brethren at home, and to your own self, how say you
to S. Luke, to the epistles of S. Peter, Jude, John, and the Apocalypse, be they
canonical or no? if you say yea, as I think you will, (or at the lest, Cont.
Campian. page 9.
that was your opinion in September last, as your book shows) then your
doctors now denyinge the same, you see what is to be concluded, that one part
of you is as wise as those former, who know not the sun from the moon. If
you deny, and be of their iudgmente, as it may be very well, your faith being
as mutable as is the moon, yet so you prove your self no wiser then they, who
in so short space have fallen out with your self and altered your iudgme^te,
and now esteem that for apocriphal, which then was to you canonical, that is,
now iugde that to be the moon, which then you thought to be the sun. Our
lord give his people grace to think of you as you prove your selves, that is,
so fantastical and inconstant, that you know not what to say: and whiles you
seek to keep your self aloof from the Catholic church, the sure pillar
and ground of tru^he, I. Tim. 3. v. 15.
you plunge your selves ouerhead and ears, in such foul absurdities, as never
did heretics before you.

The protestats refusing the church, believe not the scriptures.
For if we are bound to believe certain books, as for example the Gospel of
S. Matthew, S. Mark, S. John, and S. Paul's Epistles to be Canonical, that is
heavenly and pe^ned by divine inspiration, and yet the same can not be proved
by scripture, the^ clear it is that we are bound to believe somewhat which by
scripture ca^ not be proved, and so the tradition of the Church is established.
And marueyle it is that you perceive not, how grossly you overthwart your self,
and plainly refel that, which you would seem most earnestly to confirm. For
if you march your belief of scripture, with knowledge of the Sun and Moon,
and such like as are known by only sense and the light of nature: See after
chap. 16.
then you deny it to be any article of your faith. For these two, are directly
opposite: and the apostle confirms this reason, when he defines faith to
come by hearing, Romans 10. ver. 17.
and hearing by the word of God. ergo fides ex auditu, auditus per verbu^ Dei.
And therefore if you believe, not with human faith, as you believe
Tusculanes* questions to have been written by Cicero, but with Christian and
divine faith, as you believe Christ to be your savior, if thus you believe the
Gospel which bears S. Matthews name, as likewise that of S. Mark, and S.
John, to have been written by them: then you believe so, because so you have
heard it preached, 1. Cor. 15. ver. 11.
and so you have received. and consequently by the Apostles authority, that
very matter so preached unto you is the word of God. which word of God
whereas you find not in the scriptures, Somewhat is the word of god besides
scripture.
hereof it follows manifestly, that somewhat is the word of God which is not
scripture. and therefore you and your fellows believing only scripture,
believe not all the word of God, but only a piece thereof. and so did the
worste heretics that ever were, yea so do at this day the very Turks and
Mahometanes.

M. VV. touching your distinction between S. James, and Tobias, Judith, the
Machabees, etc. where you make this to be the difference, that S. James was
refused but of a fevv, and the other generally of the whole Church, tota
Ecclesia repudiauit say you, for declaration of your truth herein, I refer
you to the most evident testimonies of the same ancient Church. S. Aug. de
doc. Chris. l. 2. ca. 8.
Augustine setting down the Canonical scriptures as they were read and
believed in his time, places S. James I confess in order with the Gospels,
and Paul's epistles: yet not excludi^g those other, but in the self same place
numbringe Tobie, Judith, and the Machabees with the books of Moses and the
Prophets. his (says he) 44. libris, veteris testame^ti terminatur authoritas.
In these forty and four books, is concluded the authority of the old
testament. Likewise the Council of Carthage approves for Canonical S. Con.
Cart. 4. ca. 47.
James, but in the same Cano^ it approves as far the other forenamed and
teaches of them as directly as of the other, that they are Canonical
scriptures. Somewhat before S. Augustines days, they were not by public
decree of the Church received, as appears by S. Con. Laod. can. 59.

The epistle of S. Paul to the hebrews, as much doubted of in the primitive
Church, as that of S. James. and b^^n, as much as those books of the old
testament which the protestants reject.

Hier. in Esai cap. 6. et 8.


Hierome and the Council of Laodicea, but then, when there was as great doubt
of. S. James epistle, S. Paul to the Hebrews, and the Apocalypse. touching
the first, it is manifest by that which has been said by you and your fellows.
Of the second, there was more question then of the first, and S. Hierome
seldom cites it, but he gives a note, signifyinge that it was not in his
time taken for Canonical. In the Epistle to the Hebrews, which the custom
of the Latin Church receaueth not, (says he) it is thus written. Again. the
blessed Apostle, in his Epistle to the Hebrews, Latina co^suetudo.
although the custom of the Latin Church receaueth it not amongst Canonical
scriptures. Again. Ide^ in Hier. cap. 31.
this authority the Apostle Paul used, or whosoever he were that vvrote
that Epistle. In catalogo he says, that even unto his time, Hiero. in
Catalogo. Caius.
it was not accounted the writing of Paul: and that Caius an ancient
writer denies it to be his. and in his epistle to Paulinus set before the
Bible, he says, that a plaerisque extra numerum ponitur. of the more part it
is put out of the number of Paul's writings. The like might be declared by S.
Cipria^, Lactantius, Tertullian, Arnobius, and S. Austine, if it were
needful. and the Apocalypse was yet more doubtful then either of these two, and
as we see by the Council of Laodicea, leafte out of the roll of Canonical
writings, Co^ei. Laod. can. 59.
when both the other of S. James and S. Paul were put in. Wherefore, as false
that is which M.VV. constantly avouches of the ancient Church, touching the
seueringe of these sacred volumes, so has he not yet, nor ever shall be able
with reason to satisfy M. Martins demand, why they of England have
co^desce^ded to admit the one rather then the other.

And here the reader may consider and esteem as it deserves, of that glorious
(...) which in fine he sings to him self, settinge the crown of triumph
upon his own head and his fellows. Pap. 24. M.VV. brag of co^futing the
catholic doctrine, vain and impossible.
Nothing (says he) is now more vulgar then the Papists arguments against us.
Quicquid afferri a quoquam potuit, vidimus, diluimus, protriuimus. what so
ever could be said of any of them al, we have seen it, refelled it, and
trod it under foot: he may consider I say, how like this man and his
companions are to work such maisteries, who as yet know not what those
weapons are, which they should use in atchiuing such conquests. For whereas
they vaunt to do this by the written word, and yet are not resolved amongst
them selves what that written word is, and how far it extends, it is as
fantastical a part to brag of victory, as if a mad man should ru^ne into
the field to slay his enemy, and when he comes there, knows not with what
weapon to begin the fight. Wherefore well may he, and his fellows hear and see
the Catholic doctrine, as Esai speaks of the Jews concerning the doctrine
of Christ, Mat. 13. v. 14
hearing shall you hear and shall not understand, and seeing shall you see and
you shall not see, and well may they tread it under their feet, as our
Savior parabolically forespake that heretics would do, when he said: Mat. 7.
v. 6.
Nolite proiicere margaritas ante porcos, ne forte conculce^t eas pedibus suis,
but to refel, confute, and suppress it, that is no more possible, then that
Christ should be false of his word and promise, Mat. 16. Luc. 22.
that the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And whereas it has
continued by the protestants common grant, above a thousand years, in truth,
ever since Christ his passion, against other manner of tempests then these are,
heretics of excellent learning, heresies of marvelous subtilitie, most mighty
Emperors, rulers of the world: now to imagine that it may be vanquished of
these gross and contrary heresies, fortified with no manner of learning,
whereof many are so base, that men eue^ by the light of nature abhor the^,
having nothing to maintain the^ selves, but only a vain challe^ginge of the
Spirit, and bold crakinge of the word of the Lord, which a parrat ca^ do
with a little instruction as well as they, thus I say to talk, were more fit
for Pasquillus Estaticus, or a sick man when he raueth, than a sober Divine,
that wayeth what he speaks.

CHAP. III. How M. VV. defends Luther preferring his private judgment before
all ancient fathers and Doctors.
NEXT comes in again friar Luther, who^ M. Martin accused for saying that he
esteemed not a thousand Augustines, Cipria^s, and Churches, when they are
against him. That the reader may better carry away the matter, I will first put
down Luthers words where upon this controversy stands, after it shall be
easier to judge how aptly M. VV. defense is framed. The words of Luther,
Luther tom. 2. contr. Regem Angl. fol. 342.
are in his book written against King Henry the eight her Majesty's father,
and are these. But I (says he) against the saynges of fathers, of men, of
Angels, of deuels, set not old custom, not multitude of men, The common vain
and spirit of every Sect of protestants.
but the word of the only eternal majesty, the Gospel. here I stand, here I
sit, here I glory, here I triumph, here I insult over Papists, Thomists,
Henricists, Sophists, and all the gates of hell, much more over the saynges of
men, be they never so holy. Gods word is above al, the divine majesty makes
for me, so as I pass not, if a thousand Austines, a thousand Ciprians,
Henricianae ecclesiae.
a thousand Kinge-Harrie Churches stood against me. God can not err or
deceive. Austine, Ciprian, and likewise all other elect might err, and they
have erred. here answer master Harrie, here play the man. I co^tene thy
lies, I fear not thy threats, here thou sta^dest astonished like a stock
etc. These are the words with which M. Martin finds fault. M.VV. defends
them thus. Page 6.
If Luther had preferred him self before all fathers and Churches, he were not
to be borne vvithal. but this Luther never challenged to himself. But in some
causes, Luther might esteem more his own judgment, then the authority of
Austine, or Ciprian, or a thousand Churches. For if that which Luther taught,
were agreeable to Gods word, Luthers judgment was to be preferred, before all
the contrary judgments of all men living.

Before I enter into the examination of this answer, let me demand this one
thing in courtesy of you M.W. what the reason is, Luthers extreme hatred
against the Sacramentaries and Zuinglians.
why you so busily and eagerly defend Luther, be his words never so
strange, or fanatical. or why is the Pope Antichrist for resisting your
Gospel, whereas Luther you advance, if not into the place of Christ, yet at
least among the number of his Apostles. Did the Pope of Rome ever persequute
your zuinglian gospel, Cle^^^ius a Zuinglian made a book entitled, victoria
venitatis and ^uti^a papa^us Saxonici. an. 1561
with more deadly hatred, then did that pope of Saxony? Did he not from the
very beginning, to his later breath, hold you and your brethren, for most
damnable wretches, and professed enemies of the eternal testament of Christ?
Are you ignorant, how for this cause, he wrote whole volumes against your first
Apostle Zuinglius? Confess. orthodox. Eccles. Tig^r. tractat. 3. ^o. 108.
Read you never the Confession of your brethren of the Tigurine church where
thus they complain? Lutherus statim ab initio, m^rdere, furere, conuitiari,
and bacchari coepit etc. Luther presently at the beginning, began to byte, to
play the mad man, to rail and rage, and besides this, he filled his books
with the horrible names of Devils, Sectaries, Sprites, mad men: and
whatsoever slanders came to his mind, Immaniter contra nos expuit.
he cast them out against us outragiously. Complain they not in the preface of
that Confession, that he inueigheth against them as against obstinate
heretics, Ibid. in prefat. fol. 3.^.
and such as are guiltye to themselves of all impiety, as prophaners of the
Sacraments, and the most vile and pestilent men that go on the ground? He
proscribeth and condemns first of all the faithful doctors and ministers of
God, Oecolampadius, Zuinglius, and their disciples wheresoever they be: all
frindship and communion with us, he compteth wicked and abominable: and what
soever comes from us, be it letters, be it books, be it salutations, be it
benedictions, he will not only not read, but he will not so much as
vouchsafe to look upon them, or hear them spoken of: so far forth,
Lauatie^. in historia Sacram. fol. 32.

Luther rei^cteth the bible translated by the Zuinglians, how much more ought
catholics to avoided the same?


that when Eroschouerus the zuinglian printer of zuricke sent him a bible
translated by the divines there, Luther sent it him back again with this
greetinge, that he should not send him any thing that proceeded from the
ministers of the Tigurine church. for he would have no dealinge with them,
nether vvoulde he receive or read their books: for the churches of God could
not communicate with the^. Yea, he protests that he had rather sustain a
hundred several deaths, then to become of your opinion, or show any
countenance of bearing favor to it. In co^fessio. Tigur. verse supra fo. 30.
The Lord defend (says he) that I vvittingly and willingly by the authority
of my name, should cover or confirm the very least error of the fanatical
Sacrame^taries. Nam vel centies laniari aut igne comburi malle^ etc. For I had
rather be torn in pieces or burnt with fire a hundred times, the^ to follow
the opinion, and agree in doctrine, with zvvinglius, Oecolampadius, and the
rest of those miserable, unfortunate, fanatical men. Finally, know you not M.
W. that thus he began, thus he went foreward, thus he continued, thus he ended
his days, dyinge such a mortal enemy to you, that he seemed to make his
h^tred and detestation of your church and gospel, a piece of his justification
before Christ? as in his last Confession made a little before his death, and
recorded in the foresaid Confession of Zurake it appears. Confess. Tigur.
tract. 3. fol. 108.
Ego qui iam sepulchro vicitus obambulo, hoc testimoniam et hanc gloriam ad
Christi saluatoris tribunal perferam etc. I (says he) that now walk nigh to
my grave, will carry this testimony and this glory to the tribunal seat of
Christ my Savior, that I have with all earnestnes, condemned and avoided
those fanaticall men and enemies of the Sacrament, The Zuinglians condemn them
selves in defending Luther.
Zuinglius, OEcolampadius, Stinckf^ldius, and their scholar, whether they be
at Zuruke, or in what place else soever under the s^nne. Thus Luther.

If you know this Master Whitaker, as you will seem to be ignorant of nothing,
what makes you so busily to defend Luthers barbarous and proud vauntes, as
though he were such a pillar, without whom your church could not stand? But
belyke it is sufficient, that he was an Apostata friar as were the founders of
your gospel, that he with you agreed in railing at the Pope and Sea of Rome,
and so for his agreeing with you in these smaler toys, you care not for his
disagreeing from you in those weighty matters. Well, be it as you list, and
perhaps you have more reason then I perceive, otherwise you shall never be able
to justify this demeanure in the sight of any man endued with common sense.
Let us hear how conningly you cure this stinking sore. for nothing stinketh
more before the face of God and man, then a poor contemptible wretch, so
Lucifer-lyke to prefer him self before inumerable, excellent, learned, and
glorious Saints of God. What distinction have you to save Luthers honesty?
Forsooth this: M.W. distinction, when Luthers judgment is to be preferred
before all the Church.
In certain cases, Luther might more esteem of his own judgment, then of
Austine, Ciprian, or a thousand Churches. For if that which Luther taught,
were agreeable to Gods word, then Luthers judgment was to be preferred before
the contrary judgment of al men and Churches. Here M. VV. thinks he has
spoken much to the purpose, and therefore aduaunceth him self alofte.
Scripturam Lutherus protulit, cuinullus mortalis resistit, quaeque tandem
Pontificiis decretis peste^ atque exitium afferet. Luther brought with him
scripture which no mortal man can vvithstand, and which at length shall be
the bane and destruction of the Popish decrees.

That I may the better conceive this distinction, and either yield to it if it
stand with reason, or discover the vanity of it, if it fall out to be but a
peevish battologie of words as I trow it will prove: let me require a playner
explication of that part. The folly of M.W. distinction.
Luther might well prefer his judgment before a thousand Austines, Ciprianes
and Churches, if he spoke with scripture. Arrius yield to the Council of Nice?
Nestorius to the Council of Ephesus? Macedonius to the Counsel of
Constantinople? saying they brought scriptures for them, and by this rule ought
to have preferred their private judgment before those bishops, as Luther and
his offpringe do theirs, before the Council of Trente,

But first, he can never give instance that either the ancient fathers did so
in their times, or that we do so now. for howsoever in the Councels of Nice, of
Ephesus, of Chalcedon, the bishops stood much upon the tradition of their
elders ( ea que sunt patrum teneantur, Cone. Chal. actio. 1. Lirine. cont
haeres. ca. 43.
say they, sic credere a sanctis patribus edocti sumus, let us hold fast the
faith and decrees of our fathers, thus to believe we have been taught by our
holy fathers) yet they wa^ted not scriptures, as nether did the fathers in the
Council of Trent, nor we at this day in our controversies with the
protestants. And if those ancient fathers had alleged no direct and evident
place against Arrius, Nestorius, Eutyches, yet notwithstanding, the Christian
people were bound to believe them, grounding them selves only upon the
Catholic and universal faith of the churches which were before them, as they
did in the question of our B. Ladies perpetual virginity. And albeit the
heretic brought some clauses of scripture for the contrary part, yet ought al
faithful men to yield no more credit thereto, the^ to the devil when he alleged
scripture against our savior. Mat. c. 4. v. 6.
because, as the devil so al heretics may use scripture against the true sense
and meaning thereof: Joan. c. 14. et 16. Ephesians. cap. 4. b. c. Esa. ca. 59. v.
21.
the universal church ca^ never teach or believe so, as by Christ him self we
are assured. And this case in effect comes to one issue with the former. for,
give this scope to an heretic, that all the Bishops, Churches and Fathers may
err and he alone, if he can allege a text, may therefore rightly contemn al
other in respect of him self, as every Sectmaister does and has done, where
is the Churches quietness? what order is there for continuance of faith? to what
end was the coming of Christ? to what use, the sendinge of the holy Ghost?
posito per impossible that all the Churches and fathers teach against
scripture, In this case the authority of the deuel as well as of Luther is
better the^ all Fathers, or all the angels of heaven. Gal. 1.
and Luther alone teach with scripture, then lo Luther may think him self a
better man then they all. and this is true, and this I grant: as in like
manner I confess that if the heaven should fall, we know what would follow.
And yet of these two suppositions, the Spirit of God puts the later to be
more possible, Ierem. 31. g. and 33. d.
that the course of heaven shall sooner alter, then the Catholic Church of the
new Testame^te fall from Christ to Apostasy.

M.VV. will say, I scanne his words to narrowly, his meaning is plain, that
whereas Luther brings scriptures against us, that is, against all the
Austines, and Ciprianes, of the Catholic Church, all the Bishops now living,
he may well trust his own iudgmente. if this be the meaning, yet still al
comes to one end. and why may Luther so do, more then Calvin? why
Calvin, more then Muncerus? why a Zwinglia^, more then a Puritan,
Anabaptiste, or Trinitarian? Or what assurance has he, more then those other?
Luthers judgment with scripture against the Sacrametaries.


But if Luthers judgment bringinge scriptures with him, be so forcible against
us, may not we, (trow you) Lutherize a little after your example, and say the
same against you? As for example. Luther to. 7. A defense of the literal sense
of our Saviors words etc. against the fanatical sprites of the Sacrame^taries.
Luther has made a book entitled, defensio (...) verborum coenae, accipite
and comedite, hoc est corpus meum, contra fanaticos Sacramentarioru^ spiritus.
In that book not very long or large, yet contayninge more substance then some
whole volumes of his do, his principal conclusion risinge upon this text of
scripture, and grounded upon many texts of scripture beside, is, that he and
his, Ibi. fol. 383.
will and may retain external peace and civil concord with the Zuinglians
in matters temporal, but quoad spiritum, eos ad extremum vsque halitum
deuitabimus, arguemus, and damnabimus pro idololatris, verbi Dei corruptoribus,
blasphemis, and deceptoribus etc. touching the soul and matters spiritual,
we vvil avoid the^ as long as we have a day to live, we vvil reprove and
condemn them for idolaters, corrupters of Gods word, blasphemers, The
Sacramentaries enemies of the gospel by Luthers judgment confirmed with
scripture.
and deceauers, and of them as enemies of the Gospel, we will sustain
persecution and spoil of our goods vvhat-soeuer they shall do unto us, so long
as God will permit. And in the same leaf it follows immediatelye: aptlye
may we say to these men offeringe us peace, as Christ said to Judas in the
garden, Judas with a kiss betrayest thou the son of man? So this is the
very peace and kiss of Judas: for offeringe us their friendship, they vvoulde
vvithal obtain of us to hold our peace, and in silence behold the fyers and
slaughters, whereby they thrust headlong infinite thousands of souls down
to hell. Here is Luthers iudgmente, and that with scripture. for against al
communion with the Zuinglians, he in this place urges the words of our
savior Math. 10. verse. 34. Luke 14. v. 26.2. Cor. 6. v. 14. Ephesians. 4. v. 5. May
Luther now prefer his iudgmente thus qualified, before a thousand Caluines, a
thousand Peter Martyrs, or who-soeuer else be the greatest doctors of your
congregatio^s, before all Zuinglian churches? Or if Luther may so do, may not
we do the like, and think of you as he does, and that by vvarrante given us
from your own mouth? May we not say to you upon like ground. Scripturam
Lutherus protulit cui nullus mortalis resistit, etc. Luther has brought
scripture which no man can vvithstand, and which at lenght shall be the bane
and overthrow of all the Zuinglian and Caluinistical opinions?

Now if (which is the extreme refuge) you will say, that Luthers judgment
against you is not agreeable to scripture, and therefore not so deeply to be
accounted of, then see I beseech you how finely and suttely you have fet this
matter about. for now the sense of your distinction is, that when Luther
affirms any thing agreeable to the scriptures, by judgment of your self, he
ought to esteem more of it, the^ of a thousand Austines, a thousand Ciprianes,
and an innumerable company of catholic churches. And thus, Every protestant,
sovereign judge of scripture Councils. doctors, old and new.
whiles you first give Luther power to judge over al Fathers, Doctors, and
Councels, and then make your self judge over Luther, to approve and reprove him
as you please, who sees not that in fine, you make your self supreme judge of
altas before of scriptures, so now of Fathers and Councels, old and new,
Catholic and heretic, no less of your own doctors, then the ancient
fathers and doctors of Christ's church, See the 5. chap. in the beginning.
which is in deed the very last refuge and extreme resolution of all your new
divinity.

Finally (because it greeueth me to spe^de time in such unreasonable pelf) may
it please you at your better leisure, to consider the sense of this parcel, and
to put it down somewhat more intelligiblie, and if you can so do, and save
your self from the note of much folly (for, from being an heretic by Luthers
judgment, what soever the answer be, you shall never save your self) you shall
perform a matter of more difficulty, then perhaps you are aware of. In the
mean season, as it stands, it carries with it gross faults, as many
welnie as it has lines: whether you oppose Luther to the ancient primitive
Church, as it seems, and as doubtless he meante, or to the catholic
church of our time, which you would infer, or to your own divided
Zuinglian congregation, which by like sequel does follow, or whether you
consider Luther in this case, only as one principal author of your Gospel, and
so make this privilege common to him with other, or rather consider him
singularly by himself, because he was the first that brake the yse, and opened
the way to this soul Apostasy, which is now so far spread: or finally
whether you thus aduau^ce Luther, but ever holdinge the raynes in your own
hands, which (I ween) must be your last refuge, and final determination.

CHAP. IIII. Of priesthode, end the sacrifice continued after Christ in the
state of the new testament, and that it derogateth nothing from Christ.
THE difference between you and M. Martin about priests, is no private, but a
general controversy between all Catholics and Protestants. your minister like
terms of Baalites, pa. 7
and Antichristian sacrificers, I contemn, and am co^tente to dissemble. many
breaths more strong and rank then this, we must gladly abide, or else we are
not such, as by Gods mercy, we hope and profess our selves. Comfortably
says our savior, Mat. 10. v. 24.
the disciple is not above his master, nor the seruante above his lord. if
they have called the goodman of the house Beelzebub, how much more them of his
household? therefore fear ye them not. For to comfort our selves withal, if
we be Baalites and Antichristians in respect of our priesthode, then
certainly Christ is the captain Baal and Antichriste, from whom our
priesthode descends. And that will I prove in few, principally and first, by
your own words, secondarilye by manifest deduction out of the scriptures.

A priest you define thus, pa. 6. Who are truly priests.
Sacerdotes ii vere and proprie sunt qui sacrificia faciunt, qualis fuit Aaron
and Aaronis filii, and Melchisedechus, and quem illi adumbrabant, Christus.
Priests truly and properly are they that offer sacrifices, such as was Aaron,
and the sons of Aaron, and Melchisedech, and Christ whom they prefigured.
Those that offer sacrifice, you acknowledge to be priests truly and properly,
not only by abuse of speech, as in this place against S. Austine you falsely
cauille. In the number of such priests that offered sacrifice, you recke^
Melchisedec, Melchisedec did sacrifice.
and after him Christ, of whom Melchisedec was a figure. This you would
never have said, had you been skilful either in your own divinity, or in the
faith of the Catholic Church. for although hitherto we have many ways
labored, and used all possible means of proof that Melchisedec offered
sacrifice, yet we could never obtain so much of your brethren, because they
well saw, that therein was included the manifest confirmation of the Catholic
faith touching priesthod, and the utter ruin of your Geneuia^ Ministerye. For
if Melchisedec sacrificed, then was it in bread and wine, for other sacrifice
of his never man imagined, and the scripture proves it inuincibly, which
mencioneth that, and no other, nor by word, syllable, or title, gives the least insinuation of any besides. Then how necessarily it must follow, that
Christ sacrificed in like manner, and how from him, power to do the same is
derived unto priests of the new testament, this shall be showed hereafter.

First of all, that of Melchisedecs sacrifice being most certain, and of you
granted, and of us believed, you shall here note how stubborn and desperate,
yea beyond al measure, The sacrifice of Melchisedec denied generally by the
protestants though confessed by M. W.
stubborn and desperate are your fellows and masters, who in this so euidente
a truth, have hitherto resisted the Church, and would never confess, that
either Melchisedec did the one, or Christ the other. I will not stay to prove
it, because you confess it: only for plainer declaration, I will touch the
matter briefly. In the book of Genesis, where only is described this
sacrifice, thus we read. Melchisedec rex Salem, Genesis 14.
profere^s panem and vinum (erat enim sacerdos Dei altissimi) benedixit et.
Melchisedec king of Salem, bringinge forth bread and wine (for he was the
priest of the most high God) blessed him, that is, Heb. c. 7. v. 6
Abraham. In these words, we see the reason given of Meschisedecs priesthode,
and the same to consiste in his action about the bread and wine, that is, in
his sacrificinge as M..W. tells us. But the Protesta^tes to avoid this, into
how many forms and fashions have they turned them selves? How many quirkes and
false sleightes have they devised? until in fin, they have run in manner
generally, to corrupt the sacred text for avoiding of this inconvenience. In
most of their writings, and many of their translations, they give the sense
thus: that M^lchis^d^c king of Salem, brought forth bread and wine, and
because he was a priest of the most high God, therefore blessed Abraham. So
writes Musculus in his common places. That part of the sentence, Mus. in loc.
com. cap. de Miss. papist pa. 492.
(and he was priest of the most high God) is to be referred to that which
follows, vz, and he blessed him for as a king, he brought forth to Abraham
bread and wine, as a priest, he gave him his blessinge. Upon this reason, to
make the holy text more aptly serve this heretical devise, in the English
Bible it is turned thus. Bib. printed anno, 1579.
Melchisedec king of Salem, Corruption of the scriptures.
brought forth bread and wine, and he was a priest of the most high God,
therefore he blessed him. Thus the protestants commonly interpret it, and to
note one for all, thus writes Calvin, in his comme^tarie upon the Hebrews.
Call. in. com. in episto. ad Heb. c. 7. v. 9
Prius illud quod narrat, regium, fuit, etc. That first thing vvherof Moses
speaks in the story of Melchisedec, was the part of a King, to refreashe
with bread and wine, those that came weary from the fight: the blessinge
apperteined to his priestly function. The difference between him and the
aunciente fathers, in the same paragraph he compriseth thus. Ibid.
Hereby is refuted their devise who seek out the chief resemblance
(betvveene Christ and Melchisedec) in bread and wine. We see the Apostle
searches out every particular point diligently and curiously: he pursues the
name of the man, the seat of his Kingdom, the eternity of his life, the
right of his tithes, the benediction which he gave to Abraham. In any of these
there was less weight the^ in the oblation. shall we say, that the holy
Ghost forgot himself, when he makes stay upon these small matters, Calvin
rejects the au^cie^t fathers touching the sacrifice of Melchisedec.
and omitteth that which was the principal, and most perteined to the
purpose? wherefore I marvel the more that so many old Doctors of the Church
were possessed with this opinion, that they stayed upon the oblation of bread
and wine. For thus they say. Christ is a priest after the order of
Melchisedec. but Melchisedec offered bread and wine: ergo bread and wine
appartaine to Christ's priesthode. Thus far Calvin. Call. in psalm. 110.
the like he writes in his co^mentarie upon the Psalms. I will not stand to
satisfy his marueiling, why the Apostle should pretermitte that which the
holy fathers after observed. In one word this I say, that if he had wayed,
either the preface of the Apostle when he began this argument, saing, Heb. 5. v.
11.
of Melchisedec we have great speech, and inexplicable to utter: or the same
Apostles manner of writing and preaching at other times, to like auditors, or S.
1. Cor. ca. 2. ver. 5. ca. 3. ver. 2. Hier. ep. 126 ad Euagri. Greg. Nazi.
Hierome handling this matter, and giving reason of the Apostles so doing, or
S. Gregory Nazianzene in his oration de moderatione in disputationibus
serua^da, or in his second oration de theologia, he would perhaps easelie have
leaft of marueiling, and rather have marueiled at his own folly, who could be
moved to marvel at a thing so reasonable and ordinary.

But touching our purpose, let the christian reader, out of Calvin note these
two points. The one is, that Calvin and the Caluinistes generally, find
nothing wherein Melchisedec sacrificed, and so by sacrificing prefigured the
sacrifice and priesthode of Christ: The other is, that the ancient fathers and
the catholic Church, acknowledge Melchisedec to have sacrificed, and that in
bread and wine, and by that sacrifice to have foreshewed Christ's sacrificing in
like manner, and to this side M. W. forsaking Calvin and the Protestants joins
him self. Christ did sacrifice at his last supper.
This therefore is clear, that Christ fulfilled this prefiguratiue sacrifice
of Melchisedec: and we never find it done, but only the^ when he offering
bread and wine, that is (says S. Cip. ep. 63.
Ciprian) his own body and blood, Luke 22.
afterward said to his disciples: hoc facite in meam commemorationem, and
then (as witnesses S. Iren. li. 4. ca. 32.
Ireneus) noui Testamenti nouam docuit oblationem, quam ecclesia ab Apostolis
accipiens, in vniuerso mundo offere Deo. he taught the new oblation of the
new Testament, which the Church receiving from the Apostles, in the whole
world offers unto God. The sacrifice of the Mass deduced directly from
Christ by M. Whit. own grant.
This being true, as M. W. grau^ting so far as he does, can not go back, nor
possibly invent any tergiuersatio^, thus I frame him an argument.

That which Christ did, and appointed to be done, that may and ought to be done.

But Christ at his last supper offered sacrifice according to the order of
Melchisedec, and appointed the Apostles and priests to do the same:

Ergo the Apostles and priests may and ought to offer sacrifice.

The Mayor is euidente, and no Christian will deny it. The Minor having two
parts, is proved touching the later, by Christ's express commandment, Hoc
facite in meam commemorationem, do this for a commemoration of me. the former
wherein lies the difficulty, is acknowledged by M. W. for if not only Aaron,
but also Melchisedec offered sacrifice, and thereby prefigured Christ, the^ it
follows of necessity, that Christ offered sacrifice, not only in bloody
manner as did Aaron, but also in unbloody and mistical sort, as did
Melchisedec, Psalm. 109. Heb. 7.
according to whose order he is specially named a priest, and so by perfect
correspondence, fulfilled that antecedent figure. and hereto S. Ciprian, S.
Ireneus, S. Austine, and all the ancient fathers, according to Caluines
confession and evident truth, give witness: that M. W. be not leaft post alone,
to sustain so great a burden. Of this first argument, I deduce one more.

They who may and ought to offer sacrifice, as did first Melchisedec, and
afterward Christ, are truly and properly, sacerdotes.

But priests of the new testament, may and ought to offer sacrifice in such
sort.

Ergo they are truly and properlye sacerdotes, priests.

The Mayor is true and set down in form by M.W. the Minor is the conclusion
of the last argument, and so proved sufficiently already: then I hope the
Conclusion will stand. wherefore leauinge this matter for M. W. to scanne, and
to record with him self, who is that Baal, founder of the priesthode of the
new testament, now may we view with better judgment, how substantially he
answers S. Aug. ciui. li. 20. ca. 10.
Austines place de Ciuitate dei, where S. Austine does distinguishe between
all Christians, who are improperly called priests because of their mistical
Chrisme and unity with Christ, Propter misticu chrisma.
and others, qui proprie iam vocantur in ecclesia sacerdotes and episcopi, that
properly are now called in the Church, priests and bishops: and properly
such are they by M. W. definition which properly offer sacrifice. M.W.
a^swereth, page ^.
that the name (priest) was of old time, after a more peculiar sort applied
to the pastors and ministers that handled the word and sacraments, but there
was an abuse in so speakinge. then you agree not with S. Austine, who teaches
that proprie, in propriety of speech, they were so called. who, if they had
then to execute no other priestly function, then have now the English
ministers, as M. W. supposes, or would pretend, I grant the word priest
could not be applied to them but as abusiuely, as if one would call a civil
magistrate by that name, or one of the Queen's Readers in the Universities. For,
preachinge of the word, and ministringe of some one or other sacrament,
although in the Catholic Church it be done by priests, yet properly that is
not the reason why they are called by that name. but the true reason, is that
which M.W. rendereth, quia proprie offerunt sacrificia, because properly they
offer sacrifice. Now, that S. Austine meante of priests in this sort, and that
himself was such a priest, S. Austine a priest.
to pass over many pregnante and euidente places in him, for breuities sake I
refer you to the known story of his mothers death. Where she first of al in
her deathbed requesteth, Aug. Co^f. li. 9. cap. 11.
that her son would remember her at the altar of God. When after her death,
the corpse being brought into the Church, and placed beside the grave, before
the time of burial, prayers were said, Ibid. ca. 12.
and the sacrifice of our price and redemption offered for her. when
afterward, S. Austine in his most devout and zealous prayer made to God for
her, reckneth this to her singular commendacion, Ibid, c, 13.
that at her departure she took no care for costly manner of burial, or
sumptuous monumente, but only desired to be remembered at thy altar o Lord,
from whence she knew was dispensed that holy sacrifice, Coloss. c. 2.
whereby was blotted out the handvvrittinge which was against us, whereby
triumph was obtained against Satan our eternal enemy. and straight ways:
inspire (says he) o Lord my God, inspire to thy servants my brethren, that
vvho-soeuer of them shall read this, may have remembrance at thy altar, of
Patricius and Monica my father and mother.

An objection
But against this M.W. has an objection, as common and plain to them that
know ought in divinity as Dunstable hye way: and answered before hand
abundantly, in the annotacions of the the new testamente, Heb. ca. 7. v. 12.
17.23. his argument is: pa. 6.
I say there are no priests of the new testament that offer sacrifice after
Christ, who is the eternal priest according to the order of Melchisedec, and
obtains sacerdotiu^ (...) an eternal priesthod. he has made an end of al
sacrifices, and taken away the succession of priests, and committed his church
to be ruled by pastors and doctors for ever.

To begin with the last where you end, if Christ abolished all priesthod,
and left his Church to be governed for ever by pastors and doctors, The English
church ruled by Pastors, such as are no priests.
which were no priests, had this appointeme^t and ordinance of his, effect,
yea or no? if no, beware what you say, for little differ you from a Jew, and a
man of Mahomets religion, and weak is your faith in Christ's godhead, if you
think that in so many places of scripture, he appointed such a regimente for
his Church, The church of Christ was never so ruled.
which after his departure never took effect. if yea, then show us where, or
when, was his Church so governed. was it a hundred years ago, before Friar
Luther first of all in our memory, induced this kind of government? you must
needs say, no. Ascend we then 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and ten ages, until
S. Gregory's time, was it all this while governed by such pastors as you
describe? I wene as yet you will say, sure I am you should say, no. For those
pastors, were still priests, and that in proper sense, as appears by all
stories. Such were our first Apostles, the conuerters of our nation, those
excellent men, SS. Augustine, Paulinus, Laurentius, Melitus, Iustus etc. sacred
by the Pope of Rome, or other lawful Bishops in obedience of the Sea of Rome,
offering sacrifice, living and dying as priests: Beda in eccles. histor. Aug..
li. 1.2.3.4.
as by the goodly story of Venerable Bede our cou^tryman, you may every
where learn. Such pastors and priests they were, by whom, and under whose
regiment, our Churches were first builded, and the ecclesiastical state of our
realm ordered: as now under the regiment of them that call the^ selves pastors
no priests, and are in deed no more the one then the other, all is pulled
down and overthrown. And if in any other country of Christendom, the
churches had any other regiment, such as you pretend now in England, of pastors
no priests, show us your books, and we will believe you. But you will say, from
S. Gregory upward all was smooth and iumpe as it is now in the English
congregation. Suppose that to be true. how in the mean season can you justify
your own saing, in perpetuu^
that Christ delivered his Church to be governed for ever, by such manner of
pastors. Ca^ Christ's decree be made frustrate for so many ages? Can man's
iniquitye (as you in your Apology commonly, Aug. de vnitate eccle. c.
6.10.12.20. con. epistol. Parm. lib. 1. c. 1. li. 2. c. 19 con. lit. pet. lib.
2. ca. 31. co^. Cres. gra^. li. 3. c. 63.64.65.
but most bluntly object) stop the course of Christ's omnipotent and eternal
providence? know you not how copiouslie S. Augustine has confuted this self
same slau^derous objection in your forefathers the Donatistes?

But pass we on. come we to the first fathers of the primitive Church. were
they lay ministers after the manner of the English congregation, that is,
pastors, no priests? how dare, or can you say so? seeing in S. Austine
manifestly you see a sacrificing priesthod: Sup. pa. 23.
seeing your self acknowledge Saint Hierome to have been a priest of the Roman
Church which never yet approved any such ministry as you have invented: Bal.
act romans pont. in Leo ne. pa. 45. Calu. lib. de sca^. et lib. de vera eccl.
reforma^. ratio. inter opuse. P. Mar. in defens. Eucha. con. Gardi. Par 1.
obiec. 156.
seeing your great Rabbine and synke of iniquity John Bale, calls S. Leo the
great and first of that name, in plain terms an idolater for this cause:
seeing your chief captain and Apostle Calvin, and after him P. Martyr, and
before him Huldericke Zuinglius, Zuin. to. 1. Epichir. de ca none missae fol.
183.
affirm in general of the fathers in the primitive Church, that for
maintenance of the unbloody sacrifice, they forced and abused the scriptures.
Call. in libel. de caena domini.
and Calvin more execrable then the rest, adds, that the au^cie^t Church
expressed the very form and type of the Aaronical and Leuitical sacrificing,
eo excepto, quod panis hostia, loco animalis vtebantur, saving that instead of
a beast, they used bread. all which proves that in propre manner of speech
they sacrificed: and therefore by your own definition, in propre speech were
priests. And finally, does not Illyricus with his companions, confess in
word and prove by deed, Sacrifice offered by priests, was common in the
primitive church, by confession of the adversaries.
that sacrifices were ordinarily offered to God in the flower of the primitive
Church, in the midst of the persequutions, for the souls departed, in the
honor of Saints, for general and particular necessities, as is now used in the
Church of Rome? Thus write they. Cent. 3. ca. 5. col. 138.
To this end, S. Cyprian in his third book and sixte epistle to the priests
of Rome, wills those days diligently to be noted, wherein the martyrs
departed this life. In the same place he speaks of oblations, and sacrifices
observed in the memories of martyrs. Let us be informed (says Tertullian)
what be those days, wherein our blessed brethren by glorious death pass to
immortality, that we here may celebrate oblations and sacrifices in
remembrance of the^. And there is very common mention of oblations in
Tertullian. as in his book de corona militis. we offer sacrifices yerelie for
the dead, and for byrthdayes. S. pro natalitiis.
Cyprian says, that oblations and sacrifices were yerelie made in the
remembrance of martyrs. lib. 3. epist. 6. and lib. 4. epist. 5. and li. 1.
epis. 9. he speaks of sacrifice for the dead. And to end with one sentence of
S. Ib. c. 10. col. 247.
Cyprian by them alleged, thus they cite him. Our lord Jesus Christ (says S.
Cipria^ lib. 2. epist. 3.) be is the high priest of God the father, and
sacrifice to God the father he first offered, and commanded the same to be
done in remembrance of him. And that priest truly executes Christ's steed or
room, who does imitate that which Christ did, and the^ in the Church
offers he a true and full sacrifice to God the father, if he begin so to
offer, as he sees Christ himself to have offered. Thus asce^ding from our time
up to the primitive, and most pure and incorrupt age of the Church, yet we
find not the performance of that promise and order set by Christ, that his
Church should be governed by pastors that were not priests.

M. Jew. challe^g touchig the sacrifice art. 17. a^swered and confuted by the
chief protestants of our time.
And here by the way to put you in mind, because in this preface, so freshlie
you provoke M Martin now departed, and renew M Jewels challenge, may it please
you, being put a little besides his byas of comparing phrases together (which
was the very bones and marrow of M. Jew. divinity) to weigh how well you can
make his challenge agree with the manifest confessions of these your own
doctors and if it like you to view Calvin in the book before quoted, Call. de
vera eccle. reforratione.
you shall there find five Doctors within M. Jewels compass, by name, S.
Ireneus, Arnobius, S. Athanasius, S. Ambrose, and S. Augustine, not the least
or meanest of the fathers, either for a^tiquity, or holiness, or learning
reproved and checked by Calvin, for this great oversight forsooth, because to
prove the unbloody sacrifice of the church (which they believed, else would they
never have applied the scripture to confirm it) they misinterprete and falsely
apply the scriptures, ita vidicule (these are his words) vt dissentire cogat
and ratio et veritas, so ridiculously, as both reason and truth constrains me
to dissent from the^. whereas if he had lived until this time, and had been
acquainted but with half those phrases, Jewel. artic. 17. con. Hatding.
which in the 17 article M. Jew. has raked together (of which benefit by your
labors he might now have been partaker) he never neded to have run into that
desperate vain, of bidding plain defiance to all the primitive church.

And thus much being spoken by the way, through occasion of M.I. challe^g
renewed by you, let us return to conclude (if it may be) our former matter.
from this age unto the primitive church we find not (as you see) pastors
without priests. then it follows, say we, that Christ never appointed any
such. For then surely in some age, yea, in every age they would have
appeared. And how you will lose this knot I much doubt. yet I fear, you will
take Alexanders sword and cut it a sunder, and now apply that to your self,
which before you yielded to Luther, that when your judgment agrees with
scripture, you set more thereby, then by a thousand Augustines, a thousand
Ciprians, and all the churches. If you thus say (as I think you have nothing
else to say) yet remember that besides these many Augustines, and Ciprians, and
churches, you have one Christ standing against you. who promised and apoi^ted
(as you confess) far otherwise.

But pass we on. what scripture have you against priests? S. Paul, who
says that Christ is an eternal priest after the order of Melchisedec, and has
his priesthode (...). what gather you of this? you leave the word in greek, as
though it were so much the more terrible, and able to confound al priests
then if it were in latin. Our old interpreter translateth it, sempiternum,
Beza, perpetuum, Calvin, immutabile, Castalio, nunquam transiturum, 1577.1579.
the English bible of one year, unchangeable, of an other, everlasting. make
the best of it, and take which you list, or all, if ye please. The sense of the
Apostle is easy enough, How the priesthode of Christ is eternal above the
Priesthode of the law.
by the comparison which he there prosecuteth: that as Christ had many
excellent prerogatives above the priests or priesthode of Aaron, so among
many other this was one, that whereas the priesthode of Aaron passed from one
to an other, from father to son, by reason of death, Christ never dying but
ever living, never departs from his priesthode, but reteineth it for ever. To
make the reader better conceive this, which though it be many times read in
your congregations, yet is perhaps never or seldom well understood of the
minister himself, the priesthode of Aaron is briefly to be recalled to
memory. In the book of Numbers, Numer. 20.
God thus speaks unto Moses. Take Aaron and his son with him, and lead
them into the mountain Hor. And when thou have taken from Aaron his
(priestlie) vesture, thou shall put it on Eleazarus, and Aaron shall die there.
Moses did as our lord commanded etc. And when he had spoiled Aaron of his
garments, he put them on Eleazarus, and Aaron died there. In this short story,
is noted the nature and state of the leuitical priesthode passing from father
to son, and ending in the first by death, in like sort as any other faculty
of life, or body, civil or natural ends. But in Christ it is not so, who
ever living, keeps ever his priesthode as well as his life, never departing
with it to any other, as did Aaron to Eleazarus, he to Phinees, and so one to
an other in course of succession. So that Christ has (...), a sempiternall,
ever lasting, unchangeable, or unremovable priesthod, far otherwise then Aaron
and the Leuitical priests had.

This being the Apostles reason and sense and word, what follows hereof, or
what would M.W. infer? I see not what may be concluded, but either it is so
true, that we will never deny it, or it is so foolish, that he should be
ashamed to mention it. if he say Christ is a priest for ever: we affirm no
less. that his priesthod passes not from him: it is our belief. that the
force and virtue thereof endures forever: we live and die therein. and all the
baptismes, reco^ciliations, sacrifice, sacraments, al grace, virtue,
sanctification, which is in the church Catholic, depends of this faith, and
flows from the eternity of this one euerliuinge priest and priesthode.
Christ's priesthode is no more against the office of other priests, then his
kingly power is against the office of temporal kings.
But will he infer hereof, that therefore there ought to be no other inferior
priests, and that this derogateth from his priesthode? this lo, is so
chyldish, that amongst mean learned divines, it deserves rather laughter
then answer. Christ is a priest for ever, therefore there are no priests:
why, then let us argue, Christ is a true man for ever, therefore we are not,
or he has a soul for ever, therefore we have none, or he is a king for ever,
therefore let us depose all princes, and remove princely authority. Christ is
our doctor, master, and teacher for ever, Mat. 23. v. ^.10. Heb. 1. v. 2. Iac.
3. v. 1.
and so farewell al masters and doctors, and so the Eschequer shall save that,
which the Q. Majesty bestows on the University readers, and finally,
because Christ lives for ever, therefore let us rid our selves out of the way,
lest we derogate from Christ. For as Christ in most excel lent sort has the
one, that is, priesthod so has he all the rest: body, soul, kingly power,
prophecy, to be a master, doctor, and teacher. all agree to him (...), and
that, eternally, vnchangeablie, and vnremoueablie.

But o miserable people, whose souls are committed to such teachers, and most
unfortunate church, where such doctors possess the principal chaires, where
the very learned me^, who should be lights to the rest, are so blinded with
heresy, that they see not so much, as either common knowledge of mean
divinity, or the continual practice of civil policy, or their very Communion
book thrusts into their eyes and cares. for how is it possible that a
learned man having any sense of divinity, should be moved with this new
devise, hanging upon one Greek or Latin word, which so many hu^dreds of
learned fathers Greek and Latin could never yet epsy. See S. Chry. Occumen.
Theophil. S. Amoros. S. Primasius or any other in Heb. ca. 7.
but though they knew both this particular controversy, and generally all
truth, by many degrees more fully, then possibly can any of these sectaries
or secte-maisters, yet were they so far from any such collection, that
evermore, in saying and writing, in teachinge and confutinge, in life and
death, they practiced the contrary.

And what reasonable man castinge his eyes upon the Q. majesty, should not by
and by descrie the vanity of this sophistication. The authority of princes
communicated to inferior magistrates without injury of princes, shows how
the power of Christ is communicated to priests without injury of Christ.
for if she may confer upon some of her subjects, in every shier of her
realm, authority, and government to rule, to imprison, to chastise, to
correct, to release, to decide controversies, to arraygne in judgment, to
condemn and execute even unto death, and all this, with out empayringe or
diminishinge her princely authority, nay to the much greater show and
declaration thereof, for so much as her subjects doing these offices under
her, and having al their power depe^ding of her (she absolutely rulinge, and
dependinge of none) by these so many little rivers as it were, do more
excelle^tly set forth the largenes of the main spring: how much more easelie
may we conceive this of Christ, our universal and absolute king and priest, in
the regiment of his Church, that he without empairinge of his supreme,
everlasting, and incommutable priesthode, may communicate these sacred
priestlie functions with his ministerial officers, for the benefit of his
subjects the Christia^-Catholikes dispersed thorough out the world: and so
much the more, as in every holy action wrought in the Church, in every
consecration, in every sanctification, in every reconciliation, in every
baptism, in every sacrament and sacrifice, whatsoever is done to the
benefit of man's soul, Christ our high priest has therein a more true and
effectual operation concurring with his minister, then has any prince under
the sun, in like case, in regiment of his own realm.

And if this can not sink into their heads, how is it, The Parlame^t yeldeth
to ministers a principal part of Christ's priesthode, vz. power to remit sins.
that they consider not their very Communion book, where the Parlame^t (from
whence that book has his authority) gives power to the minister, in some
case to remitte sins, then which, nothing is more proper to Christ, The
Communion book in the visitatio^ of the sick.
nothing more (...), nothing more neerelie united to his divine person. And yet
thus it is appointed there. Here shall the sick person make a special
confession, if he feel his conscience troubled with any weighty matter:
after which confession the priest, (that is, the minister) shall absolve him
after this sort. And so follows a very form of Absolutio^, borrowed from the
use of our Catholic Church. Our Lord Jesus Christ who has least power to
his Church to absolve al sinners which truly repent and believe in him, of
his great mercy forgive thee thine offenses. And by his authority committed
to me, I absolve thee from all thie sins, in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

Wherefore, if either reason, or sense, or experience, or humanity, or
divinity, prevail with M. W. he can not upon Christ's sempiternall priesthode,
make any probable conjecture against the priesthode of the Church, or say, it
derogateth from Christ. Contrariwise, if he will stand, either to his own
writing, or to the judgment of his felow-zuinglians, Martyr, Bale, and Calvin,
or to the proofs and testification of the lutheranes his brethren (for so he
calls) them) Illyricus, wigandus, etc. or will admit the uniform consent of
the fathers in the primitive Church, or the verity of Christ's promise, he must
needs acknowledge, not only that in S. Augustines time, but even from the
Apostles time, priests properly so called, were pastors and rulers of the
church, and have had their origin from Christ. And therefore as before, so here
I tell him again, that in calling them Baalites and Antichristians, he calls
Christ Baal, he calls our Savior Antichrist. And therefore, if I thought my
counsel might prevail with such profane ministers, Romans 9.
given over (I fear) into a reprobate sense, and vessels of damnation, I would
say, as S. Peter said to Simon Magus, Repent thee of this thy wickedness, Act.
8. v. 22.
and pray to God, if perhaps this cogitation of thy heart may be remitted thee.
For in this blasphemous sentence, most certainly he has trodden the son of
God under foot, Heb. 10.29.
and esteemed the blood of the Testament polluted, wherein he is sanctified,
and has done contumely to the spirit of grace.

CHAP. V. Of Penance, and the value of good vvokes touching justification and
life eternal.
NEXT in place follows Penance, wherein M.W. keeps his accustomed, speaking
so doubtfullie and ambiguouslie, that he seems not fully resolved, what to
affirm: yet in fine, as commonly his manner is, he yeldeth sufficient matter
to overthrow him self. M. Martin here notes him of two faults. one, that he
iniurieth the fathers: the other, that he contrarieth him self. the injury
done to the fathers is this, that he affirms S. page 7.
Ciprian and other fathers, to have depraved the doctrine of penance.

Before he come to justify this accusation, he falls into a common place,
common to all sorts of protesta^tes, taking to him self supreme judgment
over the fathers, and complayninge of the Catholics, that so it fares with
them, pa. 7.
that except those things may prevail which in the fathers are most
corrupt or vicious, ^itiosifiima.
they are not able to maintain their cause. Whereunto I answer, that so it
fares with the protestants, that except they may be sovereign judges of
fathers, Councels, Church, and al, they must hold their peace, and say nothing.
for this is as stale a trick, Every heretics particular heresy is that word of
god, whereby they judge al fathers.
and current amongst any sect, as any thing hitherto spoken of: to protest
much reverence to the fathers, when they are not against the word of God, that
is, against their conceived heresies. marie the^, boldly to stand with the
word against them, and say they were all beetle-blynd and saw nothing. for
when, and wherein the fathers hold with them, then, and in such matters, they
were worse then mad, and altogether void of common sense, if they would thus
inueigh against the^. In the last question, press them with the fathers and
the primitive Church, Note these errors of the ancient Fathers.
touching external pristhod, and the sacrifice: it was their error, says
Calvin, Illyricus, Zuinglius, and Bale. concerning the Sacrifice. see before
pa. 60.61.69.70 etc.
Press the sacrilegious vowbreakers, with the consent of the primitive Church,
for condemnation of their unlawful marriages, P. Martyr. de votis. p. 524.
I know (says Peter Martyr) and declared no less to my auditors in Oxford,
that Epiphanius with many others of the fathers, The unlawful marriages of
priests and votaries.
erred in that they held it a fynne to break the vovv of virginity, and they
do ill to number it amongst the Apostolical traditions. Charge the English
Puritanes with the consent of Antiquity, for observation of feasts and
holy days in honor of Christ and his Saints. M. T. C. answers. T.C. pa.
122. in D. Whitg. pa. 547.
Whereas M. D. VVhiteg. cites Augustine and Hierom, to prove that in the
churches in their times, there were holy days kept besides the Lords day,
The honor of Saints.
he might have also cited Ignatius, and Tertullian, and Ciprian, which are of
greater aunciencie, and would have made more for the credit of his cause.
What memory of Christ will they reteyn who labor to abolish the day of his
resurrection.
for it is not to be denied, but this keepinge of holy days (especially of
Easter, and Pentecost) is very ancient, and that these holy days for the
remembrance of Martyrs were used of long time. but these abuses were no
auncienter then other were, grosser also then this, and therefore I appeal
from these examples, to the scriptures. Charge the Trinitarie Protestants, The
B. Trinity.
the Arians of Polonia, and Seruetus, with the Counsel of Nice, and Creed of
Athanasius: the Council of Nice (say they) was a congregation of Sophisters,
Beza in episto. theolog. epist, 81. Call. con. Sernetum pa. 82 ^91.
and the Creed of Athanasius may more justly be called the Creed of
Sathanasius. the first Nicene fathers with Athanasius, invented this
tripartite God. they were all blind Sophisters, Ministers of the Beast, slaves
of Antichrist, and bewitched with his enchauntmentes. (for that the Pope is
Antichrist, in that, as in very many other points they are just of M.W.
faith) In like sort deals the Lutherane Vbiquitarie, The person of Christ.
against whose monstrous heresy, utterly destroyng the mystery of Christ
Incarnation, when Bullinger urged the consent of all the ancient fathers,
Brentius presently gave this general answer. The fathers altogether (in this
question) are of no weight or authority. Bulling. in fundam. fir. cont.
Brenti. part 2. ca. 7.
They were taught, not in the schole of the holy Ghost, but in the schole of
Aristotle. they were deceived and blinded by Aristotle and human reason. of
celestial matters, they have childish imaginations, and gross dreams, and
earthly fancies, and carnal conceits. Thus answered Brentius, and thus (says
Bullinger of him,) Inuenit compe^dium ad omnia veterum testimonia responde^di.
A short compendious way has he found, to solue all places of the fathers,
and thus says every heretic touching every controversy wherein the fathers
stand against him. and the self same way has M.W. taken. But because this way
is either to large, Mat. 7. v. 13.
and therefore to dangerous, as lying wide open for every kind of heretic
that has been, is, or ca^ be: or to straight, if M. W. will make it private to
him self, and deny it to all others, let him therefore without this preiudicate
condemnation, give reason why he offers the fathers this intolerable
injury. for so it must be called until he prove the contrary. his reasons
are these.

Page 7.
Penance consists not in certain external penalties, or in a certain
exquisite severity of discipline, which the Apostle calls (...), l. 2. v.
23.
vvherebie the body is chastised with certain voluntary punishments, but
in internal dolor conceived through remembranco of out sins, and in
amendmente of life. and the fathers when they supposed, that by such grievous
penalties, their sins should be acquitted and God pleased, they erred
grievously, and somevvhat diminished the force of Christ's death and blood, by
which only, our sins are expiated. for pardon of sins is to be expected
of nothing but of the blood of Christ. In which words three things I note,
His description of penance.
chastisement or discipline. In the first we agree with him. in the second, we
say he erreth, and understands not the scriptures. As without the first,
External discipline and works of penance co^me^ded both in the old and new
Testament. Mat. 11. v. 20.
the second is worth nothing, so join them both together, they greatly
please God, and are highly commended in the Gospel. our Savior when he
denounced vae, to Corozain and Bethsaida sayng, if the miracles wrought in
thee, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they had not only done penance long
ago, but they had done it in beare-cloth and ashes, he shows this external
affliction to be very commendable, and to make the penance more auaylable, and
withal points the Jews to their Prophets, who willed them with such
external humiliatio^ to prostrate them selves before God, thereby the sooner to
procure his mercy. Joel. 2.
Convert ye to me (says the Prophet Joel) with al your heart, in fasting,
and mourninge, and lamentation, and rent your hearts and not your garments,
says our Lord omnipotent. In the later part of which sentence, as he
disproueth external signs, without internal remorse, as being hipocritical
and rejected of God by the Prophet Esaie, Esa. 1.
so in the first part coupling both toghether, he shows, what is perfect
penance, Mat. 6. v. 2.5.16.
as likewise does our Savior in S. Matthew, where he condemns that
Pharisaical error. but that wickedness being removed, the things in them selves
he approves, and calls them the justice of Christians, Ibi. v. 1.4.6.18.
who for the same have their revvard with God. and that M. W. reply not, this
to have been a Jewish ceremony, and therefore abrogated, he may learn, if he
know not, or he may remember, if he have forgotten, that this is a duty
moral, and therefore practiced not only in the law but also out of the law,
and before the law, and after the law, both in the time of nature and grace.

Touching the law of nature, before the law of Moses, I refer him to S.
Hiero. cont. Iouin. lib. 2.
Hierome in his book against Iouinian, partly because those examples are by
him well set forth and urged against Iouinian, partly because M.W. may withal
find, that his opinion is not new, but was of old defended by that fleshly
heretic.

This moral duty grounded on the law of nature, God confirmed and
established by his written law, Number. 30. v. 13.14. 2. Reg. 12. v. 16.
as we read in the book of Numbers. Thus, under the law the prophet David did
penance. Thus, out of the law, Ionae 2.
the Ninevites did penance, and God approved their doing. Thus, that wicked
King Achab did penance, 3. Reg. 22. v. 27.28.
and the scripture allows him therein. Thus in the time of grace S. Paul
chastised him self, 1. Co. 9. v. 27. 2. Cor. 2.6.
and enjoined penance to others. The Apostles usually enjoined fastes, before
they ordered priests, as appears in the Acts. Act. 13. v. 2.3. and ca. 14.
v. 22.
This kind of fast and penance used Timothe, when, though otherwise weak and
feeble, he altogether abstayned from wine, so far forth, that the Apostle S.
Paul thought it needeful to appoint and require him to use a little wine, 1.
Tim. 5. v. 23.
because of his vveake stomach and many infirmites. Touching which place,
were it not that M.W. has already condemned the fathers as erringe in this
point, I could wish him, quietly and consideratlie to read S. Chrisostomes
notable homely, tom. 5. Homelia 1. ad popul. Antioche: Finally in one word,
that true Christians should thus do, that is, use prescript kind of fasting
and discipline in the new testament, our Savior evidently foretells, when
he says in excuse of his Apostles, because they fasted not, as did S. Ihons
disciples, Can the children of the bridegroom mourn, Mat. 9. v. 15.
as long as the bridegroom is with them? but the days vvil come, when the
bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and then they shall fast. which fast,
must necessarily be understood of a fast d^ffering from that which they
observed with Christ. And so, nether can be understood of the fast from sin,
for so Christ would not allow them to break their fast, nether of fast, as
fast signifies temperance in diet, for Christ never allowed them excess or
intemperance, and briefly ca^ signify no other fast, but such as the Church
after Christ's departure unto these days, has and yet does observe.

Colo. 2.23.
Against all this, M. W. alleges two Greek words of the Apostle (...) that is
(according to his sense) severity of discipline in punishing the body. the
English Testament tourneth it, sparing the body. whereunto the Apostle
opposes (...). Bible 1577.
which in the same place is translated satisfying of the flesh. And what
means M.W. by this allegatio^? thinks he that the Apostle discommendeth the
first, and exhorts men to the second? is he so very an Epicure, that he can
but once imagine of S. Paul that he should wish men to pamper up their body,
and employ them selves to satisfy the flesh? if he mean so, let him speak
plainly, that men may see to what filthiness this new Gospel tends. If
otherwise, why alleges he those words in this place, and against fasting and
penance? why at all alleges he the bare words without a co^mentarie?
Touching the sense, let the reader peruse the Annotation upon the same, in the
Catholic English Testament, and he shall quickly see, what pithe there is in M.
W. greek citations, with which, I know not to what purpose he would seem to
illuminate his writing. Very well and succinctlie, Theodor. in hunc locum
Theodorete gives the sense of that place otherwise obscure and hard. Oportet
sua sponte abstinere, non tanquam ab abominandis, sed tanquam a suauissimis.
The Apostle meante not to withdraw men from abstinence. they must abstain from
meats and drinks, not as from things impure and abominable, for that is
Iudaical, but as from things pleasant and delectable to the flesh, and this is
Christian.

His reason why he disliketh the former works of penance, The protestants
common argument aginst works of penance.
is because they are injurious to Christ's passion and death, the only price
and satisfaction for sins. This argument is al one with the last, of
priesthode, and therefore in part is satisfied already. For a surplusage I
add, that these and the like reasons, proceed rather of ignorance then ought
else. and therefore if he would first learn, what is the meaning of the
Catholic Church, and all Christians, he would never so idly trouble the world
with such stuff, nor so wickedlie control the learned ancient Bishops, and
withal he might ease him self of some labor. Very diuinelie says the holy
Council. Conci. Trid. sess. 14. ca. 8.
This satisfaction which we undertake for our sins, is not ours so, that it
is not by Christ Jesus. for we 2. Cor. 3.
that of our selves, as of our selves, can do nothing, philip. 4.
by his cooperatio^ which strengthens us, can do al things. 2. Cor. 2.
so man has not whereof to glory, but 2. Cor. 10. Gal. 6. Act. 17.
al his gloriation is in Christ, in whom we live, deserve and satisfy, Mat.
3. and 4. Luc. 3.10.17.
doing fruits vvorthie of penance, which of Christ have force, by him are
offered to the father, and by him are accepted of the father. Thus the Council*
whose doctrine well understood, makes far more for the honor of the Cross
and blood of Christ, then does our adversaries, without comparison.

And surely, either our luck is evil in these our days, whose hap is to
fall amongst such perverse adversaries, that what-soeuer we can do, one way or
other will gnawe at it, or else our adversaries lotte is strange and marvelous,
amongst whom, scant any one can frame an argument against us, but presently he
has a brother of his own, that is ready to pull him by the sleeue, and call
him fool for his labor. M.W. reproves the fathers, and in them, al
catholics, for that by our works we pull from Christ, and diminish the virtue
of his blood. Contrary-wise, Jew. defense of the Apology, part. 4 ca. 19.20. 1
that most grave and learned father John Brentius, (so M. Jewel calls him,)
inueigheth against us, for that by our works we give to much to Christ, and
magnify more the^ we ought, the virtue of his Cross. and in truth, if there
were any fault in the doctrine of the Church, Bre^tius reason carries far more
probability the^ M.W. Thus he reasons. Iactat Sotus se Christo nihil
detrahere, sed potius glorificare. Brentius in Apol. co^fes. Wirtem. ca. de
contriti.
sed co^tra veru^ est etc. Sotus braggeth, that he takes nothing from Christ,
but rather glorifieth him. but the contrary is true, that Christ by him and his
fellows, is iniuried with great co^tumely. Insigni contumelia afficitur.
For to attribute unto Christ, that not only he by his death has deserved the
expiation of our sins, The Catholics by the judgment of Brentius, honor
Christ to much.
but also has imparted that merit unto our good works, this is to attribute
much more to Christ, then either he acknovvlegeth, or the thing it self can
suffer. and it is comtumelie, not only to detract from the glory due to any
thing, but also to ascribe to much praise and glory to it. and the law of God
manifestly signifies, that in service of God it is a sin to decline, not
only to much toward the left hand, but also to much toward the right.
Thus he. howbeit Andreas Fricius the King of Poles Secretary, a great learned
and zealous Zuinglian, disprouinge both the one and the other, both M.VV. the
Zuinglian, and Brentius the Lutheran, gives us testimony, that in this part
our doctrine is sincere, and holds the just and golden mediocritie, and
bends to much nether to the one hand, nor yet to the other. Andr. Fri. de
eccles. lib. 4 ca. 12.
for thus he writes. Although Christ take not away all infirmity from such
as be regenerate, yet renewing them by his spirit, and planting in them
virtues of new life and imparting to them merit and his justice, most truly
and with singular fruit he is said to live in them. Non obscuratur sed
illustratur, no^ euacuatur
anh by this means the glory of Christ is not obscured, but clarified, the
Cross of Christ is not euacuated, but made more copious, the price of the
bloodshed for us, is not diminished but increased, sed f^cunda redditut, no^
minuitur sed augetur.
whereas that which by his own nature is not so great, by his goodness is
accounted for such. so far he, truly and according to gods word. and therefore
by your warrant I may not think otherwise, if a thousand Caluins, and
thousands of any other protestants should strive to persuade me the
contrary. much less can I be moved with such seely and pitiful sophismes as
you shuffle together. for thus you go on. Atque hic insultas, etc. Page 8.
And here you triumph. S. Paul says, our suffering with Christ is necessary
to salvation, M.VV. says it is a derogation to Christ's suffering. who (M.
Martine) may not vvonder at your egregious subtlety? but I answer. To. 6.23.
heavenly life and glory, is the gift of God: ergo it is not gotten by our
trauayls. and the Apostle calls us heirs of God, and coheires of Christ:
ergo the kingdom comes to us freely by inheritance and adoption in Christ.
hereof it follows, that our sufferinges are not the efficient causes of
salvation and glory, as you (M. Martine) foolishly reason, yet are they
necessarily to be vndertake^ of us, except we vvil be excluded from grace and
glory etc. if you could have distinguished the means, from the causes
efficie^t, media.
you would never have reasoned thus. Certainly M. W. if some adversary would
have made a book in mockery of your divinity, I think he could not
possibly have more disgraced you, then you shame your self. you heap up
absurdities together, so gross and so thick one in the neck of an other, that
whereas I should by appointment have gone thorough with this pamphlet in a few
hours, I ween I shall not riddle my hands of it in many days.

When Stancarus the Archheretike of Polonia, Stancarus judgment of Calvin and
other chief protestante-wryters.
began to break from Calvin in the article of the blessed Trinity, and
Calvin either through malice or ignorance, fell into greater wickedness in that
mystery then he, and amongst other raylinges and scorneful reproaches objected
to him his study in Peter Lombard the Master of the sentences, Stancarus
after much spoken in the commendatio^ of that writer, coming at length to
Calvin, and the great Rabbines of your new Church, God (says he) has
delivered you up into a reprobate sense, Stanc. in libro de Mediatore contra
^ulling. P. Mart. Calvin. and Geneuenses, k. 5.
so as you say, teach, write and persuade others, such things as are naughty,
wicked, and heretical. for I tell you, one Peter Lombard is more vvorth, the^ a
hundred Luthers, the^ two hundred Melancthons, then three hundred Bullingers,
then four hundred Peter Martyrs, then five hundred Caluins. qui omnes (...) in
mortario co^tu^dere^tur no^ exprime retur vna un cia verae the ologiae,
presertim etc.
who al if they were pounded together in a mortar, there would not be beaten
out of them one ounce of true divinity, especially in the articles of the
Trinity, the incarnation, the Mediator, and the Sacraments. I will not apply
this odious comparison, against the English writers of our time. but this I
protest in my conscience touching you, that I suppose never man of any
account, set pen to paper to publish a thing in printe to the view of the
world, who uttered such notorious ignorance, as every where appears in this
your discourse: whether the fault be in me, that I have not hitherto so
narrowly examined others, as I have now cause to examine you, or whether the
thing in truth be so as I imagine, or whether you in your other writings
utter more substantial matter, and in this through much have have ouershot your
self, as canis festinans caecos parit catulos, (and I see, pa, 1.
that much you covet to be counted a quick dispatcher of books) or whatsoever
else may be the reason. for scarce any sentence have you given forth, which
carries not with it some mark to the shame of the maker.

In this paragraph you commit as many errors as lightly you may. M.W. manifold
ouersightes.
you understand not M. Martin.

causae efficientes and media, is pulled in by you, to make a show when it
needs not. Discor. page 205.206.
M. Martins argument is this plainly. you say, good works are injurious to
Christ's passion. he proves they are not, because the scripture requires
them, and that, as necessary to salvation. And how can you be so blind, as
not to see this argument. good works are necessary to salvation, therefore
they derogate nothing from Christ's passion. for clear it is, if they derogate
from Christ's passion, they set us forwards to damnation, and help us
nothing toward salvation.

Life eternal the effect of good works and good works the efficient cause of
eternal life. Rom, 8, v, 17
which you for ostentation of a little skill now hale in, urged not the place so
far as to prove works the causes efficient of salvation, yet the place
proves it inuinciblie. for when S. Paul says, we are coheires with Christ,
yet conditionally, that is, if we suffer with him, that we may also be
glorified with him, he shows the excellent dignity, which in Christ we are
called unto being graffed into that vine, Joan. 15. v. 5: Rom, 6, 2. 1 Cor.
12.27 2 Pet. 1. v. 4. Ioa^. 17. v. 11.
and made members of his body, and partakers of the divine nature. he does
show and deduce this, that as Christ our head suffered first, and those his
sufferinges were not only media, means, but also causes efficient of his
glorificatio^ in some respect, so from him, the like virtue is derived unto us
his members. for as it behooved Christ to suffer, and so to enter into his
glory, Luc. 24. v. 26
as he humbled him self to the death of the cross, propter quod, Philip. 2 v.
9
for which cause God exalted him, Act. 14. v. 21.
so his members by tribulations, follow where he is gone before, and not by
faith only, but also by patiente suffering, Heb. 6. v. 12.
inherit the promises. and such sufferinges and works of charity, are semen
and fundamentum, 2. Cor. 9. v. 6. 1. Timot. 6. v. 19.
the very foundation and seed growing to life everlasting, as the Apostle
calls them. And in this comparison, Heb. 12. a.
consists the dignity of our Christianity, as in S. Paul every where
appears. for whom he has foreknovven, Romans 8.29.
he has also predestined to be made conformable to the image of his son,
that he might be the first borne in many brethren. And albeit the sufferings of
this life wayghed in them selves, are short and transitory, Romans 8.18.
and therefore can not be condign to the glory to come which shall be
revealed in us, yet being wayghed as rising and wrought in us by the spirit of
God, sanctified in the blood of our Savior, 2. Cor. 4.17.
and applied to his honor, so this our tribulation which presently is
momentanie and light, works above measure exceedingly, an eternal weight
of glory in us. And S. Paul els-where most diuinelie conioyneth both these in
one, so as a man can not deny this effect to Christian men's works, but first
he must deny the same to the works of Christ. Heb. 2. v. 9.
we see Jesus (says the Apostle) because of the passion of death, crowned
with glory and honor, that through the grace of God, he might taste death for
all. for it became him, for vvho^ all things, and by vvho^ all things, that
had brought many children into glory, to consummate the author of their
salvation, by his passion. for be that sanctifies, and they that are
sanctified, all of one. for the which cause he is not ashamed to call them
brethren. In this divine discourse, S. Paul compriseth the manner of Christ's
glorificatio^, and of Christians: of him as the head, of us as the members, of
him as the root, first begotten brother, principal, anointed with oil of
exultation prae participibus, above his fellows: us as branches, Heb. 1. v. 9.
Joan. 1. v. 16
second brethren, inferior, receiving of his fulness. yet so, that we always
continue in the same race and course, according to our measure and proportion,
and so are made conformes, conformable to our head, Romans 8.29.
who is the first borne amongst many brethren. The sum of al is this, that as
in the place cited by M. Martin, glorification in Christ, shows his works to
have been the causes efficient thereof, and in Christ, passion and
glorification are so compared together, as the cause and the effect, and one
infers the other: so in us Christians his members, compassion in the
Apostles sense, and conglorificatio^, proves like cause and effect, and one is
concluded of the other. and this shall appear more plainly, by that which
ensues.

Donum Dei vita aeterna, Romans 6.23.
eternal life is the gift of God, Grace takes away the merit of work, no
more then merit of work takes away necessity and cooperation of grace.
you conclude: ergo it is not gotten by our trauails. fot the Apostle meant
nothing less then any such illation, which in so many places he refelleth.
And if these two, grace and works, be so opposite in Christians, that one
must destroy the other, then consider I pray you the force of these arguments.
In fear and trembling work your salvation, says S. Phil. 2.12.
Paul. ergo our salvation is of works, and therefore not of grace. our
afflictions and calamities sustained patiently work our glory. 1. Cor. 4.17.
ergo it is not of grace. he that sows sparingly, 2. Cor. 9. v. 6.
sparingly also shall reap. and he that sows in blessings, of blessings
also shall reap. that is, he that gives alms abundantly, shall have in
heaven abundant reward. and he that gives less, shall have his reward
proportionable. ergo heaven is not of grace. Mat. 25. d.
Come ye blessed (says our savior) receive my Kingdom. why so? for what
cause? for because you have done the works of charity, you have fed the
hu^grie, harbored the stranger, visited the sick, succored the diseased etc.
ergo heaven is not of grace. he that is not a hearer, but a doer of the law,
Iac. 1.29.
shall be blessed, in, or for his work. ergo not by Gods grace and mercy: and
so forth, infinite such arguments might be made after the pattern of M. Whit.
and prove as well. and yet notwithstanding, how many so ever they be, be they a
carte-loade, they are all wicked, and not worth a straw, and no more is his.
And the Apostle intended nothing else in so sainge, but to commend the grace of
Christ, which is the true cause of merit or good works, and not to deny the
value of good works, as he might have learned of S. Austine noted upon that
place in the new testament, were it not that he disdaineth him, See after in
the last chapter toward the end.
and plainly accompteth him a superstitious and Sorbonical papist, for giving
that sense and interpretation.

a contrariety, between grace and works, mercy and justice, inheritance and
purchase: which, although perhaps it is not so easelie conceived, in buying a
piece of land, yet is it not hard to be conceived, in buyinge or procuringe
heaven: no harder, then it is to believe, that we shall enjoy heaven, by Gods
infinite grace and mercy, and yet for all that, by right and justice, because
Christ our savior has truly and fully paid for it. and S. Paul, and S.
Austine, of old have many times notified unto us, the reco^ciliation of these
two, which to ignorant men seem so opposite.

That heaven is of grace, S. Paul cited by M. Eternal life is both of grace
and works, mercy and justice.
W. proves. that it is of works, any one of those places shows, which last
of all I noted, and in the same epistle whence M. W. takes his argument, the
same S. Paul most evidently declares, where he says. In the just judgment,
Romans 2.
God will render to every man according to his works. to them truly that
according to patience in good works seek glory, honor and incorruption,
life eternal: but to them that are of contention, and that obey not the truth,
but give credit to iniquity, wrath and indignation. Tribula, tion and
anguish upon every soul of man that works evil, of the Jew first, and of
the Gentil. but glory, honor and peace to every one that works good, to the
Jew first, and to the Gentil. for there is no acceptio^ of persons with God.
by which words also, he clearlie refuteth that distinction of media and causes
efficient, wherein M. whit. seems well to please him self, and twiteth M.
Martine with ignorance thereof. for when he lays in indifferente balance good
works and evil, and so makes one the cause of heaven, as the other is the
cause of hell, to which effect the place is flat and evident, M. W. must be
content to give over that invention, how dearly soever he esteem it: except
he will say, that sins are the means, media
but not the cause efficient of damnation.

That heaven comes of mercy, S. Ephesians. 1. et 2.
Paul shows at large in the first and second chapter to the Ephesians. that
it comes of justice, the same S. 2. Tim. 4.8.
Paul shows, when he says. There is laid up for me a crown of justice,
which our lord will render to me in that day, a just judge: and not only to
me, but to them also that love his coming. when he says, Romans 2. v. 5.
in just judgment God vvil render to every man according to his works. and
justice requires, that as God should punish the wicked, 2, Thessal. 1. v.
6.7. Heb. 6. v. 10.
so he should revvard the good, and it were injustice to do otherwise, as he
says to the Hebrews.

That heaven comes by adoption and of inheritance, M.W. says it, and though
he prove it not, we believe it, because it is true. but that it is not gotten
by works and trauayls, this we deny, because it is false, and S. Paul
refuteth, when he compares the crown of heaven, 1. Cor. 9.24. brauium.
to a price or garland, which is proposed to wrestlers, runners, or such like,
thereby declaring thus much, that as the first is gotten by running and
laboring, so is the second, by pain and well working. and the same, our
Savior signified, Mat. 11. v. 12
when he said. The kingdom of God suffers violence, and the violent bear it
away. Mat. 5.12. Ibid. ca. 6.1. ca. 10.41. 1. Cor. 3.8. Apo 11.18 Ibid. 22.12
(...) The scriptures teach that heaven is the repay or reward for good works,
as hell is for evil.
The same is proved by that ordinary phrase, wherein heaven is called merces
operum, (...) the hyre, payment, wages, stipend or price of works. The same
is proved by S. Paul, whereas though the word properly sound in the better
part, yet for truth of doctrine, he uses it indifferently, as well for the
payment of eternal damnation, which sinners receive for their iniquities in
hell, as the contrary payment of eternal salvation, which good men receive for
their holiness in heaven. So he says in the epistle to the Hebrews: Heb. 2. v.
3.
that all preuarication and disobedience has received (...), just retribution
and payment, as afterward in the same epistle, that Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and
Moses, for Christ's love sustained all affliction, hoping for (...), Ibid. c.
11.26
just retribution or payment. and in the same chapter, he puts the belief
of this point, as a first principle in Christian religion. for so he speaks:
Heb. 11. v. 6.
He that comes to God, must believe that he is (...), one that will repay
men for their good works. which point since you have not yet learned, it
follows that you are very green, and a mere nouice in Christian religion.

And S. Austin (whose judgment agreeing with S. Paul, I trust you will
esteem as well, as before you did Luthers) in sundry places expounding these
words of S. Paul, 2. Timoth. 4. 2. Tim. 4.7.
My resolution is at hand, I have fought a good fight, I have consummate my
course, I have kept the faith. concerning the rest, there is laid up for me a
crown of justice, which our lord will render unto me in that day, a just
judge, never makes doubt of this verity. He will render (says S. Austin)
being a just judge. Aug. inter hom. 50. ho. 24.
for he can not deny the reward when he sees the work. I have fought a
good fight, that is a work: I have consummate my course, that is a work: I
have kept the faith, that is a work: there remains to me a crown of
justice, this is the revvard. but in the revvard, thou do nothing, in the
work thou art a doer, but not alone. the crown comes to thee from him,
the work from thy self, but not without his help. Aug. in ps. 100.
And again: Why will God render to me a crown of justice? because he is a
just judge. Why a just judge? because I have fought a good fight, I have
consummate my course, I have kept the faith. therefore being just, he can not
but crown these things. By these virtues (says the same doctor) imparted to
us from God, Idem epist. 52. in fine.
a good life is led in this world, and life eternal the reward thereof,
is repayed in the next. for here these virtues are in act, there in effect,
here in work, there in reward, here in office, there in end. And he
doubts not to call them the very price, Idem in ps. 49. circa medium. et ad
Dulc. qu. 4.
whereby (as I may say) we buy heaven, with which word you are so much
offended.

And that this justice nothing diminishes gods mercy, or this purchase our
adoption, as you very simply imagine, the same doctor in very many places
teaches. To note one for all, explicating the place of Timothee before
touched. Aug. in psalm. 100.
God will render to me (says he) a crown at that day, a just judge. He said
not, he will give, but he will render. when he gave, he was merciful, when
he shall render, he vvil be a judge. because mercy and judgment shall I singe
to thee o Lord. but forgeuing our offenses, he made him self a debtour of a
crown. there I obtained mercy. our lord therefore is merciful first, but
afterward he will render a crown of justice. Is not a crown (says he
els-where, Aug. de gra. et lib. arbit. ca. 6.9^8.
disputinge this matter more at large) rendered as due to good works? yet
because God works those good works in us, therefore he crovvneth us in
mercy etc. This may serve to inform you a little in the state of this question.
and for your further satisfaction, I refer you to the Catholic new Testament
in English, especially those places, whence you commonly fetch your arguments
against this necessary part of Christian life and faith.

such works, though they be not causes efficient of salvation, necessario
subeundae
yet are they necessarily to be done, except we vvil be excluded from grace
and glory. For how stands this with your doctrine of only faith? By making
works necessary to salvation. M.W. overthrows the Protest. doctrine of only
faith.
how will that alone serve the turn, if now of necessity good works must come
to help forth the matter? Think you, that impertinent distinction of causa
efficiens, and medium can serve you, the whole course of your doctrine, whole
books and commentaries of your masters and brethren, being against you? some
there are (says Flacius Illyricus) who drousely vvayghing the matter, Illyr.
praefa. ad Romans pa. 636.

Quida^ somnolentius rem expendentes.


think this to be the controversy properly between us and the papists,
whether good works justify, or be the merit and cause efficient of justice
and life, and not whether they be in any respect, necessary to salvation.
which in deed is, (or was, when you first began) the very point of the
controversy. which he therefore defends, vz, that they are in no respect
necessary, by 26. most firm and strong demonstrations, as he calls them,
and reckeneth this your doctrine for a papisticall error, and calls you a
new papist for putting the question as you do. Ibidem. pa. 634.635.
These are his words. Hitherto touching the papists corruption of this
doctrine. now I come to the doctrine of the new papists, which is as
pernicious as the old. Neopapistae
they say, that the Apostle meant to exclude good works from justification,
non simpliciter and ratione debiti, not simply and as due, but only as
meritorious and causes efficient. vvhere-vpon these doctors or rather seducers,
do diverse vvayes elude that proposition of S. Paul: we are justified by
faith, gratis, without works, each one according to his own head, and as
his private spirit suggesteth to him: and most of the^ covet diligently to
mingle works, as a certain harmefull leaven with justification and the lamb
of God. And there he reckneth twelve such corruptions, the last where of is
yours, the very self same which here you defend. against which he sets down
the protestants faith thus. But the true sense of Paul's words is, that
without al merit, condition, Ibid.
or necessity of our works, by only faith in Christ, we are justified
before Christ and saved, so as our salvation does in no sort depend of our
works, nether be they any way necessary to salvation, etc. Scripture,
Luther, M. Whitak. doctrine concerning necessity of good works condemned as
papistical by the protestante divines.
and al doctors of sound judgment think thus, of which doctrine, these be
most firm demonstrations, etc. and in fine he says, Iste ipse error, est
omnino papistica corruptela articuli iustificationis. This very error is
altogether a papistical corruption of the article of justification.

And if you can recall to memory, the common arguments gathered to your hand
by every heretic, that has written upon the epistle to the Romans, namely
the fourth chapter, you shall soon perceive, Arguments of the protestants,
prouinge good works to be necessary to salvation in no respect.
that your opinion and their commentaries can never match together. out of the
main heap, I will note one or two, such as are most common to every preacher,
and found in every book. whereby you shall see, how by this assertion, you
overthrow your whole doctrine. Illyr. vbi supra.
S. Paul excludes al our boastinge from justice and salvation, and that in
Abraham a man most holy. ergo works are by no means, so much as causa sine
qua non, of salvation. otherwise, we shoud have some occasion of boasting.
gloriatio
64.) are as foul stained clothes. and how can a thing so filthy and
disallovved of God, do any thing, or be necessary to justice before God. Out
of which, M.W. may of two co^clusions, choose one which shall like him best,
either that his principal doctors interpret S. Paul peruersly and wickedly,
when in S. To. 4. et 10. Philip. 3.
Paul's epistles they interpret the works of the law our justice, legal
justice, I esteemed my works dunge and durte that I might obtain the justice
of Christ, when I say they still expound these places of the works of
Christian men, done by the grace and spirit of God: or else that his assertion
is against al sense and reason, to make that necessary to salvation, which the
Prophets and Apostles do so abase, so condemn, and make so filthy in the
sight of God. and of these two which he will choose, I know not: but because I
think he will rather condemn them, then deny him self (for so long as he may
be his own judge, the word of God shall be clear on his side) I finally
oppose against him, as in this self same question the zealous Lutherans opposed
against the cold Melanchthonistes, in the Council of Altemburg, Col. Altem.
collat. 4. fo. 75.76.

They note one special printe, because they suppose other printes to be corrupt.


after manifold arguments brought for only faith against any necessity of
works. After all this (say they) we conclude with that worthy sainge of
Luther in his first tome printed at VVittemberge. if works be necessary to
salvation, then salvation can not be had without works, and then we are not
saved by only faith. And thus you see how well you have disproued M. Martins
saing, and approved your own, so well, that by verdite of your great writers,
in fine you have marred the topp and crown of your Kingdom, your solifidian
justification, and by them for your pains are judged to be a Papist, which I
wish were true for your own sake.

CHAP. VI. How unreasonably M. VV. behaueth him self, in reproving and
approving the ancient fathers, for their doctrine touching good works.
NOw come I to the third part, that is, your accusation of the fathers, wherein
also M. Martine notes you of contradiction to your self. for with what reason
could you call them most holy, sanctissimos, when in the self same place you
defaced them as most injurious to the blood and passion or Christ. you answer,
Page 7. a little.
smoothing so much as you may the matter, and say, that they erred a little,
(and yet within five lines before, you say, grievously
they erred grievously and diminished not a little the force of Christ's death
and passion) and there error proceeded rather of lack of vvitte, then of
malice. and though we grant that herein they erred a little, yet in respect of
yours, their errors seem either light, or none at all. Here of you conclude
that well you might call them most holy, page 9.
although they erred once, or were not so wise as they might have been. This
is that, which in the beginning I told you, that you speak doubtfully, and
stammer, and falter in your tale, and know not well what to say. for to let
pass that in one page you make it a grievous error, page 7.
and in the next, either none at all, page 8. and 9.
or a very light one, compare your cruel and bloody words, whereof rises M.
Martins reprofe, with this second modification, and then let every man judge,
what a miserable defender you are. you say there, Discou. page 205.
that the fathers thought by their external works of penance, to pay the
pains due for sins, and to satisfy Gods justice, and to procure to the^
selves assured impunitie, remission, and justice. that thereby they derogated,
not a little
not a little from Christ's death, attributed to much to their own inventions,
and finally depraved repentance. Here you say, it was a little error, a small
oversight, they slipped a little, a little
and that they were not vvithstanding, most holymen. You a Christian M.W. and
dare thus to write? you a refuter of errors, and make this a light one? had you
any part either of the spirit of S. Paul, S. Cipria^, S. Austine, or such
Saints of the Catholic Church, or some zeal and sense of your own Gospel
and religion, how could this ever have slipped out of your pen? to call them
most holy, who by your doctrine, were as far from al true holiness, as ever was
Scribe or Pharisee. to call the^ most holy, who had not in them the first stepp
or degree where holiness begins. for, whereas to holiness, first of al and
principally is required faith in the death and passion of Christ, then, zeal
and fervor in good works, to call a man holy without the first, is to commend
for strenght and valor, a man that has never a sound joint, or to praise for
eloquence such a one, whose tongue is cut out of his head.

No good works, no martyrdom profits any man to salvation, out of the Cath.
church.
In the number of Christians, and professors of Christianity, there have been
from the beginning many, that have lived very hard and severe lives, that have
bestowed their goods among the poor, that after many labors, and trauails,
and rare works of extraordinary zeal, have at lenght suffered death for the
testimony of Christ. And this oftentimes chanced in the primitive Church,
within the time of the first persecutions before Constantinus Magnus. Eusebius.
lib. 5. cap. 15. Niceph. li. 4. cap. 23.
yet if such men lived and died schismatikes, that is not believing rightly in
the church, did ever any true Christian hold them for good and holy? If I
spoke with the tongue of men and angels, says the Apostle, 1. Cor. 13.
and knevv al mysteries, and could move mountains, if I bestovved al my goods
upon the poor, and my body to the fire, for the testimony of Christ, yet
wanting the charity of my brethren, 1 Joan. 3. and 4
being without ecclesiastical unity, it profits me nothing. whereupon S.
Ciprian: Ciprian. de unit. Eccles.
They cannot dvvell with God, that be not in unity with the Church. Examine
by this certain and sure rule the martyrdoms and martyrologes of Luthera^s
Zwinglians Anabaptists etc. set forth by M. Fox, Crispin Hamstedius and
others. Aug. epi. 252
though they burn amidst the flames and being delivered to the fire or cast to
vvild beasts, so yield their lives, yet that shall not be to them a crown of
faith, but a punishment of infidelity. such a one may be slain, he can not be
crowned. he professes him self such a Christian, as the devil many times
pretends him self to be Christ. For (as S. Austine says) whosoever is
separated from this Catholic Church, though he think him self to live very
commendablie, yet by reason of this only offense, that he is divided from the
unity of Christ, (in his Catholic Church) he shall not have life (eternal)
but the wrath of God remains upon him.

And is all this true of men, Christians by profession, believing rightly in
every other article of faith, and only erring in a secondarie point, against
the visible church, and is it not much more true, when the error runs so
grossly against the first, and chief, and capital article of Christianity, and
that proper and peculier part, whence Christianity has his name, the death
and passion of our savior, the very heart, life, and soul of our religion?
can a fault against the body, so pollute and contaminate a man, that he
becomes with all his supposed holiness, an infidel, wicked, profane, an enemy
of God, and a damnable creature: and can such sacrilege against the head be so
light and contemptible, that the offender remains notwithstanding, faithful,
a good Christian, and most holy? The foul grossnes of that error, with which
M.W. charge the au^cie^t fathers.
S. Paul in the beginning, when the law of Moses was not yet quite abolished,
nor the gospel so universally and clearlie published, said of the Galatians,
who would have joined the law with the gospel: O ye sensles Galatians, Galat.
3.
who has bewitched you not to obey the truth? Ibi. ca. 5. v. 2.
Behold I Paul tell you that if you be circumcided, Christ shall profit you
nothing, and though an Angel of heaven teach you so, that is, Gal. 1. v. 8.
preach you works, wherebie you should be withdrawn from Christ, anathema be
he, that is, the curse of God light upon him. how the^ may a Christian, that
either loves or fears Christ, thus extenuate the fathers error, being by M.
W. declaration, in substance, the self same, by reason of circumstance, far
more heinous, the light of the gospel spread more larglie, the truth of
doctrine more deeply rooted, the law more undoubtedly abolished, and every
part of Christian religion more clearly acknowledged and professed. wherefore
in this, I take M. Whit. inexcusablie, rather for a Pagane then for a
Christian, when he says, The fathers by their penitential works derogated
from Christ, and thrusting them selves into his room, ascribed to their own
inventions, the satisfying of Gods wrath, and remission of their sins, and
yet for all this calls them sanctissimas, most holy. whereas this being true*
they were the most impious and detestable men, that ever the sun saw.

Luther in his book aduersusfalso nominatum ordinem episcoporum, describing
his iustifiing faith, writes thus, although wickedly, yet agreablie to his
own doctrine, and the common doctrine of the protestants. Luth. To. 2. fol.
322.
Mark me (says he) what is Christian faith. Christian faith is to believe,
that by no works, but by only faith in Christ as thy mediator, and by mercy
in him given thee freely, thou art justified and saved. Gal. 1. so as a man
despair of all his own strength, works, and endeavors, and depend
altogether of an other man's merits, and an other man's justice. Iudaical faith
is to entend to be justified, to blot out thy sins, and be saved by thy own
strength and merits. Romans 10. by this, Christ is cast away. To like effect he
writes in his second commentary upon the Galatians, Luth. To. 5. in Gal. ca.
4. fol. 382.
expounding these words. his qui natura non sunt dii seruiebatis, ye served
them, which by nature were not gods, upon these words, he makes this
question, and thus solueth it. is it all one in S. Paul, to depart from the
promise to the law, from faith to works, and to serve gods, which by nature
are not gods? I answer, whosoever falls from the article of justification,
he becomes ignorant of God, and is an idolater. And therefore it is al one
whether he return to the law, or to the worshipping of idols. al is one,
whether he be a monk, a Turk, a Jew, or Anabaptist. for this article once
taken away, there remains nothing, but mere error, hypocrisy, impiety,
idolatry, although in show there appear excellent truth, worship of God,
holiness etc. Yea speaking expressly of the ancient fathers, and in respect of
this special matter, he most wickedly, but most plainly, adiudgeth them to hell
fire, for their wicked faith in this very cause. I speak not (says he)
against the papists for their life, but for their faith, because they vvil not
come to God by only faith, but by faith and works, and therefore if the
fathers those old papists lived now, I would speak unto the^ as I do to these
new papists. Ibid. ca. 4. fol. 400.
thus stand his words. Si illa facies veteris papatus, etc. if that face and
form of old papistrie stood now, if that discipline were observed now
with so much severity and rigor, S. Hierom. S Gregory and S. Austin old
papists by Luthers verdit.
as the heremites, as Hierome, Austine, Gregory, Bernard, Frau^cis, Dominike,
and many others observed it, little perhaps should I profit by my doctrine of
faith, against that (state of papistrie.) yet nevertheless after the example of
Paul inueighing against the false Apostles, in appearance most holy and good
men, I ought to fight against such Justice workers of the papisticall
Kingdom, Iustitia^ios papistici re^ni.
and say: though you live a chaste life, and vvearie your bodies with much
exercise, yea though ye walk in the humility and religion of Angels, yet are
ye bondmen of the law, of sin, and the devil, ye are to be cast out of the
house, because you seek for justice and salvation, by your works, and not by
Christ. Thus Luther. and this being the general doctrine of the Protestants,
in all their treatises of justification, and M. W. pretending to be of the
number, supposing the fault to be true which he lays to the fathers, if he
followed the judgment of S. Paul, S. Ciprian, S. Augustine, and al Catholic
Christians, he must needs account them adversaries of Christ, profane and
wicked, and cast out eternally from the face of God: if he followed the
universal sway of his own doctrine, The ancient fathers called by Luther,
Iues, idolaters, bondmen of sin and the devil, for their doctrine of works
against only faith.
teaching only faith, and justification thereby, he could not but with Luther
hold them for impious, hipocrites, bondm^n of sin and the devil, idolaters,
without knowledge of God, as il as any monk, Turk, Jew, or Anabaptist. And
certainly no monk (except perhaps some Apostataes, as Luther him self, Bucer,
P. Martyr, or such founders of this new Gospel) living in his order, thought
ever so ethnicallie of Christ's passion, as by M.W. judgment S. Ciprian and
those fathers did. And therefore I see not how he so excusing the fathers in
this point, and calling it a light error, or none at al, ca^ him self be
excused from plain Atheism, whether he be arraygned before his lawful Judges,
S. Paul, S. Ciprian, S. Austine, and their successors Catholic Bishops,
Co^tra Campian. pa. 198
or before Luther that Apostata, whom he honoreth for his father, and the rest
of that co^fraternitie. except perhaps he will plead in his defense, that he
knew not this, which is so commonly known to al, and so to quitte him self of
so foul impiety, will condemn him self of notorious ignorance. But howsoever
he shift the matter, M. Martins charge stands vndischarged, that, to say,
that the fathers took from Christ, and ascribed to them selves the office of
his mediatorship, satisfaction and remission of sins, and justice before God,
and yet to call them most holy, An evident contradiction.
is as plain a co^tradictio^, as to say, such a man sees most sharply, yet
both his eyes are out of his head. he gives consaile excellent well in any
controversy of law, mary his head for all that, is a mile of from his shoulders.

And yet, to mende the matter, presently and fast upon the former, talking of
the same thing, he stumbleth in to an other contradiction as gross as the
other. For laboring to make our faults more odious, and to sever us as far as
may be from the fathers, thus he writes. Ibid. page 8.
the fathers write sometimes, that it is our part to do satisfaction unto God,
that God is pacified with our satisfaction, that thereby we promerite him,
and redeem our sins: which albeit they are not very conveniently spoken,
Note this interpretation.
yet by these, they would have no other thing understood or signified, the^
that pardon of sins and Gods grace, was to be requested and craved of us,
vsinge also those external actions of penance, tears, fastes, vvatchinges,
alms: which thing may appear by Ciprian alone, in many places. most
evidently in his 55. epistle, in his book against Demetrian, and in his sermon
de lapsis. what sense you devise and frame to your self, S. Ciprians words
touching works of penance, and the merit thereof, in the places noted by M. W.
Epist. 55. et sermon. de lapsis.
I know not, nether skilleth it greatly. but surely the discourse of S.
Ciprian, and his words, be as much against you, as possibly may be devised: and
especially in the places by you quoted. to give the reader a taste of your
sincerity, thus he there writes. By satisfaction and just mourning our sins
are redeemed, and our wounds by tears are cleansed. our lord is to be prayed
unto, our lord is to be pacified by our satisfaction. let every man confess
his sins, while his confession may be admitted, while satisfaction and
pardon given by the priests, is acceptable before God. let our soul prostrate
her self before god, and satisfy him by sorovvfulnes. let us pacify gods
wrath and indignation, by fasting, lamentation, and mourning, as he him self
has warned us. The prophet Daniel by fasting endeavored to deserve gods
favor, and the like have done al humble, vvel-meaning, and innocent men.
Think thou that God is so easily pacified, whom wickedly thou have denied?
Thou must pray and entreat him earnestly, thou must spend the day in
mourning, the night in watching and lamentations. prostrate on the ground in
ashes and hearecloth, thou must employ thy self upon just works, the doctrine
of the Christians in the Apostles times, and of the Cathol. Church in our time
is al one concerning works of penance.
by which sins are purged, thou must give much alms by which souls are
delivered from death. In this sort, the faith flourished in the Apostles time.
in this sort the first faithful Christians kept Christ's commandments. and
to be short (for a great part of that treatise de lapsis runs after this
manner) thus he ends the same. he that thus shall do satisfaction to God etc.
being heard and helped of God, shall not only deserve pardon of him, but also a
crown in heaven. Thus S. Ciprian. which how it should most clearly make
against satisfaction and works satisfactorie, M.W. knows belike, for I,
gladly profess my self therein to understand nothing.

A manifest and gross contradiction.
But grant we the conclusion. let S. Ciprian speak and mean as you would have
him. look a little back, and consider how palpably you contradicte your self.
for if it be most evident that S. Ciprian meante well, though he spoke not so
conveniently, if he understood nothing else, but that we ought to request
pardon for our sins at Gods hand, and crave his grace, using vvithal these
external actions of penance, fasting, watching, page 7.
alms, why said you immediately before, that Ciprian with the other fathers,
corrupted the doctrine of penance? why said you, that they grievously erred, and
somevvhat diminished the force of the death and blood of Christ, by which only
our sins are expiated? Straung and wonderful divinity.
how is it not a sensible lie, when you say, that by their penitential
works, they derogated not a little from Christ's death, and attributed to much
to their own inventions? when you have quitted the^ of that superstitious
opinion of merit and satisfaction, which commonly you object to them, how can
the actions seem any way reproueable to any man, except he be worse then
Epicurus or Diagoras? do these holy actions being done with a good mind and
intent, such as you now grant to the fathers, corrupt the doctrine of
repentance? does fasting in it self, derogate from Christ's death? does
watching detract from his passion? do almesdedes diminish the virtue and force
of his blood? Who ever heard such stuff? Libertinisme. the end of
justification by only faith.
now doubtless I think ye wrote this in a dream. or if ye wrote it wakinge,
and advisedly, then are you proceeded from a common Protestant, and a Puritan,
and become a Familiane, or mere Libertine, though I can easily be induced to
believe, that this is the end, and so will prove, of your common solifidian
justification, that for a man to bewail his sins, to watch, to fast, to
pray, to give alms, shall be deemed papistical, and derogatorie to Christ, and
therefore in all respects quite abandoned.

Yea your self prove this by as sound an argument, Whit. in. li. contra Sander.
pa. 297.
as any you have to prove the Pope, Antichrist. for thus you dispute in your
academical oration, Anno 1582. Quid Christo integrum relinquunt? s^ est
Christus noster sacerdos, et sunt huius sacer dotii duae parts. altera, vt
sese pro nobis in vnicum perpetuumque sacrificium offerat, altera, vt preces
pro nobis faciat, quid est quod pontificii Christum quotidie offeru^e etc.
what leave the papists entier to Christ? if Christ be our priest, and of this
priesthode there are two parts, one, that for us he offer him self an only
and perpetual sacrifice, the other, that he pray for us, why then do the
papists offer Christ daily? by which profound demonstration, as you make us
Antichrists for hearing or saing mass, so you make your self (if you be a
minister) and your fellow-ministers, as very Antichrists, for preaching
sermons, or saing Communion. for in them, I think you do not always rail at
the Pope and Catholics, but sometimes pray, though to small purpose. The^,
whereas there be two parts of Christ's priesthode, to sacrifice, and pray,
they that pray, be injurious to his priesthode, and rob Christ of that which
by your divinity is proper to his person and office of mediation. and so if we
be Antichrists for doing the first, needs must you and your comministers be
Antichrists for doing the second. and in deed, one is as true as the other.
To avoid which mischief, what way is there, but either to allow both, and so to
return to the Church (which to do our Lord send you grace) or with sacrifice,
to abandon prayer also, and all other works of charity, which without
question (as I have said) is the meaning and extreme scope of that paradox, we
are justified by only faith, that is by only fancy and imagination. for that
being so, what need or use is there of fasting, prayer, and such superfluous
and unnecessary works, injurious to Christ and derogatorie to his priesthode,
and without which, you are most assured of eternal life, by the omnipote^t
power of your only faith.

CHAP. VII. Of M. Jewels challenge renewed by M.VV. and the vanity and
falshode thereof.
HAVING so well acquitted your self against the ancient fathers in the matter
of penance, in the conclusion thereof, upon small occasion you renew M. Jewels
old challenge, and very fearcely provoke M. Martin to oppugn it if he dare.
pa. 9.
thus you say: Touching the principal parts of religion, most true it is,
that I have written, in nostris ecclesiis.
that the same faith is taught and preached in our Churches, (that is,
Zuinglia^ not Lutherane) which the most ancient fathers held. nether fear I
to renew that challenge of the most learned M. Ievvel, which you have
mentioned, if you daere take it. They are in number 27 articles, wherein
consists the cheifest force of papistrie. of all these articles choose which
you vvil, I protest my self your adversary in the cause so long as I live. To
perform so much as you say, though of your ability I doubt greatly, yet of
your good will, I doubt not a whit. for I see you stick at nothing, nether
care what you say, or unsay, deny or affirm, be it right, be it wrong, true
of false, nothing comes amiss. and many times you show this skill, within
the compass of one page. And to go about to prove to one, who after so long
time, S. Peter's being at Rome denied by M. W. most absurdly, and against all
antiquity.
and so many, and evident, and invincible proofs of a matter historical, which
of it self was among sober men never doubted of (I mean, S. Peter's being at
Rome, and founding the Church there) yet now denies the same: to one, that had
read in D. Sa^ders, the same confirmed by all manner testimonies whereby such a
matter may be confirmed, Sander. Monarch. lib. 6. ca. 10. these are in that
chapter besides many more in other places
by those that the^ lived and from time to time ensued, by Papias S. Ihon the
Eua^gelists scholar, by Hegesippus, by Caius, by Dionisius bishop of Corinth,
by S. Ireneus, by Tertullian, by S. Ciprian, al these most ancient, and living
not long after (for S. Ciprian the youngest is almost of 1400. years
antiquity) by S. Athanasius, S. Hierome, S. Optatus, S. Ambrose, S.
Chrysostom, S. Epiphanius, S. Leo the great, S. What proofs will content our
adversaries, if these will not?
Augustine, S. Gregory, by Eusebius, Lactantius, Dorotheus, Orosius, Maximus
Taurinensis, Sulpitius Seuerus, Prosper, Theodoretus, Gregorius Turonensis,
these al (saving S. Gregory the great and Turonensis) being within the first
^00. years: some of them also grounding them selves upon the very words of
scripture, as Papias, Tertullian, Eusebius, and S. Hierome, the question also
being a matter of story and fact, which can not possibly be known, but by
the narration of such writers as then lived, and received it from their elders,
so that herein M.W. has not that liberty to cauil, by comparinge together
phrases, and expounding literal speeches by mystical Allegories, as in the
sacrament and other controversies of religion their manner is, the thing also
until our age being never denied by any writer of credit or estimation, and in
our age confessed and proved by protesta^tes them selves of greatest learning
and knowledge: See Bullinger in serie temporum et rerum as. Luca in Act. tradit.
ca. 17
to go about (I say) to prove, that Christ is really in the B. Sacrament (a
matter more hard and intricate) to a man who knows this of S. Peter (a thing
most plain and evident) and yet after all this, and much more, says
notwithstanding obstinatlie, that Peter was at Rome, Whit. cont. Sad. pa. 203.
and there, with Paul laid the foundation of that church, no papist could
ever yet show and prove: to me it seems labor as madly employed, Horace.
vt si quis asellum in campo doceat parente^ currerefraenis, or if to
Anaxagoras affirming stoutly that the snow is black, niuem esse atramentu^.
Lactantius lib. 5. ca. 3.
one would with sage reasons labor to persuade that the snow is white. and
perhaps it is not greater stupiditie (how shall I call it) vnsensiblenes, in him
to avouch the first, then it were follye in an other, to labor about proof of
the second.

Wherefore leaving that thing to M. Martin him self, as being fitter for a dead
man to handle then a living, especially having to deal against you M. Of M
Jewels challe^g.
W. who in this point seem as dead and sensles as he, I will for the readers
instruction speak a little of M. Jewels challenge which you so magnify. which
albeit it has been examined sufficiently, and so, as no one thing in my
opinion, has brought either more shame to the author, or hinderance to your
Gospel, though at the first for a while it astonished many, as a thing bearing
great countenance of learning, until in time by learned men the visard was
pulled from it: yet seeing you proclaim it again so courageously, I will in few
words touch the substance and meaning of it. It conteyneth in effect 2. or 3.
heretical articles, which M. Jewel dilated and parted into a great number, as
it were some poor rag cut out into many shriddes, partly of pride and bravery
to win among the simple an opinion of learning, partly of spite and malice
against the Catholic church, which he sought specially to disgrace, and which
by nothing could be disgraced more, then if she held and mayntened 27. M. Jewel
in his sermon at Paul's cross, the year 1560. when first he put forth his
challe^g.
articles the highest mysteries and greatest keys of her religion (as he
terms them) without any authority, example, clause, or sentence, of either
scripture, father, Council, or writer, that lived within the first 600. years
of the primitive church.

The insolent vanity of which brag, to my seeming, is much like to that,
^iui. ^eca. 4. lib. 5.
which T. Quintius the Roman Consul, noted in the Ambassadors of King
Antiochus. who coming into Greece to persuade that people to take part with
Antiochus against the Romans, they magnifyinge the force of Antiochus their
master, advanced infinitely the great hoastes which he would bring, The true
pattern and image of M. Jewels challenge.
and terrified the simple Grecians, with strange names of men never heard of
before. he will bring (said they) into the field, Dahas, and M^dos, and
E^imaeos, and Cadusios. and touching his navy, so great as no port of Greece
is able to receive, the one part thereof is guided by Sidonians and Tyrians,
the other, by Aradians and Side^ians of Pamphilia, nations that have no peer
in the world, for skilfulnes in war by sea. Here unto T. Quintius replying,
this king (quoth he) by these his ambassadors vaunteth of clouds of horsemen
and footmen, and covers the seas with his navy. but all the matter is very
like to a feast, which once mine host at Chalcis made me. of whom being
enterteyned at a certain time, when I marueyled at so great provision, and
demanded, how so suddenly he came by such variety and store of venison, he
not so glorious as these men, smiling answered, that al was but the art of his
cook, and diverse dressinge of the same thing. for otherwise touching the
substance of the feast, tota illa varietas et species ferinae carnis, er at ex
sue mansueto facta. all that variety and show of venison, was made of a tame
sovv: so it is of these strange and terrible names, Dahae, Medi, Aradians, and
Sidonians. for all these are but Sy^ians, touching any valor that is in them,
more fit to make slaves, then soldiers.

The self same, may be trewly verified of M. Jewels so many and so great
articles. for all that strange variety and multiplication of particulars, is
made but, as it were ex mansueto sue, of two or three heretical propositions,
thorough his skill in that kind of varying, so drawn forth and minced, that it
mustereth in the eye of the ignorant, as though it had great store of new
matter. for grau^ting to him one, and the same no general but a particular
heresy, that the Zuinglian opinion is true touching the Sacrament, that there
is no real presence, which is his fifth article, thereof follows directly the
6. that the body of Christ, is not in a 1000 places. the 8. that no divine
honor is due to it. the 10. that bread and wine remain as well after
consecration as before. the first, and 13. that there could not be any private
or many private masses said, whereas there was no mass at al. the 17. that
Christ could not possibly be offered in sacrifice, whereas there was not any
such sacrifice, nor the substance thereof, in rerum natura. the 21. that
Christian men could not call that, lord or God, which was nothing but bread and
wine. and so forth many other, which a man of mean skill, may see to be as
plainlye included in that one, as many less numbers are included in a
greater, or many parts and qualities are necessarily consequent to a perfect
body. as on the contrary side, put the Catholic opinion to be true, which he
denies in the tenth article, then al, or most of the same articles follow as
clearly. vz. divine honor is due unto it. and likewise many of the rest. So
that in deed, that glorious challenge is altogether such, as if Marcio^ in
ancient time, Supra cap 2.
or some of your brethren (who in this point seem as very heretics as he)
should have provoked the Catholics to defend S. Lukes Gospel after this sort.













Of this see after chapter 10.
I am content to yield and subscribe.

For as here, one article agreed on draws the rest, and one denied denies
the rest, so is it in the devise of M. Jewel. and therefore as Marcion, the
more particulars he had uttered, if he had run into as many ORS, as there be
chap. or stories, or verses, in S. Luke (which well he might have done by M.
Jewels example) the farther he had run in that vain, the more notably he had
laid open to the world, his own ambitious itching folly, pride, and arrogance:
the very self same is to be deemed of this conceyte of M. Jewel, touching the
far greater number of his articles. Three he has of weight, and more principal
then all the rest. the primacie of the Sea Apostolic, the real presence, and
the sacrifice. unto these 3. let us apply his challenge, and see (now he is
gone) how well you can supply the office of his champion to maynteyne it.

M Jewel in his sermon as before.
O Gregory (says he) O Austine, O Hierom, O Chrysostom, O Leo, O Dionise, O
Anacletus, O Xistus, O Paul, O Christo if we be deceived, you have deceived
us. you taught us these heresies. thus ye ordered the holy Communion in your
time, the same we received at your hands, etc. None of our adversaries that
stand against us, are able or ever shall be able to prove against us any one of
al these points either by scripture, or by the example of the primitive
Church, or by the old Doctors, or by the ancient general Councels. and if any
man alive be able to prove any of these articles by any one clear or plain
clause, or sentence, either of scriptures, or of the old Doctors, or of any old
general Council, or by any example of the primitive Church within 600. years
after Christ, I promise to give over and subscribe unto him.

Thus M. Jewel promised, and do you promise as much? what else and so long as
you have a day to live, you will stand in defense here of. But how dare you say
so? whereas little know you what all the doctors have written, and much less
know you, what books of theirs hereafter may be found. and your selves (if you
remember) not long sithence in your own wasted libraries, Printed by John Day.
found out certain strange sermons in the Saxon tongue, against some known
and confessed parts of religion, as you would pretend. And how ca^ you so
confidently hazard your faith (if you have any) upon one sentence or clause of
those men, of whom sundry times you profess, that they wrote clauses,
sentences, chapters, and books, in defense of as gross errors as these.
Remember your stomach against them, in this same book. thus you write. Al our
faith and religion (you mean I suppose, Cont, Sand pa. 21.
so far as it is allowed by act of Parlame^t and practiced within the Q.
dominions, for other ye defend not) is grounded not upon humane, but upon
divine authority. Yet M. Carterwrighte holds the contrary and has proved it
in many books
Therefore if you bring against it, what some one father has believed, or
what the fathers al together have delivered, Patres etiam simul vniuersi.
except the same be proved by testimonies of scripture it vvaygheth nothing, it
proves nothing, it concludes nothing. for the fathers are such vvitnesses,
that they also have need of scriptures to be their vvitnesses. if deceived by
error, they have said ought differing from the scriptures, how soever they may
be pardoned erring through want of wit, we can not be pardoned, if because
they erred, we also vvil err with them. Being thus persuaded touching them
all, how dare you venture your faith, upon a clause or sentence of any one? It
is a piece of faith, far more sure by all antiquity, and more surely grounded
in the heart of any catholic, that Christ is perfect God consubstantial and
equal to his father, then any of these paradoxes can be possibly settled in
your opinions, and we honor the fathers much more then you do. yet was there
ever any Catholic, so frantike and mad, that would promise to subscribe to
Arianisme, if out of any father greek or latin, within 600. years, any one
clause or sentence might be brought against the catholic belief? wherefore
this very assertion is a most sure argument, that you have no kind of faith.
no faith (I say) at all nether divine nor humane. not divine, because you would
never so lightly esteem it, nor upon so small warrant hazard it: not humane,
because it well appears, that nether you, nether master Jewel ever meant to
stand to that, which to the world in public writing ye have so solemly
promised.

Wherefore albeit touching you affected as you are, I account this labor as
clearly lost, as if I should water a fruitles tree, Judas. v. 18.
twice dead and plucked up by the roots, yet for the readers commodity, that
he may perceive, how ignorant, and foolish, and proud, and fantastical, that
vaunte of M. Jewels was, and how like it is that you who know much less (yet
commonly who more bold then such?) can maynteine the quarrel, and wade thorough
that mire, wherein M. Jew. him self stuck fast, I will speak a few words of
these his principal questions. And because I covet (so far as may be) to cut of
al occasion of cauilling, I will not run to any other doctors (lest you take
exception against them) then those who are named here of M. Jewel, as his
pretended masters in these heresies. and again out of them I will bring
nothing, but that only which I have learned of your own writers, and read in
your own books. and that again, in such sense, without any alteration, as
your selves allege them. So that your heroical courage in answering, shall
first be exercised upon these your own brethren, and what so ever blunted
darts you shall cast against me, they shall not reach unto me, but thorough
their sides.

I will pass over Christ and S. Paul* who taught M. Ievvel these heresies, as
he says, which is not very likely* whether he mean in jest, or in earnest:
seeing S. Paul wills us so to detest any kind of heretic, that after one or
two warninges, we should let him alone, and suffer him to perish in his sin,
Tit. 3.10.
knovving that he is damned in his own judgment: Mat. 18.17.
our savior charge us to hold them for no better then ethniks and
publicanes, who shall oppose them selves unto his church and therefore i^ can
not be that either of those should teach you that, for which, The primacie of
the Romans church confirmed manifestly by those fathers whom M. Jew. calls his
masters to the contrary.
before hand they threaten and assure you of damnation. But Anacletus and
Xistus old bisshops of the Roman church before that Sea grew to this usurped
primacie, they perhaps taught you this herisie, that the bishop of Rome has no
soueraintie over the rest of bishops, and that such claim is altogether
Antichristian. If that be so, then egregious liars are your brethren the makers
of the Centuries, who tell us the clean contrary. Magdebur. Centur. 2. c. 7.
col. 139.
Anacletus (say they) in the epistles which bear his name, in the general
regiment of churches, so joins them together, that to the Roman church, he
attributes primacie and excellency of power over al churches, and over the
whole flock of the Christian people, and that, by the authority of Christ
saing to Peter, thou art Peter and upon this rock vvil I build my church etc.
This order was approved in the Council of Nice cap ^.
the second sea after that, he makes the church of Alexandria, by reason of S.
mark scoler of S. Peter. The third, Antioche, because S. Peter abode there,
before he came to Rome. degrees of Bishops he makes thus. The bishop of Rome
is placed first, as the supreme head of the church: who though he err yet
vvil he not have him to be judged of others, So say the rathers in Conc.
Sin^essano.
but to be tolerated. the second place have Patriarchs or primates, the third,
Metropolitanes, the fovrth, Archbishops, and afterward bishops. he says also,
that certain cities received primates from the blessed apostles, and from S.
Clement. epist. 3.1. Tom. Conciliorum pa. 63. The same Anacletus, appointing
how controversies in particular churches should be taken up and ended, after
the order of S. Paul. 1. Cor. 5. wills that great matters should be
referred to the higher bishops and primates, Ibid. see the same in the Council
of Cart. and Mileu. in S. Aug. epis. 90.91.92.93
but if greater difficulties arise, or causes fall out among the bishops and
primates them selves, let them be brought to the Sea Apostolic, if such
appealt be made. for so the Apostles ordained by the apoinment of our Savior,
that the greater and harder questions should alvvayes be brought to the
Apostolic Sea, upon which Christ builte his universal church. Mat. 16. And
Xistus (who succeeded not long after Anacletus) in his 2. Cent. ^. vbi supra.
epistle, names him self, the bishop of the universal Apostolic church. and
wills others to appeal to the Apostolic Sea, as to the head.

These are the first and most ancient that M. Jewel finds, of whom he
learned his heresy against the primacie of the Roman church. and very
ancient they are in deed, the one being the fourth, the other the eight, in
order from S. Peter. But (Christian reader,) was he not a good scholar, that of
these masters could gather such doctrine? of such flowers, could suck out
such poison? or can we marueyle, if they have a feate to pervert any thing be
it never so plainly and truly spoken, who can cry out upon such fathers
speaking so roundly, and say, O Xistus, O Anacletus, you taught us these
heresies, you taught us that the bishop of Rome for challenging primacie over
the church, is the precursor of Antichrist?

But you will answer, as M. Jewel teaches you, that these epistles be not the
epistles of Anacletus or Xistus, An objection answered.
but counterfeit, and set forth by some other in their names. But what
incredible peruersitie, and contradiction, and impudency is this? or how can
he so say? for saw he ever any other books of theirs, besides these epistles?
could he for him self, or you for him, pretend any such knowledge? most
certain it is, you can not. and therefore learning ought against the Roman
Sea, from Xistus and Anacletus, he must needs learn it hence. and so, either
this makes against the Roman Sea, which thing by Illyricus and other your
own writers is at large refuted (and who having the forehead of a man can say
otherwise?) or M. Jewel in naming these two Popes at Paul's cross for his
masters in that heresy, may be an example of a more dissolute man, and more
rechles in lying and abusing his audience, then ever before, or perhaps ever
sithence occupied that place.

Let us try some other of his masters, S. Gregory and S. Leo, upon whom
first, in like manner he exclameth. and the protestants them selves, those that
be farthest gone in bold denial of any thing, yet deny not but the books
and epistles extant in their names, were truly made and leaft unto us by them.
And did they (trow you) teach him these heresies? let us hear what they say,
The primacy of the Roman Sea over all churches of Chistendo^ within the first
500 years, confessed and proved by the more famous and learned protestants.
Cent. 5. ca. 7 col. 774
and that in no other words and sense, then those forenamed your own doctors
make them to speak, and point you to the books, epistles, and chapters,
where you shall find that which they write. The bishops of Rome that lived in
this fifth age (within 500 years after Christ) affirm, that the Roman church
is chief of al others. so does Leo in his sermon de anniuersario assumptionis,
et epistola 89. ad episcopos per prouinciam Vie^nensem. The bishops that
governed the Roman church in that age, required of other Archbishops, that
they should make relation to them, if there fell any matter of controversy. so
Leo vvriteth in his 46. epistle to Anatolius Archbishop of Constantinople: Ibi.
col. 776
If there be any thing that does require consultation, with speed let
relation thereof be made unto me, that after I have examined the matter, my
diligence may apoint what is to be done. Again, epist. 62. he requires of
Maximus Archbishop of Antioche, that he acknovvledge the privileges of the
third Sea, and often times write to the Sea Apostolic, how the churches
there increase. Also they took to the^ this authority, to reprove other
bishops, if they did ought amiss. they prescribed unto them what they should
do, and appointed them orders in ceremonies. so Leo epist. 86. reprehe^deth
Nicetas (patriarch) of Aquileia, because he received to communion the
Pelagians, before they had condemned their error. He reprehendeth also the
Africane bishops in the province of Mauritania Caesariensis, for making
bishops, certain persons vnlavvfully. epist. 87. and he rebukes the bishops
of Germany and France, for contemning the order of their felovvbishops. epis.
88. And vvheras Anatolius bishop of Constantinople seemed not to believe
rightly of the incarnation of the son of God, Leo charge him to put his
faith in vvriting, Leos authority over the bishop of Constantinople.
and send it to the bishop of Rome, and therein to protest openly, that he vvil
excommunicate that man, who so ever believes or teaches of the incarnation
of Christ, otherwise then is the profession of the Catholics, and of the
bishop of Rome. epist. 33. So Proterius Archbishop of Alexandria, is reported
to have sent letters touching his faith to Leo. epist. 68. And Leo, epist. 69.
signifies to the Emperor Marcianus, that Proterius is a Catholic. Ibi. col.
778.
They also confirmed bishops in their bishopriks. so Leo confirmed Maximus
patriarch of Antioche in his bishoprike, though he were made in the Council of
Ephesus, of which Council al other acts were abrogated. act. 7. Council.
Chalced. and that the same Leo confirmed to Proterius bishop of Alexandria, the
old rights of that Sea according to the Canons and (ancient) privileges, it is
noted epist. 68. Leonis ad Iulianu^ et 69. ad Imperatorem Marcianum. Leo in his
33. epistle to Theodosius, requires that he take order, that the bishop of
Constantinople send to him a vvriting, vvherin he profess to embrace the true
doctrine, and to condemn all that dissent from the same. Also they sent abroad
legates, Ibi. co. 779.
who in far distant provinces, took notice of the errors of heretics, and
corrected them. so Leo sent his legates to Constantinople to withdraw
Eutiches from his error, as appears epist. 11. ca. 6. ad Flauianum. so he
sent legates to the Emperor, epist. 34. and to Ephesus, that they taking unto
them the Archbishop of Constantinople should absolve those that had been
deceived by Dioscorus, and were now content to do penance. epist. 44. and 46.
In like manner epist. 87. sending legates in to Africa, he commands that
Donatus a Nouatian be received (to communion) if he send to Rome, a writing
touching the condemnation of that error. They required also of Archbishops,
Hard questions rising in far dista^t provinces, referred to the Sea of Rome.
that if of themselves they could not determine any thing, they should send it
to the Sea Apostolic, and vvithal they charged the^ to receive and observe
their decrees made against heretics. so Leo epist. 84. cap. 7. prescribes
this order to the bishop of Thessalonica in Thracia, that two prouincial
Councels be held every year. and if there fall out any hard matter, and it be
not decided by the judgment of the bishop of Thessalonica, that it be referred
to the bishop of Rome. and cap. 11. he wills that the contentions risinge
among the bishops, be referred to him, with a declaration of things done in
such matters. The same Leo commands Nicetas patriarch of Aquileia, that he
cause al his bishops, priests, and clearks openly to condemn certain
heresies and their authors, and to approve al synodal decrees, which the
authority of the Apostolic Sea had confirmed for the rooting out of heresy,
and that they testify so much by their subscriptions. epist. 86.

Many things (Christian reader) of good weight and importance I pass over,
because I covet to be short, and these matters are now so clear and manifest
to men never so little exercised in these questions, that I do rather marueyle
and wonder at the dulnes and passing either ignorance or shamlesnes of our
adversaries, then greatly take care how to refute so sensible and known a
falshode. Yet one thing I may not pretermitte, which the foresaid
historiographers most evidently affirm, and by plain demonstration prove, and
wherein the primacie of the Roman Church shyneth as bright, Supremacy of the
Romans Sea in general Councils, as before confessed and proved.
as the sun at noone in a summers day, that is, the demeanure of the bishop of
Rome in general Councels. in which the whole church being gathered together,
if at any time or place, then, and there, this power is principally to be
considered. And have we any thing there, for our purpose? Is it possible that
within the first 500. years, in the ancient general Councels, ought should be
found for proof of this supreme authority, Jewel in his defense of the Apolo.
par. 2. cap. 4. and 1.
which is plainly contrary to the ancient Councels, and invaded the church
under Phocas, many years after the time we speak of, except the Apology of
the English Church, and the Protestants in their writings lie to notoriously?
Luth. Tom. 7. lib. contta Papatum page 455.
It is very true (says Luther) and the Pope him self knovveth it well
enough, and nothing is more manifest by all the decrees of the old Councels, The
facyng of a lie.
and al vvritings and stories of al holy fathers which were before the first
Pope by name Bonifacius 3. Anno Domini 605.
that the bishop of Romes authority was no greater then the authority of other
bishops.

How the honor of that Apology and Luther may be saved, I leave it to M. W.
but otherwise then as of an incredible foul lie I can not judge of that
assertion, except I would discredit these other writers, who affirm the
contrary, and prove the contrary, and that out of most autentical records,
and that by this very Leo magnus, in M. Jewels judgment, so great an enemy of
this supremacy. For continuing there narration of the same Popes, Vbi sup. col
781.782.
They summoned general Councels (say these writers) they were the Presidents
in general Councels, they confirmed general Councels, and sometimes in part,
sometimes wholy, they disanulled general Councels. and this is manifest in
Leo his epistles and the general Councels themselves keapt under him. Epist.
93. ca. 17. we have sent letters (says he) to our brethren and felovv-bishops
of Tarraco in Spain, of Carthage in Afrike, of Portugal and France, and have
sommoned them to meet at a general Council. and Leo sent Paschasinus bishop of
Sicilia to be President in the Council of Chalcedon: which is manifest in
the Acts of that Council. No lawful Counsel with out approbation of the Roman
Sea.
And the same Paschasinus the Popes vicar condemned Dioscorus Patriarch of
Alexandria, for this reason, because he durst hold a Council without the
authority of the Sea Apostolic. and Cecropius bishop of Sebastopolis, says
in the same place, we may not call the second Council of Ephesus, by the name
of a Council, because it was nether gathered together by the Apostolic
authority, nether proceeded it orderly. in actis Concilii Chalcedonensis. See
Leo epist. 10. ad Flauianum, and 12. ad Theodosium. Thus Leo condemned the
second Council of Ephesus, and required an other to be gathered, epist.
24.25.28.30.31.32. and whereas Anatolius bishop of Constantinople, would have
set him self before the churches of Alexandria and Antioche, Leo epist. 53.
vvriteth unto him most vehemently, and shows that to be against the canons
of the Nicene Council, and that he vvil not permit those churches to leese
their old prerogatives: which thing he avouches also in his epistle to
Pulcheria. and there again he rebukes the ambition or insolency of that
Anatolius, and signifies expressly, that he does abrogate and disanulle all the
decrees of the bishops there gathered together, so many as were contrary to
the rules of the Nicene Counsel. And the Counsel of Chalcedo^ (of 630. bishops
assembled out of all the world) thus vvriteth to Leo. we beseech you, that you
vvil honor our judgment with your approbation, and as we of zeal have put
our consent to these good decrees, Summitas tua filiis. Vbi sup. ca. 10. col,
1262
so let your Supremacy fulfill to us your children, that which is convenient.
Finally, this principality of the Roman church, Leo labors to persuade in
most of his epistles, as in his epistles to Anastasius bishop of Thessalonica,
to the bishops of Germany and France, to Anatolius bishop of Constantinople,
and in sundry other, where very painfully he goes about to prove, that
singular preeminence was given to Peter above the other Apostles, and that
thence rose the distinction of bishops, and especially the primacie of the
Roman church, and that therefore he is bound to take the care of al churches.
Thus far they. whereby we see, that S. Leo thought this primacy due to the
church of Rome, not by decree of Emperors or Councels, but by the express
ordinance of Christ him self in the Gospel.

And in all this, can M. W. find never a sentence, clause, or example, for the
Supremacy? thinks he that M. Jewels gra^matical divinity of comparing
words and phrases, tempered together with a huge heap of corruptions and
lies, will serve, in the judgment of any reasonable man, against such a troop
of sensible demonstrations, gathered and urged to this purpose by his own
brethren? when as the great general Councils acknowledge such authority, the
greatest patriarchs of Constantinople, Antioche, Alexandria, submit them selves
to such authority, the bishop of Rome, a man of such excellency for learning,
wisdom, and godliness, as Leo was, exercyseth upon them such authority,
prescribes to them laws, Canons, and decrees, governs in their provinces,
and in all other, in Africa, in Mauritania, in Aegipte, in Syria, in Asia, in
Greece, in Spain, in France, in Germany, in all parts of the Christian world?
Confess. Geneu. cap. 7.. 12.

Leo so magnified by M. Jewel, is a very Antichrist to Beza and the church of
Geneua.


Remembers he not that Theodore Beza and the church of Geneua answer these
places, by calling him plain Antichrist for using this authority? Co^stat
Leonem in epistolis, Romanae Sedis Antichristianae arrogantiam plane spirasse.
It is manifest (say they) that Leo in his epistles does clearly breath forth
the arrogancy of that Antichristian Roman Sea. and yet S. Leo in Geneua a
very Antichrist for his writing and behavior about the Supremacy, for the
self same matter, in England is a pure Protesta^te. He taught M. Jewel that the
authority of the bishop of Rome, was no greater then the authority of any
other bishop, and of thee o Leo, he learned this heresy. and if he were
deceived, thou Leo deceauedst him. Surely it was an oversight, that he forgot
to put in the roll, S. Bernard, the bishop of Rochester, and Sir Thomas More.
For of them in this case he learned as much as of S. Leo, or of S. Gregory,
who notwithstanding is an other of his masters. But what a froward and
overthwart scholar he was, who here again so blyndly mistook his master, I
think few of his schole-felowes are ignorant, and it is so clear, that in
truth it greueth me to spend time therein. and therefore I refer the reader to
the same story, where he shall see a good and large treatise, abundantly
proui^g the same of S. Gregory, which now has been shevved of S. Centuria
6.6.7. col. 425.
Leo. he shall find there confessed by those Protestants who hated the Sea of
Rome as deeply, as did either M.W. or M. Jewel, but were not so extremely
hardened in face and forhead as M. Jewel was, and as M.W. must be, if he take
upon him the others quarrel, he shall find (I say) confessed by them and proved
in like manner, that this S. Gregory taught, that Apostolica seeds est omnium
Ecclesiarum caput. The church of Constantinople subject to the Sea of Rome
before Phocas or Bonifacius 3.
the Apostolic Sea (of Rome) is head of al churches. lib. 11. epist. 54.
Indict. 6. that both the Emperor and Eusebius his felovv-bishop, professed
that the church of Constantinople was subject unto that Sea. li. 7. epis. 63.
indict. 2. that he cited Maximus bishop of Salona in Dalmatia to come to Rome,
there to render account how he came by that bishoprike. lib. 5. indict. 14.
epist. 25. he appointed the bishop of Siracusa to be judge over the bishop of
Constantinople. lib. 7. indict. 2. epis. 64. he sent into Spain, one who
should restore Ianuarius deposed from his bishoprike unjustly. lib. 11. indict.
6. epist. 50. and 54. he apointeth the bishops of France, how they should call
a synod for the rooting out of simonie and avarice. lib. 9. indict. 4. epist.
49. and sequentibus. and those things which in the synod they should agree
on, he wills should be sent to him, and straightly charge them, that at
the least once in the year they keep a synod, according to the canonical
decrees. lib. 7. epist. 110. numer. 2. And Virgilius bishop of Arelatum or
Arles, whom in the French church he made his Vicar and Legate, and preferred
before al other bishops, he wills to send to him, al harder controversies.
li. 4. ind. 14. epi. 52. The like privilege he grants to Maximianus bishop
of Siracusa in Sicilia, to be supreme ouerseer of those churches, and to end
lesser controversies and send the greater to him. which privilege for all that,
he gives to the person, not to the place. lib. 2. epist. 4. indict. 10.
Isychius bishop of Jerusalem, he bids to exterminate from his churches the
Simoniacal heresy. lib. 9. indict. 4. epist. 40. To Columbus bishop of Numidia
and the primate of that province he enioyneth, that he with other examine the
cause of Donadeus deposed by Victor his bishop. and if he be guilty, to bind
him to penance, if he be guiltles, that they rebuke Victor, that he may know
how unjustly he has dealt. lib. 10. indict. 5. epist. 8. when the bishop of
Constantinople had condemned a priest of Chalcedon, Gregory retracteth that
sentence, and commands him being innocent to be absolved. lib 5. indict. 14.
epist. 15.16.17. Finally he affirms again and proves by scripture, that the
Roman church is head of al churches, caput omnium Ecclesiarum. Greg. in 4.
Psalm. penitentialem, and lib. 12. indict. 7. epist. 32. and so forth, for what
should I stand upon particulars, which are in manner innumerable there
rehearsed. and by these writers it seems (and true it is) that his 12. Vide
ibi ca. 7. page 425.426.427.428.429.430 etc. until the page 439.
books of epistles conteyne in effect nothing else, but the exercise of such
universal jurisdiction, practysed by Gregory the first in all Christian
churches, from East to West, from North to South, in far more ample manner, and
with more show of authority, then appears now in Gregory the thirtenth his
successor. These things I say and very many other of this quality, did S.
Gregory the first, Calvin. Institut. lib. 4. ca. 7.. 12.13
a man for humility commended of Calvin singularly, of Luther (who seeldome
spoke good of any Pope) acknowledged for a good and holy bishop. Luth. Tom. 7.
aduersus Papatum fol. 455.
And Bale sometime an Irish prelate (though afterward a common minister) who
rayleth fowly at the most glorious martyrs and confessors Popes of that Sea
before S. Gregory, yet speaking of him, attributes this unto him, that he was
the best for life and learning, that ever sat in that place. Balaeus de script.
Brita^. cent. 1. p. 45.
Gregorius omnium Romanorum pontificum doctrina and vita prestantissimus.

But against al these examples, consisting not only in plain words, but much
more in manifest deeds, factes, judgments, corrections, jurisdictions,
appellations, excomunications, al evident practices of sovereign principality,
M. Jewel has a number of words, and they al depending of one only word, that
is, the name universal, VNIVERSALIS.
which S. Gregory does so condemn, as he accompteth him for Antichrist, that
would be called universal bishop. and here what a stir he keeps, Paul's
cross, his reply against D. Cole and D. Harding, the English Apology and the
defense of the Apology witness abundantly. For this is a common storebox,
when so ever the Pope comes in the way, so far forth, that in one side of a
leaf he quoteth S. Reply against D. Harding pa. 226.
Gregory against this name, no less then 19. times. and M. W. with his
fellows, at this day sings that song as freshly, as though it never had been
heard before. But if either he or they regarded the searching out of the truth,
and sought not continual wrangling about words, they would never so blindlie
have snatched at one word, against so many facts and examples of continual
custom, so many ways testified and expressed by word and deed. But the
answer is easy, and often times given by S. Gregory, often times repeted and
proposed by the late catholic writers. but because M. W. has nor perhaps
seen the one, and not greatly considered the other, I will give him the same,
and the true sense of such words, out of one of his own fellows.

M. Jewels and other protestants common objection taken out of S. Gregory
against the supremacy, answered truly by one of their own sect.
Andreas Fricius of Polonia, a man though bearing deadly hatred to the Pope of
Rome, yet one that could be content well enough to have the like office among
his Euangelical churches to keep them in unity, which he thinks otherwise
will never be, handling that matter and laing against him self this old ancient
objection of the Protestants, Andreas Fricius de ecclesia. lib. 2. cap. 10.
page 570.
thus answers it, and that truly. Some there be (says this writer) that
against this office (of universal superintendent) object the authority of
Gregory, who says, that such a title apperteyneth to the precursor of
Antichrist. But the reason of Gregory is to be known. and it may be gathered
of his words, which he repeteth in many epistles, that the title of
universal bishop is contrary, and does gainsay the grace which is commonly
poured upon al bishops. Universal bishop, how and in what sense denied by S.
Gregory.
He therefore that should call him self universal bishop, calls him self the
only bishop, and takes bishoply power from the rest. Wherefore this title he
would have to be rejected, which is usurped with the injury of other
bishops. Such sentences to this purpose are oftentimes repeted by S. Saepe
eiusmodi sente^tiae itera^tur a Gregorio.
Gregory in many epistles etc. this title he does abhor both in him self,
and in all other. so far of is he from granting the same to the bishop of
Constantinople. and why so? because bishoply grace is generally bestovved
(from god) upon al bishops. and it is no reason that any one should take to him
self, that which by equal right agrees to al. This being the true meaning of
such places, and this being very often times given by S. Gregory him self,
saepe et in multis epistolis, you see how justly we accuse both M. Jewel and
you, of wilfulnes and blindness. how justly we object unto you a verbal and
talkatiue divinity, who could not, or would not see that is which so commonly
repeted again and again in so many epistles.

Though S. Greg. disliked the name Universal, yet he approved the Supremacy
as agreeable to the express word of god.
But makes S. Gregory either in this word, or in all his words or works, ought
against the primacie of that church? This writer proceeds on thus. Verumtamen
ex aliis constat etc. notvvithstanding by other places it is evident, that
Gregory thought, that the charge and principality of the whole church, was
committed to Peter by the voice of our Lord. And thus much he vvrote plainly,
and almost word for word lib. 4. epistola. 32. to the emperor Maurice, and
confirmed it by testimony of scripture. It is manifest (says Gregory) to al
men that know the gospel, that by the voice of our Lord, the care of the
whole church was committed to holy S. Peter Prince of all the Apostles. For to
him it is said, feed my sheep. John. 21. To him it is said, I have prayed for
the, that thy faith fail not. Luc. 22. To him it is said: thou art Peter and
upon this rock I vvil build my church etc. If charge of the universal church
make the Pope Antichrist, then our Savior made S. Peter Antichrist.
Mat. 16. Behold he receaueth the keys of the kingdom of heaven, power to bind
and loose is given to him, to him is committed the charge and principalite of
the whole church. And yet for this cause Gregory thought not that Peter was
the forerunner of Antichrist. Thus he, proving both by scripture and by reason,
that S. Gregory, though he disliked and condemned that proud name of
universal bishop, both in him self and others (as does also Pope Gregory the
13. at this day) yet he nether disliked, nor condemned the supreme charge and
government of the church for Antichristian, which him self exercised. nether
could he so do, except he first condemned for Antichristian, S. Peter the
Apostle who received it, and Christ our Savior who gave it. So tha^ M. Jew.
has hitherto showed small wit, learning, faith, or honesty, in making these
me^, S. Gregory, Leo, Xistus, Anacletus his masters in that heresy against
the supremacy, who have not only no one word or syllable against it, but
contrariwise have whole and long epistles, chapters, discourses, examples, and
factes, arguments, reasons and scriptures to prove it. And here the reader may
guess, how like I were to cloy him with abundance and store, if I would in like
sort go thorough with the other articles, which I might do as well, and with as
great advantage. But I will not cast more water into the sea, and therefore
nether will prosequute in this order the other two questions, but only touch
them in a word, and so proceed to other matter.

As here against the Pope, so against the real presence, for the zuinglian
imagination, M. Jewel likewise chalengeth all the fathers unto him, namely those
above rehearsed, S. Gregory S. Leo etc. and besides, S. Austin, S. Hierom, and
S. Chrysostom, then which I think he could not have picked out amongst all the
fathers, more heavy and deadly enemies to him, touching any part of his false
faith, and those two parts of the real presence and sacrifice especially. For
was there ever besides this wicked man, any Luther, or Bucer, or who so ever
was worse then other, S. Gregory a priest, without all reason made a
minister by M. Jewel.
so desperate in lying, that would say S. Gregory was a minister, and
ministered the holy communion as now is the fashion in England? when his books
in so many places, show him to have been a priest, and a priest to celebrate
mass, and not to minister communion? unto whom other protestants commonly
attribute the framing of the mass, Bibliand. in praefat. epistolaru^ Zuinglii
and Oecolampadii. Melanct. li. 4 Chronic. in Henric. 4. fol. 186.187.
because of two or three rites which he ordained therein? Whom for this cause,
Theodorus Biblia^der scornfully names patriarcham caeremoniarum, the Patriarch
of ceremonies: Melanchtho^, that he horribly profaned the Communion, allowing
by public authority the sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, not only for
the living but also for the dead: Flacius Illyricus, that by miracle he
converted a faithles woman who believed not that the body of Christ was
substancially in tbe Sacrament. Centu. 6. ca. 10. col. 678.679.682. ibi. ca.
13. col. 817.819.
ex Paulo Diacono. lib. 2. cap. 41.42. and that every where be does inculcate
sacrifices and mass, and by diverse miracles confirms the same: against whom
Petrus Paulus Vergerius, for authority, place and estimation, as great a
Protestant as any in our days, has written a whole book, entitled de nugis
and fabulis Papae Gregorii primi: P. Paulus Vergeri. co^tra Grego. 1.
and finally (to pass by many others) when your own English writers protest
him to have been a perfect and absolute Papist, and that therefore your first
Apostles and Evangelists in bringing in this your Gospel, did directly oppose
them selves unto him, and rooted out that which he and his Legate our Apostle
S. Austin had planted? Gregory the first (says your Chronicler John Bale) the
year of our lord 596. Bale. cent. 1. page 66.72. and centur. 8. pa. 678.
sent Austine the monk to plant in our churches his Roman religion. But
Latimer is much more vvorthie to be called our Apostle then Austine. For
Austine brought nothing but man's traditions, Mark this confession. Our first
Apostles were Papists.
mass, Crosses, litanies etc. whereas Latimer with the hook of truth cut of
those superstitions which he had planted, and cast them out of the Lords
vineyard. And does not M. Horn the late called bishop of Winchester, in plain
terms revile this glorious Apostle, and name him most ethnically a blind
bussard, M. Horn against M. Feknam. pa. 58.
because he was ignorant of your Alcoran, and knew nothing else, and therefore
induced our forefathers to no other Gospel, then to the ancient Gospel of
Christ and religion Catholic?

And does the other S. Austin make more for you in this point of your
unbelief, then does this later S. Austin, or S. Gregory? I know you allege
him much more, but with what honesty, I had rather you should hear of your
own father Luther, then of me. In my judgment (says Luther) after the
Apostles, Luth. Tom. 7. defensio verborum coenae fol. 405.
the church has not had a better doctor then was S. Austin. And that holy
man how filthilie and how spitefully is he mangled and disfigured by the
Sacramentaries, S. Austine intolerably abused and corrupted by the
Sacramentaries.
that he may become a defender and patron of their venomous, blasphemous and
erroneous heresy? Verily as much as in me lies, so long as I have breath in
my body, I vvil vvithstand them, and protest that they do him injury. which
thing any man may do with an assured and confident mind, because the
Sacramentaries only pull and tear his words into their own sense, proving
their application by no reason, but only by vain boasting of their most
certain truth. And concerning the rest of the fathers, whereas M. Jewel
affirms, that they all taught as he did, against the real presence, Luther
contrariwise affirms, that no one ever so taught, but every one taught the
contrary. Thus he writes in the same book. This truly is marvelous, Ibid.
fo. 391. Nullus Nemo.
that no one of the fathers, whereof the number is infinite, ever spoke of the
Sacrament, as do the Sacramentaries. No one father was of M. Jewels opinion
touching the Sacrament.
For none of them uses such words, there is only bread and wine: or, the
body and blood of Christ is not there. Surely it is not credible, nay it is not
possible, where as they talk again and again of these things, but at some
time, at the lest once, these words would have slipped out of their pen: it is
only bread, Concordes and consta^tes vno ore.
or the body of Christ is not there corporally, or such like. But they al
speak so precisely, as though none doubted, but that there were present the
body and blood of Christ. They al agreably and constantly with one mouth
avouch the affirmative, that it is there. But our Sacramentaries can do nothing
else but proclayme the negative, that it is not there. So Luther, prince and
father of this Gospel. and so that Luther, supra cap. 3.
whose judgment M.VV. prefers before a thousand Austines, a thousand
Ciprians, and as many churches. and so at the least, more to be esteemed then
one M. Jewel, though M.W. stand by him to help out the matter.

But this field is so large, that the farther I go, the farther I may. and
therefore to break of, omitting S. Chrysostom, who made 6. S. Chrisostomes 6.
books de sacerdotio.
books of priesthode, (and never a one of ministerhode,) and therefore is not
like to be an enemy to the sacrifice, lib. 3.
which in one part of that work he sets forth so excelle^tly, referring M.
chap. 4.
W. for the sacrifice to that which has been said before: for the real
presence, to that which may by occasion be touched hereafter, chap. 8 and 9.
I will end this matter, wishinge the reader to carry in memory M. Jewels
challe^ge as an eternal example of his inexplicable impudency and rashness.
thereby that he learn, not to be moved with the bold cou^tena^ces of his
aftercommers, whose fashion is very commonly to look biglie, Tower
disputation.
when in deed (settinge a side the Tower rack and Tiburne) they can do
nothing: and then to crake vnmeasurably, when besides words and crakes (and
lies) they have nothing to say. which to have been the fashion of heretics in
his time, S. Austin of old noted, Aug. de vtilitate crede^di cap. 1.
and we in our time find true by experience. And in this present quarrel it can
not be avoided, but either Calvin, Luther, Beza, Peter Martyr, Zuinglius,
Illyricus, and Bale, principal Eua^gelists and gospellers be egregious liars,
who tell us that the fathers thus taught, and thus believed of the Popes
primacy, of the sacrifice and real presence: or else M. Jewel must take that to
him self, unto whom in deed, that quality was in a very high degree an
inseparable accide^t. For in that property, I believe verily he passed any one
heretic that ever wrote since Christ's time.

CHAP. VIII. Of Beza corruptly translating a place of scripture Act. 3. and of
the real presence.
WHEREFORE leaving M. Jewel, proceed we on in order to that which follows,
that is, to Bezaes tra^slatio^ of the words of S. Peter Act. 3. in defending
whereof, you draw near to the vain I look for, and show your self to be a
scholar of him whose challenge you aduau^ce so much. For you do nothing else but
dally in ambiguitie of words without any regard of truth, deceauing both your
reader and your self. You say, page 9.
when Beza translated, (...) by this, que^ oportet quide^ coelo capi, who
must be received in heaven, he did it only to avoid ambiguitie of speech,
which is found in the other, que^ oportet coelu^ capere, and the sense still
remains one. For whereas Peter vvil say and teach, How knows M.W. that S.
Peter will say so?
that necessarily heaven must receive Christ until the times that all things
be restored, this sense Beza delivered most faithfully, in most convenient
words. For if heaven shall receive Christ, then necessary it is, that Christ
be received of heaven. which thing common sense might have taught you. For tell
me I pray you M. Martin, if the schole receive and conteyne you, are you not
received and contained of the schole? Having obtained thus much, you fall into
an idle talk, that actiues or deponents may be rendered by passiues by example
of Cicero, whereof no man doubts, and then conclude, that S. Gregory
Nazianzene does affirm Christu^ (...). This being the entier sum of your
discourse, gladly would I now learn of the reader, whether he understands
hereby what you would say, or what you go about to prove, and reprove?
forsooth, that the sense in a Greek writer is not hindered, if a verb deponent
or active making the sentence doubtful and applicable to diverse senses, for
playner understanding, in Latin be turned into a verb passive. For so did
Cicero in translating a sentence of Plato, and so might you do in translating a
sentence of S. Paul, animalis homo non percipit, (...) ea quae sunt spiritus.
spiritual things are not perceived of a carnal man. where (...) a verb
deponent in Greek, is well expressed in English, by a verb passive. You say
well, and like a good scholar. But is this all that M. Martin went about to show,
and for which he found fault with Beza? Certes it is al, for ought I can
conceive by your manner of defense. but the thing it self is far otherwise. How
dangerous it is to restrain the text of scripture, to the particular sense of
some one man, or Sect


For first, although in common profane writers, where ordinarily in words and
phrases there lies no hid secrets or mysteries, to express doubtful Greek by
vndoubtful Latin, when if there be committed an error, it imports not
greatly, this is not so material: yet in the word of God, where ambiguous
speaking yeldeth diverse senses, and perhaps both, or not that one which is
taken, principally intended, there, for any man of purpose to restrain that
which the holy Ghost has leaft at large, it is to saucy and malapert, if it be
not wicked and impious. For what if the meaning of Saint Peter be here not
that heaven should take Christ, but that Christ should take heaven, to rule and
govern it even to the end of the world, according as els-where it is said.
Mat. 11. v. 27. and cap, 28 verse. 18.
Al things are delivered me of my father. to me is given al power in heaven
and in earth. and again, Cor. 15. v. 26.
thou have put al things under his feet, Ephesians. 1. v. 20
setting him on thy right hand above all principality, and potestate, and
power, and domination, and every thing that is named, not only in this
world but also in that to come. But you will say this is a false sense. Suppose
it be, as perhaps it is not. will you take upon you by Ciceroes authority, as
Beza does oftentimes by Homers and Ouids, to limite that which the Evangelist
has leaft at at large? And see by this rash audacitie what confusion you
bring, and what a hotchpoch you make of the scriptures. Suppose some other be
of my opinion, and think the sense which I give, to be the only true, and
yours to be the false. shall he be so bold to shut out yours, and thrust in his
own with like necessity and restraynt as you have done? if so, then you know
the Lutherans think as I say. For thus writes Illyricus, and he writes as it
may seem, directly against your Beza. Illyric. in Act. cap. 3. ver. 21.
Some understand this place, that Christ is received or contained of the
heaven. which sentence is against the scope of the Apostle, and should set
forth rather the infirmity, then the glory and power of Christ. For so of
angels, yea of devils it may be said, that they are received or contained of
heaven, because the word coelu^, sometime in the scripture signifies the
air. A goodly matter. he who by witness ^o the scripture fills al things,
we vvil say is received or contained in a certain place, almost as it were in
a prison.

Secondarily, what wicked and vnco^scionable you gave a passive for an active
or deponent, but because you did it in this place, and did it to this end, that
so you might seem by scripture to exclude Christ from the sacrament? For this
reason Beza gives, and for this reason M. Martin reproves Beza, and Bezaes
corruption. and of this M.W. speaks not a word, or if he do, it is a
manifest falsitie. For if M. Whit. sayng that Beza did it for that only cause,
to avoid doubtful speech, oppose him self to M. Martin in this, Scripture of
purpose falsely translated against the real presence. Discoue. page 257.
it can not be excused from a plain lie. for so much as in Bezaes behalf he
avouches that to be true, which Beza him self protests to be false. They so
conclude Christ in heaven (says M. Martin) that he can not be on the altar.
and Beza protests that he so translateth of purpose, to keep Christ's
presence thence.

Discou. page 257.
This translation of Beza is so far from the Greek (says M. Martin) that not
only Illyricus the Lutherane, but Calvin him self does not like it. Which
wodes if you had joined to the rest, if you had but named those men, your
slender reasons in the eyes of your reader, would forthwith have appeared
contemptible. And well he might have marueyled, how you durst defend such a
translation, which not only Illyricus a famous Luthera^, but also Calvin, a
prince amongst the Zuinglia^s, in plain speech reprehendeth. whereby a man may
see that you seek not for truth, but only to talk on, and serve the time, and
abuse the reader.

Recipitur continetur.
and so in fine, whiles you would seem to make S. Peter speak clearly and
plainly, you make him speak falsely and heretically. whereof, forthwith I shall
have occasion to treat. The place which you cite out of Nazianzene, oportet
Christum a coelo recipi, makes no more for you, then does the article of our
Creed, ascendit ad coelos, or sedet ad dexteram patris. and I marvel what
Catholic believes the contrary, and therefore I let it pass.

As ye proceed, the reason begins to appear, why you would so feign have
that forged interpretation of Beza to stand for good. For now you begin to
frame against the real presence, arguments drawn from natural and mathematical
conditions of a body: whereby the reader may learn the more to detest and
abhor the whole race of your heretical translators. Mat. 13. v. 25
For as our Savior says, in the field of his Catholic church in the night,
when men were a sleep, Every heretic translateth the scripture in favor of
his heresy.
his enemy came and ouersovved cockle among the wheat, and went his way,
and some time passed, before the cockle thus sown appeared: in like manner
these feedemen of the same adversary, wicked corrupters of the good feed and
word of Christ, first fall a tra^slating of the scripture, with many goodly
and plausible pretenses, of gods honor, and the peoples commodity, and
publishing gods blessed book etc. And so while no man thinks amiss of them,
as it were in the night and darkness, being espied of none, among the good seed
of god, they mingle and sow their own wicked and abhommable darnel, which at
first is not seen, but in time shows it self. For when M.W. so smoothly
went away with the matter, and found fault with M. Martins ignorance for
dislyking so plain a thing, when he told us of actiues and passiues, that
there was no difference between the first, quem oportet coelum capere, and this
second, quem oportet coelo capi, but that this later is more clear and
perspicuous, who would have supposed any great mischief to have been hidden
therein? But now, even thereof he frames his principal argument, to spoil the
church of Christ's real presence. With like sincerity translate the Lutherans
for their Lutherish, the Brentians for their Vbiquitarie, the Trinitaries of
Pole for their Arian, and Sebastianus Castalio for his Academical heresy,
sprinkling hear and there many drops of poison, with which simple souls are
daungerously infected, before the mischeuous practyse be of many discovered.
But let us hear M. W. argument, drawn (as he would have us suppose) from the
former falsified text of scripture, but in deed from Aristotle and Euclide.
Pa. 11.
If Christ's body (says he) be natural, and of the same substance that ours
is, The zuinglians most usual and plausible argument against the real presence.
then can it be contained but in one place, and if it be in heaven, it is not
in the sacrament. But Christ's body is such a body, consubstantial to ours in all
things, saving glory and immortality, and that body of Christ is now
contained in heaven, as Peter says, Co^tinetur
therefore it is not in the Sacrament, much less in infinite Sacraments. This
argument fears not your forces. For if Christ's body be together in heaven and
in the sacrament, then Christ has a double body or rather infinite bodies. but
this is false. ergo that. Furthermore if Christ's body be circumscribed with
some certain place in heaven and reteyneth all properties of a true body, and
the self same in the sacrament be (...) incircumscript, invisible, etc. then
contradictories may be verified of the same body. But this can not be.
therefore the other is impossible.

Many things to be noted in M. W. argument.
Of this kind of reasoning, which may be enlarged as far, and amplified by as
many circumstances, as either Geometry, or Philosophy, or any sense, seeing,
hearing, tasting, handling, or human reason, or common experiment, in the
course of the world list to heap together, al depending of one principle,
whether one body may be in diverse places, or whether Christ be bound to the
rules and conditions of nature, many things I learn.

First, how much you can make of a little, and vaunte so lustely of such
beggarly arguments, Great vauntinge upon small occasion.
which being found out first and invented by prentises and artisans in their
shops, thence admitted by ministers into their pulpits, and at length received
by such as you are, in to the schools for want of better store, yet rather as
rhetorical the^ theological, rather coniectural then necessary, have so often
times been refuted by Catholics, condemned by Lutherans refused of
Caluinistes, and are withal as common, as are the Postilions boots.

Secondarily (which before I noted) I learn how careful a Christian man ought
to be in dealing with you, whose fashion is, of molehils to make mountains.
wicked Sophistry.
and if of courtesy one grant you an inch, straight ways you borow a spanne,
and forthwith by force and violence you snatch an ell. For when you so demurely
made it to be a trifle, whether a man translated the words, quem oportet
coelum capere, (...).
whom the heavens must receive, or who must be received in heaven, and so
carried away the later against the former, who would have thought that to have
been such a cokatrice egg, as where of should proceed such a pestiferous
serpent, that would corrupt the universal church of Christ, and destroy the
faith, that has been since Christ's time. Contained.
If Christ's body be contained in heaven as S. Peter says, then is it not in
the sacrament. which collection when a man perceaueth, who before of
simplicity found no fault wi^h your translation, and made no conscience
whether he said, Corruption of scripture.
heaven received Christ, or Christ was received in to heaven, he can not now
forbear, but needs he must say, that your argument is false, and you belie S.
Peter. And this being your sense, you have corrupted the word of god, and
thrusting in your own word, Hiero. in Gal. cap. 1.
have made of it the word of the devil. Great danger it is (says S. Hierom)
to speak in the church, lest perhaps through perverse interpretation, of the
gospel of Christ, be made the gospel of man, or which is worse, the gospel of
the Devil. And plain it is that by this corruption and shuffling in contained
for received, and running sophistically and wickedly as you please from one to
the other, you abuse the scriptures and falsify them intolerably, and make
them your own word, not the word of god. For S. Peter, in sayng that heaven
must receive the body of Christ, affirms Christ's body to be contained in
heaven, no more then S. Luke writing that Samaria received the word of God,
(...). Act. 8. v. 14. Luc. 9. v. 48.
affirms rhat the word of God was then contained in Samaria, which was most
false. Our Savior says in this self same manner. (...). The like whereof he
speaks in S. Matthew of receiving his Apostles. Mat. 10. v. 40
(...). He that receaueth a child, Apostle, or prophet in my name, receaueth
me. and he that receaueth me, receaueth him that has sent me. Here, who sees
not what impiety would follow, if we should take to our selves M. W. liberty,
and say, he that receaueth a child in Christ's name, he receaueth Christ, he
receaueth God, that is, of him, Christ is contained, God is contained. And
albeit here in the things compared together there be some difference, yet in
the word used by our Savior, S. Peter, and the Euangeliste, there is no
difference, and this indifferency should the interpreter have expressed, and so
would Beza have done, had it not been for his heresy against the B. sacra,
meant.

Thirdly I note the proceeding of your Gospel, and learn how it goes on
according to S. 2. Timoth. 3.
Paul's prophecy, a malo in peius from badd to worse, from heresy to
apostasy, The proceeding of the new gospel.
running continually forward the very hye way to infidelity. When this gospel
began in England in the end of King Henryes days, those that in other points
were stark heretics, and the ringleaders unto others, See M. Fox. martyrologe
in Fryth and Barnes, etc.
Tindale, Frith, Barnes, Cranmer, leaft it as a thing indifferent, to believe
the real presence. And namely Frith (that glorious martyr) permitted every man
to judge what they listed of the sacrament, Fox Act. and monumen. edit. ann.
1563. p. 500.
if so be the adoration thereof were taken away. His reason was, because then
there remained no more, The real presence approved by M. Foxes Martyrs.
any poison that any man ought or might be afraid of. So that the real presence
to this great martyr, seemed no way harmful or against Christian faith, which
now to M. Whitaker is a matter so monstrous, that it is against scripture,
against faith, against S. Peter, and in steed of one Christ multiplieth many.
And how then calls he the Lutherans, his brethren in Christ, who by this
reason have an other Christ from him, nay a plain contradictorie Christ against
him?

But to answer his argument, and in this al other drawn from like principles,
I demand of M.W. whether he urge this argument so, that Christ's body by course
of nature can not be in diverse places and receive those other contradictory
qualities (as he falsely imagines) or that by Gods power and omnipote^cie this
can not be wrought. If the first, then we are agreed, and then may al these
blotted papers serve for some other purpose. For against us and the doctrine of
the church, they make nothing. And then M. VV. has done wickedly, to move
these scruples to idle heads, whereas he should rather have sought what Christ's
will is. If he say the later, that it is above the reach of Gods power, where
unto his arguments tend, I reply, that he is an infidel, Many th^^^ges in h^
scripture vncredibl^ as Christ's presence in the blessed Sacrament.
and believes not the first article of his Creed. he believes not other
things expressly set down in the scripture, of the same quality, as that
our Lady was a Virgin when she delivered Christ, Joan. 20. verse. 19.
that he entered in to his disciples ianuis clausis, that in the burning
furnace, one and the self same fire was so hot and violente, that it slew
those that stood a far of, Daniel. 3. v. 47. and 48.
the ministers of the King, and yet to those that were in the midst of it,
Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago, it was so cold and temperate, that it resembled
ventum roris flantem, a moist gale of vvinde, Ibid. v. 50.
and harmed them nothing. which is as flat a contradiction as any he brings,
and therefore belike, without the compass of his belief. I say again, that
he is proceeded farther in infidelity then his masters, who notwithstanding
were gone far enough, and a man needed not to ouerrun them. For they hitherto
were wo^t to protest, that they never doubted but Christ could do it, mary they
supposed and believed that he never meant it, and so made the question to
consist in that, whether Christ would, not whether he could, as may be seen
in M. Jewel art. 10. 9. in fine.
Jewel, in the very end of his 10. article against M. Harding, M. W. argument
against the Sacrament the very root of Paganism, and infidelity.


Next let him note, that this his argument is the very shipwreck of Christian
religion, and root of al Paganism, destroyng our redemption, destroyng our
resurrection, confounding and destroyng all the articles of our faith, although
it pretend the honor of god: Calvin contra Seruetu^ page 105.
as well writes Calvin of Seruetus and the Anabaptists. For what is the first
cornerstone of the Seruetan and Anabaptistical buylding against Christ's
Incarnation? Even that which M. W. here tendereth them, and was squared before
to their hands by Zuinglius and the Sacramentaries. The Anabaptists I say,
urging the self same Philosophical and Phisical rules, object that the
Papists belief of Christ's Incarnation of the Virgin, besides that it is base
and attributes to much honor to that woman, besides this, Calu. Inst. Lib. 2.
cap. 13. 3.4.
is also against the rules of Physic and Philosophy and implies a
contradiction. For, ex art medica and Philosophia, out of Philosophy and
Physic rules, they find that women are (...). and therefore, to say that
Christ had a true human body as is ours, and yet of a virgin without the
seed of man, was to say he had a true human body in word, and deny it in
deed. And if M.W. waygh the matter well, he shall find their argument better
then his, and that it touches more intrinsecally the essence and origin of our
nature, to be conceived of the seed of man: and that to be formed of a virgin,
is much more repugnant to nature, and since the beginning of the world has been
wrought more seeldo^, the^ a body to be (...) or (...) whereof he talks so
peremptorily, or (...), which others of his sect urge, and is more to the
purpose, that is, Petrus spo^te sua vinclis labe^tibus eq: carcere processit
clauso. Pauli. natali. 4. B. Felicis.

See the new testament in S. Ihon. 20. v. 19. Luc. 4. v. 29.


not circumscript, nor visible, nor local, where of the first was practiced in
the self same body, in his natiuitye, resurrection and ascension, and in S.
Peter Actorum. 12. The second is more common, and was not only in our Savior,
when the Jews meante to have thrown him down headlong from the hill, and
he passing through the mids of them went his way, but also in Elizeus, when
the host of the King of Syria having him in the mids of them, 4. Reg. 6. v.
17.
yet saw him not, Notu^ non agnouere surentes. Felicemque roga^t Felixvbi
cernitur and no^ cernitur, ipse nec ipse uir est, cu^ sit prope, long est.
ignotu^ notusque suis fitciuibus ide^ discernete fide vultum crede^tibus.
Paulin. natal. 5. B. Felicis.
and in S. Felix a martyr and priest of the city of Nola, of whom S. Paulinus
bishop of the same city writes, that in time of persequutio^, when the
citizens, such as were infidels well acquainted with him, would have apprehended
him, they could not see or discern him being in the mids of them: although
(which is more strange) the faithful at the same instant saw him, and knew
him, and perceived in him no difference or change at al. So that at one and
the self same time, he was visible and invisible, known and unknown, endued
with his accustomed figure, proportion, and lineaments, and yet altered and
changed and so forth, subject to other such marvelous accidents, as M.W.
fondly and falsely names contradictions. The third is so far beneath the
omnipotency of God, that by the vulgar opinion of Philosophers, the first
heaven being a perfect natural body, is notwithstanding (...) in no place, and
therefore much more may we yield this prerogative to Christ the Lord of heaven
and earth, whose word and will, is the very rule and squyre of nature. And let
M.W. see how urging so vehemently his proposition, Chri^tes body is per omnia
nostris corporibus (...) saving glory and immortalitye: and he has all the
propertyes of a true and human body, how he will free him self from the
filthy and wicked heresies of the Ebionites and Nestorians. Epiphan. lib. 1.
Here. 30. Socrat. l. 7. ca. 32.
Who upon this general proposition, may and must infer their opinions, that
Christ was begotten between our Lady and Joseph as other men are. they may and
must infer, that Christ assumpted as well the person, as the nature of man: the
personalitie, being a thing much more nylie, and essentially joined to the
nature, the^ are these accidental qualities of visible and circumscript, which
here are objected.

Thirdly, I answer that this absurdity was forseene by the ancient fathers,
who for all that were never induced to inue^t this distinction that you have
found out, that is, to deny the verity of Christ's presence. Let us evermore
believe God (says S. Chrisost. in Math. hom. 83.

M.W. argument rejected by the ancient fathers.


Chrisostom) albeit it seem absurd to our sense and cogitation that which he
says, albeit his words surpass our sense and reason. Thus as in all things
we ought to do, so especially in the sacraments, not beholding those
things, which lie before our eyes, but holding fast his words. For in his
words we can not be beguiled, but our sense is easily deceived. Therefore
since he said This is my body, let us believe it without casting any doubt, and
with the eyes of our understanding conceive the same. The like is used by
diverse other fathers, which they never needed to have spoken, nether could have
spoken with reason, had their faith been so agreeable to the rules of
Philosophy, as you would now make it.

M. W. argument abhorred and condemned by the more learned protestants. Cent.
4. ca. 4. col. 241.
though in other heresies they agreed with you, yet in this kind of argument
detested and abhorred you. So the Historiographers of Magdeburg, in their
fourth Centurie where they prove by many authorities of S. Ambrose, S. Hierome,
S. Hilary, S. Epiphanius, S. Nazianzen, S. Basil, and others, the verity of
Christ's presence, dedicating the same to the Queen's Majesty, thus they speak
unto her. Ibi. in prefat. page 9.
And this (most excellent Queen) is not to be ouerpassed, that whereas now
there grow every where, diverse as it were factions of opinions, among
which, some flatly by Philosophical reasons make void and frustrate the
testament of our lord, so as they take away the body and blood of Christ
touching his presence and communication, according to the most clear, most
evident, most true, and most puissant words of Christ, and deceive men with
marvelous aequiuocation of speech: principally your majesty has to provide,
that the sacraments may be restored without such pharisaical leaue^ etc. And
Melanchtho^, whom Peter Martyr makes equal for learning and godliness, with S.
Pet. Martyr in dialog. de corpore Christi in loco. fol. 107
Austin, S. Hierom, S. Leo, and the ancient fathers, debating this matter with
Oecolampadius, There is no care (says he) that has more troubled my mind
then this of the Eucharist. Lib. 3. epist. Zuinglii and Oecolamp. fol. 132.
And not only my self have vvayghed what might be said on either side, but I
have also sought out the judgment of the old vvriters touching the same. And
when I have laid al together, I find no good reason, that may satisfye a
conscience departing from the propriety of Christ's words. You gather many
absurdities, which follow this opinion (as here we see in M.W.) but
absurdities will not trouble him, who remembers, that we must judge of
divine matters, according to Gods word, not according to Geometry. And not
far after in the same book. I find no reason, Ibi. fol. 140.
how I may depart from this opinion touching the real presence. Well it may
be, that an other opinion more agreeable to man's reason, may please an idle
mind, especially if the opinion be furnished and commended with arguments
well handled. But what shall become of us intentation, when our conscience
shall be called to account, what cause we had to dissent from the received
opinion in the Church. Then these words This is my body, Fulmina erunt.
Westphal. in Apol. contra Calvin. c. 19. pa. 194. anno 1558.
vvil be thunderboltes. So Ioachimus VVestphalus in his Apology against
Calvin, answering this very argument, the body of man is circumscribed in a
place, therefore at one time, it can not be but in one place, therefore not in all places where the supper is ministered: Is not (says, he) this Geometrical
argument fetched from Euclides demonstrations, the pillar and vpholder of all
these Sacramentaries? Plurimos scripturae locos corrumpunt.
Does not this uphold the building of their syllogismes, which corrupt very
many places of scriptures? Most truly is verified of the Sacramentaries, that
memorable saying: The Sacramentaries corrupt the scriptures.
Take from heretics that wherein they agree with Philosophers, and they
cannot stand. The ground of the Sacramentaries divinity.
Take from the Sacramentaries that which they dravv from Philosophy, and how
small a quantity will remain of the great volumes of all the Sacramentaries?
How long vvil it be, before the doctrine of Berengarius fall to the ground?
Well and truly vvrote Tertullian, that Philosophers are the Patriarchs of
heretics. For philosophy brought forth all heresies, and she begat the error
of Zuinglius.

Finally, Jew. defense of the Apolog. part. 4 cap. 4.. ^.
because the English church in their Apology acknowledges Luther for a most
excellent man, sent from God to lighten the whole world, and M. VV. says
that they vvorshippe him as their father in Christ, M. W. argument answered at
large by Luther.
I answer as that excellent man of God and their father answered long ago. His
discourse being long, I will gather shortly the sum of it, and set it down
in his words. If M.VV. would be better satisfied, I remitte him to the maine
work. First, he confesses this argument to be fundamentum quod habent omnium
praecipuu^, Luth. To. 7. defens. verboru^ coenae fol, 388.
the chief ground and foundation of the Sacramentaries. But he asks, whereas
they can bring none, he concludes, The contradiction is in their carnal
imagination, not in faith or the word of God, which teaches no such matter.
vvhere-as Gods power surpasses al cogitatio^, and works that which is to
our reason incomprehensible, and which only faith believes: and the same God
said, This is my body which shall be delivered for you, how can I persuade my
conscience, (says he) that God has nether means, nor ability to do as his
words sound. Mary bringing forth in her virginity, is against that universal
sentence, Increase and multiplye, or this proposition, Christ is God,
overthrows this other, that Christ is man. Out of which thus premised, he
falls in to a vehement exhortation, that al Christians beware of the
Sacramentaries in this kind of argument, Ibid. fo. 390.
for so much as directly thereby they draw men to Paganism and infidelity,
Boni isti Sacramentarii (says he) sua nausea aditum parant ad Christum and
Deum ipsum, The Sacramentarie heresy, the hye way to infidelity, and denial of
al faith.
and omnes articulos abnegandum etc. These good Sacrame^taries by their
lothsomenesse, make a way to deny Christ, and God him self, and al articles
of our faith. and truly for a great part they have already bego^ne to believe
nothing. For they bring themselves within the compass of reason, which is
the right way to damnation. and them selves know, that these Ethnicall
cauils, either are nothing vvorth against this article, or if they conclude
ought against this, they do the like against al. For the word of God is
foolishnes to man's reason. 1. Cor. 1. and they would never have uttered this,
if they had any regard of the scripture, and were not their hearts full of
infidelity, so as their mouth speaks of the abundance of their heart. 1 bid.
fo. 391.
The unequal deali^g of the Sacramentaries in alleging the fathers.
This truly (says he) is worthy of admiration, that none of the fathers,
whereof there is an infinite number, did ever speak so of the Sacrament as do
the Sacramentaries, but clean contrary. Yet notvvithstanding, if perchance
they fall upon some odd place in a doctor that sounds toward their opinion,
as where S. Aug. says, corpus Christi in vno loco esse potest, here (says
Luther) by reason of their preiudicate opinion, they snatch at that, and make
much of it, whereas otherwise, against the saings of all the fathers they are
most stiff and stubburne, and sensles, and more immovable, then is any rock
amiddest the sea. and though the fathers all with one mouth affirm, yet the
Sacramentaries harden them selves to deny them. Ibid. fo. 397
as I conclude against him. If these be the grounds and reasons, which should
certify us of truth, approve our faith, and confirm our conscience, Note how
deeply M. W. argument wayghed with Luther
then truly we are in evil cas^. If a man had delivered me such books
without title and name, and I knevv not otherwise such excellent and learned
men to have been the authors of them, I should surely have thought, that some
i^sting Comediant, Histrio, aut erro Macho metanus.
or Turkish vagabond had made them in despite and derision of Christians.
Verily I see not how they can be excused with any probable pretense, as many
other heretics have had. For it appears, that they play with Gods word, of
vvilfulnes and malice. Frigidae nugae and (...).
And I think it can not be that such cold toys and bablinges should in deed
move a Turk or a Jew, much less a Christian. But that great lothsomenes and
disdain of the sacred supper, and immoderate greedines to defend their
opinion, makes them so mad or giddie, that vvhat-soeuer they take hold of,
though it be but a straw, yet they imagine it to be a svvorde or a spear, and
that at every stroke they kill thousands. This is the terrible argument so
magnified by M. W. quod impetus nostros non pertimescit, that fears not our
forces, an argument, which plucketh up the very roots of Christianity, and
gain says many places and histories of the Scripture, and makes frustrate the
testament of Christ: an argument carnal and ethnical, and for such contemned of
the ancient fathers, and condemned by the late heretics of greatest learning:
an argument which Luther would never believe could proceed but from a Turk,
had he not seen it in the books of some of the Zuinglian Sect usurping the
name of Christians: such an argument, as he accompteth them heretics, wilful
and inexcusable, who are ought moved therewith: finally, such an argument, as
M.W. can never maynteine, except withal he maynteine him self to be an
Anabaptist, an Ebionite, and a Nestorian.

And thus much touching your philosophical reason. wherein I have stayed
somewhat the longer, partly because you crake so much of it, as though it were
very pregnant, partly because it is an argument whereinto both in pulpit and
writing you gladly fall, and (because it stands well with sense and reason)
easily deceive the simple, partly also because it touches M. M. Jew. challeng
touching the real presence artic. 5. refuted by martyrs, Confessors, and
doctors, of his own religion.
Jewels challenge, which here is disproued sufficiently. except these great
States and Evangelists, so magnified by your selves, be so fowly ouerseene, as
so vehemently to auerre that, which has no one clause of Scripture, Father,
Council or Doctor to uphold it. And if they do so in this, where they use such
heat and detestation, how may we credit them in any other part of their
doctrine? how may we be persuaded, but they continually lie and deceive us in
like sort? But I trow, you will not judge so rashly, especially of Luther,
what soever you account of Barns, Frith, Westphalus, Melanchthon, and
Illyricus, and those ancient fathers alleged by him and his companions. for,
seeing the whole church of England commends Luther for a man so excellent,
sent of God to give light to the whole world, I hope that you being but a
simple member of thar church, will not by defending the contrary oppose your
self unto him. And certain it is you can not come from God, if you poor
worm resist and withstand that excellent man, whom God sent to be your
Prophet and Evangelist. which is as monstrous a case, as if some simple
sheep, should presume to direct his skilful pastor, some ignorant scholar, to
teach his master most learned, 2. Tim. 4.
or some Alexander a miserable coppersmith should oppose him self against S.
Paul, whom Christ had made his governor, and furnished with sufficient gifts
to instruct him and all the world besides. But you have (I fear) a general
salve for such fores, that you believe nether Luther, nether yet the church of
England any farther then they agree with Gods word and your own conceit
thereof. And so still the supreme rule and determition of al shall rest in your
own hands.

page 11.
After your reasons against the sacrament, you bring in to like purpose a place
out of S. Ciril that Christ is ascended in to heaven, and is absent from us in
the presence of flesh. which if we did not believe, we would never say the
Creed so often as we do, nor keep the day of Christ's Ascensio^ so honorable
and festiual, as you I think may know. Mary if you think, there is more pith
in S. Cirils word of absence, Mat. 26. v. 11
you might better have objected Christ's own words, The poor you shall have
alvvaies with you, me you shall not have, but then for answer I should have
sent you to the note upon that verse, as I do now also for this, the reason
being al one. For, that S. Ciril was not a Sacramentarie, appears most
clearly by a large discourse which he makes as it were of purpose against
that manner of reasoning which you have given out in this place. Thus he
vvriteth. Quomodo potest hic nobis carnem dare etc. Ciril. in Joan. lib. 4.
cap. 13.
The Jews ask, how can he give us his flesh? Thus they cry out upon god,
not without great impiety, nether remember they, that with god nothing is
impossible. But let us making great profit of their sins and having a firm
faith in these mysteries, never in such divine things, utter or so much as
think of such doubting. for that word Quomodo, how, is Iudaical and cause of
extreme punishment, And after a long and good treatise against such peevish
fantastical toys as here M.W. obiecteth for profound arguments, thus he
concludes. If notvvithstanding all this, thou (Jew) cry still, how is this
done, I following thy ignorance will demand of thee, how so many miracles
were done in the old testament, the passinge over the red sea, Moses rod made
a serpent etc. To search by reason how Christ is present in the B. Sacrament,
is to deny al scripture.
wherefore we ought rather to believe Christ, and humbly to learn of him,
then like drunken sots to cry out, how can he give us his flesh, by which
questioning thou must needs be driven to deny the whole scripture. In which
words we see he reckeneth you amongst the Jews, and accompteth you neth^r
very learned, nor much better then an Infidel, for these stout reasons which
here you so magnify. And Peter M. being pressed with the authority of this
Ciril, Ciril. in Joan. lib. 10. cap 13.
that Christ by the mystical benediction, that is, by receiving of the
Sacrament, dwells corp^rally in us (which M. Ievvel after his manner
answers very learnedly, Jew. art. ^.. 10. In M.W. translation fo. 414.415.
though very easily, by comparing it with an other phrase, that corporally is
as much as truly, and truly may signify spiritually, and that is al one with
tropically) says more rudely, yet more sincerely. Martyr defens. ad object.
Guard. part 4. pa. 724.
The flesh of Christ so to dvvell in us corporally, that the substance of his
body should be communicated with us, that is (as this man interprets it) be
mingled with our flesh, it is not in any case to be granted, no not if a
thousand angels, much less if one Ciril said it. For it can not be, that
Christ's flesh should so be diffunded or multiplied in infinite men and places.
which shows that Peter Mart. took not S. Ciril to be of your faith touching
this article of the sacrament.

The place which you cite out of S. Damascene, page 11.
because you direct me no where to find it, I vvil not bestovv the pains to
seek it. and being granted, it is not much to the purpose, and I marvel
why you put it in greek as though there were some great terrible bugge in it.
Damascene.
That which was circumscript (says he) was circumscript, and vncircumscript
vncircumscript, and visible visible, and invisible invisible. which I take to
be as true, as that a spade is a spade, and a mattock a mattock, fire is fire
not water, and the sun is the sun and not the moon. And if you mean
hereof to infer your heresy, that therefore Christ is not in the sacrament,
frame you the argument, and perhaps it vvil persuade much. Damascene lib 4. de
orthodoxa fide. c. 14.
In the mean season that Damasc. was no more of your religion, then S. Ciril,
I refer you for proof to his books de Orthodoxa fide, where, Few of the
ancient fathers, argue more vehemently and directly against M. W. heresy and
argument proving the same, then S. Ciril. and Damascene whom he cites.
namely in the fourth you find a very good and large chapter against your
Zuinglian heresy. and especially against your philosophical fancies he
disputes thus. If the word of god be lively and forcible, if what soever
our lord would, he did: if he said, let light be made and it was made, let the
firmament be made and it was made: if by the word of god the heavens were
established, and with the spirit of his mouth all the power of them: if
heaven, and earth, and vvater-fier, and air and al their furniture, and man
him self were perfited by his word: if when god the word so would, he
became man and of the most pure and immaculat blood of the holy virgin, framed
him self flesh without the seed of man: can not he (in the sacrament) make
of bread, his own body, and of wine and water, his blood? No mary can he
not, says M.W. for that is against reason, and so he should have two bodies,
one (...), the other (...) the one (...) the other (...), etc. But S. Damascene
conte^ning such ethnical joys, proceeds and concludes, that as god in the
beginning said, let the earth bring forth green herbs, and hitherto being
helped and strengthened by that precept it so does, so god said, this is my
body, and this is my blood, and do this in commemoration of me, and by his
omnipotent commandment it is wrought, which thing only faith can conceive.
How shall this be done, says the B. Virgin. the Archangel Gabriel ansvvered,
the holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the most high shall
ouershadovv thee. And now demau^dest thou, how bread is made the body of
Christ, and wine and water his blood? I answer in like manner, that the holy
Ghost comes upon it, and works that which passes the capacity of
reason, and reach of understanding. Whereby you see, that how soever
circumscript remained circumscript, and visible visible, S. Damascene never
intended by such visible folies so to circumscribe our f^^th, or subject our
religion to human reason, that Christ's presence should be excluded out of
the sacrament, or the sacrament should be esteemed a Zuinglian figure, which
to induce you take much pain, but to very small effect.

CHAP. IX. Wherein is refelled M. VV. answer to certain places of S.
Chrysostom touching the real presence and sacrifice.
IN the last chapter we had an example how sufficiently you are wont to
confirm your own faith by scripture, reason, and fathers: here you give us
an example how substantially you answer the fathers which we use for
confirmation of our faith. Two places M. Martin objected out of S. Chrysostom
against your geometrical opinion of Christ's body in one place. you avoid them
so, as you give out plain demonstration, that you never considered them in the
author him self, but only took the answer at delivery from M. Jewel without
any farther search. Thus you write. page 11.
To Chrysostom teaching that Christ both leaft his flesh with us, and ascended
having the same with him, I answer, that Christ placed his flesh in heaven,
and nevertheless leaft us a sacrament of that flesh. And our faith enjoys
the same evermore present. For the very substance of his flesh, Christ no more
leaft in earth, then Elias leaft his body, when he ascended in to heaven. For
so Chrisostom vvrote a little before, that Elias was afterward double, there
was an Elias above, and there was an Elias beneath. Tell me I pray you M.
Martyn was that Elias body in earth, when he leaft his cloak to Elizeus? you
will not say so. So true it is which Chrysostom vvriteth, that Christ has
left his flesh unto us symbolically, and yet has carried the same in to heaven
corporally.

Jewel. art. 6.. 4.5.
This is your answer, which I say, you rather allow us (as may be thought)
because Master Jewel applies the same to the self same place, albeit in my
opinion els-where he gives you a better. Ibid. art. 10.. 2.
For laboring to answer the place of S. Ciprian de caena Domini. Panis iste
quem dominus etc. This bread which our lord gave to his disciples, being
changed not in shape but in nature, by the almighty power of the word of
Christ is made flesh, after a number of phrases alleged against the other
parts of this sentence, coming to the last is made flesh, he shows that
nether this proves the real presence, and that hystore of like phrases. For S.
Aust. says, nos Christi facti sumus, we are made Christ's. Leo says, Corpus
regenerati fit caro crucifixi, the body of the man that is regenerate, is made
the flesh of Christ that was crucified. Beda says, nos ipsi corpus Christi
effecti sumus, we our selves are made the body of Christ. Origin says in like
manner of speech, spiritus sanctus non in turturem vertitur, sed colu^ba fit,
the holy ghost is not changed into a turtell, but is made a dove. Thus if you
had answered, that Christ departing took his flesh with him really, and leaft
his flesh behind him allegorically, that is, the Christian people, his church,
which S. 1. Cor. 12. v. 27. Ephesians. 5. v. 23.
Paul many times calls his body, that had been more probable, more to S.
Chrisostoms discourse (and you see what doctors you might allege for it) the^
to say, that Christ took away with him his flesh really, and leaft the same
with us symbolically, that is, bread and wine, which when we receive at the
supper, we remember perhaps that Christ had flesh. But because it was either
your chance or choice to give us the other, let us see how handsomely you frame
it unto S. Chrisostoms text.

The sum of your answer is, that as Helias ascendinge leaft his cloak, which
for certain reasons was called Elias, A commentary clean against the text.
so our Savior ascending leaft us bread and wine, which is a sign of his
body, and for some reasons is likewise called by the name of his body, but was
no more his body, the^ the cloak was Elias. And are ye not ashamed thus to
dally and abuse the reader? Or can your ignorance be so gross, as to think
that this is S. Chrisost. meaning? Or ca^ your reader otherwise deem of you,
then as of a man altogether rechlesse what you say, if ever he read the place
in S. Chrysostom him self? For so far of is it, that S. Chrysostom has any
such thing, that contrariwise he overthrows most strongly this your folly,
and vehemently urges the clean contrary. First touching Elias, he has some
of those words which you allege. As a great inheretance (says he) Elizeus
received the cloak: and truly it was a very great inheritance. And
afterward that Elias was double. There was an Elias above, and there was
an Elias beneath, meaning (as it is plain) that he was taken up in body and
soul, and remained beneath in power and operation, for so much as by the cloak
Elizeus wrought strange miracles, such as Elias him self did before. And so S.
Chrysostom says expressly. propterea and in coelum ascendens, nihil aliud qua^
melotem discipulo reliquit. Therefore Elias ascending in to heaven, leaft to
his disciple nothing else, but his cloak. And would he make a like comparison,
and say the same of our Savior? Let us hear his words. Thus he comes to
speak of Christ. quid igitur si vobis demonstrauero quid aliud quod illo multo
maius etc. Chrisost. homil. 2. ad pop. Antio. in fine.
what then vvil you say, if I show you an other manner of thing much greater
the^ that, vvh^ch al we have received, who so ever have been made partakers
of the holy misteryes? Elias in deed leaft his cloak to his disciple, but the
son of God ascending leaft to us his flesh, And Elias did so, but him self
being deprived of his cloak, but Christ both leaft it unto us, and ascended
having the self same with him. Therefore let us not fainte in courage. For he
that has not refused to shed his blood for us all, and has commun^cated unto
us his flesh and the self same blood again, he will refuse nothing for our
salvation. These are S. Chrisost. words, which tend to set forth, not a
similitude, but an opposition, not an equalitye, but a supereminent excellency
in our Savior. The great difference between Elias leaving his ma^tel to
Elizeus, and Christ leaving his flesh to us.
I will show you an other manner of thing (says this holy father) far greater
then that of Elias. And how so? and wherein stands that so great and singular
difference? In this. Chrisost. in 1. Cor. ca. 10. hom. 24.
Quod est in calice, id est quod fluxit e latere, et illius sumus participes.
That which is in the chalice, is that which gushed out of his side, and we
are partakers thereof.

This is the most evident speech and sense of S. Chisostome, and no man I
suppose can be so simple, but he may forthwith see, how well this matcheth with
the doctrine of the catholic church, and how dissonant it is from the
preaching of your congregation: especially if he know your doctrine a right and
be not deceived with your fantastical painted words, which you sometimes use to
beguile simple sowles, seeming to advance that very hyghly and magnifically,
which in deed your selves esteem most basely and co^temptibly. For think you
of your Communion otherwise, then as of common bread and wine, without al
grace, virtue, or sanctification, The true opinion of the Zuinglians, touching
their Supper or Communion.
with a bare figure of Christ absent, which figure your selves ca^ not
explicate, nor shall be ever able to give reason, but you have or may have as
good figures, at your common breakfastes diners, and suppers? This is your
faith in that point, if you be Zuinglians, and believe as the church of Geneua.
Zuing. tom. 2. lib. de vera and falsa relig. c. de Eucharist. fol. 212.
The Eucharist (says Zuinglius) or communion, or lords supper, is nothing else
but a co^memoration, in the which they that firmly believe them selves to be
reconciled to god the father by Christ's death and blood, set forth his lively
death, that is, praise it, give thanks, and preach. And when Luther objected
to him, that he and his fellow heretics were divided amongst them selves, Ibid.
in exegesi ad Lutherum fol. 362.363.
he answered thus. whereas thou say (Luther) that there are sects amongst
us, it is false. both I, Carolostadius, and Oecola^padius, Symbola ta^tum esse.
the Sacrament, only a figure.
and the rest avouch that the bread and wine be only figures, mary we shift
the words of Christ after a diverse manner, verba diuersimode expedimus. And in
an other book against Luther, It is to be noted (says he) that Paul 1. Ibi.
ad Luth. Confess. responsio. duae fo. 435. and ad Matthew. Rutling. fo. 155, and
ad Theob. Billica. 261. The Sacrament nothing out bread.
Cor. 11. after the words of the institution, calls it no otherwise then
bread and the cup. For he says (...) that is, this bread of the supper or
that bread, hunc hunc pane^ qui praeter panem non est quicquam amplius. this
bread this bread I say, which is nothing else but bread. Al which he there
expresses by a plain similitude in this sort. Ibi. respons. duae, ad Lutherum
fol. 477.
Behold this is the sacramental presence of Christ in this supper, as the
Emperor or the King of France are said to be in the kingdom of Naples,
Signa. The Sacrament is no more the body of Christ, then a painted scutchion is
the Queen of England or king of France.
because their banners or signs be there, whereas in the mean season, the
one of them lives in Spain, the other in France. But the bread and wine are
no more one and the same thing with Christ's body and blood, then those
kings banners be the very kings them selves, because they note unto us the
majesty and power of the kings. And that you cavil not, that this is not
the faith of your Geneuian church, and so shrowde your self in your ordinary
cloud of words, whereby you seem to speak honorably of this sacrament,
hear you what Theodore Beza writes, whom you extol so highly. Dico
impude^tes esse calumniatores etc. Beza. in epi. theologicis epist. 1.
I say they are impudent slau^derers who imagine that there was ever any
co^trariety between the doctrine of these most excellent men, Zuinglius,
Oecola^padius, and Calvin touching the sacraments. I say also, that the self
same faith in every respect, is proposed and defended in the Churches of
Suizzerlande, Sauoy and France, in the Flemmish, Scottish, and (as I think)
in the English churches also.

Wherefore this being your faith, that in the Sacrament there is nothing but
bread in such sort as has been declared, I say with Zuinglius panis, How aptly
M. W. answer and S. Christ. text match together.
panis, and nihil amplius, bread, bread, and nothing else, now compare your
faith with S. Chrysostom, and see how handsomely you can patch it together.
thus you must needs say. that fact of Christ leauinge the sacrament of his
body to his Christians before the fact of Elias leauinge his cloak to Elizeus
(for of our co^uersinge with Christ in heaven by faith and understanding, M. W.
quite peruerteth S. Chrisost. sense and sentence.
here is no question, and Elizeus might have, and had no doubt his mind in
heaven with Elias) by your commentary and sense, far greater was the fact of
Elias then that of Christ. Chrisost in hoc loco.
as writes S. Chrysostom, as by the which he fought against the devil and
vanquished him. That your bread should give any grace, zuing. to. 2. li. de
peccato origin. fo. 121. et ibid. respon. ad D. Baltazarem. fo. 105.
it is against your whole doctrine, and Zuinglius labors to prove it at
large in sundry places, aliquid momenti confer ad sanctificationem aut
remissionem peccatorum, profit any jot to sanctify or take away sin. 4.
Regum 2. v. 14.
Elizeus by that cloak wrought strange miracles. so did you by your figurative
bread never, nor never shall, so long as the world stands. and power, was a
thing surmounting the ability and reach of man, and could not be done but by
the omnipotency of god: your bread being nothing but a sign or banner, as it
were a may pole, or token of a tavern, by Zuinglius his own confession, the
king of France or Spain can make ten thousand as good. And the truth is,
they can make much better, because theirs do no harm, whereas yours lead men
the hye way to damnation. Wherefore your answer to this place of S.
Chrysostom is to to fond and childish.

And hereby we may have a guess, how substanciallye you are like to deal with
the next, which is taken out of the same father. I must needs write it down
somewhat at large, for the readers better understanding of us both. It is in
his third book de sacerdotio, where he sets forth the high estate of the
priests of the new Testament, and that act wherein priesthode especially
consists, that is, the sacrifice: thus he writes. Chrisos. lib. 3. de
sacerdotio. paulo post initium
This priesthode it self is exercised in earth, but is to be referred to the
order and revv of things celestial, and that for good reason. because no
mortal man, no angel, no archangell, no creature, but the holy Ghost him self
framed this order. Terrible were the things and dreadful, which were
before the time of grace in the law of Moses, as were the little bells,
pomegranats, precious stones in the breast of the priest, the mitre, golden
plate, The excellency of the priesthode of the new Testament. above that of the
old.
sancta sanctorum etc. But if a man consider these things which the time of
grace has brought to us, he vvil judge all those things which I called
terrible and dreadful, to be but light, and though glorious, yet not
comparable with the glory of the new testament, as S. Paul says. This
being laid before, 2. Cor. 3.
as it were a preface or preparatiue to that which follows, he then comes to
that place, out of which M. W. culleth certain words. For (says he) when
thou see our Lord sacrificed, and the priest earnestly intent to the
sacrifice, and pouring out his prayers, and the people about him imparted and
made red with that precious blood, Intingi and rubefieri.
think thou thy self to converse amongst mortal men, and remain on the
earth? And immediately, o miraculum, o Dei benignitatem, o miracle, o singular
goodness of God, he that sits with his father above, at the self same moment
of time is handled with all men's hands, and delivers him self to those that
will receive and embrace him. and this is done playnlie in the sight of all
men, without any deceate or illusion. Of this place M. Martin infers, that
M.W. reasoning, Christ is in heaven, ergo not in the Sacramet, is wicked and
refuted by the old fathers. But M.W. replyeth, no. And I vvil give you your
answer (says he) out of the same place. Page 12.
for here Chrysostom affirms that we see our Lord sacrificed in the supper,
and the people imparted and made red with the blood, and that this is done in
the open sight of all that are present. But who sees either our Lord tru^y
sacrificed, or one drop of blood, with which the people are made red, so as
all see it, as Chrysostom vvriteth. Therefore as we see Christ sacrificed,
and the people embrued with his blood, so we receive him in our hands. In
these words, Chrysostom would both amplify the dignity of priests, unto
whom Christ gave power to minister the Sacrament of his body and blood, A
bad way to make the^ afraid, if they universally knew and believed the
contrary,
and make the people afraid, that they which come to this supper, should
bring with them godly and religious minds, as though they should take Christ
him self in their hands. The substance of the answer is this. Chrysostom in
the same place says: we see Christ offered, which in truth is not so, but by a
figurative speech: therefore when he says Christ is in heaven and in the
Sacrament, it is not simply true, but by like phrase and figure. But whereunto
then tend al these great words and persuasions of this father? to honor the
priests office, and make the people afraid. and were there priests in the
church in those days? No. but by priests you must understand m^nisters. and
then, a simili, by the sacrifice he speaks of, that is the mass, you must
understand the Communion, that is by Catholic religion, you must understand
heresy, and by light, dark^es. But I will go thorough the branches of this
answer in order.

First, whereas you make that a thing most assured and certain that no man
sees Christ offered, except you mean in your English supper, We see Christ
offered in the church.
you are greatly deceived For in the church Catholic we see Christ offered,
and that not in phrase of speech only, as the protestants may be said to do
injury to Christ, when they abuse his image, but in verity and truth of
doctrine. And S. Chrysostom with the rest of the fathers, never thought or
spoke otherwise. How often has S. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in 1. Cor 10. hom. 24.
qu^d summo honor dignum est, id tibi ^n terra ^stendam. That which deserves
most honor, that vvil I show thee on earth. and in the same place. The royal
body of Christ is in heaven, which now in earth is set before thee to be
seen. I show unto thee, not angels, not archangels, not heavens, not heaven
of heavens, but I show thee the very Lord him self of al these. Perceauest
thou not, how not only thou see in earth and touchest, but receauest also
the sovereign and principal thing that is? And in the same place. This body
which thou see on the altar, the wise men adored in the manger. But it were
tedious to note out such places, which are common in every book. This rather I
would wish M. W. to understand, that where it has pleased God in certain
creatures to exhibit his presence after a more special and singular sort,
there in a more special and singular manner, truly we may and ought to believe
that we see our Lord. God is by essence, power and operation, present in every
creature, yet in seeing a beast or tree, Genes. 32. ver. 30.
we may not say as Jacob does in Genesis, vidi dominum facie ad faciem, I have
seen God face to face, when he wrestled with the Angel: or as Moses, Aaron,
Nadab, and Abiu in the mount viderunt deum Israel savv the God of Israel, Exodus
24. ver. 9.
and under his feet as it were a work of sapphyre stone, or as the
prophets many times savv God sitting upon his throne. Which if it be true, 3.
Reg. 22. ver. 19. Esa. 6. v. 1.
how much more boldly and truly may we affirm, that we see Christ in the B.
Sacrament, where we have most certain warrant, that his humanity and
divinity are present after a most singular, and effectual, and substantial
manner. Our savior talking with the blind man unto whom he gave sight, said to
him. do thou believe in the son of God? Joan 9. v. 38
he ansvvered and said, who is he lord that I may believe in him. And Jesus
said to him. both thou have seen him, and he that talks with thee, he it
is. and forthwith he fell down and adored him. This by your opinion must be
false, because he only saw the external lineaments of a mortal man, but saw
not, nor could see the son of God, being him self God: Joan. 1. v. 18. 1 Timothy
6. v. 16. Exodus 33. verse. 20.
and god no man has seen at any time, and not only no man has seen, but
nether can see. for as God him self says, non videbit me homo et viuet, man
shall not see me and live. Yet as Christ was truth it self, so he taught truly,
and by reason of his divine and eternal person joined to that humanity, the
poor man saw the eternal son of God: and so though after a far different
manner, those prophets and Patriarchs saw God. And therefore to you it should
not seem strange, if S. Chrysostom and the Catholics profess, that truly
they see Christ offered. for most true it is. It should seem no more strange
I say, then it was strange for Christ to point to that which he had in his
hands, and gave to his Apostles, and say withal, 2. Cor. 11.
this which you see, is my body, and the same, which shall be delivered for
you. which body delivered for us, if it were Christ, then the Apostles by
Christ's demonstration saw Christ, and in such sort as we see him.

Christ, and apply hereunto, that ancient rule of our forefathers (...), and
thereby adore it, and give to it godly honor, and believe that they take,
receive, and touch Christ him self, and account you, not to be their
brethren, (though you so basely will needs claim their kindred) but to be
brethren of the old Ethnikes and Apostataes, who for like belief scorned and
mocked the ancient Christians, as you do us now. So Martin Luther confirming
that, which in the first place I have said of gods exhibiting him self to us
in creatures, writes thus. Luth. Tom. 7 sermon. de Eucharistia. fo. 337.
Although Christ be every where in all creatures, yet we may not look for
him without the word. Wherefore he has appointed us a certain way to
find him, how and where he is to be sought and found. This they see not,
nether understand, who say it is absurd to affirm or believe that Christ is
in bread and wine, because they understand not what manner thing the Kingdom
of Christ is etc. He is most present in his word, albeit he is not present in
that sort, as he is here in the sacrament, by which he exhibiteth to the
Christians his body and blood by the ministry of the word joined in bread
and wine. And that the old Paganes in this kind of infidelity were the
fathers of our Zuinglian Protestants, he shows in the same place writing
thus. Ibid. fo. 335.
The devil labors (says he) to sup up the egg and leave us the shell, that
is, the zuinglia^ Communion plain bakers bread.
from the bread and wine to take away the body and blood of Christ, so that
nothing remain, but plain bakers bread. And here they mock us at their
pleasure, calling us shamefullie, sarcophagos, and haemopotas, eaters of flesh
and drinkers of blood, Infidels and Apostataes forefathers of the Protestants,
in mocking and scorning the Sacrament.
and that we vvorshippe a god made of bread, as they say: as of old that
naughty man, and laden with all sin Auerroes said. who slydinge back from
our faith, slaundered and reproched the faithful Christians, sayng that there
was not under the sun a more wicked people, then were the Christians,
because they devoured their own God, which wickedness no people ever is read
to have committed. Kemnit. in exam. conc. Trident. co^tra canones de
Eucharistia.
And Kemnitius in his examen Concilii Tridentini, upon this ground of the real
presence, approves the custom of the Church in adoringe Christ in the
sacrament, by the authority of S. Augustine, and S. Ambrose in Psalm. 98. by
Eusebius Emissenus, and S. Gregory Nazianzene, and says it is impiety to do
the contrary.

in Calvin as your profession requires, you could not so far have been
ouerseene in this easy distinction known to Catholic, Lutheran and
Zuinglian, although when Calvin wrote thus, perhaps he was more then half a
Lutheran, and not so far gone in Zuinglianisme as after. In his little book de
caena domini thus he writes. Calu. de ^oena Domini inter opuscula.
The bread and wine are rightely called the body and blood of Christ, because
they be as it were instruments, by which Christ does distribute them unto us,
we have a very apt example in a like matter. When god would that the holy
Ghost should appear in the baptism of Christ, he represented him in the
figure of a dove. Joan. 1. v. 32.
John the Baptist rehearsing the story, says that he savve the holy Ghost
descending. If we look narovvlie, we shall find that he savve nothing but a
dove. For the essence of the holy Ghost is invisible. Yet because he knevv that
vision to be no vain figure, but a most certain sign of the presence of the
holy ghost, he boldly affirms that he savve him, because it was represented
in such sort as he could bear. So in the communion, which we have in the
body and blood of Christ, the mystery is spiritual, which we can nether see
with eye, nether comprehend with human vv^^^. Therefore is it shevved us by
signs, yet so, The Sacrament in what sort a figure.
that it is not a naked or only figure, but io^ned to his truth and substance.
Rightly therefore is it called the body, which it does not only represent,
but also exhib^te unto v^. Thus Calvin, teachinge and prou^nge by scripture,
that truly we see Christ (though not in his own form) partly because the
sacrament is a figure which has the verity io^ned with it, and therefore
may well have his denomination of the principal, partly because being
inconvenient either in respect of gods wisdom, or of our infirmity, to
receive that glorious body in his own form (which reason Theophilacte, S.
Damascene, S. Cirill, S. Chrisosto^, and other fathers give) god has appointed
these external sacraments for instrum^ntes, by m^anes whereof we might truly
be made partakers of that, which otherwise we should abhor.

But grant we now to M.W. that it is only a phrase of speech to say we see
Christ or his body and blood, how follows his reason, therefore it is also but
a phrase of speech to say, the body is there at all? Suppose a man may stand
in argument that the Apostles seeing the humanity of Christ, saw not the son
of god, saw not the creator of the world, will your philosophy or divinity
serve you to infer, ergo that person or man, whom they beheld, was not the
son of god? Again what logic, The Protestants by their analogy of faith.
of every place of scripture or doctor conclude what they list.
what wit permits you from one particular, to conclude as many as you list?
It is a figure when we read in scripture, god has hands, face, nosetrils:
ergo it is a figure when we read that Christ took flesh of the virgin. It is
a figure when Christ said, that he descended from heaven: Joan. 3.
ergo his ascension is not true but imaginary. It is not possible for us in
the height and excellency of the divine mysteries, and the baseness of our
understanding and barrennes of our tongue scarce to think, much less to speak
of them, but we shall fall in to some improper terms, as appears by the whole
course of divinity. From which necessity, he that takes this license, which
M. W. allows to him self, and from one word spoken figuratiuelie, at his
pleasure will deduce the like of an other, he will make Christian religion as
variable as is the raynebowe, as inconstant as the wethercocke. And yet this
lose kind of talking (for who can call it reasoning) is the very root and
mother of the Zuinglian gospel* for upon this pillar was erected the
sacramentarie heresy in Zuricke, as Zuinglius him self signifies: for thus
he reasoned. When Christ said this i^ my body, he spoke tropically, because
when Moses said, Exodus 12.
the lamb is the pasouer (which notwithstanding is a text of his own coining,
as Luther proves against him) this is a tropical speech. Luther to. 7.
defens. verborum coenae fo. 386.
Against which, Luther replying and scorning, says it is as valiant and wise a
proof, as if a man would argue that Sara or Rebecca brought forth children and
remained virgins, because our Lady did so: or that Pilate and Herod were
two glorious Apostles of Christ, because Peter and Paul were.

But see you not says M. W. that S. Chrysostom is full of vehemency and
amplification? He is vehement I confess, Impossible to interpret S. Chrysostom.
of the English Communion.
and perhaps amplifieth. But wherein is he vehement, or what does he amplify?
a lie or a truth? a truth, to wit the dignity of priests, say you. Then
there were priests, and so there was a sacrifice by your own definition. supra
pa. ^7.
and plain it is that S. Chrysostom so much advaunceth the priest in regard
of the sacrifice. Now this amplificatio^ must rise upon a true ground,
otherwise he may rather be said to magnify a lie, then to amplify a truth.
Then gather me out of S. Chrisost. any one truth where upon he does thus
enlarge and use his vehemency. Nay consider by your opinion and faith,
whether almost every word in this place be not a lie. We see Christ says
he. that is a lie, and now refuted by you. We see him offered, that is a lie,
and a blasphemous lie. M. Jewels 17. article.
The priest bent earnestly to the sacrifice, that is a lie, for there was no
such sacrifice within six hundred years after Christ. The people receive the
precious blood, that is a lie, The 5. artie.
for no man believed the real presence within six hundred years nether. O
miracle (says S. Chrysostom.) o singular goodness of god, he that sits with
his father above, at the self same moment of time is received in the church at
the priests hands. that is a lie, The 6. artie.
for so should the body of Christ at one time be in a thousand places, which
is against M. Jewels sixth article, and there fore needs it must be false, so
to speak or think. What truth now remains for S. Chrysostom to amplify,
whereas every word he speaks being taken as it stands, according to your
religion is false? Belike he m^a^t to aduau^ce such dealing of bread and wine
as you use in your congreg^tions, and consequently your ministry which is
promoted to so vvorthie a vocation. But what sentence, what word, what
syllable has he to that purpos? yet grant it be so. The^ your faith and
religion being all one with S. Chrisostomes (as you tell us) let your ministers
use such amplification to their people (and you need not to be ashamed to
borovve or learn of so excellent a doctor) and see whether both the people
will not cry out upon them as false prophets, and the Commissioners bring
them within the Praemunire, for preaching against the pure gospel received and
authorized by parliament. Let them preach that they offer and sacrifice their
lord and master, that they are earnest lie bent to perform that duty of
priesthode, that at their hands the people receive the precious blood of
Christ, let such preachers be brought before you M. W. as the public professor
of divinity, and I appeal to your conscience, whether you will allow such
preaching as an amplification of their m^nisterio and not condemn it as
wicked, and detestable, and blasphemous against the gospel.

True sacrifice in the church.
and makes the comparison between all three so nighly and exactly, preferring
alvvayes ours by infinite degrees of excellency, that a man with half an eye
may see that M. W. thrust it in rather because he had so read in M. Ievvel,
then because he co^siderately perused the place him self. Before the words
pertayninge to the sacrifice of the church, S. Chrysostom thus speaks of the
Leuiticall sacrifice. Chryso. vbi supra.
All things were terrible and dreadful about that sacrifice and priesthode:
but if you match it with this sacrifice and priesthode, wherein by the
priest, our lord himself is sacrificed, all that is nothing as in the words
set down in the beginning appears. Immediately after, thus he proceeds*
vvilt thou see the excellency of this holiness by an other miracles put before
thy eyes Elias and that infinite multitude about him, and the sacrifice l^yd
upon the altar, the prophet p^vvring forth his prayers, suddenly fire
descending from heaven and consuming the sacrifice, all strange and full of
admiration. Ab illis sacris ad nostra sacra te transfer, from that sacrifice
turn thy self to behold our sacrifice, and thou shall see that ours is far
more vvonderfull and passing all admiration. For here is the priest caryinge
not fire, but the holy Ghost, from whom grace flovveth in to the sacrifice
etc. Wherefore, whereas he begins with a true sacrifice, and ends with
a true sacrifice, and compares the middle with the extremes as a most true
and excellent sacrifice, and affirms it so to be, and uses the other two
for no other purpose, then by the abasinge of those sacrifices to aduau^ce the
dignity of this singular sacrifice: for one to come now and against such
evidence, upon one or other metephorical word (which in such divine things
can not possibly be avoided) to say, al is metaphors, and he mea^t no such
thing etc. it is an argument nether of wit, nor of learning nor shamefastnes,
nor conscience. it is a manifest sign of one, that nether seeks after the
truth, nor cares what he says, nor regards man, nor fears god. but pass
we on.

CHAP. X. Of the place in S. Lukes Gospel cap. 22. corrupted by Beza.
BEFORE you come to justify the corruption of S. Lukes Gospel, whereof your
graund Captain Beza is attainted, very orderly you begin with the
commendation of so singular a personage, sayng that M. Page 12.
Martin with the rest of his adversaries, in respect of him be but Pigmees,
whom if he could once see, he would sovv them up in a bag, insutos in
culcum allideret.
and knock out their brains, as Polyphemus did to Ulysses companio^s, wherein
you speak perhaps truer then you are aware. For in deed, in murdering men he
has better skill then he has in his bible, as cunning as you make him, whereof
all France is witness, unto which he has been a known Catiline and
fierbrand, and has in deed been the cause that some good men have been so
used, as you threaten he would use his adversaries, Vide orat. Pet. Frar.
co^tra sectarios. item epist. Bezae 41.
as in the stories of the civil wars of France we read. Mary that you wish
some man to write against him, whose tongue he understands, as though such
wanted, this argues that either you are very ignorant, and know little out of
your own territory, who think there are none such, or else that you are not
his frind, who wish him more enemies: whereas he has store of such, more then
ever he can turn him self unto, and therefore lies continually as it were
broken in back and wind, groueling under such heavy burdens as he is charged
withal. And although I take not upon me to know much in his affairs (and I
wish withal my heart I knew less) yet thus much I am assured of, Writers
against Beza.
that not only Catholics of excellent fame and learning, some of the^ renowned
Bishops and doctors, have written against him in such a tongue as he well
understands, as Claudius Santesius, Espenceus, Vigor, Lindanus, Franciscus
Balduinus, Michael Fabricius and his nephew Gabriel, but also Lutherans and
Caluinistes have plied him with such books: as for example, Heshusius, Flacius
Illyricus, Selneccerus, the University of Iena in Germany, Sebastianus
Castalio, Carolus Molineus, besides many other Polonians, his own scholars,
whose names I know not nor list to learn. These Pigmees and dwarfes, how little
so ever they were, in countries Catholic and Lutherish, and in many places
professinge Zuinglianisme, have so put out the eye and diminished the
estimation of your Poliphemus, that of the Catholics he is known to have been
but a wicked sicopha^t, of detestable manners, a feared conscience, 1. Tim. 4.
v. 2.
and mean learning, and of the Lutherans, he is accounted as ill, howsoever
among the ministers of England, where perhaps Luscus may regnare inter caecos,
he is esteemed for a marvelous Evangelist, as it were an other Hercules or
Atlas, that holds up your gospel with his shoulders.

But let him be as huge as may be, as big and great as you would make him: he
had need be as great as Gargantua, or the great devil of hell, if he bear
away that which we charge him withal, though you lay to your shoulders to help
him as well as you can. M. Mar. accuses him that he controleth our Savior,
sets the holy Ghost to schole, and corrects the Evangelist. For whereas
the Evangelist by Beza his own confession wrote one thing as uttered by our
Savior, and therefore most assuredly our Savior spoke so in substance and
effect, and the holy Ghost guiding the pen and hand of the Evangelist endited
so, this your great Giaunt comes and shouldereth them all out, alters quite
the text, says it is false, and gives us a new text of his own. The point of
this controversy, well to be marked.
The point of the controversy is this, that S. Luke avouches, that that
which was in the chalice (for to babble about the metal of the chalice, (...).
is more meet for William Summer the Kings iester, then for M. William
Whitaker the Queen's reader) was the new testament in Christ's blood, or as S.
Mark and S. Matthew write, in meaning and truth al one, for easynes of
understanding, to common Christians more plain, is Christ's blood of the new
testament, and the self same (contained in the chalice) was shedd for us. So
Beza him self gives us the translation in S. Beza in Mat. 26. ver. 28. Mar.
14. v. 24
Matthew and S. Mark. Hoc (poculum) est sanguis meus noui testamenti, This
(cup) is my blood of the new testament, meaning by the cup (as him self
there writes) tha^ which was contained therein, vulgata and trita omnibus
linguis consuetudine loquendi. by a common kind of speech and familiar to
every language. So that M. Whitakers gross affectation of a little subtilitie,
is here more out of season, then in lent vnguentum, or to mingle S. Romans 9.
Paul's discourse of Predestination, with a tale of Robin Hoode. The matter
being well and at large handled by M. Martin, Discou. ca. 1 numb. 38. c. 17.
number. 10.
I remitte the reader to him for more particular explication of every parcel
and circumstance, I will only note the conclusion, for which all this stir
against S. Luke is kept, and perhaps it is a great reason, why in their late
conference in the Tower, See before cap. 2.
they have turned him out of his ancient authority, and matched him with
Judith and the Machabees, which they esteem little better then Aesopes fables.
The real presence manifestly proved by S. Luke.
The conclusion is, that whereas S. Luke most directly affirms that which
was in the chalice to be the self same blood that was shedd for our sins,
hence we confirm (as all the world may see) the old Catholic faith, and
refute this new, profane, and bakerlie Communion devised by Carolostadius and
Zuinglius. That this is the reason, why Beza altered the text, him self
confesses in flat terms. Quum haec verbasi constructionem spectemus, Beza in
Luc. 22. v. 10.
necessario non ad sanguinem sed ad poculum pertineant, neque tamen de poculo
intelligi possint etc. whereas these word (which is shedd for you) if you
regard the plain construction, appertain of necessity no^ to the blood, but
to the cup or chalice, and yet can not be understood of the cup or chalice
(which he speaks, presupposing his heresy to be true) therefore I have made
this alteration says he. That he never found among all his ancient copies
latin or greek, any one reading as he translateth, himself also confesses.
Omnes tamen vetusti nostri codices ita scriptum habebant. Albeit I thus
translate, yet all our old ancient books had it otherwise. that is, so
written as it is commonly read, and as the papists would have it.

Wherefore this being his fault, that upon private fancy to serve his
peculiar heresy, he has altered the very letter and text of the Gospel, is he
a Christian, is he a common heretic, nay, is he not worse then a Jew, then a
Turk, then the worst kind of Paganes, that pretendinge the name of a
Christian will defend such a vile caitife and monster, directly against the
sacred Evangelist and our blessed Savior him self? and yet forsooth because
this man is not only a great pillar, but also for some great part a very
coyner of this new Gospel, as it were their very Evangelist, (for much of
their text is made by him) he must needs be defended, though the old
Evangelists go to vvracke for it. Pardon me (Christian reader) if I seem
somevvhat vehement, their dealing being such, that if men held their peace, the
very infa^tes, Luc. 19. v. 40
yea the very stones would speak, as says our Savior. And vvithal consider
thou, when they vvil give over those barbarous Paradoxes, of feminine
primacie, of baptism not remitting sins, of their tropical bread etc.
wherein they stand only against the Catholics, or at the most, against us and
their brethren the Lutherans, when as they will not give over, but continue and
mainteyne their traiterous and Satanicall action commenced against our blessed
Savior.

But if we may without sin spend time in hearing what they have to say
against him, let us attend M. Whitaker and waygh what he dares utter in that
behalf. M.W. arguing against the text. of S. Luke. Page 13.
Thus he disputes. The words of Luke are. This cup is the new testament
in my blood: that is, if we follow M. Martins interpretation, This blood is
the new testament in my blood, which is shedd for you. what sense is there
of these words M. Martin, (...).
and what doubt blood is this? See you not here a manifest repetition of the
same thing rising of your interpretation? Wherefore seeing your sentence is
plainly absurd, who vvil not rather with Beza say there is a fault in the
words, or with Basil read (...). First of all to begin, you somewhat
misreporte M. Martin in sayng that he interprets, Hic sanguis est nouum
testamentum in sanguine meo. this blood is the new testament in my blood. For
though he deduce that by necessary consequence, yet is it an other thing to
say he interprets it so. The real presence.
The interpretation he gives you precisely out of S. Chrysostom, Chris. in.
1. Cor. 10. hom. 24.
hoc quod est in calice, illud est quod fluxit de latere that which is in the
chalice, is that which flovved out of Christ's side. Leo sermon. 11 de pass. The
just blood is the cup which S. Luke me^tioneth.
which also S. Leo the great very diuinelye expresses. Fudit sanguinem instum
qui reconciliando mundo et pretium esset et poculu^. he shed the just blood
which should be both the price and the cup to reconcile the world, the one
in his passion on the cross, the other in the sacrament at his last supper.
whereof though you may truly infer, that the blood of Christ in the chalice, is
the self same blood that flowed out of the side of Christ, as here S. Leo
does, yet talking exactly of propositions, you may find a great difference.
As if a man pointing to you should say, this man is a Caluinist or heretic,
he says in deed, this Caluinist is a Caluinist. yet can you not deny but there
is a great difference in the proposition. Wherefore we hold you to the
words and sense of the Evangelist, as your great Rabbine sets them down.
hoc est sanguis men's noui testamenti. This (cup) is my blood of the new
testament, which is the self same without any the least difference, which M.
Martin gives you out of S. Chrysostom. Now what have you against it? Many
faults committed by M.W. in his defense of Beza.
Oh say you it is tautologia, an absurd repetition of the self same thing,
for what double blood is this?

First why lie you so grossly and intolerably, as to say here is mention of
double blood? If I say, this Christ is Christ the son of God, this Messiah is
the Messiah and Savior of the world, this God, is God of heaven and earth,
find you mentioned a double Christ, a double Messiah, a double God, as here
you find double blood, if we say, this blood is the blood of the new testament?

with a sprite of giddines, Esa. 19. v. 14.
and what a miserable surgeon you are, who going about to cure Bezaes wound,
wound your self as deeply, and whiles you endeavor to excuse his Atheism
and impiety, run headlonge on the same rock your self. For what is Bezaes
fault? this, that to help forth his Zuinglian heresy, he corrected S. Luke
in the later part of the sentence ( shed for you) and altered that
according to his fancy. How does M. W. mende this? by railing at the first
part, This cup is the blood of the new Testament. for this (says he) is
tautologia. here is double blood. here is an absurd sentence. So that now
between you and Beza, S. Luke has never a word right, Beza reproving and
mending the later part, and you being as saucie with the former. Is not this
well defended?

^aut^ ogia, an absurd sentence, an idle repetition etc. where lie these
faults? doubtless not so much in the Evangelist, who wrote them, as in our
Savior who spoke them. Suppose I say it seem hard to your delicate and
Ciceronian ears. must therefore Christ be set to schole to learn his lesson
of that fierbrande of sedition, that sink and gulf of iniquity Theodore
Beza? and what is the absurdity you find in these words? mary that that which
was in the chalice was shed for our sins, and therefore consequently, it
was the real blood of our Savior, which is plain Papistrye and against our
Communion book. Is it so? Then to hell with your Communion book, and you to,
if that be so opposite to the Gospel of Christ, and you dare mainteyne it by
open checking and controling Christ the eternal wisdom of God.

The Protestants by their example and practice, make the scripture more
uncertain and mutable then any wethercock
if this unchristian divinity go forward. And always I desire the reader to
remember, that I am by force constrained to remain in this base kind of
talkinge in so plain a matter, against these enemies of Christ, that seem to
have lost the common senses of men. S. John the Baptist beholding Christ says:
Ecce agnus dei, ecce quitollit peccata mundi. John. 1. v. 29
Behold the lamb of God, Behold (the lamb) that takes away the sins of
the world. Call S. John to M. VVhitakers consistory, and he will ^^^ke him
recant his speech. For first Christ is no lamb, because he has no woll on his
back. It is the self same reason, which here is used against S. Luke, about
the me^^all of the chalice* Then being driven from that, the adsurditie of
tautologia still remains. Behold this lamb is the lamb of God, what an idle
speech is this? what is this double lamb? therefore send it to Geneua to be
cast a new in Bezaes forge. Chriso to 3. sermon. de ^rin^tate. Genesis 19. v. 24.
Victor de persequutione Vandalic. li. 2. in sine. Psalm. 66.
The Catholics of old time to prove distinction of persons in the deity, used
that place of Genesis, p^uit. d^mi^^^ a^ domino, our Lord rayned from our Lord:
to prove the Trinity of persons, they used the place of the psalm, Benedicat
nos Deus Deus noster, benedis at nos Deus. God our God bless us, our God
bless us. This to a Trinitarian, is absurda sententia, and induces a
plurality of Gods. whereas S. Paul says, vnus Deus, vnus Dom^nus o^^ God,
Ephesians. 4. 7.5. ^
one Lord* what remains the^, but that according to the arrest of this,
supreme arbiter, we fall to new casting of the scripture, and so in short
space (no doubt) we shall grow to perfection, that is, to the Turks Alcoran, if
we be not come so far already. The scriptures are full of such absurdities,
which nevertheless are absurdities only to carnal cogitatio^s, to Satan and
Satan's ministers: 2. Co. 10. v. ^
but to the^ that have learned in the schole of the holy Ghost, to subject
their understanding to the obedience of faith, they are nothing so. And M.W. If
other heretics should do as Beza gives them example. within a short time we
should have a strange Bible.
if he had in him any drop of religion and faith, he should thus think.
Howsoever I can reconcile two or three Gods with one, the blood shedd on the
cross with that which was in the chalice, were it blood or wine, let Christ's
words stand as he spoke them and the Evangelist wrote them, and let us
afterward in the name of God, be we Lutherans, Zuinglians, Caluinists,
Trinitaries or Anabaptists, each according to his private spirit, search for
the sense as well as we can. Christ's soul went down to hell, says our Creed
and S. Luke. It is absurd (says Beza) and papisticall, Actor. 2.
and therefore for soul I have translated carcas, and for hell grave, whom in
so doing the English congregation approves. That Christ ascended into heaven,
it is a fancy of Aristotle and Mahomet says Brentius, Brentius and the
Vbiquitaries have written many books against the arti^le of Chr^sts Ascension.
and to the Lutherans, it is absurda sententia. shall they now leave out that
word, and put in the text, for ascendit, euanuit or disparuit, he vanyshed out
of sight in steed of he ascended, which to them is the true and only sense of
the place, and which they may and ought to do by like reason and authority?

One or other father^ reading* is no warrant for us to alter the text of
scripture.
S. Basil, or S. Luke? if S. Basil, you have done well, to follow your greek
copye. If S. Luke, then do you wickedly to alter S. Luke upon conjecture of
one greek doctor, all greek copies and doctors being to the contrary. And
what if S. Basil in an other place read otherwise? shall we not make a wise
patching of scripture, if upon every particular doctors citation we alter the
holy text? S. Aug. in many places, S. Bernard, and other good men dravv
exhortatio^s for their friends, or monks, or people, and commonly they do it in
the very phrase of scripture. yet because they knitte together many sentences
of scriptures, that be in diverse places, they must of necessity add some
words or parcels of their own. Nether is it material, if oftentimes they leave
out one word or a few words. But if by such authority we should alter our
text, we should in short space have so many texts, that in deed we should have
no text, because we should have no certain text whereunto we might trust. And
why remember you not that, which in this self same place M. Martin told you
out of Beza, who notes it to be the custom of the ancient fathers in citing
scriptures, Discou page 261. nu. 1^.
to allege the sense and not to stick precisely upon the words. And that
therefore how soever they read, that is no certain rule to reform or alter
the words of scripture.

But here you make your advantage of M. Martins words, and say, Whit. pa. 13.
if Basil cited not the words, but the sense of the scripture, the^ Beza when
he so translated, missed nothing of the sense. so M. Martin does now plainly
acquit Beza, vvho^ before he accused. For if Basils words give a true sense,
and the interpretation of Beza and ours all agree with Basils words, then
your accusation is false, that we had corrupted the sense of the scripture.
Somewhat you say, and this has some appearance, more then any thing that you
have said hitherto: Luc. 22. v. 20
Basil. hic est calix, nouum testamentum in sanguine meo qui pro vobis
fundetur. This is the chalice, the new testament in my blood which shall be
shed for you. And whosoever reads and takes these later words, as
referring them to the blood of Christ shed on the cross, Great difference
between a Catholic reading indifferently one way or other, and an heretic
choosing precisely one only way most serving his herefie.
he thinks very well and truly and no man would ever find fault with such a
sense or citation, if it stayed there. For this nothing impayreth the other
truth whereof we speak, that the same blood is in the chalice. But when there
rises up a new heresy by one truth overthrowing an other, and by one part of
the sentence destroyng an other (as it fares betwixt us) this circumstance so
far alters the case, that the old father alleging the text without any
thought or imagination of heresy, did well and christianlike, the new heretic
enforcing the same in defense of heresy, does n^ughtely and sacrilegrously. as
for example. If some good man as S. Basil or S. Bernard, to induce his auditors
to the love of Christ, had used this sentence of the Apostle. Tit. 3. ver. 5.
In this appeared the benignity of our lord and savior toward us, that not
by the works of justice which we did, but of his infinite mercy he saved
us. This place according to the sense, had been well and truly cited. For
albeit infinite is not in the text, yet that is no hinderance to the meaning,
and although I name not Christ god, In this sort S. Peter 1. epist. c. 2. v. 6
cites a place out of Esai. 28. v. 16
yet nether that word hinders any thing, because in a Christian audience, it
is all one to say our lord and savior Christ, or our god and savior Christ.
But if there rose up some Nestorian heretic, that should divide Christ from
god, and make two persons of this one savior (from which heresy Beza was not
far, Whit. cont. Came. pa. 135
as you know) now this heresy makes that citatio^ though otherwise good and
sound, yet not so perfect and absolute, as it had been to put in the word god.
Because in this time, and against such an heritike, the place thus alleged is
more forcible, and S. Bernard erred not in citing the first, but this heretic
plays the very heretic in pressing it against the later. Take an other
example, to make the thing more manifest. In S. Luke we read that the angel
thus speaks to our blessed Lady. Luke. 1. v. 35
Spiritus sanctus superueniet in te etc. ideoque quod nascetur ex te sanctum,
vocabitur filius dei: The holy Ghost shall come upon thee etc. and therefore
that which of thee shall be borne holy, shall be called the son of god. who
doubts but S. Bernard or S. Thomas, and some ancient copies, albeit they
leave out the words ex te, of thee, nevertheless mean the true and perfect
sense of the place, that our Lady through the power of the holy Ghost,
conceived of her body, and brought forth the son of god? Now rise your
frindes the Ana baptistes, and amongst other heresies spread this, that
Christ brought his flesh from heaven, and took it not of our blessed Lady, but
passed thorough her as water thorough a cundit pipe, or according to your
ancient comparison when you first began your gospel, Christ was so in her, as
saffron in a saffron bag. And they being pressed with this place, answer as
you a^swere for Beza, that the true reading is to leave out those two syllables
ex te, and so the place proves nothing. And this they would prove by better
argument then you pretend any, having for them some ancient copies both greek
and latin, besides the reading of more fathers then one. Can not you in this
case easily conceive, how those fathers and writers gave a true sense and far
from the Anabaptisticall heresy, and yet the Anabaptists are wicked heretics
in urging this correction of the text? why so? because the fathers spoke truly,
and meant entierly the full truth, although the sense be not so full and
absolute to all purposes, and in every respect. namely of this new heresy
(whereof these fathers never dreamed) as is the text it self in his natural
strength and force, put down in those words and syllables as it was first by
the holy Evangelist: the Anabaptists speak falsely and mean detestably, when
by that alteration they will seem to confirm their heresy and take from the
Catholic church so good a ground refelling the same, which those other fathers
never intended. This is your very case, and so S. Basil meant truly and simply,
and as a Saint and a Christian, though Beza and you deal in the self same
matter, falsely, and subtly, and as it becomes heretics.

Bezaes corruption inexcusable, for ought M. W. either has said, or can say.
is nothing to the purpose. For suppose ye sin^e many Basils, and many greek
copies reading as you would have it, yet shall you be never for all that able
to justify Beza, because he confesses, when he so translated he never savv
any, and therefore was not moved by any such reading. And therefore your p^ying
and searching for fyg-leaues to cover his filthiness, Genes. 3.
can no more serve the turn, then if a man should excuse Judas for betrayng
Christ, by reason of the good, which came thereby to the redemption of
mankind. Because whatsoever was the event of that actio^, he sinned th^rin
damnably who regarded no such matter, but only for malice and gain of xxx.
pence, sold his lord and master. and the self same is to be said of this
Judas, whose honesty you would so feign sane. For whatsoever may be the
success of your labors in this argument, he certainly played therein the
part of a damnable corruptor of gods holy word, who for malice against the
truth and love of his heresy, without any such knowledge committed so
sacrilegious an act.

And the reason which you make, Wh. page 23.
helps the matter never a whit, but so much the more discovers your
folly. Thus you argue. M.W. argument.
If by the cup you understand (not the cup it self, but) the blood of
Christ in the cup, is not this a trope? why then are you offended with us,
when you your selves grant that there is a trope in these words? Is it
lavvfull for you to invent tropes, and is it unlawful for us to appoint one
necessary trope? The vanity thereof.
Whereunto I answer, first that this is also from the purpose. For be your
Zuinglian heresy most true, as it is most false, it furthereth you nothing,
nor abbettereth his rashness in altering the text. For we may not make the
scripture speak every truth in every place, much less may we make it
speak vile heresy in any place. Then, the form of your reasoning is so lose,
that if a man would study for an argument to make sport vvithall, he could
not devise one more fond and ridiculous.

We allow of a trope, when we interpret the cup to be the blood, or the
thing contained in the cup.

Ergo we ought to allow your trope, in the other part of the sentence, that
the blood shed for us, should signify a cup of wine.

What wit, reason, probability, or sense, induces you so to talk? whence
rises the coherence and connection of this consequent? Is it this, because in
one part of the sentence there is a trope or figure, therefore the other part
is figurative also? as for example. S. Gal. 2. v. 19.
Paul says, by the law I am dead to the law, with Christ I am nailed to
the cross. Romans 6. v. 13
and again. We that are baptized, are buried together by baptism in to death
with Christ. in which sentence the Apostle joins two several truths, in
the first, Christ was nailed to the cross, and I am nailed to the cross
with him. in the next, Christ was buried, and we that are baptized, are
buried with him. Now is this your argument. S. Paul was nailed to the
cross mystically, and this a trope. ergo Christ was nailed to the cross in
such manner, and that is also a trope and when the baptized are said to be
buried with Christ, it is a figure. ergo that Christ was buried, is likewise
a figure. If this be the knitting of your argument, you see what pith is in
it. Or is it, because of one particular figure you may infer an other? then
also you have your aunsvvere, given you partly in that which is how said,
partly before by your father Luther, See before page 220.
that it is as substantial a reason, as if I should say: Peter was an
Apostle, ergo Pilate was an Apostle. the blessed virgin brought forth and
remained a virgin, ergo Sara did so. Or mean you that your trope has as good
reason to support it, as has ours? Infinite difference between the figure of
the Catholics and that of the heretics.
if so, we give you infinite difference, because upon our trope, to vvitte,
that the cup, that is, the metal, could not be shed or powered out, and
therefore the words must needs be understood of the thing contained in the
cup, all Catholics now living, all Catholics from Christ's time, all
heretics though otherwise most perverse and obstinate enemies of the truth,
Lutherans, Zuinglians, Anabaptists, of any sect and fashion, all creatures
endued with wit and reason, man woman and child agree, and (as Beza
confesses) it is a trope vulgar and usual to all languages and nations. But
upon your trope, where you interpret the blood of Christ by wine, and refer
the later part, not to that which was in the chalice, and so deny the real
presence, no Catholic now living, no Catholic ever living agreed, the church
of God from the beginning has abhorred it, the very gra^mat and gra^matical
co^struction refelleth it, your own brethren deteste it, Luther and the
Lutherans condemn it, yea the Sacramentaries them selves many of the^, account
it a very dull and blunt evasion, so far forth, that Carolostadius the first
father of your Sacramentarie heresy, (though he be not commonly so esteemed)
thought it a more cleanly exposition, to say that Christ referred those worde^
hic est corpus meum, Carolost, exposition of Christ's words, hoc est corpus
meum.
hic est sanguis meus, to him self sittinge at the table as if Christ had said:
iccipite, manducat^, take ye, and eat, and be merry, for I am he that must die
for all. And Hulderike Zuinglius that most excellent man sent from God with
Luther to lighten the whole world, by the judgment of your English church,
Apol. Angl part. 4. ca. 4.. 2.
is so uncertain of your trope, that he allows well of this exposition, and
gives you good leave to follow it, and it was allowed of many thousand
Sacramentaries besides him. Touching Zuinglius, his words are evident.
Carolostadius pius homo, etc. Zuing. tom. 2. in epist. ad Matthew. Rutlin. de
coena fol. 255.
Carolostadius that godly man (says Zuinglius) does interpret the words of
the supper, as though Christ had directed them not to the bread, but to him
self, sayng, take, eat, for I will deliver this body for you. This
interpretation he proves, Scripture applied by heretics to prove any thing be
it never so absurd.
because the prophets foretell that Christ should be crucified, etc. And after
many places of scripture brought to prove this exposition, he gives in his
own judgment thus. Ego hominis pii laudo industriam, de fide gratulor, hanc
Carolostadii sententiam qui probauer it, nos minime offendet. I comme^d the
diligence of this godly man, I praise the lord for his faith, if any man vvil
follow this his opinion, I shall like well of it. So that, great is the
difference between our trope and yours, as great as is between our doctrine and
yours, that is as great, as is between truth and falshod, light and darkness,
heaven and hell: and therefore except you furnish it with better reasons then
this, your figure will remain a poor, beggarly, heretical shift, devised by a
few of one sect, and contemned by many of the same sect, and infinite of other
sects, when ours shall stand accounted a certain truth, not only to Catholics
and heretics of al sorts, but also to al men endewed with common wit or reason.

And this is all that M.W. brings for the defense of Beza wherein after a
number of faults, errors, ignorances, impieties, he has so behaved himself,
that he has lea^t the matter worse then he found it. so that in the next
writing, he has not so much to labor for Beza, so Lucifer like controling the
Evangelist in one word, as he has to shift for him self, who in a greater
piece and more important, has so damnably and detestably thvvarted the same
Evangelist and our B. savior, and like a plain Atheist worse then Beza; has
more defaced that first and principal part this is the new testament in my
blood: this speech of our Lord and savior he has reproved I say, of
^aur^logia, vain repetition, and absurd consequence. How much better and more
honest had it been for him and Beza both, to have followed the sober counsel
of their father Martin Luther. Luther tom. 7. defensio verboru^ coen. fo. 411.
I go v^^o (says he) de iris Sacramentariis hoc sanc suaderent etc. I truly
would give the doting Sacramentaries this advise, Luth. sage counsel to the
Sacramentaries in this case.
that seeing they will needs be mad, let them play the mad men rather
wholy, then in part. Therefore whereas they must adventure somevvhat, let
them make short work, and raze altogether out of the supper those words,
this is my body which is given for you. For touching their faith and
celebration of their supper, they have no need of these words, but it is all
one, if thus they keapte it: Christ took bread, gave thanks, brake it, and
gave it to his disciples, sayng, take, eat, do this in my remembrance. For
this proves sufficiently, that bread is to be eaten in remembrance of Christ.
This is the whole and entier supper of the sacramentaries. And then to what
end keep they in the book, that other superfluous and unprofitable text?

Yea as though he had foreseen this desperate boldness whereunto the Zuinglians
are now grown, he before hand even particularly and in the self same words,
warns us of these very reasons, or rather peevish and shameless assertions,
which Beza and M. W. throw forth for singular and mighty arguments against
this clause of S. Lukes Gospel. For what is Bezaes demonstration against the
later part, qui pro uobis fu^ditur, with which he is so offended? forsooth
this: Beza in Luc. 2^. verse. 20.
aut manifestum est solacophanes, aut potius quum haec essent ad marginem
annotata ex Mat. and Mar. postea in co^textum irrepserunt. Either there is some
manifest fault in the Greek, or (which I suppose rather) whereas these
words were noted in the margent out of Matthew and Mark, afterward they
creapt in to the text. And what says Luther of this? Luther vbi supra fo. 411
Thus he speaks to the Sacramentaries. Quid inepti, nihilne consilii habetis
etc. Luther thought it impossible that the Sacrame^taries would ever grow to
such absurdity as now they defend
what ye fools, have ye no vvitte? you must venture. Dicite verba illa primum
margini ascripta, postea vero ab aliquo textui inserta, say that those words
were first written in the margent, and then by some odd fellow thrust in to
the text, and not written so by the Evangelist, seeing you have a sure rule to
prove all this: and your rule is, A good rule
that that is not true, whatsoever seems superfluous and unprofitable unto
you. And what is M.W. argument against the first part, this (cup) is my blood
of the new testament? Mary that this implies an absurd sentence, it is
tautologia, an idle repetition. Ibid.
And what says Luther of this? whereas those words, that show the real
presence of the body and blood, have naught to do in the Sacramentaries
supper, eodem modo his quoque argumentari licet, mera tautologia est haec verba
in cana poni. They might do very well here also to make this argument, that it
is tautologia, a vain repetition, to put these words in the supper, and
therefore they ought not to have any place there, whereas the supper without
them is described, used and practiced fully and perfitly, and no man can show
any reason or necessity why they should be there.

This is the proceeding of the Zuinglia^ gospel. that which their eternal
enemy spoke in scorn and derision, as a thing so ridiculous and absurd, that
they would never admit for shame, that have these good fellows without shame
now received in good sooth and sadness. Wherefore to help them forward, if M. W.
will take a little pains in searching old copies, perhaps he may find some one
or other, at lest some ancient father, that reads as Luther wishes the^ to
read. And to give him an entrance, let him look in S. Basil, Basil. in ethic.
reg. ^1. cap. 4.
the next chapter to that which he cites, and he shall find him to read
thus. Caenantibus illis accepit Jesus pane^ etc. vvhiles they were at supper,
Jesus took bread, and blessed, and brake, and gave it to his disciples. And
then leaving out the rest, puts next, et hymno dicto, exierunt in montem
oliuarum. and having said an hymn, they went forth to mount Oliuet. And
perhaps if Beza live to set forth his testament once again, well it may be
with some good advise of such brethren, he will leave the words clean out of
the book, or put in one syllable more ( non) and so mende all, as he has
done in some other places upon as small reason as this, as writes Gabriel
Fabricius: whose words to conclude withal, I will set down in latin, because
you shall perceive, that some man has written against him, whose tongue Beza
understands well enough. The book is entitled, Gabrielis Fabricii responsio
ad Bezam Vezeliam Eceboliam. fol. 17.
Gabriel is Fabricii Responsio ad Bezam Vezeliam Eceboliam, printed at Paris
an. 1567. In that book amongst many other notable things, thus he writes. Id
agis, haec verba toties repetita, (hoc est corpus meum) perinde accipie^da esse
ac si dictum scriptu^que esset, hoc non est corpus meum. Et fortasse vt tandem
te expedias, et tot commentariorum plaustra facessere iubeas, recurres ad talem
emendationem. Et quia nostri correctores dicunt in ipsis etia^ Pandectis
Florentinis saepe deesse negationem, tu tali artificio, statim te liberes, et
aduersariis os obstruas, praesertim cum alios multos euangeliorum locos
similiter scilicet emendaueris, partim ex coniectura, partim ex manuscriptis
(vt ais) exemplaribus. You labor to shevve that those words so often repeated
(this is my body) are to be taken as though it had been spoken and written,
this is not my body. and perhaps at length, that you may rid your self, and
dispatch out of the way these cartloades of commentaries, you will fly to
such a kind of correction. And because our correctors say, that in the very
law books of Florence, Bezaes manner in correcting the testament.
oftentimes there wants a negative particle, you also will use such a shift
to stop the mouth of your adversaries, especially whereas you have already
corrected in like sort very learnedly, many places of the gospels, partly by
conjecture, partly by hand-vvritten copies, as you tell us. Some such corrected
copies if M. W. ca^ find against the next time, it will ease him of much labor
and put us to much trouble. In the mean season, this I dare promise him, he
shall never scour his coat clean from those spots with which in this
defense of Beza he has foully stained and soyled him self, so long as the old
copies of S. Lukes gospel stand in force.

CHAP. XI. M.VV. general answer to the book of Discovery, and of the
notable impiety committed by the translatours of the English Bibles.
AFTer these particular controversies and reprehe^sions M. W. comes now to
make a general answer unto M. Martyns Discovery, which although it be very
short, yet is it very sweet, to the singular commendation of their English
tra^slations. The sum is, that al is well, nothing amiss, every word stands
right, so as he marueleth that M. Mart. was not ashamed so notably to publish
his own ignorance and unskillfulness to all the world. Thus he writes. Whit.
pa. 14.
Albeit heretofore I liked well our translations, yet now I love them much
more, whereas I see so fevv faults, and those so small and trifling can be
found out and reproved eue^ of our enemies. For what adversary was there ever
so blinded with malice that can not perceive our translations to be disallovved
of you, without judgment, learning, or reason? (...) we translate sometimes
instructions, sometimes ordinances, sometimes precepts. (...) images, (...)
congregation, (...) an elder, (...) to amend our lives, (...) mystery or
secret, (...) thankesgeuing, (...) freely be loved, (...) god is not tempted
with evil. He must take and allow in like manner (...) carcas, (...) grave,
(...) table etc. Ibid.
What is there here that a man can find fault vvithall as not translated well
and truly? and who vvil not judge him a reprehender to wicked and importune,
who when he can find no greater thing, for these faults, which are none at
al, pronounces that all the vulgar tra^slations of our churches are to be
rejected and condemned? Haec et is it iusmodi nugae, nostra crimina sunt. These
and the like trifles are our faults. This is M.W. defense of their English
translatio^s, or rather a friendly assertion, that al things in the^ are very
well, and therefore the whole book of the Discovery is a peevish devise of M.
Martin, proceeding only of malice, without judgment, learning or reason.

To show the falsitie and malicious wickedness of the heretics in translating
these very words so, were to make an other book, and it is so well done by
M. Martin touching every particular, notwithstanding any replye yet made, that
to handle the same again were to cast water into the Terns, or light a candel
at noone day.

an image, or among Pagans (...) a carcas, more then minister talking of the
English ministers a slave or homo a dog. He will say, that (...) by his
primitive signification and deriuation may so signify. Does (...) so signify
a carcas? But leave we the second, talk we of the first, and in that of al
other where is like reason. I will not enter in to any new or serious
disputation touching this using or abusing of words: when, by what authority,
and how far, such mutation is necessary, or allowable. Only resting my self
upon the Protestants common and vulgar kind of disputing, that is, upon the
first and original deriuation and signification of Ecclesiastical words, I will
by manifest and plain examples taken from their use and practice, show how
absurd and unreasonable their dealing is in this behalf. Upon this ground,
(...) say you is well translated image, and hereupon because we give reverence
to images, which reverence is well expressed by the word (...) (for the
distinction between (...) and (...) is nothing, says M. D. Humfrey, and he
refuteth it at large in his book of M. L. Humfred. in vita Iuelli. page
145.146. etc.
Iuels life: and the rest of the protestants of that sect, commonly are of the
same judgment) therefore we are condemned of you justly as Idololatrae,
Idolaters for giving honor and reverence to sacred images which in greek are
called Idols. Let us note now whether this Idolatry turn not on your own
head. Honor not you the Queen in her images, The Protestants idolaters.
in her cloth and chair of estate, in her maces, in her seals and letters, in
keeping holy her Nativity and Assumption to the crown? I somewhat
disadvantage my self, for perhaps this in deed draws near to true
Idolatry. But let it pass with the rest. The Protestants give honor to the
images of the Queen. Images and idols are al one, ergo the Protestants are
idolaters. Or more briefly and plainly thus. Every prince in his realm is
an image of the true god, that is, and idol of the true god. Ergo the
Protestants in that they worship and serve their princes, worship and serve
idols, and so by M.W. judgment are Idolaters. Examples, wherein the Protestants
may consider their own fault in profaning ecclesiastical word^.
Again, church you say is well expressed by congregation. What is
congregation in greek? (...), which being a word made English by custom as
well as congregation, it can not be any error to use that in place of
congregation. and (...) in greek, is superintendent or ouerseer in English,
and both these translations are used and justified by your English bibles. Now
if your knowledge be so good in the English as I take it, you can not be
ignorant that an ouerseer is as properly and usually expressed in our
language by this word surueyer, (...) supra videre to survey.
which comes directly from supra videre, to ouersee. And what of all this?
Forsooth that it is no error, when we talk of the bishops of the English
church or congregation, to whom you dedicated your latin translation of M.
Ievvel, if we say you dedicated it to the most reverend surueyers of the
English synagoge. Euangelium the gospel, in greek you wot well what it
signifies, good nevves or tidinges, and testamentum in hebrew and greek, is
in English and latin covenant, (...)
foedus as Beza commonly tra^slateth it, inscribing both his Testaments the
greater and lesser printed the year 1565, Jesus Christi nouum Testamentum sieve
foedus. as properly a bible is nothing else but (...) a book, for it is the
self same word. If so, then when one comes to you, and brings you good
nevves and tidings that a benefice is befallen you, you may say, he brings
you the gospel of a benefice, or when your farmer receaueth of you a lease
with a new covenant, he receaueth a lease with a new testament, and Lucians
Dialogues, because they are (...), therefore they are a bible, almost as good
as yours.

But in one example to show, how void of sense and understanding you prove
your self in this discourse, by like reason in every respect as you can
justify the aforesaid words, you may and must justify the translation of
(...) washing, as well as (...) thankesgeuing, the use of Baal for dominus,
lord, for it signifies so precisely in the hebrew, (...)
whence comes Baalzebub, the idol of Accaron called in contempt, yet
according to the true original, and primitive signification of the word
dominus muscae, lord of a fly 4. Reg. 1. And what signifies (...) diabolus
in greek? word for word calumniator, a slaunderer. And angeli (...)
messe^gers, as you translate it, Heb. 1. v. 7. and (...) vvynde, translated
likewise so by you, Joan. 3. v. 8. and Christ (...) the anointed both in greek
and hebrew, (...)
used so by you in sundry places of the bible. These being all alike, so as
you can not find any exception to disprove any syllable, and so al approved by
your English translations, which now you love more then ever you did, because
they are found to be without al fault, let us suppose in our grandfathers time,
some Catholic priest or Bishop in our realm to have exhorted his people to
charity, devotion, and reformation of their lives. Suppose he spoke unto them
in this sort.

I that am your priest and bishop, placed in this church by the holy Ghost for
the feeding of your sovvles, do denounce unto you in the name of Christ our
Lord, that except you with more devotion come to receive the B. Sacrament, and
perform better your promise made to God in baptism, you shall be body and
soul condemned to hell: your portion shall be with the devils, I say with
Beelzebub and his angels. The meaning of this, every Christian does know, and
no doubt it might, and I think would move a Christian audience. Let us now
after your translations, turn the same into the phrase and style of the new
gospel, and see how it will sound. Let us suppose some of your youthful
ministers or superinte^de^ts to make the same exhortation. The^ thus must it
ru^ne.

I that am your elder or surueyer and superintendent, placed in this synagoge
by the holy vvynd, for the feeding of your carcasses, do denounce unto you in
the name of the Anointed our Baal, that except you with more devotion come to
receive the thankesgeuing, and perform better your promise made to God in
washing, you shall be condemned body and carcas to the grave, with the
slaunderers, I say with the Lord of a fly and his messengers. How deeply this
would sink into the hearts of your Euangelical auditorie, let their own
conscience be judge. But touching you, if you continue as you here begin, and
say, all this goes well, there is no fault in it, I appeal to common sense
whether you have not as little wit and capacity, as ever man that bare the name
of a Christian Divine.

The abuse of ecclesiastical words, the ruin of al religion.
For what Christian, had he either of these, would not at the first warning,
revoke or moderate so gross and filthy absurdity, whereby must needs follow
the contempt, and plain euacuation of the whole Church, of the sacraments, of
religion, of Christ? for if the eucharist be rightly expressed by
thankesgeuing, and bapt^sme by washing etc. then when a man with thankesgeuing
has been at a good breakefast, he has been at the eucharist, and when one of
your ministers goes to be vvasshed and trimmed at the barbers, he goes to
baptism. But what spend I words in such vanity? Shortly thus I say, he that
can swalow down such Camels as these, Mat. 23. v. 24
and avouch such translations to be faultles, and unworthy of reprehensio^,
Page 15.
and forthwith conde^neth the late translation set forth in this College as the
most corrupt that ever was made sithence the world was created (for so he
speaks) against which him self with all his search and prying obiecteth only
two faults, and the same not in the thing nether, but both of the^ rising of
his either malice or ignorance, whether this man's face and forhead be made of
common matter, and not rather of some harder metal, such as the Prophet Esaias
describes, Esa. 48. v. 4.
frons aerea frons tua, I leave to the wisdom of the discreet reader.

To approve the English translations is to approve plain Atheism and deny God.
that when we read in the latin and greek, that the soul goes to hell,
the English without staggering may turn it as the true meaning and sense, that
the carcas, or life, or soul is put in the grave, and M. W. as principal
professor in divinity, by supreme censure confirm such translation, where
shall we have warrant to prove the immortality of the soul, the last
judgment, the place of hell, and the eternal pains thereof? See (Christian
reader) for thy own sake this corruption in the Discovery, Discou* ca. ^ nu.
1.2.3.4.
where thou shall find the causes moving the heretics thus to do.
Protestant^diuines against the English tra^slations.
yea those of his own University and perhaps acquaintance, find fault with
his pure and faultles bibles, and flatly pronounce that they lead men the high
way to very Atheism, worse then Gentilitie, or the schole of Epicure.

Castalio in his notes upon the Testament against Beza, after many reasons
alleged, Castal. defens. contra Bezam. page 189.
concludes, that whereas in our common Creed Christ is said to have been
first buried, and then to have gone down to hell, here manifestly hell and
the grave are distinguished. wherefore it were far better in such hard and
obscure places, religiously to speak as becomes an interpreter of the holy
Ghost, then vvhiles we vvil seem to know al thing, to shut up the way to
the truer sense, if perhaps afterward we aspire to more knowledge. And
Flacius Illyricus by diligent comparing of the parts and words of the text,
refelling at large al Bezaes foolish and blind arguments, Illyric. in Clau.
part. 1. in verbo infernus. page 598.603.604.605.
sets this down as a more assured verity. Non est dubium quin (...) Sheol,
sepulchrum, infernus, hic pro ipsissimo loco aeterni exitii ponatur. There is
no question, but the hebrew word Sheol here signifies the very place of hell.

See D. Hum. judgment after, in the 14. chap.
But what need I to go so far as Germany for authority, whereas there are of
your own Universities, D. Humfrey for Oxford, and an other for Cambridge, of
which, the one refuteth learnedly your impiety, the other inueigheth eagerly
against your passing impudency in this behalf: though the party whom I mean,
in any other thing seem as far gone as you. Read M. Carliles Disputation
which publicly he maintained in your University, and printed this last year,
directly against the Apostolic Creed, against Christ's descending in to hell,
and see whether he proves not that of you which I say. In one place thus he
writes. Job c. 33. v. Carlisle in his book, that Christ went not down to hell.
fol. 144.
22. it is said, than man draws near to the grave and his life to the dead.
The English bibles have. The soul draws to the grave and life to the
buriers. The English translations draw men to think that Christ's soul
perished.
what a translation is this, to say, that a man's soul draws to the
grave? do our sovvles go to the grave? can a soul corrupt? do not all that go
to the grave putrify? why should they translate the text thus? Thus he.
whereof it follows, that our English translators in steed of hell giving us
the grave, and placing our Saviors soul there, teach that it did corrupt and
perish. Yet M. W. says, al is well, this is no fault, although by this his own
doctors verdite, they say and teach that our Saviors soul perished
everlastingly. Again David psalm. Ibid. fo. 117.
30. gives god thanks for his health which he had recovered, and therefore
says. O lord, I thank thee that thou have delivered me from the grave. And
this place also have they (in their English translations) hitherto corrupted, O
singular purity of the English Bibles.
depraved the sense, obscured the truth, deceived the ignorant, and supplanted
the simple. for it is Sheol which they translate, hell. The Geneua bible has
thus. Against the immortality of the soul.
Thou have brought up my soul out of the grave. And the greatest bible.
Thou have raised my soul up from the grave. What a translation is this? to
say that the soul is enclosed in the grave and buried with the body, which
is an impiety to imagine? Ibid. fo. 120.
One place more I vvil note out of the same writer. Ps. 86. when David was
in great danger of death by Saul, and delivered, he gives god thanks who
had delivered him from present death and from the grave. The Geneua bible
translateth it thus. So translateth the Bible of the year 1579.
Thou have delivered my soul from the lowest grave. wherein they offend.
For nether can the immortal soul of man be enclosed in a grave, nether a
spiritual thing in a corporal place. The greatest bible translateth it thus.
The English translations lead men to detestable errors.
Thou have delivered my soul from the lowest part of hell. VVhereon they
ground a detestable error, that they should think that David a man of perfect
faith, of singular virtues, and such a one as was written in the book of
life, should imagine that he either should or could go to hell. Much more has
he against your bibles which you so love as being perfect and immaculate, and
by very many plain demonstrations proves them to be so filthelie corrupted,
as they rather resemble Mahomets Alcoran, then the word of the holy Ghost,
and these fevv (to say the truth) prove it sufficiently. Wherefore upon these
faults and many other such, common in the greatest bible, Ibid, fo. 116.
and the bible printed at Geneua, he infers against your translations and
translators with great vehemency, more then M. Martin ever used, that in many
places they detort the scriptures from the right sense, they show them selves
to love darkness more then light, and falsehode more then truth.

Now tovvching particulars, I think it needeles to stand upon every word so
co^fidentlie allowed by M.W. Because M. Mart. shows by good reason the
wickedness of the heretics in the devising of them, and his reasons stand as
yet unanswered. Yet because M.W. simple man thinks there is no more danger
in such alteration, then if a man should in translating of Plato or Zenophon
use the like liberty, and turn (...) gratiarum actio, or (...) a secret, let
him learn of Beza whom he so aduau^ceth, Bezaes true judgment, what harm is
like to ensue by abusing ecclesiastical words.
what danger ensues of such novelty. Beza much detesting in others that
fantastical and impious vanity (though he could not perceive the same in him
self) thus vvriteth against the^. The world is now come to that pass, Beza
in Act. c. 10. ver. 46. edit. anno 1556. He (or the printer) has altered some
part of these words in the later editio^ an. 1565.
that not they only who write their own discourses, refuse the familiar and
accustomed words of scripture, as obscure, unsavory, and out of use, but also
those that translate the scripture out of greek in to latin, challenge unto
them selves the like liberty. So as vvhiles every man vvil rather freely
follow his own judgment, then religiously behave him self as the holy
Ghosts interpreter, many things they do not convert, but pervert. For which
licentiousnes and boldness except remedy be provided in time, either I am
notably deceived, or within fevv years, in steed of Christians we shall
become Ciceronians, (that is Gentiles) and by little and little, shall leese the
possession of the things them selves. In these words Beza teaches you,
that this vvanton novelty of placing secrets for sacraments, and messengers
for angels, and ambassadors for Apostles, and washing for Baptism, and
thankesgeuing for Eucharist, and so forth, vvil come to this end, Change of
words induces change of faith.
that in fine you vvil with the words take away the things signified,
Sacraments, Baptism, Eucharist, Angels, Apostles, and al Apostolical doctrine,
and so in steed of Christians make us again Pagans. Whereof besides his
warning, the world has to much experience already.

And if our dear countrymen would judge of things to come, by trial and event
of things past, they must in their own memory find and feel this to be
true which Beza here tells them. For look what old words you have upon
newfanglednes (as it might seem) altered and taken out of the Bible by the
working of Satan, those very things you have removed from the hearts of men,
and cast out of the churches which you have invaded. With the name priest, went
away the office of priest, with the altar, that which was the proper service of
God, and done at the altar. with taking away the word penance, you have
withdrawn the people from al doing of penance, and in altering the word
church, you have cut them clean from the church, and more estraunged them from
the communion of it, then some barbarous and faithles nations that never heard
of Christ. And so likewise for things to come, when they see you prick at the
name of angels, and begin to leave out that, and for Christ, to give them the
anointed, and for Apostles, Ambassadors, and for hell, a grave, let them assure
them selves that your purpose is, to extinguish in them al faith and memory of
Angels, Christ, Apostles, Heaven, and Hell, and to bring the^ in to the same
lamentable state wherein their au^cesters were, when by blessed S. Gregory then
Pope, and S. Austin our Apostle, they were first converted.

Wherefore seeing reason both human and divine proves that to be true which I
have said touching their notorious rashness in corrupting the scriptures, The
sum of such foul and ethnical corruptions, as by reason are proved and by
confession of the adversaries are granted to be in the ^nglish translatio^s.
seeing not only reason but also plain experience confirms the same, seeing
farther the thing is so clear by reason, and experience, and al learning, that
the very heretics confess it, whereas their own brethren by plain
arguments prove their ttanslatio^s to be most wicked, as which labor to
pervert the sentence of the holy Ghost, to detort the scriptures from the right
sense, to prefer darkness before light and falshode before truth, to deceive
the simple, to induce the mortality of the soul, to make men think that the
soul of Christ was enclosed in the grave and so buried with his body, to
plant detestable errors, to overthrow Gods eternal predestination, to take
away the belief of hell, and consequently of heaven, of the extreme judgment,
and of God him self, to make us of Christians Ciceronians, that is, Ethnikes
and Infidels, and with alteration of words to take from us al our faith:
whereas this is evident and confessed, and yet for all this M.VV. comes and
says, all this is nothing, these be no faults, if the Papists can find fault
with no other thing but such toys and trifles, I loved our translations well
before, but now shall I love them much better, haec et istiusmodi nugae, nostra
crimina sunt, these and the like trifles be our faults: I can not otherwise
judge of him, but that he is a very Atheist, a plain Sadducee, without any
feeling and regard of faith and conscience, and as it may very well be thought,
The sect of Libertines far spread.
of the profession of the sect of Libertines and Academikes, who of late are so
far enlarged, to whom are joined very many of the finest and most elegant
Sacramentaries, of whom he may read in Beza, who think al these questions, of
Christ and his office, Beza de haereticis a civilly magistratu punie^dis, pa 41.
of his co^substancialitie with the father, of the Trinity, of
predestination, of free will, of God, of Angels, of the Supper, of baptism, of
the being of men's sovvles after this life, Right Gospellers. These show us what
is the true meaning of only faith justifying.
who think I say al these things to be but trifles and things indifferent
and not necessary to justification which is obtained by faith. For these good
Gospellers have a faith, and a iustifiyng faith, whereby they apprehend eternal
life, without father, son, and holy Ghost, without Christ and his passion, or
any of these other matters, which are rather subtle points of the papists
historical faith, then of the lyuelie justifying faith, wherewith these
Euangelical brethren in all security are warranted of the certain favor of
God in this life, and assured glory in the next.

CHAP. XII. M. VV. reasons against the latin bible are ansvvered: and the same
bible is proved to be in sundry places more pure and sincere then the hebrew
now extant.
HERE M. VV. draws to that which is his principal scope in this preface, that
is to deface the late Translation of the new Testament set forth in this
College. For although he spend more words against M. Martins Discovery, yet
he shows far more stomach against this. whereof before I come to speak,
order requires that I examine his disputation against the decree of the
Tridentine Council, Council. Trident. sessio. 4.
which for verity and sincerity justifies and approves as autentical, the
old common latin edition. Against which decree M.VV. thinks him self to have
good advantage, and much honor he speaks of the fountains, the greek and
hebrew originals, and much he disgraceth our latin translation and translator,
for differing so much ftom those originals.

First of al before I come to his arguments, 3. things to be noted in this
question.
I request the reader to carye in mind three things touching this
controversy, whereby he shall the more uprightly and skilfully judge between
us and our adversaries. him self and his brethren more then against us. For
whereas they pretend to translate after the greek and hebrew, (as we do not)
and yet in sundry places svvarue from the greek and hebrew, M.W. discourse
most against him self.
this his long idle talk conuinceth us of no fault, but it condemns him and
his brethren of great and inexcusable corruption, who pretending reverence to
the greek and hebrew, yet at their pleasure depart from both. And this is
that whereof M. Mar. reproves them in a great part of his Discovery. Example
whereof see thou in his preface Number. 16.17.18.23.43.44.45.46.47.48.49.50, 51.
and after in every chapter of the book vvelnie: and so much M. Mar. protested
to them in the beginning in plain terms, Discou. in prefat. nu. 39.
sayng. And if they follow sincerely their greek and hebrew text, which they
profess to follow, and which they esteem the only autentical text, so far
we accuse them not of heretical corruption. but if it shall be evidently proved
that they shrink from that also, and translate an other thing, and that
vvilfully, and of intention to countenance their false religion and wicked
opinions, making the scriptures speak as they list: then we trust etc. And of
this first rises a second note, The greek and hebrew more aduantageable to
the Catholic cause then the latin. Page 15.
because it more harmeth our cause then the latin, as the adversaries gladly
pretend and M. W. very confidently avouches, but only in respect of the truth
it self. And thus much also was he told in the preface of the new testament, to
wit, that as for other causes we prefer the latin, In prefa. noui testamen.
so in this respect of making for us or against us, we allow the greek as
much as the latin, yea in sundry places, more then the latin, being assured
that they have not one, and that we have many advantages in the greek more
then in the latin. And this is there manifested by sundry and very evident
examples, touching traditions, priesthode, justification by works, the real
presence, fasting, freewil, the mystical sacrifice, and against their only
faith and assurance of salvation, wherein the greek is more pregnant for us
then the latin. Contrariwise let M. VV. frame against the Catholic religion,
or any part thereof, one argument out of the scriptures, which we refuse to
stand unto upon this pretense, because it is in the greek and not in the
latin, and I am content to excuse him here of a lie. Otherwise he can never
save him self from a lie, and a lie in sight, to object that unto us, which
nether he nor any of his can prove, and we before hand have in precise terms
warned him of it, and professed, and proved the contrary.

And therefore, although in truth (reader) whatsoever he says, and a great
deal more, is answered very sufficiently and abundantly already in the
preface of the Testament, as thou wilt confess, if it shall please thee with
diligence to pervse it, and I account it a piece of our misery in this time,
to be matched with such blunt adversaries whose manner of writing is now to cloy
us with cra^be recocta, cole vvorts twice, yea te^ times sodden, and nether
the^ selves can bring any new stuff, nor scour more brightlie or otherwise
mend up their old, nor refel our answers and confutations made to them, but
dissembling any such matter, as though it had never been treated of before, use
to run idelly, and ministerlike upon a common place as M. VV. does here,
which is more against them selves then against us: yet because it is my lotte
to deal with him now the first time, and therefore am loath to pretermit any
thing wherein him self seems to put any force, I will take his arguments as
new, and suppose that he never read the preface of the Testament against which
he writes, and therefore will likewise hereafter borow some part of my answer
thence.

Two arguments he makes against our latin translation, and consequently
against us for following the same in our English. The first is, M.W. reasons for
preferring the hebrew and greek before the latin.
that the fountains, vz, the greek and hebrew, are more pure the^ the latin,
which he proves by certain sentences of S. Hiero^, S. Austin, and S. Ambrose.
The other is one particular fault, wherein as he says, the vulgar translation
is universally false, the greek contrary is true. Before his arguments he
premitteth certain interrogatories, wherein he seems to avouch (if I
understand him) that only to be the word of god, which is written in the
language wherein first the holy Ghost by the Prophets and Apostles uttered it.
That I misreporte him not, I will set down his words. Page 15.
Thus he opposes us. Quid interpretandum suscepistis? nonne scripturas?
Quaenam vero sunt scripturae? If the latin testament be not the word of god,
whose word are their vulgar translations?
quis nescit dei verbum scriptum illud esse etc. What took you in hand to
interpret? not the scriptures? and what are the scriptures? who is ignorant
but that is the written word of god, which the lord committed to his church
in books and letters? and those oracles of god were they uttered by the holy
Ghost in latin? or can they better or more divinely be declared in any tongue,
then that which the holy Ghost would use? where unto I answer, that if his
questions have such meaning and sense as the words bear, and may stand full
well with his skill and knowledge, then are they not so much fantastical as
phrenetical. For accounts he nothing the written word of god, but that
which is in hebrew and greek, and was written by the prophets and
Apostles in that language? Then what means he, and the rest of his
Eua^gelical confraternitie so perpetually to brag, that they have given us
nothing but the pure word of the lord, who have given us nothing but their
own contaminated translations in English, French, Fle^mish, Dutch and such
vulgar languages? Is this the word of God M. W? uttered the holy Ghost his
oracles ever in Fle^mish or English? why inscribe you your English testamente,
The testamente of our Lord Jesus Christ, An assertion both foolish and impious.
if nothing but the greek or hebrew be the written word and testament of god?
But let this pass for an example of his singular foolishnes, speaking he
knows not what. See we herein an other example of his notable impiety. The
Apostles and Evangelists cited scripture, not according to the hebrew.
Our Savior Christ, the Evangelists and Apostles when they cited places of
the old testament, not according to the fountains and hebrew, but according to
the Septuaginta, cited they not scripture? Romans 10. v. 18. Linea coru^. (...)
In omnem terram (says the apostle Paul) exiuit sonus eorum. Their sound is
gone forth in to all the world. whereas in the hebrew now it is far otherwise,
and otherwise your selves translate it in your later bible, their line is gone
forth. Anno 1575.
although in the bible of the year 1577. ye leave the hebrew and follow us.
Act. 13. v. 41.
Take heed (says the same Apostle) lest that fall upon you which is spoken in
the Prophets: (...). Heb. in gentibus.
See ye contemners, and vvonder and perish. which words in the hebrew are
nothing so. Shall we say this is not scripture, (...)
and the Apostle abused his audience, and according to M. VV. divinity must
needs tell them a lie, when he tells them, this says the Prophet, this
says Esaie, this Jeremy etc. because he cites the words not according to
the original, but according to the translation of the 70. which many times much
varieth from that which we find now in the original? The Apostle S. James
reproving the proud and lofty minds of some, brings this text of scripture
against them. Iac. 4. v. 6.
deus superbis resistit, humilibus autem dat gratiam, translated in your
English testaments thus. The scripture offers more grace, and therefore
says. God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. which words
are taken out of the Proverbs of Solomon, Proverb. ca. 3. ver. 34.
but not according to the hebrew, but after the 70. Calvin. in Jacob. ca. 4.
which Calvin cut clean away and leaft out of his translation, either for
this reason which you give, or because (belike) they agreed not well with his
proud and disdainful stomach, Calvin ma^gleth S. James epistle.
notvvithstanding they remain in the greek testaments printed at Geneua. But
by your argument he does well therein, and saves S. James from a manifest lie,
who affirms the scripture to speak so, whereas by you, it is no scripture.
And then it were well done of you to mend your testaments at the next edition,
and leave out this so clear a falshode, except you retain it of policy, that
at a need you may have one more reason to refuse this epistle, which we see
graueleth you so sore. I will not multiply examples, because it is a thing most
evident, and he knows little that knows not this to be the common manner both
of some Evangelists, and of S. Peter and S. Paul generally, to cite the
scripture in this sort. Whereof S. Paul's epistle to the Hebrews in every
chapter almost gives proof, 1. Pet. ca. 2.3. and 5. Beza in Ioh. c. 19. v. 37.
as likewise does the first of S. Peter, and Beza grants the same of the
Evangelists, and the ancient fathers affirm both the one and the other.
Ireneus l. 3. cap. 25.


And what need I to press M. W. with sentences, whereas I may dispute against
him out of whole chapters and books. For let us suppose some part of the old
testament to have been written first in hebrew or chaldee, as is a part of
Daniel, and to have been translated into greek or latin, afterward the
chaldee or hebrew to perish, the greek or latin to remain: as for example we
see in the books of Tobie, Judith, and one book of the Machabees. Hier.
prefat. in Tobiam, Judith. and li. Regum.
The two first of which, S. Hierom translated out of the chaldee, the third he
found (though he translated it not) written in hebrew. And the like is thought
very probably of the song of the three children. Shall we now be so fond as to
imagine, that as so one as the hebrew or chaldee was lost, we lost our
scriptures? S. Mat. wrote the Gospel in Hebrew.
then what say you to S. Matthewes gospel, which certainly was written by him
in hebrew, as witnesses Apud Eusebius. l 3. c. 33 Irene. li. 3. ca. 1. Eusebius.
lib. 2. ca. 18.
Papias, Ireneus, Eusebius, li. 5. c. 19.
Pa^tenus, l. 6. c. 19.
Origenes, in argument. in Mat c. in catal.
Sophronius, Mt. gospel in hebrew set forth by Munster and Quinquarboreus.
S. Hierom and al antiquity. Have we not S. Matthewes gospel, because we have
not his hebrew text? nay presuppose that a gospel of S. Matthew in hebrew may
be found, as you know such a one is extant, and setting aside the authority
of the Church, (which to you is nothing) no reason can be brought, but you
ought as well to admit that for the original, as the greek of S. Luke and S.
John: yet dare you prefer that before the greek, and count that the more
aute^tical, and reform the greek according to that hebrew? this one example
if M. VV. had the grace to consider, and the ground hereof, it were sufficient
to answer whatsoever he says in his idle discourse in praise of the greek
and hebrew for defacing the latin. But let us examine his reason wherein lies
the pith of this question.

Thus he declaimeth for the purity of the greek and hebrew. Page 15.
Whereas we covet to attain the meaning of the holy Ghost, how shall we do
this more assuredly, then if we hear the holy Ghost speaking in his own
words. This is so clear that the Papists them selves confess it to be
necessary, if so be the first original copies were pure and vncorrupt. For
now they cry that the old testament in the hebrew fountain, and the new
testament in the greek, is most corrupt. and why so? what causes our
Papists so to refuse the hebrew and greek fountain, and to hunt after the
little river of the latin edition? who doubts, but it is done for that only
reason, because they find the fountains to be not so commodious for them. For
if they had the fountains favorable enough, they would rather take thence,
then from the diches and dregs of a corrupt translation. It had been
valiantly done of M. W. by one example to have made this conquest over us.
Now because they know that certain destruction hangs over their heads, if
they be called to the fountains, therefore are they constrained not only to
avoid the spring of the purest and most wholesome waters, but also they labor
to prove that the little rivers are purer then the fountains. Here (Reader)
thou have many words and little matter, much a do and small reason, much
craking and boasting of the pure fountains, by one who from his infancy never
drank but of the stinking puddles of Geneua lake. In which discourse of his,
three things may be learned. because the fou^taines be not so commodious for
us. once again, because the fountains are not favorable enough unto us. and
yet once again, because we know there is no way with us but death and
destruction, if we he called to the fountains. whereof because I have spoken
already, I will say no more. only this may serve for an example what a lusty
courage they can show in bragging, and what a pretty feate they have, in so few
lines to vary a lie so many ways. And if M. W. had given but one example,
wherein he by his hebrew and greek text could so plage us, and bring us certam
perniciem, assured destruction, he had done somewhat like a professor of this
new divinity, and it were a ready way to end al these controversies. Because
he does not (and I dare warrant him he can not) for the contrary part, that
the greek is more commodious and favorable to us then to them, see thou
(Christian reader) the preface of the new testament, and thou shall find it
justified by sundry manifest examples. and touching the hebrew somewhat shall
be spoken hereafter. commonly printed, which they pretend to follow. By the
latin edition, that which is used in the Church of Rome, and has been these
thousand years, and is approved by the general Council of Trent.

To the end thou may the better judge of that which shall be spoken, thus much
must I warn thee of before, touching the historical knowledge of this
controversy, that whereas in S. Aug. and S. Hieroms time, there was marvelous
variety of new Testamentes in latin, whereof rose some confusion and trouble
in the Church, that godly and learned man Damasus then Pope of Rome and ruler
of the Church, S. Hierom author of our common edition of the new testament, and
that by the Popes appointement.
took order with S. Hierom, that he should correct one before used, which
otherwise was least faulty, which afterward should be commended to the
Church by that supreme authority. Thus much S. Hierom signifies in diverse
places, In catal. in fine, and praef. in nouum testamentum.
especially in his preface before the new Testament dedicated to the same Pope
Nouum opus (says he) me facere cogis ex veteri etc. You co^straine me to make
a new work of an old, that I after so many copies of the scriptures,
dispersed thorough the world, should sit as a certain judge, and determine
which of them agree with the true greek. And afterward showing the
difficulty of such a work, how dangerous it was and subject to the
reprehensions of many, he comfort him self principally with this: That thou
(speaking to Damasus) which art the high priest, do commau^d it so to be
done. Tu qui summus es sacerdos fieri iubes. This work when S. Hierom had
accomplished, and delivered up, yet nether was his judgment so absolutely and
universally in every part followed, that without farther search and trial it
was by and by approved. But at length after due examination and some alteration
of lesser points, as we find by S. Hierom him self, being approved by the Pope
and allowed by the Church, it grew to a more general usage, and to be most
frequented in public writings, commentaries, schools, and al places of
Christian exercise. This is that which we call the common latin edition, which,
albeit it have some places translated obscurely, some unaptly, some copies
corrupted by false writing or printing etc. yet comparing it with the greek
now extant, we say it is far more pure and vncorrupt, and nothing so subject to
cauilling and wrangling by great diversity of different copies. The old
testament.
The like we say of the old testament, a great part where of was translated by
S. Hierom by order of the same Pope, most of al corrected and brought in to
ecclesiastical use: saving the psalms, which could not be done so easily
because thoroughout Christe^dom, the principal part of the Service in all
churches consisted of them, and therefore could not well be altered without much
trouble and scandal, Aug. de doctrina Christian. li. 2. ca. 13. and epi. 10 ad
Hieron.
as we gather by S. Austin, and which therefore we retain still as they were
used in the primitive church long before S. 4. things ha^deled in this question
Hieroms time according to the version of the 70. Touching both these
Testaments translated and corrected thus, we say.

That M. W. speaks never a word to the purpose.
but rather much and al against him self. For if the fountains were so pure in
the times of S. Hierom and S. Ambrose, and the church then troubled with the
great diversity of their latin bibles, reformed one to the purity of the
fountains and originals, and we now find those fountains and originals
differing from that reformed bible, why shall we not conclude, that the
fountains have in the mean season been corrupted? not so, says M. W. More
probable that the hebrew is corrupt the^ the latin.
but contrariwise, rather the latin bibles have been corrupted. What reason
leads him thus to speak? what probability moves him to imagine, that so
many hundred years, hebrew books could continue without error, being written
out by a fevv, and they for the most part Jews, ignorant, enemies of Christ
and his Church, destitute of the spirit of God, men given over in to a
reprobate sense, rather then the latin publicly read, expounded by thowsandes
in every province of the Christian world, The church warranted, that she
should ever keep the word of God.
guarded by infinite good men, by Saints for life, and full of the holy Ghost,
living in that church wherein properly was fulfilled the prophecy of Esaie
made by God to Christ his son, and to his Catholic Church in him. Esaie 59.
This is my covenant with them says our lord* my spirit which is in thee,
and the words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart from thy mouth,
and from the mouth of thy seed, and from the mouth of thy seeds seed says
our Lord, from this time forth for evermore. Wherein God promises the Church,
that she shall be a faithful and perpetual obseruer of his word and testament.
Which vvarrant you never find made in like sort to the synagoge. But this
notwithstanding you perhaps prefer this synagoge before the Church, and Jews
before the Christians, that is in effect, Moses before Christ, and therefore
are content to speak and think more honorably of them with whom you join
more nylie, and to whom you bear a better affection* yet how soever your
mind be therein, S. Hierom commending the hebrew fountains in his time,
makes nothing in the world for you in these days, except he say, that in all
ages to come, the hebrew should remain still pure and incontaminate, and the
latin should again be corrupted, and the Church though warned by the trouble
which she sustained in his time about that matter, yet afterward should
contemn so precious a thing as the written word of God is, and run in to a
far greater inconvenience then before, and through extreme negligence, nether
have the latin bible true which once was reformed and made agreeable to the
hebrew, nor yet the hebrew bible true, by which she might once again mende and
correct the latin.

And here let the reader weigh whether we thinking of the Church as we do,
Joan. 14. and 16.

Praise of the Roman Church, for holding fast the true doctrine once
delivered.


thinking of Christ's promise and the assistance of the holy Ghost as christian
faith teaches us, whereby we are most assuredly persuaded that she never
erreth, nor ever can err damnably, whether we, I say, have not great reason to
support our opinion which here we defend. Calvin. inst. l. 4. c. 6.. 26.
Calvin in his Institutions recounting certain causes why the ancient writers
speak so reverently and yield so much to the Roman church, amongst other
puts this for one. That whereas the churches of the East part and of
Greece, as also of Africa, vvereful of tumultes and dissensions among them
selves, the Roman church was more quits then other, and less troublesome.
Unto this reason drawn from humane wisdom, set the Christian reader add
Christ's prayer. Luc. 22. v. 32 I have prayed etc. that thy faith fail not.
For as the western people are less sharp and quick of wit then they of
Asia and Africa, so much less desirous are they of novelties. This therefore
added very much authority to the Roman church, that in those doubtful times
she was not so unquiet as were the other, Doctrinae semel traditae suit aliis
omnibus tenacior.
and the doctrine once delivered to her, she held and retained more fast then
did all the rest. This grace of constancy in the faith and truth once received,
when as the adversaries yield to the Roman church, The Greek church not
comparable to the Roman.
and reprove the Oriental and greek church for lightness, inconstancy, and
mutabilitie in the same kind, we who believe the same grace of god to have still
remained, have just occasion to think that she was as tenax, as constant in
preserving the truth of the bibles, as of other parts of religion, wherein by
Caluines verdite she excelled al churches under the sun. And if the greek
churches then, in that prime flower, were so mutable and inco^stant and so far
inferior to the latin, in this respect especially of holding fast matters of
religion once delivered unto them, with what judgment or conscience can we
magnify the later ages of those Greeks, who much more have deflected from the
Catholic and Apostolic faith, have more decayed in learning, virtue, and al
good qualities, have degenerated almost in to a barbarism, and are now fallen
in to such misery, ignorance, and slavery, as every man sees: much less can
we mention in this comparison the Jews Synagog, who having the maledictio^ of
god upon them, Math. ^5.
as many times our Savior foretold in the gospel, are not only quite destitute
of the graces of god, but also for the most part seem altogether void of the
gifts of nature, of wit, judgment, policy, and ordinary humane discourse.

But all this vvil M.W. say, is but conjecture. and as probably he disputes
against it for the contrary part, that in the hebrew and greek there is no
corruption. For if it be so, Page 20.
that the Jews and heretics have labored so much herein, who can doubt but
they have attempted this especially in these places and sentences of
scriptures, which the Church of Christ most used for confirmation of her faith
and religion? There are most evident testimonies of scriptures, by which the
Jews and all heretics are refuted. tell us what in them have those men
perverted, but that they remain unto us safe and sound. Never would other
Jew or heretic corrupt the scriptures, except he thought that might be to him
some way commodious for the mainteining of his monstrous opinions.
Wherefore seeing those places are safe by which the Jews are refelled, and
the heretics of al times are killed, this must needs seem a fained tale,
incredible, and false, which you bring, that the fountains are corrupted. To
satisfy M.W. longing, who would so feign know wherein the Jews or heretics
have falsified the bibles, I will severally give him examples, some sithence S.
Hieroms time, and some before, and acknowledged by S. Hierom him self, from
whom M. W. takes most in commendation of the hebrew fountains.

That the hebrew bibles are in some places corrupted.
And that those fountains are somewhat infected, and degenerated from that
purity which they had in S. Hieroms time and before, I prove by evident
reason, manifest experimentes, and plain confessions of our more learned
adversaries. First touching the hebrew, S. Hierom read and translated according
to the ordinary reading and pointing of his time, Esaie 9. Esa. 9.
Puer datus est nobis, et filius natus est nobis, et vocabitur nomen eius,
admirabilis, consiliarius, Deus, fortis, pater futuri saeculi, princeps pacis.
A child is given to us, and a Son is borne to us, and he shall be called
Admirable, a Counselor, God, Strong, Father of the world to come, Prince of
peace. And in his commentary expressing every word, he makes no doubt of any
other reading. Forsake the latin, and go to your Jews and their hebrew
fountains now, and what find you? pro thesaur^, carbones. Thus. Puer datus est
nobis, et filius natus est nobis, et vocabit nomen eius qui est admirabilis,
consiliarius, deus, fortis, et pater aeternitatis vel futuri seculi, principem
pacis. Whereby is taken from Christ, as principal a testimony of his
divinity, as any we find in the old testament. And whence comes this
alteration, but from the iniquity of the Jews, who have altered the passive,
vocabitur, (...)
into the active, vocabit, and given other points then were used or read in S.
Luth. tom. 4. enarration. Esa. cap. 9.
Hieromes time. And this, Luther confesses manifestly. Totus hic textus misere
and scelerate (says he) a Iudaeis est crucifixus etc. The Jews corrupters and
crucifieis of such places of scripture as appertain to Christ.
This whole text is miserably and vilanouslly crucified, and depraved, and
corrupted by the Jews. For as the child him self was crucified of them, so
by the same men both this place, and Scriptura eius.
his scripture, (or scripture appertayning to him) is daily crucified. The
prophet attributes six names to the child and son, the Jews read the
first five in the nominative case, the sixth in the accusative, and they al
expound it of Ezechias, 4. Reg. 19.
under whom God gave that great victory against Se^nacherib. And in the same
place. The text seems to have been corrupted by those that put to the points.
The letters whether ye read them with points or without points are alone,
and the grammar does bear it well, but the Jews most pestilent men, often
times corrupt sentences of the prophets by their points and distinctions.
But let it suffice us that the Chaldee interpreter, and the 70. think as we
do.

Thus Luther, condemning of vile corruption on your pure originals, and giving
withal this general rule, that the Jews most pestilent men have no conscience
in that foul abusing, and altering, and crucifying the scriptures, no more
then they had in crucifying Christ, and that therefore he prefers the
Septuaginta and Chaldee interpreter before all the hebrew copies. Which reason
touching Luther and the Protestants is nothing at al. For the Chaldee
interpreter is no more the hebrew original then is Luthers translation. And
the translation of the 70. which is now extant, besides that it is full of
diversity and not of the Catholics esteemed to be altogether autentical, is
much more of Luther and the Protestants condemned. For of them thus he writes
in the same commentary. 70 interpretes digni sunt odio etc. The 70. Luth. in
Esa. ca. 53. v. 11. fol. 282.
interpreters are vvorthie of hatred, for I can not believe, and it is false
that they translated and turned the bible by the holy Ghost: for there
appears in them manifest vanity, impiety and study to corrupt it. Thus
Luther. Where in though he rail to fowly, yet hereof appears how much he
esteems of the 70. And the true ground, whereby both Luther and the
Protestants hold this so singular a piece of scripture against the Jews, is
nether the Chaldee interpreter, nor the 70. as Luther pretends, nor the
hebrew fountain which is worse, but that, whereby we retain al scriptures,
that is the churches authority and warrant, who testefieth unto us that this
is the letter of the prophet, as Lyra from whom Luther borrowed his answer
teaches. Thus he writes. In this place of Esaie is proved the humanity and
divinity of Christ, Lyra. proba. diuinitatis and humanitatis Christi contra
Iudaeos, in fine glos. noui testamenti.
but the Jews answer sayng, it is not in the hebrew, He shall be called,
but, he shall call, and so that which directly expresses the divinity is not
referred to the child borne, but to the true god calling him, and the name of
the child is put in the end of the place, that is, (...)
Principem pacis, prince of peace. But they that thus say corrupt the text.
therefore we must run to the translations. And first that this is false, is
proved by the 70. who translate, vocabitur, he shall be called, and by S.
Hierom. And thus it is read in the office of the mass upon Christemas day,
and that office for the most part, follows the translation of the 70.
Translatio^s, truer then the original text.
And by this translation it is clear that the hebrew should not be, vocabit,
but vocabitur, as these vvil have it corrupting the text. And the same is
proved by the Chaldee translation. Where the churches authority is the
supreme ground and stay, for in deed the other convince nothing, as shall
better appear heareafter.

An other example of like corruption, and in as high and great a point as this,
against the divinity of our Savior, I give you, Ierem. 23. where S. Hierom
did read and translate according to the hebrew, thus. Ierem. 23. v. 5.6.
Ecce dies veniunt dicit dominus, et suscitabo David germe^ iustum, er regnabit
rex, et sapiens erit. et hoc est nomen quo vocabunt eum, dominus iustus etc. as
in our vulgar translation. Behold the days come says our lord, and I vvil
raise to David a just branch, and he shall reign, as a king, and shall be wise.
and this is the name by which they shall call him, Our just lord, or, the lord
our justice. where the name Tetragrammaton, attributed to our incarnate
Savior, proves that he is the (...) or lord god of Israel, wherein the two
natures divine and humane appear most evidently. S. Hierom in the text puts
a double reading, one after the hebrew, an other after the 70. Upon the place,
Hier. in Ier. ca. 23. v. 6.
in his commentary he writes thus. If we read according to the 70,
Vocauerit eu^ Dominus, the sense is, he shall be called Iosedech, a just lord:
if according to the hebrew, nomen eius vocabunt, then the sense is, He shall be
called the lord our justice. The thing which I note, is the word, vocabunt,
they shall call him: which in S. Hieromes time was the hebrew reading, and
touching Christ his divinity is of that consequence as has been said. In the
hebrew text now, it is clean otherwise, and upon one point and letter
changed, thus it is to be translated. God ((...)) who is our justice, (...)
shall call him: whereby is lost all the proof of Christ's divinity, which that
so pregnant a place otherwise should yield. And that this fault is likewise
committed by the like malice of the Jews, and the true reading is to be taken
from our latin translation, Lyra in the place aforesaid, shows in these
words. Other names of God are communicable with creatures, but the name
Te^ragrammaton is not so, Lyra vbi supra.
which signifies the divine essence, pure and simple in it self without
relation to external works or creatures, and therefore whereas Christ is
called by this name in the place of Jeremy, it follows that he is true God.
The Jews corrupt the letter of the scripture.
But the Jews answer by corrupting the letter, sayng, that thus it is in
the hebrew, Et hoc est nomen eius qui vocabit eum, Dominus iustus noster. And
this is the name of him that shall call him, Our just lord: so that the name
Tetragra^maton which in our translation is turned, Dominus, is not referred to
Messiah the son of David, but to the true God, who called Messiah to deliver
his people. And how goes Lyra against this distinction? says he the Jews are
honest men, and have kept their bibles pure and uncorrupted, and in respect of
them, all the latin bibles are most contaminate, after the pattern of M. VV?
Nay, far otherwise. notwithstanding he knew the hebrew bibles and tongue in an
other manner of degree and perfection (as being him self a natural borne Jew)
then M. W. or any of his great clearkes who vaunt so much of a little, yet he
replieth thus. Contra istam solutionem non potest argui etc. Against this
solution a man can not argue, but by shevving them that here they corrupt the
true letter and deny the truth, because they vvil deny Christ's divinity. And
this might best be done by old bibles which were not corrupt in this passage
and in others in which mention is made of Christ's divinity, if a man could
come by any such. And thus our forefathers disputed against them out of this
place and the like. Al bibles corrupt in this place.
And although I never yet savv any bible of the Jews which is not corrupted
in this place, yet I have heard of men vvorthie of credit by reason of their
life, conscience, and knowledge, who have sworn that they have seen it so
in old bibles as it is in S. Hieroms translation. But if a man can not get any
such bibles vncorrupt, then must we run to other tra^slations, which the
Jews with reason ca^ not deny. And the 70. read as does S. Hierom, as
appears by our Ecclesiastical office. Here again M. W. may see the foul and
monstrous corruption of the Jews in these fountains and originals,
universally in all their hebrew bibles. Universally I say, for if in our days
some one or other print be corrected, that correction has been made in respect
of the latin Church, which has kept the truth of doctrine, and therefore
preserved the true letter, not in respect of the Jews, who altogether (as
witnesses Lyra) corrupted the true letter, because they would deny Christ's
divinity.

One example more I give him in an other kind, which nevertheless imports us
as much as do these former of Christ his deity. It is touching his passion and
our redemption, and shows that the Protestants them selves esteem more of
our translation, not only then of all the hebrew bibles which are now current,
but also then those that were in S. Hieroms time. And therefore to answer your
misapplied allegations by your own English translations, confer you your
English bibles in the 53. chapter of Esaie, with your hebrew fountains. Our
translation has thus. Esa. 53. v. 8.
Generationem eius quis enarr abit? quoniam abscissus est de terra viuentium:
propter scelus populi mei percussi eum. Who shall declare his generation? for
he is cut of from the land of the living: for the sin of my people have I
smitten him. A plain testmonie, that God laid upon our Savior, our
iniquities, which is the su^me of the chapter: that he therefore was true man,
and withal (as before is declared) that he was true God, whose generation was
inexplicable. for so do the fathers commonly expound that parcel. So that in
this one verse, we have the true effect of Christ's death and passion, besides
his divine and human nature. The 70. translate it thus, (...), Hierom. in
Esa. ca. 53.
for the iniquities of my people, he was lead to death. The hebrew bibles in
S. Hieroms time, did read thus. Generationem etc. propter scelus populi mei
percussit eos. For the sin of my people he stroke them. The hebrew bibles in
our time, though in sense agree, yet in reading seem to differ, having thus:
(...)
A preuaricatione populi mei plaga, vel percussio ipsis. Because of the
transgression of my people, a vvound was given to them. which inuerteth the
sense, and makes a great alteration, as every man may see. The English bible
of the year 1577. Bib. 1577.
translateth it: which punishment did go upon him for the transgression of my
people. 1579.
of the year 1579. For the transgression of my people was he plagued. And this
sense commonly others follow, as Castalio, the French, the Geneua bible etc.
which is the sense and word of our latin translation, not of the hebrew text.
Only the English translator of the year 1562. Bib. 1562.
follows nether the 70. not greek, nor latin, but the brainsicke fancy of
his own head, making a mingle mangle, and thrusting in a patch of his own.
The English translations add to the text.
Thus he goes to work. whose generation yet who may number? he was cut of
from the ground of the living, which punishment did go upon him for the
transgression of my people, who in deed had deserved that punishment. where
in deed he deserves a whippe, and plaieth not only a foolish, but also a
wicked part, in adding that later sentence to the text, only because he would
seem to come somewhat nigh the hebrew, which for all that he touches not.
Luther, who follows the error of the hebrew copies, exclaimeth upon the
Jews for their old spitful and malicious ma^gling of this text as of many
other. Luther to. 4. in Esa. c. 53.
Thus he translateth and co^menteth upon it. Propter tra^sgressiones populi mei
plaga eis. for the sins of my people a vvou^d to them. This place is
somevvhat obscure and hard, because of the novvne of the plural number, lamo.
The 70. read pro sua iustitia, vel potius malitia ductus est ad morte^. For his
justice, or rather malice he was lead to death. Wherein I marvel at Luthers
reading of the 70. For S. Hierom cites them far otherwise, and far otherwise
is it in the common prints now exta^t, for ought I can find. Which agree with
the citation of S. Hier. before noted. But proceed we on. Our interpreter
(says Luther, meaning the latin used in the Church) turns it thus: propter
peccata populi mei per cussi eum. For the sins of my people have I smitten
him. An excellent sentence, but the Grammar does not well bear it. Much here
are we beholding to the devil and to the Jews, who have not only depraved
filthily, but also co^fou^ded this as much as is possible, by their divisions.
And those that study hebrew must note this, that the Jews wheresoever they
can, deprave the meaning of the prophet by their wicked expositions, where
they can not do so, by their distinctions or divisions: as in Daniel, The 70.
vveeks are abbridged, there a man with his fingers may feel their corruption,
where they separate and tear a sunder these things that are to be joined,
The Jews corrupt the scripture, in despite of Christians.
and all this, in despite of the Christians. Wherefore I leave this to those
that be studious of the hebrew tongue, that they mark the malice of the devil
and the Rabbines, whose only study and labor is to deprave, tear a sunder,
and turn vpside down the prophetical and Christian sense. In which chapter
again he calls them corruptores scriptorum propheticorum, corrupters of the
vvritings of the prophets. And in this one place besides the authority of
Luther, besides the general rules which he deduceth, vvilling us ever to
bevvare of the Rabbines and Jews, whose whole study is to abuse and deface
the scriptures in despite of us and our religion, and therefore small reason
has M. W. to make so much of them as he does: ^. manners of corruption.
I note two sorts and manners of their corruption. were joined, which is as
vile and desperate a corruption as may be. So for example, Seruetus avoided the
authority of the Apostle S. Paul, Romans 9. v. 5.
affirming Christ to be God. For being urged with these words: Ex quibus est
Christus secundum carnem, qui est super omnia deus benedictus in secula: Of
whom (that is of the Jews race) is Christ according to the flesh, who is
God blessed for ever: which contain a sure testimony that Christ was not
only man, as Seruetus would have him, but also God most blessed, he well
acquainted with Bezaes manner of correcting the testament, ansvvered after this
Jewish trick: that he believed with al his heart what so ever S. Paul that
elect vessel of the Lord had written. Sixtus Senensis in bibliotheca sancta.
lib. 8. page 646.
mary it seemed to him that S. Paul said not so, and pleaded his greek
testament where thus stood that sentence. (...). of whom is Christ according
to the flesh, who is above al. And there making a full distinction, then
follows the rest as a thankesgeuing. The Lord be praised for ever. amen. And
thus have the. Jews done in very many places of scripture by Luthers verdicte.

Sundry other particular errors could I note unto thee (Christian reader) in
the hebrew, had I but a piece of that insolent vain which many of our
adversaries have, and wherein they triumph against men of great and excellent
learning, such as of whom they and I shall (I doubt) never be vvorthie to be
named scholars (example whereof take thou Charkes scornful abusing of Father
Campian in the Tower, for ignorance in such trifles as these are) or were I
disposed to disgrace the fountains and originals, which I am not, but honor
them as I may, and saving the evident truth and faith of Christ, which stands
fast and immovable, though heaven and earth fall, much more though the Jewish
Pharisees and Scribes write their text amiss, this cause and faith I say
foreprised, I esteem of them, as of things deserving much study and
reverence: because how soever some gross errors, partly of malice, partly of
ignorance, have crept in, yet commonly and for the most part, the text I hold
to be true and sincere. And again I suppose this kind of writing can not be
but tedious to the English reader, whose profit I principally intend, General
reasons why the hebrew text can not be so sincere as the adversary would
pretend.
and therefore will go from these particularities so far as I may, to talk of
a few reasonable and the same general arguments and questions, wherein M.W. if
he have some part of that wit, intelligence, and modesty, which a scholar and
divine should have, will not I hope much stand against me.

Jacob was the peculiar people of God, and Israel the lot of his inheritance,
Deuteronomy. 52. v. 9
Exodus 19. v. 6
when of al nations they were to God a holy nation, a kingly priesthode, Act.
14. v^ 15.
when al other people were suffered to go their own ways, and the Jews
only were in Gods special protection. For touching the books of the ancient
prophets sometime extant, and now not appearing, we read commonly in the old
testament. as of Number. 21. v. 14.
Liber bellorum domini, The book of the vvarres of our Lord, Iosue 10. ver.
13. 2. Reg. 1. v. 18.
The book of the just men, 2. Paral. 20 v. 34.
The book of Iehu the son of Hanani, ibid. 12. ver. 15.
The books of Semeias the prophet, and Addo: and 1. Reg. 10. verse. 25.
Samuel vvrote in a book the law of the kingdom (how kings ought to rule)
and laid it up before our lord, 2. Paral. 9. verse. 29.
and the works of Solomon were written in the words of Nathan the
Prophet, and in the books of Ahias the Silonite, and in the vision of Addo
the Seer, The Jews have lost many and whole volumes of their Prophets: much
more may they leese or alter points, letters and syllables.
and many other which were to long to rehearse. Which entier books of the
wars of our lord, of the just, of those excellent prophets, of Iehu, of
Semeias, of Addo, of Samuel, of Nathan, of Ahias and others, are quite
perished, and perished then, when the Jews were so chosen a people, such a
kingdom, in such order and government, of Kings and princes, and Senate, and
ecclesiastical regiment. And now when they are no people, have no government,
no king, no Priest, no comparable regiment, may we reasonably think their
divine and ecclesiastical books to have been so warelie kept, that every
part is safe, every parcel sound, no points, letters or titles lost, al
sincere, perfect and absolute. If the protestants will claim this to them by
man's wisdom and policy, see how notably they contradicte themselves. All the
bishops, and princes, Most unreasonable absurdity, and contradiction.
and states of Christendom were not wise enough by the protestants opinion,
these thousand years past, to keep them selves in the true religion and
Gospel of Christ. But whereas until 600. years, (as we learn by M. Jewels
challenge) they were protestants and enemies of the Mass, of the Real presence,
of the Pope of Rome, and (as M. W. tells us here) universally protestants quo
ad praecipuas religionis parts, Whit. page 9.
in the principal parts of religion, they fell from that pure
protestant-Gospel to serve Antichrist, to worship bread and wine for God, to
adore Images, which is most gross idolatry, in steed of a true bible and word
of God, to have our common translation, which is most impure and fullest of
corruption. All this M.W. tells us, and he tells us in this book, and it is
the common song of them al. And therefore how is it credible that all this
while the Jews should be so wise, so prudent, so politic, and circu^specte
that they admitted no faults, kept their bible so sincere and immaculate that
there only the water of life was reserved, Whit. pa. 15.
and the mind and meaning of the holy Ghost was to be found novvhere so
assuredly as there: what is this but to make the Christians all this while more
brutish then beasts, and the Jews almost equal to Angels.

Similitude of letters.
that excellent learned men have been deceived by mistaking one for an other,
as appears by comparing the old translations of the bible with the later,
Hieron. in Osee. c. 2.
and S. Hierom affirms the same of the Septuaginta. This if a man would
declare by examples I think he might gather some hundreds out of the psalter.
I will note only one verse of a short psalm which also may serve for a higher
point. In the psalm 109 after our translation thus we read with the
Septuaginta. Psalm. 109. v. 3
Tecum principium in die virtutis tuae in splendoribus sanctorum: ex vtero ante
luciferum genuite. The Protestants for the more part (as we see by Marlorate,
Marlorate in Psalm. 110.
following therein Bucere, Musculus, Calvin and Pomerane) translate it thus.
Populus tuus cum voluntariis oblationibus in die exercitus tui, in
pulchritudine sanctitatis: ex vtero ab aurora tibiros adolescentiae tuae. Of
the year 1579.
The english bible of the last edition differing notably both from old and
new, from us and the Protestants, translate thus. Thy people shall come
willingly all the time of (assemb^ing) thine army in holy beauty: the youth
of thy vvo^be shall be as the morning dew. which translation is farthest from
the hebrew, farthest from al sense and reason. for who would make youth to rule
womb and join them together being sundred so far? Of the year 1577.
and the bible given out two years before, has scant one word like, and
touching the later part is clean opposite. for thus it translateth In the day
of thy p^vv^r shall the people offer thee free-vvil offeringes: the dew of thy
birth is of the womb of the morning. there is, youth of the womb, and, dew
of the morning: here is, dew of the birth, or youth (for that is one word in
hebrew) and, womb of the morning. If a man would translate it precisely,
using only the liberty to make choice of diverse significations which the
hebrew words yield, and draw it so far as the hebrew will bear, to the sense
of the Septuaginta, which I take to be the best, then word for word thus it
should stand. Tecum principatus in die pote^tiae tuae, in decoribus
sanctitatis: ab vter^ a Lucifero tibi ros natiuitatis tuae. How ever it be
framed, great difference will rise of necessity amongst diverse interpreters.
And whence proceeds that? one great cause is the diverse signification of one
word. The first, which the 70. turned (...), tecum, with thee, others, populus
tu^s, (...)
thy people, is in the hebrew one word, with so small a difference of one
point, as is possible. The next expressed of the 70. (...)
by (...) principatus, may be as well signified by the hebrew, as spontanea
oblatio. The third, which the 70. (...)
turned (...), S. Hierom, fortitudinis, the Protestants, exercitus, may truly
signify them al, power, virtue, strength, liberalit^e, and army: and so
aurora or Lucifer is the same word. (...)
But that which chiefly I note in this sentence, whatsoever other difference
was between the old hebrew text and the new, is the diversity of sense rising
through diversity of reading, upon occasion of similitude in the hebrew
letters. (...)
as for example. The Septuaginta read in sp^endoribus, or decoribus (...) in
brightness, whom commonly all the Protestants follow S. Hier. in mentibus, in
mountains, the difference comes of the likeness of two hebrew letters daleth
and res^h. The last word, the 70. rendered by genuite, I have begotten thee.
Which word of how great strength and force it is in this place, may be
perceived by view of the Apostle Paul's argument, Hebr. 1. v. 5.
who out of that verse word proves the eternal divinity of our Savior. S.
Hierom translated that word, adolescentiae tuae, as commonly do the
Protestants. What is the occasion of this difference? (...)
the great likelines of two words: the Septuaginta read the first, S. Hierom
the second. The printes now used though in sense follow S. Hierom, yet miss one
of his letters, and therefore come nearer to the reading of the 70. And this
verse letter vau for iod, has certainly made disagreeme^t in some other
places. As where the Septuaginta read (...), fortitudinem meam ad te custodiam,
Psalm. 58. v. 10 (...)
my strength will I keep to thee, and so S. Hierom read and translated. now it
is in the hebrew, fortitudine^ eius, (...)
his strength vvil I keep to thee, to the great perverting of the whole sense
and sentence. A like error to that Genes. 3. Genes. 3. v. 15.
(if it be an error, as many very probably rather think it is none) ipsa
conteret caput tuum for ipse or ipsum, (...)
about which the Protestants keep such a stur.

That nether eye has seen, nor ear heard, 1. Cor. 2. v. 9.
nether has it entered in to the heart of man, (...)
what God has prepared for those that love him, iis qui diligunt illum,
whereby we prove that heaven is prepared as a reward for charity and the
works thereof, and so refel their mathematical solifidian fancy, Pretty
a^sweeres and interpretations.
many pretty answers they give us: as that S. Paul does after his fashion
very finely writhe the place. Luther in Esa. ca. 64. Illyric. in 1. Cor. ca. 2.
v. 9
So Luther, Paulus sententiam commode detorsit. Illyricus, That to love, is as
much as to believe, and so charity as much as faith, and then, to be saved by
only faith, why may we not interpret it, To be saved by only charity? Qui
diligunt (says he) p^nitur pro iis, qui ad eum supplices fide confugiunt.
Fides per effectum suum dilectionem declaratur. Those that love him, that is
those that by faith humbly fly unto him. Faith is noted by his effect, that is
charity. But Peter Martyr goes an other way to work, and thinks that the
Apostle read not right. Thus writes he. Diligentibus se, habet Apostolus,
Martyr in 1. Cor. ca. 2 fo. 46.
Propheta vero dixit expectantibus: et diserimen agnoscitur prouenisse a magna
similitudine duorum elementorum (...) et (...) etc. The Apostle has the word
loving, the Prophet has, S. Paul missed in reading Hebrew.
trusting or expecting: and it is well known that this difference grevve from
the great similitude of two hebrew letters (...) and (...), (...)
for so much as among the hebrews the same verb written with one letter
signifies to trust or expect, with the other, to love vehemently, which
Paul followed In which censure (Christian reader) besides his sacrilegious
contempt in divinity (wherein thou may learn to care the less for their
condemning and railing at the fathers, when they are so saucy with this
singular Apostle) besides this profane wickedness in divinity, I say, he fowly
belieth the Apostle against al humanity. For the second word, which he
obiecteth, has no such signification: and if he meant some other word somewhat
rese^bling the first, as other of his brethren guess, yet nether ca^ they serve
his turn, for so much as the gra^matical rules will not bear such
construction, (...)
as against Erasmus and him, Beza in 1. Cor. ca 2. v. 9.
Beza has truly noted. But grant we to P. Martyr, that which he would have,
let S. Paul, I will not say endued with the holy Ghost so abundantly, The
Protestants attribute more to the Jewish scribes, then to S. Paul the Apostle.
Paul that pillar and foundation of the Church, so directed by God, as he
could not err: but only Paul brought up from his infancy in the law of
Moses, in continual study of the law and Prophets, at the feet of Gamaliel,
Act. 22.
so noble a scholemaister, let this Paul be deceived in reading the Hebrew,
then how intolerable is their peruersitie, who will not suffer so much to be
judged of the common, base, vulgar and ignorant scribes, so maliciously bent
against Christ and al Christianity, as before is noted.

Castalio defens. suae tra^slatio. page 227.
Sebastianus Castalio by occasion defending him self against such a one as M.
W. seems to be writes thus. Videtur esse in ea opinione (sicut et plerique
omnes Iudaei, et no^nulli hac in part Iudaizantes Christiani) vt in hebraicis
bibliis nullum vsque mendum irrepisse putet etc. M.W. opinion touching the
Hebrew vncorrupt, is luysh.
This good fellow seems to be of that opinion (as in manner all Jews are,
and some Christians dravving to Iudaisme in this respect) that they think no
error ever to have creapt into the hebrew bibles, that God would never suffer
that any word should be corrupted in those holy books: as though the books
of the old testament were more holy then those of the new, in the which
new, so many diverse readinges are found in so many places, or as though it
were credible that God had more regard of one or other little word or
syllable, then he had of whole books, whereof he has suffered many, I say
not to be depraved, but to be utterly lost. This Iudaical superstition etc.
Hitherto Castalio. And D. Humfre. lib. 1. de rat. interpre. page 178.
Humfrey in his first book de ratione interpretandi, says. Iudaismus quot
locos deprauauerit etc. The Jewish superstition, how many places it has
corrupted, the reader may easily find out and judge. Lib. 2. page 219.
And in the next book. I like not that men should to much follow the Rabbis
as many do. Nam quae Christum verum Messiam promittunt et annu^ciant, ab^istis
turpissime c^nspurcata sunt. for those places which promise and declare Christ
the true Messiah, are most filthely depraved by them. And Conradus Pellicanus
sometime professor of hebrew in Zuricke, writing upon the 8^ psalm and those
words of our tr^nslation, Conuertuntur ad c^r, where, (...) cor, the
protestants according ^o the hebr^vv prints now, have (...) gesseth well, (...)
and no doubt ri^htly that the difference came through the great likeness of
two letters (...) and (...) and prefe^reth our reading before the hebrews and
vvithal accuses the Jews of al times not only since Christ, but also before,
of n^glig^nce in co^^e^uing their holy bo^kes. Thus he vvriteth. The old
interpreter seems to have read one way, Pelican to. 4. in psalm. 85. verse 9.
whereas the Jews ^ovv read an other. which I say, because I would not
have men think this to have proceeded from the ^gnorance or sl^uthfulnes of
the o^d interpreter. Rather we have cause to find fault for want of
diligence in the Antiquaries, The Jews at al times negligent in conseruing the
scriptures.
and faith in the Jews, who both before Christ's coming and fithence, seem
to have been less careful of the psalms, then of their own Talmudicall
songs. And again in the same volume, upon that verse of the psalm 108. Quis
deducet me in ciuitatem munitam? Idem ibide^ in psalm 108. verse. 11.
quis deducet me in Idumaeam? who will bring me in to the sensed city? who
will bring me in to Idumaea, vvriteth thus: The Syriake interpreter, either
following, or finding out, or i^er^asing the fables of the Jews, translateth
this verse after this s^r: who vvil bring me in to that wicked Rome? who
vvil bring me in to that Constantinople of the Idumeans? sol centiously do the
Rabbines of the Jews abuse their authority, In vulgo legend is legis suae
translationibus.
not only in their commentaries, but also in the translations of their law,
which commonly are to be read, whereby the miserable people reading so, is
easily seduced. Where besides our principal purpose, we may learn vvithal,
The Protestants and Jews resemble one the other in many points both of faith
and manners.
that the Jews have one trick of the Protestants, vz, in to their bible and
communion books or such like wherein is cont^yned their manner of Se^u^ce, to
thrust besides the text, glaunces against the Pope and Church of Rome: as ^n
deed the hatred of Christ, Christianity, and that Church, commonly runs
together. The like testifies Munster alleging these words of Ab^n Ezra
against the Christians. F^vv there were that believed in that man, Munster. in
Genesis ca. 27.
vvho^ these (Christians) have made their G^d, and when Rome did believe in
the time of Constantine and altered the whole law, and put in his banner the
sign of the crucified man, by the persvvasio^ of that Monk of Idumaea, that
is the Roman bishop (so Aben Ezra expounds it) there were none through the
world, that observed that law, besides a fevv Idumeans: and here of it
comes, that the kingdom of the Romans is called the kingdom of Edom.
Wherein a man may see and compare together the Iu^aical and Protestantical
vain in rayl^ng at the Roman Church, and those that live in the unity of it.
To the I^wes we are Gentiles, to the Protestants we are Idolaters. In the
Jews speech and sense, it is al one to say, a Roman, a Catholic, or an
Idumean, that is a Gentile: so is it in the speech and sense of the
Protestants, save that in steed of Catholic, sometimes they use the word,
Papist. The Jews pervert their divine Service with the manifest abuse of
scripture, Where is now become the canon of Carthage Counsel. 4. cap. 47. so
much urged by M. Jewel, that nothing should be read or sung in the church
beside Canonical scripture?
against the Roman faith and Church: and do not our Jewish Protestants much
more? Call to remembrance (Christian reader) their Geneua, or rather Gehenna
psalms sung in their co^gregations, where (as they tell us) nothing sou^d^th
but gods word and the Canonical scripture, and see whether in any old Greek,
Hebrew, Latin, or English psalters they find praying against the Pope, and to
be delivered from al Papistrie. That the Pope, as well as the Turk, would
thrust our of his throne, Bad time, and worse reason.
our lord Jesus Christ, Gods dear son. whether in any old Creed, either
Apostolic, or made by Apostolic or honest men, they are taught to believe,
release and pardon of their sins (which is in these men's divinity, perfect
and entier justification) and that only by faith, as in their rim^ng Creed
without rhyme or reason they sing. Finally as the Jewish Rabbines thrusting
once in to their peoples ears, that Rome is Edom, and the Roman an Edomite,
m^ke that al scripture spoken against Edom, sounds against Rome: even so the
Protestants telling their people, that Rome is Babylon, and the Pope
Antichrist, make them forthwith believe, that whatsoever the scripture has
against Babylon and Antichrist, that makes just against the Roman Church, the
Pope and Catholics.

But to return to our original matter, and to draw to an end of this
question, touching the pure fountains and originals: for plain and evident
demonstration how true that is, I refer M.VV. to these two general
experime^tes, which at his leisure he may view and consider of. Great variety
in the Hebrew bibles
For example whereof, let him peruse Exodus ca. 2. losue 22, and 23. Iudic. 3.
the first of Samuel ca. 10, 17, 22, 28. 2 Samuel 7. Esa. 14, 33, 54, etc. and
Munsters notes upon those chapters, where he shall find the reading and sense
oftentimes as far disagreing as black and white. And Munst. in his preface
forewarneth the reader thereof. Munster in praefat. bib. ^omi primi.
Sometimes (says he) even amongst the hebrvves in one sentence I have found
diverse reading. For sometimes dissensions are sound amongst the^, some thinking
this to be the true reading, some thinking contrary.

ps. 144.
which being made according to the hebrew alphabete and having the verses in
number answering to the hebrew letters, the first beginning with Aleph, the
second with Beth, the third with Gimel, etc. (as does the Psalm. ps. 33.
33.) and therefore should certainly have 22. verses, as has that other, this
lacks one verse in all hebrew copies, and so wanted it even in S. Hieroms
t^me. The Hebrew bibles imperfect.
and evident it is, that the error is in the hebrew, where lacks the 14.
verse which should begin with Nan, as it is very plain by the translation of
the 70, and by our common Psalter. (...)
Fidelis Dominus in omnibus verbis suis, and sanctus in omnibus operibus suis.
Which verse in hebrew should have begun with that letter, (...)
which of all the alphabete only misseth. So as most certain it is, that the
hebrew is faulty. And thus to end this matter of the hebrew fountains and
originals, I will gather that which I have said in to a fevv conclusions and
vvithal answer M.VV. allegations.

The protestants opinion injurious to the holy Ghost.
and yelding so much to the hebrew, is Iudaical, injurious to the Church, to
the holy Ghost and state of the new testament, as whereby they profess to
think more religion and care of Gods word to have been resident in the Jewish
synagoge, the^ in all the Kingdoms, Princes, Pastors and Provinces of
Christianity, for these thovvsa^d years.

heresy of the Arrians against the divinity of Christ and the holy Ghost,
Although S. Hierom appealed from the latin to the Hebrew, yet the like reason
is not for us now.
when as yet the Canon it self comprehending the sacred books of scriptures,
by general authority was not confirmed and received, when (as says S.
August. de doctr. Christiana. lib, 2. ca. 11.
Austin) there was in^umerable variety of latin tra^slations. ( Qui ex
hebrae^ lingua scripturas in graecam verterunt, numerari possunt, latini autem
interpretes nullo modo) and they infinitely differing among them selves, as in
the same place he notes, when for these causes there was not, nor well could
be any one uniform translation approved: although at this time S. Hierom might
justly appeal from them al to the hebrew as in comparison being most pure and
incorrupt: yet nether then were the hebrew copies simpliciter faultles, as has
been shevved by plain examples and demonstrations, by the very Protesta^te
bibles, and by confession of the best and learned among them. and S. H^erom,
S. Hierom thought the hebrew bibles to be in some places corrupt and faulty.
For examining two places of Deuteronomie urged by the Apostle S. Paul in his
epistles, both differing in that point which he most presses, from the hebrew
bibles extant in S. Hieroms days, he resolves in fine, that the hebrew was
corrupted, otherwise then the Apostle read it. The one place is: Gal. ^. v.
1^. Deuter. 21. v. 23.
Scriptum est, Maledictus omnis qui pendet in ligno. It is written, Cursed is
every one that hangs on tree. in which short place compared with the
original in Deuteronomie, there is somevvhat to much, and somevvhat to little.
To much, because here is omnis, every one, and in ligno, on tree, which are not
now found in the Hebrew, (...)
though both in the Greek of the Septuaginta. To little, because there is in
the hebrew, Elohim, which wants in S. Paul, maledictus Deo or Dei, cursed of
God is every one so hanged. S. Hiero. in ^al c. 3.
Hierom answers thus. My judgment herein is this, either that the old books
of the Hebrews had otherwise then they have now, or that the Apostle put
the sense of the scripture not the words, or (which I rather suppose) after
the passion of Christ both in the Hebrew and in our books, the name of God
was added by some man, that he might make us more infamous, who believe in
Christ accursed of God. The other place is this. Scriptum est, Maledictus
omnis, Gal. ^ v. 10. Deutron. 27. v. 26.
qui no^ permanserit in omnibus quae scripta sun^ in libro legis, vt faciat ea.
Cursed is every one that abides not in all things which are written in the
book of the law to do them. Where the Apostles argument hanging principally
upon the two words omnis and in omnibus, every one, and in all things, both
which are in the Septuaginta, (...) and (...) nether in the hebrew, he thus
answers the matter. Hier. in Gal. cap. 3.
I am uncertain, whether the Septuaginta added, omnis homo, and in omnibus,
or whether it were so in the old hebrew, and afterward put out by the
Jews. Thus t^ suppose I am moved for this reason, because the words, omnis,
and in omnibus, The Jews convicted by S. Hier. of corrupting of the scriptures.
al, and in all, as necessary to prove that they be al accu^sed, who are of the
works of the law, the Apostle skilful in the hebrew tongue, and m^st cunning
in the law, would never have so set down, had it not been so in the
hebrew. Wherefore I perusing the hebrew volumes of the Samaritanes found
there written the word (...) as much to say, as omnis sieve omnibus, al or in all, and so that to agree with the Septuaginta. In vain therefore have the
Jews razed that out, lest they should seem to be accursed, whereas the more
ancient examples of an other nation, testify that it was written so. Thus
S. Hierom.

Hieroms time much more have the hebrew books been corrupted, and that not in
small ind^fferent matters, which might better be borne, but in very hye points
touching the divinity and humanity of our Savior, touching his passion and
the redemption of the world. And therefore when S. S. Hierom praising the
hebrew bibles of his time, nothing justifies these of our time.
Hierom speaking of the purity of the bibles before his birth, is applied to
justify the copies written so many ages after his death, and so consequently
to justify al their new English, Fle^mish and Germane interpretations made
according to some hebrew copies as they pretend, this is as just as Germans
lips, according to our english proverb, whose hearts and minds and
religions we see to differ infinitely. This is to answer of chalk, when the
question is proposed of cheese.

of the word of Christ (especially such places as most appertain to him) as
they were of Christ him self, and that they employe their study hereunto. And
if we consider withal, how in time of the law thorough their default they lost
whole books and volumes of their divine Prophets, we shall find small reason
to move us to believe, that since Christ, they should become so holy, and
devout, and watchful, and circumspect, as M.VV. by commending their fountains
and originals would make them.



And hereof may the reader easily learn an answer to that question, An
argument commonly made for the purity of the hebrew bibles
which many frame as a matter of intricate difficulty, when these corruptions
should come in to the hebrew bibles, whether before Christ's time, or between
that and S. Hieroms, or from S. Hieroms time to us. The answer.
because whether part of the three so ever a man take he can not miss. Very
probable, that Christ noted the Jews for corrupting the text of scripture.
Ioa^. 21. v. 25
And well it may be that Christ objected the same unto them, though it be not
recorded in the Testament, as certain it is, many things he preached unto
the^ and reproved in them, whereof no written record is extant. And well it may
be that both Christ objected and the Euangilist noted so much, when he writes
as spoken of our Savior, informing his Apostles, and rejecting the doctrine of
the Scribes and Pharisees: You have heard that it was said to them of old,
Thou shall not kill. Exodus 20. v. 13. Mat. 5. v. 22. v. 28.
you have heard that it was said to them of old, Thou shall not commit
aduoutrie. Exo. 20. 32.
14. It was said also, Whosoever shall dimisse his wife, let him give her a
bill of divorcement. Deuteronomy. 24. ^. Again you have heard that it was said to
them of old, 34.
Thou shall not commit perjury, but shall perform thy oaths to our Lord. 38.
Exodus ca. 20. v. 7. You have heard that it was said, An eye for an eye, and a
tooth for a tooth. Exodus 21. v. 24. You have heard that it was said, 43.
Thou shall love thy neighbor and hate thy enemy. Leuit. 19. v. 18. Where our
Savior joining this later precept, Thou shall hate thy enemy with those other
precepts of the law and written in the law as, Thou shall not kill. Thou shall
not commit aduoutrie. He that diuorceth his wife, let him give her a bil of
diuorcement. Thou shall not commit perjury. Thou shall perform thy oath. An
eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth: shows plainly that the pharisees
taught this later to be the law of god as well as the former, and therefore no
marueil if they put it unto the law with the rest, as by christ's words it
seems most lykely they did. And whether this were so or not, certain it is,
through the intolerable negligence and iniquity of Priest, The whole law for
many years together lost by the Jews
Prince and People, that in the time of Manasses, not one piece or parcel, but
the whole law was lost for many years together, as appears in the book of
Kings, 4 Reg. c. 22.
and at length, as it were by great chance was it found out again in the time
of Josias, which crime our Savior for ought we read, never charged them with all. And therefore if likewise he never charged them with this, it were no great
marueil.

Ex scripturis quae pro confessis apud vos habentur testimonia petam, Justinius
martyr tom. 2. page 141.
says he, I vvil bring proofs of that which I say from those scriptures
which your selves acknovvledge for such) of their corruption he gives three
examples. S. Iustine the Martyr conuinceth the Jews of mangling the scriptures.
One out of Esdras. A second out of Jeremy. A third out of the Psalms. Out of
Esdras, this. Esdras spoke unto the people. This Pascha is our savior and
refuge. Esd. ^.
And if you shall persuade your selves, and this shall enter in to your hearts,
that you shall humble him upon the vvood, and after hope in him, this place shall
not be desolate for ever, says our lord of hosts. But if you vvil not believe
in him, nor hear his preaching, you shall become a scorn to the nations. which
place is in like manner cited by Lactantius. Apud Esdram ita scriptum est.
Lactant. lib. 4. cap. 18.
Et dixit Esdras ad populum. Hoc Pascha saluator nost^r est et refugium nostrum
etc. The place out of the prophet Jeremy is this. Ex Ieremiae responsis haec
verba recideru^t. Ierem. ca. 11.
Ego vt agnus qui ad sacrificandum etc. Out of Ieremies answers this have the
Jews cut away: Whole sentences cut out of the bibles by the Jews.
I as a lamb that am lead to be sacrificed, and against me they devised
counsels sayng, come, let us cast vvood upon his bread, and let us take him
away from the land of the living, and let there be no more memory of his
name. Which place contains the prophetical foreshewing of a double verity.
First of Christ's crucifying upon the cross, to which purpose the words are
plain. The real presence.
Then of his true presence in the blessed sacrament. for the Prophet calls
Christ's natural body upon the cross by the name of bread, in respect of Christ
first promising the same body for everlasting food to his Christians in form
of bread, Ihon 6.
and then after accomplishing the same promise by actual delivery of the same
body in such form at the time of his last supper. Mat. 26.
And the place is so expounded by the ancient fathers, Hierom. in Ieremi. ca.
11. Tertul. in lib. contra Iudaeos. Oecolamp. in Ierem ca. 11.
as for example by S. Hierom, and by Tertullian most evidently. And
Oecolampadius in his commentary upon these words, confesses it to have been
the common sense and interpretation of the ancient and Primitive church. The
third place out of the psalms, is this. Psalm. 95.
Ex nonagesimo quinto etiam Dauidis psalmo haec pauca verba reciderunt, a
ligno. Cum enim scriptum esset etc. Also from the nynetie and fifth psalm of
David they cut away these fevv words, From the vvood. For whereas it was
written, Declare ye among the nations, that our lord has reigned from the
word, they leaft thus much only, Declare ye among the nations, that our lord
has reigned. Of these three places thus defaced by the Jews, the first at
this time is extant in no hebrew bibles, nor to my knowledge in any greek
translation. The second is in all the hebrew now corrected and restored by the
Christians. For S. Iustine notes that it was not clean abolished out of al
hebrew bibles, and the fault was but freshly committed in his days. Resectio
istae says he, Justinius vbi supra, pa. 142
ex Hieremia, ad huc in quibusdam exemplaribus quae in Iudaeorum asseruantur
synagogis, scripta reperitur. Non enim ita diu est, quod haec verba reciderunt.
This piece so cut of from Jeremy, is as yet found vvritte^ in some of. those
copies that are kept in the Jews synagoge. For it was but of late, that they
cut away these words. By which words also it is evident that he means
the very hebrew bibles, not the translation of the 70. only, whereas he so
precisely names such as were preserved in the Jews synagoges, In quibusda^
exemplaribus.
some of which retained still that parcel, but most vvanted it. and manifest it
is that the Jews nether in our time keep so honorably the translation of the
70. in their sinagoges, and much less did they ke^pe it in S. Iustines days,
when (as appears by the whole discourse and manifest words of this author
in this same place) they much more detested it. The third, a ligno, is vvanting
in all greek and hebrew bibles, and is only reserved in our ecclesiastical
Breuiarie, and certain Doctors, as Tertullian, Lactantius, Cassiodorus,
August. in Psalm. 9^.
and S. Austin, who notvvithstanding so reads it, as though it were the
common reading in the churches of Africa in his time, and makes no mention of
any other reading, where those words should be leaft out.

Our first preachers and forefathers perfect Christians without hebrew bibles
and without the which they have for these thousand yers lived most christia^ly
as Saints, and christianly as Saints finished their temporal lives, and after
lived with Christ for ever.

And now touching M. W. page 19.20.
question demanding how the Church has faithfully conserved the books of
scriptures, who thus finds fault with the hebrew bibles as corrupt, I answer
as before, The church has faithfully co^serued the scriptures, notwithstanding
the corruption of the hebrew bibles.
that the Church has most faithfully conserved the scriptures, albeit not in
this or that tongue, which the wanton curiosity of every fantastical heretic
coueteth. We have the true word and gospel of Christ, though perhaps we have
not ten words in that language which our Savior spoke. And then why may we not
have the law and the prophets, though there were never an hebrew bible in the
world? Again unreasonably demands he of our church for hebrew bibles
vncorrupt, which perhaps never had any such, and never undertook to keep the
word of God in that language more then in Arabike or Syriake, no more then she
undertook to keep S. Matthevves Gospel in hebrew, or S. Paul's epistle to
the hebrews. But if she deliver faithfully to the Christians, ^he office of
the true Church.
that which she received of Christ and his Apostles touching al parts of
Christian faith and religion, be it written or unwritten, in one language or
other, she performs that, which Christ committed to her charge, and which
is sufficient for the salvation of every Christian, and whereby she proves
her self to be the House and Church of the living God, 1. Tim. 3. verse. 15.
the sure Pillar and ground of truth, the Spovvse of Christ, Ephesians. 5. c.
and faithful mother of al Christians.

M. D. D. Whit. in the defense, etc. tract. 2 page 87. tract. 7. page
257.265.266.285.287.289.
Whitgift thinks it intolerable that the English ministers should appoint,
what manner of apparel is convenient for them selves to wear, what
ceremonies or rites should be used in their poor Service. He by many arguments
takes from them al authority in such matter, and vvil have the whole
Ministry altogether to depend and be directed by the superior magistrates,
the Queen and the Lords of her Counsel. No more reason that every particular
man should prescribe the church in this, then that every subject should
prescribe the prince how to rule his realm.
Then how much more intolerable is it, that some one or other single minister
should appoint the universal Church and governors thereof, in what manner and
fashion the word of God must be kept, in what language, as it were in what kind
of paper or parchement he will have it written. As if some busye headed fellow in
a common wealth not contented to be ruled and preserved by his Prince in true
religion, justice and quiet possession of his own, should farther take upon
him to prescribe what manner priests, how qualified, and in what University
brought up, should preach unto him the word of God, and minister the
sacraments: what sort of men should exequute unto him justice, and examine his
cases of law: by what capitaynes, of what birth, country and experience, by
what kind of defense, open force, or secret policy, fight by sea, or rather
land, strength of horsemen or footmen, he vvil be maintained in peace and
quietness.

The protestants can not possibly believe any bible delivered them by the Cath.
Church in what language so ever.
And what means he to require for pure bibles in any language of our Church,
which he holds for Antichristian, and the prelates thereof and al other
Catholics, for members of Antichrist. For vvhiles he thus thinks, what
soever bibles, hebrew or not hebrew, Greek or Arabike we offer him, he can
by reason yield no more credit unto them then to our latin, no more then to
our traditions, or any other thing proceeding from vvarrant and credit of such
professed enemies of Christ: as well and learnedly proves S. August. de vtil.
credendi ca. 14.
Austin in his book de vtilitate credendi. Much more agreeable to reason and
Christian divinity is it, for him and his to resort to their own church of
elect and predestinate, or how so ever he list to term them, which has so
flourished these many hundred years, by witness of their ecclesiastical stories,
by report of M. Fox in his Acts and monumentes. Fox acts and monume^tes edit.
1563. page 44.45.91.101.102.103.108.141 140.235.251
Let him resort to the brethren of Lions, to VVycleffe, and the VVycleffis^es,
to Robert Rigges, John Puruey, Henry Crompe, John of Chlum, John Scut, William
Havvlam, Richard Which, John Hus, alias John Goose, the Hussites and Thaborites
of Bohemia and such other, The protestants church and succession.
who (as they tell us) were glorious pillars, and doctors, and maintainers of
their church and Protestant-gospel, and like glistering stars shined in the
face of the Christian world. And that I tie him not to particular me^, or one
only province of Bohemia, in many other provinces and kingdoms of the world
has their church continued, as most confidently writes D. Whit. in the
defens. etc. tract. 8. chap. 6. page 465.
Whitgift against T. C. who framing an argument against the Archbishops
authority drawn from this supposition, What if the whole church be in one
province or in one realm, which has been, Act. cap. ^.
and is not impossible to be again, M. D. Whit. answers it thus. To your
supposition if the whole church etc. How stands this with the inuisibilitie
and general, suppression of the Church, which the Tower disputers so painfully
labor to prove? The second days conference.
I say that if the sky fall you may catch larkes, as the common proverb is,
making it as impossible a case to have the church of Christ in one only
kingdom, as it is impossible for the sky to fall. And presently in the same
page: Do you not know, that the church of Christ is dispersed thorough the
whole world, and can not now (after Christ's ascension) be shut up in one
kingdom much less in one province, except you vvil become Donatistes? He that
is not vvilfully blind, may see in to what straightes you are driven when
you are constrained to use such impossibilities for reasons. And M. VV. in this
book tells us, Whit. co^tra Sander. p. 47
that there never wanted mighty States, and Princes, and nations, who
withstoode the bishop and Sea of Rome as they do now. Nullis temporibus
defueru^t (says he) nec Episcopi, nec Presbyteri, nec Imperatores, nec populi
etc. There never vvanted at any time, nether Bishops, nether Priests, nor
Emperors, nor nations, nor Private men, which had not rather be condemned of
your church for heretics, then to maintain the Catholic communion of your
Apostasy. wherefore having so large a scope, let him repair to that his own
church and succession of Protestants, and of them seek for the true written
bible, of whom he receaueth the sense and meaning of the same, not to our
church and succession of Catholics, whom he chiefly condemns for erring in
the true sense, and then reproves as bitterly for corrupting the true text.

The conclusion of al is this. if as a Christian, as an obedient child of the
Church, and willing to learn, A short and true answer to M. W. demand.
if thus he demand of the Church for true bibles, she can serve him with more
variety of such, and in mo languages, then it will stand with his ease to
read. Such demaunders will never be satisfied, nether can they, while they
remain so minded. Mat. 22. v. 18. Mat. 7. v. 6.
If he demand this as an heretic, as a rebellious Apostata, as to pick
quarrels and maintain strife, the Church has naught to do with him. She
answers as our savior answered the Pharisees. Quid me tentatis hypocritae?
and as he taught his Apostles: Nolite dare sanctum canibus. She sends him to
his own scattered and divided congregation, in to whose communion he has
thrust him self, and under whose false banner he fights against her, whom
the universal Christian world, in all times and ages until our days, has
acknovvleged, for the only, true, catholic and apostolic church of Christ.

And hitherto of the hebrew fountains and originals, wherein I have sta^ed
somevvhat the longer, first of all that the reader may see that not without
just cause I charge M.W. with a manifest lie, page 16.
in saing we flee the hebrew, for that we know it to contain the assured
bane and destruction of our cause. He may here perceive in part, We honor and
esteem of the hebrew bibles notwithstanding we alter not our faith upon
pretense thereof.
what reason, what argument, what conscience moves the Church thus to
prescribe, and us to follow the Churches ordinance herein. That we nether
fear, nor contemn, nor refuse it, but for the understanding of the true
sense, study and honor it as much as he, though we hang not our faith upon
it so, as if the Jews deprave a text touching Christ's divinity, we
therefore vvil deny him to be God, and if they raze out the only text, that
foreshevveth the manner of his passion and crucifying, we vvil not for all that
give over our faith, that in such sort he was crucified for us.

Secondarely thus I have done to satisfy M^ VV. d^maund, who chalengeth us so
confidently, to shevve any error in the originals. who affirms so
peremptorily those places to be safe and untouched, which appertain to the
proof of our Christian religion. Which how true it is he now sees, if he will
believe either reason, or his own masters. Besides that his argument is over
slender, when he will conclude those originalles to be pure, because there is no
corruption in matters of controversy, as though there could be no errors, but
those which proceed of wilfulnes and malice against Christian religion: The
Protestants, partial judges for the Jews against the Christians and Church
Catholic.
as though the Jews could not err by negligence, ignorance, and other humane
infirmity, by which Calvin, Beza and the rest of that knot can imagine very
many, and the same very gross errors to have crepte in to our latin bibles.
But true is the old proverb, Graculus graculo, Like will to like as I have
said. Of the Jews for near alliance and brotherhode they judge so divinely,
as though they were half gods, who never erred. either of malice* either of
wilfulnes, or ignorance, or slowthfulnes, or want of due consideration, or
thorough any kind of like either sin or imbecillitie. But of the Christian
Catholic Church, of the Bishops and Pastors, by whom they have that piece of
Christianity which yet they retain, they deem most wickedly: them they
account more dissolute, more irreligious, more careless and negligent in matters
divine, then the worst people that live under the cope of heaven. These in the
same kind have erred, both of malice, and of wilfulnes, and of contempt, and of
negligence, by all manner of faulting, voluntary and inuoluntarie, whereunto a
man may possibly fall.

Thirdly, some reason moving me thus to do, was because nether M. Martin in
his Discovery, much less the preface of the new testament (handling only such
things, as were incide^t to that book, that is, giving reason why in that
translation the latin vulgar edition was followed before the common greek
testamentes) had any occasion to treat of this matter. For albeit M. Discover.
c. 22 number 9.10.11.12* and in the preface nu. 39.
Martin proves errors in matters historical to be in our common hebrew bibles,
yet he makes no stay therein but rather presupposing the hebrew text to be
altogether true, as the adversaries pretend, he so much the more discovers
their wilfulnes and peruersitie, who in their translations depart sundry times
from those hebrew originalls, which they seem to magnify as altogether
faultles and unspotted.

One principal corruption of great moment and importance he obiecteth out of
the 21. psalm, In the preface to the reader, nu. 44. and c. 22. number. 9.
where the prophet says in the person of Christ, They have pierced my hands
and feet, which by the Jews being maliciously altered by mutation of one or
other letter in to, As a lion my hands and feet, without wit, reason, or
common sense, whereby is euacuated the best and clearest prophecy in the whole
body of scripture touching the manner and fashion of Christ's crucifying, who
besides M. W. would so blindly have dissembled it, and yet still sing us the old
song of the pure fountains?

It is written that not long sithence, certain euangelical Anabaptists lately
converted from Iudaisme, reading that place of S. Peter in Castalios
translation, Act. 2. v. ^5.
Iesum Nazarenum scelestis manibus comprehendistis, et ad palum alligatum
sustulistis, Jesus of Nazareth you have apprehended, and binding him to a post
or stake, so made him away, Sixtus ^enens. in Bibliotheca sancta. lib. ^. page
648.
upon this text fell to a great and dangerous contention among them selves in
their congregations, whether Christ were pierced hand and foot with nails as
the Church believes, or were only bound hand and foot to a gibbet, as the
fashion among the Turks is now a days, and as the other two thieves were done
to death which were crucified with him. And remove the tradition of the Church
(which these good fellows care not for) and this place of David, The
Protestants secretly begin to disprove the Churches faith touching the manner of
Christ's crucifying.
and certainly out of the old testament it can not, perhaps nether out of the
new, be clearly proved to a contentious heretic, that he was crucified in
such sort as the truth is, and we believe. For as the heretics now a days at
home in our country gladly abhor the name of the cross, and al signs or
memories there of, and both in private talking and public preaching and
writing, Calfh. against the cross.
rather use the name of gallovves or gibbet: so others abroad in their
commentaries upon the scripture much urge the same, and willingly take and
prosecute al co^iectures and gesses, that tend to the proof thereof. Marlor.
in Psalm. 22. v. 17
So for example Marlorate favoring (as it plainly appears) Castalios
translation and the Jewish reading, writes expressly. De foss^one manuum ac
pedum Christi, in historia passionis Christi, nihil memorarunt Euangelistae. Of
pearcing Christ's hands and feet, in the story of Christ's passion the
Evangelists make no mention. as much to say, as therefore we are not bound to
believe it. For by these men's doctrine, we are bound to believe nothing, which
is not proved by scripture. And the self same affirms Wolf. Musculus, vz,
Muscul. io Man. cap. 27.
that the Evangelists make no declaration that Christ should be put to death
in any such manner. And it may well be that M. W. accounts this for a trifle,
nether cares greatly which way Christ died, so that he confess him to have
died one way or other. Bucer. in Psalm. 22. v. 17.
For so touching this place writes Martin Bucer that great Rabbine and Apostle
of Cambridge University in the sacrame^tarie heresy, and M.W. first
predecessor in that profession and chair which he now possesses. His words
are these. Although it be now in the hebrew bibles, As a lyo^ my hands and
feet, yet Felix Pratensis witnesses, that he read, Foderunt, (...)
They pierced my hands and feet in a certain commentary, where unto the
Jews give as much credit, as to David him self. Sed cum Iudaeis ob voculam
ego nunquam contend crim, But I for my part (says Bucer) would never conte^d
vith the Jews for so trifling a word. And Zuinglius in his Tigurine
translation in deed contendeth not, but strikes it quite out, and puts in
for it, Tanquam leo, As a lion, translating it more like a Jew and sworn
adversary of the gospel, then a Christian. For whereas the evangelist writes,
applying it to our savior, Os non comminuetis ex eo, Ioa^. 19. v. 36.
A bone of him you shall not break, he translateth this place of the psalmist
clean opposite to the evangelist thus, Zuing. tom. 3. in E^chirid. psalmorum.
Psa. 21.
Concilium pessimorum frangit manus meas et pedes meos instar leonis. The
Tigurine translation, wicked and Iuysh against the crucifying of Christ. to
like purpose is the translation of Leo Iudae Cinzit me, ^cu leo manus meas, etc.
The assembly of wicked men breaks my hands and feet like a lion. By that
wicked interpretation secretly also furthering the detestable opinion of other
his brethren before touched, against the manner of Christ's crucifying.

But to let this pass which requires a larger discourse, how soever M. W.
like or dislike the opinion, here of I conclude, that these fountains, which
he calls, Page 16.
Most pure and wholesome, are in many respects impure and pestilent, and have
in them far greater errors maliciously thrust in against matters of such
height, the^ he and his fellows shall find in our latin bibles so long as they
shall be able to read one letter in the^. The conclusion.
They have errors against Christ's divinity, they have errors against his
humanity, errors against his passion, errors against the force of his
redemption, and many other errors against other parts of our religion. These
errors Luther him self confesses, Lyra a Jew borne acknowledges, reason and
experience co^uinceth, S. Iustine to Triphon a Jew avouches and approves, S.
Hierom by plain demonstration shows: and to pass by others, Castalio
accompteth M.W. half a Jew for thinking so superstitiously, as here he
pretends. And except he can bring better arguments, then hitherto he has, he
gives us occasion to think him not only scarce half a Christian, but also
scarce half a wise man, who of so difficile and hard a point pronounces so
rashly, so improbably, and so unreasonably. Whereof I infer, that not so
lightly as these fellows imagine, but with great and divine wisdom, the
general Council autorized the ancient latin translation so corrected and
amended, as in the Canon of the same Council it is appointed: although
peradventure when those fathers so decreed, they intended not this comparison,
in to which by the importunity of our adversaries we are now drawn.

CHAP. XIII. Of the purity of our latin testament in respect of the greek
copies now extant. Item a comparison of our translator with al other^ of this
age, with an answer to those objections which M. VV. deuiseth against him.
IT rests now that I finish the other two parts which as yet remain of the
last chapter, touching the exact verity of our latin translation, and the
impiety in appealing from that to the greek and hebrew. But before I come
thither, reason requires somewhat to be spoken of the new testament in greek,
as has been spoken of the old in hebrew. And it may be that the Protestants
find more fault with us, for that at the least in the new testament we leave
not our old latin and follow the greek, in which tongue the Eua^gelistes vvrote.
To justify our doing herein, much may serve of that which has been said in
the last chapter, much more may be seen in the preface before mentioned of the
new testament, whereof as I said I vvil make my advantage for breuities sake,
because I perceive this trifle rises and increases between my fingers more
then either my self, or others would have it. Wherefore I vvil gather to M.
VV. hands the sum of that which is there spoken, The preface of the new
testament.
because he seems never to have read it, and after add one or two short
observations of mine own and so pass away.

Te^ reasons there shall he find, Reasons to justify the latin testament, in
comparison of the Greek.
why we in our translation followed rather the latin then the greek: the tenth
reason whereof may be subdivided in to ten reasons more at the least, proving
the latin to be purer then the greek, by most clear examples, fortified with
the authority of Tertullian, of S. Hiero^, of the Ecclesiastical history, of
Calvin, of Beza, of Erasmus, of the English translations and translators them
selves. Which discourse is concluded with this approbation of that excellent
man Theodorus Beza. Beza in praefat. noui testamenti anno 1556.
How vnvvorthely (says he) and without cause does Erasmus blame the old
interpreter, as dissenting from the greek? he dissented I grant from those
greek copies which Erasmus had gotten, The greek printes now in use are not
sufficient to disprove the Latin testament.
but we have found not in one place, that the same interpretation which he
blames, is grounded upon the authority of other greek copies, and those most
ancient. Yea in some number of places, we have observed that the reading of
the latin text of the old interpreter, though it agree not some time with our
greek copies, yet is it much more convenient, for that it seems he followed
some truer and better copy. After this, follow eight other reasons showing our
latin translation to agree generally with the greek or with more grave and
sufficient authority the^ are the greek copies now extant: after which follow
many examples wherein Beza particularly charge the greek copies of
corruption, whom in that case the english tra^slations follow. Al which makes
most evidently for us and justifies our doing. For if in truth (even by the
confession of our greatest adversaries) our latin be purer then the greek, if
our latin be framed exactly though not to the vulgar greek examples now usual,
yet to more ancient and perfect examples as Beza has observed, if the greek
testaments have in them many faults, errors and corruptions, as Beza in word
avouches and by manifold examples shows, if this be so true that our english
translators them selves at their pleasure leave the greek and follow our latin,
with what face, reason, or conscience, can M.W. cry upon the pure and
vncorrupt originals, which him self and his masters prove to be so impure and
contaminated? With what honesty can he call us to the greek, from which them
selves depart so licentiously? Unto these I will join only three short
observations, which the diligent reader perhaps may amplify by very many
particular examples, and so will come to confer our translator with our
adversaries.

Beza in Ioa^, ca. 7. v. 53.
Beza rejects the whole story of the adulterous woman whereof mention is
made in the eight of S. Ihon. His reason is, Veteres illi reiecerunt.
because the old fathers did so, and it was not in the old greek testaments:
which he proves by the authority, of S. Chrysostom of Theophilact, of Nonnus,
and S. Hierom. and amongst 17 old copies of Henry Stephen, one vvanted it, the
rest had it, but so, Beza doubts of a part of S. John's gospel.
that in their reading there was marvelous variety. whereof he inferrteh,
Ta^ta varietas lectionis facit vt de totius istius narrationis fide dubitem.
This great variety of reading makes me to doubt of the truth of the whole
matter. Yet notwithstanding this contrary practice of the old greeks and
greek testaments, and infinite variety in the copies, the new printes have it
(for ought I can find) universally and agreably: and in all our english
testaments (translated after the greek) it is as canonical as any other part
of S. John's gospel. So that herein appears a great diversity between the old
greek testaments and the new, and therefore dangerous it is to follow these
new, if we can not do it but with comdemnation of the old: and yet as
dangerous is it to follow the old, if we can not do it without comdemnation of
that which the church holds for a part of S. John's gospel. Bez. ad Ephesians. 3.
verse. 14.
The like notes thae same writer in the epistle to the Ephesians. the 3. chap. In
graecis no extat.
a parcel whereof in S. Hiero^s time Was not in the greek books, but only in
the latin. but (says Beza) In omnibus veteribus libris et scholiis quoque
graecis haec particula additur. Now it is added in all the old greek copies
and scholies also.

Additions rashly made to the greek.
an example whereof may be taken from the same Evangelist and the end of the
same chapter, Joan. 8. v. 59
where in the greek is added this piece, Exiuit e templo, (...). Transiens per
medium illorum, et sic praeteriit. touching which thus writes Beza. Beza in
Ioa^. cap. 8. v. 59.
These words are found in very ancient copies, but I think as does Erasmus,
that the first part is taken out of Luke the 4. v. 30. and creapt into the text
by fault of the vvriters who found that written in the marge^t, and that the
later part (...) was added to make this chapter join well with the next. And
thus to think I am moved not only because nether Chrysostom nether Augustine
make any mention of this piece, but also because it seems not to ha^g
together very probably for if he withdrew him self out of their sight, how
went he through the midst of the^? etc. and so forth disputes against this
part as altogether improbable and not likely to be true. Yet is it now
generally in most greek copies, how beit the english translators leave it out
of their testaments. Of the year 1561. 1562. 1577. 1579.
The reason I take to be, because howsoever they brag of their greek and
hebrew originals, the truth is, No certainty in the English translations
they translate nether the one nor the other (except sometimes some few words
for a show) but only take that, which Beza in latin delivers unto them. And
yet (whereof I marueil) the freshest translation which professes to follow
Beza, anno 1580.
and inscribeth the book thus: The Testament of our Lord Jesus Christ
translated out of greek by Theodore Beza, and Englished by L. T. puts this
in, which Beza leaves out and against which Beza disputes so earnestly that
it can not be scripture, Scripture made Canonical and not Canonical according
to Bezaes fancy.
as being contrary to it self. But for excuse of the English translator it may
be (and true it is) that Beza one year thought thus, an other year thought
otherwise. Of the year 1556.

Of the year 1565.


And so in one Testament of his, held that for false and Apocryphal, which in
an other Testament he gave out and autorized as sacred and Canonical. Unto this
place thou may refer that piece which the Protestants so gloriously sing
and say in the end of the Lords prayer. For thine is the Kingdom, the power,
and glory for ever and ever. Amen. which as Erasmus disliketh, confessing it
notwithstanding to be, Eras. in Annot.
In omnibus graecis exemplaribus and nulla latino, In all greek testaments and
no one Latin, so Bullinger himself counts it to be a mere patch sowed to the
rest, by I know not who^, and allows well of Erasmus judgment, Bulling.
decade 5. ser^. 5.
reproving Laurentius Valla for finding fault with the latin editio^ because
that lacks it. Non est (says he) quod Laurentius Valla stomachetur etc.
There is no reason why Laurence Valla should take the matter so hotely, as
though a great part of the Lords prayer were cut a way. Rather their ras^nes
was to be reproved who durst presume to piece on their toys unto the Lords
prayer. Assuere suas nuga^.


Parcels of importance heretically leaft out of the greek.
that the greek testaments omit upon light occasions, often times that which
they should not, and which the latin retains for autentical and canonical.
Before cap. 10. pa. 248 Luc. 1. v. 35.
Example where of may be the place before noted of the incarnation. Quod
nascetur ex te sanctum, vocabitur filius dei. That (says the Arch^ngel to our
blessed lady) which of thee shall be borne holy, shall be called the son of
God. In which sentence the two syllables, ex te, (...), what force they carry
against the Anabaptists has been declared. Now consider the gener^l corruption
of the greek cop^es in that behalf. Of them thus writes Carolus Molineus a
great Protestant in his new testament. Carol. Molin. in nou. testament. part. 1.
I have read, exte, in most ancient bibles, of which one copy I have,
printed at Lions* the year 1479. and that is the old undoubted reading. for so
read the old and new Breuiaries and Roman offices. But Erasmus, whom Bucer
and Bullinger follow, seems only to have fallen upon a copy in this part
vnp^rfite, the error whereof is spread a broad in many copies both greek and
latin printed at Basil, Zuricke, Paris, and Lions, you and at Geneua also in
the ordinary gloss upon the three first Evangelists set forth the year 1549.
and 1554. but now of late the Geneuians, especially Theodorus Beza have
acknovvleged and mended this error. See the greek testament of Basil print of
the year 1536. 1540. 1543. Zuri^. 1547. Geneua 1565. 1576.
how it is mended I know not, but sure I am in the text of any greek copy I
could never yet for it, and Beza in his mending does show so notable a trick
of an Anabaptist as may be. In the annotations of his testament, he writes of
this piece well and christianly thus. Beza in testament. 1556. in Luc. 1. verse.
35.
Exte, (...), of thee. so I found it written in some books of the old
edition, and in the book of Complutum, and in many places of Epiphanius. And
Athanasius in h^s epistle to Epictetus bishop of Corinth, shows that so we
must read. For thus vvriteth he. The Angel said not simply that which shall be
be borne in thee, but of thee, (...).
that we should believe that which was borne, by nature to have been formed
of her. By which reasons he proves that to be the true reading in the greek,
the latin testaments generally concurring therewith. Beza furthereth the
Anabaptists against Christ's incarnation of the blessed Virgin.
But how now ame^deth he his testament? thus. whereas before it was in the
margent of some greek testame^ts, as appears by the print of John Crispine
the year 1553. he leaft it clean out both of text and margent of the greek
testaments which after this were printed in Geneua, as appears in the two
prints of the testament set forth by Beza him self the year 1565. in greek and
latin, and the greek testament printed after that by Henricus Stephanus the
year 1576. so that the other true reading remains only in the latin, which
against an Anabaptist, or any other Protestant making no account of the latin,
farther then it agrees with the greek, is nothing worth. And therefore the
english bible of the year 1561. in this point drawing toward Anabaptisme, as
also the bible printed the year 1577. leaves it clean out.

An other error of like quality, though not of like quantity and greatness is
in the 36. C^rol Mol. in testament. par. 64.
verse, ca. 17. of S. Luke which (as the same man says) wants in Euthimius
an ancient greek writer and in Theophilact, and in all the copies printed at
Basile, and in the translation of Zuricke, and in the bibles printed at Geneua,
nether Erasmus, nor Sanctes Pagninus, nor Bucer, nor Bullinger, nor Brentius,
nor Calvin, read it. sed habetur in meis antiquis, et in vulgari aeditione.
but it is in my old bibles, and in the vulgar edition. Hereof it rises, that
Erasmus in sundry places would leave out verses, because they were not in his
greek copies, Beza contrariewise would put them in, because he found them in
his. For example. Mar. 11. v. 26
Of that sentence Mar. 11. v. 26. Quod si vos n^n dimis. ritis, nec pater
vester qui in caelis est, dimittet vobis peccata vestra, Erasmus writes, Beza
in illu^ locum.
that in the greatest number of greek testaments this verse is not read,
neether in Theophilacte. Nos tame^ in plarisque vetustis exemplaribus
reperimus, atque ad^^ in Theophilacto Romano (says Beza) yet I found it in
most of the ancient copies, and in The ephilact printed at Rome. A sm^le
student with mean diligence may enlarge this by very many examples, and the
greek testaments of our time for the greater multitude coming through the
hands of heretical printers, specially in the beginning of this tragical
heresy, ministers great store and variety of cutting of, and leaving out,
and such like false practices.

Illyric. in clau. par. 1. praefat.
Vnus (says he) popularis meus Hieronymus linguarum egregie peritus fuit etc.
Only my countryman Hierom was marvelous cunning in the to^gs. If S Hier and
the Church in his time were destitute of these helps, is Illyricus and the
rest of that cru^ furnished with them?
he endeavored to illustrate the scriptures, both by his translations and
commentaries. But he in deed being ignorant of man's sickness and Christ the
physician, and vvanting the keye which opens the scripture, that is, the
difference between the law and the gospel, being also destitute of Christ
who opens the door, he did little good. The like defect was in Lyra not long
before our time, whereas otherwise he took great pains to setforth and
expound the holy bible. Out of which censure this I gather, not how arrogantly
and impiously these men despise and contemn the principal doctors and
Primitive church, but that al skill and knowledge of tongues serves not to make
a man interpret the testament as he ought, Religious sincerity principally to
be regarded in an interpreter of the scripture.
except withal he be of sound religion toward God, endued with his grace and
spirit, void of partiality and affection, and with single and sincere mind
coueteth to express the sense and meaning of the holy Ghost.

If by these rules we examine and scanne our old interpreter, we shall
manifestly find that he is to be preferred both before all the interpreters of
our time whosoever is counted best, yea put the^ al together, as also before
the greek testaments which now are current. For that his knowledge was
sufficient in the greek tongue, and therefore erred not for want off kill, the
thing it self speaks, and it is confessed by all his and our adversaries,
Pellicane, Our old interpreter had variety and choice of good greek copies.
Beza, Castalio, Molineus, as shall appear hereafter. That he had good stoare
of greek copies, and those truer and perfecter then we have commonly now, Beza
likewise in plain terms confesses. his words are cited before. Page 362.
and he gives this general rule of him, that amongst the old greek examples
which he used to the furnishing of his new testament, two he had which he
calls, The second and the eight, which lightly never disagreed from our
vulgar translation. Upon the first of S. Mark he vvriteth thus. Beza in Mar.
ca. 1. verse. 2.
In prophetis (...), so we found it vvritte^ in all our greek books, saving
the second and the eight, in which we read, Hiero. de optimo genere
interpreta^di. c. 3. Augu. quest. 57. vet. and nou. test. Epiph. co^tra
haereses. li. 2 Chrisost. ca. 1. Marci.
(...), in Isai the prophet, and so did the old interpreter translate the
place. And that it should be so, is proved most clearly by the Syriake bible,
S. Hier. S. Austin, S. Epiphan. and S. Chrysostom. specially defending this place
against Porphitie. Again in S. Luke, Eiectis for as omnibus, (...), Bez. in
Luc. cap. 8. v. 54.
the old interpreter read not this, yet we found it in all our old books,
excepting the second and eight, quorum mirificus est cum vulgata editione
consensus. Betvveene which and the vulgar edition there is a vvounderful
consent.

But because all this serves not in this divine work, The religious fidelity
and sincerity of our old interpreter*
except the mind be rightly guided and void from al passions, in this part
principally our interpreter by all reason must needs be judged sovereign and
excellent, because living so long before the names of Papists and Protestants
were knovve^, he could not unequally bend to one side against the other. and
his precisenes and religious vprigh^nes is often times singularly commended by
the adversaries them selves. Vetus interpres (says Beza) videtur summa
religione sacros libros interpretatus. Beza in 1. c. Lucae v. 1.
The old interpreter seems to have inteepreted the holy books with
marue^ous sincerity and religion. And Molineus. Molin par. 30.
I gerrime a un gari consuetaque lectione recedo, quam etiam enixe defendere
so^eo. I can very hardly depart from the vulgar and accustomed reading, which
also I am wont very earnestly to defend. And ^o use one domestical witness,
Humfred. de ratione interp lib. 1. page 74,
D. Humfrey thus speaks of him. Proprietati verborum satis videtur addictus
vetus interpres, et quidem n^mis anxie, quod tamen interpretor religione quadam
fecisse, non gnorantia. The old interpreter seems sufficiently bent ^olovv
the propriety of words, and he does it in deed to carefully, which
notvvithstanding I suppose him to have done not of ignorance, but of religion
and conscience. Hereby is well and perfitly justified the sincere and upright
dealing of our interpreter, whose fault either is none, or if it be any, it is
this, that in following the exact signification of the greek word, he was to
scrupulous and careful, to full of conscience and religion, which is a very
good fault, if it must be called a fault, and commended and justified else where
by D. Humfrey him self. Humfred. ibid. pa. 175.
Liberius (says he) in aliis prophanis licet expatiari and degredi a verbis:
in canonica scriptura nulla licentia est tolerabilis. non enim concessum est
homini dei linguam mutare. In profane vvritings a man may range abroad more
freely, and depart from the words: in canonical scripture no such license is
tolerable. for man may not alter the tongue of God.

Against this man so learned, Protestant translators of the new testament al
partial, in favor of their several heresies, and so al false and corrupt.
having good greek copies, and following them exactly and with such religion
let now any Protestant oppose any of his new translators, whom by manifold
reasons, trials and experiments, I can not disprove and plainly show, that for
one error of our interpreter, he has at least a score. And in reason how can
it be otherwise, whereas they al being here^ikes, and each addicted to some
peculiar sect (saving Erasmus, who notvvithstanding was far out of the way)
and therefore full of pride, arrogancy, selfvvil, and given to that partial
humor whereof his heresy most consisted, drew al places, especially
indifferent, to serve that vein. Luthers excellency in interpreting, is of
the greatest number of Protestants thought very singular, so as not only the
Lutherans but even the Zuinglians give him great praise, Sleid. li. 17. in fine.
as we learn by Sleidan. Brent. in Apolog. conf. Wirten. cap. de horis
canonicis.
Habemus sacra biblia (says Brentius in the Apology of the Wirtenberg
Confession) a Luthero in Germanicam linguam diuino beneficio ta^ perspicue
co^uersa etc. we have the holy bibles through the great benefit of God turned
by Luther in to the Germain tongue so clearly, that his translation yeldeth to
none, either greek or latin. Yet how elega^t and sincere a translator he was,
we may conjecture by Emserus, Bey viertz^hin hundert ketzerlycher luge^.
Lindan. dubitant. dial. 1. pa. 79.
who gathered out of his translation Fourteen hundred foul lies and
falsifications. But because the authority of this man being a catholic
vvayeth not much with M.W. and to write out those lies were to fill up a good
book, which I am not disposed to do at this time, to make short work, both
in this and the rest I will stay my self upon the authority of such men, as I
know M. VV. honoreth for singular instruments of the Lord in setting forth the
gospel, such as he well knovveth, speak not of partiality but of conscience.
And who can judge of Luther better then his coapostle Zuinglius, Luthers
translation full of corruption, in favor of Lutheranisme.
who is so far of from approving his translation, that he accounts him a
foul corrupter and horrible falsifier of scripture to make them serve his
heretical fancies, and in that kind reckeneth him for a very Arrian and
Marcionite. Thus he vvriteth. Zuing. to. 2. ad Luther. lib. de sacrame^to fo.
412
Thou do corrupt (Luther) and adulterate the word of God, following herein
the Marcionites and Arrians, who of old were wont commonly to raze out of
the scriptures such places as seemed to be against their doctrine. This fault
he exemplifieth in Luthers translation thus. Whereas these words of Christ,
(...) John 6. he should have translated thus, That flesh profits nothing,
there he leaft out the Germane article, (das, that) answering the greek
article (^) to the intent those words should not precisely and determinately
be referred to the self same flesh, of which Christ had spoken a little before,
and spoke of still, for thus he translated it etc. And after many words spent
against Luther for his malicious wickedness, he thus concludes. See how thy
case stands Luther, Ibid. fo. 143
that in the eyes of al men thou art seen to be a manifest and common
corrupter, Manifestus and publicus sacrae scripturae corruptor and adulterator.
and peruerter of the holy scripture, which thing thou can never deny
before any creature. How much are we ashamed of thee, who hitherto have
esteemed thee beyond al measure, and now try thee to be such a false
fellovv. Two fit Apostles for such a church as they erected
Between which two (most excellent Apostles of the english congregation)
thus chiding, I know not who is of us, more to be abhorred and detested.
whether Luther, who plaieth the part of an Arrian and Marcionite in mangling
and defacing the scriptures, or Zuinglius who so eagerly strives to prove
that the flesh and humanity, and consequently the incarnation of our most
blessed Savior is vvorth nothing.

But to let that pass, and proceed to talk of our translators, M. W. because
he is a Zuinglian, therefore by likelihode reckeneth the^ for more exquisite in
giving forth their testame^ts. No translation of scripture made by a Zuinglian*
can possibly be good.
Grant that be so in the judgment of him and his companions: how can we be
induced so to think of them, whereas Luther their common father, holds them
for most ignorant and foolish, and (to use his own words) as senseless and
brutish, as is any stock or beast, in giving the true sense of the scripture.
who calls them commonly touching d^uinitie and matters theological, stultos,
srolidos, stupi^os, stipites, asinos, Ibid. apud Zuingl. fol. 388.389.
truncos, antichristos, impost^res, stipites, asinino intellectu, and so forth
many like raylinges unworthy to be heard amongst the vilest creatures that
live, much less amongst two such Arch apostles, had they in them any parcel,
Particular translations of diverse protesta^tes.
I will not say of Apostolic or Christian, but of civil or human gravity.
But I will descend unto some of their particular Testaments set forth by
Zuinglians, to find out if it may be, one which may be preferred before our
common. That which was set forth by Oecolampad us (as I suppose) and the
Divines of Basi^e, The translation of Basile wicked.
is of many well allowed. And vvil you have us refuse our old, and take that?
but Beza charge us in any case not to do so, and gives his reason, Bez. in
resp. ad defens. and respo^sio. Castalion.
because that Basile tr^nslatio^ is in multis locis impia, and a spiritus
sancti sententia prors^s discrepans, In many places wicked, and altogether
dis^greing from the mind of the holy Ghost. Will you vvishe us rather to take
Castalio, whom D. Humfred. de rat. interpret. li. 1* pa 62 63.189.
Humfrey matcheth with the best, and praises his bible as most painful, most
diligent, most thorougly conferred, Gesner. in Bibliotheca Sebastia. Castalio.
examined, sifted, and polished? and Conradus Gesnerus simply prefers it
before al, as the best that was ever yet set out by the Protestants. Vertit
biblia (says he) ita diligenter ac su^ma fide ad hebraica and graeca
exemplaria etc. vt omnes omnium versiones hactenus aeditas longo post se
interuallo reliquisse videatur. Cast alio bath translated the bible so
diligently, and with so singular fidelity according to the hebrew and
greek, that he seems far to have surpassed al tra^slations of al me^ what
so ever have hitherto been set forth. Yet this notvvithstanding, Beza in test.
an. 1556. in praefat. and in Mat. c. 3. 1. Cor 1. Mat. 4. Luc. 2. Act. 8. and
10.
we can not possibly so esteem of it, considering that Beza in so many places
of his notes conde^neth it not only for false, corrupt and perverse, but also
for pestilent, sacrilegious Ethnical, and Turkish, such a one as contains the
very seed, The translation of Castalio, Ethnical,
and lays open the high way to manifest Apostasy from Christ. To come
nearer home, Calvin I suppose by M. W. judgment should succeed in place of our
old. but so should we make as evil a change as if we took any yet
mentioned. Calvin in his translation, alters and adds to the text of the
gospel.
For Calvin whatsoever grace or good quality otherwise he had, was as
savvcie and malapert in altering the text of scripture as any of his fellow
sectaries. so vvriteth of him, his own brother Carolus Molineus. Carol. Mol.
in sua trans. testam. noui part 11. fo. 110.
Caluinus in sua harmonia textum euangelicum desuitare facit sursum versum, vt
res ipsa indicat, vim infert literae euangelicae, et illam in mul it is locis
transponit, et insuper addit literae. Calvin in his harmony (which is the very
letter of his translation) makes the text of the gospel to leap up and
down, as the thing it self shows. He uses violence to the letter of the
gospel, and in many places clean transposeth it, and besides this he adds to
the text. that is, he gives us a text of his own making.

What remains for us to do now, but to stick to our old, seeing the
Protestants them selves thus dissuade us from taking any new? But there
remains yet one sure fellow whom I suppose M. W. could be content to
substitute in place not only of our ancient edition, but of Luther,
Occolampadus, Castalio, yea and Calvin him self, that is Theodore Beza, whom
the english congregation seem most to follow. Bezaes translation more
disagreing from it self and worse then any of the rest.
But he must tell us what testament? of what year? of what date? because
certain it is, that the first editions d^ffer notoriously from the middle and
the middle from the later, as has been touched before, and of al testame^ts
set forth by any her^t^ke, no one has been more refuted and co^uinced of foul
and wilful corr^ptions* and that by the ver^e heretics them selves, then
those of Bezaes. Before c. 10.
witnesses whereof are (besides Catholic vvriters noted before) Selneccerus
the Germane, and the Vniu^rsitie of Iena, Carol. Moli. in testam. part 8 13.14
21.23.
Se^astianus Casta^io in a whole book, and Carolus Molineus in v^rie many
places of his not^s upon the new testament which he set forth. Where often
times he reprehendeth Calvin and Beza. Part. 26.30.40.64.
often times of Beza he says, that he, de facto mutat textum. Alters the
text not only in sense, but in the very word and letter. Again, Theod. Beza
Mat. Part. 64.65.66.74.99.
10. v. 10. and Luc. 9, 3. defacto mu^at textum, A pretty way to roco^cile
places that seem to disagree.
vt hos ita conciliet. Sed non p^acet mutari textum qui ab omnibus et antiquis
et rece^tioribus doct^ribus retinetur, quum sacile co^ciliari possint. Beza in
S. Matthew chap. 10. v. 10. and S. Luke chap. 9. v. 3. actually changes the
text, so to make a reconciliation between the evangelists. But I like not
that, so to change the text which is retained of al doctors both old and new,
and otherwise they may well be reconciled. and whether they may or may not
surely that is a very mad way of reconciliation. And commonly that writer
prefers our vulgar editio^, before Erasmus, Molin. in Luc. 17.
Bucer, Bullinger, Brentius, the Tigurine translation, Pagnines, etiam Iohannis
Caluini et omnibus aliis, yea before John Caluins to, Our old translation
better then al Protestant translations Carolus ^olincus.
and all other. And in the same place. Here Erasmus did well to follow the old
edition, and it had been better for Beza to have done so to. And again, Peccat
Beza antiquam versionem mutans, Ioha^nis 3. v. Vide ibi. in Joan. 7. v. 35.
19 et 43. And the like is very common in Castalio, Beza male reprehendit
veterem interpretem. Castalio in defens. page
179.174.18^.183.188.198.202.206.213.
Melius transtulerat vetus interpres. Unjust reprehendit veterem interpretem
etc. unjustly and with out cause Beza reprehendeth the old interpreter. The
old interpreter had translated it better before. And touching Beza he says,
Castal. defens. trans. page 176.
that to note al his errors committed in translating the new testament, Opus
esset nimis magno l^bro, It would require a very great book. And having noted
certain faults of Beza committed only in the first ten chapters of S.
Matthew, Ibi. page 182 183.

Bezaes innumerable corruptions in the new testament.


thus he concludes. In his december Matthaei capitibus (in quibus tame^ plurimae
quae merito reprehe^dere potuissem praetermisi) quam prolixum passem etc. I
trust I have shevved sufficiently by these ten chapters of S. Matthew (in
which notvvithstanding I have omitted very many things which justly I might
have reprehended) what a long register of his errors I could gather out of his
whole work. For this is true, that often times he erreth not only in words
(which is not so dangerous, and might be tolerated) but also in things, and
the same most weight: and often times he enforces by vvrithing not the
sentences only, but also the words of the holy vvriters to serve his error. So
John 1. v. 12. he corrupts a most not able place and of greatest moment
touching freevvil etc. And in fevv to speak al (for I should write out whole
treatises and books, if I would show the vile abusing of scripture committed
by that wretch of damnable memory, Before c. 10.
whom our english Protestants cheefely extolle, as by M. VV. we learn) thus
much Castalio notes and shows by manifold examples, Beza then especially
corrupts the text, when he thereby may most dishonor Christ.
that Beza then principally labors in perverting the scripture, when it
appertains most to the benefit and virtue of Christ's passion and our
redemption. Thus he vvriteth upon the 6. chapter to the Romans, and these
words of our latin text, Romans 6. v. 6.
Vt destruatur corpus peccati, in the english translation, That the body of
sin may be destroyed, both agreing exactly with the greek, Castalio vbi sup.
pa. 192.
(...), Beza (says Castalio) turns the Word (...), Eneruetur, may
bevveakened, and reprehendeth the old interpreter, Erasmus, and me, for
translating, may be destroyed. for this honest man, vvil not have sin to be
distroyed by Christ, but only weakened, wherein he does plainly diminish the
benefit bestovved upon us by Christ, Id quod multis aliis in locis eum facere
animaduerti. which thing I find him to do in many other places.

I will not bestow time in disprouing our english bibles, which for the most
part are nothing but corrupt gutters, flowing from these forenamed corrupt and
stinking lakes. English tra^slations set forth in schism, al faulty.
Yet if otherwise any man list to disprove them al and singular, there is
nothing more facile and easy. For whereas in our time since the gospel (as
they call it) began in our country, King Henry's bibles.
we have had three kind of diverse bibles, under king Henry, king Edward,
and the Q. King Edwardes.
Majesty that now is, king Henry's bibles as corrupt, were corrected by king
Edward and the duke of Somersets appointment, as by comparing them is easy to
see and the Protestants I think will not d^^y Eduardus sextuo (says D.
Humfred. de sat inter. li. 3. pa. 523.
Humfrey) procerum consi^is, et suasu episcoporum, biblia emitti curauit
castigatiora et purgatiora, ac legi public et omnibus in templis baberi
mandauit. King Edward by the advice of his noble men, and m^t^on of his
bishops, caused the bibles to be set forth more corrected (then were his
fathers) and more purged of faults, and commanded the same to be read
publ^kly, and to be had in all churches. The bibles set forth in our time.
Next, that the bible set forth by the Queen's authority, correct those of king
Edward, is showed in many places of the Discovery, and requires for proof,
no more but that the reader co^fer one or other epistle of S. Paul, for
examples sake that to the Romans, The year when it was printed, is not put in
the print.
in The new testament of our Savior Jesus Christ, faithfully translated out of
the greek, and perused by the commandment of the Kings M. and his honorable
council and by the^ autorized, and printed^ly R^ch. Judge, with the same
epistle in The new testament of our lord Jesus Christ, translated out of
greek by Theodore Beza, and englished by L.T. and printed by Christofer Barker
the year 1580. Cum gratia et pri^ilegio. and now that al these are very falsely
translated, and the best con^aine wicked, and horrible, and ethnical errors,
this has been showed before at large by manifest demonstration, Before c. 11.
and the confession of our adversaries them selves, and so no ways are they to
be opposed to our bibles.

And what can M.W. now say against us? or whom would he have us to follow?
Perhaps his last counsel is that at least we should our selves fall to
translate, and so according to the original greek, fashion our selves a new
testament, seeing we can like none of theirs. Not possible to put forth any
translation more indifferent then our ancient.
But nether may we thus do. First, because we believe our testament to be truer
then the common greek copies now extant, wherein as he sees we stand, and
that not without reason. Secondarily, because we are persuaded that had we true
originals, we could never make a translation in these partial times, more
sincere, upright, indifferent, and freer from reprehensio^ then is this which
we have already.

Finally and for a conclusion, Note this.
let the Christian reader note this, Few faults are found by any protestants
in our old translation, which, by other Protestants are not iustsied.
that whereas commonly every sect of our adversaries, in words and general
terms finds fault with our translation, few or none of them show any error
or fault in particular, but lightly there is some one of their own brethren
which stands with us in defense of our testament against that reprehender,
which no doubt proceeds of the manifest sincerity which our tra^slator used,
and the invincible force of truth which so breaks forth in despite of her
adversaries. Laurentius Valla first of al carped at out common edition,
Bulling. decad. 5. sermon. 5.
but his rashness is justly reproved by Erasmus, Bullingere, Beza, and sundry
others. Erasmus next fell in to that vein, Bez. in praefatio. noui testamenti
an. 1556.
but how unreasonably let Beza speak. Quam immerito (says he) multis in locis
reprehendit Erasmus ve^erem interpreteni tanquam a graecis dissentientem? How
unjustly in many places does Erasmus reprehend the old interpreter as
dissenting from the greek? Then came Luther for the Lutherans, and Castalio
and some other for the Zuinglians, and every one had some tooth against our
interpreter. But both in particular, Beza does justify those points, which
they accounted erroneous, as may be seen in very many places of his notes,
Supra. Our old translation better then any of the protestants* Beza.
and in general, prefers him before any interpreter that he ever saw.
Vulgatam aedu ionem (says he) maxima ex part amplector, and caeteris omnibus
antepono. The vulgar edition I embrace for the greatest part, and prefer it
before all other whatsoever. There remain only certain faults which Beza
imagines, and which in his notes sometime he reprehendeth, but they for the
greater number, and such as be ought worth, are so well defended by Castalio,
and Carolus Molineus (to let pass our own writers) that if M. W. would gather
in to a heap all the faults which are objected against our testament, and
afterward take away those which are to be taken away by the judgment of Beza,
of Calvin, of Castalio, of Molineus, and such other Protestan^s who have set
forth their own new translations against others of their brethren, I ween the
number remaining would be so small, that it would shame M. W. him self as
obstinate as he seems, to compare with that, any of their English testaments
which soever is most exquisite.

Wherefore to conclude this, as before touching the hebrew, so here touching
the greek, and al other translation, the reader may see a few rea^ons amongst
infinite, The Council of Tre^t.
why the holy Council of Trent having in it multitude of excellent godly and
learned men (with who^ to compare any, or al these divided and scattered
sinagoges of Lutherans, Zuinglians, Anabaptists, or such like, were impiety
and sin before God, and intolerable injury before man) decreed as in the
Canons we read touching the old ancient translation. which decree stands
upon many clear and most evident reasons, whether we compare it with the
hebrew and greek now extant, or with any of these new heretical versio^s, be
it of Luther, of Oecola^padius, of Basile, of Geneua, of Calvin, of Castalio,
of Beza, of Molineus, The later translatio^s of heretics as likewise al other
their procedings, are worse then the former, according to S. Paul's prophecy,
proficie^tes in peius. 2. Timo. c. 3. v. 13.
of the English after King Henry's allowance, or King Edwardes, or that which
the english congregation now best allows, which of al other is the vvorst,
most contaminate, and most draws to Paganism and Atheism, as has been
shevved. And that we esteem more of our old translator then any of these, not
only reason, experience, conscience, divinity and humanity requ^reth us so to
do, not only our duty to the Church of God, our honor to our holy and learned
forefathers, our faith in Christ's promise and assured confidence of the
assistance of his holy Spirit requires the same, but also in this our opinion
we are warranted by the manifest approbation of our most capital enemies, In
approving our old translation, we are warranted by the Protestants the^ selves.
those that have some learning more then the rest, of Luther, of Zuinglius,
Castalio, Beza, Molineus, D. Humfrey and others, vvho^ M. VV. dare not control
(as I suppose) how well soever otherwise he think of him self.

And now may I with more facility answer his second reason, and wherein
for some part I ground the exact perfection of our latin translation, and
affirm, that howsoever some small fault may be found in it, absolutely it has
no error, either touching doctrine or touching manners. For why should I not so
gather, when as I see the adversary being so eager, yet with all his search and
study finds one only fault in it. which I will set down in his own words,
because I will not diminish the force of his argument. Pa. 17.18. M. W argument
against the old translation.
Very absurdly have you done (says he) when in translating the testament in
to English, you had rather fol^vv the latin translation then the greek
original, and that so obstinatly that although all the greek examples read
otherwise then is in your vulgar editio^, yet you prefer that before them al.
I vvil give you one example. In 1. Cor. 15. v. 54. Paul says, (...). This
parcel in your translation is omitted. for what reason? because it is not in
the latin vulgar edition as they call it. But it is in the greek exemplars, and
in the most ancient edition Siriake. and what if Hierom read it not? yet
Chrysostom and Ambrose him self read it, which men whereas they lived with
Hierom, hereof it follows assuredly, either that Hiero^ dealt not faithfully
here, or that his version was corrupted afterward. unto which thus I
answer. The answer.


1. Cor. 15. v. 53.54.
This corruptible must do on incorruption, and this mortal, immortality. And
when this (corruptible has done on incorruption, and this) mortal has done
on immortality. where thou see the words which I have put down enclosed
within the parenthesis to be contained most expressly in the sentence going
before, which is in all our testaments, so that there is no harm or danger
either to faith, doctrine, or manners, if it be omitted.

Beza in Luc. ca. 20. v. 28.
Luke he thus writes (...). Omnia quae vidi exemplaria ita scriptum habent. All the greek examples which I have seen, Beza praeferreth our latin translation
before al greek examples.
read so. But the old interpreter reads otherwise, et rectius vt opinor,
and better as I suppose. Again in the same gospel. (...). Haec verba deerant
in omnibus vetustis cod^cibus, Ibi. c. 7. v. 31
quae tamen prorsus videntur requiri. These words vvanted in all the old
(greek) books, which for all that seem necessary. Testament of the year
1577, 1579. and 1580. and the Scottish great bible of the year 1579.
And therefore he supplieth his text with them out of our translation, and so
do the english translators, who seldom depart from him but like good scholars
turn in to english, his latin.

going before? and that it was not corrupted since, appears by the common
reading of most men in all later ages. And how unlearnedly argues he against S.
Hierom from the authority of S. Ambrose and S. Chrysos^o^ reading otherwise?
Must therefore S. Hierom be unfaithful, or the Church after him, because S.
Chrysostom or S. Ambrose have those few words more then he? why may he not
far more reasonably, more like a logician and like an honest man to invent an
other part and make a better division, that either S. Hierom dealt not
faithfully, or else his greek copies had not that piece repeated, which I
think to be most true and certain.

S. Hieroms translatio^s more aute^tical then the reading of many doc^ora.
Hierom? whereas by common intendement and probability, S. Hierom framing a
public translation for the Church by supreme authority, had more variety of
copies and examined the same more narrowly, then does ordinarily any other,
who expounds the scripture, either by way of homelies to the people, as does
S. Chrysostom, or by way of commentary, as does S. Ambrose. And truly
writes Beza, that whosoever by such authority of one or other father, would
go about to alter the ordinary translation, except he use an other manner of
judgment, wisdom, and diligence, then we see used by our adversaries, he will
rather corrupt the scripture then correct it. And his reason is very good and
pregnant. Beza in praefat. nou^ testamen. an. 1565.
Neque enim (says he) scriptores illos seu graecos seu latinos, existimandum
est quoties locum aliquem citarint, toties vel libros inspexisse vel singula
verba numerasse. For it is not to be supposed, that those vvriters either greek
or latin, when they had to cite a place, alvvaies either vevved the book, or
numbered the words. For this had been a matter of infinite labor and not
necessary etc. To which infinite labor notwithstanding, and vewing the book,
and numbering the words S. Hier. in his translation was of necessity bound, as
was nether S. Amb^n or S. Chrisost.

And yet S. Chrysostom makes little for you, if you compare well his own
discourse and text together. Nay he makes clean against you and approves our
reading. For though he have those words in the second place yet he has them
not in the first, and repeateth them not, S. Chrysostom justifies our latin reading.
but only once reads them in his text according to our latin. And thereunto
agrees his comme^tarie, and therefore qu^te overthrows ^l that you would
build upon his credit. Thus they stand in him. For this corruptible must do
on incorruption. Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. ho. 15
And when this corruptible shall do on incorruptio^ and this mortal
immortality, the^ shall be fulfilled etc. And whereas you add that S. Ambrose
reads as you do, S. Ambrose untruly cited.
you must pardon me, if I believe mine own eyes better then your report.
Cert^inely S. Ambros. in 1. Cor. 15.
Ambrose in his commentary upon that place reads as we do. So reads S.
Austin de ciuitate Dei, cited by S. Beda in 1. Cor. ca 15.
Bid in his commentary upon the same chapter, though S. Austin read also as
M. VV. would have it according to the greek. And with S. Bid, and after S.
Bid so read the rest of the Catholic interpreters and doctors, Haymo,
Anselmus etc.

by M. W. are in the ancient greek example whereof the church has due
regard, the same particle is added commonly in the margent of every latin
testament which the Church uses, as may be seen in diverse prints of Paris,
Louane, and other catholic Universities. And if there be any fault in our
english translation, it is this, that this parcel was not added in the marge^t,
as it was in the latin which we followed.

Wherefore this proves no corruption but rather great fidelity in our latin
testament, that it agrees with S. Hierom, and consequently the greek examples
which he interpreted, with S. Ambrose, S. Austin, S. Bid, Haymo, S. Anselmus,
and the rest of the latin writers, which in a matter not doubtful, and
otherwise in no respect prejudicial to any verity of Christian profession, are
of that authority that Beza him self in this case would not disallow our
doing. and M.VV. him self also in justifying his english translations for pure
and perfect, does consequently approve and justify ours, and so an^wereth ^im
self in this objection. for the later clause before noted (...) (...), and the
lord said, they have added to their english testaments after Beza upon the only
authorite of our latin against all the ancient greek, (albeit now it is thrust
in to the common greek prints of Geneua, Basile and Zuricke) and therefore he
should not be offended if we attribute so much to our testament who profess to
honor it, seeing he and his fellows do as much, who profess a perpetual hatred
against it.

And this I trust may suffice for these few words, to quitte our testament of
any fault, considering that first they concern not any controversy: the^,
that the sense of it is in word and deed fully and evidently comprised in the
same place. again if we preferred our latin before al greek, we do no more
then does Beza, then does M.W. then do all the English and Scottish
congregations in their own pure and immaculate bibles. Last of al, our reading
is confirmed not only by all the later ages of the church, these seven or eight
hundred years, as by S. Anselmus, Haimo, S. Bid and others, nether only by the
more ancient latin fathers, S. Austin, S. Ambrose, S. Hierom, but also it was
according to the greek copies which S. Hiero^ had and the same agreing in
substance with S. Chrysostom and no doubt many other, and therf^re has
sufficient ground to defend it self: although we confess the other reading to
be used of many fath^rs, which we therefore mislike not, and yet rash^y
presume not to thrust it in to our text. And this is the only fault and yet all the faults which M.VV. finds in our latin testament.

The rest, he supplieth with a lusty brag, that there are at the least,
page 18.
Six hundred other, wherein against the faith of all the greeks and their
perpetual consent, the errors of the latin tra^slatio^ are retained of us. Of
which reckning, I dare at first without any farther stay, strike out five
hundred and yet the su^me which remains is sufficient to convince him of a
maine lie. But for a farther refutation, page 20. Benedictus Ar^as Montanus a
Catholic priest.
he turns us over to Benedictus Arias Montanus a good priest, one that
serves in the Catholic Kings court, and submits al his labors to the
judgment and censure of the University of Lo^ane, and therefore very unlike it
is that either he vvil bestovv so vnfruitefully his labors, as to write
against the Sacred Tride^tine Counsel, or that that University vvil approve
his endeavors if he should so heretically employ the^. and whatsoever shall
become of him hereafter, in his hebrew bibles already set forth, we see that
in the places before noted, he alters not the latin according to the hebrew,
but lets it stand as autentical. What speak I of him a catholic man and a
priest, whereas your selves though otherwise most obstinate and stony hearted
against the truth, yet dare not alter it according to the hebrew, but leave it
as you found it in our bibles.

And therefore why you call us, (...), Bible-beaters.
bible-beaters, I wonder, and muse what brainsicke conceit you have therein,
or what reason moves you thus to rail. Because we defend the sincerity of
our bibles against your peevish, and unlearned, and fantastical, and
contemptible talking (for what one tolerable argument bring you?) because we
defend the inheritance left us by our forefathers, because we prefer the Church
and Spouse of Christ before the sinagoge of the Jews, because at their wicked
appointment we vvil not raze out so many places touching our Saviors honor
and the truth of our religion, is this the cause why your wisdom terms us
Bible-beaters? Nay let the reader consider, and the world judge, Never since
Christ's time were there such manglers and defacers and corrupters of the bible
as are the protesta^tes of our age.
whether since Christ's time or before Christ's time, there were ever any beaters
and circumciders, and gelders, and manglers, and defacers, and corrupters of
those holy books comparable to you and your sect. Who have rent out of the
bible so many parts which our ancient fathers delivered us, and we hold fast
as sacred and canonical. Who have rejected out of the old testament so many
entier books as I have noted in the beginning, the prophecy of Baruch, the
story of Judith, of Tobias, of Hester, of the Machabees and Ecclesiasticus:
who in the new testament have cut out S. Paul's epistle to the hebrews, S.
James, one of S. Peter's, two of S. John's, S. Jude and the Apocalips, and the
whole gospel of S. Luke. who in those other which you pretend to keep, have
lopt of great pieces, so many as pleased your arrogant and heretical spirit,
pieces of S. John's gospel, pieces of the prophet Jeremy, pieces of the
prophet Daniel, pieces of the book of Cronicles or Paralipomeno^, See example
before page 288
besides many lesser parcels, pared away both in the epistles and gospels, and
all the rest by your tra^slations miserably corrupted. Who by the same reason
and authority by which you judge and condemn these books, give like
authority and liberty to every fantastical minister to contemn and
condemn the rest. The protestants lay the way open for any man to deny the
scripture at his pleasure
For think you a lying reason may not be found against the gospel of S. John,
as well as against the gospel of S. Luke? Or may not a man pretend as good
arguments of humane spirit to be in the second epistle to the Corinthians, or
to Philemon, as in that of S. James, or to the hebrews? Or may M. William
Charke oppose him self against the universal Church of Christ by the mouth of
those most holy and Apostolical fathers gathered together in the great Counsel
of Nice, Hier. prefat. in Judith.
M. Charke has a deeper insight in scripture, then all the bishops and fathers
of the great Nicene Council.
acknowledging for Canonical the book of Judith, and may not any other
minister of like quality and learning do so by like example? Because the book
of Tobie makes expressly for the patronage of angels, may you say
disdainfully, We pass not for that Raphael mentioned in Tobie, Whit. co^tra
Camp. pa. 17
nether acknovvledge we those seven angels whereof he makes mention. All that
differs much from Canonical scriptures which is reported of that Raphael, and
sauoureth of I know not what superstition. Light reasons to disauthorize
received parts of scripture.
Nether vvil I believe free vvil although the book of Ecclesiasticus affirm
it a hundred times etc. and may not a Lutheran, an Anabaptist, a Suinkseldian
say the like with as good countenance against other parts of scripture, which
stand as plainly against their conceived heresies? Is Beza to be allowed,
Before page 364.
pronouncing peremptorily touching the story of the aduouterous woman in the
8. of S. John, upon the diversity which is in the greek writers and
testaments, that so great difference he found in that narration, that he
doubts altogether of the whole story, which is as much as to take from it
utterly al authority Canonical, and is not every man else to be allowed, upon
like vvarrant giving like censure upon other parts of scriptures? Read S. S.
Hier. ad Edibiam quaest. 3.
Hierom vvriting to Edibia, and see whether a part of S. Marks gospel may not
by like reason be called in question: yea read Bezaes notes upon the sixth
chapter, Beza in Ioa^ ca. 6.18. and 19 and Luc. 22.
the 18. and 19. of S. John, and 22. of S. Luke and see whether that divine
sermon of our Savior and his very passion by such argument ought not so to be
cut out of the testament. The like is to be said of very many places of S.
Matthew and S. Paul's epistles. Then judge thou Christian reader whether these
me^ be not, (...), bible-beaters, or rather in deed, bible murderers. For the
first presupposes the having of a bible, whereas they have none. For that
which they call their bible and word of God, The protestates bible is no more a
bible, then a headles man is a man.
is in deed no word of God, no bible at al. For how can a man call that the
bible and word of God, which has in it so many foul and filthy corruptions,
so many wicked, Ethnical, and Iudaical errors, as I before have noted in their
bible by confession^ of their own brethren. Is that the bible of God, which
has in it so many places maliciously perverted against the eternal truth and
testament of God? Can we call him a man whom we see to lack head, hand,
foot, heart, and other principal and essential parts of humane nature? and
how then is that a bible that lacks (for canonical) the writings of so
many Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists S. Luke, S. Paul, S. James, S.
Peter, S. John, S. Jude some of which no bible ever vvanted since Christ's time,
nor can want, remaining a bible. The rest were ever true scriptures, though
not ever in all places so accounted, as nether was the Godhead of our Savior,
the dignity and office of his Apostles, of al and always at first
acknowledged. But al have been so accounted for these thousand years and more,
by general and prouincial councels, the great and Apostolic council of Nice,
of Laodicea, of Carthage, by the supreme pastors of Christ's church, by the
general consent of the same Catholic Church in most times and ages. These me^
therefore (good reader) following the steps of their old fathers Marcion,
Cerdon, Carpocrates, the Arrians and Manichees, despising and rejecting so many
books of sctipture, are in deed not beaters, but ma^glers and defacers, and
extreme murderers of the bible. And that not only for this plain and evident
reason now given, but also for their profane and irreligious variety of
translations, whereof now in the last part I have to speak.

CHAP. XIIII. That to leave the ordinary translation of the Bible appointed by
the Church, and to appeal to the hebrew, greek, and such new diverse
translations as the protestants have made, is the very way to Atheism and
Infidelity.
IN this later part this have I to show, that whosoever takes to him self
that liberty which the heretics give, and here M.W. most busily strives for,
that is, to refuse the latin, and appeal to the greek and hebrew, and these
new translations, which (as they bear us in hand) are framed according to the
greek and hebrew, he takes the high way to denial of al faith, to Apostasy
from Christ, and plain Atheism. This to do, the fittest way were historically
to declare, how certain known Sects of the Protestants, principally upon this
very reason of pretending the greek and hebrew verity, and therefore running
to infinite variety of diverse translations, and resting in no one, have fallen
to despise al Bibles, and Scriptures, and concluded as a most assured
Euangelical verity, that nothing is certain, but every man is to be left to
his own fancy, to believe as he list. Such is the sect of the Swinkfeldians,
Anabaptists, and Academikes, and it is the very drifte of Castalio (so much
commended of many) in the preface of his Bible to King Edward the sixte:
although he beat pretily upon an other point much of like effect, vz, that the
Messiah promised in the law, is not yet come, Castalio in praefat. ad Edouardum
sextum Angliae regem.
but vvil come hereafter according to the Jews expectation. Thus vvriteth he.
Profecto si verum fateri volumus, est adhuc nostrum soeculum in profundis
ignorantiae tenebris demersum: A true confession of a principal protestant.
cuius rei certissimu^ testimonium sunt, tam graves, tam pertinaces, ta^
perniciosae dissensiones, tam multi et irriti co^uentus de hisce controuersiis
etc. The protestate church drowned in gross ignorance.

A sure proof thereof.


Truly if we vvil confess the truth, this our age is as yet drowned in
extreme darkness and ignorance: a most assured proof whereof, are these so
grievous, so obstinate and so pernicious dissensions, so many, and the same so
unprofitable meetinges about these controversies, so great number of books
every day set out, and the same differing one from an other so far, as heaven
differs from earth. And prosecuting this his plain and irrefutable argument,
whereby he proves the Protestants notvvithstanding al their latin, greek,
and hebrew, to be most ignorant in true divinity and matters spiritual, thus
he adds. For if the spirit of God be one, The protestants void of the
spirit of God and al truth
and truth one, it must of necessity follow, in vvho^ that one spirit and one
truth is, that they also be one among the^ selves, and of one judgment in
matters spiritual. And if the day of the most clear truth (of the gospel)
shined unto us, we would never lighten so many darkesome and obscure candles
of books and writings. Their light of the gospel, is the night of the gospel.
The which reason concluding this euangelical state and age to be full of
ignorance, gross and gross again, Crassa, crassa (inqua^) saecu^um tenet
ignorantia, The end of their religion is Atheism, eeuery man to believe what
he lists.
and that there is no certain way to find out the truth and come to an end of
these controversies, hereof he infers, that every man is to be leaft to his
own judgment, and suffered to believe as he list. Thus he speaks, Vbi supra
addressing his words to the king. Cum haec it a sint, o rex, et cum aetas
nostra in tanta adhuc ignorantiae caligine caecutiat etc. Mark this plain
confession approved by so manifest reason, against their common vaunting of the
clear light of the gospel.

Scripture applied to prove Atheism.


Whereas these things are so, O king, and whereas our age as yet is blinded
in so great darkness of ignorance, I think we ought to use marvelous
diligence, lest by error we offend. And if there be any controversies in the
case of religion, (as there are very many) in these I think it good that we
follow the example of Judas Machabeus and his fellows, who when they knevv
not what to determine touching the altar of the perfect sacrifice, they laid
the stones thereof in the mount of the temple in a convenient place, 1. Match. 4.
until there came some Prophet, who should declare Gods oracle, what was to
be done with them: or rather the example of Moses, Number. 15.
unto whom notvvithstanding God had in precise words given commandment,
that if any man of purpose brake the law, he should suffer death therefore,
yet the man who gathered vvood upon the sabbath day, he would not put to
death, until he had particularly received answer from God so to do. And after
many other places of scripture brought for this purpose, as Act. 5. v. Act. 5.
Romans 14. Mat. 7.
38. et 39. Romans 14. v. 1. et 4. Mat. 7. v. 1.2. thus he concludes. Expectemus
iusti iudicis sententiam etc. Let us attend the sentence of the just judge, and
employ our diligence not to condeme other men, but to prouide^ that our selves
do nothing why we should be condemned. Let us obey the just judge, and suffer
the cockle until the time of harvest, lest while we vvil seem to be vviser
then our master, perhaps we pluck up the good corn. For the later end of
the world is not come as yet, nether are we angels, unto whom that office is
committed. Unto this Atheism and indifferent approbation of al manner faiths
and religions very many learned and smooth Prootestants are already grown. and
whether those Atheists whereof M. D. Whitg. defen. tract. 3. c. 6. pa. 178
D. Whitgift says the english congregation is full, appertain to this order,
yea or no, the^ selves best know. But it not possible that this daily and
infinite multiplcation of contentions, sects and schisms, new and diverse
translations of testaments and bibles, should have any other end. The
protestants manner of preaching, the right way to Atheism
For (to speak the truth, and pass over all the rest) what certainetie of
faith or religion can a man have, when as he is taught to neglect at his
pleasure, al antiquity, al ages past, al Synodes and Councels of fathers and
doctors old and new, See the preface.
and suspend his religion upon the only testament translated after the new
guyse, (and interpreted after every man's particular new fancy) where he
finds far more variety, then there are colors in the raynebovv. And if M.
Whitaker speaking so much of his pure greek and hebrew originals, or latin
or english translations, should be required to answer directly, which
greek, which hebrew he understands, especially which translation latin,
english, Scottish, French, or Dutch, he means, when he so magnifieth them
against our vulgar testament, I ween it would put him to more trouble then he
is aware of.

But to disadvantage my self of this manner of discourse, and keep my self more
precisely to the argument which I have begone, I say, that to give liberty of
appealing from one certain latin text appointed by the general Counsel, to
diverse greek, hebrew, latin, and vulgar, as the heretics do, is the very
introductio^ to apostasy for this reason: Impossible to do good with any kind
of heretic, so long as he may have liberty to flee to diverse translations and
interpretations.
because puttinge the case of religion to stand in those terms, to which now
the heretics have brought it, it cutteth away al persvvasion, al ground, al
proof of Christian faith. For how can you deal with any heretic to bring
him to the way of salvation? To be so short as I may, and in one example to
give the reader occasion to recall to memory hundreds, which he may easily do,
suppose I had to deal with one of the sect famous and well known in
Germany, by the name of Antinomi, Enemies of the law. Antinomi a sect of
protestants.
I rather name them of Germany then of England, although England has store of
them, because M.W. shall consider of it more quietly. They being in other things
common Protestants, believing that man in matters of life eternal has not free
vvil, that he works not his own salvation, and that good works are of no
value in that respect, join unto that common opinion this one consequent. Ipsi
statuunt (says Sleydan of them) quaecunque tandem fit hominis vita, Sleid. li.
12. anno. 1538. fol. 199.
and quantumuis impura, iustificari tamen eum, si modo promissionibus eua^gelii
credit. The true conclusion of only faith justifying.
This they put as a sure principle, that howsoever a man live, live he never
so filthely, yet he is justified, if he believe the promises of the gospel. And
this is the very conclusion of the Protestants common and general doctrine of
justification by only faith. Suppose now I have to draw such a one from his
wicked opinion, The protestants manner of a^swering the Catholics.
and would move him to be either sincere in faith, or honest in life, what
way could I take with him.

Al fathers and Councels contemned
Bernard, S. Gregory, S. Austin, S. Hierom, and ancient synods of learned
bishops: the sum of whose teaching is comprised briefly in these words of
the late Council of Trent. Council. Trident. sess. 6. cap. 9.
If any say that the wicked man is justified by only faith, understanding it
so, that no other thing is required that should cooperate for obtaining the
grace of justification etc. Anathema be he. But this is nothing, for against a
thousand Austins, and a thousand Cyprians, and as many general Councels
consisting of men, See before chap. 3. and in the praeface
such a Protestant is many ways armed by M. W. and his brethren. And therefore
this will not serve.

S. James refused.
and Churches, even to the Apostolical age, and scriptures them selves. there
we prove that men must cooperate and do good works by the authority of S.
James. But S. Before c. 1.
James is flat against S. Paul, he abuses scripture, he disputes
ridiculously, he sauoreth nothing of an Apostolical spirit, he quite
overthrows that which S. Pau. had well built and therefore he is no more worth
then S. Austin, and so not to be objected.

say Beza and Calvin, Calvin and Beza in co^mentar. ad Hebr. in argumento, and
ca. 2. v. 3.
touching the denial of the author, and touching the whole epistle thus say
others. Sed quu^ his rationibus quibus vtitur author epistolae Iacobi, et
epistolae ad Hebraeos, neque vtatur Christus, Cent. 1. li. 2. c. 4. col. 328.
neque caeteri apostoli, et hae epistolae apocryphae sunt, vt suo loco dictum
est, pro stipulis iure ista habe^tur. But where as nether Christ, nor any of
his apostles, use such reasons, S. Paul's epistle to the hebrews rejected.
as does the author of James his epistle, and the author of the epistle to the
hebrews, and again, whereas these epistles be forged and apocryphal as has
been said in place convenient, these reasons are not to be esteemed vvorth a
straw, Jew. defense of the Apolog. par. 4. c. 19.20. 1.
says Illyricus (with his colleages) one of the best learned men of this age,
by M. Jewels verdicte.

S. 2. Pet. 1. v. 10
Peter. VVherefor^ brethren labor the more, S. Peter's second epistle may be
denied.
that by good work you may make sure your vocation and electi^ But this is
more easily avoided the any of the rest. For first it standet^ upon courtesy
whether this epistle sha^ be autorized or no. for being doubted of in the
primitive Church by some, we may doubt of it now. The fourth days
conference, see before cha. 2.
This is a case ruled in the Tower disputatio^s. Again, admitting the epistle
for canonical, the place avails nothing. A place of S. Peter refused, ^^cause
it wa^teth in many greek pri^^es.
For notwithstanding it be in all latin copies that ever were, and many
greek, and therefore put in the first translation of the Protestants, as
namely, that which was appointed to be read in the english church the year
1561, and Luther otherwise an immortal enemy to good works, in his
commentary says expressly, Petrus hortatur, Luth tom. 5. in 2 Pet. ca. 1.
fol. 487.
vt vocationem et electionem nostram bonis operibus certam et stabilem
reddamus, Peter exhorts, that we make our vocation and election stable,
Testament^ of the years 1577.1570.1580. and the Scottish bible.
firm, and assured, by good works, yet because those words want in the
later greek prints, and therefore are not put in Beza his translation, and
therefore are left out in the later english versions, this text is not
scripture, and so the argument taken thence is nothing vvorth. This answer
gives Vergerius in his dialoges against that great learned man Cardinal
Hosius. Vergerius dialog. 1. de Ofio. ^0.27.
Hosius obiecteth unto me that Peter says etc. Possum respondere illa tria
verba, nempe (per bona opera) non reperiri in font graeco: I may answer him,
that those three words (by good works) are not found in the greek fountain.

pregnant is the place in the first epistle of the same Apostle S. Peter,
where he exhorts Christians to live as be comes men of so excellent a
vocation, Castificantes animas suas in obedientia charitatis, 1. Pet. ca. 1. v.
22.
Purifying their souls by obedience of charity, Ibid. v. 17.
remembering alvvaies that God without acception of persons judges every man
according to his works. And this place at lest conuinceth the adversary,
first, that we have free vvil vvorking with the grace of God: then that we
purify and cleanse our selves from sin: thirdly, that good works are
necessarily required of Christian men. For by many divine arguments S. Peter
urges this conclusion, Vt animas nostras castificemus, That we purify our
own souls. And against this epistle there is no exception, as being never
doubted of, and therefore by the Protestants is not refused. And al greek
copies have this text most clearly, (...) and so translateth that man of god
Luther. Castificantes animas vestras per obedientiam charitatis. Luther tom. 5.
in 1. Petri ca. 1. fo. 451. Illyricus. T^gurine translation.
and Illyricus, Qui animas vestras purificastis, and the Tigurine translator
has the same words, and according to this was translated the testament in
King Edward his time. For as much as you have purified your souls. and the
first of the Queen's reign. Year 1561.
That ye might have faith and hope toward God, eue^ ye which have purified
your souls. So as this place stands strong for proof of our faith and those
several points which now I noted. S. Peter notably corrupted in the later
protestants translations against freewil and good works.
But (says my Protestant) howsoever Luther or the Divines in king Edwardes
time or in other times and places read, it should appear that either some
greek copies have otherwise, or at least our masters deliver otherwise unto
us. For Theodorus Beza translateth it in this manner. Testament of the year
1556, and 1565
Animabusvestris purificatis obediendo veritati per spiritum. which the later
bible printed by C. Barker, printer to the Q. year 1579.
majesty, and translated according to the hebrew and greek, re^dereth in
these words, Seeing your souls are purified in obeying the truth thorough the
spirit, and so translateth the english bible printed at Geneua, year 1561. year
1579.
and so does the Scottish printed at Ede^borough: so that these words make
nothing at al either for free will, or cooperation, or value of good works. S.
Peter's words clean inuerted.
Nay rather they make much for the contrary side against free will and our
working with Gods grace, and prove that in our justification we work not, but
active are wrought, we cleanse not our selves, but are cleansed, we are not
active and doers, Cone. Trid. sess. 6. ca. 4.
but passive and sufferers: which is the very opinion of Luther and the
Protestants, and for such condemned in the Tridentine Counsel.

Wherefore leaving this, and wishing the reader to remember by this example
amongst many, how madly and furiously our adversaries are bent to coin us a
new testament of their own, who translate thus, having no greek or latin
copy in the world favoring them, but even in the very same place, when they
give us this latin, yet there leave they the greek as they find it agreeable
to our latin, ^hisi. 1. v. 28
Sophistical quarelling.
though they persecute never so terribly, Which to them is cause of perdition,
but to you of salvation. where he makes good works necessary, and so the
causes of salvation, Beza annot in illum locum. (...).
as sins are the cause of damnation. But Beza replieth, that the old
interpreter was ouerseene translating so, Quu^ nusquam fideliu^ afflictio
dicatur salutis eorum causa, sed testimonium, Testament of the years. 1577.
1579. 1580.
Because the affliction of the faithful is never called the cause of their
salvation, but the testimony, and therefore he translateth it, Inditium, and
the english translators his scholars, a token: although the first testament
before noted, translate it as we do, a cause, and so does Erasmus, 1561. ^ood
works the cause of our salvation
and so does the Tigurine tra^slator. And the Apostle matching sins with good
works, these leading to heaven, as the other do to hell, conuinceth the sense
to be so. and Theodoretus a greek father gathers so much of that word.
Theod. in Philip. ca. 1.
Id enim illis exitium, vob is autem salutem conciliat, says he, That
procures to the^ destruction, but to you salvation. And to pass over S.
Primasius, S. Hier. S. Aust. and the other latin fathers, how false the reason
of Beza is which moved him to alter the text, has been showed else where
sufficiently.

And our Savior shows best of al other, Before ca. 5. pa. 98 and in
sequentib.
when he thus speaks of Marie Magdalen, Remittuntur ei peccata multa, quoniam
dilexit multum. Luc. 7. v. 47.
Many sins are forgeuen her, because she has loved much. Against which no
man living can cauil by greek, hebrew, or latin, but that works of charity
are a cause why sins are forgeuen, and so a cause of our justification and
salvation, for so says and means our Savior most evidently, and the latin
and greek, word for word agrees with this english, and in hebrew the
Evangelist never wrote. Remissa sunt peccata eius multa. Beza transl. anno
1565. (...) quonia^. because. The years 1579. 1580.
Nam dilexit multum. That is according to our english translation, Many sins
are forgeuen her* for she loved much. And what difference is there between
these two translations? howsoever it seem to thee (Christian reader) the
difference is as great, as is between our doctrine and theirs. And first they
make a wilful fault and corrupt the text, by making a fuller point, then either
the greek or latin bears. And Beza does somewhat more desperately, who
makes a down and full point, thereby more dividing and distracting the later
parcel from the former, as though it contained not a reason of that which went
before, as it does, but were some new matter: wherein he is controled of foul
dealing, by his own translation set out the year 1556, and by the very greek
prints of 1553.
Geneua, 1547.
Zurick, 1536. 1540 1543.
Basile and other Germane cities, who point it as does our latin and english.
But the reason of his and their turning Quonia^, in to, Nam, Because, in to
For, (...).
descrieth yet more their obdurate hearts against Christ and his word. For
where as Christ by S. Lukes report says in effect thus, because she loved
much therefore many sins are forgiven her, they by this peruersion and
mispointing make a clean different and almost contrary sense thus: because
she had many sins forgeuen her, Christ's words clean inuerted.
therefore she loves much, and this love following was a token of the remission
which she by only faith had obtained before: so turning the cause in to the
effect, the antecedent into the consequent, and hereby utterly spilling the
doctrine which Christ by his words and reason gives, and the Church of his
words and reason gathers. That this is the true ground and reason, why they
so Luciferlike alter the speech of Christ, Beza plainly confesses. Thus he
writes. Nam dilexit. (...). For she loved. The vulgar translation and Erasmus
turn it, Because she loved, Beza in Luc. 7. verse. 47.
but I had rather interpret it as I do, that men may best understand in these
words to be shevved not the cause of remission of sins, but rather that
which ensued after such remission, and that by the consequent is gathered the
antecedent. And therefore they which abuse this place to overthrow free
Justification by only faith, are very impudent and childish. wherein he
speaks very truly, Intolerable pride and malice in abusing the scripture, to
help only only faith.
the words and sense being so as he has framed them. But if he had not played
the part rather of a devil then of an heretic, to alter in pointing, word and
sense, the speech of our Savior, and so taught him his lesson what he should
say, it had not been impudency for us thus to argue, but it had been more then
brutish ignorance in him to have denied that charity is required as well for
obtaining remission of sins as is faith: which both in this place our Savior
most divinely conioyneth, saying of charity, Many sins are forgeuen her, The
sense of Christ's words according to the ancient fathers.
because she has loved much, and adding straight way, Thy faith has made thee
safe, go in peace.

And so of this text gathered all the ancient fathers, who were for all that
nether impudent nor childish. So S. Chrysostom. Chrysostom. hom. 6. in Mat. Sins
purged by works of penance and claritie,
As first by water and the spirit, so afterward by tears and confession we
are made clean. And he proves it by this place. So S. Gregory expounding the
same place. Many sins are forgeuen her, Greg. hom. 33. in Eua^g.
because she loved much. as if it had been said expressly, He burns out
perfectly the rust of sin, whosoever burns vehemently with the fire of
love. For so much more is the rust of sin scoured away, by how much more the
heart of a sinner is inflammed with the great fire of charity. And S. Ambrose
upon the same words. Ambros. in Luc. lib. 6. c. 7. de mulicre peccatrice.
Good are tears which are able to vvash away our sins. Good are tears, In
quibus no^ solu^ redemptio peccatorum, sed etiam refectio est iustorum,
wherein is not only the redemption of sinners, but also the refreshing of just
men. And S. Austin debating this story in a long homely says. Aug. hom. 23.
inter 50.
This sinful woman the more she ovved the more she loved, the forgeuer of her
debtes our lord him self affirming so, Many sins are forgeuen her, because
she loved much. And why loved she much, but because she ovved much? Quare
fecit illa omnia, nisi vt dimitterentur sibi peccata? Why did she al those
offices (of vveping washing etc.) but to obtain remission of her sins? I
omit other fathers, al agreing in the self same verity, al making her love
to be a cause going before, nor only an effect or sequel coming after the
remission of sins. And this was the gathering of the ancient fathers, S.
Chrysostom, S. Gregory, S. Ambrose, and S. Austin etc. who were ever
reverenced for holy and learned fathers by the children of Christ's Catholic
Church, until this Chams brood and profane generation invaded their rooms,
who now condemn them for impudent and childish.

But let me with thy leave and patience (Christian reader) prosecute in one
word more, their wonderful tossing and turning and inuerting this short
sentence of our Savior. And in this one allegation which I will now produce,
thou shall see the very image of Atheism, of contempt of God and man, of
impossibility to do any good by scriptures, so long as this license of
framing new translations is allowed. Thou see what stir Beza has kept, and
to serve his turn, what foul and detestable corruption he has used. But to
make up the matter, and reconcile Christ's words a little better to this new
solifidian gospel, An example of singular and notorious wrangling.
comes in Wolfgangus Musculus, with a deeper fetch after this manner. First
because S. Lukes words be very plain, and he can not so probably wrangle upon
the^ in greek, he in his own fancy imagines what Christ either did or should
have spoken in hebrew. Good grou^des to expound and correct scripture upon.
Next, that fancy he puts to be true. and forthwith according to the same
he corrects S. Luke, and so concludes that al matcheth right with their
Lucianical only faith. For now by this time, with his good help not one word
in effect stands as Christ spoke it, at least by S. Lukes report. Thus he
discourses. Musculus in locis co^munibus ca. de Iustificat. number. 5.
Ecce (inquiunt) manifesto datur dilectioni remissio peccatorum. Ergo non sola
fides iustificat etc. Behold (say the Papists) remission of sins is
attributed to love. ergo faith alone justifies not. but we answer, that
love in this woman, was not the cause of remission of sins, but a token and
declaration thereof. Remission of her sins she obtained by faith in Christ.
Luc. 7. v. 47.
Therefore whereas Christ says (...), The word (...) (as witnesses
Suidas) is a Dorical word, and signifies not in the imperative, Remittantur,
Remitted be they, but in the preterperfect tense, Remissa su^t, Have been
remitted. Next the particle (...), signifies here, not the cause, but the
probatio^ of that which is put before. Thirdly, the word (...) has loved,
Yet S. Luke took it otherwise. dilexit.
is an hebrew phrase by which the preterperfecttense is put for the present.
For the hebrews speak thus, (...) that is, because she has loved much, in
steed of, because she does love much. And plain it is, that Christ spoke not
greek or latin, but hebrew. Therefore whereas Christ said, Many sins have
been forgeuen her, he proves it by that which follows, because she loves
much. as if he had said, That she loves me much it is no marvel, she has good
occasion so to do. For many sins have been forgeuen her. So we say that he
has obtained that which he desired, because he is merry and laugheth: he is
very hu^grie, because he eats much etc. I will not bestow time in examining
this answer* who told him that Christ used the preterperfecttense for the
present, whereas S. Luke so flatly affirms the contrary, or that S. Luke in
this phrase, so stra^gely affected the Dorical language, with the rest of his
bold assertion, but wanting al reason of reasonable conjecture to support them.
this only I wish thee to consider, Note the wonderful tearing and renting of
this short sentence.
whether thou did ever see a little sentence so racked, and torn, as this is.

For co^paring this sentence as it is now fashioned by them, with the same
sentence, as it was first pronounced by our Savior, not one word of any moment
remains in such sort as Christ uttered them. Christ said, Many sins are
forgeuen her, because she has loved much: now with their correction thus it
is. Many sins have been forgeuen her. For she loves much. No spirit but the
spirit of Satan could teach the protestants this desperate manner of
interpretation.
Luke wrote, what sense the Apostolical Church gave, and the holy Ghost in the
same has always continued, what the very letter of the greek requires as
now it stands: but how it may possibly be wrested, if a man will follow the
spirit of contention, if he will fetch the pointing of the sentence from
Geneua, the meaning of one word from Dorica in one corner of the world, of an
other from Jerusalem, of a third from Swytzerla^d, and the entier sum of al,
from the deep pit of hell. For except the devil him self stood by the^, and
suggested to them such construction, I think the nature of man having some
regard of honesty, of learning, of modesty, of Christ and his Eua^gelists,
could never break forth into so much monstrous absurdity.

Of al which this I conclude, that allowing men this liberty unto which now by
this libertine-gospel they are driven, I say, there is no possibility, to
contain men in faith, or to reduce men to faith, or to prove any parcel of
Christian faith. Protestant shifts to avoid scripture when it is plain
against the^.
words want, which is easy to find, heretics of diverse sects having now
the printing of most greek testame^ts, and every one being content to favor
his proper gospel and heresy:

As in this very place whereof I speak, Zuinglius following nether the words
of the Evangelist, nor sense of the Church, nor Co^mentarie of the ancient
fathers, nor invention of Beza, nor any of those manyfold shifts of Musculus,
wills us rather for dilexit, to put, credidit, for charity, faith, and then
gives us the meaning of Christ's words thus. Zuing. to 4. in Luc. 7.
Quonia^ dilexit multum. Ego puto dilectionem hic pro fide accipi, Propre
expositions. dilexit, id est credidit. works, that is, faith. the sun, that
is, the moon.
quod tantum mihi fidit, tantum peccatoru^ ei remittitur. Nam post a dicit,
sides tua te saluam sec it. Because she loved much. I suppose that love is here
put for faith. because she has so great affia^ce in me, so many sins are
forgiven her. for he says afterward, thy faith has saved thee, that is, has
delivered and absolved the from thy sins. which one distinction answers all the places that in this controversy we bring out of the scriptures to refel
their only faith.

By these fevv heretical sleights (and M. Whitaker knovveth his brethren have
many other as bad as these) used in one particular controversy, any man may
guess how likely it is to tie an heretic having some wit and learning, and
sight in tongues, with any text that gainsaith his opinion. How true we find
by experience that which Tertullian so many ages ago spoke of the heretics
of his time, and prophesied as it may seem, of the heretics of our time.
vertul. de praescripti. number. 5.
Ista haeresis non recipit quasdam scripturas etc. These (Zuinglian, Lutheran,
Puritan, Anabaptist, Trinitarian etc.) heretics admit not some books of
scriptures. and those which they do admit, by adding to, The agreement
between the protestants of our time and ancient heretics touching their
behavior about scriptures.
and taking from, they peruerte to serve their purpose. And if they receive
some books, yet they receive the^ not intierly: or if they receive the^
entierly after some sort, nevertheless they mar them by devising diverse
interpretatio^s. In this case what vvil you do that think your self most
skilful in the scriptures, when as that which you defend, the adversary
denies, Not possible to do good with an heretic having this liberty to
discourse.
that which you deny the adversary defends. Et tu quidem nihil perdes nisi
vocem de contentione, nihil consequeris nisi bilem de blasphematione. And thou
truly shall leese nothing but thy words in so contentious a brauling, thou
shall gain nothing but grief and anger in saying an heretic so to blasphene.

And now if I should show the like in the hebrew, and by examples manifest
the same, I should trouble my self much, and the reader much more. Because I
must be driven to talk of titles, and points, and rules of the Rabbines, The
hebrew tongue open to infinite cauillinge, and so vnfie to bind a co^tentious
heretic.
and readings of the Massoreth and such other obscure matter, troublesome for
me to lay together and write out, and not intelligible for a common reader. I
vvil therefore put down only certain propositions, exemplifying the^ in one
or two words, whereby the learned shall understand how true that is which I
affirm, and the unlearned shall be able to conceive somewhat. I say therefore,
that of the hebrew far less hold can be taken in binding a contentious
heretic then of any other language.

Hebrew words have great diversity of significations
far more then is found in latin or greek or many vulgar languages. and
therefore if you press him with one translation or sense, he forthwith has
sundry and diverse senses to flee unto. Hence comes that diversity in the
Psalm. Psalm. 54. v. 21.
54. Extendit deus manum suam in retribuendo, (...), according to the 70. God
has stretched forth his hand to revvard or recompense, as the church reads,
which place the catholics both of late and ancient times use to prove the
reward and recompense of good works. The english bibles turn it thus. He has
laid his hands upon such as be at peace with him, the more common Protestant
translation, Marlorate.
as it appears by Marlorate, Misit manus suas in paces suas, He has laid his
hands upon his peaces. This diversity rises of the same hebrew word, (...)
whence comes. (...)
but having diverse senses.

Dedisti metuentibus te, Psalm. 59. v. 6.
significatione^ vt fugiant a facie arcus. Thou have given to those that fear
thee, a sign that they flee from the face of the bow, according to the 70.
(...), and so was the hebrew in S. Hieroms time, as we see by his
translation. The Protestants, Luther, Bucer, Calvin, as we see by Marlorate,
vvil have it, Dedisti metuentibus te vexillum, ad vexilla^dum propter
veritatem. Thou have given to them that fear thee a flagge, to flagge for
truth. the english of one year, The year 1577.
thou have given a token for such as fear thee that they may triu^phe because
of thy truth, of an other, 1579.
Thou have given a ba^ner to them that fear thee that it may be displaied,
because of thy truth. This difference in one part comes of the 2. radical
hebrew verbes, (...)
the old church, the 70. and S. Hiero^ following one, the new congregation of
the Protestants rather liking the other. The difference in the other part bovv
and truth no doubt came thence, (...)
that the old hebrew books had that word written with one kind of T, the
later with an other.

A hard difficulty, what masters we must follow touching the true signification
of the hebrew words
Aben Ezra, and such other. Thus to say, Beza, Munster, Calvin, Castalio and
the Protestants commonly induce us. But Master D. Humfrey holds the contrary,
and not without reason, if we had a good pilote to rule the stern and contain
us in mediocritie. Humf. lib. 2. de rat. int pa. 219.320.
We ought not to credit (says he) in my judgment the Rabbines touching the
very exposition and deriuation of the hebrew words. Christ pronou^ceth of
them that they are blind, and guides of the blind. Therefore this is not the
way to interpret rightly, nether may we follow them, except we vvil
prefer darkness before light, errors before truth, doubtful things before
assured, dangerous before safe, and wicked and blasphemous before Godly and
Catholic. The protestants following the Jewish Rabbines: translate wickedly.
By which rule al your new hebrew translations are called in to question, yea
are pronounced to be darkesome, erroneous, doubtful, dangerous, wicked, and
blasphemous. For your best and greatest translators, whom did they follow in the
sense of the hebrew words but their common dictionaries? And out of who^ are
they drawn? look upon the title of Munsters. Dictionari^ Munsteri printed at
Basile the year 1564.
Dictionarium Hebraeum vltimo ab autore Sebastiano Munstero recognitum, et ex
Rabbinis, praesertim ex radicibus David Kimhi auctu^ et locuplet a tum. This
hebrew dictionarie is now last renewed by Sebastia^ Munster, and increased
and enriched out of the Rabbines, especially out of David Kimhi. And Munster in
his translations (which is accounted most exact to the hebrew) protests that
he regarded therein no Christian fathers but only the Iudaical Rabbines.
Munster. in praef. bibli. tom. 1.
Nobis (says he) in animo fuit talem parare aeditionem scripturae, quae per
omnia hebraismo esset co^formis, ideo solos hebraeos co^suluimus scriptores.
And here perhaps I might propose unto you an Insoluble, an argument that you
will never answer, saving the honor of your masters and doctors. Your
master Beza corrects the new testament generally, and draws the greek
citations in the same, and al doubtful words to the sense of the hebrew and
the Rabbines. Doctor Humfrey on the contrary side will have the hebrew words of
the old testament drawn to signify as the Apostles cite them according to the
70. in the new testament, and condemns your translators for doing otherwise:
and namely whereas in the 2. of the Acts your English bibles, after Beza
translate Sh^ol, Grave, he acknowledging that in hebrew and according to the
Rabbines, It may so signify, and many things besides, Humf. vbi sup. pa. 225.
as pit, the state of the dead and damned, death, a ditch, the east or birth,
and hell: this last, says he, must we follow by authority of the holy Ghost,
Act 2. interpreting a place of the psalm 15. Where you see one will have the
hebrew word in the psalm translated, Hell, because so it is in the greek, Act.
2. the other will have the greek, Act. 2. translated Grave, because so may be
the signification of the hebrew, ps. 15. et sic in caeteris. where, by the
way you may note that your pure and undefiled bibles, are not altogether so
judged by this writer, a man of such credit and name in your congregation, yea
that he judges them corrupt in so great a matter as a principal article of our
faith comes unto.

true controversy which is about the hebrew originals, that is, whether we
must take them as now we have them given us with the ordinary points and
vovvels put to by the Jews and Rabbines: or whether we must take the
consonantes only, and put to the points or vowels by our own discretion. If
the first, then al those horrible absurdities must stand, Before chap. 12.
which before I have noted against Christ's Divinity, Humanity, Passion* and
Incarnation. If the second, then must the Protestants fall to translate a
fresh: for all their bibles hitherto are little worth, because they generally
(though not in every place) have followed the common points and vowels,
according to which they frame us their common Gloses, Commentaries, and
Dictionaries.

and abnegation of al Christianity. For though they care not greatly whether
me^ think our Lady to have remained a virgin in Christ's birth, Bez. in praef.
Test. noui ann. 1565. principi Cond. dica^i. and Molinae. in a. Luc.
or after Christ's birth, yet they seem to believe most assuredly that she was
a virgin when she conceived him. That being granted, that this denial is
plain apostasy, Christ's incarnation of the virgin can not be proved by
scripture according to the protestants manner of expounding it.

Mat. 1. v. 23.


I require of him what scripture he has to prove that verity? for church,
Tradition, Fathers, and such other, I know he contemns, and we are bound to
believe nothing say they, but that which is in plain scripture. The only place
that may serve the turn, is the first of S. Matthew. (for the allegories of
Ezechiel convince not) where it is said, Ecce virgo concipiet etc. Behold a
virgin shall conceive and bring forth a son. But this place proves nothing by
M. W. own rule, by Bezaes common kind of scanning such citations, and by the
Protestants interpretation of this place: either because the translation is
framed according to the 70. Before page 286.287. (...) See Munst. in the word
(...)
not the hebrew, and so it is no scripture by M. W. or if it be, then (...)
virgin, according to the hebrew must signify a young vvenche, adolesce^tula,
sieve virgo sieve maritata by Beza his rules (and so says Munster) as well
virgin as not virgin: or because the most precise Iudaical Protestants
translate it so, to put the matter out of doubt. So for example translateth
Oecolampadius in the bibles of Basile, Oecolamp. in Esa. ca. 7.
which Bullinger in the preface so much comme^deth, Ecce adolesentula illa
praegnans, Translation Iudaical and Antichristian.
et partens filium, Behold that young vvenche great with child, and Munster
precisely according to the hebrew as he says, Ecce virgo illa impraegnata,
Behold that virgin gotten with child. And howsoever M. W. may cauil upon
the later, the first is mere Iudaical, no ways Christian, Luth. tom. 2: ad
Amsdorf. de Eras. fol. 485.
and the peruersion rather of a monster then of a man, as Luther pronounces
against Erasmus for the like cause. and yet I acknovvledge according to the
heretical manner of examining citations, the hebrew word may bear that sense
which Oecola^p. yeldeth, and so did those old renegates and enemies of our
religion, Aquila Ponticus, Iren. lib. 3. cap. 24. vide Eusebius. li. 5. ca. 8
Epiph. haer. 30. Justin. in dialog. eum Tripho^e.
and Theodotion translate that word, upon which translation afterward the
beggarly Ebionites founded their beastly opinion touching the manner of Christ's
incarnation.

And here (Christian reader) I have to request thee, not so to interpreete me
in any thing which I have spoken, as though I coueted to disgrace the study of
greek and hebrew (as this man would have thee to conceive of us) and condemned
those languages, which I confess to be great helps to the attaining of the
true sense in su^drie places of scripture, and condemn my self for knowing so
little as I do in either of them both. The hebrew and greek knowledge, much
advanced by Catholics.
And manifest it is, what pain the Catholics have taken in setting forth the
bible most perfitly and diligently in the Hebrew, Chaldee, Greek, and Arabike
languages. what labor they have taken about the Greek translation of the
Septuaginta. How continually, and at this present, most honorable Prelates, and
Cardinals, and other men of great name, employ them selves in the same kind of
study, to the end they may procure al helps so far as is possible, for the
perfect understanding of the sacred scriptures. How in most Catholic
Universities, me^ excellent for skill in these languages, flourish and are
maintained, to the great aduaunceme^t of the faith and Church Catholic: with
the list or cataloge of whose names I think it needeles to trouble the
reade^, because otherwise they are well known to the Christian world. But this
I say, and thou shall find it true when soever thou come to examine these
matters with that aduisednes and maturitie of judgment as the thing it self
requires, A man must have a settled faith before he come to co^ferre greek and
hebrew else shall he never have any faith. Vide Aug. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 1. ca.
21. and tract. 18. in Joan.
that who so will go about to pick his faith out of the greek and hebrew
testaments without a settled and constant form of faith before, and from which
he must not be drawn by any pretense of greek and hebrew, his greek and
hebrew will never make him a Christian, will never establish him in any true
faith. Aquila Ponticus, first a Christian, after a Jew, was very perfect in
the hebrew, and translated the bible so, as S. Hier. ep. 138 Marcellae. and 1^5
Damaso. quaest. 2.
Hierom calls him to his praise, Diligentissimum verborum hebraicorum
interpretem, A most diligent interpreter of the hebrew words, and yet how
good a Christian he was, is noted before. The Arrians, Trinitarians,
Anabaptists and Lutherans of our time, Many great Grecians and Hebraicia^s
are wicked and detestable Christians.
want they greek or hebrew? No dout their arrogancy and pride which for their
greek and hebrew they conceive, is a great cause of their continual
alteration from one heresy to an other, as we see in the stories of
Melancthon, Blandrata, Bernardinus Ochinus etc.

Before we were Grecians, or Hebritians, or in deed Englishmen, or
understood any letter of any language, first of al we were Christians, First
we must be sure of our faith
we were graffed into the Catholic Church the mystical body of Christ, and
made members of the same, and by solemn vow we bound our selves to honor,
love, reverence, and cleave to her as Timoth. 3. verse. 15.
the pillar and firmament of truth, Ephesians. 5. verse. 25.
the spouse of Christ, Gal. 4. v. 26.
our divine mother, 1. Pet. 3. verse. 20.21.
the ark of Noah Mat. 13. saepe.
and kingedome of God, See before chap. 6. page 117.
without which there is no way but death and damnation. Let us hold this fast,
and then our greek and hebrew may do us some good. Let us depart from her,
talk we so long as we list of our greek and hebrew, as S. Act. 8. v. 20.
Peter said of Simon Magus money, so that vvil be to us, In perditionem, To our
everlasting destruction, it vvil never do us good. Aug, confess. lib. 8. ca. 8.
And as S. Austin says, in the mean season while the unlearned rise and get
possession of heaven, Nos cu^ doctrinis nostris ecce vbi volutamur in carne et
sanguine, We with our greek and hebrew and what other learning so ever,
shall always be tumbling in flesh and blood, in continual braules and
contentions, which vvil set us the right way to hell.

CHAP. XV. How M.VV. inueigheth against the new testament lately set forth in
this college, with a clear refutation of such faults as he finds in the
translation thereof.
Here now is the place to speak of our late English translation set forth in
this college. For though M. W. upon passion and heat, disorderlye before he
had spoken of the originals and in respect of them condemned our latin,
reproved us for translating according to the latin, yet to make all sure, here
again he repeateth his former accusation, and in particular charge us with
certain faults committed both in the testament it self, and in the
annotatio^s made upon the same. His words albeit they show far more
stomach then wit, more malice then reason, and therefore are the more loathsome
to read, yet because they may be an example of an heretical spirit then most
vaunting, and triumphing, and swelling a high in loftines of words, when in
deed he is under foot, and stands upon no ground at al, I vvil put them
down as they are. Thus he speaks.

page 14.15.
There is now abroad a certain english translation of the new testament, M.
W. inuectiue against the late Catholic translation of the new Testament.
set forth and labored by that new college at Rhemes, to which I am right
glad that our translation is nothing like. For since the first creation of
the world, there was never found any translation like to that which you
have of late published, and by common judgment commended to your countrymen.
For whether we consider the unaccustomed and monstrous novelty of words,
or the profane corruptions and outrageous boldness to pervert every thing,
never any heretics at any time have done more violence and injury to the
sacred testament of Christ Jesus our lord. They that thus translate the
scriptures into any language as you have done in to ours, may rightly be
thought not to have intended that the people should understand the vvil of God
declared in the word, but that they should mock and contemn it. And truly so
far is it that I think this your translation vvil any ways harm our cause,
that I vvish it might be read also of strangers, that when they consider this
your new kind of trans^ation hitherto unheard of, they might acknovvledge the
madness and desperatnes of the Papists. It is altogether framed according to
the form of the old latin edition.

This is his accusation of us (good reader) uttered as thou see in such
terrible words, as if some counterfaite Ajax Mastigophorus, or Hercules
Furens, or some tragical Tereus or Thyestes, after the eating of their own
children, were raging upon a scaffold. Here thou have, The creation of the
world, Unaccustomed and monstrous novelty, Profane corruptions, and
outragius boldness, Never heretics at any time did the like violence and
injury to the sacred testament of Christ Jesus, The word of God mocked and
contemned, Madness and desperatnes of the Papists. and so forth, as if we were
guilty of (or himself as boldfaced as he is, durst object unto us) any one of
those wicked, Profane, Heretical, and Turkish corruptions, of which we have
proved him and his brethren to have committed many. Which seeing he does not,
nether ca^ do, thou may undoubtedly take this for Brutu^ fulme^, Affected
hypocrisy
a pange of vile hypocrisy, such as when they are disposed, now and then they
use in their pulpits to make the people imagine they have in the^ some dram
of religion, whereof they are quite destitute. And if thou will know where
these thundering terms may be truly verified, recall to memory, not words,
but factes, experime^ts, change of words, alterations of sentences,
oppositions against Christ him self and the Evangelists, errors Ethnical,
Iudaical and Diabolical confessed to swarm every where in these men's new
bibles, in those very same, which this vehement orator praises as undefiled
and most pure. Record this Reader, and thou shall find, where these oratorial
terms so unaptly applied, may be sincerely and truly bestovved. And that we
are altogether guiltless of any such fault, and vvithal that he practices not
only manifest lying, but in deed very gross hypocrisy in this accusation, our
own conscience before Christ and his Tribunal-seate, and the work it self
perused by any indifferent man acquiteth us in the first, and his own words
and vvriting in this place conuinceth him of the second.

I have shevved before how well the learneder protestants esteem of our latin
translator, that Molineus, Before page 372.373.374.383.
Our English translation following so precysely the old latin, can not be so
corrupt as M.W. imagines.
and Castalio commonly defend him against Beza, that D. Humfrey much commends
his sincere sidelitie, that Beza acknowledges him to have used great
conscience and religion, and prefers him before al other translators,
Caeteris omnibus antepono, that this eager Ar^starchus, with al his study,
malice and conference, finds one only fault in him: and of what quality
that is, has been declared sufficiently.

This being so, how can our english translation possibly be so monstrous, so
horrible, so heretical, so outrageous, etc. as this man fayneth here, of which
him self says, that it is Expressa tota ad veteris latinae aditionis formam,
Page 15.
wholy framed and fasshioned to the form of the old latin edition, which is
by the verdicte of his masters, so pure, so sincere, so religious, and
Caeteris omnibus anteponenda, Better then al other? Is it possible (I say) that
this translation should be so horrible and absurd, being wholy formed after
the old edition, which in comparison of al other is so perfect and absolute?
See thou not here the very image of old Caiphas crying out, Blasphemy, and
renting his garments when Christ spoke of the judgment, that They should see
the son of man sitting at the right hand of God, Mat. 27.
and coming to judge in the clouds of heaven? by which kind of strange
behavior, he moved the people to think that he did so upon great zeal of
religion, whereas he being a Sadducee, believing the soul to die with the
body (to which opinion Master W. pure bibles lead me^ the ready way) and
therefore conte^ning as trifles, heaven, and hell, and judgment to come, only by
that histrionical dissimulation sought to abuse the simple people, when in the
mean season him self cared nothing but for his own belly commodity, Ne forte
venirent Romani, Joan. 11. v. 48.
least perhaps the Romans their lords should put him and his besides their
good feeding, which under the title and pretense of religion they enjoyed. The
end of the new gospel, carnal liberty.
And he that judges otherwise of these carnal gospellers, and the final scope
of their gospel, he much deceaueth him self, and knovveth not what they by
their gospel mean.

parts of this inuectiue be not agreeable to this general intention. You have
given us (says he) a translation of the new testament, such a one as there
was never found the like since the world was first created. The true grace
of this amplifying figure.
What kind of amplificatio^ is this? what figure, but of most gross and
ridiculous hypocrisy? form substance thus he speaks. It is now 5000. years
and more since the world was created, in which time many translations of the
new testament have been made: yet these 5000 years and upward, no man ever
translated the new testament so profanely and wickedly as you have done. And
is this true? and has he examined all the translations made these 5000 years?
belike he has, or else he could never give his sentence so peremptorily. Of the
first 1000 years, or second, under the Patriarchs and until Moses, how many
new testame^ts has he perused and conferred with ours? I trow not very many.
And of the third and fourth thowsande years under the Prophets has he seen
any more? or were there then extant any such testaments to confer, in
comparison of which ours is so far abased? by his amplification it should seem
yea, and yet of his wisdom I trust he will say no, except he list to show him
self as learned as his fellow, In his sermon printed, fo. 14. see the Discovery
pa. 178.
John Keltridge preacher of the word in London, who refers us for the true
reading and sense of the A^e maria, to the translation of the 70. But suppose
he meant of the time since Christ. what a mad kind of spech is this? as if two
frindes who by some occasion were separated some few years, after by good hap
meeting, the one should thus gratulate that good day. Blessed be God (frind)
that now I see you, whom I have not seen these 5000 years, whereas they
perhaps had not lived one quarter of so many weeks.

Now let us allow for good that Ab orb condito, A most absurd and false
amplification.
since the creation of the world, may signify 4000 years after, that is since
the incarnation of Christ, how many translatio^s of the first thousand years
after Christ ca^ he produce, whereupon he may color this lying? how many of
the next 500? how many until this later 80 years, wherein every Sectmaster has
fallen in hand with tossing and turning the scriptures? But amongst the^, is
there none worse then ours? none set forth by the Trinitarians, Seruetans,
Arians, Anabaptists, Academiks? How say you by such a translation as abuses
the word of scripture against al ancient faith and religion, against
Catholics, against the Lutherans, against the learned Caluinists, against
Calvin him self, To say God is author of sin, is to say, that god is a devil.
against the literal sense of the word and whole drift of the place, and all this to make God the author and worker of sin, that is by Caluins express
judgment in his book against the Libertines, Calvin in instructio. contra
Libertinos. ca. 14. Deum in diabolum transforma^t
To transform God into a devil and to make us Christians worship in steed of
god an idol, and such an idol, Quod nobis execrabilius esse debet omnibus
gentiu^ idolis, Which ought to seem to us Christians, more abominable then all the idols of the Gentiles, what say you to such a translation? English
translatio^s lead men to that opinion.
And such translations of the new testament have been set forth within these
5000 years, yea some within these 5 years, and that in England, and that with
authority, yea with the Princes privilege, except the printers lie.

S. Peter says of the Jews, that Christ is to them, Petra scandali, 1. Pet.
2. v. 8.
qui offendunt verbo, nec credunt in quo et posti sunt. (...). the english
testament of king Edward, and the first of the Q. reign translate it thus.
They believe not that vvhereon they were set. Illyr. glos. in 1. Pet. c. 2.
verse. 8.
This is well to be marked (says Illyricus) least a man imagine that God him
self did put them, and (as one, he means Beza, against the nature of the
greek word does translate and interpret it) that God did create the^ for
this purpose, that they should vvithstand him. Erasmus and Calvin referring
this word to that which goes before, interpret it not amiss, that the
Jews were made or ordained to believe the word of God and their Messiah,
but yet that they would not believe him. For to the^ belonged the promises,
the testaments, and the Messiah him self, as S. Peter says, Act. 2. et 3. and
Paul Romans 9. and to them were committed the oracles of God by witness of the
same Paul Romans 3. thus Illyricus. Here is given the true sense of this place
according to the signification of the greek word. the same is proved by
scripture, by S. Peter and S. Paul. The same is confirmed by Calvin and
Erasmus, and by Luther in his commentaries upon this place, Castalio defensio.
suae translatio. page 153.154.155.
and more at large by Castalio in his annotatio^s of the new testament. Only
Beza against al these, translateth it thus, Sunt immorigeri, Beza in ^. Pet. 2.
v. 8.
ad quod etiam conditi fueru^t. They are rebellious, where unto also they
were created. which words in his note thereupon he explicateth, That men are
made, or fashioned, framed, sturred up, created or ordained, not of them
selves, (for that is absurd) but of God, God creates men to sin, Beza.
to be sca^dalized at him and his son our Savior. Christus est eis
offendiculo, prout etiam ad hoc ipsum a Deo sunt conditi, and discourses at
large, and brings many textes to prove this sense and this translation. which
error being of such consequence as Calvin grants, that it makes God, no
God, but an idol and a devil, any man may boldly ptonounce of such a testament,
that it is the testament rather of Satan then of Christ.

So here is at least one translation worse then ours. and are there no more?
look upon your testaments of the later translators, al in manner apes of Beza.
in one thus you read, Bible of the year 1577.
Being disobediente, unto the which thing they were ordained, in the next,
Being disobedient, the year 1579.
unto the which thing they were even ordained, this is a little worse. and
with this, word for word agrees the later testament of the year 1580, and the
Scottish bible. The year 1580.

The year 1579.


and this is altogether the first Geneua translation, Printed at Geneua the
year 1561.
whom the French Geneua bible follows, Sont rebels, a quoy aussi ils ont
este ordonne^. They are rebels (against Christ) whereunto also they were
ordained. Cast. defens. suae translacions p. 155.
Atqui si deus creauit aliquos ad contumaciam, omnino author est eorum
contumaciae, quemadmodum, si quos ^re^uit ad obedientiam, omnino author est
eoru^ obedientiae (says Castalio against Beza) But if God have created some
men to rebellion or disobedience, he is author of their disobedience, as if he
have created some to obedience he is truly author of their obedience. Al these
translations by verdicte of Calvin, make god an idol and a deuel.
And so by verdicte not only of catholics but also of your own great doctors
such as are Luther, Castalio, Calvin, etc. and in deed by manifest reason,
here have you 7. translations of the new testamente* within these 500, yea
within these 50 years worse then ours. For find your any one so wilful and
horrible an Atheism in ours, and hardly set a fire on them al. Many more
examples could I give, but I will not be troublesome nor enter new discourses.
For conuincing this so gross and impudente a lie, let the testimony of that
excellent man Beza so commended by M. W. suffice, who accounts our latin,
better then that of Luther, then that of Basile, M.W. in his last short
sentence, 6. refelleth and gain says whatsoever he has said before.
then that of Erasmus, then that of Castalio, then any that ever he saw. and
consequently our english framed altogether according to that, by M. W. own
judgment, can not be the worst.

The next three faults are objected The protestants more desirous of nouelty
of words then ever were any heretics.
or least argument in the world. Mary that he and his fellows are most guilty
of them al, both in the Discovery and annotations of the testament it is in
many places declared. And judge thou (reader) whether we or they love
unaccustomed and monstrous novelty of words, we, who strive so much as we
may, to retain the ancient words left to us by our Apostles and founders,
Mass, Bishop, Priest, Baptism, Church, the very names of me^, Isaie, Amos,
Judah, Jerusalem, Ezechias, Ozias, or they who have turned these in to the
Supper or the Thankes-geuing, Superintendent, Minister or Elder, Washing,
Congregation. who upon most childish affectation to seem somewhat skilful in
the hebrew, reduce al sacred names to the old Iudaical sound. As for example
one of their greatest Evangelists thus begins his translation of Esaie. The
vision of Iesaaiahu the son of Amoz, Oecolam. Esa. c. 1. v. 1.
which he savv upon Iehudah and upon Hierusalam in the days of Yziiahu,
Iotham, Ahhaz, Iehhizkiiahu, Kings of Iehudah. And this is the common vein of
their preachers if they know a little, especially in that lan^^nge. as though
Petrus, Ioannes, Iacobus, Stephanus, howsoever they be uttered in any other
tongue, Hebrew, Greek, Latin, Spanish, French, or Italia^ were not truly and
exactly expressed in English by Peter, John, James, Steuin, but must needs be
pronounced, as they are in the first language from which originally they are
derived. as though a man translating some story out of French or Spanish into
English, translated not well if he said, Frau^cis the French King in his wars
against the Spaniards, but must needs say, Fransois King of the Fransois in
his wars against the Espanioulx: or, los Espan^oles in such a victory
against los Franceses, in steed of, The Spaniards in such a victory against
the Frenchmen. And why then do they not in the new testament use like novelty?
why for Christ use they not, Ieschua, for our Lady, Miria^, for S. Peter,
Cepha, for S. John, Iochanan, and so in the rest of the Apostles, whereas they
know that thus were they called in their proper language, as at this present we
see in S. Matthewes hebrew Gospel. If their own ears abhor this wanton
curiosity, and their own judgment tell the^ it is apish arrogancy, and
peevish affectation of popular praise, let them confess the like in
pronouncing, Beltshazzar, Nebucadnezzar, Iehuda, Iehhizkiiahu, for Baltasar,
Nabugodonosor, Judah, Ezechias. for the case is al one.

Much more have they committed this monstrous novelty in the things them
selves, A far greater alteration and nouelty in articles of faith.
in taking away the sacrifice of the new testament, like the forerunners of
Antichrist, in yelding to women and children the headship and supreme
government of the Church in all Ecclesiastical and spiritual matters, in
abrogating five or six sacraments of seven, in devising such a kind of faith,
as before their time was never heard of, The authors and writers of sundry
books of scripture, mocked and scorned by the protestants.
and is more fit for the schole of Epicure then of Christ, and so forth in the
rest of their negative irreligion.

And as for mocking and contemning the word of God, this was never so proper
and peculiar to any heretics before, as it is to them. For who are they that
mock at the book of The tower disputatio^s the 4 day.
Judith, that compare the book of Zuingl. to. 1 art. 57. fol. 100.
Machabees to Robin Hoode or Beauis of Hampton, that call the Prophet Idem to.
3 in rhrenos Iere. fo. 384.
Baruch a peevish ape of Jeremy, Simia est non admodum sae^ix Ieremiae, that
accounte the epistle to the Magdeb. see before page 414.
Hebrews Pro stipulis, as stubble, that reiecte S. Lutheranes and Zuinglianes.
see before chap 1.
James epistle as made of straw, that contemn S. Lukes gospel, that mangle
many other parts of the scriptures, and thereby teach the contempt of them al,
al standing upon like ground? Who do this? We, or they? Catholics, or
Gospellers? and to speak briefly, what is their whole manner of writing, The
new preaching a very mockery of scripture.
preaching, teaching, and living, but a very mockery of the gospel of Christ?
such filthy application of holy write, as shows them to use it for no other
purpose but for color and shroud of their filthiness. Rebuke a leacherous monk
for his incest which he calls Matrimony, 1. Cor. 7. v. 9. see the
annotations upon that chap.
o says he, Better it is to mary then to burn. Require of him that he
chastise his body with fasting and discipline for repressing of his beastly
concupisce^ce: that is against Gods word says he. For, nemo carnem suam odio
habuit, Ephe. 5. v. 29
No man hates his own flesh, but loves and cherishes it. when such an
Apostata is promoted amongst you to be a superintende^t, The protestants use
scripture for a veyle (...) coueral filthynes.
and then spoileth his tenants, wastes his woods, pulls down his hous^^^
never built by him, or for him, or any of his religion* sells away lead,
tile, stone, and makes money of al, reprove him for this oppression and rauin,
he has his text ready, 1. Tim. 5. v. 8
He that provides not for his own, and namely for them of his hovvsehold, he
is worse then an Infidel. These interpretations and worse then these very
many shall you find in Peter Martyrs book, De votis et caelibatu. Pet. Mar de
votis and cael.
And at this present, what is the universal preaching of the ministers for the
most part, but a very mockery and ridiculous abuse of scripture? what other is
their common writing? and M.VV. in the next chapt. will show himself in this
kind as very a scorner as the worst.

Truly so far of is it that I think your translation vvil any vvayes harm
our cause, that I vvish the copies thereof were multiplied, and other men
might be partakers thereof, This is as foul a figure of hypocrisy as any
hitherto touched. For if they think it will no ways hinder their cause but
rather benefit it, why make they such busy inquiry after it? why burn they
such as fall in to their hands? are they such witles babes as ^ain not suffer
that which does them good? Compare (good reader) their doings, their
preachings, their searchings and inquiries, with this speech, and thou shall
sensibly perceive that it is naught else but a very desperate facing out of a
lie, and setting a bold countenance on that, which in deed pincheth them at
the very heart root. With like phrase and character of shameless vau^ting
wrote M. Jewel defense of the Apolog. part. 6. ca. 8.. 1.
Jewel to D. Harding. we never suppressed any of your books M. Harding as you
know, but are very well content to see them so common, that as now children
may play with them in the streets. Incredible impudency in bragging and lying.
Thus his face served him to write then when in the self same Defense he
suppressed by leaving out, the very substance of that book which he then
pretended to answer, when by help of his felow-Superintendents and other
friends, every corner of the realm was searched for those books, when the
ports were laid for them, Paul's cross is witness of burning many of them,
the Princes proclamation was procured against them, in the Universities by
sovereign authority, Colleges, chambers, studies, closets, coffers, and
deskes, were ransackt for them, when not only children were forbid to play with
them, but ancient m^^^ and students of Divinity were imprisoned for having of
them. So that all this can be naught else but a plain example of palpable
dissimulation and affected lying. Ad populum phaleras, when intrinsecally, they
fear, and labor, and sweat, and by exterior signs declare thus much, and
every day more and more misdoubt the ruin of their Atheistical gospel, which
daily the more it is known, the more it grows in horror and execration
among honest natures: not only such as are directed by the spirit of God, but
even such as are somevvhat helped with the assistance of natural wisdom and
honest inclination.

But come we to the particular crimes laid against us, and whereupon this
dreadful inuectiue is properly builded, which is, The particular faults of
our English translation.
our corrupting the text, or departing from our latin testament. For as we in
examining their testament framed according to the greek as they pretended,
reproved them not in their translation, nor could so do reasonably so long as
precisely they kept them selves to their greek (for whether the greek ^a^ere
so to be followed, is an other question) in like manner we proposing to
translate the latin (which to us is as autentical as the greek to them) can
not reasonab^y be blamed as false and corrupt translators, but where we have
gone aside and leaft that original which we pretended to translate. And if
herein we have erred, we gladly vvil acknovvledge our oversight, and are
ready to amend the same. And here (Reader) have thou specially to mark, by
what argument he verifieth that which he obiecteth, A terrible accusation
Our profane corruptions, our outrag^ous boldness, our more violence used to
the holy testament of Christ, then ever was used by any kind of heretic so
notorious that all the world may judge that our intent was, To make the people
scorn and contemn the word of God. how justifies ^e all this? by what
proof? for hitherto we have words, and nothing but words, such as every
grammar-boy can pick out of the book which he reads and join together. But
from M. W. the Q. Majesty's reader, his auditors look for sounder stuff then
such childish grammatical declaiming. How weakly the same is justified.
Many places (says he) have I noted wherein you have manifestly erred from
that your vulgar latin edition. that vvil I declare by one example, the like
where of I could bring forth many. Surely this is very weak to maintain the
greatness of the accusation thundered out before. And whereas you promise one
example, and give us two, the reader may assure him self, you would have spared
us three if you had been able. But belyke these, one or two, are horrible
monstrous faults, and touch matters of marvelous great height, Christ's
Divinity, Humanity, Incarnation, Heaven, and Hell, such as are the faults of
these men's bibles, and so these two may serve in steed of a number. Let us here
them in M. W. own words. In the epistle to the Romans ca. Vbi supra.
13. v. 19. thus it is read (...) which words the old interpreter turned
thus, Non vosmet ipsos desendentes, but by you they are turned otherwise
according to the greek verity, Not revenging your selves. The like place is
in Matthew. 4. v. 16. where these words, (...) (...), Mark the greuousnes of
these 2. faults.
the old interpreter turned, The people which vvalked in darkness, ambulauit
in tenebris, as also in Hierom we read. but you following the greek exemplat
have turned otherwise and more truly: The people that sits in darkness, Qui
seeds in tenebris.

Thus M. VV. and this is al. And here first of all the reader may again
remember how just cause I had to charge him with affected hypocrisy for
exclaming so tragically upon our testament wherein he finds only these
faults, which if they were faults, of what weight they are, every child may
judge. But to pass that over, let the reader see how blindly and fovvly he is
deceived. We have left our latin and followed the greek (says he) in turning
Defendentes, Defendere is well translated to reueng.
Revenging. and why so? how proves he that we leave our latin? he vvil
answer I suppose (for reason him self yeldeth none) because in all M. Coopers
Dictionarie we find not, that Defendere signifies To revenge. If that be
true, then belike if we were master Coopers scholars, the case would go
somvvhat hard with us. But if he vvil vevv other Dictionaries as well as M.
Coopers, he shall find both that (...) in greek, in latin is truly turned by
Defendere, and Defendere in latin, is well and properly turned in English by
Revenge. So the greek dictionarie of Basile printed the year 1557. teaches
us. (...), defendo, vindico, vlciscor, in alicuius gratiam. So the latin and
french, and latin greek and french dictionaries printed at Paris the years
1559.1575 1580. set forth by Sonnius and Rob. Stephanus teach us, that
Defendere signifies (...), defender, garder, et preserver, venger, as well to
revenge, as to defend, guard and preserve. And which is to us more then al, the
dictionarie of the Church, that is, the ancient ecclesiastical use of this
word in the scripture and fathers teaches us sometimes and in this place, this
to be his proper and grammatical ense, and so the ancient fathers used this
word. So Tertullian. Tertullian contra Martionem li. 2
Durum videbatur populo a deo expectare defensam edicendam postea per
prophetam, mihi defensam et ego defendam. It seemed a hard thing for the
Jewish people (in Moses time) to expect revenge from God which was
afterward promised by the prophet saing, To me revenge, and I vvil revenge.
Where manifest it is that Defendere and defensa, is gra^matically Revenge and
To revenge, Ambros in Romans ca. 12.
and manifest it is that S. Ambrose does not expound, but grammatically take
the word Defendere, in the self same manner, that is, to signify Revenge, eue^
as S. Hier. put it, or rather as I think leaft it, being so used by the former
tra^slator. So does Haymo, so does S. Beda in Romans 12.
Bid, and makes no scruple at it, but in his commentary taken out of S.
Augustine expresses by Vindicare that, which our interpreter uttered by
Defendere.

And the same is most plain by the tra^slatio^ of the bible it self. For
whereas in other places, for example, in the story of Holofernes the greek
is, That he swear he would, (...), Judith 1. v. 12. and 2. v. 1.
Revenge him self of all the lands, that does the old interpreter utter by
Defendere. ca. 9. v. 2.
And in the 9. chap. where Judith praises God, The year 1579.
saing according to the later English bible, O Lord God of my father Symeon, to
whom thou gave a svvord to take vengeance of the strangers, the latin is,
Gladium ad defensione^ abienigenaru^, the greek, (...), which the English
bible printed two years before, 1577.
tra^slateth, A svvord for a defense against the enemies, and puts in the
margent, 1562.
Or to reuengment. The former bible uses only, Defense and not Revenge at al,
whereby it is clear that those tra^slators having belike some more skill in the
old use of this word the^ M.W. accounted (...) to be well turned, either by
Revenge, which is more proper, or by Defense, which is also most true,
respecting the use of the latin, but must signify as much as Revenge in
English, for else they translated falsely. So in Ecclesiasticus, that writer
speking of a father that dies and leaves behind him a good and wise son,
among many other benefits which he has thereby, he reckneth this,
Ecclesiastici 30. v. 6.
that he has leaft one who will Defend and Revenge him against his enemies, in
greek, (...), in our latin, Reliquit defensorem, in the English bibles, He
least behind him an avenger. Of the years 1562.1577.1579.
The same writer speaking of the revenge wrought upon Baals Priests for their
Idolatry 3 Reg. 18. calls it, Ecclesia^^ici 48. v. 7.
(...), our latin, Iuditia defensionis, the English bibles, Judgment of
vengeance.

Many like words there are in the new testament, wherein if a man examine us
according to the vulgar signification of the word as we learned it when we were
children, we can not always avoid bl^me. Great difference ofttimes in the
sense of a word, as it is used by ecclesiastical writers and profane
But if we respect the true use of the latin word in the ancient Church, he
whosoever blames us, therein much more shameth him self. So in S. James, Naue^
minanour, we translate not, Men threaten ships, Jacob. 3. v. 4.
as some gra^marian would perhaps imagine we ought, but ships, are carried or
driven. Abraham confortatus est fide, Romans 4. v. 20.
not, Abraham was comforted in faith, but, Was strengthened in faith. Mat. 11.
v. 10.24.
Christus exprobrauit ciuitatibus in quibus fact essent plurimae virtutes eius
etc. quia si in Tyro et Sidone factae essent virtutes quae factae sunt in
vobis, we English not, Christ vpbrayded the cities wherein were done most of
his virtues etc. but, wherein were done most of his miracles, and because if
in Tire and Sido^ had been wrought the miracles which have been wrought in
you. I pass over very many examples of the like quality and nature, in all
which we give not that English which the latin word seems at first to
require, and yet for all that nether do we (as some man like M. W. may imagine)
forsake our latin, and follow the greek, but by conference of latin with
greek, and one place with an other, and by the fathers of the Church, and
continual practice of the same, we know assuredly, that our enterpreter
verbatim, word for word meant to express the greek (...) in S. James, by his
latin Minar^, that is, Te be driven. (...) in S. Paul by Co^fortari, that is,
To be strengthened, (...) in S. Mat^hew, by Virtutes, Miracles.

And in this place it is most evident that our e^terpreter so took the word
Defendere, and that not only because we see his use in other places, but even
by considering the pieces of this very sentence. Have peace with al men, Romans
12. v.
Non vosmet ipsos defendentes charissmi, sed date locum irae: scriptum est
enim, (...) Defendentes. (...) Mihi vindicta.
Mihi vindicta^ et ego retribuam, dicit dominus. Where very plain it is by the
anteced^n^s, by the consequents, by the whole drift of the place, by that which
he infers, that he meant to take Defendere in the former part, as signifying
the same with vindicare in the later, where unto if we join the use of the
same author in other places, the ancient speech of the Church and fathers, and
the very new heretical bibles, we shall much more easily per^eue, that both he
meant (...) Reueng by Defendere, when he first translated the greek into that
latin, and that we truly gave his meaning, when we turned Defendere by
Revenge, out of latin in to English. And so this first, is no Prodigious error,
nor Profane novelty, nor Heretical contempt, nor Outrageous or desperate
boldness, nor of our part any fault at al: but on M. W. part, it is a gross
error, and a blind error, and foul ignorance, and great malice, and little
vvitte, to amplify so outragiously a thing of so small value if it were an
error, and a thing of no value being no error at al.

The other perhaps that remains is huge and monstrous enough to make
recompense for both. What is that? forsooth whereas Our old editio^ reads
Populus qui ambulauit in tenebris, A great and monstrous fault, to translate a
thing more truly.
The people which has vvalked in darkness, we according to the greek and
more truly have translated, The people that sits in darkness, Populus qui
sedet in tenebris. so that herein at least we have outragiously abused the
people and desperately gone about to deceive the^, by making them read more
truly Sitting in darkness, whereas they should have read, vvalking in darkness.
And how can we answer this? now in truth very hardly. For it is so bald a
toy, as I know not which way well to begin with it. But to say somevvhat,
let me ask him for what purpose should we here forsake our latin and choose
the greek? what article, what conclusion, what argument, either for our
selves or against the heretics get we by this alteration? Certainly he had
need to be very subtle that could gather any.

Next, if I answered that he belyeth us, some man might think it rudely
spoken: but it is most true. For to let pass that his reading is quite beside
the book (for nether S. Hierom nor any old edition that I could yet find
has, Ambulauit, and manifest it is that we translate not, Sedet, Sits, as
any man may judge that ca^ read English) our vulgar copies had Sedebat, Sat,
as we translated: and that is the most common reading, as may be seen, if any
list to peruse the common printes of Andwarp or Louayne etc. of the years
1563, 1564, 1565, 1569, 1570, 1574, 1577, 1580, set forth by Brickeman,
Tiletane, Grauius, Plantine, and sundry others.

Thirdly I add, that here more evidently then in the last, The unconscionable
demeanure of our adversaries.
the Christian reader may learn with what perverse, and malicious, and
unconscionable adversaries we have to deal. The words are cyted out of the
Prophet Esaias thus, Vt adimpleretur quod dictum est per Isaiam prophetam etc.
Esa. 9. v. 2.
Populus qui sedebat in tenebris. The word which S. Matthew (or whosoever was
author of this greek) turned, (...)
Sedebat, is in Isai, Ambulabat, as also it is in the hebrew testament extant
in S. Matthews name. of our vulgar testaments many read according to the
hebrew, Ambulabat, more, according to the greek, Sedebat. In the sense there
can not be imagined any difference without manifest reproof of the Evangelist.
For clear it is, that he cites not the text according to the 70 who read
otherwise (...), but translated it of him self, (...).

And to leave the authority of the Evangelist, plain it is, that either word
is of so small force in this place, that it skilleth not one jot whether you
take the hebrew or greek, Ambulabat, or Sedebat. yea the greatest Protestants
follow according to the letter, nether the one nor the other, nether hebrew nor
greek, but put other words which they esteem in sense to be equivalent:
Beza, Beza, Illyricus, Castalio.
Populus positus in tenebris, Illyricus, Populus qui agebat in tenebris,
Castalio, Populus in tenebris degens, etc. So that if in either of our latin
testaments be any error, one following precisely the hebrew of the prophet, the
other the greek of the Euangeliste, how much greater is their fault which
follow nether of both? But not to spend time in so vain a cau^l, the truth is
(reader) we followed as I have said, the common and best corrected printes,
which have this in the text, and the other in the margent. And therefore in
this also, note thou to what beggarly shifts this man is driven, who to make
some show of talking is glad to snatche at such shadows, to imagine faults,
to seyne lies, and the some nothing vvorth if they were granted.

And these faults in number of obiecting, two, for any color pretense or
show, one, in truth and verity, none, Parturiu^^ montea.
are al those profane, horrible, outrageous, and desperate corruptions
committed in our testament, for which he boldly pronounces as from his chayer
of estate, that this 5000 years from the first creation of the world (he might
have added, or 50000 years before) there was never set forth a new testament in
any language, so full of outrageous faults, so much to the contempt and
irrision of Gods word, and wherein the desperatnes of the papists so much
appeared etc. A man might say, Iuuenal.
Medici mediam pertundite venam, or, minister unto him some physic: for
surely he seems not to be very well in his vvittes.

CHAP. XVI. A defense of such faults as are found in the annotations of the
new testament.
FROM the translation, which he impugneth by such strong arguments as now has
been showed, he proceeds to the annotations, which he refelleth with like
learning and wisdom. And first he begins as before with a like inuectiue
in these words. Nihil illis annotationibus contaminatius vnquam in lucem
prodiit etc. Page 21.
Nothing was ever published a broad more corrupt then those annotations.
Truly as heretofore I have ever hated the Roman religion even with al my
heart, so sone as I could judge of it, so now I confess that I am induced by
these men's desperatnes and importunity to abhor it much more. How much or
how little he abhors our religion, were it not for regard of his own
soul, it is not much material. For except he have better learning in store
then he has uttered yet, I trust his great hatred against it will not do it any
great harm. And these are but words. And as he upon this pretended occasion,
conceiueth so evil of our faith (if he mean as he speaks) so I know many,
who having been brought up not in Catholic religion as he was in heresy,
but in heresy with him, and continuing a long time in the same, and loving it
with al their heart, coming to better judgment, through the grace of God, The
incredible lying and falsifications used by the English writers of our time,
are a great motive to the Catholic faith.
upon consideration of such lying writers as he most honoreth, M. Jewel, M.
Horn etc. have been so altered, that they have detested his gospel even to hell
gates: of which number I confess my self to be one. But this kind of
asseueration is common to both sides. This rather is worth the examining,
whether we have ministered him sufficient occasion to fall in to so deep hatred
of the Catholic faith, or they rather have given us just cause in like manner
to abhor their new gospel. This in some part will appear by M W. discourse
against these Annotations.

Page 22.
Thus he proceeds. I doubt not but when this beat of the Papists is
somevvhat cooled, wise men vvil daily more and more dislike that religion. For
when they understand such things as of old were alvvaies accounted false or
at least suspected, the same now to be set forth of these men as most true
articles of the Roman religion, when they consider with them selves how
miserably these men abuse the holy scriptures to most absurd interpretations,
it can not otherwise be but that they vvil disallovv the whole cause of the
Papists, which they see to be supported with such trifles and tales. Mat. 2.
v. 11.
When they hear the wise men which came from the East to worship Christ to
be called three kings, whose names are Gaspar, mat. 3. v. 12.
Melchior, Baltasar. That John Baptist was a monk and father of monks. That
when S. Act. 7. v. 58.
Steuin was stoned to death a stone rebounded back from his elbovv which
now is kept at A^cona in Italy. That Elias the Thesbite is expected to come
before the later day.

Unto three heads he reduces all the faults which he finds in the
Annotations. The sum of M W accusation.
aestus po^tificius, Heat of the Papists which he hops vvil be cooled, I
know not well. If he mean the zeal of good Priests who to reclaim some
from damnation, venture their lives in England. The protestants manner of
disputing.
although he with his fellow ministers take a ready way to cool their heat
by their strange manner of disputing, I mean by thrusting in every Syllogism
a conclusion of treason, from Sacrament, Mass, Tower disputation Tiburne
disputation.
Confession, Reconciliation, Church, inferring, ^go you are traitors, and so
enflaming the civil magistrate to answer by hanging, them whom they cannot
answer by learning, yet our lord be praised this manner of their dealing,
though it be bloody and of them assumed against the preaching of their first
apostles and martyrs even of necessity, See M. Fox. martirologe in King
Henry's time.
because otherwise they see their gospel can not stand, yet I say, our lord be
praised, experience shows that it cools none, but enflameth many. Luc. 12.
v. 48
Ignem veni mittere in terram (says our Savior) et quid volo nisi vt ardeat?
and howsoever our lord shall deal hereafter with our Country, whether he will
abando^ it to Apostasy, as he has Asia and Africa, or reduce it to the unity
of his church, which he of his infinite mercy grant, thus much assure your
self M. W. that this kind of heat will never be cooled in your days. The plot
is laid, the charges are cast, and the matter is begone, and we see and feel
that Christ has powered his blessing upon it abundantly.

If you mean the heat of vvriting books, with which notvvithsta^ding you
are not much troubled, the way to cool that heat is, either to a^svvere them
more substantially then hitherto you have, English writers.
or else not to answer them at al. For so long as you set forth such stuff as
you for your part and your late vvriters of like quality allow us, your
selves blow the coals and make matter to kindle the fire, that if men would
be silent, children may find sufficient argument to prove you heretics.

If you imagine that our church is so unconstant that she vvil in short time
leave this zeal in preaching the Catholic religion, The Catholic Church
built upon a rock. (Christ) and therefore in all times constant and immovable.
and thereby that your congregation shall gather strength and stabilitie, and
wise men vvil fall in good liking thereof, then your ignorance is great, who
know nether the nature of our Catholic Church and religion, nor of your own
heretical faith and congregation. Not of ours, because you may learn, or
remember that from Christ's time hitherto, nether by persecuting Emperors, nor
by undermining heretics, otherwise qualified the^ are the Luthera^s or
Zuinglians of these days, it was or could ever be subverted, but rather the
more it was assaulted, the better irresisted, the more it was gainsaid, the
more it flourished, and when subtle heretics upon temporal favor were most
insolent, then she most excellently did defend her self. Examples you have of
the times of S. Augustine against Pelagius and the Manichees, S. Hiero^ against
Iovinian and Vigilantius, Lanfrancus against Berengarius, and all the Primitive
church against Constantius, Vale^s, and Arrius. The English church bu^lt upon
the favor of Lords and Ladies, gentlemen and gentlewemen, and therefore ever
tottering, and variable.
Ignorant you are of your own faith and gospel, because you may remember that
nether had it ever any stay or stabilitie since it was first begotten, nether
can it have so long as it endures, the very pillars which under proppe it
being such rotten matter, as of it self quickly corrupts and falls in to
dust.

Fox act and monumentes page 512 Desire of revenge. Ibid. p. 592. Covetousness.
For when in king Henry's reign it first set foot in our realm upon occasions
which I am content to pass over, though M. Fox to the everlasting shame both
of such a gospel and such gospellers, have recorded them and committed them to
eternal memory, how variable a state it had your elders know, Fox acts and
momuments in Henri. 8. pa. 1295. postremae aeditionis.
and he much complains. Eue^ as the king was ruled (says he) and gave care
sometime to one, sometime to an other, so one while religion went forvvard,
at an other season as much backwards again, sometime clean altered and
changed for a season, as they could prevail which were about the king. So
long as Q. Anne lived, the gospel had indifferent good success. And not only
Queens, but very mean ge^tlemen and doctors of physic were then able to
craze your gospel, and set it backward or forward as pleased them. For so much
also is recorded in M. Foxes story in the end of king Henry's life.

Thus writes he. So long as Queen Anne, L. Cromwell, B. Cranmer, M. Denny, D.
Buts, with such like, were about the King and could prevail with him, Fox
acts and momuments, in the end of king Henryes life* page 682.
what organe of Christ's glory did more good in the church the^ he? Again
when sinister and wicked counsel had gotten once the foot in, thrusting
truth and verity out of the princes ears, how much as religion and al good
things went forvvard before, so much on the contrary side al revolted
backwards again. And this gospel (as M. Fox calls it) which King Henry left
established as he thought most assuredly by Act of Parliament, Continual
change of the English faith.
in his son King Edwards days went clean vpside down. In Q. Mary's days
came a new alteration. under the Q. Majesty that now is, an other clean
contrary. And at this present, find you not a general murmuring even amongst
the Protestants against the Communion book and state of religion which in the
beginning of her Majesty's reign was brought in? If the Catholics said
nothing, have you not the Puritans most eagerly detesting your faith, and were
it not for the Princes sword, like to dispossess you of chayrs and churches?
And what stabilitie can that gospel have which altogether depends of the good
allowance of the Prince and her council in Parliament, which we know within
these fifty years so often to gain said one an other. And if it should please
God to turn the Queen's heart to the catholic faith (for which we incessantly
pray) were not the face of your religion streightvvaies altered and turned
quite vpside down? must nor the inferior parts of the body turn and frame
them selves according to the head? would not the same statutes which now are
unjustly executed upon Catholics, without alteration of any one word, be much
more justly executed upon the Ministers and Superintendents, if so be they
called her Majesty Scismatike or Heretic? Wherefore little reason have you to
imagine that wisemen will fall in liking of your new devised fancy, which as it
altogether depends upon the Favor of Court and Courtiers, so for this very
reason, must needs ever remain as chaungeable as the Court and Courtly
benevolence is.

And your father Luther who best knew the nature of his children, and quality
of your religion, gives such a sentence of it, Luthers judgment of the
Sacramentarie religion.
as I doubt not at this present is allowed of all the wisest of our Realm, and
much confirmed by your manner of writing. The arguments and reasonings of the
sacramentaries (says he) are such vain words without wit, Luther tom. 7.
defensio. verborum coenae fol. 381.
that I can not marvel sufficiently how learned men can be moved with such
lies. and truly they do their matters with so fearful a conscience, Trepida
co^scientia.
that they seem to vvish they had never taken them in hand. Equide^ opinor si
eis esset potestas de integro co^sule^di, quod nu^quam inciperent. Verily I
suppose if they were to consulte of the matter a fresh, they would never
begin their sacrame^tarie heresy. And I verily suppose, if the wise governors
of our Realm who now may see the issue of your gospel, what wickedness and
iniquity in life, confusion and Atheism in faith, contempt of God and man it
has brought with it, if they were now to consult of the matter a fresh, I
believe verily with your father Martin Luther, that amongst al heresies of name
at this time current in the Christian world, they would least of al have
admitted yours, as being the most gross, most licentious, and most improbable
of al others.

Faults historical.
But come we to the particular faults historical committed by us. Things
always accounted false or suspected, we set forth as most true articles of
the Roman religion, as that the wise me^ which came from the East, were 3
kings and had such names. That S. John Baptist was father of monks, That a
stone with which Steven was stoned to death, is reserved at Ancona etc.
Before I come to make a^swere, Note.
I wish the reader to carry in remembrance, More contaminate then these
annotations, That we have shevved herein great desperatenes and importunity,
That things always accounted false or suspected, we affirm as most true
articles of the Roman religion etc. In the preface fol. b. ii
In these annotations we show the studious reader, the Apostolic tradition,
the expositions of the holy fathers, the decrees of the Catholic church and
most ancient Councels. which means who so ever trusts not for the sense
of holy scriptures, but had rather follow his private judgment or the arrogant
spirit of these Sectaries, he shall vvorthely through his own vvilfulnes be
deceived. Now whether part fails in perfourmance of that which it
undertakes, whether we give not The sense of holy scriptures according to
the Apostolic tradition, the expositions of holy fathers, or whether he
convince us of Desperatnes, and importunity, and such contamination as he
threatens, this is that which the reader concerning either side, has to note
and consider.

Of the wise men thus we say. These three sages, In Mat. 2. v. 11.
being principal men of their country, represent the whole state of Princes,
Kings, and Emperors, Psalm. 71. Esa. 60.
that were according to the prophecies of David and Esaias to believe in Christ,
to humble them selves to his cross, to foster, enrich, adorn and defend his
church: where upon it is also a very convenient and agreeable tradition of
antiquity, Chrysostom. Theophil. Cic. de diuinat. Plin. lib. 20.
and a received opinion among the faithful, not lacking testimonies of ancient
vvriters, and much for the honor of our Savior, that these three also were
Kings: Esther. 1.13.14.
to wit, either according to the state of those countries, where the princes
were Magi, and Magi the greatest about the prince: or as we read in the
scriptures, of Melchisedech King of Salem, Tob. 2.15. Ambro. 1. offic. ca. 12.
and many other Kings that dwelled within a small compass: or as Iobes three
friends are called Kings. These are commonly called the three Kings of Colen,
because their bodies are there, translated thither from the East country.
Their names are said to have been Gaspar, Melchior, Baltasar. In these words
thou see (reader) upon what ground, and with what moderation we speak of
that matter, not precisely auouching them to be Kings in such sort as we
commonly esteem of that name, but after an other sort and some inferior
degree. Albeit if we affirmed them to be as great monarkes as the Kings of
France or Spain, or the great Sophie of Persia, we might so affirm for ought
he brings to the contrary.

But because M. W. makes his first entrance with this matter, as though it
were so absurd, let us search out wherein lies the great absurdity and fault
committed in this note. Is it trow you, in that we call them Kings, or in that
we say they were three, or in that by our report their names are said to have
been such? That the wise men were king^.
If because of the first, let him show his reason why that can be so harmeful,
what it makes against the honor of Christ, what against the verity of the
scriptures, the faith of the church, tradition ecclesiastical, the manners of
me^, or any title, point or dependence of Christianity, and Christian
profession. The like I affirm of the second, the like of the third, the like
of al three joined together. We call them kings, and why not? seeing the
scripture well bears with that appellation, and the ancient fathers have so
called them many hundred years before we were borne. Tertullian contra
Marcionem. l. 3. Ciprian. ser. de Bapt. numer. 1. Chrysostom. hom. 1. ex variis in
Mat. locis
So Tertullian in his 3. book against Marcion calls them. so S. Cyprian
calls them, in his sermon De baptismo et manifestatione Christi. And S.
Chrysostom proves by scripture that they were kings. thus he writes. The
wise men offered gifts to this child Christ according as the holy Ghost had
testified before of them, saing Esai 60. They shall come from Saba offering
gold, and frankencense, and precious stone. We acknovvledge that the wise men
evidently fulfilled this prophecy. David quoque de his ita testatur, psalm. 71.
Reges Thaersis et Insulae munera offerent, Reges Arabum et Saba dona adducent.
David also witnesses of these, psalm. 71. The kings of Thaersis and the Isles
shall offer gifts, The kings of the Arabians and Saba shall bring presents. And
S. Hier. in psa. 71.
Hierom applies that text of the psalm to them in like manner. And Tertullian
against the Jews who seemed with M. W. to envy all this honor of Christ
vvriteth thus. David also spoke of this offering of gold when he said, Tertull.
co^tra Iudaeos probatio. natiuit. Christi.
ps. 71. there shall be given to him of the gold of Arabia. and again, the
kings of Arabia and Saba shall bring him gifts. Nam et magos reges sere habuit
Oriens. Aug. ser. 43. ad fatres in Ere.

Claudian. in Epigra^a. Isidorus and Remigius apud D. Tho. in catena in Mat. 2.
Theophi. in Mat. 2. Ansel. in Mat. ca. 2.


For the East part had commonly such wise men for their kings. S. Augustine
plainly names them kings. so does Claudianus, so does S. Isidorus, so does
S. Remigius, so does Theop^ilactus, so do generally the writers that have lived
in the church this later 500 years as we learn by S. Anselme, who speaks De
istis tribus regibus, Of these three kings, as of a thing most usual and
vulgar. Gesnerus in Pa^dectis Vniuersa. lib. vltimo. tit. 2. fol. 29.
And Conradus Gesnerus directs you to certain writers who have made
treatises, De tribus Magis, De tribus sanctis regibus, Of these three wise
men, Of these three holy kings. And among these ancient and Catholic fathers
to allege one new, Zuing. to. 4. in Mat. ca. 2.
Zuinglius holds it as very probable that they were kings. Thus he speaks
of them, writing upon the 2 chapter of S. Matthew. Magi (says he) sunt
sapientes et astrorum et omnium rerum peritissimi. huiusmodi homines fere
administrationi rerum publicarum adhibuerunt gentiles. Magi are wise men
skilful in astronomy and al other matters. The gentiles made such men commonly
gouerners of their common vvelthes. After al which, for us to call them kings,
how can it in any sort be hurtful or prejudicial to any truth of Christian
religion? Nay on the contrary side, whosoever carpeth at this, certainly he
maligneth the glory of our Savior, he secretly detracteth from his honor, and
maliciously pincheth and snarleth at the ancient and Apostolic church, which
in this sort witnessed such prophecies to have been fulfilled.

But perhaps M. W. That the wise men were three.
is offended at the number of three, where upon S. Augustine so sweetly
alludeth unto the mystery of the Blessed Trinity, and that Christ was King,
God, and yet should dye as a mortal man. This is that great corruption which so
greueth him. But who would be grieved here at, except some detestable Arian,
Trinitarian, Libertine, or Anabaptist, against whose religion only (for ought I
know) that note makes. And touching the story that they were three, August.
ser. 1 de epipha. Leo sermo. 2.3.4.5.6.8.
S. Austin plainly affirms it, Tres erant. So says S. Leo the Great and
first of that name, above a dozen times in his sermons upon the feast of the
Epiphanie. And whereas the Evangelist speaks of them, not in the dual but in
the plural number, (...) fewer they could, not well be, and more we need not
to believe, except we see more reason the^ yet appears.

Their names.
And touching the last part, vz, Their names are said to have been such, how
could we have spoken more moderatly? For who has heard them called by any
other names? And I suppose they were not namelesse. And if they had names, why
not Gaspar, Melchior, Baltazar, rather then William, John, and Thomas, or any
other, that M. W. list to imagine, whereas the common opinion of our
forefathers makes for the first, no probability or reason can be brought for
the second. And if M. VV. believe that the Jewish Sinagoge erred not in
continuing by tradition without scripture the names of Pharaos wicked
sorcerers, Iannes and Mambres, 2. Tim. 3. v. 8.
why thinks he not this much more likely, that the Church would keep in
remembrance the names of these such excellent men, who with so great danger
came so far to adore our Savior in his infancy, and are called Primitiae
gentium, in whom the Church of the gentiles first began? But hovvso ever the
exact truth be in this case, it is a very small point of desperatnes for us to
write, that their names are said to have been such, and most false it is that
we set this forth, as a most certain article of the Roman religion: and
whatsoever, either in general or in special shall be objected hereafter, in the
mean season the annotation grounded upon good reason, gathered out of the
scriptures, the psalms of David, Esai, Esther, Tobias, besides other
authority sacred and profane, S. Ambrose S. Chrysostom, Theophilact, Cicero,
and Pliny, in any judgment (I trow) is able to cou^teruaile the bare word of
so seely a man as M. VV. shows him self.

Mat. 3. v. 1.
Touching S. John thus we say. Mat. 3. v. 1. Desert. Of this word desert (in
greek Eremus) comes the name Eremitages, and Eremites, that live a religious
and austere life in deserts and solitary places, by the example of S.
Monastical life.
John Baptist, whom the holy doctors therefore call the prince, and as it were
the author of such profession. S. Chrysostom. hom. 1. in Marcum. et hom. de Io.
Baptista. Hiero^ ad Eustach. de eustod. virg. Isid. l. 2. c. 15. de diui. off.
Bernardus de excel. Io. Baptistae. vvherevvith the protestants are so offended,
that they say S. Magd. cent. 5. c. 6. page 711.
Chrysostom. spoke rashly and untruly. And no marueil, for whereas the
Evangelist himself in this place makes him a perfect pattern of penance and
Eremitical life, for desert or wilderness, for his rough and rude apparel, for
abstaining from al delicate meats (according to our Saviors testimony also
of him, Cent. 1. li. 1. cap. 10. Cythraeus in 3. ca. Mat. ^ucerus ibi.
Mat. 11.8. Luc. 7.33.) they are not ashamed to pervert al with this strange
commentary, that it was a desert full of towns and villages, his garment was
cha^let, his meat such as the country gave and the people there used: to make
him thereby but a common man like to the rest in his manner of life: clean
against scriptures, fathers and reason. Be Canis. de verbi Dei corruptelis
lib. 5. c. 2.3.4
Here (Christian reader) to prove that S. John was a monk, thou have as
before, reason plainly deduced out of the scriptures, thou have the ancient
fathers deducing the same with us, S. Hierom, S. Chrysostom, S. Isidorus, S.
Bernard. Against these scriptures and ancient Doctors, An easy kind of
answering.
thou hear the bare word of this new Doctor, who had he ever been a good
scholar, would never so boldly without face or forehead have abused thy
patience, as to oppose his only word against these reasons, Doctors, and
scriptures.

Touching the stone which is reserved at Ancona, and the coming of Elias
before the day of judgment thus we say, Of the first, Act. 7. v. 58.
Read a marvelous narratio^ in S. Augustine of one stone, Relikes and miracles
in the honor of Martyrs.
that hitting the Martyr on the elbovv rebou^ded back to a faithful man that
stood near, who keeping and carrying it with him, was by revelation warned
to leave it at Ancona in Italy: vvherevpo^ a Church or Memory of S. Steven
was there erected, and many miracles done after the said martyrs body was
found out, and not before. Aug. tomo 10. Ser. 38. de diuersis. in aedit. Paris.
Now of al these, miracles, Church built in memory of Martyrs, Revelations,
Stone reserved, M. W. digesteth well the rest, only he seems to wonder that a
stone could be kept so long. As though that were so wonderful a case, or there
were not both in scripture, Hebrew. 9. verse. 4.
as Aarons rod and the Manna, and out of the scripture, as al Churches through
Christendom are witness, many things preserved as long time, far more unlike to
continue then stones, which may well endure fifteen hundred years five times
told, if they be kept as well as that at Ancona. And whatsoever fault he find in
the story, let him scoff at S. Austin who so seriously rehearses it, not at
us, who refer only the reader to S. Austin, and speak never a word of our
selves.

Mat. 17. v. 11
And the like I answer for the second, of which these are our words. Christ
distinguishes here plainly between Elias in person, who is yet to come
before the judgment, and between Elias in name, to wit, John the Baptist,
who is come already in the spirit and virtue of Elias. So that it is not John
Baptist only nor principally of vvho^ Malachie prophecieth (as our Adversaries
say) but Elias also him self in person* which annotatio^ contains nothing else
touching this point, but the very words of our Savior and the prophet
Malachie, That Elias shall come. which words when our Savior spoke, S. John
Baptiste, who was Elias by some rese^bla^ce, figure, and office, was past and
dead. This truth else where we approve by the authority of S. Aust. Tract. 4.
in Joan. Apoc. c. 11. verse. 3.
li. 1. de pec. mer. ca. 3. and the rest of the latin Doctors. as S. Hierom ad
Pammach. epist. 61. ca. 11. et in psalm. 20. S. Ambr. in psalm. 45. S. Hilar.
can. 20. in Matthew. Prosper. lib. vlt. de promiss. ca. 13. S. Greg. lib. 14.
Moral. ca. 11. et homil. 12. in Ezech. Beda. in. 9. Marci. The Greek fathers
also, as S. Chrysostom. hom. 58. in Matt. et hom. 4. in 2 Thessalonians. et hom. 21. in
Genes. et hom. 22. in epist. ad Hebr. Theophilact. and Oecumen. in 17. Matthew.
S. Daemas. lib. 4. de Orthodoxa fide. ca. 27. Finally by the universal consent
of al Christians, where of S. Austin is witness in these words. Heliam
Thesbitem vltimo te^pore venturum ante iudicium, Aug. de ciuit. li. 20. cap. 29.
celeberrimu^ est in sermonibus cordibusque fidelium. That Elias the Thesbite
shall come before the day of judgment, it is a most notorious thing in the
mouth and hearts of faithful men. And now the Prophet foretelling so, our
Savior affirming so, the ancient fathers both Greek and Latin teaching so,
faithful and christian men always believing so, this is the question which I
will not dispute but leave it at large, and M. W. may do well to put it to his
thesis of Antichrist (for they are both just of like probability) and handle
it at the next comenceme^t, vz, whether we must rather credit him upon his
bare word telling us one thing, or the universal consent of Christendom and
the primitive Church, Intolerable boldness and arrogancy.
rising upon the express words of the prophet and our Savior him self,
teaching us the contrary. And these touching matters historical, be the
horrible faults of our Annotations, for which he accuses us of Desperatnes,
and them of such absurdity, that never any thing more contaminate and corrupt,
was set abroad in the sight of the world.

Faults in making arguments.
Our errors in making arguments are far more, at least in number and show, how
soever they prove in substance and truth. I will follow the order begone, that
is, first particularly I will write down the argument which he fathereth upon
us, then the reason as we gave it out: by conference whereof* the indifferent
reader shall be able to judge either of our ignorance, or his impudency. Thus he
proceeds. Wise men must needs much more abhor from your religion, when
they shall find you thus to gather of the scriptures. Christ and Peter vvalked
on the waters. Whit. pa. 22 Argument. 1.
ergo the body of Christ may be shut up in a little bread. Our words are these.
Mat. 14. v. 26
When not only Christ, but by his power Peter also walks upon the waters,
it is evident that he ca^ dispose of his own body above nature, and co^trar^e
to the natural conditions thereof, as to go through a door, John 20. to be in
the compass of a little bread. Ephiphan. in A^nchorato. Let M. Whitaker show
the reason why the one follows not as well as the other, why he vvil more
abridge Christ's power, and bynd him to the rules of nature in the Sacrament,
then in that miraculous entering to his disciples, or vvalking on the waters.
A^beit if he had advisedly considered the note, he might have perceived the
same to consist, not so much in our collection, as in the authority of
Epiphanius, Real presence.
who makes the case of Christ's being in the Sacrament so clear, that he
accounts M. VV. and his fellows for their infidelity in that behalf,
reprobates from the face of God, and sure of eternal damnation. Excidit a
gratia et salute, in the place before quoted.

Peter vvalked on the waters. Ergo the Pope of Rome has authority over all the
church. Mat. 14. v. 29


This application as S. Bernard and Catholic men use it, is no more
reprouable, then that of our Savior, As Moses exalted the serpent in the
desert, Joan. 3. v. 14
so must the son of man be exalted, Or that of S. call. 4. d
Paul, Abraham had two sons Ismael and Isaac, one of the bond woman
according to the flesh, and one of the free woman by promise. And as then he
that was borne according to the flesh, persecuted him that was after the
spirit, so now also. But for a man to follow M. VV. Scripture made
ridiculous, when it comes to the handling of profane men.
example, and make Christ or S. Paul to argue after his pattern thus, The
serpent was exalted in the desert, Ergo Christ must be hanged on the cross,
or, Abraham's two sons could not well agree, but Ismael vexed Isaac, Ergo the
Jews must vex and persecute the Christians, this in old time would have
been accounted divinity fit for Lucian and such like scorners, howsoever it
be now used of these new gospellers in great sadness. Thus stands our note.
Peter (says S. Bernard) vvalking upon the waters, as Christ did, Peter's
primacy.
declared him self the only vicar of Christ, which should be ruler not over
one people, but over al. For many waters are many peoples. Bernard. lib. 2. de
considerat. ca. 8. See the place, how he deduceth from Peter the like
authority and jurisdiction to his successor the bishop of Rome.

The good Samaritane said to the host, whatsoever thou shall supererogate,
Luc. 10. v. 35.
I vvil restore it to the. ergo there are works of supererogation. This
argument follows well enough, and it is S. Augustins conclusion, not ours. This
is the annotation. S. Augustine says that the Apostle (1. Cor. 9.) according
to this place did supererogate, that is, did more then he needed or was bound
to do, when he might have required al duties for preaching the Gospel, but
would not. li. de op. Monach. c. 5. Whereof it comes, that the works
which we do more then precept, be called vv^rkes of Supererogation: and
whereby it is also evident against the Protestants, that there be such
works. See Optatus li. 6. cont. Parm. how aptly he applies this parable to
S. Paul's counsel of virginity (1 Cor. 7.) as to a work of supererogation.

Christ was transfigured. ergo he gives us his body in form of bread and
wine. Man. 17. v. 2.
This is M. VV. scoffing, not our arguing. we only deduce hence, that Christ
may so do, as not being bound to philosophical rules or conditions of nature,
which is clear and manifest, not that for this cause he does so, which is
foolish and impertinent. See the first argument. Our words are. Mark in this
Tra^sfiguration many marvelous points. As, that he made not only his own
body, which then was mortal, but also the bodies of Moses and Elias, the one
dead, the other to die, for the time as it were immortal: thereby to represent
the state and glory of his body, and his Saints in heaven. By which
marvelous transfiguring of his body, you may the less marvel that he ca^
exhibit his body under the form of bread and wine, or otherwise as he list.

Mat. 22. v. 30 Scripture falsified.
Saints in heaven are like unto Angels, because they use not marriage. ergo
they can hear the prayers of al men, and every where succor us. This
consequent consists of two parts, the one is, the falsificatio^ of Christ's
reason, the other is like falsificatio^ of our argument drawn thence. For
nether Christ said, Saints are like unto Angels, because they use not marriage,
but contrariwise, they use not marriage, because they are like unto Angels:
nether infer we their ability of hearing or succouring us, for that false
cause which M. VV. assigns, but because they are advanced unto the state
and condition of angels as says our Savior, whose office ^s to succor and
aid men, as in the scripaure we find every where, and the very English
Communion book does teach and allow. Communion book, in the collect of
Michelmas day.
The difference is as great, as if when one argues thus, N. is a man,
therefore he has a head: an other should inuert it after this sort, N. has a
head, therefore he is a man. The first is true, as any may perceive. the second
is false, as whereby an ass or a goose is proved to be a man. This is our
note. As Christ proves here, that in heaven they nether mary nor are married,
The Saints hear our prayers.
because there they shall be as Angels: by the very same reason, is proved, that
Saints may hear our prayers and help us, be they near or far of, because
the Angels do so, and in every moment are present where they l^st, and need
not to be near us, when they hear or help us.

Joseph vvrapped Christ's body in sindo^. Mat. 27. v. 59
ergo Christ's body on the altar must be laid in pure linen. I know not what M.
W. disliketh in this argument, whether the real presence of the same body on
the altar, which was in the sepulcher, or the linen used at the altar, as it
was in the sepulcher, or the relation from one to the other. Because each part
is warranted in the Annotation by sufficient authority, I think it needeles
to add any more, until I better know the point whereat he is offended. This
is the note. This honor and duty done to Christ's body being dead, was
marvelous grateful and meritorious. And this vvrapping of it in clean sindon
may signify by S. S. Hiero. in hunc locum
Hierom, that the body of our Lord is to be vvrapped not in gold, precious
stones, and silk, but in pure linen. To. 1. Conc.
And so in the whole Church it is observed by S. Siluesters constitution, that
the Corporal whereupon our Lords body lies on the altar, must be pure and
plain linen.

The vvome^ came to behold the sepulcher. Ergo now we must go in pilgrimage
to the holy sepulcher. Mat. 28. v. 1.
If M.VV. enforce the word, must, as it seems, we confess the argument
follows not, Pilgrimage to holy places.
and the argument so, is of his own devising, not of ours. For we bind not,
nor enforce any man by this example, but they that list, may tarry at home, and
take their ease. Mary waying that duty of visiting such holy places in it
self, without constrayning or binding any to it of necessity, then
presupposing this to be well done by these holy women, the reason follows well
thence, to approve the like devotion of Christian people now. And this
deduction is justified by S. Hierom and the universal consent of Christendom
in his time. The words of the note are. The devout women came to visit our
Saviors Sepulcher, and for their devotion first deserved to know the
Resurrection, and to see him risen. The honor of which Sepulcher and of the
pilgrimage thereunto in the primitive Church, S. Hierom declares in these
words. In epist. 17. Paul. and Eus^. ad Marcel. tom. 1.
The Jews sometime honored Sa^cta Sanctoru^, because there were the Cherubs,
and the Propitiatory, and the Arc of the Testament, Manna, Aarons rod, and
the golden altar. Does not the Sepulcher of our lord seem to thee more
honorable? which as often as we enter into so often do we see our Savior
lie in the sindon: and stayng there a while, we see the Angel again sit at
his feet, and at his head the napkin vvrapped together. Esa. 11.
The glory of whose Sepulcher, we know was long prophesied before Joseph
hevved it out, by Esaias sayng. And his rest shall be honor: to wit, because the
place of our Lords burial should be honored of al men. And at this present,
notvvithstanding the Turks dominion, yet do the religious Christian Catholic
me^n by Gods m^ghtie providence keep the holy Sepulcher, which is vv^thin a
goodly Church, and Christians come out of all the world in Pilgrimage to it.

Christ appeared to the two disciples in an other form. Mar. 16. v. 12
ergo he is in the sacrament in form of bread. This is of like quality with
the fourth, and needs no farther answer. The words are. Christ body under
diverse forms
Christ though he have but one corporal shape, natural to his person, yet by
his omn potencie he may be in whatsoever form, and appear in the likeness
of any other man or creature, as he list. Therefore e^et no man think it
strange, that he may be under the form of bread in the B Sacrament.

Christ to the man domb and deaf said, Ephpheta. Mar. 7. v. 34.
ergo exorcisme is to be used, and the same words to be recited in baptism.
This ergo, is as wise as many of the rest, for ab^olutely no more necessary it
is to use, Ephpheta, in baptism because Christ so spoke, then it is to use,
Eli Eli La^mazabachthani, Mat. 27. v. 46
which Christ spoke as well as the other. Argument we make none, but only we
note out of S. Ambrose, that the ancient and primitive Church, which best knew
which words and actions of Christ were imitable, which were not, that Church
retained this word and other ceremonies used by our Savior. Aug. de
Ecclesiasticis dogma. c. 31* Idem de nupt^is, and concupis e^^^a. lib. 2 ca.
18. and 29.
As also the same Church universally used, Exorcisme, as witnesses S. Austin,
which he calls, Traditionem ve^ust^ss^^^am, antiqu^ssimam, undatissimam, in
Ecclesia toto orb diffusa. A tradition most old and ancient, and most
grounded in the Church dispersed through the whole world. Our words are. The
Church does most godly imitate and use th^se very words and ceremonies of our
Savior in the Exorcismes before baptismes, Exorcismes and other ceremonies in
baptism.
to the healing of their souls that are to be baptized, as Christ hear healed
tho bodily infirmity and the disease of the soul together. Ambr lib. 1. de
Sacram. ca. 1.

Luke the Evangelist used a familiar preface. Luc. 1. v. 3.
ergo the author of the second book of the Machabees might desire pardon and
excuse his slendernes, and yet his vvritings be Canonical. This argument
follows well. and M.VV. will make many worse before he make one better, if he
take and wa^gh the word and reason as they are delivered in the Annotation. For
it does derogate as much from the majesty of the holy Ghost to use humane
helps in searching out the truth, as to crave pardon for the style and manner
of writing. And if you will apply this note to that argument made against the
Machabees, Page 3.
and so much vaunted of by your dearest brother in Christ. M. VV. Charke in the
Tower, you shall find the case to be like, and both S. Luke and the Machabees,
touching your censure to stand upon one ground. Thus urges he there. In the
4. days conference. The protestants reason against the Machabees, is as
forcible against S. Lukes gospel.
The vvriters of scripture ask not any pardon either for the matter or for the
manner. Again, Whatsoever is the word of the holy Ghost nether does ask, nor
does need pardon in any respect. Again, The holy Ghost never asks pardon of
man for any thing he does, for that were to bring God under man and make the
spirit of God subject to the allowance or disallovvance of sinful flesh. And
may not all this as well be applied against S. Luke? The holy Ghost is not
ignorant, so as he needs to run to sinful flesh, thence to learn what
Christ did. The holy Ghost can of him self teach his Evangelists and craves
not help of mortal man etc. And therefore S. Luke writes not of the holy Ghost,
when he professes him self to write by humane aid and diligence.

Much more these reasons take from us many entier epistles of S. Paul. More
arguments of humane spirit in S. Paul's epistles the^ in the book of
Machabees. Romans 25. v. 15.
For what shall we judge of the epistle to the Romans? Audacius autem scripsi
vobis fratres ex part. I have written to you brethren more boldly in some
part. what is this but an excuse, a very craving of pardon? So to the
Corinthians. And I was with you in infirmity, and fear, 1. Cor. 2. v. 3
and much trembling. Is the holy Ghost in infirmity? in fearer does the holy
Ghost tremble? After, he desires them, To bear with some little of his folly.
Ibi. c. 11. v. 1.17.
That I speak I speak not according to God, but as it were in foolishnes.
because many glory according to the flesh, I also vvil glory, Ib. c. 12. v. 11
Factus sum insipiens, vos me coegistis. I am become foolish, you have
compelled me. Such places many we find in S. Paul's epistles, which if some
man like M.W. and M Charke should apply to the holy Ghost, and ask whether
the holy Ghost could do this or that, could glory, could brag, could speak
not according to God, could be foolish, the party so arguing should prove him
self little better then a fool, and yet the argument is a pithy and wise as
this against the Machabees. And I much muse, whether it is not more against the
honor o^ the holy Ghost, to crave the prayers of sinful flesh, Romans 15. v. 30.
which implies sum fear of falling and humane imbecill^^ie* then to excuse
the manner of the sti^e and writing, and in that respect Crave pardon of sinful
flesh, which is a thing of far less prejudice. And yet this does the Spirit
of God almost in every epistle of S. Paul, to the Romans, 2. Cor. 6.11. Ephe.
6., 19. Colos. 4.3. These. 5.25.
to the Corinthians, to the Ephesians, to the Colossians, to the Thessalonians,
etc. Thus stands the note. Hereby we see, that though the Holy Ghost ruled
the pen of holy vvriters that they might not err, Sacred writers and holy
Councils.
yet did they use humane means to search out and find the truth of the things
they vvrote of. Even so do Councels, and the President of them, Gods vicar,
discuss and examine al causes by humane means, the assistance of the Holy
Ghost concurring and directing them into al truth, according to Christ's
promise, 10.16.13: as in the very first Council of the Apostles them selves at
Jerusalem is manifest Act. 15, 7. and 28. Again here we have a familiar
preface of the Author as to his friend, or to every godly Reader (signified by
Theophilus) concerning the cause and purpose and manner of his vvriting, and yet
the very same is confessed scripture, with the whole book following. The
second book of the Machabees.

1. Match. 2. and 15.


Marvel not then if the author of the second book of the Machabees use the
like humane speeches both at the beginning and in the later end, nether do thou
therefore reject the book for no Scripture, as our heretics do: or not
think him a sacred writer.

The Angel vvissheth well to me^ of good vvil, Luc. 2. v. 14. This is M. W.
gloss added to the text.
that is, those whom God embraces with his grace and mercy. ergo men have
free will. By this example a man may see what difference is between the old
Gospel and the new. If the words were ^easte as in the old time they were read
and understood, the consequent of this reason would have held, and so S.
Augustine gathered whom we allege. But taking the word and sense as M. W.
delivers it, nether S. Augustine nor any other sober man did or would ever
have inferred such a consequent. Our words are. Free will.
The birth of Christ gives not peace of mind or salvation but to such as be
of good will, because he works not our good against our vvilles, but our
vvilles concurring. August. quaest. ad Simplic. li. 1. q. 2. tom. 4.

Christ went into Peter's ship. ergo the whole church is Peter's ship. Luc.
5. v. 3.
This is of like quality with the second before noted. It is only an allegory
aptly and truly declared, the substance whereof is usual among the ancient
fathers, who call many times the Catholic church by the name of Peter's shipp.
The Catholic Church Peter's ship.
And touching this special place, S. Gregory makes no question, Gregor. in
Job. li. 17. c. 14.
but Christ so signified by this fact when he made choice to enter into that
ship. Thus he writes. Jesus a scended into Peter's ship etc. sitting there he
preached to the multitudes. Per nauem Petri, quid aliud quam commissa Petro
ecclesia designatur? See S, Amb. in Luc lib. 4 cap. 5. Aug. quaest. eua^g. l.
2. c. 2 ^ed. in Luc. cap. 5.
By Peter's ship what else is signified, but the church, which was committed
to Peter? To like purpose upon the same place writes S. Ambrose, S. Augustine,
and S. Bid. The words of our annotation are these. It is purposely expressed
that there were two ships, and that one of them was Peter's, and that
Christ went into that one, and sat down in it, and that sitting he taught
out of that ship: no doubt to signify the church resembled by Peter's ship,
and that in it is the chair of Christ, and only true preaching.

Barnabas laid down the price of his land at the Apostles feet. Act. 4. v.
37.
ergo we must kiss the Popes feet. If the Apostle S. Peter had not before
told us that heretics in the later days especially should be Illusores,
mockers, 2. Pet. 3. v. 3.
and the Prophet David named their general profession, Psalm. 1.
a Chair or school of scorners, Cathedra^ irrisorum, Heretics generally
given to scorning and mocking.
we might by our own experience have learned thus much of the Protestant
writers of our time, who by this feate among the popular have brought into
contempt the grauest parts of Christian religion, and have much shaken the
obedience due both to spiritual and civil magistrates. Vide Brentium contra
Bullinger. de mansionibus in caelo. anno 1561. fol. 22.23.35. Carlisle in his
book that Christ descended not in to hell. fol. 35, 36, 37, 38, and 96, 97, 98.
By this chiefly the Lutherans refel the article of Christ's Ascension and
being in heaven, as we see in Bre^tius. By this the Zuinglians refute Christ's
desce^ding into hell, as we see in master Carlisle, and disprove the real
presence, whereof their common preachings and writings are witness. By this as a
very plausible mean the Germane ministers stirred the people against their
Emperor Charles the fifth as we read in Sleidan. Sleid. li. 17. pa. 311.
And how like M. W. is unto them for his small talent, by most of these his
merry conclusions it appears. In this present, how far his unreasonable
collection differs from our reasonable admonition, the discrete reader may
easily judge. Our words are, Barnabas as the re^, did not only give his goods
as in vulgar alms, but in all humble and reverent manner as things dedicated to
God, he laid the^ down at the Apostles holy seete, as S. Luke alvvaies
expresses, and gave them not into their hands. 4. Reg. 4. v. 37.
The Sunamite sell down and embraced Elisaeus feet. Many that asked benefits
of Christ (as the woman sick of the bloody flux) fell down at his feet,
Luc. 8. v. 47. Luc. 7. v. 38.
and Marie kissed his feet. Such are signs of due reverence done both to
Christ and to other sacred persons, either Prophets, Apostles, Popes, or other
representing his person in earth. See in S. Hierom of Epipanius Bishop in
Cypres, how the people of Jerusalem of al sorts flocked together unto him,
offering their children (to take his blessing) kissing his feet, plucking the
hemm^s of his garment, so that he could not move for the throng. Ep: 61: cap.
4. cont. error. Io. Hierosol.

The Eunuch of the Queen of AEthiopia, came to Jerusalem to worship. Act. 8.
v. 27.
ergo pilgrimages to holy places are acceptable to God. why this reason should
not be allowable, I can not guess. The Eunuch came a long journey from
Aethiopia to Jerusalem there to worship God* and is commended for so doing.
therefore if we go in like manner to Rome or Jerusalem for like cause, we are
not to be blamed. where is the diss^militude? Pilgrimage to holy places.
whence rises the inequality? what part is there not answerable? that man to
us, his fact to ours, his intention to ours, the beginning, continuance and
end, proportionable to ours, every part and parcel of his doing, fully
rese^bled in ours. If M.W. have any hid imagination which we can not reach
unto, let him imparte it, and we will frame him a reasonable answer. The
marginal note upon the words of S. Luke is this. Note that this Ethiopian
came to Jerusalem to adore, that is, on pilgrimage. Whereby we may learn
that it is an acceptable act of religion, to go from home to places of greater
devotion and sanctification.

To Christ is given a name above al names, that in the name of Jesus, Phil. 2.
v. ^0.
al knees should bovv. Ergo so often as we hear the name of Jesus, we must put
of our cappes and make curtesy. For confirmation of this ergo, I send M. W. to
M. D. Whitg. who will ease me of some labor in this behalf. He tells him, D.
Whit. defens. tract. 21. c. 7. pa. 743.
That this gesture of capping and kneeling at the name of Jesus, has continued
in the Church many hundred years, M.W. takes part with Jews and Infidels
against Christians.
and yeldeth this reason thereof, that the Christians to signify their faith
in Jesus and their obedience unto him, and to confute by open gesture the
wicked opinion of the Jews and other infidels (who most abhorred that name)
used to do bodily reverence at al times when they heard the name of Jesus, Why
Christians do honor at the name of Jesus.
but specially when the gospel was read, which contained that glad tidings
of salvation, which is procured unto man by Christ Jesus, where upon also he
is called Jesus, that is a Savior. Hereof he infers, Nether ca^ it be
against Christianity to show bodily reverence, when he is named, by whom
not only all the spiritual enemies of mankind are subdued, but also the faithful
be made partakers of the kingdom of heaven. Thus far he. Now if we shall join
to this reason, the reason given in the Annotation, that the Protestants gladly
yield this honor of cap and courtesy to the letters, maces, The Protestants
use more devotion, and yield more reverence to the pictur of a dog and a lion,
then to the name, image or cross of Christ.
name, seal, seat, and very many other things having any relation or
dependence of the Q. majesty, of these two thus conferred together, we shall
find this to follow, and be a very good consequent. M. VV. yeldeth less honor
and reverence to the name and cross of Christ, then he does to the name and so
many base signs apperta^ning to a temporal prince: E^go M. VV. is a very
Atheist, one that makes no account of Christ. This is the note. Name of Jesus.
The Protestants will have no reverence done at the name of Jesus.
) By the like wickedness they charge the faithful people for capping or
kneeling when they hear the name of Jesus. As though they vvorsh^pped not our
lord God therein, but the syllables, or letters, or other material elements
whereof, the word written or spoken consists, and all this, b^
sophistications to dravv the people from due honor and devotion tovvard Christ
Jesus, which is Satan's drift by putting scruples into simple men's minds about
his sacraments, his Saints, his Cross, his name, his image, and such like, to
abolish al true religion out of the world, and to make them plain Atheists.
But the Church knovveth Satan's cogitations, and therefore by the scriptures and
reason, vvarranteth and teaches al her ch^ldren to do reverence when so ever
Jesus is named. How Catholics honor the name of Jesus, and other things
pertaining to him.
because Catholics do not honor these things nor count them holy, for their
matter, color, sound, and syllables, but for the respect and relation they
have to our Savior, bringing us to the remembrance and apprehension of Christ,
by sight, hearing, or use of the same signs. Else why make we not reverence
at the name of Jesus the son of Sirach, as well as of Jesus Christ? And it is
a pityful case to see these profane subtelties of Heretics to take place in
religion, which were ridiculous in all other trade of life. When we hear
our Prince or Sovereign named, we may without these scruples do obeisance,
but toward Christ it must be superstitious.

These be the arguments, which he says are of our making, how truly, thou
may now judge. To speak of them more at large and in special, each one
containing so diverse matter, of Praying to Saints, of the Real presence, of
Peter's primacie, of Pilgrimage, of Canonical scriptures etc. would amount to a
great volume. Touching these and the like, because it is grown now of late to
a common vein in writing and preaching, thus much will I say in general, that
M. VV. and his fellows in making such sporting conclusions, First, show them
selves as ignorant in divinity as may be, for so much as hereby they give
forth plain signification, that they know not the first rule, or principle of
Christian religion, they know not what Christian faith means. Secondarely,
that by so doing, Whereunto the Protestants ten^t by such ridiculous
co^clusions.
they instruct their scholars and auditors to make a mock of Christ and his
gospel, and to scoff at every part of Christianity. Both these I will jointly
declare in a few lines. Note thou therefore (good reader) that Christian faith,
and the articles thereof are of this property and nature, that they can not be
concluded or proved by any manifest rules of natural wisdom and reason, as we
find in other sciences, Geometry, Philosophy, Law etc. Heb. 1. v. 1.
but they rest only upon the authority of Christ our Savior and his Apostles,
who first delivered them unto us. Ibi. c 11. v. 1. Romans 8. v. 24
For as the Apostle teaches, Fides est substantia rerum sperandarum,
argumentum non apparentium. Faith is the substance or subsistence and
foundation of things hoped, the argument or sure persuasion of things not
appearing to sense, or reason, or humane discourse. As for example. we believe
the resurrection of our bodies, The true nature of Christian faith.
not because it can be confirmed by any philosophical or logical demonstration,
(for if it could be so, then were it not properly an article of faith) but
because Christ and his Apostles so taught. This being the ground and essential
form of faith, and of every part thereof, because men are hardly m^ued to
believe things so improbable, so f^r b^yond reason, and against common sense,
the office of Divines is by compar^ng these articles with other works of God,
either in the creation of the world or redemption of the same, to declare that
these are not so impossible or incredible as men imagine, but such as God has
done the like in many other, and therefore may also in this present. So our
Savior disputed against the Sadduces. Erratis non scientes scripturas, Marc.
12. Mat. 22.
neque virtutem dei etc. You err not knovving the scriptures, nor the power
of God. And concerning the resurrection of the dead, have you not read that
which was spoken of God, sayng I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac,
and the God of Jacob? In which words are contained 2 or 3 arguments to prove
the resurrection. One, that God can do it, because he is of such power. An
other, that it is not vn^^kely but he will do it, because he does toward the
dead, things as hard and improbable as that, vz* that he protecteth,
sustaineth, and preserves them as their God and Savior, and in that sense is
called the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, many hundred years after their
death. Nether of which arguments for all that, proves directly that the dead
shall rise, but that depends only upon the will and word of God revealed in the
scriptures, which our Savior does first of al insinuate.

After like manner disputes S. Paul in his epistle to the Corinthians. 1. Cor.
15.
If the dead rise not again, then in vain is our preaching, then in vain is
your faith, How S. Paul. proves the resurrection Cor. 15.
then are we the most miserable men that live, then nether Christ is risen. As
the grain which is sown in the earth, dies first before it rise again
with such fruit and commodity as we see, so is it in the resurrection of our
flesh. In all which arguments there is no one that conuniceth necessarily, no
not that which is the principal: Christ is risen, therefore we shall rise,
because true it is, well might Christ rise, though we never rise, as he truly
was crucified and descended into hell, as we by Gods grace shall never. But the
verity of this point being first planted in the hearts of Christian men by
Christ's teaching and doctrine, then afterward these reasons are good motives
to declare, that the resurrection stands well with Gods providence, his
justice, his mercy, his other works in creating or redeeming of the world.

The like is to be said of that, wherewith M.W. makes most sport, I mean the
real presence. which if any man would directly prove by one of M.W. arguments,
as, Christ was transfigured. Ergo he gives us his body in bread and wine, he
makes as blind an argument as did a famous English preacher, who in great
sadness would prove the English Communion book to be good, because in our
Creed we are bound to believe not the Mass, but The communion, of Saints. Or
as did an other of like vocation, then a preacher, afterward^ a Doctor, who
felt him self much troubled in conscience, and almost persuaded that the mass
was found in many places of scripture, because in many subscriptions of S.
Paul's epistles he found written, Missa est Corintho, Missa est Philippis,
Missa est Roma, Missa est Athenis, Missa est Nicopoli. But no Catholic man was
ever so mad, as from Christ's transfiguration to deduce such an Ergo: and
absolutely as well he might infer, ergo he is in every cheste, in every
chamber, in every tree, in every mountain, in every piece of bread in the
world. But thus to ^angle, is for Lucianes and hickscorners, it is not for
Divines. How one part or article of faith, is applied to the confirmation of an
other.
Thus far only we apply such reasons. First grounding our faith simply upon
our Saviors words declared by the uniform consent of three Evangelists and
S. Paul, and interpreted by the universal consent of Christ's Catholic church
in all times and ages: because we find certain carnal and fleshly me^, lead by
reason and sense and humane conceit, offended at this article, upon pretense
of philosophical rules, of natural qualities, Before pa. 177.178.
of mathematical dime^sions, as we see by M.VV. we supposing that they be not
plain Atheists (wherein perhaps sometimes we are much deceived, for D. Whitg.
defense against M. Car. Trac 3. c. 6.. 4.
Whitegift tells us that the English Church, is now full of such) by
declaration and comparison of other things which they profess to hold and
believe, show them that this is not so impossible, or so incredible, or so
unlikely as they pretend, whereas some other points they retain as far above
reason as this. And thus far forth we apply Christ's transfiguration, Christ's
walking upon the waters, his entering unto his disciples the doors being shut
etc. to declare that his body is not bound to those general rules, which nature
and reason has appointed to common bodies, and on which is founded the
greatest part of the Zuinglian Divinity. And therefore as in the first, if a
man would have brought Christ's or S. Paul's reasons to M. VVhitakers ergo, as
thus:

God is omnipotent. Ergo the dead shall rise.

God is the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and Jacob. Ergo the dead shall rise.

Christ is risen again. Ergo the dead shall rise.

The Apostles were not miserable fools. Ergo the dead shall rise.

Their preaching was not in vain. Ergo the dead shall rise.

The husband man sows corn, and it dies before it brings forth fruit.
Ergo the dead shall rise.

As I say any man framing these arguments of Christ's and S. Paul's words, The
English writers teach the way to scorn al Christian religion.
were he an Ethnike, had played the ignorant fool, if he bare the name of a
Christian, had played the part of a wicked caytife, and an Atheist: because true
it is, every article of our faith is in this sort subject to scorn and
irrision: so M. W. in this case following the like example, must needs before
God and man sustain a hard judgment. And therefore if he shall be disposed
hereafter to write more books, I would wish him to leave this apish trick
which he has learned of M. Jewel, M. Jewel thoroughout his first book against
^. Harding.
who notwithstanding got small honor thereby. and surely if the matter were
correspondent, such kind of jesting would better become some merry fellow
making sport upon a stage, with a furred hood and a woodde^ dagger, the^ either
a learned bishop, such as M. Jewel took him self to be, or a profound Reader
of divinity, as I think M.W. would gladly be accounted.

And whereas next he says. Quando has nouorum magistrorum etc. Page 2^.
when wise men shall hear these interpretations and arguments of these new
masters, if there be left in them any sense, I vvil not say of the holy Ghost,
but of common judgment, they can not think a religion builded upon these
grounds, to be firm, assured, and better then al other, I answer, first, that
he much deceaueth him self, when he calls these the interpretations of new
masters, as he does likewise after in his Antichristian book where he says,
Nou^ Theologi Rhemenses etc. Page 114. Annot. in Mat. cap. 10. v. 22.
The new Divines of Rhemes teach that the bishops blessing takes away venial
sins, where as we speak not so of our selves, but upon warrant of an old
Divine of Milan, even S. Ambrose whom there we cite. And here excepting the
places where we urge the very text of the Evangelist, every one of the other is
the interpretation of old and ancient fathers, of S. Epiphanius, S. Ambrose,
S. Hierom, S. Austin, S. Chrysostom, S. Siluester, etc. And if these be new
masters, I marvel who be old? be like M. Jewel, M. Horn, M. Fulke, M.
Keltridge, M. Charke, and such vvorthie doctors of your old congregation, The
antiquity of the Protestants church
which now grows well to fifty years standing, if I misrecken not my
self. For M. D. Haddon a fevv years sithence, in his answer to Osorius made
great vaunt, that then your gospel had continued above thirty years (abating
from that count 6 years) Annos plusquam triginta, excepto sexennii
turbulentissime tempore. Haddon in fine epist. contra Osori^^^.
And therefore belike now it is come to a goodly and a reverend antiquity.
But as ancient as it is, many a good man lives who knew when it was not
begotten, and may live full well, til it be again dead and rotten.

Then whereas you aff^rme our religion to be built upon these grounds, you
follow but the common v^yne of your fellows, that is, to belie us: saving that
you have gotten perhaps a deeper habit therein, thorough to much imitation of
M. Jewel. Aug. de nupt. et con cupis. lib, ^. cap. 31.
In this very kind S. Austin complains that he was much iniuried by the
heretics of his time, and so does Luther that he was vexed by the heretics
of his age. whose authority I had rather use to you then S. Austins, because
you seem to honor him more, and esteem him for an old father, rejecting S.
Austin amongst the new masters. Thus says Luther to Zuinglius and
Oecola^padius and the rest of that sect, and thus he requesteth of them, as we
request of you being of the same order. Luth. to. 7. defens. verboru^ coenae
fol. 400.
Obsecramus (says he) and obtestamur vos Sacramentarios, etc. We desire and
beseech you Sacramentaries, Debacchari
if hereafter you vvil needs rail against the Lutherans or new papists as
you call us, yet abstain from lying, The Zuinglians notable liars.
and feign not, nether write of us otherwise then we publicly profess and
teach. Nam ex his quae iam diximus, patet nos non it a docere, vt hactenus de
nobis impudentissime mentiti estis. For by that which has been spoken, it is
clear that we teach not so, as hitherto you have most impudently belyed us.

So Luther of the Zuinglians. and we leaving Luthers terms to him self,
request the like of our adversaries. If they tell us of any fault committed in
the ha^dling of Gods mysteries, we are ready to acknowlegde and amend the same.
If we defend any point of doctrine erroneous in their judgment, let them refel
it by Theological argument, by Scriptures, Fathers, Councels, or reason
grounded upon them, and we are in quiet and orderly sort either to yield to
them, or show them their oversight. If they fall to scoffing and scorning, and
making ridiculous and boysh arguments of their own, and then show their
profound wisdom in co^futing the same, and withal cry out upon the
Importunity, The pitiful shifts of our adversaries.
and Desperatnes of the papists, as we can not but tell them of their
peeuishnes, and laugh at such miserable shifts, so we dare assure them that the
wise will never be moved to like well of their ruinous gospel, thorough such
jesting tricks most unfit for Divines, and which are able to quayle and
disgrace a good cause, though it stood upon better grounds the^ their gospel
yet does, or (I hope) ever shall.

CHAP. XVII Of certain blasphemies contained in the Annotations.
As good orators according to the rules of their art, reserve some chief and
principal arguments unto the end, of purpose at parting to leave a deep
impression in the mind of their auditors: so does M. VV. in this his inuectiue
against us. And increasing somewhat his accustomed style, declaimeth terribly
and lays to our charge, not errors, or ouersights, or mean corruptions, as
are our leaving the latin and following the greek, but horrible crimes, even
blsaphemies, and blasphemies intolerable. He presupposes that wise men are
somewhat moved by such reasons and persuasions as he has used hitherto, Page
23.
But it must needs be (says he) that wise men vvil be moved much more when
they consider the intolerable blasphemy of certain places. For answer
whereunto, we crave no pardon of him, or the reader. But if he prove his
accusation, let us sustain that judgment, as by the law of God and man, to
such Intolerable blasphemers is due. Only of the reader we request indifferent
audience, and then we doubt not but this storm and tempest will pass without
any damage, as quietly as the rest.

Hebr. 7. v, 17.
The first blasphemy is this. The Apostle compares together Christ's priesthod
and the priesthod of Melchisedech in the epistle to the Hebrews, The first
blasphemy
where he makes no mention at al of bread or wine, in which notvvithstanding
they will Christ chiefly to have been like to Melchisedech. Here these men
write flatly, that of al those things which are proposed by the Apostle, it
follows not that Christ's priesthod is eternal, and therefore that properly
Christ is a priest after the order of Melchisedech, because he instituted a
sacrifice of his body to be continued for ever of his priests. But this which
was principal, the Apostle in that disputation omitted, and brought those
things which prove not that which he meant to prove. But wherein Christ was
principally like unto Melchisedech, that must be learned not of the Apostle but
of the Fathers, who have written far more aptly and properly of Christ's
eternal priesthod then did the Apostle. Of this he concludes. If they fear
not to find some fault in the Ap^stle, and reprehend the holy ghost him self,
is it marvel if our doctrine displease them? Thus M. VV. which if it be true,
The answer.
if we thus disgrace the Apostle, if we say he goes about to prove a thing and
proves it not, if we refuse to be taught of him, and prefer the Fathers before
him, finally if we control him so singular an instrument of the holy Ghost,
and reprehend the holy Ghost him self, I can not blame M. W. if he cry out
Intolerable blasphemy. But if these things be so far of from al show of
truth, that there is no color or pretense of so unmeasurable lying, what
should a man say, but shame to the devil and his ministers, Lie upon lie
who now are grovve^ to such a passing impudency. that so they may have
license to lie, they care not how grossly and palpably they lie, though they be
taken with the manner, though it presently turn to their own shame, though
the lies which they invent of others, be most evidently, and in truth only
verified of them selves. S. Paul's epistle to the hebrews rejected by the
protestants.
For who but they thus disgrace this Apostle, and that in this epistle? who
but they find fault with the writer and reprehend the holy Ghost, bearing us
in hand that this vvriting much differs from other scriptures, much from
Christ's preaching and the other Apostles, Before page 414. 1. Cor. 3. v. 12
and therefore is to be reckened Prostipulis, For stubble, good for nothing else
but for the fire, for this would they signify by that contemptible phrase.
And do not our english translators them selves in their Testaments leave out S.
Paul's name in this epistle, and plainly say It is not like that ever he was
the author of it? Bible of the year 1579. in the preface of this epistle.
But let this pass. we vvil not use this kind of defense. our words and
sayings defend them selves sufficiently. The words of which he gathers this
Intolerable blasphemy, stand thus, Heb. 7. v. 17. A priest for ever. Christ is
not called a Priest for ever, only for that his person is eternal, How Christ
is a priest for ever.
or for that he sits on the right hand of God, and perpetually prays or
makes intercession for us, or for that the effect of his death is everlasting:
for all this proves not that in proper signification his Priesthod is
perpetual: but according to the judgment of all the fathers grounded upon this
deep and divine discourse of S. Paul, and upon the very nature, definition,
and propriety of Priesthod, and the excellent act and order of Melchisedec,
and the state of the new law, he is a Priest for ever according to
Melchisedecks order, specially in respect of the sacrifice of his holy body and
blood, instituted at his last supper, and executed by his commission,
commandment, and perpetual concurrence with his priests, in the forms of
bread and wine, in which things only the said high Priest Melchesedec did
sacrifice. For though S. Paul make no express mention hereof because of the
depth of the mystery, and their incredulity or feebleness to whom he
vvrote: yet it is evident in the judgment of all the learned fathers (without
exception) that ever vvrote either upon this epistle, or upon the 14 of
Genesis, Christ's eternal priesthod consists in the perpetual sacrifice of his
body and blood in the Church.
or the psalm 109, or by occasion have treated of the sacrifice of the altar,
that the eternity and proper act of Christ's priesthod, and consequently the
immutability of the new law, consists in the perpetual offering of Christ's
body and blood in the Church.

Which thing is so well known to the adversaries of Christ's Church and
Priesthod, and so granted, The protestants cauilling upon particles, against
Melchisedecks sacrifice and priesthod, directly against the Apostle.
that they be forced impudently to cavil upon certain Hebrew particles, that
Melchisedec did not offer in bread and wine: yea and when that will not
serve, plainly to deny him to have been a priest: which is to give checkemate
to the Apostle, and to overthrow al his discourse. Thus vvhiles these wicked
men pretend to defend Christ's only priesthod, they in deed abolish as much as
in them lies, the whole order, office, and state of his eternal law and
priesthod.

Christ's eternal priesthod and sacrifice in the Church is proved out of the
fathers.
Arnobius says, By the mystery of bread and wine he was made a Priest for
ever. And again, The eternal memory, by which he gave the soode of his body
to them that fear him. in psalm. 109.110. Lactantius, In the Church he must
needs have his eternal priesthod according to the order of Melchisedec. Li.
14. Institut. S. Hierom ep. 126. to Euagrius, Aarons priesthod had an end, but
Melchisedecks, that is, Christ's and the Churches is perpetual, both for the
time past and to come. S. Chrysostom therefore calls the Churches sacrifice,
Hostiam inconsumptibilem, An host or sacrifice that can not be consumed. ho. 17
in 9 Hebr. S. Cyprian, Hostiam qua sublata, nulla esset futura religio, An host
which being taken away, there could been religion. de coena Domini nu. 2.
Emissenus, Perpetuam oblationem and perpetuo currentem redemptionem, A
perpetual oblation and a redemption that runs or continues everlastingly.
ho. 5 de Pasch. And our Savior expresses so much in the very institution of
the B. Sacrament of his body and blood: specially when he calls the later
kind, The new Testament in his blood, signifying that as the old law was
established in the blood of beasts, so the new (which is his eternal
Testament) should be dedicated and perpetual in his own blood: not only as it
was shed on the Cross, but as given in the chalice. And therefore into this
sacrifice of the altar (says S. Augustine li. de Ciuit. 17. c. 20. S. Leo ser.
8 de Passione, and the rest) were the old sacrifices to be translated. See S.
Cyprian ep. 63 ad Cecil. nu. 2. S. Ambrose de Sacram. li. 5. c. 4. S. Augustine
in psalm. 33 Conc. 2. and li. 17. de Ciuit. c. 17. S. Hierom ep. 17. c. 2. and
ep. 126. Epiph. haer. 55. Theodoret. in psalm. 109. Damascene li. 4. c. 14.

Finally if any of the fathers, or all the fathers, had either wisdoms, grace,
or intelligence of Gods word and mysteries, this is the truth. If nothing vvil
serve our aduersares, Christ Jesus confound them, and defend his eternal
Priesthod, and state of his new Testament established in the same. In which
words of ours if thou mark well, and confer them with his, thou shall find
that in this short paragraph he has povvred out together, (...) a foul and
stinking heap of lies, errors, ignorances, and contradictions to him self and
his brethren.

Of al those things which are proposed by the Apostle, it follows not that
Christ's priesthod is eternal? say we not the clean contrary, when we avouch
that All the fathers gather, not of them selves or their own vvittes, but of
this deep and divine discourse of the Apostle the eternity of his priesthod?
Is this to write flatly, that of all the things proposed by the Apostle it
follows not that Christ's priesthod is eternal, when we write flatly, that not
one or other but all the fathers teach that eternity, grou^ding them selves
upon this discourse of S. Paul? Heretics very blind in the scripture, though
they crake much of their deep insight in them.
and how could they ground them selves upon S. Paul's discourse, if no such
thing were to be found there? This perhaps he might have gathered, and we
would have granted, that this deduction can hardly or never be perceived of a
Luther, of a Beza, of a Stancarus, or such other (...), damned in their own
judgment, Tit. 3. v. ^
whom for punishment of their Apostasy from Christ and his Church, God has
given up into a reprobate sense, Vt videntes non videant, et audientes non
intelligant, sed credant mendacio, Romans 1. v. 28 Luc. 8. v. 10. 2 Thessalonians. 2. v
11.
That seeing, they see not, and hearing understand not, but believe lies,
because they would not believe and hold fast the truth when they had it. but to
a S. Ambrose, to a S. Chrysostom, S. Primasius, S. Beda, or any other directed
by the spirit of God, these things which are proposed by the Apostle ministered
sufficient matter to find out the eternity of Christ's priesthod, as by their
commentaries upon these very places we learn. For albeit express mention of
the Sacrifice of the Church be not here made, for reason given in the
annotation, and by the Apostle him self, cap. 5. v. 11. yet the truth there of
is inuincibly concluded out of this very disputation, and that so pregnantly,
See the Anotations in cap. 5. v. 11. and 7. v. 11.12 c. 9.12.15.25 c. 10. v. 2.
that who soever denies the Churches Sacrifice he consequently denies all the
Apostles drift and argument, he denies the whole state of the old and new
Testament. This therefore is the first maine and capital lie, and in which he
inueigheth not against us alone, but also against all the Fathers without
exception, Arnobius, Lactantius, S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose, S. Hierom, S. Austin,
and the rest named in the annotation.

From this lie he draws out 4 other, as that we say, The Apostle proves not
that which he meant. that we prefer the Fathers before the Apostle, that we
find fault with him, Multiplication of lies.
and finally reprehe^d the holy Ghost. Al which is nothing else but lie upon
lie, no one of which, is or ever was, in word or sense uttered, or in thought
or cogitation conceived of us. which being delivered most evidently in sundry
places of the 7. 7. v. 4.11.23.9. v 12.15.10 v. 2.4.5.11
9 and 10. chapter, and repeated again and again, I will not h^re make a new
t^eatise thereof. No time to talk of the Sacrifice of the church, when the
Sacrifice of the cross is not first believed.
Thus much the reader that knows a little divinity may consider of him self,
that whereas the Apostle deals against the Jews who could not be content
that their leuitical priesthod, and sacrifices of beasts should yield to
Chr^sts priesthod and sacrifice of the Cross, for S. Paul discoursing of the
infinite virtue, power and excellency of this above the former, to have
undertaken to handle the priesthod and sacrifice of the Church, besides that it
was very hard to explicate, besides that the Hebrews were very dull to
conceive, both which reasons he gives in the 5. chapter, besides that the
other matter was of it self large enough, besides all this, I say, to have
urged the Jews with this secondary and depende^t sacrifice of the Church, who
as it believed not the first, singular, and sovereign sacrifice of the Cross,
had been as fond a part, as if a man would teach a child to ru^ne before he
can go, or teach him to read before he can speak, or set on the roof of the
house, before there be either wall built or foundation laid.

The ancient fathers speak more plainly of the church Sacrifice then does S.
Paul, without any derogation to S. Paul.
This is a lie. For we are not so wicked, nether learn we to make any such
odious co^parisons between diverse instruments of the holy Ghost. For the
consent of the universal church and al fathers, we gladly profess to be the
voice of the holy Ghost. And if all the fathers had been joined in one, in S.
Paul's case and having to do with such adversaries, at such time, place, and
other circumstances, they would not nether could have written more aptly and
properly then did S. Paul, although afterward they did more clearly and
manifestly open that, which S. Paul insinuated more closely and covertly, and
so would S. Paul have done, had he lived in their times.

So in like sort S. Peter in his sermon made to the Jews touching Christ's
glory and resurrection, calls him A man approved of God, Act. 2. v. 22.
by diverse wonders and miracles. He calls him not God of God equal to his
father. Our Savior in his long exhortation made to his disciples before his
passion, speaking of his unity with his father, Joan. c. 12.13* 14.15.16.17.
expresses not his co^substantialitie with the father, or divinity of the
holy Ghost, The council of Nice expressed the consubstantialitie of Christ with
his father more plainly then any Evangelist.
so clearly as did afterward S. Athanasius and the fathers in the Council of
Nice and Constantinople against the Arians and Macedonians. nether for all that
prefer we S. Athanasius and those Councels before S. Peter and our Savior,
nether say we that they spoke more properly and aptly thereof then either Christ
or his principal Apostle, or such like guegawes as this man ignorantly and
maliciously obiecteth unto us. Christ spoke most properly, perfectly, and
absolutely, according as his divine wisdom knevv was most convenient for
that time and audience. so did S. Peter, so did S. Paul. And yet this barreth
not but the holy Ghost may, and so has by the Church afterward declared the
same more evidently, without any derogation to Christ or his Apostles.

Yet one scrupule more M. W. moves. At least this can not be denied, M.W. last
objection.
and so we can not shift our hands, but some oversight we must impute to S.
Paul and the holy Ghost. Nothing less. Answered.
Or how soever by his profound subtilitie he thinks to drive us unto this
absurdity hereafter, hitherto sure I am, we have uttered no word or syllable
so vnchristia^. And therefore he belieth us in sayng that we have done the one
or the other. And the whole matter is answer sufficiently already. Answered by
him self.
Yet for more full satisfaction I will answer M. VV. by him self. I ask him
therefore whether Melchisedec did not sacrifice, and by sacrificing foreshewed
our Saviors priesthod according to the arder of Melchisedec? he can not deny,
for he has granted it in plain terms in this very book. before page 17.
And yet S. Paul here makes no express mention thereof. Then by M. VV.
judgment S. Paul omitteth some principal part of Melchisedecs priesthod
apperteyning to Christ, and therefore if this be to find fault with S. Paul,
and reprehend the holy Ghost, then M.VV. finds fault with S. Paul, M. VV.
reprehendeth the holy Ghost.

Again, Answered by M. Jewel.
let him recall to memory his founder in divinity M. Jewel, in that book
which M. VV. Jewel in his Reply art. 1 5. in M. W. translation page 9.
him self has translated into latin. Says not he, that Melchisedech by his
bread and wine signified the Sacrifice of the holy (English) communion (M. VV.
translateth it, sacrificium sacrosanctae Communionis) where the whole people
lift up their hands and hearts unto heaven, and pray and sacrifice together?
And where find you this sacrifice of the holy Communion in all S. Paul's
discourse? ergo by the same reason, M. Jewel also does carp at S. Paul and
reprehend the holy Ghost, who omit The sacrifice of your holy Communion,
prefigured by Melchisedech three thousand years at lest before either Patriarch
or Apostle, or doctor, or any good man, ever heard, or thought, or dreamed of
it.

Again, Answered by Illyricus
Illyricus a Luthera^ writes upon this very chapter somewhat more probably
then either M. VV. or M. Jewel, that Melchisedech foreshewed his Communion after
the Lutherish faith, Illyric. ad Heb. c. 7. v. ^
and that As Melchisedech by bread and wine refreshed Abraham, so Christ the
true heavenly bread refreshes us to life eternal. His flesh is true
nourishement, and his blood is true and healthful drink. Joan. 6. Luc. 22.
Thus he. so that the Zuinglians can fetch out of Melchisedecs sacrifice, by
their own private authority without warrant of any either doctor or father,
the sacrifice of their Communion, and the Lutherans can find that theirs was
prefigured likewise: and though S. Paul mention nether of them, that is not
material, so long as you hold your self within compass of the Communion book
Lutherish or Zuinglian: Who ever saw such folly, pride and partiality?
only when we say the same of the Communion and sacrifice of the Church, and
prove it by the authority of Damascene, of Theodoretus, of S. Hierom, S. Ambr.
S. Epiphanius, S. Austin, S. Leo, S. Cyprian, S. Chrysostom, Eusebius
Emissenus, Lactantius, Arnobius, by all antiquity, by all fathers, by all
Councels, by the universal consent of Christendo^ since the Apostles time, we
poor souls set S. Paul to schole, we prefer the fathers before him, we find
fault with him, we reprehend the holy Ghost, we commit intolerable blasphemy.
I know not whether a man may rather laugh at their peevish pride, who knowing
nothing, take upon them to control al fathers, or wonder at their incredible
partiality, which has so be reaft them of common wit and judgment, Mat. 7.
v. 3.
that they can perceive a mote (in deed no mote) in our eye, and can not feel
a beam in their own, or rather lament their Pharisaical hardness of heart and
ignorance whereto heresy has brought them, so gross, that nether they know
the verity of Catholic religion, nor well understand the state of their own
fantastical gospel.

One more blasphemy he obiecteth and so makes an end. His words are. The
second and last blasphemy page 24. Romans 6. v. 23
The like boldenes they utter in that most goodly place of S. Paul where thus
he vvriteth to the Romans, Stipendia peccati mors, donum autem Dei vita
aeterna. The stipend of sin, death, The principal of these Sorbonists (after
S. Paul) is S. Austin.
but life eternal is the gift of God. Here the Sorbonists of Rhemes have noted,
that the sequel of speech required, that as he said, the stipend of sin is
death, so on the contrary part he should have said, the stipend of justice is
life eternal. And this to be true they plainly affirm, whereas it is
manifest that S. Paul spoke in this sort that he might leave no place to
merits, and he uses such a word as utterly excludes al respect of stipend
for that which is a free gift, can in no case be a stipend, and repa^ to
merits. To answer this as all the rest, there needs nothing else but to
compare our words with his. Thus we say Romans Life everlasting a stipend, and
yet grace.
6. verse 23. The sequel of speech required, that as he said, death or
damnation is the stipend of sin, so life everlasting is the stipend of
justice, and so it is, and in the same sense he spoke in the last chapter: That
as sin reigns to death, so grace reigns by justice to life everlasting,
But here he changed the sentence somevvhat, calling life everlasting, Grace,
rather then, Revvard: because the merits by which we attain unto life, be
al of Gods gift and grace. Augustine. epis. 105. ad Sixtum.

Because the sense and sum of the annotatio^ is taken out of S. Austin, I will
set down his own words although they be somevvhat long, because they may
help the reader both to understand the truth of this point, and vvithal
discover M.W. notorious ignorance. Thus vvriteth S. Aug. epist. 105.
Austin in the place quoted. Eternal life which in fine we shall obtain for
ever, How eternal life is of grace and yet the reward of justice.
is repayed to merits going before. and yet because those merits unto which
it is repayed, are not gotten of us by our own ability, but wrought in us
by grace, therefore life eternal is called grace, for no other reason, but
because it is given gratis, not because it is not given to merits, but because
those merits are given, to which life is given. That eternal life is called
Grace, we find in S. Paul Romans 6. The stipend of sin is death. life eternal
is the grace of God. See how vvarely he put these words. For when he had
said, The stipend of sin is death, who would not have thought he should
have said most aptly and conveniently, The stipend of justice is life eternal.
Let M W. mark this, True it is.
And true it is. For as to the merit of sin death is re^dered as the
stipe^d, so to the merit of justice Life eternal (is rendered) as the stipend.
Vnde and merces appellatur plurimis sanctaru^ scripturarum locis. Quod est
autem merces operanti, hoc est militanti stipendium. Sed Apostolus aduersus
elationem etc. And so it is termed, merces, wages, in very many places of
scriptures. For that which is called, Stipendium, Stipend, to a soldier, that
is called, merces, wages, to a labourer. But the Apostle used that word
against the pride of men, etc.

Thus far S. Austin. of whose words our note is only a short su^me and
abbridgment, and so whatsoever sport M. VV. makes to him self of the
Sorbonists of Rhemes, it nothing touches us, but good S. Austin the Sorbonist
of Hippo. And yet not to rest there, S. Austin quitteth him self well enough
from that dry jest, when he affirms the same to be taught, Plurimis
sanctarum scripturarum locis, In very many places of holy scriptures. For if
they be Sorbonists that say, Vita aelerna est stipendium iustitiae, All the
Prophets, Evangelists and Apostles were Sorbonists by M. W. judgment.
or which is the self same, Vita aeterna est merces bonorum operum, then not
only S. Austin is a Sorbonist, which to say perhaps you streine not greatly
(for in this place so you call us in word, S. Austin in deed) but long before
him the Prophets were egregious Sorbonists, in whom both in sense and word,
this proposition is commonly found. Prou. 11. v. 18. c. 24. v. 12 Sap. 5.16.
ca. 10.17. Ecclesia. 16.12. c. 51.38.
Solomon was a Sorbonist, Psalm. 61.12
David a Sorbonist, Esa. 40.10. c. 62.11.
Esaias a Sorbonist, Ierem. 31.16.
Jeremy a Sorbonist, 1. Peter. 1.17.
S. Peter a Sorbonist, 2. Joan. 8. Apoc. 2.23. c. 22.12.
S. John a Sorbonist, Romans 2.6. 1. Cor. 3.8. 2. Cor. 5.10. 2 Thessalonians. 1. v. 6.7.
S. Paul a notable Sorbonist, who has it more often then the rest, Mat. 5.12 c.
6.1 c. 10.41. c. 16.27. c. 20.8. c. 25.
that I name not our Savior for honors sake, who notwithstanding in the
gospel, many times teaches his Christians, this Sorbonical conclusion. But as
for M.W. if he continue in this simplicity or rather stupiditie, that he
suppose eternal life not to be the stipe^d of justice or good works, because
it is the grace or gift of God, I will give him a quittance for ever deserving
the name of a Sorbonist. Sorbone a famous College in Paris.
For I think there is scant any boy frequenting the Sorbone schole, that is so
dull and ignorant as to doubt, but that heaven is the gift and grace of God,
though he trust to atteine it by his good works, Shameful ignorance.
I mean, that knows not how to reconcile these two propositions together,
heaven is the stipend of good works, and heaven is the gift of God: which in
deed to every lad well catechized, is no harder, then it is to believe that the
father is God, the son God, and the holy Ghost God, and yet there is but one
God: Christ is God, and yet Christ is man, our Lady was a mother, and yet a
Virgin, our bodies are corruptible, and yet shall live for ever, and almost any
other article of our religion. But hereof I have spoken more at large before,
See before page 99.100. etc.
to which place I refer the the reader. And this is the last intolerable
blasphemy which M. W. has found in the Annotations, common to us with
Christ him self, and every prophet, Apostle, Evangelist, Father, and good man,
that since Christ's time lived in the unity of his Church.

THE CONCLUSION.
AND thus have I examined, and (I trust) answered sufficiently, whatsoever
faults M. W. has found either in the Testament of late set forth by us, or the
Annotations adjoined, or M. Martins book of the Discovery. wherein I have
bestowed somewhat longer time, then either so small a trifle required, or my self
at the beginning intended, partly for the more clear defense of truth and
fuller instruction of the reader, partly also because in the diligent perusing
of his discourse, his manifold errors and ouersightes multiplied far beyond my
expectation. And withal I would not have him or his brethren so far deceive
them selves, as to suppose they may set forth against this College, freely,
hand over head what they list, without control or gainsaing. For howsoever we
be loath to spend our time in such contentious disputes, and gladly would
employ it otherwise to our better commodity, yet the zeal of God, and honor
of his Church, regard of truth, and love of our countrymen, whom we see so
pitifully seduced, and due obedience to Superiors, vvil and must enforce us, to
take some pains that way, though in part against our vvilles: especially
when we are provoked by adversaries so insolent and full of bravery in
words, and the same, most feeble, impotent, and unable to perform any thing
in deeds, and therefore lying very open to receive a blovv of any scholar, be
he never so mean and indifferent.

And albeit no heretical opinion can lightly be defended without many foul
shifts and inconveniences, yet M.VV. M. W. has undertaken hard matters to
defend.
has brought him self within harder straightes the^ any other, by reason of
most strange paradoxes, which he has taken upon him to maintain. for what
man bearing the name of a Christian, were he otherwise as excellent as ever
was Cicero or Demosthenes, can possibly without increase of infinite
absurdities, defend Luther against the Apostle S. James, Chap. 1. Chap. 10.
Chap. 5.
Beza against the Evangelist S. Luke, Illyricus against S. Cyprian, and al
fathers of the primitive Church. And which in truth is more false and wicked,
M* Jewels challenge, Chap. 7.
more unreasonable and impossible then the rest, M* Jewels Challenge made at
Paul's cross against al men living, which long since is known for a mere
shameless, proud, lying vaunt, to Catholic and Protestant, Lutheran and
Zuinglian, learned and unlearned, lippis and tonsoribus: and in effect notified
for such, by public proclamation of the prince and Realm.

And therefore if he find in this treatise some words more sharp and rough
the^ he is used to hear, let him attribute that not to hatred of his person,
whom I never saw, and for whose good and amendme^t in Christ, God is my witness,
I would refuse no pains, and how soon I may fall into his hands our Lord
knows, but to hatred of his heresy, and his immoderate heat and ostentatio^
uttered to color and save such things as can never stand, but with open
injury of Christ, disgrace of his Apostles, and ruin of Christian religion.

Our adversaries (Christian reader) are now proceeded beyond their ordinary,
beyond that which at first they pretended. The proceeding of our adversaries.
They plead not now for scripture against fathers, for the lively word of the
Lord against man's traditions, which a few years sithence was their common
song, they are gone far beyond that note, and oppose them selves not against
S. Hierom, S. Austin, S. Gregory, but against the self same scripture, the
self fame lively word which they seemed so to honor, against S. James, S.
Paul, S. Luke, against the Apostles, and Evangelists, against the very
Gospel of our Savior. And what can be their next step but to call Christ him
self in question, to doubt whether he be the true Messiah and redeemer of the
world? Many of the^ are proceeded thus far already. See the prface pa. 65.66.
etc
And if any of their brethren do move that doubt (as infinite there be that do,
yea that deny it utterly) what way in the world remains for proof thereof,
al other authority besides the written word, as the old Fathers, Councils,
Tradition, Church, being by these men quite abandoned, and now the written
word it self being rejected as far? and what Christian talking of these
matters, and seeing these horrible mischeefes not intended in thought, surmises,
cogitations, and secret vvhisperings, but practiced and put in ure by vvriting,
defenses, public books, open disputations, manifest violences, and most
unjust murtherings of those which withstand it, who I say, though he were as
pacient as Job, and as void of galle as the dove, but would be moved? 2. Cor. 4.
Scriptu^ est (says the Apostle) credidi, propter quod locutus sum, et nos
credimus, propter quod et loquimur. It is written, I have believed, and
therefore I speak, and we also believe constantly and therefore we speak
boldy. And as says S. Hierom, Hieron. ad Theophilu^ contra errores Ioannis
Hieros. Nicep. li. 8. cap. 42. Mar. 2. v. 11.
Quod simpliciter creditur, simpliciter confitendum est. And if Spiridion that
reverend and ancient Bishop, in a great assembly of Bishops were well allowed,
for that he sharply rebuked in public audience, an other in learning his
superior, in vocation his equal, who in citing a text of the gospel, altered
of finenes and curiosity one only word, and the same of no great moment (
grabatum, into lectulum) what rigor and vehemency of speech, deserve not they,
who in Sacraments and chief points of faith, in the Sacrifice, in Baptism,
in Priests, See before chap. 11.
in Bishops, in Church, in Apostles, in Angels, in Christ him self, have made
most profane innouations, and reduced all to the first ethnical terms? But of
this hitherto.

The rest which remains is only touching Luther and Calvin, whom M. W.
singularly commends, whereunto he adds certain ordinary words of course,
concerning him self and his fellows, how heroically they have always gotten
the victory over us, and our forefathers. page 31.32.
Of these matters somewhat has been spoken before, and therefore here I will not
say much. Luther and Calvin if they were such notable good men, they find it
now, and the better they were, the better it is for them. if otherwise, M.W.
commendation stands them in small steed. Nevertheless certain it is, both can
not be so excellent, as he would make the^, being continually, in opinion and
faith, in word and work, in the whole trade of their life and manners, so
opposite, If Luther be sa^ed, al they of English religion are damned.
so contrary, such deadly enemies, as their books testify, and the world
knows. And M.W. does very unwisely, so often and so painfully to range abroad
in praise of that man, See before chap. 3.
who is so far abhorring from him and his sect, that if Luther be right, they
are surely out of the way, if Luther be a restorer of the gospel, they are
enemies and destroyers of the gospel, if Luther be in heaven, they continuing
as they do, are certain of hell. For so Luther every where pronounces of them.

As for the other, I mean that vulgar bragging and boasting, it proves not
much. It is a common itching humor of most kind of heretics. Omnium
haereticorum quasiregularis est ista teme ritas says S. Aug. epi. 56.
Austin. And S. Peter long before gave it as a general mark of them, 2. Pet.
2. v. 28
that they shall be superba vanitatis loquentes, speaking provvde, arrogant, and
vain things. Howbeit it seems in our days more proper in some special sort
to M. VV. sect, then to any other, as judges that excellent man, of whom we
last spoke Martin Luther, The Zuinglia^s prove al thing by boasting.
who reports of them and that by experience, that they will say any thing,
boast of any thing, confidently affirm any thing, bur prove nothing by any
sound reason or argument, Luther defens. verborum caenae fol. 405.
nisi gloriatione inani de certissima veritate, save only by frivolous craking
of the most clear truth. And if once they fall in to that vein, then is there
no end. Ibi. fol. 381.382.
In suis libris gloriandi finem et modum nullum faciunt. But against al such
kind of talkatiue vanity he gives a very general and resolute lesson, which
if I profess to take from him, and commend the same to others, M. w. can not
be offended, because he extolleh the man for so peerles a master. And this it
is. Ibid. fo. 394*406.
Nemo eorum obtestationibus et iactationibus quicquam cred at (says he) Nam
eos mentiri (et dupliciter mentiri) certissimum est. Let no man give any credit
to the fair speeches and crakings of the Zuinglians. For most certain it is
that they lie and lie again.

Wherefore (Christian reader) to leave M.VV. and return to thee, and so make
an end, if thou be in judgment Catholic, I know thou find not, nor ever
shall find reason to make thee a Protestant of any sect, and least of al after
the English fashion. No more reason to be a Zuinglian, then a Lutheran or
Arrian.
And if thou feel in thy self any such temptation, consider advisedly* but
this only, why thou should incline to be of that side, more then to be
Lutheran, a Puritan, an Anabaptist, a Trinitarian, and so forth, and thou shall
never find any probable cause why thou should not as well become any of
these, as a Caluinist or Zuinglian. And universally to make thee detest all
Sects, if thou have some fear of God, and regard of the judgment to come,
waygh only that which the very nature of our religion, and this treatise
offers to thy consideration, and thou shall easily find abundant reason, why
to reject and forsake them al.

Consider the infinite difference between the Catholic pleading, ^nfinite
dif^^rence be^wene the Catholic ^ause and ^he prote^tantes.
reasoning, and disputing, and their perpetual wrangling, brawling, and
railing. We give thee to stay thy self, in our time, unity of faith in all
Christian provinces, Churches well governed and in due obedience, Church of ^he
time present.
flourishing common welthes quietly maintayning the doctrine which of their
fathers they received. They give thee infinite variety and difference of
religions, disordered co^gregations, the sheep controling their pastors, and
scholars presuming to teach their masters. And in the civil common-welth,
disobedience against the magistrate, contempt of princely authority, spoil
and ruin of churches, of palaces, of al things sacred and profane.

In the former ages, we show thee consent and agreement in the religion which
we profess, Church of the time past
Bishops, Churches, Princes, Provinces, Peoples, al realms Christened joining
in the same. They tell thee of invisible churches, imagined congregations,
Mathematical devises in the air, as it were Minotautes and Hippocentaures,
sometimes chalenging to them selves the company of Bere^garius, VVicleff, Hus,
and the like, sometimes refusing them as heretics, and running per saltum unto
the Apostolical age, or the first 3.4. or 5. hundred years after Christ,
condemning all the church following of superstition and Papistrie, and sometimes,
yea commonly condemning those former ages no less then the later.

When we treat of scriptures, Scriptures.
we give them unto thee syncerely and perfitely without any cutting or paring
away of this or that book, or this and that piece of such a book, and al
expounded uniformly by excellent Saints, by most learned Doctors, by general
Councels, by the most approved practice of the Catholic church in all
antiquity. They give thee scriptures so peecemele and patchedly, that they cut
of at the least the third part of them, sometimes sentences, sometimes pieces
of chapters, sometimes chapters, commonly entier books. And as for the
exposition of them, contemning al Saints, Doctors, and Councels of antiquity
al Doctors, Fathers, and Martyrs of their own Congregations, they reduce the
final scope and determination of al, Preface pa. 35.36.
to This is my opinion, and this is my judgment, and, the Doctors may not take
away from us our liberty to judge of them etc.

Consider this intolerable wilfulnes whereunto they are now grown, and the
more they show them selves to abhor from al reason, stay, or moderation, the
more ought thou to obhorre from them. Consider with thy self, Judgment.
that never the founder of any commonwealth, as Solon of Athenes, or Minos of
Creta, was so brutish or void of common sense, as to leave his commonwealth so
disordered, that there should be no judges to end controversies, no governors
to keep the people in peace and tranquillity, Never was there any commonwealth worse ordered, the^ the Church of Christ by the Protestants divinity.
but that every man should live according to his lust and liking. Then how much
more abominable is it for us to imagine, that Christ Jesus the eternal wisdom
of God, should frame a larger commonwealth then ever was under the Sun,
dispersed thorough al quarters and corners of the world, and yet for order and
quietness, should leave the same worse policed, then was ever the least city or
borough town whereof we read in any story. For so much as he bound every one
of his subjects not only to live well, and in charity one with an other, but
also under pain of eternal damnation he bound them al to believe a like, and
to have the self same faith unchangeably in all places, times, and ages,
touching a number of articles, and yet leaft no order whereby to procure any
such unity: nay rather took order to drive the^ into diverse and innumerable
faithes, appointing so many supreme heads of churches, as there were sovereign
kings, princes, dukes, and rulers, in several kingdoms, countries, provinces,
and cities, appointing a book of the gospels whereby they should be governed,
but leaving the exposition of the same at randon in the discretion or rather
fancy of every preacher and minister.

Recall to memory, No ground of the English religion.
that which their own principal writers and masters teach thee, See chap. 7.
page 165.
who deny not but that they lead thee an other way then any of thy forefathers
went for these thousand years. Chap. 4. pa. 69.70 etc. etc. 6. p. 121.122.
Again they deny not but they give thee a faith far differing from the faith
which the more ancient fathers followed in the first five hundred years. Then
whereas they praise unto thee for most divine and Apostolical, men of later
memory, those who within these 80 years have restored (as they call it) the
gospel, Chap. 3. page 45.
by those me^ also thou art earnestly dehorted from the Sacramentarie faith, as
a faith wicked, blasphemous, and damnable. Furthermore remember that a long
time they used to reteyne at least the name and countenance of the written
word, of the Gospel, of the scriptures, that those were altogether for them,
whatsoever became of the Fathers, Councels, and Doctors. Chap. 1. and 2.
But now that hold also have they given over, confessing thereby the scriptures
to be as plainly against the^ as the rest. And with what conscience or reason,
can any man follow such blind guydes as these are, who profess them selfs to
follow none, but to be at plain defiance with all Fathers and Churches of this
later thousand years, with all Fathers and Churches of the other five hundred
years, and with the sacred scriptures and Gospel of Christ it self? whom for
these and other reasons their own doctors, masters, and brethren, condemn as
heretics most wicked and sacrilegious.

God indue thee with his spirit, and send thee of his grace, that thou may
take the right way and follow it, that thou may renounce al sects and
heresies, and become a true member of Christ's Catholic Church, without which
there is no sanctification of the holy Ghost, no remission of sins, and
consequently no hope of the favor of God, no hope of life eternal.

LAVS DEO.
A GENERAL TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL THINGS contained in this book.
A
ACADEMIKES, a sect of Protestants. page 279. their belief. pa. 280. Antinomi,
a sect of Protestants. pa. 411. M. W. inuectiue against the Annotations of the
new Testament. page 476. The sum thereof. pa. 477. Annotations of the new
Testament, what they co^teine. pa. 484.485. what fault M.W. finds in them.
484.491. Blasphemy in the Annotations touching Christ's Priesthod. pa.
528.529. Ansvvered. 530. vsque ad 542. blasphemy touching merit of works.
pa. 543. ansvvered, 544 etc. How the Protestants fell to call the Pope of Rome
Antichrist. in praef. pa. 42. M. W. knovveth not well what that Antichrist is,
against whom he vvriteth. Ibid. pa. 4. The absurdity of that assertion. Ibid.
pa. 4. The impossibility of that opinion. 52.53.54. The end of that doctrine.
72.73. Arguments ridiculous made by M. W. and attributed to us. pa.
497.498.499.502.504.510.511.513. such arguments tend to make a mockery of al
faith. 516.517.521.522.523. S. Leo the great, called Antichrist by Beza. pa.
155. The first Apostles of our nation were Papists and Massing priests by the
confession of our adversaries. p. 165.166. Ancient archheretikes the
protestants forefathers in sundry parts of their faith. pa. 31.32. S.
Athanasius called Sathanasius by the heretics. pa. 84. S. Austin called a
blind bussard. pa. 166 S. Austin most filthily abused and mangled by the
Sacramentaries. pa. 166.177. S. Austin a priest. 65. S. Austin and S. Hierom
old papists. 121.
B
BEza a fierbrand of sedition. pa. 231. VVriters against him. pa. 232. He
corrects S. Luke and our Savior. 233.234.236.241. and is defended by M. VV.
in so doing. 236.237. His reasons. 238.239. Refuted ibid. et 240.241. Refuted
long ago by Luther. 257.258. how he corrects the new Testament. 260.261.
Bezaes fault in excusable for ought M. VV. either has said, or can say. 250. He
doubts of a part of S. John's gospel. 363.364. He furthereth the Anabaptists
against Christ's incarnation of the B. virgin. 368.369. See Translation of
scripture. Bible-beaters pa. 400. The Bible never so mangled by any as by the
protestants. 400.401. Their bible is no bible. 404.405. See Scriptures.
Ceremonies in Baptism pa. 504.505.
C
Catholic doctrine impossible to be overcome by any heresy, least of al by
this of our time. pa. 41. The name Catholic, not applicable to the English
religion. praef. 87.88. Calvin condemns the ancient fathers for approving
Melchisedecs sacrifice. pa. 60.61. Calvin for the real presence. pa. 223.
Carolostadius exposition of Christ's words, Hoc est corpus meum. pa. 254.
allowed by Zuinglius. 255. Castalios translation of the Testament. much
commended by the protestants. pa. 380. His discourse that Christ is not the
Messiah. praef. pa. 67.68. The Church catholic after Christ's time is ever
populous and spread in many nations. pa. 350. et praef. pa. 62.63. She is the
ground of al faith. 442. built upon a rock immovable. 479. No good work or
martyrdom profits to salvation out of the Catholic Church. 116.117. Infinite
difference between the Catholic cause and the Protestante. pa. 556.557.558.
No stay in faith, out of the Catholic Church praef. pa. 24. To say that the
whole Church has failed, is to deny Christ's incarnation. pref. p.
56.57*58.59. to make him a liar. ib. 66.67. to deny him to be the true Messiah.
ib. 68.69.70.71. The invisible Church a poetical fancy pref. pa. 60. refelled
by Melanchton. 60.61. by Calvin, Oecolampadius, and others. 62.63.64. the
Protestants sensibly co^tradict them selves in devising it. 64.65 The
foundation of the English Protestant church. pa 480.481.482. The antiquity
thereof. 524. It is full of Atheistes. 410. S. Chrysostom for the real presence.
p. 188.208.215.217.218. his place comparing Christ with Elias. pa. 207. It
proves inuincibly the real presence. a pa. 204. vsque ad 214. S. Chrysostom. for
the sacrifice. pa. 214.215. He is almost as full of lies as words, by the
protestants doctrine pa. 227. S. Ciril for the real presence. p. 198.199.200.
D
S. Damascene for the real presence. pa. 201.202. David George upon what
ground he denied Christ. pref. pa. 66. Defendere is well translated to revenge
pa. 464.465.466.467. The Doctors of the primitive Church condemned by every
private sectarie in that wherein they gain say his heresy. pa. 82.83. by the
Zuinglians for approving the sacrifice of Melchisedech. pa. 60. and Mass pa.
69.70.71.72. and for disallowing the marriage of priests and votaries* 83. by
the Puritanes for allowing holydaies in the honor of Christ and his Saints.
84. by the Trinitarians for acknovvledging the B. Trinity. 84. by the
Lutherans for denying the Vbiquetie of Christ's body. 85. by M. W. for their
doctrine of penance and works. 82.11^. and for sayng that Antichrist is one
man. pref. pa. 44.45. See works.
E
Elias cloak and the Zuinglians supper compared together. pa. 212.213. Elias
shall come before the day of judgment. pa. 494.495. English vvriters. 478. their
manner of vvriting. 284.285.475. and disputing 477. more absurd then others.
pref. pa. 6.7. Those of the English religion are not Protestants. pref. pa. 88.
they are properly called Zuinglians or Sacramentaries. ibi. 89.90.91. by what
names they call them selves. praef. pa. 91. how they are called by Act of
parliament. ibi. 21.
F
The true meaning of Only faith justifying. pa. 280.411.412. Libertinisme the
end thereof. 127.128. The nature of true Christian faith. pa. 517.518.519. how
one part of faith is applied to the confirmation of an other. 521.
Ecclesiastical manner of fasting comes from Christ and his Apostles. pa.
89.90. The Zuinglians figure in Christ's words touching the sacrament pa* 251.
The figure of the Catholics ib. infinite difference between these two.
252.253.254.255. Freevvil. pa. 509.
G
Grace hinders nothing the merit of works. page 102.103. To say, God is the
author of sin, is to say, God is an Idol, or a devil. pa 451. The protestants
say so. 451.453 454. S. Gregory much praised by the Protestants. page 158.
much rayled at by the Protestants. 164. A book written against him by
Vergerius. 165. S. Gregory a priest, without al reason made minister by M.
Jewel. 164. The Greek Testament more aduantageable for the Catholics then the
common latin pa* 283.284. Our common latin Testament more pure then the greek
now extant. 361.362.363. The greek Testament now differs much from the old.
363.364. Additions rashly made to the greek. 365.366.367. Parcels of
importance left out of the greek. 367.368.369.370.
H
Heaven is of grace and works. pa. 104.105.106.107* 544.545. Of mercy and
justice. 105.106* 107.108.109. Heaven must receive Christ, Act. 3. v* 21 makes
nothing against Christ's presence in the sacrament. pa. 179.180.181.193. handled
at large, a page 170. vsque ad 175. S. Paul to the Hebrews as much doubted
of in the primitive church, as the epistle of S. James. pa. 38.39. The Apostles
cited not scripture always according to the hebrew pa. 287.288.289. Books of
scripture written in hebrew, lost. 290. S. Hierom preferring the hebrew before
the latin in his time, justifies not the hebrew of our time. pa. 297.337. More
probable, that the hebrew has been corrupted then the latin. pa.
297.298.299.300. Corruptions in the hebrew pa. 302. in Isai against Christ's
divinity. 303. confessed by Luther. 304. confessed by Lyra. 306. Item in
Jeremy. 307. confessed and proved by Lyra. 308.309. in Isai against Christ's
passion. 310.311. confessed by Luther. 312.313. item in the psalms. 355.
followed by the Tigurine Translators. 358. and Bucer. 357. item in Daniel. 313.
General reasons why the hebrew text can not be so sincere as the heretics
pretend. 317.318. etc. Many books of the Prophets, and histories of the old
Testament, lost. pa. 317.318. Great difference in the hebrew, by mistaking one
letter for an other. pa. 322.323.325. That the hebrew bibles are faulty,
confessed by Castalio. pa. 326.327. by D. Humfrey. 327. by Conradus Pellicanus.
327. It is a Jewish opinion to think them altogether faultles. 327. They have
great diversity of reading. 331.332. somewhat wants in them. 332.333.
Although S. Hierom appealed from the latin to the hebrew, yet the like reason
is not now. pa. 333.334. He confesses and proves the hebrew to be faulty.
334.335.336. An argument commonly made for the purity of the hebrew. pa.
338.339. answered. 339 340. etc. S. Iustine proves the Jews to have corrupted
their bible. pa. 341.342.343.344. Hebrew knowledge much advanced by
Catholics. pa. 352.440. The hebrew tongue much subject to cauilling. pa.
431.432.433. See Rabbines. A man must have a settled faith before he confer
greek and hebrew textes. pa. 441.442. best Hebritians are not best Christians.
pa. 441. our first Apostles planted perfect christianity without hebrew. pa.
345. Heretics generally given to scorning* pa. 511. S. Hierom condemned as
ignorant of al divinity. pa. 371.
I
S. James epistle refused by Luther, Lutherans, and Zuinglians. pa.
8.9.10.11.12. et 17.22.23. Calvin mangleth it. 288.289. M. Jewels challenge.
pa. 133.138. The true image thereof. 133. vsque ad 138. It is grounded upon no
reason or learning. 138.139.140.141. It contains in effect only three
articles, the primacie of the Sea Apostolic, the real presence, and the
sacrifice. 133.136.137.138. See of them in their several places. M. Jewels
passing vanity in bragging and lying* pa. 460. his manner of answering D.
Harding. pref. 75.76. Reverence done to the name of Jesus. pa. 513.514.515. The
Jews corrupt the text of scripture. pa. 304. in despite of Christians.
314.329. negligent in conseruing their scriptures 328.329. their malice against
the Sea of Rome. 329.330. Very probable that Christ reprehended them for
corrupting the scripture. 339. See Hebrew. S. John Baptist lived a monastical
life. pa. 492.
K
That the wise men which came to worship Christ, were kings. pa. 485. vsque
ad 489. that they were three. 489. 490. their names. 490.491.
L
S. Lukes gospel called in question. pa. 27.28.29.32. Luthers works altered
and corrupted by the Lutherans. pa. 5*6.13. by the Caluinists. 7. He denies S.
James epistle. p. 11. his immoderate bragging. 42. his extreme hatred of the
Sacramentaries. 43.44.45.46. his judgment of their religion. 52.53.483. he
refuses their bibles. 45. singularly honored by the English church. 18.191.
preferred by M. W. before al doctors. 47. most absurdly. 48.50. He derideth the
Zuinglians fond arguments. 258. Luther a shameful corrupter of scripture.
377.378. Lucians true histories. praef. pa. 4.5.
M
Heretical martyrs damned. pa. 117. S. Matthew vvrote his gospel in hebrew.
pa. 290. the protestants hold the greek translation more autentical. 291. The
protestants reason against the Machabees, is as forcible against S. Luke and S.
Paul. 506.507.508. Melchisedech did sacrifice. pa. 57. granted by M. W. denied
by all other protestants. pa. 58.59.60. acknovvleged by the ancient fathers 60.
why not expressed by the Apostle. 61.537. etc. Melanchthon for the real
presence. pa. 190. Merit of works. See in Heaven, and works.
N
Novelty of words dangerous in Christian religion. pa. 266.267. exemplified.
268.269. it induces contempt of faith. 270. and leads to paganism
276.277.278.
O
Only faith. See Faith.
P
Penance what it is by the Protestants doctrine. 86.90.91. It rejects
external works of fasting and discipline. ibid. which are required by the
scripture. 87.88.89*90. by S. Cypian and the primitive church. 124.125. the
Catholic doctrine touching the value of them 92. the Protestants
contradictory argument against them. 91. 93.94. S. Peter's being at Room denied
most absurdly. pa. 130.131.132. his primacie. 498.510. Pilgrimage to holy
places. pa. 502. 503.512.513. Primacie of the Roman Sea proved evidently by
those fathers, whom M. Jewel names his masters to the contrary. pa. 143. by
Anacletus and Xystus. 143.144. by S. Leo 146 147. S. Leo governs in all parts
of Christe^dom. 147.148.149. his authority over the bishop of Constantinople.
148. he summoneth general Councels. 152. he is head of them. 153. no lawful
Council without his approbation. 152. This primacie is grounded upon Christ's
words and the Apostles ordinance. 143.144.153. S. Gregory accompteth the
Roman Church, head of al other. pa. 156.158. his authority over the bishop of
Constantinople. 156. over the bishops of Europe, Asia, and Africa. 156.157.
158.162.163. The Protestants common objection taken out of S. Gregory,
answered. pa. 159.160.161.162. the name universal, in what sort and sense
disliked by S. Gregory. pa. 160.161.163. Priests properly so called were
appointed by Christ. pa. 64. S. Austin such a priest. 64.65.66. So was S. Leo
and S. Hierom. 69. The church of Christ was never ruled but by such priests.
67.68.69. Such were the orderers of our Ecclesiastical state, and builders of
our churches in England. 68. S. Paul's discourse of Christ's eternal priesthod
Hebr. 7. makes nothing against the priesthod of the church. page 74. vsque ad
79. The name of Protestants. praef. pa. 88.90. It agrees not properly to our
English gospellers. ibi. In their faith there is no stay or certainty. praef.
pa. 7.24.37. Exemplified by the Supremacy of princes. ibid 9.10. by baptism.
11.12. Confirmation. 13. Christ's descending into hell. 14. Christ's divinity.
14.15* Rebellion against princes. 15.16. Regiment of women. 18. great
difference in their Communion books. 11.12.13. the diverse chaunges of religion
in England since the time of schism. 20.21.22. In the Protestants vvriting and
disputing there is no ground. pref pa. 8. exemplified by their refusal of
scriptures. ibid. pa. 26. Apostolical Traditions and general Councels. ibi.
Ancient fathers. 27. Apostles and Doctors of their own. 28.29.30. Martirs and
whole Churches of their own. 30.31.32. They reduce al to private fancy.
35.36.37.38. They pass the ancient heretics in denial of al things. pa.
38.39. their manifold Popes. 33.34. The forefathers of the Protestants church.
pa. 349. of whom they must look for the true scripture. 348.351. a true
confession of a principal protestant. 407. their churches void of al truth and
knowledge. 407.408. they persuade Atheism by scripture. 408.409. al their
preaching and writing tends thereunto. 410.411.428. their vaunting of the
clear light of the gospel sensibly refuted. 408. The Protestants manner of
answering the Catholics. page 412. They deny al Doctors. 413. They deny
sundry parts of scripture. 413.414. They pretend the greek. 415. They falsely
translate the greek. 416. They refuse the ordinary sense of the greek. 418.
They leave and corrupt the greek. 420. vsq. ad 427. They interpret at
pleasure greek, latin, and every tongue else. 429.430. their strange
interpretations of scripture. pa. 324.382.429.430.424. of fathers. 217. Their
manner of arguing. 225. of one figurative speech, they conclude as many as they
list. ibi. et. 226. The folly thereof. 226.251.252. The agreement between the
Protestants of our time and old heretics. pa. 430.431. they are most desirous
of novelty. 455.456.457. they mock at the Prophets and sundry writers of
scripture. 458. their preaching a very mockery of scripture. 458.459. they
proceed to infidelity. pa. 2.3. 559.560. et pref. pa. 21.22. they make
themselves supreme judges of scripture and al other authority. pa. 54 and
pref. p. 19 20. etc. they are obstinate in what soever absurdity they once
take. 237. they honor the Jews more the^ S. Paul. 325 326. or the Church of
Christ. 353. like to the Jews in malice against the Sea of Rome. 329.330.331.
they use more reverence to the images of beasts the^ of Christ. 514.515. Be
they never so contrary, they are all assured of the truth. pref. 32. The
Protestants allow all Sects to rebelle for their several heresies. pref. page
16.17.
R
The Rabbines of the Jews not to be followed in the sense of the hebrew
words. pa. 434. the Protestants translating after them translate wickedly.
434.435. They corrupt the text of scripture by mispoynting it. 314.315. Power
to Remitte sins given to the English ministers by act of Parliament. pa.
79.80. M. Jewels challenge touching the real presence artic. 5. answered pa.
182. vsque ad 196, the Zuinglians most usual and popular argument against it.
178. answered at large. 179. etc. the first heretics of the English church
approved it. 182. Many things in scripture as incredible as that. 183.184.186.
the Zuinglians argument against the sacrament is the root of Paganism.
184.185.193.199. It ioynerh them to the Anabaptists, Ebionites, and
Nestorians. 185.187. It is rejected by the ancient Fathers. 188.198.199.
Condemned by the Lutherans 189.190. answered at large by Luther. 191.192. he
supposes it to proceed rather from Turks then Christians. 194.195. In the
sacrament, al humane and philosophical reason must yield to faith. p.
188.189.190.192.198.199.201.202. Scriptures and fathers for the real presence.
S. Luke. 235.236. Jeremy. 342.343. S. Chrisostom and S. Leo. 238. S. Ciril.
200. Heretics for the real presence. Melanchthon. 190. Westphalus. 190.191.
Luther. 221. Calvin. 223. The ground of the Sacramentarie divinity. p. 191.
The Sacramentaries, infidels. 193. Infidels, their forefathers in mocking
Christians for their belief in the sacrament. 222. how they deal with the
fathers. 193.194. no one father ever was of their religion. 167. See more in
Supper. The sacrament a figure joined with the verity. pa. 223.224. The Roman
Church constant in holding fast the doctrine once delivered. pa. 300.301. pure
for six hundred years after Christ. in pref. pa. 47. It can not be proved, that
she ever changed her faith. ibid. 47.48.49.55.56.
S
Christ sacrificed at his last supper. pa. 62. the sacrifice of the Church
deduced thence. 62.63. sacrifice offered by S. Austin for the dead. 66.
sacrifice for the dead and in the honor of Saints was usual in the primitive
church. 70.71. Christ a priest in respect of the churches sacrifice.
530.531.532. In the church we see Christ sacrificed. 217 218.219.220. True
sacrifice in the church. 214.215.229.230. Melchisedechs sacrifice. See
Melchisedech. M. Jewels challenge touching the sacrifice artic. 17. ansvvered
by the chief protestants. pa. 70.71.72. Saints hear our prayers. pa.
500.501. Sundry books and parts of scripture denied by the protestants. pa.
26. vsque ad 32. et 401.402. they refusing the authority of the church,
believe not the scripture. 33.34.35.36. they open the way for every man to
deny what he lists. 402.403. A part of S. John's gospel doubted of. 364. S.
Peter's second epistle. 441.415. the epistle to the Hebrews denied. ibidem. See
S. James. S. Luke. scripture made ridiculous, when it comes to profane
handeling. 498. somevvhat is the word of God besides scripture. 36.37.
Scripture corrupted by heretics in favor of their heresies. 176.177. in
Genes. against the sacrifice. page 59.60. in S. Peter against freevvil and good
works. 416 417. Christ's words in S. Luke, notably corrupted for the same
purpose. 420.421.422. Esai translated detestably agaistn Christ's incarnation.
439. S. Peter corrupted to make God the author of sin. 451.452.453.455. S.
Paul against Christ's divinity. 315. Act. 3. against the real presence.
174.179.180. against the immortality of the soul. 273.274. scripture falsely
interpreted by heretics, is the word of the Devil. 180.50. The protestants by
their example make the text of scripture very uncertain. pa. 241.242.243. one
year canonical, the next year not. 366. It is not to be altered upon one
doctors reading. 244.245. the partiality of heretics choosing precisely one
or other reading, because it best serves their heresy. 246.247.248.249. they
apply scripture to prove any thing be it never so unreasonable. 255. to prove
Atheism 408.409. Books of scripture faithfully kept by the church though the
hebrew text be false. 346.347. heretics may not prescribe the church in what
tongue to keep them. 347.348. Stancarus judgment of the principal Protestant
writers. pa. 96.97. The Septuaginta interpreters condemned by Luther. pa. 305.
The Zuinglians true opinion of their Supper. p. 209. it differs nothing from
common breakfasts. 209.210.211.213. it is no more the body of Christ, then a
painted scutchion is king of France. 210. only bread. 210.214.222. the Supper
of the Sacramentaries has no use of Christ's words. 257. their arguments
against the words of Christ in S. Luke, foretold and answered by Luther.
258.259.
T
Tradition of the Church, necessary. pa. 36. S. Hierom author of the common
Translation of the new Testament used in the Church. p. 294.295. by
appointeme^t of Pope Damasus. 294. it is approved by the Council of Trent.
281.389. It agrees with the ancient greek. 372.373. commended for
synceritie, by the Protestant writers. 374.375. defended by them and preferred
before al new. 383.387.388.389. preferred before the greek. 393. not to be
corrected by the reading of some doctor. 394.395. M.W. argument against the
same. 391.392. the answer. 392.393. etc. English translations of the new
Testament al approved by M.W. pa. 262. his wickedness therein. 263.264. Such
translations lead men to Atheism. 271. and are condemned by the learned
Protestants. 271.272.273.274.275.436. for Hell they translate Grave, most
wickedly. 272. thereby moving men to think that the soul is mortal. 273.274.
A brief su^me of damnable faults committed by those translators. 278.279.
English Translations made in schism, al naught. 385. English Translations
leave the hebrew. 312. differ notably one from an other. 321. Protestante
Translations of the new Testament all partial in favor of their peculiar
heresies. page 365. Luthers condemned by Zuinglius. 376.377.378. Al Zuinglian
translations condemned by Luther. 378.379. that of Basile condemned by Beza.
379. item Castalios. 380. Caluins corrupts the text. 381. Bezaes most
variable and vvorst of al other. 381.382.383.384. he then most busily
corrupts scripture, when it is most to the dishonor of Christ. 384.385. M.
W. inuectiue against the late Catholic translation of the new Testament 444.
it is mere histrionical 445.446.448. in condemning it, he reproves himself.
447.454.455. the hypocrisy of his accusation. 449.450. Notable bragging and
lying. 459.460.461. how weakly he justifies his inuectiue. 462.463. he
obiecteth only two faults. 263.264. both false, and if they were true, of no
importance, 464.470.472.473. What they are in particular. 464. his
unconscionable dealing 472.473. What is principally requisite in a Translator
of scripture. pa. 371.372.375. Translations more autentical then the original.
pa. 290.291.306.
V
Of the name Vniuersali^, See Primacie.
W
Arguments that Good works are not the cause of salvation. pa. 95. refuted at
large. 99.100.101. etc. Good works in Christians are cause of salvation. pa.
99.100. vsque ad 106. and 418.421.422.423. as evil works are cause of
damnation. 104.105.106.107. See Heaven. Good works are in no respect
necessary to salvation by the Protestants doctrine. pa. 110.111.113. their
arguments proving the same. 112.113. The fathers doctrine touching good
works set down by M. W. pa. 115. the wickedness thereof. 116.118.119. they
are therefore condemned by Luther as very Jews. 120.121.122. M.W. notable
wrangling. pa. 14.15. his manifold ouersights. 97.98. he understands not the
Protestants doctrine of only faith. 109. he commonly contradicts him self.
23.25.114.115.123.126.319. he proves the English ministers to be Antichrists
for sayng Communion. 127.128. how fondly he answers a place of S. Chrysostom.
204.206.211.212. his strange assertion, that only the hebrew text is
scripture. 286.287. Refuted. 287.288.289. he calls S. Austin a Sorbonist for
his doctrine touching the value of good works. p. 543.545.546. and by like
reason all the Apostles and Prophets. page 545.546. his arrogancy in
condemning al doctors. 495.496. et praef. page 44.45. The sum of his
answering D. Sanders consists partly in preferring him self before al other,
pref. pa. 42. ad 51. partly in leaving out the substance of D.S. arguments.
ibid. pa. 75. vsque ad 81.
Z
Zuinglius the Apostle of the English church. pref. pa. 89.90. Zuinglians
notable liars. page 525.526.555. and braggers. 554. their manner of writing.
pref. pa. 81.82.
The faults correct thus.
Pa. 4, linea 13. for charged, read charging. Ibidem in many copies wants a
marginal note. Contra Campian. page 11.

Pa. 41, li. 26. Estaticus, read Ecstaticus.

Pa. 85. lin. 6. Christ, read Christ's.

Pa. 145. lin. 18. forth, read forth.

Pa. 195. l. 17. argumenr, read argument.

Pa. 328. li. 8. for the two hebrew letters (...) and (...), read (...) and
(...), where also in some few examples, the later hebrew word is divided, which
should be joined.

Some other faults there are of like quality, especially of one letter for an
other, as s for f, and r for t, and in one place of some copies, is which for
which is, al which, considering the ordinary difficulties of printing, where
strangers are the workers, co^positors, and correctors, (besides other
extraordinary mishaps) I trust the Reader of his courtesy will easily pardon.
Whom I request, if by reading hereof, he find ought for the increase of his
faith toward Christ and his Church Catholic, even for love of the same
Christ and Church, to help me with his prayer.

FINIS.

