Th'overthrow OF STAGE PLAYS, By the way of controversy betwixt D. Gager and
D. Rainoldes, wherein all the reasons that can be made for them are notably
refuted; th'objections answered, and the case so cleared and resolved, as that
the judgment of any man, that is not froward and perverse, may easelie be
satisfied.

Wherein is manifestly proved, that it is not only unlawful to be an Actor,
but a beholder of those vanities.

Whereunto are added also and annexed in the end certain latin Letters betwixt
the said Master Rainoldes, and D. Gentiles, Reader of the Civil Law in
Oxford, concerning the same matter.



1599.

The Printer to the Reader.
THe vanity and unlawfulness of Plays and Enterludes has been often spoken
against by the holy men of God. The danger and hurt that comes by them has
been plainly laid open by sundry frutfull treatises of this our age. Farther
it seems that the Lord himself by sundry his visible judgments from Heaven,
has pronounced a sensible vae against them even in the face of the world.
Witness Paris Garden and other places where diverse have been grievously hurt,
wounded, and maimed; and some by lamentable death and destruction utterly cut
of and consumed. These and such like warninges and examples going before should
(a man would think) have been a fearful precedent to the succeeding age that
came after. But alas our practice shows it to be far otherwise, Th'vsuall
flocking and gadding that we see daily before our eyes to these Play Houses and
idle places of intercourse (many leaving their houses and sundry necessary
duties unperformed, yea not sparing the very Sabath it self, nor fearing the
profanation thereof, so they may therein serve their unruly appetites and
affections) does sufficiently descry a far of of what metal we are made,
and wherein the treasure of our heart consists.

Th'Israelites that were so backward and unwilling to serve the Lord and to
follow his ordinances, were yet willing enough Exodus (...)*
(we see) to spare their earinges and most precious Iuells to the furtherance
of Idolatry and worshipping of a Caulf. This is truly, good Reader (I speak
it with grief) the very case and disease of to many of us at this day. There is
nothing in a manner tedious and burdensome unto us but the furtherance of holy
Religion, and the Christian practice of the same: on the other side there is
nothing commonly so dear and of price unto us, but the love of our vanities
and fleashly delights can easily make it melt and consume. Move men to
contribute any thing to the relief of Gods Saints, or to the re-edifying of a
decayed Church and place of prayer, alas they have in a readiness without
study a whole budget full of letts and excuses, able to drown and extinguish a
better man's devotion then theirs. Why, they give forsooth, in their own
parishes; they have a great charge at home, or else they are so indebted and
behind hand, that they can not etc. And yet to the maintenance of their
pleasures, or to nouzle themselves in their vanities (whether it be in
apparel, gamening, gadding to plays, masking, dancing, bellicheare, shows,
or such like.) It is wonder to see how cheerfully they can untie their
purse-stringes without respect either of parish, home charge, debt or anything
else. The young man in the Gospel went away sorrowful and mourning, but when?
When our Savior bade him, Go sell all Mat. 15. 21.
that he had, and follow him. Wherein if we mark the words well, the holy Ghost
seems to lay down unto us that the young man's grief did arise not only from
this, in that he was to depart with his substance and wealth, which he loved
so dearly, but also from this that he must depart withal to so base, so hard,
and dangerous an end as he imagined, namely To follow Christ, wherein he saw
there was no earthly comfort and felicity to be hoped for. For if our Savior
had enjoined him to sell that he had for his better attendance on Caesar's
Court, or for his preferrement to any place of credit or commodity, like
enough it would not have gone so nigh him, nor have been any such gall or
coresie to his heart, but, To sell all and follow Christ, this was the stinger
that made him thus to hang down his head, to look droopingly, and to fling
away thus inwardly wounded and discontented. And has not this young man to many
followers and successors in this age of ours? or, are there not Israelites
enough among us ready to give any thing to the golden Caulf, and repining at
every thing that they should depart withal to the good of Gods Church? Do we
not see before our eyes, how he that can hardly be drawn to spare a penie in
the Church, can yet willingly and chearefullie afoord both pence and teaster,
enough for himself and others at a play? Nay more, are there not some that never
gave groate in their lives to the furtherance of any good cause without
grudging, and yet to feed and foste^ themselves in their vanities and
superfluities, have full gallantl^ spent themselfs and their patrimony in all
manner of riot and li centiousnes? The Lord lay not this sin to their charge
bu^ humble them to repentance before the day of his wrath.

This treatise therefore of that thrice Reverend man Maiste^ D. Rainoldes,
against stage Plays (being a notable looking glass for such cold Christians
as these, and coming from (...) man of those rare and incomparable gifts,
envied and yet admi red of his very ennemies for his learning, judgment, and
piety* falling by Gods providence into my hands, I thought it not my part,
good Reader, (though it should be in some respect offensive t^ the Author
himself) to conceal and keep back from thee in re guard of the public
benefit that may thereby arise to the Church of God: And so much the rather,
in that the matter herein laie^ down, is handled in another sort by way of
controversy, and far otherways canvased both by sound arguments, divine and
humane authorities, then to my knowledge has been done by an man that ever
wrote in that cause before. His adversary Master D. Gager is likewise, I
understand, a man of gifts, a good Scholar, and an honest man, and (as it
should seem by Master Rainoldes his several aunsweres and replies) has
said more for the defense of Plays then can be well said again by any man
that shall succeed or come after him. So that the cause being thus wittely
and scholar like maintained on the one side, for, and in defense of plays, and
yet in the end all this rampire of defense quite overthrown and laid flat
to the earth by an irresistable battery of profound and unanswerable arguments
and resolutions on the other side, this must needs make the case more clear
and evident in th'eies of any man of judgment, then if it had not been gain
said or withstoode at all. I have been informed also that Master Gager
himself upon the last rejoinder of Master Rainoldes has let go his hold,
and in a Christian modesty and humility yielded to the truth, and quite
altered his judgment. If it be so (good Reader) and that so grave and learned
a man has chosen rather with that ancient father humile peccatum, then
superbam ignorantiam, be not thou for thy part wilful and obstinate in thy
conceit, whosoever thou art, but ponder the reasons and arguments on the one
side, consider the dangers and inconveniences on th'otherside. And if thou have
been bewitched with his vanity heretofore, see whether th'advised perusal of
this excellent treatise may happily by Gods mercy vnwitch thee again. And take
this with thee for a general lesson and observation while thou live, That
whatsoever thy fleash, according to the common course of carnal men,
delights in, suspect thou there is mischief in it, though thou be able to
defend it by thy reason. Surely for mine own part, I am persuaded if this
present discourse be read, marked, and disgested as it should be, the
gentlewoman that swear by her troth, That she was as much edefied at a play
as ever she was at any sermo, etc. will, ere she die, be of another mind,
though it may be she said true then, in regard of her own negligence and
backwardnes in not giving ear to the word of God with reverence. The like may
fall out also to those men too, that have not been afraied of late days to
bring upon the Stage the very sober countenances, grave attire, modest and
matronelike gestures and speeches of men and women to be laughed at as a scorn
and reproach to the world, as if the hypocrisy of Judas (if it were brought
upon the stage) could any whitt disgrace the Apostles of our Savior Christ,
and yet if these men had but thus far exceeded, kept themselves there, and
gone no farther to the foul profaning and abusing of the holy Scriptures of
God, their sin had not been half so great as it is. Well to heal, if it may
be, or at least, to correct the bad humor of such humorists as these (who in
their discovery of humors do withal foully discover their own shame and
wretchedness to the world) here is now laid before thee (good Reader) a most
excellent remedy and receipt, if thou can be so happy to make thy profitte
of it. Read it therefore and disgeast it, and, if thou find good thereof, give
God the glory, and bless his Name, for so worthy an instrument.

Thine in the Lord.

Master D. Rainolds answer unto Master D. Gager, concerning Theater-sights,
Stage Plays, etc.
I AM much to thank you, Master D. Gager, for both your letters, and your
Tragedy: the more, for that you have enlarged the answer to Momus (as you
signify) because you understood that I and others should ask why those
things were not answered which were objected. Indeed, as our Savior John. 18.
2^
when he was smitten by one for speaking naught but reason, said, If I have
spoken evil, bear witness of the evil; but if well, why do thou smite
me? so they, whose objections against plays you attributed to the person of
Momus, and thereby noted them as unjust reproovers, might justly say in my
judgment; If our reasons be naught, discover their naughtines; if good, why
do you Mome us? And what so ever others had cause to think of them selves,
yet I must needs think my self touched therein: although I should yield unto
your request (which I most gladly do) in that you pray me, not to mistake
your meaning; protesting your intent is not to note any man, but only Momus.
For Praefat. Thesiu^ ad Acad, Oxon.
I did reprove our Theater-sights and Stage Plays, as Pestes scenicorum
theatralia spectacula.
hurtful and pernicious, many years ago: and this year, ere your Momus, or
any of your Enterludes came upon the stage, I had (in letters written to our
good friend Master D. Thornton) alleged those reasons, which you make Momus
use, against them. Now Aesopes tale of Momus (as De partib. anim. lib. 3. cap.
2.
Aristotle shows in that your self mention of his reproving nature for
setting bulls horns upon their heads, not upon their shoulders) was devised
to check such as reprove unjustly the best and perfitest works of the most
wise and skillful. To the which purpose since you rehearse it also, and infer
upon it, that the man who taunteth plays with Probr. Arrepta quae conge^sit ex
triviis.
the rascal reproaches there specified, offends in the same sort: how can it
be avoided, but I, who had uttered those things against plays, though deeming
them sound reasons, not rascal reproaches, must think my self charged under
the name of Momus? unless I should be so unwise as to suppose, that my friend
a lawier, saying, If Sempronius borow a horse of Seius, and ride him a mile
farther, then Seius was content he should, L. qui iume^ta. D. de surtis. Val
Max. lib. 8. cap. 2.
he commits theft, the speech does not charge me with theft, though I had
done so, because the lawier meant not to charge me, whom he loves, nor knew
perhaps that I had done it; but his meaning was to charge Sempronius only.
Wherefore albeit you mean not to hot any man but only Momus, as you
protest, and I believe you: yet you mean withal (I trow) the same that
Prolege Man.
Tullie, when having reprooved the covetousness of Chieftaines and Gouuernours
of their wars, I (quoth he) name no man; Wherefore no man can be angie with
me, unless he will confess first of him self. Which I do not mention to
prove that I have cause of being angry with you (be it far from me,)
although I confess my self to have written those things which they, who
speak, are stained with Momus name by you: but only to show that by your
speech against Momus, notwithstanding your intent to note no man but him, yet
you note us all, in him, as unjust reproovers of plays, who soever inveigh
against them as he does. And this your self can not choose but see and
grant, if you call to mind your verses ad Zoilum, and Epistle ad Criticum.
For you will profess (I hope) that your intent is not to note any man but
only Zoilus and Criticus: Yet, if any find such fault with your Tragedy, as
you control them for: you will not deny but you mean to note him as a
malicious Zoilus, and a carping Critic. Your words enforce so much, in that
you tell the Critic, that who so carpeth at the baseness of your matter and
style, does not blame you but Homer; And who so blames Homer, he must needs
be a Zoilus. I must pray you therefore, not to misdeeme of me, that I mistake
your meaning, when I think you purposed to note generally all reprovers of
plays, as unjust reproovers: and so do take my self, though not intended by
the Censurer, who did not aim at me; yet touched by the censure, which in
event does light upon me.

As for that you add, that upon confidence of your own conscience, and the
truth of the things them selves, you assure your self, that I can not be
displeased: I will assure you also that I mislike nothing in your entitling
Momus unto our reasons of reproof, or in your answer to them, if, as you
approve your cause of confidence on the one part, so you shall on the other.
For your protestation of your own conscience does bind me by the law of
charity to think that you have done this in singleness of heart, without
spite and malice. But the truth of the things themselves, that you challenge,
belongs to the reasons fathered on Momus, not to your answer, in my
opinion. Whereof, least you suspect it to proceed rather from a conceited
fancy, then a sound judgment, I will open to you my grounds and inducements:
requesting you the same that Epistolar. (...). 1. epist. 6.
Horace did a friend of his; Si quid novisti rectius istis, Candidus imperti;
si non, his utere mecum. And, because in weighing your aunswers with the
reasons I shall be occasioned to name this or that part, by circumstances, of
your plays, as Antinous, Eurymachus, Hippodamia, Melantho, the rest of
Penelopes wooers, or her maids, Phemius, Irus, Rivales, Phaedra, or her Nurse:
I must pray you to deal with me in this case, as you desired to be dealt
with, that is, to take my words, as spoken of Histrio (to feign a person like
your Momus) with no intent to note any of your players; no more, then if they
had not seen the stage at all, but Quae gravis Aesopus, qu^ doctus Rosci us
egit. Horat. epist. lib. 2. epi. 1.
Roscius and Aesopus had played those parts, not Christ-church-students. Whom,
and you for them, I shall find the readier to grant this, I trust: because
both my conscience does bear me witness before God, that I bear none of
them evil will, nay, I wish unto them all as to my self; and I assure you I
know not who they were that played any of those parts, nor what their names be.

To the first reason then (for I will take them in your own order) that
Stage Players are infamous by the civil law, you answer that Famosus ergo
est quisquis in scena^ exiit? Praetor negabit.
they are not all, but only such as play for gain sake: which you avouch is
proved by the Praetors words. But that which you make the Praetor say, as
distinguishing, Qui sui spectaculum Mercedis ergo praebet, infamis siet; the
Praetor says not. Nay, contrariwise Praetoris verba dicunt. D. de his qui no
tantur infamia. L. 1.
he says without all distinction, generally and simply: Infamia notatur, qui
artis ludicrae, pronuntiandive causa, in scenam prodierit. And Ulpian (whose L.
2. Ait Praetor.
place you quote for proof thereof) does report him so, with these very
words: Ait Praetor, Qui in scenam prodierit, "infamis est". But Vlpian,
expounding these words of the Praetor, cites some Pegasus and Nerva filius.
lawiers saying, that they are infamous, qui quaestus causa in certamina
descendunt, and propter praemium in scenam prodeunt: and hereof you conclude,
that Non ergo quenqua^ scena, sed quaestus notat.
they, who come not forth into the stage for gain sake, are not infamous. By
which kind of reasoning one might conclude likewise, that since by Deuteronomy. 23. 18
the scripture a woman taking money for prostituting her body to men is
infamous: therefore she is not so, who does it freely; much less, who gives
money to have her lovers company; whom yet Ezekiel. 16. 33.
the scripture counts most infamous of all. Howbeit, had those lawiers, in
adding, quaestus causa, intended your conclusion; which I know not whether
they did, but admit it: nevertheless you know that a Dionysius Gothofredus
comment. in corp. iur. civ. ^dit. 2.
lawier also, perhaps more learned then they, has made this note thereon, Immo
and qui sine quaestu. omnes enim scenici probrosi. August. lib. 2. de civit.
Dei, cap. 11. and tribu moveri soliti, Livius lib. 7. wherein, as he
gathers, that such as come upon the stage without gain, are prooved by S.
Augustine and Livie to be infamous, because S. Austin and Livie do show that
all stage players (free players not excepted) were branded with a mark of
infamy and dishonestie, disfranchised in a sort: so he confirms hereby
(which was and ought to be the drift of his note) that by law the players
without gain are infamous, not only such as play for gain sake. And this
do their words, whom he alleges, implie, if they be unfolded and weighed
indifferently, according to the rules of law for douts thence rising: to
weet, that L. 37. D. de legib. Senatusq. consult.
custom is the best interpreter of laws; and, L. 38. D. eod
authority of things still judged of alike has the force of law. For S. li.
2. de civ. Dei. cap. 13.
Augustine groundeth his Quisquis civium Romanoru^ esse scenicus elegisset. etc.
general conclusion upon the ancient practice and order of the Romans
testified by De repub. lib. 4.
Tullie: who says that their ancestors, counting all kind of stage plays
shameful and dishonest, agreed that such persons should not only want the
honor of other citizens, but also be disfranchised by the controlment and
check of Censors. Neither were they checked with this reproach and ignominy of
old time alone, but in Livies age too; yea, before, and after; at least, with
the blemish and stain in men's opinion, though not with the punishment. Or,
Aemilius Probus, de vita excellent. imperat. praefat.
Cornelius Nepos says, that to come on the stage and be a spectacle to the
people, was counted no dishonestie or shame among the Graecians; among the
Romans it was. Laberius, a gentleman of Rome, taking pleasure in writing of
poemes, Macrob. lib. 2. Satu. ca. 7.
when Caesar prayed him to play them him self upon the stage, he yielded as
constrained by the Princes request; but signified so much in his prologue, and
declared withal what a blott it was unto him: Ego his tricenis annis actis
sine nota, Eques Romanus e lare egressus meo, Domum revertar mimus: nimirum hoc
die Uno plus vixi, mihi quam vivendum fuit. Satyr. 8.
fuvenal, rebuking men of noble parentage tainted with like dishonor, does
touch them under Lentulus name, with this censure: Laureolum velox etiam been
Lentulus egit, Iudice me dignus vera cruce. So shameful a matter seemed it to
him for Lentulus to play the part of Laureolus (one, who in a Tragedy was
fained to be hanged, as Melantho in yours) that he thought him worthy to be
hanged in ea^ est for it. Moreover, he prosequuteth the point in such sort,
^at he cutteth off all opposition and reply, whereof else a show, but show
alone, might be made against this testimony and the former. For the Grecians
spoken of by Cornelius Nepos did come upon the stage for gain, at least As the
deg^nerate Lacedaemonian widows, whom he mencioneth.
some of them: though his speech concerning them (in the branch I cited) be
general, like Li. 4. de repub. August. de civit. Dei, lib. 2. cap. 10
Tullies, without that limitation; and so must contrariwise be meant touching
the Romans. Laberius had a ring and money given him by Caesar: though he show
sufficiently, that whereas no ambition, Nulla unqua^ largitio.
no reward ever, no fear, no force, no authority, could make him a
stage player in his youth; much less should it have done in his old age at
three score years: it was necessity only, even Caesar's request, that is,
constraint, which brought him to it. The men of noble parentage, whom Iuvenal
rebukes, were hired, as Consumtis opibus voce^ Damasippe locasti Sipa rio,
clamosum ageres vt phasma Catulli.
himself notes; and the story of Nobiliu^ famil^aru^ posteros egestate
venales in sce^am deduxit. Tacit. Annal. li. 14
Nero, who bought those needy squires to do that service, records: though
Iuvenal adiudgeth them unworthy of life, not only in respect that they played
for their fee, but even that they played too; as may appear by that which
follows, Nec tamen ipse Ignoscas populo: populi frons durior huius, Quisedet
and spectat triscurria patriciorum, Planipedes audit Fabios ridere potest qui
Mamercorum alapas. For seeing that he finds fault with the people, who sat
and beheld the foul misorders and scurrilities (such as your Antinous and
other wooers practice) of persons nobly borne; who heard the race of Fabius
resembling and couterfaiting such base ridiculous things as are expressed in
Irus; who could abide to laugh at blows and whirrets, given to the Mamercians,
as you would say unto Ulysses. he shows that the very action it self, all
regard of lucre, or what soever motive had brought them to it, set apart, was
dishonorable and shameful in his judgment. But his like or sharper inveighing
against Nero, touching whom he adds, Res haud mira tamen citharaedo Principe
mimus Nobilis.
that it was no marvel if noble men were stageplayers when the Prince was a
minstrell, does put the matter out of doubt: in as much as he, comparing Nero
to Par Agamemnonidae crimen.
Orestes, both murderers of their mothers, makes Nero worse in many
respects, and this amongst them: In scena nunquam cantavit Orestes. Wherein,
by "cantavit, he means not only that Nero played a minstrels part upon the
stage, as Phemius on yours: but also that he played the parts of men and
women, perhaps with song alone, as your Hippodamia; perhaps with song and
speech both, as Eurymachus; but parts of Men and Women certainly. This,
obscurelie signified by Iuvenal himself, mentioning the Ante pedes Domiti,
longum tu po^e Thyestae Syrma, vel Antigonae seu personam Menalippes.
tragical habit of Thyestes, Antigona, Menalippe, worn by the offspring of
Domitius, that is, by Nero; In Ner. ca. 2
Suetonius makes playner; saying, Tragoedias cantavit personatus; and, Inter
caetera cantavit Canacen parturientem, Orestem matricidam, Oedipodem
excaecatum, Herculem insanum. In the last of which tragedies it is reported
that a young soldier (one of Neros guard) being set to keep the entry, when
he saw Nero attired and bound with Chains, as the argument required, he
ran to him to help him; thinking (poor freshwater creature) that his
master had been chained in earnest. Another, better acquainted then he with
stage matters, and having served longer, Dio Ner. in Xiphili. epist.
when Nero played the first of them, namely Canace, the soldier being asked
by some who met him in the city what the Emperor was doing, He is
travailing with child, quoth he. The singing then used upon the stage by
Nero, for which Iuvenal counts him worse then Orestes, was his playing of
men's and wemens parts in tragedies. But Nero never played for gain: nay, he
was so far from it, that, when a Praetor, who did set forth plays, offered
him Sesterium decies. Suet. Ner. cap. 2^ (...). Dio.
about eight thousand pound to be an actor, he took the pains, (...). as Dio
says expreslie: and Suetonius sig nifieth, not saying that it was given him
but that a Praetor offered it.
refused the money, disdaining to do ought for hire. Iuvenal therefore counts
all stage players infamous, not only such as played for gain. And what
should I adioyne the testimonies of others, learned, unlearned; both sorts
declaring what Roman citizens thought hereof? For beside Suetonius, Tacitus,
Dio, etc who has written of Nero that has not attainted him with this
reproach? the common people, even soldiers, reckened his stage-playing among
his vicious acts: as, Tacit. Annal. lib. 15.
in a conspiracy that was made against him, he heard to his great grief; when
Subrius Flavius, a Tribune, being demanded by him why he had sought his death,
answered, Oderam te, nec quisquam tibi fidelior militum fuit, dum amari
meruisti; odisse caepi, postquam parricida matris, and vxoris, auriga, histrio,
and incendiarius extitisti: and Sulpitius Asper, aunswering more briefly to
the same demand, said, Non aliter tot flavigitiis ejus subveniri posse.
Neither was it the baseness thereof in comparison of his imperial Majesty,
that they detested only, as his chariot-driving vpbraided him withal might
give cause to think, were it not a whelpe too of Circenses ludi. Sueton. Ner.
cap. 22.
the same litter: but the dishonestie and lewdness, which, accompanying
commonly that trade, by many occasions incident into stage plays, made such
men infamous; and thereupon was noted, though as a more eminent fault in him
then others, yet as a fault in others also. Pecuniam ob delicta dedit, says
Annal. li. 14
Tacitus, telling how Nero brought those poor decayed gentlemen of noble
houses to the stage: and blaming Eius flagitiu^ est qui pecuniam ob delicta
potius de^it, quam ne delinquerent
him, that he did not rather give them money to keep them from offending (so
he terms stage-playing of it self without gain) then to drive them to it.
And Dio, a Senator of Rome, well acquainted with their laws and orders by
Lib. 43. and 49.
sundry great offices of state borne among them, Xiphil. epi.
amplifying that injury done to more also, and to meaner persons then Tacitus
speaks of, nether all rewarded like them peradventure, sure Dio giving no
inkling of that as the shame of it, says, (...)
it was most shameful and grievous that they entered, some willing, some
marvelous unwilling, but they entered, (...).
as the most infamous persons, to the stage, and played both tragedies and
comedies. Wherefore since the practice and judgment of the Romans noted all
stage players generally with infamy, not only such as played for gain: it
follows that the meaning of their law was general, and so all stage players
to be infamous by the civil law. Which law, if it deserve, though not the
title of ^gregia vero laus and ingenuum decens Agere Histrionem lege famosum
optima.
the best applied to it by your Momus, yet of Agere histrionem, lege damnatu^
pia est.
good and godly, given it by you in the rehearsal of his words, as you will
grant it does: I leave it to your own consideration, what credit your
apology of those plays deserves. Chiefly seeing Nero, whom that law
condemned, might have used the same defense against his Momus, that you against
yours, and knit it up with the same words; Quis hic rogavit sportulam, vel
quis dedit? Cui non patebant sponte sine lucro fores? And thus far of your
answer to the first reason.

2 To the next, drawn from the best law indeed, even the law of God Deuteronomy. 22.
5.
which forbids a man to put on woman's raiment; a thing though not distaining
all stage plays, yet welnigh all, and there amongst all yours: you answer that
Semper^ Quid si cogeret lethi metus Mutare vestem? publicum quid si bonu^
suaderet? and, Non ergo juveni est gr^de simpliciter nefas, Mollem puella^
induere.
it is not unlawful simply and always, as if one do it to save his life, to
benefit many; and hereof you conclude, that to do it in plays is not
unlawful. Of the which enthymeme (to call the trial of your arguments to the
touchstone of Logic) the consequution doutlesse is unsound and naught,
whatsoever the antecedent be: and the antecedent, although in the balance of
humane reason it may seem to have weight, yet if it be weighed in the 2 Timothy
3. 16
skales of the sanctuary, will prove unsound and light too. For the holy
Ghost, the Spirit of truth teaches us that Romans 3. 8.
it is not lawful for us to do evil, that good may come thereof. When Mat.
12. (...)
Christ on a Sabbat day went through the corn, and his disciples were an
hungered, they began to pluck the ears of corn and to eat. The Phariseis
reprooved them for it; but unjustly: because it was not evil to work upon
the Sabbat day in such a case. For by evil is Romans 3. 7.
sin meant. 1 Ioh. 3. 4.
Sin is the transgression of the law. The Number. 28. (...).
law allowed Priests to work on the Sabbat day in offering sacrifices. And
Hos. 6. 7.
sacrifice did not please God in comparison of mercy. Matt. 12. 7.
Therefore to do that work of mercy and charity for the relief of hungry
bodies upon the Sabbath day, was not evil. Contrariwise, when Peter Luke 22.
verse 31.
being in danger of trouble and vexation, if he had been known to be of
Christ's disciples, ver. 56.
did thereupon deny that he knew him, or had been with him: he was put in
mind by Christ's ver. 34.
words and ver. 61.
deeds, and he did acknowledge by ver. 62.
his own tears, that he should not have done so. Why? Because he lied, and
Exodus 20. 16 Psalm. 15. 2. Zach 8. 16. Ephe. 4. 25.
to lie is evil; not allowed in any case by Iam. 4. 12.
our Lawgiuer, no Job 13. ver. 4. 7. and 10.
not for the defense of the glory of God, much less for the safety of man a
Job 25. 6.
woorme. By conference and laying of which things together we are taught this
difference between the moral law, and the ceremonial, that the ceremonial
was not enjoined to be kept absolutely and simply; and therefore 1 Samuel 21. 4
Matt. 12. 3.
when it could not be kept without the breach af the moral law, the law of
love and charity it yielded thereunto: but the moral law is simply and
absolutely enjoined to be kept, as a pattern of that holiness which God
requires in Romans 8. 14. Ephe 4. 24.
his children, Lev. 19. 2. 1 Pet. 2. 15.
Be ye holy, for I am holy; and therefore, Rom 3. 7. and 6. 2.
who so breaks any part thereof, though to keep an other part, does defile
himself, and displease the Highest. Now, the prohibitio^ of men to be attired
as women, women as men, belongs to the moral, not to the ceremonial law.
For Gal. 4. 9. Col. 2. 16. Heb. 8. 13. and 9. 11. and 10. 1.
Christ has delivered us from the keeping of the ceremonial. So that, were
this difference of attire a ceremony, then Christian men and women might e^h
co^tinuallie wear the others raiment: as lawfully; as they may Lev. 19. 19.
wear a garment made of linen and woollen; sow their field with maslin; Deuteronomy.
22. 10
plow with an ox and an ass; Lev. 11. 7.
eat of swines flesh; of Deuteronomy 12. 16
blood; of strangled: if not more lawfully rather then these last, which Act.
15. 29. and 21. 25.
the Apostles did forbid the Gentiles for a time, in respect of the Jews. But
they may not wear each the others raiment: as the general precepts absolutely
given in 1 Cor. 11. 7. (...) Iim 2. 9.
the new testament touching the distinct and several attire of both sexes,
show. It is a commandment therefore of the moral law, that women shall not
attire them selves like men, nether men like women. And hereof it follows that
if a man might save his life, or benefit many, by putting on woman's raime^t,
yet ought he not to do it, because it is evil. Nay (which adds greater
weight unto the reason) it is a notorious and detestable evil: as Deuteronomy. 22. 5.
the Spirit shows by the words ensuing, For all that do so are abomination
to the Lord thy God. And seeing that himself has given this censure, God
forbid but we should think it most true and just: although our weak eyesight
could discern no cause, why so small a matter, as flesh and blood might
countit, should be controlled so sharply. Howbeir, if we mark with
judgment and wisdom, first, how this precept is referred by learned Divines
to the commandment Exodus 20. 14
Thou shall not commit adultery, some Calvin. harmon. in lib. Mos. expos.
sept. praecept. Beza leg. Dei mor. cereino. and Posit. D. Babingt. exposit. of
the command.
expreslie making it a point annexed thereto, some impliedlie, in that either
Procopius in Deuteronomy. Thom. Aquin. 2^. 2^ q. 169. art. 2. Hyperius de fer. Baccha^.
they knit it to modesty, a part of temperance, or Cypria^. epi. 61.
Chrysostom. hom. 38. in Mat. Liran. in Deute. 22.
note the breach of it as joined with wantonness and impuritie: next, among
the kinds of adulterous lewdness how filthy and monstrous a Romans 1. 27.
sin against nature men's natural corruption and vitiousnes is prone to; the
Scripture witnesses it in Genesis 19. 5.
Cananites, Ind. 19. 22. 1 Kin 14. 24 2 King. 23. 7
Jews, 1 Cor. 6. 11.
Corinthians, Aristot. polit. lib. 2. ca. 9. Senec. epi. 95
other in other nations, and Quintil. li (...) cap. 4. and lib. 2 cap. 2.
one with special caution, Nimium est quod intelligitur: thirdly, what
sparkles of lust to that vice the putting of wemens attire on men may kindle in
unclean affections, as Sueton. in Ner. cap. 28.
Nero showed in Sporus, Lamprid. in Heliogab.
Heliogabalus in him self; yea certain, who grew not to such excess of
impudency, yet arguing the same in causing their Hora. carm. lib. 2. od. 5.
Catul. in nup tias Iuliae Iuvenal Satyr. 8. Acer si comes.
boys to wear long hear like women: if we consider these things, I say, we
shall perceive that he, who Deuteronomy. 23. verse 17.
condemns the female hoore and male, and, ver. 18.
detesting specially the male by terming him a dog, rejects both their
offeringes with these words that they both are abomination to the Lord thy
God, might well control likewise the means and occasions whereby men are
transformed into dogs, the sooner, to cut off all incitements to that
beastly filthiness, or rather more then beastly. But whether this were part of
the cause that moved the Spirit of God, or no: it is clear and certain that
he pronounces them abominable in his sight, or (as the Hebrews speak more
forciblie) abomination, whosoever put on the different sexes raiment. And so,
it being simply and absolutely unlawful, because it is forbidden by the
moral law, and proved to be evil, a foul abominable evil in Gods sight: the
Christian faith instructs us that we may not do it for any good to come
thereof, no not for the saving of honor, wealth, or life, of others, or our
selves. The arguments, whereby you strive to prove the contrary, are drawn
from two examples: One of the Macedonians, whose king Amyntas entertaining
Persian ambassadors, and having at their request brought noble women to the
banquet, when the ambassadors dalying with them did touch their breasts, and
offered some to kiss them; Vest filius Amyntae indui Iuvenes muli^bri dum
iubet, tot faeminis Claris pudorem ser var, and petula^tiam Persis superba^
coede praeclara excutit.
the kings son, misliking their lascivious actions, desired the^ to give the
women leave to go forth, prete^ding they should return neater, and so by his
direction there came in their steed young men, attired like them, with daggers
under their garments, who slew the ambassadors as soon as they offered to
touch them: The other of Achilles, whose mother Thetis, at the time of the
Trojan war, knowing (as Poets feign) that he should dye at Troy, if he went
thither with the Grecians, did thervpo^ attire him (they say) as a woman, and
committed him as her daughter to Lycomedes king of Scyros, Vita^ tu^tur filius
Thetidis suam.
there to be kept safe from that danger. For hence you conclude that a man may
lawfully putt on woman's raiment to benefit others, to save his life; because
the Macedonians, by their young Princes motion, and Achilles did so. Which
argument if it hold, then may a man lie to save his life, or benefit others,
because 1 Samuel 21. 2
David did so: then may a man forswear to save his life, or benefit others,
because Mat. 26 72.
Peter did so. For the examples of Iam. 5. 10.
Prophets and Mat. 5. 14.
Apostles are surer grounds to build on, then of Achilles or Macedonians. But
you will not say that we may forswear, nor lie (I hope) for any cause; sure
the Scripture will not, neither the Justin. Mart. apolog. ad Anton. Impe.
August. li. de mendacio, and contra mendacium: and others of the soundest
Fathers. Calvin Tremellius, Iunius, in Exodus 1. and the rest of ours.
best Divins; no not Magist. sentent. li. 3. did. 38. Thom. Aquin. 2^. (...)*
quaest. 110. ^rt. 3. and the rest.
Schoolmen, or cap. Super eo. extra de usuris* and all the Canonists thereon.
Canonistes, which yet in many points are far beneth the best. you must
remember therefore that we are to live by laws, not by examples: and regard
in Macedonie, and Greece, as in L. 13. D. de officio Praefidis.
Rome, not what is done there, but what ought to be done there. Else, by these
very examples that you stand o^, not only kings, but also their sons may
put to death; and that, for wanton touching, not only for adultery; nor
their own subjects alone, but foreign ambassadors; yea, their servants also,
though innocent and giltlesse; and make a booty of their carriage, their
treasure, their furniture; all against the kings advise and commandment: for
Herodotus in Terpsichore.
so did the son of Amyntas. And a man, whose country does need and crave
his service in lawful war against their enemies, may, for fear of death,
use Valor. Max. lib. 6. cap. 3.
Vettienus his shifts to keep at home; a youth, that is in love, may put on
maidens raiment, as Terent. Eun.
Chaerea did the Eunuchs for his Pamphilaes sake; a son may obey his mother,
not Ephe. 6. 1.
in the Lord, but against the Lord, and by her commandment behave him self
vnduetifullie, cowardly, wantonlie: for Statius A^hilleid. li. 1.
so did the son of Thetis. Wherein by the way you may observe too, both what
inconvenience and danger of uncleanness cleaves to this practice: and how
Heathen men by the light of nature did descry the shamefulnesse of it and
condemned it. For as he whose fact Mollem puella^ induere, scelus est Clodio;
Non est Achilli: Clodius stuprum parat.
your self adiudge wicked Clodius I mean, Sueton. in Caes. cap. 74.
did satisfy his vilanous lust with Caesar's wife by cladding him self in
woman's raiment: semblably Achilles deflowred Deidamia, king Lycomedes daughter,
by the same occasion. And Statius, who reports the story (so to term it
with Id quod crebra testari p^ test Historia.
you) most exactlie, says Achilleid. lib. (...).
that Chiron, the instructor and bringer up of Achilles, would not have
suffered his mother to have had him away, Si molles habitus and tegmina
foedafateri Ausa foret: that Calchas the Prophet, being filled with Apollos
spirit, cried out, O scelus, en fluxae veniunt in pectora vestes; Scinde puer,
scinde, and timidae ne creed parenti: that Achilles him self did say unto
Deidamia, Neque ego hos cultus, aut foeda subissem Tegmina, ni primo te visa in
littore; and Lib. 2.
unto his mother, Paruimus genitrix, quanquam haud toleranda jubebas, Paruimus
nimium; and unto Ulysses, that Maternum nefas had caused him to put on
indecores, fatorum crimina, cultus* The which resolutions and speeches being
attributed to heathen men by an heathen, and him an excellent Poet, who so well
discerned what was fit and seemly for every one to speak and think, that in
this respect he is preferred by a Julius Caes. Scaliger. Poet. lib. 6. ca. 6
learned judicious author before Homer; do argue and declare, that wise and
virtuous persons, represented in Chiron, would not have a man for safeguard of
his life undergo the shame of wearing woman's raiment; that religious folk
having the Spirit of GOD, as Calchas is imagined, accounted it a heinous crime,
and wished children to rent such raiment when it were put on, and therein
disobey their parents; that ingenuous valiant youths, like Achilles, may be
ensnared for love sake to wear it, not for life; and do it for reverence of
parents, though with grief; and lay the fault afterward upon their mothers,
and the destenies, that they were tainted with such dishonor. Thus is it
apparent even by the example which your self commend, that, as S. 1 Cor. 11.
^3
Paul observes on the like occasion, nature and scripture ^each the same: and
the moral law of God, and law of nature, agreeing both in one, do prove it to
be simply unlawful and evil for men to put on wemens raiment. But suppose it
were not unlawful simply and always, because a S. Austin, Soliloquior. lib.
2. cap. 16
great Divine says it is a great question whether a man may do it to deliver
his country from an enemy, though In that he adds these words, Fortasse
verior vir futurus.
him self seem to approve the negative; and a certain Thomas of Aquine 2^.
2^. q. 169. art. 2.
Schoolman, affirming it to be evil and naught of it self, says that it may
nevertheless be done for necessity, perhaps 1^. 2^. quae. 102. art. 6.
upon I know not what conceit of somewhat ceremonial in it; but suppose a man
might do it for the saving of his life or country: yet your reason fails in
the consequution, that a man may therefore do it to play a part in comedies or
tragedies. Matt. 12. 3.
David, when he was hungry, did eat the shewbread, which was not lawful for
him to eat: and our Savior shows that he did well therein. But if he hah
done it in sport and of a meriment, when no need enforced: the law, which Number.
15. 32
condemned a man for gathering sticks upon the Sabbatday, would have condemned
him too. The grave Athenian Judges, Areopagitae did never punish any (I trow)
for killing quails to supply his want. But, Quintil. lib. 5. cap. 9.
when a lewd boy did pick out quails eyes of a wanton humor, they judged him
worthy of death for it. Good Emperors have L. 3. c. de feriis.
allowed men to do their works of tillage and husbandry on the Soonday, when
other days the season serves not. What? to have stage plays upon the Soonday
therefore, or running of horses, or bearebaytings? No: they L. 11. c. eod. and
Cod. Theo. lib. 15. tit. 5.
disallowed it. He that should spend his life as Iud. 16. 30.
Samson did, in avenging him self of the Philistines, might have the same
testimony of faith which Heb. 11. 32
Samson had. But if one should spend it to show men Theater-pastime, as
Sueton. in Ner. cap. 12.
that fellow did who played Icarus before Nero, and falling down near to his
chamber, sprinkled him with blood; well might he earne the praise of Icarus.
Wherefore albeit a man for the performance of necessary duties might putt on
women's raiment: yet would it not follow thereof, that he may do it to play a
part in Enterludes; Much less will that conclusion follow, which in steed
hereof you set down generally, thereby to fetch about this hidden
conclusion. For you do infer, as proved by those examples with the contrary
of Clodius, that No^ ergo vestis foeminca iuveni est scelus; Sed prava men's,
libido, malitia ac dolus: nec habitus ullus, sed animus turpem facit.
it is no fault for young men to wear women's raiment, but to do it (as
Clodius) with a lewd intent of committing whoredom, beguiling, and deceyving:
neither does any apparel, but the mind, make a man dishonest. And so
assuming hereto, that Quid simil^ nobis obijcere quisqua^ potest? Quid
cogitatum tale? quis
none of your young men, who were attired like women, had any such intent or
meaning; you implie by consequence that it was no fault for them to be attired
so; and therefore men may lawfully put wemens raiment on to play. But what a
foundation this frame is built upon, the consequence in religion and reason
both will show. The Scripture says that 1 Cor. 11. ver. 5. and 10.
women, praying, or prophesying, ought to have a veil or cover on their heads
in token of subjection: but verse 4. and 7.
men ought not to have so. Now, what if a man should preach or pray in the
Church with such a veil as women bear in this respect; with a call (for
examples sake) or with a French hoode: should he offend, or no? Your inference
says, Nay, unless he wear it with a lewd intent, as Clodius did. For no
apparel, but the mind, does make a man dishonest: and therefore Non ergo
velum foeminae viro est scelus; Sed prava men's, libido, malitia, ac dolus: Nec
habitus ullus sed animus turpem facit.
it is no fault for a man to pray with a French hoode on his head. But Saint
Paul says otherwise: and, though he would grant the wearing of it with
Clodius mind to be a greater fault; yet a fault would he judge it to wear it
with Penelopes, because the very wearing of it, is forbidden. The L. 23. D. de
auro, argento, mundo.
Civil law, speaking of Men's and Women's garments, some peculiar to either,
some common to them both, defines those to be common, which both may wear
without reproof; peculiar, which both may not. Women shall have no garments
peculiar now to them, if your speech be true. For men may wear their
peticoates, kirtles, and whatsoever else without reproof: beeause it is not
any apparel, but the mind, that makes a man blame-worthie. The Esai. 3 ^7.
Soph. 1. 8.
Prophets reprehend the people of Jury and Jerusalem, for vanity in
apparel. The 1. Tim. 2. 10 1. Pet. 3. 3.
Apostles require modesty and decency therein. The Clem. Alex. paedag: lib. 2
cap. 10. 11. and 12. lib. 3. cap. 2. 3. and 11. Chrysostom. orat. Calend. habit.
Hiero. epist. 2. ad Nepot. ep. 4. ad Rusticum. ep. 8. ad Demetriad. ep. 47. de
vitando suspecto contubernio.
Fathers, instructing folk of several sexes, estates, and professions, give
special precepts of the same. The Xenoph. lib. 2. de dict. and fact Socr. ex
Prodico Cic. lib 1. de Offic. post. Pane^um.
Philosophers, and Cato. Lev. lib. 34. Lysander. Plut* apoph reg^ and imper^t.
Archidamus Zeuxidami. Plut. apophthegm. Laco^.
Statemen, have thought some raiment comely for honest personages, some
uncomely. All greatly overseene, if it be no shame for what so ever person to
go attired how so ever; and every one may wear of any matter, facion,
color, price he list. But if they were not overseene all, which for some of
them we are sure they were not: then must we acknowledge, that, as in meats
and drinks Mat. 15. 11.
that which goes into the mouth, defiles not the man; yet, if men drink too
much Ephe. 5. ^8
wine, they are defiled by their intemperance and riott: likewise in apparel,
that which comes upon the back, dishonesteth not the man; yet, if men wear
costlier garments then they ought, they are dishonested by their riotous and
immodest behavior. And so, if any man do put on Woman's raiment, he is
dishonested and defiled, because he transgresses the bounds of modesty and
comeliness, and wears that which Gods law forbids him to wear, which
man's law affirms he can not wear without reproof: though otherwise a
Woman's raiment of it self does neither discommende or commend the wearer; no
more then 1. Cor. 8. 8
meat makes us acceptable to God; Romans 14. 17
For the kingdom of God is not meat, nor drink (I may add, nor apparel)
but righteousness and peace and joy in the holy Ghost. Wherefore you had done
better service to the truth, if, in steed of your egre knitting up of this
point with this epiphonema, Maledicta textum glossa quae vitiat bonum.
Cursed is the gloss that corrupts the good text, you had observed rather as
De idolotat. cap 16.
Tertullian does, that the good text you speak of, I mean, the holy Scripture
specifieth not any apparel Maledictus omnis qui muliebribus induitur.
Cursed by God, but only woman's worn by man; and had applied it also against
men's wearing of it in stage plays, as De spectac. cap. 23.
he does. At least I could have wished your censure had been milder, if not
in regard of a younger Preacher, who did so expound that text in a godly Sermon
before your book was printed: yet in consideration of that ancient Father,
with Cypri. Chrysostom. Calvin. and Hyperius, in the places quoted in my letters
to D. Thornton.
many other worthy men, whose learned writings do gloss it in the same sort;
and of a Sext. Synod. in Trull. can. 6^.
general Council, which noreth men's wearing of wemens, raiment though in
plays, as a heinous crime. But if our gloss be cursed, who say that in the
general sentence of the Scripture, All men are abomination that put on wemens
raiment, the special is comprised, Players are abomination that put on wemens
raiment; a thing which your Law-glosses observe upon your L. 5. C. d^ legib.
and constitut. Princ. L. 3. c. quando prouo^. non est necesse.
laws, as standing with reason, and thereupon do gather (agreeablie to a L.
147. D. de regulis iuris Semper specialia generalibus insunt.
rule of law) that he, who fordiddeth the general, will not have the special
practiced; and, every special is suspended, when the general is suspended:
what manner a gloss is yours, which deduceth out of the general affirmative a
particular negative, that is, a flat contradictory; and turns, Alare, into,
Some are not; and delivers as a rule that it is no dishonestie for a man to
wear whatsoever apparel, if his mind be chaste?

3 Yet the third reason, wherein plays are charged, not for making young men
come forth in hoores attire, like Prou. 7. 10.
the Iewde woman in the Proverbs; but for teaching them to counterfeit her
verse 11.
actions, her verse 12.
wanton kiss, her impudent face, her verse 18.
wicked speeches and entisements; should have been allowed even by your own
gloss and exposition of the text: since Distincta sexum forma distinctum de
cet, Virile n^ est foeminae mores sequi.
you say upon it, that different behavior becomes different sexes, and, it
beseems not men to follow wemens manners. Stat. Achilleid. lib. 1.
Thetis taught Achilles how to play the woman in gate, in speech, in gesture:
Sic ergo gradus; sic ora, manusque nate feres, comitesque modis imitabere
fictis. And because his mother had not taught him enough, or he was but a bad
scholar: Lib. 2.
Deidamia gave him farther advertisements, how he must hold his naked breast, his
hands, and so forth. These are wemens manners unseemly for Achilles to
imitate: he should not have done it. How much less seemly then is it for
young men to danse like women, though like exodus 15. 20.
those, who praised God with danses: and much less seemly yet to danse like
dishonest women, like Mar. 6. 22.
Herodias? whereby what a flame of lust may be kindled in the hearts of men,
as ready for the most part to conceue this fire, as flax is the other,
Chrysostom. hom. 49. in Matthew. Hyperius de ferus Bacchan. Viues de instit.
faeminin. Christ lib. 1. cap. de saltationibus.
Christian writers show in part by Herodes example: but a Propertius lib. 2.
eleg. (...)
Heathen Poet more fully by his own experience; affirming that he was not
ravished so much with his mistresses face, though mavelous fair and
beautiful, nor with her hear hanging down loose after the facion about her
smooth neck; nor with her radiant eyes, like stars; nor with her silks, and
outlandish braverie; as he was with her galant dansing. And greater reason is
it you should condemn all stage plays, wherein young men are trained to play
such wemens parts, because, unto Momus terming the stage a Scurrilitatis
ludus, ac lasciuiae.
school of scurrilitie and wantonness, you reply, that Ludicrum petula^s vocat
merry things are called wanton by him, and that Scurrile tu pro^erre ne verbu^
potes.
he is not able to allege one word savouring of scurrilitie. As if you had
said, that, could he make proof of the least scurrilitie or wantonness
therein, your self would condemn them: according both to Christian piety, by
the Ephesians. 5. 4.
Apostles, and to civil honesty by the Arist. Politi. li. 7. cap. ult.
Philosophers precept. Which shows that you acknowledge it unseemly also
for men to play such men's parts, as defile their mouths with immodest
speeches; much more, as stain their bodies and minds with wanton deeds.
Xenoph. de dict. and fact. Socr. lib. 1.
When Critobulus kissed the son of Alcibiades, a beautiful boy, Socrates
said he had done amiss and very dangerously: because, as (...). Aristo. de
hist. anim. lib. 9. cap. 39. Dioscorid* lib. 6. cap. 42.
certain spiders, if they do but touch men only with their mouth, they put
them to wonderful pain and make them mad: so beautiful boys by kissing
do sting and power secretly in a kind of poison, the poison of incontinencie,
as Paedagog. lib 3. cap. 11.
Clemens Alexandrinus speaking of unholy and amatorie kisses, says: Amatorie
Procul impudicos corpore a casto amoue Tactus: quid hoc est? etiam in amplexus
ruit.
embracing goes in the same line with amatorie kissing, if not a line beyond
it. Amatorie dansing is, in Odys. a. and D.
Homers wantons, as oil unto the fire: and the Multarum deliciarum comes est
ex trema saltatio Orat. PerMuraen.
commendation that Enervis hist^. amorem dum fingit, infligit
Tullie gives it in bankets, S. De paenitent. lib. 2. cap. 6. Chry. ho. de
Dav. and Saul. periculosum esse adire spe ctacula quodque ea res adulteros per
fectos facit.
Ambrose gives it in stage plays. Herewithall if amatorie pangs be expressed
in most effectual sort: can wise men be persuaded that there is no wantonness
in the players parts, when experience shows (as wise men have observed) that
x men are made adulterers and enemies of all chastity by coming to such
plays? that Cypri. epi. 2 ad Donatum
senses are moved, affections are delited, hearts though strong and constant
are vanquished by such players? that Minutius Felix, in octavio
an 2 effeminate stage player, while he faineth love, imprinteth wounds of
love? Moreover, since of like things you must needs judge alike: you disallow
the practicing of other vices also, as well as of wantonness and scurrilitie.
Which I presume the rather, because Nostra tibi soli impud^ Visa est ^uventus
ingenua, casta, elegans, Generosa, do^a
you say of your actors, the young men of your house, that they are ingenuous,
learned, chaste, well nurtured, and virtuously disposed. For if, upon this
praise given them by you, I should reply, as Plut. apophthegm. reg. and imperat
Phocio the Athenia^ did, who, when the king of Macedonie (his countries secret
enemy) sent him a hundred talents, and he dema^ding of the bringers why among
so great a number of the Athenians, the King sent that to him alone, they
answered that the King thought him alone an honest man; Then let him suffer me
both to seem and be such a one, quoth Phocio: I assure my self you would
reioyne that you wish them to seem and be such as you avouch they are; and
therefore that you would no more have them do any thing, whereby they might
hazard the loss of any other of those good qualities, or the credit thereof,
then whereby of chastity.

Now, within the compass hereof does the playing of sundry parts in Comedies
fall, as of coosening varlets, base parasites, and the rest, reproved by S. De
specta^. cap. 5.
Cyprian: of sundry parts in tragedies, as of ambitious, cruel, blasphemous,
godless caitiues, and such as Epist. lib. 1. epi. 2.
Horace notes, Sponsi Penelopae, nebulones, Alcinoique In cute curanda plus
aequo operata iuventus: in a word of all such parts in what soever plays, as
De guber^. Dei. lib. 6.
Saluianus censureth with that Prove. 10. 23
text of Scripture, As the Seauentie interpreters (who^ his Latin follows)
expressed it in Greek: agreeing with the Hebrew in substance, though having
peradventure read ye letter Beth amiss in steed of Caph
The fool does committ wickedness in pastime; and the Pro. 26. 18.
Scripture teaches they are no better then madd men, As a mad man casts
firebrands, arrows, and mortal things; so is he that deceyueth his
neighbor, and says, was I not in sport? For, the care of making a show to do
such feats, and to do them as lively as the beasts them selves in whom the
vices reign, works in the actors a marvelous impression of being like the
persons whose qualities they express and imitate: chiefly when earnest and
much meditation of sundry days and weeks, by often repetition and
representation of the parts, shall as it were engraue the things in their
mind with a pen of iron, or with the point of a diamond. In which
consideration the Spirit of God instructs us, that we ought to (...) and (...)
imitate, resemble, Ephe. 5. 1.
follow God, and 1 Cor. 11. 1 Heb. 13. 7.
Godly men, and 1 Pet. 3. 13.
that which is good; 3 Ioh. ve. 11
not any evil thing, but good only; and (...).
meditate, 1 Timothy 4. 15
exercise those things. And the Paynim Romans, though Live. li. 7 25 27. and 29.
Au gust. lib. 1. de civi. Dei, ca. 32. Paul Oros. li. 3. ca. 4
bound to have stage plays by their superstition in honor of their Deified
devils, Yet Live. epi. lib. 48. Aug. lib. 1. de civ. dei, cap. 31.
destroyed Theaters once as unprofitable, and likely to breed public Theatra
stuprandis morib* orientia statim destru ebant: says Tertull* speaking of ye
old Roman laws Apolo. ca. 6
corruption of manners. And the Plutar. insti. Lacon.
Lacedaemonians, by their ancient orders, might not hear comedies nor
tragedies: because they would not have their laws gainsaid, though in jest.
Neither would the Val. Max. li. 2. cap. 6.
Massilia^s suffer any stageplayers to come amongst the^: least the custom of
beholding evil things represented should breed licentiousnes of following them.
And 7 Solon, when Thespis, the first tragedie-player, being demanded by him if
he were not ashamed to utter such lies before so great a company, said it was
no harm to speak and do such things in sport; the grave old man, striking
the ground with his staff, But shortly (says he) we, who do commend and
approve this sport, shall find it (...) Plutar. in So ^one.
in our earnest contracts and affairs. This if that discreet Athenian
lawgeuir, if the Romans, the Lacedaemonians, the Massilians feared in the
beholders and hearers, and feared not without cause, as Isocrat. orat. de pace:
and Ariopagit. Corn. Tacit. Annal. li. 14 Aug. li. 1. de civit. Dei, ca. 33.
Salvian, de gubern. Dei, li. 6. and 7
experience taught: how much greater outrage of wickedness and iniquity are the
actors and players them selves likely to fall into? Seeing that diseases of the
mind are gotten far sooner by counterfeiting, then are diseases of the body:
and bodily diseases may be gotten so, as appears by Martial epigram. lib. 7.
epigr. 38.
him, who, faining for a purpose that he was sick of the gowte, became
(through Quantum cura potest, and ^rs doloris? Desit fingere Caelius podagrum.
care of counterfeiting it) gowtie in deed. So much can imitation and
meditation do. Wherefore, in my iudme^t considering what your self do grant,
or must by consequence, such plays as bring in wooers masked, and dansing,
using much immodest behavior in words and deeds; young men in wemens
raiment, and supposed to be gentlewemen, dansing with them; Eurymachus kissing
of Melantho, and Melantho bewailing the case that no more kissing, nor dansing
now, when she must be hanged; Riuales fond, and amarous; mariners beastly
dronken; Phoedra incestuously embracing, and endeavoring to inflame her sonnne
Hippolytus with loue-speeches; the Nurse, and a new Nymph thereto, bringing
fuel enough to heal and melt a heart of yse or snow; with other things
happily, which, as Vale^. Maxi. (...). 8. cap. 10
Aeschines said of Demosthenes, What if you had heard him self? so they who
were present, and beheld the plays, can better tell then I: such stageplayes,
I say, you ought in my judgment acknowledge to be justly charged and
condemned by the third reason. But At grande factum est tempotis dispendium*
At Mome, non est: Mome mentitis.
you, proposing it briefly, that much time was lost and misspent about them,
make answer that there was not; and add sundry arguments to justify the
spending of time and pains therein. S. Epist. 61. ad Euchrat.
Cyprian writing of a stageplayer who made boys effeminate by instructing then
how to play the women, and to express and counterfeit dishonest wanton
gestures, says, Magister and doctor no^ erudiendorum sed perdendorum puerorum.
he was a master not of teaching but spilling children. Whose words put me in
mind that the loss of time should not have been objected so much against your
plays: seeing some of the players (if they were like the youths whom Cyprian
speaks of) might reply as Terent. E^.
Phaedria; when Parmeno did tell him that his gift bestowed on Thais would be
lost, Ego quoque vna pereo, quod mihi est carius: ne istuc tam iniquo patiare
animo. There was no more time spent about them ( Nihil studiis remissum est
publicis: id fabulis Te^pus tributum est quod solet tribui jocis, Somnoque
colloquiisque, doctoque otio.
you say) then uses to be spent in sports, sleep, talk, and learned
releasing of the mind from study. It may be that there was: even some time
that should have been spent in hearing Sermons the very day that your Ulyssis
redux came on the stage. But if a student haunting a dicing house or tavern
with us, or stews at Rome, should say he spent no more time thereat, then
others do in sports, sleep, talk and learned releasing of the mind from
study: were this sufficient proof that he did not misspend his time? you
add that B^ne collocati te^poris fructum chorus praestare noster, Mome,
maiorem potest, quam disciplina quis piam Momi editus.
your actors can show greater fruit of their time well spent, then any that
is bredde up by Momusses discipline can. I pray God they may. Sure they shall
the better if they be informed that this which you term the discipline of
Momus, is not his, but De spectac. cap. 5.
Cyprians, who entitled the stage Pudoris publici ^upana.
a stews of public shame; or rather the 1 These. 5. 22
holy Ghosts, who wills us to abstain from all appearance of evil: and that
the contrary, for the love whereof you would disgrace this, has to great
affinity with the Pro. 7. 21.
strumpets discipline, mentioned in the Proverbs. You demand An tu poesin
despicere docta^ audeas?
whether we dare despise learned Poetry. No. For S. 1 Cor. 15. 33
Paul has sanctified (as Ad vxorem. lib. 1.
Tertulian well says) a verse of Menander: and Act. 17. 28. Tit. 1. 12.
citing other Poets does show that there is good use of them. But S. Paul who
did not despise Menanders comedies could have deemed it unmeet for a 1 Timothy 4.
12 2 Timothy 3 10
Timothee to play the midwifes part, or Darus, or Dromo, in Terent. prolog.
Andriae.
his Andria or Perentia. you ask Senecamne tu recitare iactura^ putes?
Whether we think it a loss to recite Seneca. Not I: who have recited sundry
of his verses upon occasion in my Lectures. But it is one thing to recite; an
other thing to play: as you may learn by Satyr. 1. and 8
Iuvenal, who dispraised not Poets for Impune ergo mihi recitaverit ille
togatas?
reciting comedies, yet thought a ^inge tame^ gladios inde atque hinc pulpita
pone. Quid satius Mortem sic? quisquam exhorruit vt sit Zelotypus Thymeles,
stupidi collega Corinthi.
man ought rather choose to dye the^ play them: by Pliny, who esteemed (no
dout) of stage-playing like a Roman; yet Epist. lib. 2 epi. 10.
prayed others to recite, or Lib. 1. ep. 13 lib. 3. ep. 15. lib. 16. ep. 15 and
17. lib. 9. epi. 27
praised them for doing it, and Lib. 3. ep. 18 lib 5. epi. 3. and 13. lib. 7.
ep. 17. lib. 8. epi. 21.
did it him self; by Poetices li. 1 cap. 7.
Scaliger, who reports out of the same Pliny that a Latin comedy endited in
such sort as the old comedy of the Greek was Recitatam, non tamen actam.
recited in his time at Rome, but not played. And if your tragedy had been
recited only, as by the Ulysses redux, tragedia nova, in aede Christi Oxoniae
public recitata.
title a stranger might conceue, who knew not that it had been played: surely
for mine own part I would have accounted it no more loss of time to have
heard you pronounce it then my self to read it. But it being played as Acta
ludis Megalensib. tit* Andr. etc. ludis Funebribus, tit. Adelph. ludis Romany,
tit. Phorm.
Terences were: a looser Poet then Terence would control my judgment and very
justly might, if seeing there is in it a Dulcis Melantho, etc. act. 3.
sweet Melantho, a lewd queen, I should not think there came hurt by the
playing of it. For you know what In prologo Captiv.
Plautus says of his captive, that Profecto expediet fabulae huic operam dare.
it would be good for them to hear and see that interlude played, because it
was not made like others, it had no filthy verse, nor perjured bawd, nor
wicked hoore, nor boasting soldier. Finally you say that Locus suus est jocis,
Ludis, choreis, seriis etiam est suus. And, Tu tollis hominem ex homine? tu
part altera constare credis?
there is a time for sports, plays, danses, a time for earnest studies: and,
man consists not of one part alone; he has a body as well as a mind.

Time of recreation is necessary, I grant: and think as necessary for
scholars that are scholars in deed, I mean, good students, as it is for any.
Yet in my opinion it were not fit for them to play at stool ball among
wenches; nor at Mum-chance or Maw with idle loose companions, nor at trunkes in
Guile-hals, nor to danse about Maypoles, nor to rifle in alehouses, nor to
carowse in tavernes, nor to steal dear, nor to rob orchardes. Though who
can deny, but they may do these things, yea worse, even those S. Romans 13. ^3
Paul meant by chambering and wantonness, and that in the most heinous degree,
even of incest, if your general speech concerning recreation be not better
limited? For to go no farther then your own Phoedra, the same reason serves
her unto Hippolytus: Ovid. epi. (...).
Quod caret alterna requie durabile non est: Haec reparat vires, fessaque
membra levat. Arcus, and arma tuae tibi sint imitanda Dianae: Si nunquam cesses
tendere, mollis erit. Good verses, and a wholesome lesson: fit for chaste
Hippolytus to think of and remember. But as he had learned by the light of
nature, that albeit rest and recreation is needful, yet the thing which
Phoedra labored to persuade him under pretense of rest and recreation, was
execrable: so students are instructed by Xenophon. (...). lib. 1. de dict. and
fact. S^cr. l. 4. Panaetius and Tullie after him de off. lib. 1.
folowers of the same light (to go no higher for this matter) that all sports
and plays are not expedient, honest, seemly, some savor of dishonestie. Of
which kind danses are, as the Gentiles saw by the same light also: those
danses, that you speak of, if you speak to purpose; not 2. Sam. 6. 14
David's dansing, which S. De poenit. li. 2. cap. 6.
Ambrose does well distinguish from them, but danses of Penelopes wooers, of
Melantho; of other of her maids, and simply all stage-dansing. In so much
that the Dio, Xiphilini epit. in Ne^
Romans, whom Nero enforced, if they could do no other service on the stage,
to danse there at least, (...).
pronounced the dead happy, who by departure out of life had escaped that shame.

The Iud. 16. 25.
Philistines accounted it a meet dishonor for their greatest enemy, when they
put Samson to it: if yet the playing and sporting before them, which they put
him too, were so ignominious. All ancient laws almost (as a Arias Mo^. in
Iud. ca. 16.
learned man does note upon occasion of that concerning Samson) yea, and
reason it self do brande with a mark of dishonestie and infamy, those that
daunse publikelie; and persons of such shows and spectacles. Wherefore the
needfulnes of a time for sportes, for plays, for recreation, as well as for
study, does not prove the lawfulnes of your Theatricall sports, and plays;
of the daunses mentioned; of young men's womanly raiment; of Melanthos kissing;
of Phaedras furious rage; her Nurses and the Nymphs bawdrie; of wantonness and
scurrilitie showed in sundry speeches, actions and gestures; of the loose and
beastly behavior of the mariners, with the rest of like quality. Nay, your
own argument that man consists not of one part alone, he has a mind as
well as a body, confuteth all such sportes; because, as recreation is needful
in regard of the body, so virtuous recreation in regard of the mind: and
virtue more necessary much then recreation, by how much the mind is of more
excellency then the body; or rather by how much more profitable it is for
mind and body both, since he who wants 2. Pet. 1. 5.
virtue, verse 9.
is blind, and, 1. Tim. 4. 8.
godliness has the promise both of the life present and of the life to come,
and Heb. 12. 14
without peace and holiness, no man shall see the Lord.

Now, these things standing thus, what need I spend words in prooving of the
fourth reason, namely, that the charge of setting forth such plays is money
cast away, and adds wastfulnes to wantonness, when your own answer does
strengthen it sufficiently? For in that you say, Est, ubi parcas, locus: suus
est honesto sumptui.
there is a time of sparing, a time of honest spending, you grant that
dishonest expense is still unlawful: as you have cause to do, seeing it is of
Luke 15. 13.
riott condemned by our Savior in the prodigal son. Wherefore, unless that
unthrift might have answered Christ or any other reproouer, Thou blamest me
for wasting, but I wast none of thine; thou may drink with me scotfree, if
thou be a good fellow, and welcome: I see not how At sumptus ingens: at tibi
gratis licet spectare, Mome, nemo te stipem rogat.
your answer to Momus can be justified, Thou say the charge is great; but
thou may come, and look on, Momus, and pay nothing, no man does ask thee
a penie. And that which Huc tantus iste sumptus, in pauperculos magis
elocandus, rediit?
he obiecteth, that it had been better bestowed on the poor, is as weaklie
met with; in that you reply, Sumptus est ingens tibi; Nobis mediocris: nemo
propterea minus fovebit inopes; absque eo ^emo magis (...).
The charge, great to him, is mean and moderate to you; none will give the
less to the poor for that* none would have given the more without it. For
Sueton. (...) Ner. cap. 20.
Nero, being tickled with desire of praise, and loving to hear men approve
his playing on the stage with clapping of their hands, and crying out,
Excellent, excellent, did choose a lusty band of valiant youths to do it,
whose Captains he gave Quadrag^ millia ^tium.
three hundred pound a piece, or better. This, if we consider Co^. Ta^ hist.
lib. 1.
the millions that he wasted in prodigal gifts, was less charge to him,
supposing it amounted to three thousand pound, or four, or five, or more,
then three or four, or five, or a few more shillings is to some of yours. Yet
the story notes it as part of his wastfulnes: and Nero peradventure was
either less able or less willing to help the poor, by reason of that moony
given for a Plaudite. But you tell Momus, that Adquid ist^ perditio est, Here?
Mala, Mome, vox est.
their speech, who said, Mat. 26. 8.
what needed this waste? is evil. An evil speech in deed, as Ioh. 12. 4.
Judas and others used it, because that was no waste, Mat. 26. verse 10.
it was a good work verse 12.
done for the preparing of Christ to his burial. But neither is it a good
work or service unto Christ, to spend thirty pound in trimming up a stage
and borowing roabes out of the revils, for the feeding of that humor which
Epistol. lib. 2 Est. 1.
Horace, though an Epicure, condemned of great Tanto cum strepitu ludi
spectantur and arts Diuitiaeque peregrinae, quibus oblitus actor Qu^m stetit
in scena, concurrit dextera laevae. Dixit adhuc aliquid? Nil sane. Quid placet
ergo? Lana Tarentino violas imitata veneno.
lightness in the people of Rome: and Hon il. 56. in Genesin.
Chrysostom, but what speak I of a Christian Bishop, who may be thought to
rigorous? a Plutarchus Opusc. Bellone an sapientia clariores fuerint Athen.
heathenish Lacedemonia^, seeing much cost bestowed on a stage at Athens, said
they were much to blame for wasting things of worth on toys; And m Tullie
with the learned (whose judgment he relieth on) do give such expense the note
of Prodigi dicuntur qui ludorum apparatu pecunias profundunt etc.
prodigality. The more sorry am I, that you conclude your answer to this and
all the former reasons with alleging Academiae tu judicia nihili facis?
the judgment of our University; yea, with asking us, whether we set nothing
by it. Wherein first you do the University wrong, in charging the body
thereof with allowing that, which some were not present at, because they
disallowed it, some disallow it who were present: as in part I know by a grave
learned man, your good friend and mine, who showed me his dislike of the
representation of amorousnes n De offic. lib. 2.
and drunkenness, in Rivales both; the former, not in Rivales only: in part I
conjecture by that I understand that certain who came thither, came eue^
pressed to it by great importunity; and as my self by such means have been
ouerintreated to do that sometimes which I repented afterward, so I think of
others, men subject to the like passions that I am. Next, you do us injury,
who dissent from them that approve and like it, in that you entwite us as
setting nothing by their judgment: when you should rather think, by the rule
of charity, that we dissent from them as De baptism. contr. Donat. lib. 2.
cap. 5. cont. Crescen. grammat. lib 2. cap 3^
Augustine did from Cyprian, whose judgment notwithstanding he reverenced and
made account of. But to them I say* with Phil. 3. 15.
Paul; to the Philippians, If ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveile even
the same to you, and I assure my self, they will take in good part, that I
prefer before them the judgment of the Church in so many Counsels, what
General, what Provincial, of Sext^ Synod. in Trull. can. 62.
Constantinople, Concili. Laodicen. can. 54. De consecrat. Did. 5. c. Non
oportet.
Laodicea, Council. Carthag. tertium can. 11. septimum, can^ 2. c. Definimus.:
Omnes. 4. q. 1.
Carthage, Council. Arelat. secund. can. 20.
Arles, and Conc. Aquisgran. sub Ludov. Pio. cap. 83.
Aquisgranum; to pretermitt the Fathers, of whom what one is otherwise minded?
To your self I say farther, that in steed of your question proposed unto us,
Academiae tu judicia nihili facis? I propose you an other upon a 1. Cor. 11. 16.
surer ground, though in a verse like yours, and God grant you may think
religiously, wisely, and fruitfullie thereof, Ecclesiae t^ iudi^ia nihili
facis?

Thus have I showed you what mooveth me to think that the truth belongs
rather to the reasons fathered upon Momus, then to your aunsweres: Which I have
strained my self to do the sooner amiddest my great business, that as you were
desirous by a common friend of ours to satisfy me, with protestation of your
hearty affection and good will: so you might perceive I am as careful to
approove my judgment unto you, my good will at least, if you shall
notwithstanding mislike of my judgment. And if you will signify to me what
you mislike in any of the points; which I have stood upon or touched by
occasion; you shall find me as willing to learn, by Gods grace, as I am
ready to teach, according to Saint Epist. 1. ad Greg^. Naz.
Basils counsel. For as the love I bear to you, and to others, enforces me
the (...).
later, not to conceal through envy any thing I know; so the love I bear to
GOD and his truth, persuades me the (...).
former, not to be ashamed to learn that I know not. The Lord fill our
hearts with his holy Spirit, and have us in his gracious protection for ever.

At Queens College. Iul. 10. 1592. Yours in the Lord John Rainolds.

Unto this master D. Gager replying and desiring Master Rainoldes to
forbear, Master Rainoldes did reioine as follows.
YOUR request, Master D. Gager, that I should forbear farther reply in
writing, and by word of mouth in private conference inform you, if you have
greatly erred in any part of your answer; brought into my mind Diog. Laer* in
Diogene.
the Philosophers censuring and checking of such as offered sacrifice for
health, and at their very sacrifizing did banquet riotouslie against health. For
that which I wrote concerning things, the stage plays, you draw unto the
persons, who played on the stage at Christchurch, as if I went about to make
the^ and your house most vilanouslie infamous: and partly by concealing,
partly by perverting the drift and substance of my speeches, you seek to
smoother up and suppress the truth. Which being done in writing by you with
care and diligence, not to be imparted unto me alone, but to others also, as
your self do signify: if I should note the fault thereof by word of mouth,
my plaster would be less a great deal then the wound, and therefore never
reach to heal it: for words have wings, and fly away, men's writings do
remain. But as far as possibly I may without neglect of the duty I owe to
GOD and to his Church, I yield to your request: that is, I will endeavor to
make plain unto you the injuries and wrongs that your answer does me, as
briefly as the necessary clearing of the truth, and scattering of the mistes
whereby you go about to darken it, will permit.

The point that is in question between us touching stageplayes, was generally
moved: to weet, whether such as play them do offend, or such as reprove the
playing of them. You undertook to show that the reproouers are faulty: I,
that the Players. And least the dissension of opinions herein should breed
exulceration of minds between us, if that, which either of us said touching
the matter, should be taken odiously as meant against the persons whom it might
concern: you, with protestation of your good will to mee-ward, desired me not
to think that you meant to note me by the name of Momus; I prayed you the like
with like protestation in respect of your players; and that with greater reason
why you should have yielded to it in my opinion, since neither one of their
names, Phemius for example sake, does signify a lewd player, as Momus does
an unjust reproouer; neither did I know who played that part and others, as you
knew my mislike of plays. Now, I condescended to your desire most gladly:
your self acknowledge it, and heartily thank me for it. I would to God I
might have likewise thanked you: whereof you have given me so little cause, so
great cause to the contrary, that I must needs complain you have forgotten
the lesson which a Alexander Seuerus, apud Lampridium.
heathen Emperor had learned of Jews or Christians, and marueilouslie loved
it, Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris. For whereas you had said that
stage players were not counted infamous by the civil law, but only such as
played for game; and I, to refute this, declared that the Romans, whose
judgment and custom does best interpret their own law, counted Nero
infamous for playing, though freely; which, least you perhaps through
ambiguitie of a The word cantavit, used by Iuvenal. sat. 8.
word, should except against, that it was not stage-playing of Men's and Women's
parts, I opened it by the examples of your Hippodamia, Eurymachus, and
Phemius: you reply hereon, that this is my arguing; Many noble men, and Nero
him self were infamous for playing, though freely, men's and women's parts,
and specially Nero for singing like a fiddler on the stage; Ergo, scholars and
the students of Christ-church are to be noted with a mark of infamy, for
playing, though gratis, such parts as they did in Ulysse reduce; and namely
the Master of our Choristers for playing Phemius; notwithstanding for his
honesty, modesty, and good voice, he is as worthy to be delivered from
infamy, as Phemius him self is fained to be saved from death, for his
excellent skill in Music, to say nothing of the rest. And not content to
wrest mine argument from my drift, and rack it to my sentence from the Civil
law, to Christ-church players from the Roman, you shutt up your tale with this
moral: I dare not deny this argument, because it is yours; I refer it to
the charitable judgment of my betters. Act. 25. ^2.
Have thou appealed to Caesar? to Caesar shall thou go, quoth Fest^s, Even so
am I contented, good Sir, that our betters do judge of mine argument, and your
charitable usage of it. To the which intent I beseech you heartily, that, with
the next play you publish, you will set forth my letters, and your answer to
them. In the mean season, I think, that when omitting the force of mine
argument against your distinction of playing for gain, and freely, you drew
in the mention of the Master of your Choristers, his honesty, his modesty,
his good voice, his Music, and of the rest of the Scholars and students of
Christ-church: your purpose was to show a piece of that art, that Servius
Galba did. Who, being endited of a Valor. Max. lib. 9. cap. 6. Sueto. in Gal.
cap. 3. Oros. lib 4. cap. 21
great offense, whereof he could not clear him self, and therefore Cic in
Bruto Livi. lib. 49. epitome Valor. Max. lib. 8. cap. 1.
slipping from it, commended to the judges both his own children, and the
child of his kinsman, a most worthy citizen, that being lately dead, had left
him guardian to his child: so to save him self by the peoples mercy and
commiseration of the boys, which he could not have done by the desert of the
cause and his own innocence. For if the good qualities of the Master of your
Choristers, or of your Scholars and Students, do prove that the Romans
counted it no infamy for such to be stage players, how soever they counted it
for Nero: then Orat. pro P. Quintio.
Tullie spoke absurdly, when he said that Roscius both for his skill in playing
seemed alone worthy to come upon the stage, and for his Vir eiusmodi est. The
sense of which words he opens in his oration pro Q. Roscio comoedo, saying
thus of Roscius: Quem populus Romanus meliorem viru^ quam Histrionem esse
arbitratur; qui ita dignissimus est scena propter a^i. ^cium, ut dignissimus
sit curia propter abstinedam
virtue and honesty, seemed alone worthy not to come upon it. And how can the
charitable judgment of your betters; nay, how can your own, charge me as
offending for setting down that of the Romans, which by consequent touches
the Master of your Choristers credit, and others of Christchurch: where your
self acknowledge, that your invectiue against Momus, does consequently fall on
me, on the Preacher, on whosoever else reproove plays, and yet you may have
written it without offense, you trust?

But in this matter your fault is the less, because you had some color
thereof by mine exemplifying in three of your players: nor did the Romans
always count them so infamous but that the best of them were sometime well
esteemed of, as Macrob. Saturn. lib. 3. cap. 14.
Tullies great acquaintance with Roscius and Aesopus argues. In the next you
do me so much the greater injury, by how much both the turpitude and vilanie
is greater wherewith you bear your Students in hand that I charge them: and I
was farther off from giving cause to be so dealt with, having refrained
purposelie from naming any of yours in opening of the point. For being to
prove that the prohibition of men to put on women's raiment (in Deuteronomie)
belongs to the moral law, and thereupon declaring how it is referred by
learned Divines, to the commandment, Thou shall not commit adultery: I said
that they had reason to refer it so, because, among the kinds of adulterous
lewdenes, men's natural corruption and vitiousnes is prone to monstrous sin
against nature, as the Scripture witnesses in Cananites, Jews, Corinthians,
other in other nations, one with special caution Nimium est quod intelligitur;
and the putting of women's attire upon men, may kindle great sparkles of lust
thereunto in unclean affections, as Nero showed in Sporus, Heliogabalus in him
self; yea certain, who grew not to such excess of impudency, yet arguing the
same in causing their boys to wear long hear like women. This, in your
examining the sense of Moses words, whereunto I used it, you pass over
wholly; without mention of the judgment of the learned Divines, or of my
reason given for it. But in the point following, where I handled other
inconveniences and discommodities of plays, with special applyinge thereof
unto yours: We pray you Sir (say you) to make a great difference between us
and Nero with his Sporus, or Heliogabalus with him self, or the Cananites,
Jews, Corinthians, or them that cause their Pages to wear long hear like
women, or any such dogs: we heartily abhor them. You say out of Quintilian,
Nimium est quod intelligitur: and I may say, Nimium est quod dicitur. We
thank God, our youth do not practice such things, they think not of the^,
they know them not: neither ca^ any man living the rather for our plays charge
any one of us with the least suspicion of any such abomination. I have been
often moved by our plays to laughter, and sometime to tears: but I can not
accuse either my self, or any other, of any such beastly thought stirred up
by them. And therefore we should most uncharitably be wronged, if our putting
on of Womanly raiment, should either directly or indirectlie be referred to
the commandment, Thou shall not commit adultery. All these are your own
words. In which that you may see, what your dealing is, behold a pattern of
it. There was a certain Preacher, who catechizing his hearers in the
principles of faith, and delivering to them Mat. 5. (...).
Christ's exposition of the law, Thou shall not committ adultery; told them
that the very looking upon women, whereby men are occasioned to think or
lust vnchastlie, is a breach thereof. He prooved it by the examples of Genesis 39.
7.
Putiphars wife, who cast her eyes on Joseph, and fell in love with him; of
Job. 31. 1.
Job, who therefore made a covenant with his eyes, least he should think upon
a maid; of 2. Sam. 11. (...)
David, who looking on Bethsabe from his house top, did lust incontinently
after her. And because the parties, whom he taught, were scholars, well read
in foreign writers, he added how the learned Heathens had declared that Plato
in Cra tylo. Xenophon de dict. and fact. Socr. lib. 1.
love does enter in by the eyes; Theo. (...). 2. Musaeus in Her. and Lean.
Virg. ecl. 8.
fair persons seen, have made men madd; and in them also is that verified,
Virg. Geor. lib. 3.
Uritque videndo Foemina; as (...). lib. 5.
Xenophon records Cyrus to have noted; and Lib. 3. eleg. 19.
Propertius found by trial in him self. Now, among the company to which the
Preacher spoke, one, not evil minded, yet loving good fellowship, and a more
remiss, or welnigh loose kind of living, fearing least by the credit and
force of this doctrine, certain of his friends whom he had made acquainted
with beautiful wives, or handsome maids, should grow into suspicion of
wantonness and lightness, rose up and said unto the Preacher; We pray you, Sir,
to make a great difference between us, and them whom Cyrus speaks of, or
Propertius him self; or Putiphras Wife, Job, David, or such as let their eyes
be porters unto love, and dote by seeing fair persoons: we heartily mislike
them. You say out of Uirgill, Uritque videndo Foemina; and I may say, Uritque
loquendo Masculus. We thank God, our youth do not practice such things, they
think not of them, they know them not: neither can any man living, the rather
for our looking on handsome maids, or beautiful Wives, charge any one of us
with the least suspicion of any such uncleanness. I have been delited often with
their sight, and sometime moved to pity: but I can not accuse either my
self, or any other of any such wicked thought stirred up thereby. And
therefore we should most uncharitably be wronged, if the casting of our eyes on
wives, or on maids, should either directly or indirectlie be referred to the
commandment, Thou shall not commit adultery. What think you of this man,
Master D. Gager? Did he not the Preacher wrong? Certainly, if you have the
spirit wherewith 2. Sam. 12. 5
David answered Nathans parable, you will confess, he did. And what ensues,
you see: I need not add, You are the man. But this I must add, that the
wrong you do me is so much more palpable, then was this carpers of the
Preacher, because I said, that the putting of Women's attire upon men, may
kindle sparks of lust in unclean affections: I said not, in all men's
affections, but in some; not in sanctified, but in unclean. What? And do you
grant, that you, and your youth, have unclean affections, to the intent you
may blame my speech? If not, why tell you me, that the putting of womanly
raiment upon men, has not stirred any such beastly thought in any of you;
when I spoke expreslie of unclean affections? Besides, can you accuse your
self, or any other, of any wanton thought stirred up in you by looking on a
beautiful Woman? If you can; then ought you beware of beautiful boys
transformed into women by putting on their raiment, their feature, looks and
facions. For men may be ravished with love of stones, of dead stuff, framed by
cunning grauers to beautiful women's likeness; as, in Ovid. Metamorp. lib. 10
Poets fables appears by Pygmalion, by Plin. hist. na. lib. (...). ca. 38.
and li. 36. ca. 5
Venus Gnidia in stories: and Terent. Eun. act. 3. scen. 2.
Chaerea, araied like an Eunuch only, did moove the beastly lust of him who
was lasciviouslie given in the Comedy. If you can not: then do you both me,
your self and others, injury in co^cluding, that therefore you should most
uncharitably be wronged, if your putting on of Womanly raiment, should either
directly or indirectlie be referred to the commandment, Thou shall not
commit adultery. For my speech was general, that the cladding of youths in
such attire is an occasion of drawing and provoking corruptly minded men to
most heinous wickedness, and therefore should be wisely cut off by the
faithful: as if, in a Sermon to the university, expounding that of Job, Job.
31. 1.
I made a covenant with mine eyes, I should tell the Students, that though he
name a maid, we must extend the lesson farther; by Sophoc. Cic. de offi. lib.
1. Valor. Max. lib. 4. cap. 3.
the man's example, whom a worthy governor, in Praetori non solum manus a
pecuuiae lucro, sed etiam oculos a libidinoso aspectu continentes esse debere.
Val. Max.
other words to like effect, admonished of making a covenant with his eyes,
for saying; O puerum pulchrum Pericle. Whereupon if any should tell his
acquaintance of this, or that College, Tutour, or other, accustomed to cast his
eyes on such children as God had adorned with comelines of body, that I went
about to make them suspected of most horrible lewdenes, he should do both them
and me notorious injury. Albeit, as our Savior, saying to his Disciples, Mar.
4. 24.
Take heed what you hear, did purpose to stir them up to mark diligently
that which he delivered, and faithfully to perform it; yet condemned them not
as retchlesse or unfruitful hearers of his word: so I would acknowledge that
in saying likewise, Take heed what you see, my meaning were to stir up both
Tutours, and all other, to carry them selves chastely, even in their looks
also, least death come in by their windows, though I mean no more to make
them suspected by this admonition, then I do my self. Which if you, who touch
me so bitterly, and often, for doing you or yours uncharitable wrong, had
charitably marked: I should have less cause of wishing you to play the (...).
Gregor. Nazian. apolog. fugae suae.
Physician better, and first to heal your self.

This I say not only of my general speeches set upon the rack to make me
odious to your Students: but of the particular too, that may be thought to
concern them specially. As namely that I mentioned Eurymachus kissing of
Melantho: a thing which I gathered to have bin done by her own words: 5 Furtiva
nullus oscula Eurymachus dabit. Act. 5.
since they were both intended to be alone secretly, when he had Pulcherrima
Mela^tho, quid effari q^eam? Nemo severa^ juuenibus legem ferat, etc Act. 3.
foul immodest lascivious talk with her; and the music and daunsing, Ad
strepitu^ lyrae Non laeta salies. Act. 5.
whereof she speaks withal, was represented on the stage. But I named them
only for example sake; my drift being general against such plays as
express such actions: whether set forth presently by you; as your Rivales,
in which some of the wooers perhaps kissed Phoedra; or heretofore, as Plauti
curculio.
that of Plautus, in which Act. 1.
Phaedromus kissed Planesium without perhaps. Wherefore since you defend your
former plays as well as these, and in that respect commend by name Plautus,
as you have great reason, comparing any Comedy of his with your Rivales: what
aimed you at in saying, that, for the danger of kissing beautiful boys you
know not how the suspicion should reach unto you, because it is untrue that
Eurymachus kissed Melantho; unless your meaning were to practice that malice
(so Aristot. li. 1. rhet. cap. 1. Vives de tradend. disci^plin. lib. 4.
learned men do justly term it) of rhetorike, I mean, by restraining my
general intent unto your present players, to draw me into their hatred? Else,
when you enquired of the parties them selves, whether any such action were used
by them, and they (you say) denied it constantly: why did you not enquire also
of Plautus, whether it were used by Phaedromus, and Planesiu^, and of the
ancients of your house, whether Phoedromus and Planesium came ever on your
stage? Sure you should have taken this course by the equity of that which
seems reasonable to you in your own cause. For, spying by mine answer, that
your example of Achilles wearing woman's raiment, did not serve your turn: you
reply, that we may imagine such a one as will serve it, with change of a
circumstance. And this in your defense must go for sufficient. But the case is
altered, when it touches me: yea, although my purpose may be prooved by true,
not by imagined, examples. So indulgent commonly are men unto them selves: so
rigorous unto others.

Howbeit, I should not complain of this rigor, but for the tail of it, and
the sting of breeding evil will among brethren, which does lurk therein. The
venom and poison whereof goes about to spread it self abroad through more
parts of your body, then Phemius, Eurymachus, and the players of women; by
means that you likewise instill the same humor, at least seek to instill it
as much as in you lies, into the rest of all your players, their teachers and
instructors, and in conclusion your whole house. For whereas the third branch
of our reasons, set down by you in Momus his name against plays, had avouched
not only their time to be misspent who were employed therein, but some of
their persons, their minds, corrupted also; and I, to show how cunningly
you, encountering this proposed the loss of time alone and not of men, did
declare that Cyprian writing of a stage player, who made boys effeminate by
instructing them how to play the women, and to express and counterfeit
dishonest wanton gestures, says, he was a master not of teaching but spilling
children; and thereof did infer, that the loss of time should not have been
objected so much against your plays, seeing some of the players (if they were
like the youths whom Cyprian speaks of) might reply as Phaedria, when
Parmeno did tell him that his gift bestowed on Thais would be lost, Ego quoque
una pereo, quod mihi est carius; ne istuc tam iniquo patiare animo: behold,
with how charitable applying of my words you come in thus upon me, The saying
of Saint Cyprian against a stage player, or of Phaedria of him self to
Parmeno, can not be justly used against us. For he should do us great
contumely, that should think, or say, that either we are masters not of
teaching, but spilling children; or that both time and our young men were cast
away altogether by those exercises. And to make a deeper impression in your
young men that I do them this contumely, with an other also brought for
proof hereof: you go forward thus: But it is no marveile that you imply so
ill a coceite of them, if you doubt that, as I answered Momus, our actors can
show greater fruit of their time well spent, then any that is bredde up by
Mo^usses discipline can. For you pray God that they may: as doubting it is not
so. Wherein, first and foremost, if your conscience tell you, that your self
(for whom else you associate to you by we are masters, I know not) are touched
in Saint Cyprians reproof of the stage player: I can no way help it, save
with that of Scripture, 1 Ioh. 3. 2^
If your heart condemn you, God is greater then your heart, and knows all
things. But whether I might not allege Saint Cyprians words, to show that
somewhat more then time is cast away and spilt by such stage plays as make
boys effeminate: let our betters judge. Who, I trust, will not condemn the
poor swalowes for chattering and using their voice, agreeably to nature,
because Plutarch. de lenta numinis vindicta.
Bessus surmised they cried against him that he had killed his father. Next, in
that you charge me with insinuating of your young men, that both time and them
selves are cast away altogether by those exercises, and add, it is no marveile
that I imply so ill a conceyte of them: truly, it is marveile, that you,
professing so much good will to me as you do, should in so few words use so
many tricks of calumniation to breed a misliking of me in your young men. One,
by making me to speak of them at large, and indefinitlie: whereas I noted
only such as played the Women, and of them such only, as were taught to
counterfeit dishonest wanton gestures, that is, as played unchaste women. An
other, by adjoining the particle Cast away altogether.
Altogether, as if I had judged them dead, dead, past all recovery: whereas
the Spilling, in^ S. Cyprians words; and Pereo, in Phaedrias, Ego quoque una
pereo.
terms I used imported that they were in spilling, not spilt, much less spilt
altogether, but like Revel. 3. 2.
the things in Sardis which were ready to dye. A third, by suppressing the
means of their spilling, to weet, the making of them effeminate, which I
specified; and by setting down a word of more honest and common signification
in steed thereof, to weet, By those exercises.
exercises: as who say that peremptory sentence had been given of all, even
them who played men's parts, yea the best men's; where I censured only the
filth of playing wanton queanes so with Cyprian. A fourth, by rehearsing it as
absolutely pronounced: where I with a If they were like ye youths whom Cyprian
speaks of.
condition restraining the sentence, did manifestly show that I affirmed it
not, except they took like harm with those whom Cyprian speaks of; and
therefore drew my speech from your special players, to the general question.
A fifth, by making proof thereof, as good and sound, as the thing proved; in
saying, It is no marveile that I imply so ill a conceit of them, if I doubt
that your actors can show greater fruit of their time well spent then any that
is bredde up by Momusses discipline can: and yielding this reason to persuade
the young men that I doubt it is not so, because I pray God that they may.
Which reason if it hold: then our Oxford Preachers have a badd opinion of the
Uicechancelour, the Doctors, the Proctors, the Heads of houses: for they are
wont to pray that we may be good; and therefore by your inference they doubt we
are not so. And will not your Christ. church Preachers be discredited hereby
with your Students, as much as I am: seeing they pray commo^lie as well for
the Students, as for the Deane and Prebendaries? Questionless your self
would think, he did you injury who should say you believe not an article of
your faith, the forgiveness of sins. Yet you are accustomed to pray, Luke
11. 4.
Forgive us our sins, when notwithstanding Mat. 14. 3^ Iam. 1. 6.
he that doubts, fails in belief. And for mine own part, if to one
commending the French most Christian King, that he can look wisely enough to
his own safety against both open force, and secret fraud of the Leaguers, I
should answer (in like sort as I did to you) I pray God he may; sure he
shall the better if he never trust them, nor any of that brood of the whore
of Babylon: I would be understood, both heartily to wish, and reasonably to
hope, that he shall meetelie well be able to do it; although the more able,
if he use this caution. Or, if some presumptions moved you to dowt whether I
meant thus, or worse: you should have remembered the L. 56. l. 19^. fin. D. de
regulis juris.
rules of your law for Se^per in dubiis benigniora praefere^da sunt: et, In re
dubia benigniore^ interpretatione^ sequi, no^ minus iustius est quam tutius.
gentle construying of things doubtful. But suppose that I had even denied
also, not only doubted, that your actors can show greater fruit of their time
well spent then any that is bredde up by Momusses discipline can: is it
therefore likely that I imply so ill a conceit of them as that they are
altogether cast away? Yea, you say. And why? Because they could do little, if
they could not do so much, and a great deal more, and better, when soever
they shall be tried. For what is the discipline of Momus, but the school of
carping, nipping, depraving, and reprehending of every good thing? Whereupon
you add, to amplify the strange iniquity of my dealing, that of all other
things you thought I would not, or could not have taken any exception to that
speech of yours. In deed if I had taken the discipline of Momus in that sense
you give it; your so ill collection of my so ill conceit should have some
probability. But I had declared that by the name of Momus you noted all
reproovers of plays. And howsoever that be, whereof more hereafter: dowtlesse I
meant scholars trained up by such in godliness and good learning, when I
prayed that your actors might show greater fruit of their time well spent, then
any that is bredde up by Momusses discipline can. Which is plain and evident
by the words following, in that I affirmed, that this which you term the
discipline of Momus, is not his but Cyprians, or rather the holy Ghosts. For
God forbid that you should proceed from evil to worse in such excess of
sclandering, as to tell your actors, that I say, the discipline of the holy
Ghost is the school of carping, nipping, depraving, and reprehending of every
good thing. Now, though my conceit of them be so good, that I am persuaded, or
rather know in part, they can show great fruit of their time well spent, and
have in trial done it: yet I know withal some of so great towardnes brought
up by the other, that, if all your actors think they can show greater fruit
the^ any of these, they will make me think their good conceit of themselves
is worse the^ mine ill. And see of how different opinions you and I are about
this matter. I know sundry scholars of rare expectation and hope in other
Colleges, for whom my prayer is they may show as great fruit of their time well
spent as some of these can: and yet in my judgment I have no ill conceit of
them. You, unless I think that your Christ-church actors can show much
greater fruit, do judge, and give sentence, that my conceit of them is ill: so
ill, beyond all huy and cry, that it is a token I imply in covert speech
(expounded charitably) that they are cast away, yea, cast away altogether, and
irrecoverably lost.

Lesser is the wrong, yet a wrong also, that of your actors likewise you say,
they are condemned by me to hateful infamy, a thing to all honest minds more
intolerable then death it self: and farther, that your house, your self, and
many honest towardly young men, your friends, whom for good causes you heartily
love, are charged with open infamy. It may be, the circumstance noted
herewithall, in that you add it greeveth you and them not a little, that they
should in private, but much more in public, be charged with such infamy:
has reference to the Sermon rather which was preached in the public audience
of the university, then to letters written in private unto you. Howbeit,
whethersoeuer of us it touches more, your complaint is somewhat partial to
your self: who take in evil part, that we by word or writing should teach
or maintain ought whereof there may grow infamy by consequent to you; yet
would have us take it well and patiently, that you have set forth and
published that in print, whereof there may grow infamy by consequent to us.
But the wrong I meant you do me in those clauses of your accusation,
concerns both the matter of crime, and the persons: the matter, for
aggravating the quality of the note of infamy, which they are charged with,
by terming it hateful, open, more intolerable to all honest minds then death
it self: the persons, for extending it from a few members to the whole body,
from the players to your house. Concerning the later (to begin with it) beside
that you say that in aunswering my writing you defend your house, not only
the particular players, from infamy: you add that they are charged therewith
to the general reproach of your house, if so hard a censure should be by men of
note enforced and persuaded. And why should you more interpret our action to
the general reproach of your house, because we reproved that by word or
writing which some of Christchurch had practiced: then we interpret yours to
the general reproach of our house, because you defended that by printed
treatise, which some of Queens college had reprooved? If the reason be, for
that we are men of note who work the discrediting of you: they are men of
note too, whose verses you having prefixed before your book, do countenance
your disgrace of us. Nether do I see what reason else you bring, or can, but
that we shall meet you in the same (speak of consent, or what you list) to
wring out of the special reproach of your players the general of your house.
As for the former concerning the infamy, the quality whereof not content to
amplify with terms that may be common to all infamy in a sort, you name it
more intolerable to all honest minds then death it self: whether do you
mean the infamy they are charged with by the Civil law, in the first reason;
or that which lights on them by the law of God, in the reasons following? If
by the civil law: then belike a chaste and honestly minded woman, who having
lost her husband does marry within twelve month after his decease, had
rather she were dead: and her father likewise, who places her so in marriage,
had rather he were dead with her. For both these are noted with infamy by the
L. 1. D. de his qui nota^tur infam ia. L. 1. and 2. c. de secundis n^ptiis.
civil law: and that in such degree, as may be more intolerable and greevous
unto them, for ought that I said, then unto your players. If by the law of
God: do you not know that (...).
infamy being opposite to (...) 2. Cor. 6. 8.
good fame, and nothing being counted of (...)
good fame, (...) Phil. 4. 8.
praiseworthy, but that which is honest, just, pure, virtuous; every fault has
infamy, annexed thereunto; not every fault a little degree and height of
infamy, but every fault infamy? Do you not think that all your players
have some fault: and account the shame thereof to be more tolerable a great
deal, then death? Do you not confess (though tempering it with saying it may
be so perhaps) that they have in their playing picked out as it were quails
eyes of a wantonness, and offended in some small matter? What needed then your
tragical exaggeration of hateful open infamy, more intolerable to all
honest minds then death it self: when all that I enforced against them was but
infamy? whom sought you to make hateful by that patheticall speech, tending
to compassion of Ulysses in show, to somewhat else in deed: Unhappy Ulysses,
to whom as it was fatal ever to be in trouble in his life, so is he more
hardly dealt withal after his death, that his person may not honestly be
resembled without note of infamy to the actor? How skillful an inveigling is
this of your players, to think themselves defamed most odiouslie for ever,
when he who played Ulysses part, one of the best, and therefore least of all
touched with that note, is said to be so touched with it, that all the
troubles of Ulysses are nothing to his shame? Nay, the shame inflicted on him
who played Ulysses, is such a vexation to Ulysses himself, that he is more
hardly dealt withal herein (poor soul) after his death, then while in his
life time Homer. Odyss. lib. 9.
his sweet wine was drunk, his men were eaten up, two at a meal, by
Polyphemus; himself escaped hardly through Polyphemus rams help out of his
clouches, not without great fear, I know, when Polyphemus talked with the
ram; and beside the danger to be soonke and drowned by the top of a
mountain that Polyphemus hurled at him, Lib. 12.
he was tossed in the sea, upon broken pieces of his ship, being wracked,
ten nights and nine days, save one wherein he stuck fast to a wild figtree
growing in Charybdis; whereof, and of a great deal more Lib. 5.
such woe, he tasted, by Lib. 10.
his men's unhappy letting out of the winds, which Aeolus had given him bound
up in a leathren bag or satchell.

To make an end of this point, I am to request your Students and your house;
because you constrain me (that I may use the Psalm. 69. 4.
Prophets phrase) to restore that which I took not away, that they will
consider how the note of infamy, which I did enforce, I enforced it against
the parts played by Histrio, not against the Christ church parties who played
them; against Roscius and Aesopus, not against the Master of your Choristers;
I mean against players, not against those players: as Orat. in Pis.
Tullie says of Piso, that when the Aedilis es factus. Piso est a populo Romans
factus, non iste Piso.
Romans gave him the office of the Aedileship, they gave it to Piso, not to
this Piso; meaning that in committing such place of honor to him they
respected the dignity of his name and stock, not the qualities of his person.
For as this Piso, the particular man, was lewd, base, dishonorable; yet Piso,
the kindred it self, whereof he came, was honorable and renowned: semblably
may players, the general that I spoke of, be esteemed infamous; and yet the
same infamy, as small as it is in comparison of the capital marks you fasten
on it, be less or none at all in the special persons of your house, of those
players. Which, if it be lawful for me to compare lesser things with greater
(as I, by the example of Mat. 13. 3. Mar. 12. 1. Luke 14. 21. and so forth in
the Evangelistes commonly.
our Saviors parables always thought I might, and never heard them called
incomparable comparisons till you controlled me with this taunt and the like
for using them) I shall make plain unto you by the clear evidence and light
of both those laws, whence they are charged. For Romans 1. 26. (...).
wicked persons are infamous; 1 Pet. 4. 3.
idolaters are wicked; they, that offer incense, as 1 Cor. 10. 20 L. 7. c de
paganis and sacrificiis.
Paynims did, are idolaters. Theodoret. hist ecles li. 3. cap. 15 and 16.
Zozom. lib. 5. cap. 16
Certain Christian soldiers, not knowing what such offering of incense did
import, were by the conveyance of Julian the apostata brought to offer it. Who,
when they were afterward informed, what they had done, returned back to
Julian, professing and protesting them selves to be Christians, persisting in
the faith, and praying they might die for it. Were these infamous for that
fact? No: because their hand did offend through ignorance (says the Theodor
and Zozomen in the places quoted. Ca^iodor. in the Triparti. lib. 6 ca. 30.
Nicephorus lib. 10. ca. 23 and others after them.
Ecclesiastical history) their mind was pure and guiltless. And although
their ignorance of Luke 12. 48 L. 9. D de iu ris and facti ignorantia. L. 12.
c. eod.
the law was faulty, the mother of their error: yet L. 9. D. de iur. and
fact. ignor.. Si filius familias. l. 1. ca. eod.
man's constitutions bearing with soldiers that way, and 1 Timothy 1. 13
God forgiving his servants greater ouersights, who dare condemn them for
their fall? Those monsters of nature, which Romans 1. 27.
burning in their lust one toward an other, men with men work filthiness, are
as infamous, as Genesis 18. 20.
Sodom: not the doers only, but the 1 Cor. 6. 9.
sufferers also.

A Sleida^ li. 19.
young Italian Gentleman, named Cosmus Cherius, had that horrible villainy
wrought through force upon him by Petrus Aloisius Pope Paul the thirds son.
Was he infamous for his suffering? No more then Livi. lib. 1.
Lucretia for violence done by Tarquin, how soever he died for sorrow and shame
of it: the law of Deuteronomy. 22. 25
God and L. 1. D. de postulando. removet.
man both will acquitt him. In a word, Romans 1. 29.
all impious and dishonest wretches, namely the unrighteous, fornicatours,
adulterous, thieves, covetous, drunkardes, raylers, extortioners, are infamous.
The 1 Cor. 6. 11
Corinthians had been such, but they repented. Were they infamous for their
vices? A Seneca in Agamen.
natural man might stick hereat in Quem poenitet peccasse poen^ est innocens.
He says not, plane est innocens, but poene.
some part: but Saint Paul denies it. For 1 Cor. 1. 2. and 6. 11.
he says, they were sanctified, holy, washed, justified: and such as are
cleansed from the filth of sin, are cleansed from the blemish and reproach
thereof; no just and holy man is infamous. In the like sort therefore may a
note of infamy remain upon players: and yet be removed as far from your
players, as is the East from the West. For what if some of them knew not this
point of law? and were of such Minoribus viginti quinque annis ius ignorare
permissum est.
age too (which they were all perhaps, at least the players of wemens parts)
as the Lus. D. de jur and fact. igno.
law exeuseth for ignorance thereof? What if others were commanded to play by
their superiors, whom they durst not displease; and so were in a manner L. 1D.
Quod metus causa gestum erit. L. 12. c. de his quae vi, (...) cau^
enforced thereunto; excused by Orat. p^ Coelio.
Tullie for Si jussus (...) accusare: necessitati tribuo.
necessity? What if a third sort, or more, even these also, have since
repented their playing, and thereby Esai. 1. 16.
Washed them selves, and made them selves clean? Or if neither ignorance, nor
force, nor repentance, had either diminished that ignominious blott, or clean
abolished it; the contrary whereof I am persuaded by the good nature, and
honest ingenuitie of such of the parties as I know; but if they had not: yet I
being taught to presume the best by him who says that 1. Cor. 13. (...)
charity believes all things, hops all things, was to deem they had, and
so I do still.

Yea, although you say it greeueth them not a little that they should in
private, but much more in public, be charged with infamy, I believe and hope
so much the better of them: knowing that there is a 2. Cor. 7. 9.
grief to repentance, which the Lord works in his by such reproves; and it
was well with Mat. 26. 75.
Peter, when he wept bitterly. Wherefore having this persuasion of your
players, even of them for whose parts I charged plays most, namely
Hippodamia, Melantho, the Nyph, Phaedra, and her Nurse; if I should have noted
them as infamous, them I say, not their parts, these players and not players;
I should have taken on me the judgment that belongs unto the searcher of
hearts and reins, and spoken against mine own conscience. Which if you have
made them believe I love them so ill, by reason of the bad conceit I have of
them, that I would do of spite and malice to discredit them: yet let me
entreat them to think I love my self better, then that I would through their
sides wound mine own; who, when I was about the age that they are, six and
twenty years since, did play a woman's part upon the same stage, the part of
Hippolyta. As for you, who pretending in your proposition you would assay to
show that the truth in this controversy belongs rather to your aunswers,
then to the reasons fathered on Momus, do afterward endeavor in your
confutation to obscure and darken the truth with mistes of pity and humane
affections, inculcating that it would be a contumely to this or that youth
with many, unless the cause be won on your side: let me entreat you
likewise to regard hereafter, if not my most reasonable petition and desire,
yet your own conclusion; who, saying you may grant without offense, you
trust, that your censure of Momus in the generality lights upon me, do add
these words to prove it; For the maine matter is not, whether you had
occasion to think your self to be touched in the generality, or no, being of
that opinion you are, but whether the opinion be justifiable, or no. Which
point if you remember in your next reply, though next reply rather I need not
much to fear if this point be remembered, no more then Cato needed to fear
Galbas answer, who had been condemned except he had used boys and tears, as
Cic. lib. 1. de oratore.
Cato wrote; but, had you remembered it in your last reply: you might have
induced me the more easily to hearken unto your advise and request, that I
should rather deal with you by private conference then by further writing, if
you had greatly erred in any thing.

For the truth and equity of that which I said in defense of the reasons
fathered on Momus to the reproof of plays, is so undoubted and manifest of it
self; that men of understanding and sense, who should compare your reply with
it, must (though I kept silence) needs perceive your stomach was sick of that
(...) (...) Hippocrates terms it. Aphorism. sect. 2. Apho. 21.
hunger, which for an inordinate appetite it breeds, Galen. in aphoris.
Hippocra. lib. 2. Alex. Tralli. lib. 7. cap. 3
Physicians call (...).
the dogged appetite: more greedily disposed to devour and swallow up all that
it met with, then able to concoct or to retain well ought that it had taken.
A proof hereof you give in your very beginning by crossing of my proeme.
Wherein I having thanked you for that by enlarging your answer to Momus, you
showed why you thought our reasons to be naught, since that your reprooving
thereof did touch me also, who took them not to be rascal reproaches, as you
termed them, but sound reasons: every branch hereof you carpe and check. But
how? First, where I had written, that as our Savior, when he was smitten by
one for speaking naught but reason, said, If I have spoken evil, bear
witness of the evil; but if well, why do thou smite me? so they, whose
objections against plays you attributed to the person of Momus, might justly
say in my judgment, If our reasons be naught, discover their naughtines; if
good, why do you Mome us? You reply, that no man can rightly say to you, If
our reasons be naught, discover their naughtines; if good, why do you Mome
us? as Christ might truly say, If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the
evil; but if well, why do thou smite me? because he undoubtedly had said
nothing but reason, and therefore was most unjustly smitten; but the
objections in your case and against you, are most untrue, and there is no man
smiten by you. Then which speech of yours (I pray you be not offended with me
for my plainness) I never read any, to my remembrance, more void of reason.
For our Saviors dilemma (according to Hermogen. de inve^t. (...). 4 ex Demost.
de corona. Cic. lib. 1. de invent sub no mine complexion.
the natural force of that argument) was made to apprehend and hold fast his
adversary whether soever him self had spoken, evil, or well. So that, when
the Mat. 27. 38.
two thieves, who suffered with Christ, and Luke 23. 41.
deserved death, were brought into judgment, in case the judge had offered to
give sentence against them Act. 25. 16.
before they *heard why, they might have justly said, If we have robbed any,
bear witness of our robbery; if not, why do you condemn us? Wherefore when,
to reproove the former part of my dilemma, you affirm that no man can rightly
say unto you, If our reasons be naught, discover their naughtines, because
Christ undoubtedly had said nothing but reason: undoubtedly your self do
speak beside all reason. As much in a manner, as beside the truth, when to
reprove the later part thereof you add, that you do Mome no man. For so must
I interpret your words of smiting no man: or else you speak beside all reason
herein too, when upon my citing Christ's words, Why do thou smite me, by
way of similitude to your Moming us, you say, no man is smitten by you. But
that some are smite^ by you with Momus name, even all reproovers of plays, and
so (which is the next branch you pluck at) my self; I showed by the meaning
of the tale of Momus, opened out of Aristotle, joined with your applying
thereof unto a person who charge plays as we do. To the refutation whereof
it makes nothing, that when you declared you did enlarge therefore your
answer unto Momus, because I and others had asked why the things by him
objected were not answered, you say that by others you meant some of your
friends, not reprovers of plays: and that you had no purpose to touch me in
particular, nor knew, when you conceived and penned the devise of Momus, that I
had reprooved them. For was it the man in the moon, trow we, whose Probra
Arrepta quae cogessit ex triviis.
rascal reproaches, or (as you correct it) trivial and common, you put in the
mouth of Momus, and made your Epilog control them? Or was it some on earth,
whose speeches, being noted by you as common and taunting, do argue that they
had one or more authors, not friends, but adversaries of plays? Moreover,
when you tell me, that till you understood it by me and by a Preacher of late,
you never thought that either I, or any other, in the Universitie had abbetted
Momus objections: do you not confess, that, ere you wrote this, you
understood it of us two? And can you persuade your self that we two alone,
and no body else, are abbetters of them? Nay, do you not signify that you see
there are more, when, speaking of others, you say you mean^ not such, as you
perceive by me there are, who should mislike your plays; and by way of
opposing me and them to Many, you name us One or a Few? You acknowledge then,
that notwithstanding your self meant not these by others, yet certain such
there are. Neither can your using the devise of Criticus and Zoilus in like
manner to rebuke the carpers of your own Tragedy as curious and malicious,
permit you to deny with any color of probability that you meant to note
these by Momus name. Chiefly now that you have expreslie fastened it on them
in your reply: saying in excuse of the time, the Sunday, whereon your Tragedy
was played, that some of them, it may be, who misliked your plays, were worse
occupied then your actors were on the same night, playing Momus part in good
earnest before you, which you did afterward but for pastime. Wherefore your
complaining that you know not whom, nor very well what, I mean by They and
Us, in that I said, They whose objections, and, Why do you Mome us, is
frivolous and idle, to say no worse of it: frivolous, because you know I mean
the Preacher, my self, and all abbetters of Momus his objections: idle, because
albeit you knew not whom I mean, yet my speech is found, that, They, whose
objections against plays, you attributed to the person of Momus, might justly
say in my judgment, If our reasons be naught, discover their naughtines; if
good, Why do you Morn us? More idle and frivolous is your laboring to
persuade me, that I had no just occasion to suspect that your purpose was
therein to touch me, to tax me in particular; both by discoursing that those
two inducements, to weet, my reproving of Theater-sights and stage plays in
the Preface of my Thesis, and my reasons given thereof in letters to D.
Thornton, which I (so you affirm) did chiefly allege to prove my
conjecture, are not enough to prove it, in as much as you had not read the one
of the^, nor heard of the other: and by most earnestly avouching coram Deo (as
if an Gal. 1. 20.
oath needed to clear you from my wrongful opinion and surmise) that your
meaning only was to moove delight in the auditorie, with the noveltie of the
invention, and the person; and to object those things against your selves by
your selves, which might abate all suspicion of vain glory or selfe-pleasing
in you; and so by this means, as it were with a slight, to shift of all
occasion of others ill speaking, when you had prevented them with as ill as
might be. I say, this is more idle and frivolous then the former, because I
was so far from making any show of suspecting my self to be touched
purposely by you in particular: that contrariwise I signified I thought my self
touched, not so, but in general; by the censure lighting, not in your intent,
but in event, upon me. And for this respect alone, not for the other, did I
allege those writings of mine, which you mention; to prove, not a
conjecture thereby, but a certainty, that I was a reproover of plays; and
therefore since you meant to note all such reproovers under the name of Momus,
as I showed withal, must needs think my self to be touched therein. Which
also I delivered with such care of plainness and perspicuitie, distinguishing
eftsoons your intent of noting no particular man from your general note
touching me by consequent, that as on the one part you could not choose but
grant that I had occasion to think my self touched in the generality;
likewise of the other, you were enforced to see, that I gave no token of any
way suspecting you to have intended particularly to tax me. In so much that
your self, encou^tring as it were your discourse thereof, acknowledge it
expresselie with these very words; But that I had no purpose by Momus side to
wound you, according to the law of charity, upon my former protestation, you
do most gladly credit me, as you write; and with these, The matter is cleared
in your good mind; thus your self commend me, and heartily thank me for
it. A strange kind of dealing to charge a man with thinking amiss of your
purpose, who, by your own confession, thinks rightly of it; to touch him as
breaking the law of charity through false surmises, who keeps it in your
own judgment; to take the name of God for effecting with him by new
protestation, that which your former protestation, your self say, had
obtained of him; by manifest misconstruction to press out of his writing a
point whereof he writes the contrary, as your self witness; to control a
thing as misdeemed by him upon erroneous conjecture, which your own
conscience testified to you, and your own mouth to others, that it is cleared
in his mind; finally to pretend, that being assaulted by one who sought your
life, you were compelled to enter a long combat with him, when you grant
straightwayes upon the end thereof that no man did assault you; it was a post
only, whereon you set a helmet to make it seem a man, that so by valiant
foyning at it, and hacking of it, you might get the creditt of having slain
an enemy, and left him in the place as dead as a door nail. The Alex.
Trallian. li. 7. ca. 3. A^tius tretrab. 3. sermon. 6. cap. 21.
Physicians note, that such as are diseased with that kind of hungry sickness,
which I mentioned, have a greedy appetite to be eating still: but being unable
to keep that they have eaten, do cast it up by vomit; and then eat more, and
vomit again; and eat eftsoons, and vomit. How like a distemper you are
fallen into, through desire of swalowing up and contradicting all that I had
written, which yet your want of strength to hold and maintain does force you
to regorge and yield: your going onward in this course bewrays farther. For
I, to show how all reproovers of plays are noted as unjust reproovers by your
tale of Momus, declared out of Aristotle, that it was devised to check such as
reprove unjustly the best and perfitest works of the most wise and skillful.
You reply that you brought him not in so much in that sense that Aristotle
speaks of, as a reproover of the best and perfitest works of the most wise
and skillful; for I never took (say you) either our selves, or our plays to
be such: but as we commonly take him as a carper, and a pincher at all
things that are done with any opinion of well doing. Wherein with one breath
you overthwart, and grant, the purport of my speech. You overthwart it in
saying that you brought Momus in, as we commonly take him; and opposing this
point to the point I mentioned, Not in that sense that Aristotle speaks of,
but thus: You grant it in confessing that you brought him in also in that
sense, though not so much in that sense: which I said not you did so much, but
only that you did it. And albeit herein by gainesaying me with your, Not, and
But, you may seem to charge me with saying that you brought him in so much in
that sense: yet you meant rather by cunning interlacing of those words, so
much, closely to discharge your mouth of a morsel, which you had taken in, and
felt it overhoott and burning. For having alleged Ipsamque reprehendit
artificem om nium. Quod capire tauris cornua, haud armis daret.
the very same that Aristotle, how Momus carped Nature, the Creator of all
things, that is, God, I trow, the most wise and skillful framer of the best and
perfitest works: you add, that Sic matre Nocte genitus ^ac Somno Patre, Nihil
ipse praestans optimos carpit tamen
after this sort, Momus (whom you bring in) though doing naught him self, yet
carpeth at the best; and has with these and these tants declaimed against your
plays. So, whereas your reason, that you never took your selves or your
plays to be such, should import that you brought him not in at all in that
sense; and then had I affirmed amiss, that you rehearsed the tale to such
purpose: your ground thereof alayed with the terms, so much, implies that you
grant, that the thing it self, which I affirmed, is true, and that you were
disposed to play by this conveyance a iugling trick of fast and loose.
Again, whereas I noted that you called our reasons, attributed to Momus,
rascal reproaches, using the English words to express your Latin, probra
arrepta ex triviis: first you wish I had not so tanslated it, for that the
words in Latin naturally sound not so hardly; yet afterward you grant that
you know the words may be so properly translated. Whereof in the later how
manifestly you cast up that which you swalowed in the former, appears by your
laboring to confirm the former, what with De verbo^. significat. lib. 1.
Alciats saying, that words must be generally taken so far forth as their
propriety may bear; what with your own denying that In your copy sent me,
it is, arrepta ex triviis: with greater injury if you meant to sup press the
word probra Which that you did, you give me occasion to suspect, because before
likewise, you cite it, leaving out ye word, and English it common and trivial
speeches: yet because in another copy, given by you abroad, belike after mine,
I find ye word here: I take the omitting thereof in my copy to be a slip of
your pen, and therefore do insert it.
probra arrepta ex triviis do most properly and principally signify rascal
reproaches. Most properly, and principally; a like feate in adding to the word
properly, most, and principally, as before in thrusting in the terms, so much:
since neither in the clause, which answers to this, you join most with
naturally; nor say out of Alciat, that words must be taken as their most
principal propriety may bear (though by an Primus autem intellectus
proprietatis est sua vniuscujusque rei appellatio
other note of his, From parag. 5. as if it ensued the rest of the words you
cite out of Paragr. 10
displaced cunningly, and racked hereunto, it seems you would feign imply it)
but as their propriety. Howbeit, if I list to press you therein also, perhaps
the same phrase, arnipere maledictum ex trivio, used by Orat. pro. Muraen.
Tullie, and compared with Alciats meaning of most proper and principal
signification, would prove that probra arrepta ex triviis do most properly and
principally signify rascal reproaches. Sure they have been deemed skillful of
both languages, who taking on them to deliver the principal and most proper
signification of Latin words, have Englished maledictum arreptum ex trivio,
Eliota biblioth. aucta a coopero, edit. an^. 1548. in the word arripio.
a reproach or tant, which is commonly spoken by every railing knave, or, The
same, in the same place edit. ^t.
that is common in every verlets mouth: and what does this, I pray you,
differ from rascal? But since your self acknowledge that words naturally do
sound and signify that which they signife properly, and that these in question
may be translated properly as I did translate them: you show that in affirming
they do not naturally sound so hardly, you controlled as false that which your
self knew to be true, yea, which you needs must so acknowledge. In like sort
do you cross your me, nay, you cross yourselfe, when in an other enditement
that you draw against me for the same Englishing of your Latin, to weet, that
though the words may be so properly translated, yet not to your mind so
properly, that is, not so gently as you meant them, and therefore I did
mistranslate them: you say that in law and reason they are ever to be
interpreted according to their natural and proper signification, unless we
conjecture that he who speak them meant otherwise; and no man can justly
conjecture that you meant to use any honest man with so illtermes, when you
meant no man at all. See the pitiful taking of such as seek devises to
bolster out untruths for their credits sake: who by those very shifts, by which
they hope to escape, are oftentimes entangled, and as it were with nets or
chains entrapped faster. Your own affirmation, that you meant no man at all,
does give me just cause of coniecturing that you meant to use the term of
rascal, as well as of reproaches, be they never so ill. For in that you say,
that you meant no man at all, you intend your former speech, that you meant
Momus only. Now you charged Momus with a Ipsum esse Momum lingua tam ^da
arguit.
filthy tongue, an Dira facies.
ougly face, a Quis huius oris spiritum effugiat gravem?
stinking breath, an Comae color improbus Ardens capilli quis domet virus tui?
ill favored ghastly rammish bush of hear: and can no man justly conjecture
that you meant to use him with so ill terms, as rascal reproaches? You called
him a Obiicere tali me queam spectro, Deos Hominesque, naturamque carpenti
impie; Odioque Diis propterea hominibusque optimis.
spirit, an impious carper of the Gods, of men, and of nature, a person
therefore odious and detestable to the Gods, and to the best men: and can no
man justly conjecture that you meant to use him with so ill terms, as rascal
reproaches? You reported of him that Linguaeque tactu foedat imundo omnia.
he defiles all things with the unclean touch of his tongue; that Inscitia
tibi vt impune sit, and animi stupor Pietas putetur?
he is unskillful, dull, or sottish rather: and can no man justly conjecture
that you meant to use him with so ill terms, as rascal reproaches? But what
do I reason out of your former writing that I had cause to think so: when
your self, in this, do give most evident and clear tokens that you meant so?
For you say expressly that you made Momus to speak as ill as might be;
neither cared greatly what you made him say, as thinking any such thing became
him well enough: nor talked otherwise of him, then as of a carper, a nipper, a
depraver, and a reprehender of every goodthing. And can you deny that your
meaning was to speak of his reproaches as rascal, base and contemptible, whom
you made purposely to speak as ill as might be, and cared not what you made
him say? or dare you affirm you meant to use him gently, whom you accuse of
carping, nipping, depraving, and reprehending all good things, and do rough
hew him in such sort? You tell me that how words are to be taken in charity
I know better then you: but in law and reason they are to be interpreted with
this rule of the speakers meaning. Belike because you weened that you had
prooved hereby, (chiefly having quoted thereto a Alciat. de verb. signifi.
lib. 1.
lawiers text,) that, look in what sense you say you meant your words, in that
I must interpret them by law and reason: you thought that I was likewise in
charity bound to think that you meant them so, in as much as the scripture
says, 1 Cor. 13. 7
Charity believes all things. But you should have marked that the scripture
says also, Prove. 14. 15
A fool believes every thing: and he who exhorts the faithful to be
charitable, dehorteth them from doing foolishlie, Ephe. 5. 15.
Walk not as fools, but as wise. A sure demonstration, that charity is said
to believe all things, not properly, but in a figure; not simply all, but a
number; even all that a good man in wisdom may believe. And to 2 These. 2. 11
believe untruths, is a point of folly; repugnant, as to wisdom, so
consequently to charity: which in the 1 Cor. 13. 6
same parcel of scripture is said, not to rejoice in iniquity, but to
rejoice at the truth. Wherefore seeing reason does show by sundry
circumstances, that you say untruly, You meant not to use so ill and hard
terms, as rascal reproaches; and this is the natural and proper signification
of your Latin words, which therefore must be so interpreted by law: it were to
be wished, that you learned better what charity requires, before you raise
uncharitable suspicions of others as sinning against it when they do not; and
then it might be hoped you would no more pretend the name of law or reason, to
plaster your unreasonable and unlawful blaming of things delivered rightly
according both to law and reason.

Olympior. Hymn. 6.
Pindarus says, that men who take works in hand, must set them forth with
beautiful forefrontes and entrees. The less do I marvel that you who make
so badd a beginning of your work, deal worse, if worse might be, and more
perverslie in the rest. Whereof to reserve for their several places the proof
that in a manner all the particulars yield; two general kinds of seely
evasions and shifts may serve for the first taste: one, that when you see your
arguments refuted, you deny them to be yours; an other that you say, you
used them not to us, but to Momus; and by this fine devise you neither answer
Momus, nor us. For examples sake, whereas to the objection made out of the
word of God against your plays, that it is unlawful for men to put on wemens
raiment, you replied that it is not unlawful simply and always, as if one do
it to save his life, to benefitt many: I showed that this reason is unsound
and naught:; A man to save his life or country, may do it; He may do it
therefore to play a part on a stage. Hereunto you answer, that you do not
thus argue, It is lawful in such and such cases to putt on women's raiment;
Ergo it is lawful to do it in plays: but thus; ergo it is not simply
unlawful so to do. And did you argue thus in deed, neither concluded you,
that it is lawful therefore to do it in plays? Certes then you disputed
valiantly against Momus, who Praeclara res est Mimus, and gestum assequi,
Simulare vultu^ ac verba, testari Deos, Et sub puella tegere iuvenem puberem.
reprooved plays because young men are cladde like maidens therein. But your
whole discourse does argue that this argument whereof you are ashamed (well,
if you would also ingenuouslie confess it) was intended by you. For you
professed that albeit you thought Momus rascal reproaches against plays
worthier to be laughed at, then to be refuted: Graviora paucis excutere fas
sit tamen.
yet the weightiest of them you would in few words shake out of their rags;
or who soever you will translate your excutere, applied to those rascals. Now
by what consequence does your answer shake that reproach of his, unless it
conclude that men may be lawfully cladde in plays like women? Or who is so
blind that reading your reply, perceyueth not your No^ ergo vestis faeminea
iuveni est sce lus, sed prava men's, libido, etc.
second Ergo, I say your second, For the No^ ergo iuueni est grande simpliciter
nefas Mollem puell induere
first (I grant) concludes, that it is not simply unlawful so to do; but
the second Ergo, with the Quid simile nobis obiicere quisquam potest?
assumption following, and the Maledicta textu glossa quae vitiat bonum.
Epiphonema, directly do imply a contradicting of Momus; and therefore a
concluding out of the former point, that, because it is lawful in such and
such cases to put on Wemens raiment, Ergo it is lawful to do it in plays?
What? And when you said that Nec habitus vllus, sed any mus turpem facit.
no apparel but the mind does make a man dishonest, meant you not that men
may wear women's raiment with honesty in plays? When you concluded that Quae
dixit in nos alia diluere haud placet.
You list not wash away other things which Momus spoke against you: did you not
imply that herein you had met with his blaming you for young men made maidens
on the stage? When you begged a Proinde disrumpantur vt Momo ilia, Iterum
benignus vndique applausus sonet.
second Plaudite of the beholders, that the guts of Momus might burst for
spite asunder: sought you their approbation of Achilles changing his sex to
save his life; or of Melanthos doing it to feed theatricall humors? In the
Lib. 2. ca. 30
Greek Epigrammes we read of two deaf men impleading one the other before a
deaf judge. Amongst whom when the plaintiff objected to the defendant, that
he ought him five months rent for his house, and the defendant answered that
he was grinding corn at the mill that night: What a Gods name, quoth the
judge, what needs this contention? Has not each of you a mother? Let each
find his own. I am glad, Mr D. Gager, that by your appealing to the judgment
of our betters, we have agreed on judges who hear well enough. For they,
understanding how your Ulysses redux is penned and was played, will judge that
you are not deaf: as Cic. de Senect.
their like at Athens having heard Oedipus Coloneus read, a tragedy written by
Sophocles, gave sentence that he was not a sott or doting man. And therefore,
though you tell them that in your reply, of grinding at the mill, you meant to
prove only that you hurt not Momus by seeking of his life or purse that night
on Salsbery plain: yet they, considering wisely that you professed to answer
his bill of complaint touching the five months rent, will think you argued
thus against him; I was grinding corn at the mill that night, Ergo I owe him
not five months rent for his house. Neither can I doubt but they will in like
sort mislike your other practice, of saying that you spoke not to us but to
Momus, and so slipping away with answering neither him, nor us. As when you
asked us in Momus person, (so I took it) Dare ye despise learned poetry?
secretly to infer thereby your maine conclusion, that if learned poetry may
not be despised, your students may be actors of learned Poets plays; and I out
of St Paul did refell this argument: you reply that you asked not of me, or
them, or any man but Momus, any such question. Which thing you do not only
avouch upon your word, affirming that you should be believed: but you cite your
writing also to prove it, An tu Poesin despicere doctam audeas? Urging that you
said not, An vos; but An tu. Many grievous panges of that hungry sickness,
which, for the symptomata of eating still and vomiting, Physicians (as I
showed) do name the dogged appetit, appear in your whole reply. But none more
grievous in any part thereof, then here, where, through the sharpnes and
outrage of your humor, you fulfill that proverb, (your Crudelem medicum
intemperans aeger facit. Publius Syrus
intemperance forces me to be more cruel, I mean, to use more loathsome and
displeasant speeches then otherwise I would, specially to persons of your
state and quality) you fulfill, I say, that proverb of Solomon, Prove. 26. (...)
A dog returns to his vomit. Yea, in so much worse sort do you suppe this
again up, which you vomited before, of meaning neither me nor any other man
in your reproof of Momus: because you add such reasons to prove you meant
not us in asking that question, as your self must needs know you uttered but
a sick man's dream. For (to begin with the later, which is the stronger of
them) your self do acknowledge upon my proof thereof out of your own
words, that in Epistola ad Criticum.
your reproof of Criticus and Zoilus, whosoever finds such fault with your
Tragedy, as you control them for, him you meant to note as a malicious
Zoilus, and a carping Critic. Yet the Critic you speak to in the singular
number, as well as to Momus: You answer to his sundry checkes of your
epistle, Recte tu quidem ista, Critice, si scriberem epigrammata: you say not
vos, but tu. You note him for his Ita es ingeniose maledicus.
witty railing at your Tragedy, Profecto ipsum te esse Criticum oportet: you
say not vos, but te. You detest his foolish and quarelsome wranglings, Emoriar
si amem lites, saltem criticas, id est futiles, id est tuas, Critice: you say
not vestras, but tuas. You come upon him eftsoons, again, and again, with
Quid enim putidius, quam quod tu facere soles?
tu, and Tu improbe facis, qui in alieno libello nimis es ingeniosus.
tu, and tuae; and, Critice, as to one still: you say not vos Critici, vos
Critici, and vestrae. Wherefore if notwithstanding your form of speech to one
in the singular number, you inten ded it to all, as curious carpers, who will
be picking quarells at your Tragedie-writing: alas, What was become of your
wits and senses, when by such a cavil you thought to convince me, that,
because you said not An vos, but An tu, you meant not 5 Lector debebit tuae, id
est, malae linguae.
your speech to me and all others, as unjust reproovers, who will be finding
fault with your enterlude-playing? Those Zac. 11. 17.
idole-pastors of the Church, Tit. 1. 12.
evil beasts, and slow-bellies, who Psalm. 115. 5
have mouths, and speak not; eyes, and see not; feet, and go not; who Ezekiel.
34. 2.
feed themselves and not their flocks, but Amos. 6. (...)
take their ease in Sion; do seek with faces harder then brass, and hearts
then adamant, to besott themselves, and persuade others, that Luke 19. 22.
Christ's reproof of the wicked servant, which employed not the moony he
receved as his master charged him in trade and traficke to his advantage,
belongs not to them. But amongst their wretched excuses and defenses of their
non-residence, though as lewd and brainesicke many, as this is, yet never
heard I this; that Christ speaks not to them; but to a losell who laid up his
money in a napkin, because his words are, of thine own mouth will I judge
thee, o evil servant; he says not, of your own mouths, but of thine; not, I
will judge you, but thee. The covetous engrossers of wealth and slaves of
Mammon, who Esai. 5. 8.
join house to house, and lay field to field, till there be no place; whose
Job. 31. 24.
hope is their gold; whose Amos. 8. 5.
godliness their gain; whose Luke 12. 17.
meditation, what shall I do? I will pull down my barnes and build greater,
and therein will I gather all my fruits and my goods; and I will say to my
soul, Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years; live at ease, eat,
drink, and be merry: these worldlings feign would flatter themselves with
assurance of many years life, and much would they give for a lease thereof.
But I think they are not so full of 1. Sa. 25. 25
Nabals quality, that the Lords advertisement Luke 12. 20.
o fool, this night shall thy soul be fetched away from thee, they will
reject by noting he says, thy soul from thee, he says not, yours from you:
and thereupon imagine they are not tenants at will, nor may be turned out of
their Job. 4. 19.
houses of clay upon an hours warning, nay upon no warning given them at all.
Orat. pro Muraen.
Tullie makes mention of some witty lawiers, who, because they found the name
of Caia set down for example sake in some autours books treating of a
certain solemnity in betrothing, they thought that every woman so betrothed
and married should be called Caia. A conceit, that seemed ridiculous to Tullie:
yet coming far behind that which yours implies, that no other woman but
Caia alone was meant in the treatise, and therefore none but she might be so
betrothed. By consequence whereof if you had lived in those days, you must
have maintained that it was not lawful for any to be married but only John
and Ioane, I would say Caius and Caia. For Plutar. Romanor. institutor. ca. 30.
the manner was that they, who brought the bride into the bridegromes house, did
bid her use this speech, Ubi tu Caius, ego Caia: not making any mention of
Lucius and Lucia, Sempronius and Sempronia, but of Caius and Caia; neither
saying nos, and vos, but tu and ego.

Now if the stronger of your reasons hinder not but your demand might be
made to us: much less does the weaker.

For whereas you tell us, that you demanded not of me, or them, or any man but
Momus, any such question, if you may be believed; as, why you should not, you
see no cause: first how prove you this, that you see no cause, why you should
not be believed? Forsooth because you were as sure (you say) that I or any
learned man did not despise poetry, as you were certain that Momus did. O
miserable blindness shall I say? or madness, wherewith your humorous greedines
of crossing me distracted you. As who say you had not so much the greater
reason to ask us such a question, because you were sure that we did not
despise poetry. Else you must affirm that when Christ demanded, Matt. 12. 12
what man shall there be among you that has a sheep, who, if it fall on a
Sabbat day into a pit, will not take holdof it, and lift it out? He asked not
any such question of the Phariseis, or Scribes, or any man, but your Momus
brethren, that is, the men whom fancies imagine in the clouds: because he was
as sure that the Phariseis or any wise man would not suffer his sheep to lie
in the pit on the Sabbat day, as he was certain that the clouds would. For
if you perceive that Christ, to make the Phariseis confess that it is lawful
to heal a man on a Sabbat day, had reason to demand whether they would not
lift up their sheep out of a pit then, which he knew they would; that by
granting this they might discern the better they must needs grant that: how
could you choose but see, that your purpose being to make us confess, that
comedies and tragedies may be lawfully played, you had like reason to ask
whether we did despise learned poetry, which you were sure we did not; that
by granting this (you thought) we might the rather be forced to grant that.
Wherefore sith-even herein there was cause sufficient to make me imagine that
you did demand the question of us: you should conclude rather that your sight
was naught, who saw not so much, then that, because you saw it not, you should
be believed affirming the contrary. Moreover, to admit there was no cause
herein why you should not be believed, yet might there be in somewhat else:
and such, as you should also have easily espied, unless the inordinate passion
of your mind had daseled your sight. For your L 2. D. de testibus. l. 27 D. ad
leg. Corn. de falls.
law informed you that they, who are unconstant and light in their testimonies,
must not be believed: Now, though you perceue not your own fault therein, as
Politicor. lib. 3. cap. 12
Aristotle says, Physicians being sick can not discern the truth touching
their own diseases because of their distemper, and therefore do they use the
help of other Physicians: the events of your hungry sickness, which I noted,
do manifestly argue, that you wauered much in saying and unsaying the same
when you wrote to me. And how small account of yielding to the truth you make
in these matters, you had showed before when Epist. ad Criticum.
you told Criticus, that Haud seio an vera ista sint: fortasse non multum
absunt a veris Sed tame^ libet ire contra.
you know not whether those things be true, which he obiecteth; and perhaps
they are not far from being true: yet are you disposed to go against them,
to cross them. You might see cause therefore why you should not be believed
in that you affirm you demanded not of us, or any man but Momus, any such
question. Howbeit granting this, which you so wrestle for, what say you then to
Momus; I mean to the argument implied in your demand to him, and prooved by
mine answer to be naught and defective? Nay, not a word to that. Only, as
if you would say that you were disposed to spur him idle questions, and not
to reason against him; or that, although the reason meant therein were naught,
yet good enough for him whom you make a Mome and feign to your self a foolish
adversary, a thing that Lib. 5. ca. 13 Declamatores in primis sunt admonendi,
ne sibi stultum adversariu^ fingant. Facimus autem etc.
Quintilian misliketh in declaimers; you say that you asked it of no man but of
Momus. Thus in these general and common kinds of miserable evasions and
shifts through the mist whereof you would escape away: our judges will
acknowledge (I hope) that your intent was rather to seek corners for hiding of
your fault, then to confess your oversights and yield the victory to the
truth. Surely, for mine own part, your dealing does persuade me that when
you resolved to reply upon me, you thought with your self the same that you
uttered in your epistle unto Criticus: I know not whether these things be
true which he writes; and perhaps they are not far from being true, Sed tamen
libet ite contra.
yet am I disposed to have a crash against them.

Yea, even for the branches and points whereunto you stand in the particulars,
the four heads of reasons, neither denying their drift, the mark they aimed
at; nor excusing them as fair against Momus, though they come nothing near
the mark: albeit you deal with greater probability, and therefore carry your
self the bolder, yet deal you like your self, and lay still the colors of
probability on sophistry. For whereas in the first, concerning the judgment
of the ancient Romans holding all stage players infamous by their law, you
said that the Praetor pronounced none infamous but such as played for gain
sake, and I prooved the contrary by the Praetors words: you reply that the
Praetor meant the same that you say, though his words were general of
stage players without distinction. This in the foremost rank, if it will
prevail. If not; you add thereto, that the actors of your plays are no
stageplayers. But how false both these things are, and how fraudulently sought
to be avouched: our bettets, if it please them to compare my proofs with your
reply, shall see. For Tullie, as I showed, affirms that the Romans counting
all kinds of stageplayes shameful and dishonest, agreed that such as played
them should not only want the honor of other citizens, but also be
disfranchised: Which, for the last note of infamy, being also witnessed by
Livie, and S. Austin having thereupon observed that the Romans counted all
stage players infamous: Gothofredus knowing that the edict of the Praetor did
express the judgment and law of the Romans, and marking that the words of the
edict were general touching all stage players, says in the interpreting
thereof that both players for gain sake and without gain were held infamous
by it, according to S. Austin and Livie. And this to have been truly said by
Gothofredus, I declared agreeably to the grounds of law by testimonies of the
Romans; of Cornelius Nepos, Laberius, Iuvenal, Suetonius, Tacitus, Die, and
others. As for that Vlpian (whose words you cited as the Praetors) and Pegasus
with Nerva, do say that such as play for gain sake are infamous, I answered
that it follows not that therefore they thought free players not infamous:
since the Scripture likewise counts a woman infamous who prostituteth her body
unto men for money; yet counts her infamous too who does it freely. Or if
they thought the Praetors edict to have that meaning, which perhaps they did:
then they come too short of his meaning somewhat, and are well corrected
therefore by Gothofredus. Now you, to prove the contrary and disproove my
proofs, affirm that D. de his qui notantur infam. l. 2.. Ait Praetor.
Nerva and Pegasus add those words Quaestus causa, and propter praemiu^.
for gain sake to distinguish players for gain from free players, which, you
say, is manifest: and again as manifest, you say, that Ulpian does approove
their distinction. But if you thought good to confirm this point, whereof I
showed only what cause I had to dout, I denied it not: you should bring strong
arguments to convince they do so, not idle affirmatio^s that it is manifest
they do. For what if a wealthy and lascivious courtisan should say that Deuteronomy.
23. 18
Moses mentions the hire of the whore, to distinguish mercenarie whoores
from free and frank dames, as it is manifest: and again, as manifest that the
Hos. 9. 1. Mic. 1. 7.
Prophets do approove his distinction? were there any weight in this to
persuade us that Moses and the Prophets mention the whoores hire to distinguish
hired whoores from defilers of them selves without hire; dishonest from honest;
infamous from prayse-worthie: and not to note rather that such as play the
whoores do it for hire commonly? You add, that Glossa communis, Baldus,
Petrus de Castro (would you not say Paulus? for Petrus I can not hear of) and
all whom you have seen upon that text of law do so understand it. This is an
argument yet: though not strong enough. For all, who^ you have seen,
understand it so. It may be. But others, who have seen more law-bookes,
perhaps can tell you of many that understand it otherwise. My self, as few as
I have seen, can tell you of two; Annotat. in (...).
Budaeus, and an Autour of a Greek abridgement of the Civil law, whom Budaeus
cites. For the Greek author does expound it thus, That all, who try
masteries in solemn games for gain sake, are infamous: (...).
and also they who come upon the stage for praise sake. And Budaeus moving a
question and doubt how these words of the text, that all who come upon the
stage Propter prae mium.
for reward, are infamous; should be understood, whether that they be not also
infamous who come upon the stage Ambitiosa ostentatione.
for vaineglorious ostentation, answers and resolves out of St Augustine, and
Livie, Attem omnem scenica^ probrosam Romae fuisse: atque omnes scenicos
censoria nota tribu moueri solitos.
that all stageplaying was counted infamous at Rome, and all stageplayers were
wont to be disfranchised by the Censors. Whose interpretation in a point of
this quality deserves more credit then a hundred such as Paulus de Castro: so
meanly seen in the text he treats of, that he gives the word, stage, a
different meaning from that in the Praetors edict, which it expounds; and
says, it speaks of other games. An argument much stronger in show, in
substance weaker, you fetch out of the text: that in certamen descendere, and
in scenam prodire, do (as they say in your law) ambulare aequis passibus, in
the same places of the same title, De his qui nota^tur infamia; but it is most
evident, that D. de postulando. l. 1.. bestias. and D. de his qui not. infam.
l. 4.
qui descendit in certamen depugnaturus cum bestijs dentatis, ac feris,
virtutis ostendendae no^ mercedis causa, non est notatus; Ergo qui prodit in
scenam pronuntiandi gratia sine praemio and quaestu, non est notatus. Which
syllogism of yours if you allow for good: what say you unto this, that (me
seems) is like it? In certamen descendere and in scenam prodire do ambulare
aequis passibus in the same places of the same title; but it is most evident,
that D. de his qui not. infam. l. 4. C de athletis. l. un.
qui descendit in certamen luct a aut cur su certaturus cum hominibus non facit
artem ludicram; Ergo qui prodit in scena^ pronuntiandi gratia non facit artem
ludicra. The major is your own. The minor as true as yours: Yet the conclusion
false; which L. 1. 2. and 3. D. de his qui not. infam.
the same places of the same title show. And seeing by my syllogism you
perceive, I trust, that the manly exercises of wrestling and running do far
out-runne stageplaying, as it is meet they should: you see that the major of
your syllogism fails, and that certamen and scena do not walk with eve^
pass, but are coupled together as a quick greyhound and a lazy curre. Farther
is it from reason that you adioyne a reason of the favorable part of the
distinction out of the C. de spectaculis. l. 1. in fine.
Code; or rather adioyne it not, but say that you think it may be gathered
thence: because the games of wrestling, running, and such like be permitted to
them who desire and offer to bear the charge thereof. When neither does it
follow that because these games are allowed by Emperors to willing bearers of
the charge, L. 10. D. ad leg. Iul. de vi publica.
not imposed on the unwilling, therefore free stageplayers are approved by
Ulpian: and it is a wandering fancy to imagine why it should be so, when the
question is whether it be so or no. The reason of the other side which I set
down to show that the distinction can not be enforced out of Ulpians words,
because the scripture likewise condemns them of wickedness who play the hoores
for hire, yet acquitteth not free hoores; you confute as soundly, as you
confirm your own. For you say it is simply evil to play the hoore, either
freely or for reward; but not simply evil to come upon the stage, because the
law allows it if it be done sine quaestu: which is a plain begging of the
point in question. And yet having told me that I must evict that it is simply
a sin for any prodire in scenam, as it is for a woman to prostitute her body;
(I cut off your superfluous words, as namely, vile, in adding which epitheton
to sin you double a fault corrected by your self before when you said, that
I assume that the one is as greevous a sin, as the other, or at the least as
absolutely a sin:) but having told me this, you plead again the same
sophisme, avouching that your consequence, Prodire in scenam quaestus causa,
infamat; ergo prodire in scenam sine quaestu, non infamat, is a good
consequence, because the law so distinguishes. How much greater reason had you
to be persuaded, that since I had evicted it to be simply evil, because simply
infamous by the Praetors sentence, that is, by the law; Vlpian, with his
autours, interpreters thereof, did insert those words not for distinction
sake, but to note the common cause why it was practiced, the love of reward.
Chiefly seeing otherwise it must needs follow there is (...) between the texts
of your law, and one of them does cross an other. Which if the lawiers whom
you have seen thereon, had as well observed by S. Austin and Livie, as Budaeus
had: perhaps they would have thought that all sorts of stage players, even
such as show them selves for applause to please men, are therein noted also, as
Budaeus did. But I, who think there may be repugnancies in your textes, and
had an eye to the point in question between us, to weet, whether the Praetor,
whose Edictum per petuu^. Ascon. Paedian in cic. orat. pro corn D. de orig.
jur. l. 2.. Eodem tempore. C. de vet. jur. enucleand. l. 2.. Sed quia.
edict expressed the ancient Romans law, pronounced all stage players infamous;
not whether Vlpian thought so, who lived in later age after greaterand longer
corruption of manners, and consequently of opinions; in so much that he would
exempt a Agitatores. D. de his qui notantur infam. l. 4.
sort of fruitless game-servers from infamy, whom neither Tacit. annal. lib.
14. Curriculo quadri garum insistere, foedum studium. Dio, Xiphil. epit. in
Net. Es (...).
ancient Romans, though Heathens, did before him, nor C. de spectaculis and
scenicis. l. 4. See Cuiacius upon it.
Christian Emperors after: I (as you acknowledge) did admit they thought so,
but urged that the Praetor affirmed the same that I do, and they mistook his
meaning, as Gothofredus prooveth in his note thereon. To the which assertion,
after a preferring of them before Gothofrede, if not in learning, yet
authority, needelesse to be stood on; (for though he were not better
learned then they were, yet might he see by S. Austin and Livie that they saw
not; neither is it authority, but learning, that must teach us what the Praetor
meant:) you say that in some sense his short, but quick note, Immo and qui
sine quaestu, hurts not you at all. Well. In some sense then it hurts you,
in some it does not. And does that sense, wherein he meant it, hurt you or no?
If no: why say you afterward, Gothofrede does gloze against a manifest law
without giving any reason of his so doing? If yea: what spirit of wrangling had
bewitched you to construe an autours words as not gainesaying you, which in his
own meaning you knew made flat against you? For after you had said, If he
means thereby to tax Laberius, Lentulus, Nero, and such like, that did
exercere histrioniam, though gratuitam, his exception makes not against your
text; and had given a reason thereof, beside the text clean, neither agreeing
to Laberius, whom yet by your forenaming him it should have touched: you come
in with these words, But Gothofrede in deed foundeth his sharp note upon a
saying of S. Austin, Omnes enim scenici probrosi; and of Livie, Et tribu moveri
soliti. So you do confess that Gothofrede in deed, although you sensed him
as if he taxed only them who played to satisfy their dissolute and lewd
humors, that so he might not seem to make against your text, your sense
thereof at least; yet in deed he counts all stage players infamous,
according to the sayings of S. Austin and Livie, whereon he foundeth his note.
In deed Master Gager, you are much to blame, who, to show that you can
obscure a most clear truth with pretense of law, and a distinction of some
sense, do hazard the shipwreck of a good conscience, and wastfully employ
your wit and time both, in bolstering out by writing that which your self see
and know to be untrue. I did say before, that I gathered by your dealing that
when you resolved to reply against me, you thought with your self: I know not
whether these things be true which he writes; yet am I disposed to have a
crash against them. Now I must inpart correct that my saying. For you show that
somewhere in your reply you thought; I know that this thing, which he writes,
is true; Sed-tamen libet ire con^.
yet have I a lust to contradict it.

True it is therefore that by Gothofredes judgment the Praetor accounted all
stage players infamous; and they, who took the Praetor otherwise, mistook
him. Whereof although I did not allege Gothofredus for the chiefest proof,
but principally cited him to satisfy you, a lawier by a lawier, and prooved it
by the best interpreter of the law, the practice and consent of the ancient
Romans, which he does ground on also: yet you having answered him (you say)
already as it were by the way, do add that by him the rest of my autorities
and all mine examples also may receve their true, though short answer. The
autorities then of Tullie, of Nepos, of Laberius, of Liuie, of Iuvenal, of
Suetonius, of Tacitus, of Dio, and of S. Austin; the examples of Nero,
Lentulus, and the rest, whom not such autours only but the people of Rome too
did esteem infamous for their stage-playing, were it freely, or for gain;
may be answered by your answer to Gothofredus. And how? For he (you say)
glozeth against a manifest law without giving any reason of his so doing.
Why? Does not he give a reason in these words, Omnes enim scenici probrosi,
and tribu moveri soliti, prooved by S. De ciuit. Dei lib. 2. cap. 11
Austin and Lib. 7.
Livie? But S. Austin and Livie could never dream of your text, you say; and
so their autorities serve not to interpret it. As who say Gothofredus brought
them to interpret your text, that is, Ulpian: not rather to interpret the
Praetors edict, and to correct your text thereby. For thus does he reason in
effect: Ulpian expounding the Praetors edict, says that, they only, who play
upon the stage for gain sake, are infamous: but the Praetor meant that they,
who play without gain, are infamous also, even generally all stage players; as
it is apparent by S. Austin and Livie: therefore Ulpian misseth in expounding
the Praetors edict. And, I trust, an older writer may be cited to correct a
younger, of whom he could not dream: or else your self do evil to cite
Ulpian against me, of whom he could not dream you wot well. Though S. Austin
also might have dreamed of Vlpian, Vlpian lived about two hundred years before
S. Aust. Lamprid. Alexandro Sever. Eusebius. Chro.
for ought that I know. But you say farther that S. Austin and Livie are to be
understood against Histriones: and so their autorities serve not to this of
your text. Wherein I must confess I understand not what you mean. For I can
not imagine you should be so absurd as to say that they speak not against
players on stage, because they speak against Histriones. Only as Diog. La^.
in Socr.
Socrates; being asked what he thought of a certain book of Heraclitus,
answered, Those things which I understood in it are excellent, and so, I
think, are those to which I understood not: semblably may I say touching these
branches and parts of your reply, that what I understand therein makes
nothing against the point that I did conclude by Gothofredus; no more, I
think, does that which I understand not. Nay, I say too little when I say I
think. For seeing histriones signifies stage players; and stage players are
such as come Qui artis ludicrae pronuntiandive causa in scenam prodierit.
upon the stage to play or pronounce, whom the Praetoris verba dicunt. l. 1.
Ait Praetor. l. 2 D. de his qui not. infam.
Praetor speaks of: I know, that what soever your meaning be therein, it can
have no force to overthrow that which I concluded by Gothofredus. So this with
the former distinctionlesse distinction of a sense he meant not, being all the
answer that you make to him: the rest of my authorities and examples all are so
far from being answered by him, that your answerlesse answer does rather
leave both him and them as unanswerable. But you go forward, and, to overthrow
them both an other way, you deny that the Romans ever judged Omnes scenicos
infames. And why? Because plays (say you) were sometime instituted, as in a
common plague, ad placandos Deos, and were provided by great officers of the
common treasure: and so they are referred ad religionem and deuotionem.
Sometime they were set out at the private cost of them that sued to the people
for great offices, or generally for the honor and solace of the city: and so
they are referred to magnificence. For magnificentia is a goodly virtue, and
versatur circa sumptus amplos, non turpes aut infames, because it is a virtue,
but circa quaecunque in Rempublicam honestae laudis studio conferuntur: among
the which Ethicor. lib. 4. cap. 5.
Aristotle reckeneth Ludos splendide facere. Neither is it to be thought that
Aesopus and Roscius, being both men of that fame, favor, wealth, and entire
familiarity with the best and wisest in their times, were reputed as infamous
persons. What should I speak of so many Circi, Theatra, Amphitheatra, builded
by the greatest and bravest Romans with so huge charge and sumptuousnes? Which
though they were once upon foul abuses, or some other occasion, as you write,
overthrown by the Romans themselves: yet even those plays for which they were
abolished were ex eo genere of whom they might have said (as Histor. lib. 1
Tacitus does of Astrologers) quod in civitate nostra, and vetabitur semper,
and retinebitur. Howsoever; I can not think that either they would have
suffered such things to be done at all, if they had judged them evil: or to
be performed by infamous persons, being matters of that state and magnificence,
and, as they thought, of that devotion and necessity. Thus far your own
words. In which, to show that you do not deny without cause that the Romans
ever judged all stage players to be infamous, you make two proofs thereof:
one, that Aesopus and Roscius were not reputed as infamous persons; an other,
that the Romans would not have suffered such things to be performed by
infamous persons, being matters of great state and magnificence, and; as they
thought, of great devotion and necessity. Such proposition, such proofs. The
proposition savouring of a strange boldness (to use no harder term) that you,
who scarce are forty years old, if yet forty, in a question of fact, of a
thing done fifteen, sixteen, or seventeen hundred years ago, which a number
of witnesses, that lived the same time, men of good credit, affirm to have
been done, should presume to say, I deny that it was done. For Tullie
reports that the Romans counting all kinds of stage plays shameful and
dishonest, did judge accordingly of the players. Nepos, Laberius, Livie,
Iuvenall, Tacitus, the rest, whom I cited, both of the learned sort, and of the
common people, do testify the same. Neither can you deny but their words
alleged by me, do clearlie argue that they judged thus of free players also,
not only of players for gain. Yet you harden your face to say against them
all: I deny that the Romans ever judged all stage players to be infamous.
Yea, for proof hereof you produce two reasons, which imply that they thought
no stageplayers infamous, no not players for gain: and so you avouch an
evident untruth against your own confession, your own conscience. For
Roscius and Aesopus played for gain: as Nature. hist. lib. 7. cap. 39 and lib.
10. cap. 51.
Pliny and Saturn. lib. 3. cap. 14.
Macrobius show. Their wealth, which you mention, was gotten by that trade. Now
your text of D. de his qui not infam. l. 2.. ait Praetor.
Ulpian with Pegasus and Nerva, says that all who play for gain, are
infamous; as you confessed before; adding that you saw no cause to mislike it,
less durst dispute against it. Wherefore in saying that Aesopus and Roscius
were not reputed as infamous persons, your own mouth and heart condemn you of
gain saying an undoubted truth. Much more when you infer the same of other
stage players, even of the rascals, the most vile among them, in the reason
following. For although the fame, the favor, the wealth of Roscius and
Aesopus, should no more have moved you to wash away all stain from their
credit, then from Lactant. divine. instit lib. 1. cap. 20.
Flora and Athenaeus dignolophist. lib. 13.
Phryne, who were whoores of great fame, favor, wealth: yet their familiarity
with the best and wisest might probably persuade you, that they were not
reputed as infamous persons. Howbeit, had you weighed, how Tullie.
the best and wisest so well acquainted with them, had showed in Roscius.
one of the^, that Orat. pro Q. Roscio comaed.
other things brought him to such estimation, his Orat. pro P. Quintio.
stage-playing was some stain unto him: you should have perceived that in this
respect their credit might be tainted, notwithstanding the acquaintance,
whereto, by means of other parts approoved in them, they grew in process of
time with the best and wisest. But your next reason says as much for the
vilest and most beastly stageplayers, as for Aesopus and Roscius. For in
certain plays, called Ludi Florales Ovid. Fastor. libro 5. Valor. Max. lib 2
cap. 10
the plays of Flora, the Mimae, as they are termed by Vale rius Maxim.; turba
meretricia, by Oui. meretrices, quae mimor^m funguntur officio, by Lactantius.
lib. 1 cap. 20
players were not men, but women, and those lewd ones, professed whoores and
strumpers: which, besides all wanton filthiness of words, did show them selves
naked also to the people, and used most shameful motions and gestures. These
plays were instituted (to use your own words) ad placandos Deos, Cic in ver.
li. 5. Plin. not. hist. lib. 18. cap. 29.
that Flora, as the Goddess of flowers, might be entreated not to hurt the
corn, nor any thing that blows and blossemeth: and so they are referred ad
religionem and devotionem. The Aediles. Cic. de offic. lib. 2 Mamerco, ho mini
ditissimo, praetermissio aedilitatis consulatus repulsam attulit.
officers that had the charge to set them out, did set them out at their
private cost, to get the peoples favor for the obtaining of greater offices:
and so they are referred to magnificence. The Theatra Scauri, Curionis,
Pompeii. Pli. not. hist. lib. 36. cap. 15. Plutareh. vit. Pomp. tertullian. de
spect. cap. 10.
stages and theaters, wherein men behold them, were builded by the greatest and
bravest Romans with huge charge and sumptuousnes: Wherefore since the Romans
would not have suffered such things to be performed by infamous persons,
being matters of great state and magnificence, and, as they thought, of great
devotion and necessity: it follows, by your reason, that they did not judge
professed whoores and strumpets to be infamous persons. Now, if this consequent
touching whoores be false, as your D. de co^dict. ob turp. vel injust. cause.
l. 4.. Sed quid D. de ritu* nupt. l. 41.
law shows it is: then is the consequution of your reason faulty. Which your
self may see by the other branch thereof, avouched jointly, to weet, that the
Romans would not have suffered such things to be done at all, if they had
judged them evil: and by him, whose sentence, that it is a virtue Ludos
splendide facere.
to set out plays bravely, you add for the gracing and countenancing of
your reason, I mean, even by Aristotle. For he, in reckening it among
magnificent actions (...)
if any where men think they ought to set out plays bravely (so he
qualifieth his sentence with a circumstance of moment omitted by you in
alleging it,) respects the opinions and customs of the Grecians: who
thought it an honorable thing to be at charges with furnishing and decking
companies of Musicians, of Dansers, of Players, in their solemn feasts, and
usual processions celebrated to their Gods. As among the Athenians, for
example sake, Orat. in Midiam.
Demosthenes, when no man of his tribe was willing to bear the charge thereof,
did promise of his own accord that he (...)
would bear it, and therevppon provided golden crowns and costly garments
for a company Ev (...)
in the feast of Bacchus. This feast Herodot. Euterpe. (...). Athenaeus dipnos.
lib. 14 (...) and (...), Cle* Alexandr. ad hort. ad gent. Arnob. advers. gent.
lib. 5.
had as filthy matters represented, though by an other sex, in the shows and
plays belonging thereunto, as that of Flora had. Yet, such was the brutish
superstition of Heathens, that Politicor. lib. 7. cap. ult.
Aristotle him self, one of the best among them, banishing all unseemly
speeches and spectacles out of his common wealth, (...).
excepteth such as these, done in the honor of their Gods, according to their
law, Aristot. de poetica.
which (...).
allowed that beastliness in many cities then. In like sort the Romans, albeit
they judged the things to be evil which the players did in the feast of Flora,
so evil that Valor. Max. lib. 2. cap 10 Seneca epist. 98.
the refuse and dregs of the people durst not for shame desire to have the
fight there of while Cato was present: yet did they allow; and by public order
provide for the doing of them, Quo ve malo mentem concussa? timore Deoru^.
Horat. satyr. lib. 2. sat 3.
because they thought them pleasant to their divelish Goddess, whose wrathful
plagues they feared, if they should omit them. And thus, for the rest of their
plays also, whether made to pacify Ludi Megalenses. Liui. lib. 29. and 34.
Aug de ciu. Dei lib. 2. cap. 4.
the mother of their Gods, or Ludi Romani, in honorem Iovis, Iunonis, and
Minervae: ludi Apollinares, etc. Cic. in Verr. li. 5. Livi. li. 27. ^1. etc.
any of her children, they thought it a necessary devotion to set them out, a
stately magnificence to set them out bravely; yet did they repute the
players thereof infamous, as Tullie, Livie, the Praetor, Vlpian, all consent;
though withal discrediting thereby both Gods and plays, as De civ. Dei. lib.
2. cap. 13.
Austin and De spectaculis, cap. 22.
Tertullian note. How much the more strange does your boldness seem, not
only to pronounce that the Romans would not have suffered such things to be
performed by infamous persons; but to say, as bringing a proof thereof too,
that you can not think it, I can not think that they would have suffered it.
And can you think that this is a seemly thing, or tolerable, in a matter of
fact, prooved by the uniform consent of so many and so worthy witnesses, for
you to contradict it with these kinds of speeches: I deny that the Romans ever
judged all stage players to be infamous; It is not to be thought that they
deemed Aesopus and Roscius infamous; I can not think that they would have
suffered their plays to be performed by men infamous? Can you think without
blushing, how the ancient Fathers conclude by the confession of the Romans
themselves, Tertullian Quanta confessio est malae rei, quaru^ actores cum
acceptissimi sint, sine nota non sunt.
one, that plays are evil, because the Praetor noted the players with
infamy; an S. Augustine. Theatricae illius turpitudinis qua fro^te notatur
actor, si adoratur exactor? Proponu^t Grae ci; Si D^ tales colendi sunt,
profecto etia^ tales homines honorandi sunt. Assumunt To mani: Sed nullo modo
tales homines honora^di sunt. Concludunt Christiani; Nullo igitur modo Dii
tales colendi sunt.
other, that such Gods should not be worshipped, because such men were counted
infamous who performed the plays that they required: and you, of the
contrary, deny that such men were counted infamous by the Romans, or noted by
the Praetor; a thing, that no Heathen, amongst all their adversaries (whom I
have ever read of) durst? Can you think your students of Christ-church, and
others, with whom you have communicated this reply of yours, to be so weak
eyesighted, that they perceive not, that your self, in citing and applying
Tacitus his words touching Astrologers to the point in question, do confute
your self, as if God had bereft you almost of common sense, when you went
about it? For if you think that the Romans would retain Astrologers always
in their city, yet forbid them always: can you not think that they would have
suffered such things to be done at all, if they had judged the^ evil? And if
you think plays to be of that kind, of which they might have said as
Tacitus does of Astrologers: can you think that they who Tacit. annal. li. 2
Vlpian. li. 7. de offic. Procon. coll. leg. Mos. and Roman. C de malef. and
mathem. li. 5.
judged Astrologers worthy of greater punishment, would have judged players
worthy a note of infamy? I would to God you could think, and think upon your
bed (as the Psalm. 4. ver. 4
Prophet exhorts) of your offense herein, your ver. 2.
loving of vanity, your seeking of lies. Then would you be still, and
quietly acknowledge that by Tullie, Nepos, Laberius, Livie, Iuvenal, and other
ancient Romans, stage players were taken to be infamous persons, even all,
whether they played freely, or for gain: and therefore not only the
hirelinges, but the free too, are comprised and noted in the Praetors words.
Then would you rather observe in the reading of your Ad paragr. Ait Praetor.
lib 2. D. de his qui not. infam.
Glossa communis, that though certain lawiers took the Praetor otherwise, yet
certain took him so as well as Gothofredus. Then would you devise more and
better reasons for the general doctrine out of C. de spect. and scenicis.
Justinians Code, and Lib 15. cod. Theod. tit. 7.
Theodosius both, then now for the favorable part of your distincto^ you did
out of Iustinianus; omitting and neglecting that, in De spectac. and sceni. li.
4.
the same title, whence that seely single reason was enforced, stage players
are termed Vilem histrionem.
vile, Inhonestas personas.
dishonest persons, without all distinction.

It may be that your conscience felt some prick hereof; or at least your
knowledge informed you that this would not hold water. Else, why adioyne you a
new point of defense, that the actors of your plays are no stage players?
Whereas Epilo. Vlys. red respon. ad Mom.
before your only answer to this point was, that you played freely: nor
needed there more in your desire to be short (which you pretend often) if you
thought it certain the law comprised not free players. But what soever you
thought, when you resolved of having two stringes unto your bow: this new
string is worse a great deal then the old was; the hemp is naught whereof you
made it. For whereas you deny; that you, who come on the stage once in a
year, or two, in seven, or in ten, or sometime twenty years, are to be
termed Scenici, o^ histriones.
stage players; as he is not a wrastler that sometime to prove his strength,
tries for a fall or two; nor he a fenser, that sometime takes up the cudgells
to play a venny: First make these similitudes perfitt with adding In arenam. D.
de postulando li. 1.. removet. D. de accusationib. li. 4.
that which answers to In scenam.
the stage, that they be not similia dissimilia, (as De finib. l. 4
Tullie calls them,) and then he is a Athleta C. deathle. l. (...).
wrastler who to prove his strength on that stage, as it were, does try for
a fall or two; and a Gladiator. Cic. Philipp. 7. Ovid. Trist li. 2. Quintil.
declamat. 9.
Fenser likewise, who comes once thither, though he never come again; and so
are they stage players, who play upon the stage once in a year or two. Next,
the law does cut off all strife about the name, by noting him with infamy,
Qui in scenam prodierit.
who comes on the stage to play, or pronounce. So that when you acknowledge
that yours come on the stage to this intent and end, you show that both you
wrangle and trifle in denying they are to be termed stage players. As for that
you add, that you do differ from them, whom I mentioned, in the manner of your
playing, in the end, effects, and other circumstances, as in the examination
of mine exaples shall appear; the which as I have alleged to illustrate mine
authorities, as being the men whom they properly speak against; so if you show
that you are not to be likened to them, neither mine authorities, nor mine
examples shall touch you: the drift of your speech is to prove, even for the
thing too, that you are clear from that which the law disgraceth; but with
what sinews of arguments you do it, I will (by a more perfitt similitude the^
yours were) endeavor to make plain unto you: Iul. Capitoli. (...) Maximi^s
duobus.
Maximinus, a savage Emperor, a man of a huge, tall, and strong body, took a
most sottish and proud conceit thereof that he could not be killed. Whereupon
a certain man said in his presence; He that can not be killed by one, is
killed by many: The Elephant is great; yet is he killed: The Lion is strong;
yet is he killed: The Tiger is swift; yet is he killed: Beware of many joined,
if single ones you fear not.

The autour of this speech meant to reason thus, by way of a syllogism: Every
living creature may be killed: Maximinus the Emperor is a living creature:
Therefore he may be killed. And least Maximinus through his proud conceit
should object against it, that every living creature, who could be overmatched
by one, might be killed; but it was impossible for any one to match him: the
autour said, that such as could not be killed by one, might by many; adding
for proof thereof that Elephants, Lions, Tigers, be they never so great,
strong, and swift, are killed. Here suppose that he had withal, in hope of
better persuading Maximinus, told him that De not. Deor. lib. 3.
Tullie says all living creatures may be killed: which to be true in all
absolutely and simply, yea even such as no one can lightly overmatch, De offic.
li. 2
Tullie shows farther; and De Venat.
Xenophon, Lib. 5.
Polybius, Lib. 21. and 24
Livie, Not. hist. lib. 8. cap. 6. 7. 16. and 17.
Pliny, Conjugalib. praecep. and vita Pompeii.
Plutarch, do witness by sundry stories of those beasts. Now, if Maximinus
had given ea^e thereto, and answered that him self did differ from those
beasts in the manner of his strength, in the end, effects, and other
circumstances, as it should appear in examination of the examples; which as
the man had cited to illustrate his autorities, as being the creatures whom
they properly speak of, so if Maximinus had showed that he was not to be
likened to the^ neither the autorities, nor the examples should touch him; what
should the fellow have done, who did make that argument? Should he have denied
that Maximinus differed from Elephants, Lions, Tigers, in the manner of his
strength, and the rest of your circumstances? How could he? when he might have
been controlled straight by Maximinus saying: They have no man to their
subjects: I rule the whole world; they want helps to shield them from wounds;
I wear armor: they can hold no swords, or other weapons; I can: they are of
low stature; I am eleven foot high. Should he have granted that because it
appears by those and the like differences, that Maximinus was not such a
living creature as those beasts were, therefore he was no living creature:
nether could he be touched either by the examples or by the autorities? That
had been to bewray either fear, or ignorance, and to betray the truth: since
the autorities reached to the thing in general; and so the examples brought to
illustrate them did touch Maximinus also by consequent. Then belike, albeit the
differences, that he might allege against the autours reason had been true
all, yet had they all bin idle; as neither disprooving the major, nor the
minor, whereof the conclusion does necessarily follow. This is the condition
and state of your differences, Mr. D. Gager; they are not all true, and they
are all idle. They are not all true. Nay, is there any of them not untrue in
part? Doutlesse not the first: wherein you affirm that you differ from them
altogether in furniture, and manner of setting out plays: they did it with
excessive charge: you thriftily, warily, and almost beggarly. For, I hope, as
Irus came beggarly in with you; so Horace show eth that they ought; de ar* te
poetica: and that they had wherewt to do it; Epist. 7. lib. 1 Vilia vende^tem
tunicato scruta popello.
they would have clothed him in rags too, and could: and such clokes as they
used to borow for brave wooers, cost Chlamydes Lucullus, vt aiunt, Si posset
centum scenae praebere rogatus, Qui possum tot? ait; tame^ and quaeram, and
quot habebo Mittam. post paulo scribit scribit sibi millia quinque esse domi
chlamydum: partem, vel tolleret omnes. Horat. epistolar. li. 1 ep. 6.
them no more the fetching, then yours out of the revils: and excess in
charges is measured by ability, as Ethicor. lib. 4. ca. 1. aut 2.
Aristotle shows; the Mark 12. 4^.
widow giving two mites, gave more then all the rest: and you in spending pence
might be more excessive then they in spending pounds. Not the second
difference, touching the manner of action; whereof you say that they acted their
plays in an other sort then you do, or can or well know how: but so
exquisitly and carefully, that you may seem compared with them either for
skill, or diligence, rather Recitare, which I do not dislike, then Agere. For
other sort of playing you fancy without ground, saying you know not what of
things performed you know not how: I ween you know not, neither why they who
played unwilling and had small list to learn it; should be more skillful and
diligent then yours: sure if yours should seem rather recitare, which I
mislike not, then agere; none of yours played in Rivalib.
drunken, nor Vlyss red.
daunsed, nor Scabellu^ jacit Antinous Act 2.
hurled footestooles, nor Riv. Vlyss. red. and Hippolyt.
put on wemens raiment. Not the third difference, which you set in this, that
they came on the stage of a lewd, vast, dssolute, wicked, impudent, prodigal,
monstrous humor; you contrariwise do it to sundry good intents, as namely
(for example) to conform your youth to convenient action. For neither came
they all with such a disposition; witness is Laberius, witnesses are others
alleged out of Dio; so that you speak herein as if Maximinus had said that
those beasts, which the fellow mentioned, are of low stature, a thing untrue in
Oppian. de venat. lib 2 Aelia^. de hist. anim. l. 12. c. 8 Lud. Verto man
navigat lib. 4 cap. 10. Petr. Gillius elephanti descript cap 6.
Ele phants: noris it more true that you frame your youth to convenient action,
framing some of them to the action of wooers, some of knaves, some of
parasites, some of clownes, some of drunkards, some of bragging soldiers, or
of the like to these, then that Iul. Capitol. in Maximin. duob. Erat
magnitudine tanta, ut octo pedes digito videretur egressus.
Maximinus was eleven foot high. Not the fourth difference, wherein (to make a
farther profit of the circumstance that before you urged against the name of
stage players) you say that they frequented the stage; you do it seldom,
sometime not in seven, ten or twenty years. For how do you prove that they
whom Iuvenal, Tacitus, Dio note, frequented it more then some of yours have?
and Laberius did it but once in Ego bis tricenis annis actis sine nota, Eques
To manus e lare e gressus meo Domum revertar mimus. Macro. Saturn. lib. 2 cap.
7.
three score years, who yet both called himself a stage player for that doing,
and counted it a stain unto him. The fifth offends less, affirming that
they did it on the public theater not of the city only, but of the whole
world: you in a private house, and to a few, men of understanding. Yet look by
what reason you name the Roman theater, the theater of the whole world, your
should be the theater of England, France, and Ireland, if not of whole Europe:
and why say you that you did it to men of understanding? as if in Rome women
also had been present who might behold the lusty motions of the players, and
understand not what they spoke; At siqua forsan iuueni vellicet toga^, Quidque
hic agatur scire discupiat nimis, etc. And Rogare veniam a foemi nis non est
opus. Prolog. and epilog. in Hippolytum
none such on your stage. In the sixth you lavish more then in the fourth,
saying that they were men grown, one of them three score years old, Knights,
of noble houses, Patricii, and one of them Emperor of the world: in you being
young men, boys, poor Scholars, all these things are quite contrary. For,
touching age, among Non nobilitas cuiquam, non aetas, aut acti honores
impedimento, quo minus Graeci Latiniue histrionis artem exercerent. Tacit.
annal. lib. 14.
them who were compelled by Nero to become stage players, the stories, which I
cited, do record (quite contrary to your quite contrary) that there were not
only (...).
men grown, and (...)
old, but young too; and some of your players came on the stage as old as
Sueton. Neron. cap. 8. and 11. Tacit. annal. lib. 13 and 14.
Nero, your great Emperor: touching wealth, the beggerie of those needy
squiers, whom out of Iuvenal and Tacitus I specified, has small contrariety
unto poor scholars state: touching birth, and gentry, you forgott your self,
when, in saying elsewhere, The gentleman that played Ulysses, and setting 8
(...). Dio Neron* in Xiphilin. epit.
F. S. Actor. Vlyssis ego.
his verses before your book, you showed that your players are not quite
contrary to Patricii; unless you think so meanly of his name, and stock,
that a Fumosos equitum cum dictatore magistros-Iuvenal. satyr. 8.
smokie Lentulus, or Fabius, or Mamercus, does pass it in nobility; yea,
though it have learning and Scholership joined with it; neither only pass it,
but pass it so far, that not content to make it differ in degree, you make
it quite contrary, as if it were of the basest of the rascalitie. And seeing
these things, specially this last point, wherein you must bear with me, if
farthermore being taught by Epistolar. ad familiar. lib. 3. epi. 7.
Tullie, that Lentulitas, what shall I term it? the Lentulusnes of noble
parentage is Etiam ne tu has in eptias, vllam App^etatem, aut Lentulitatem
valere apud me plus, qua^ ornamenta virtutis existimas?
nothing in comparison of virtue; nay, being taught by him, whom Tullies Prou.
20. 27. Ioh. 1. 9.
light came from, even by the Iam. 1. 17.
Father of lights, that Act. 17. 11.
they are most noble who most excel in godliness and graces of the spirit, I
account all Christian Scholars and Students, as good and noble gentlemen, as
the Heathen Lentuli; but seeing these differences do square so from the
truth: the rest, which are the same, enlarged and applied to particular
comparisons of certain of your players with certain of theirs, must needs be
enroled in the same predicament. Howbeit you do utter them in such a
Quintilian. lib. 9. cap. 2. Interrogamus, quod negari non possit.
sort, as if you did not only mean to have it though, that there is less
resemblance, and therefore greater difference between their players and yours,
whom I notwithstanding had compared as like: but also that I should be forced
to acknowledge it by mine own confession, and grant that I was wonderfully
overseene therein. For you ask of me (to set down your own words:) Who
ever would resemble our Melantho with your Laureolus? the one represented by an
ingenuous boy, and for her lewdnes imagined to be hanged within: the other
acted by Lentulus, a man nobly descended, expressing perhaps openly on the
stage the same punishment. What likeness is there between our young men, putting
on the persons of Antinous, and the rest of Penelopes wooers: and between
gentlemen of the noble race of Fabius, in their own persons, not so much
counterfeiting others, as expressing their own scurrilities? Such as our
Antinous and the rest of the wooers can not be justly charged with: no not our
Irus, or Ulysses. Again, what resemblance is there between our Hippodamia
only singing, Eurimachus only saying, Phemius both singing and saying, all
three represented by such as they were: and between Nero, playing men's, wemens,
and minstrels parts upon the stage in Rome? Behold A marvelous case, that I
should compare and resemble players together so absurdly, as no man would ever
have done besides me: and that I should affirm them to be like one an other,
between whom there is no likeness, no resemblance, as your sharp urging does
emply. But perhaps your stomach is the more egre against my comparisons,
because of our dissension about the stage and plays. The party, that spoke in
the presence of Maximinus, spoke In theatro.
upon the stage, and was a Scurra mimus. Iul. Capitolin. In whom it is printed,
minus: by error, for mimus, as I take it.
player himself: it may be you would have used him more gently. For else, had
you been there, and loved Maximinus you might (which I marvel if you think
not absurd) have answered thus in his behalf. Who ever would resemble
Maximinus to an Elephant? the one, a man well featured, and feeding very
daintily within doors in his palace: the other a beast, a Plin. not. hist.
lib. 8. cap. 10. and li. 11. cap. 39.
thick skin, having a So is his proboscis termed by Aristotle. de hist. any
lib. 2. cap. 1. and by Oppian, de venat. lib. 2.
nose an Or two yardes, some of them, with the advantage. Petr. Gillius eleph.
descript. cap. 5. and 6.
ell long, and Job. 40. 15.
eating grass perhaps without doors on the mountains. What likeness is there
between him, our Emperor, a most gracious personage, and of sweet conditions:
and between a Tigre, a Virg. Geor. lib. 2. Ovid. epist. 10.
cruel savage beast, wearing Plini. nature. hist. lib. 8. cap. 17. Oppian. de
venat. li. 1. and 3.
hear of sundry coolours, speckled, spotty? Such as our Emperor has none
upon his body: no, nor the like paws, or (...). Oppian. lib. 3. de venat.
tail. Again what resemblance is there between him, excelling in all three
things, greatness, strength, and swiftnes: and between an Elephant, great and
strong only; a Tigre, strong and swift; a Lion having little to trust to,
beside strength? Think you that you had spoken with any grain of salt, Mr. D.
Gager, if you had spoken thus? Though I have disadvantaged my self in this
similitude: because both your Melantho was a great deal liker to Iuvenals
Laureolus, your wooers and the rest to those degenerat gentlemen, then
Maximinus was to beasts: and I have scarce put one false difference in mine,
of Maximinus sweet conditions; you have put many in yours. For, to pass over
the ingenuousnes of the boy that represented Melantho, opposed to the noblenes
of Lentulus who did act Laureolus, the unlikeness whereof in noblenes, and
acting, is disprooved already; chiefly since Nullum simi le est idem, you know.
things that are not the same, may be like: first, what proof have you, that
The gentlemen of noble houses which Dio specifieth: and (...) among them namely.
they, whom Iuvenal noted under the name of Fabii, did not so much counterfeit
others, which your wooers did, as express their own scurrilities? When
contrariwise some of them would have hid their faces with (...). Dio Neron.
visours, for shame, that they might not be known, as counting the infamy
thereof worse then death: a very great presumption, that they did abhor from
expressing their own scurrilities on the stage, whom it greeved so much to come
on the stage at all.

Next, what wrong is it to charge your Antinous, and other of the whoores, with
such scurrilities, as theirs? were not the Iuvenal. sat. 8. Sueton Ner cap. 2^.
Dio Ner.
plays that they played made of like arguments, in like sort, to yours? Is not
Antinous set forth by Odyss. li. 17. 18. 20. 21. and 22.
Homer, as a malapert Sponsi Penelopae nebulones.
knave? to speak in Epist. lib. 1. ep. 3.
Horaces phrase, of him and his accomplices. Do Epist. ad Criticum.
you not follow Homer, and express Antinous with the rest accordingly, both
in their misbehaviour of words and of deeds? Thirdly, do you know what is
meant in Iuvenal by planipedes Fabios, when I having said that the race of
Fabius resembled and counterfaited such base ridiculous things as are expressed
in Irus, you deny that he may be justly charged with such? And if you know
that they, who were termed Diomedes gramma Iul. Scalig poeti. lib. 1. cap. 10
planipedes, counterfaited such things as Macr. Satur. lib 2. cap. 7.
Laberius did when he put on the person of a bondslaue whipped: are you not
ashamed to deny that such are expressed in Irus, a beggar buffeted, thrown
down, and Pedibus Iru^ extrahit, ridentibus procis Vlyss. red. act. 2.
haled out by the feet, the wooers laughing thereat? Finally, why are not the
blows, in your tragedy, given to Ulysses, like the Mamercoru^ alapas.
Mamercians whirrets that Iuvenal speaks of? you think them not so badde. I
think them worse rather. For whirrets, that he speaks of, were given with
the hand. Your Ulysses is Vylssem calce ferit.
strooken with Melanthius heel, and Scabellum jacit.
with Antinous foote-stoole: unless Antinous hurling it did miss the mark,
and played not his part as you appointed him out of (...) dys. li. 17.
Homer. Thus are your differences all untrue, in part: in whole, a number of
them. But suppose they were true. Yet are they all idle: because, as in the
fellows speech to Maximinus, the mayor being prooved that all living creatures
may be killed, whether one or many be able to surprise them; the minor
apparent, that he was a living creature; the conclusion followed,
notwithstanding whatsoever differences between him, and them, whose examples
were brought to prove the mayor: likewise in my reason, the mayor being
prooved, that all stage players are infamous by the civil law, whether they
play for gain, or freely; the minor apparent, that they who play your plays
on the stage, are stage players; the conclusion follows, notwithstanding
whatsoever differences between yours, and them whose examples for proof of the
mayor I produced. Nay, I say farther, that as some true differences between
Maximinus, and the beasts, do sharpen the edge of the conclusion against him;
for if Pli. not. hist. lib. 8. cap. 4. Viribus, magnitudine, velocitate
praestantiores.
greater, stronger, and swifter creatures are killed, how much more might he
be? so for you to be stage players it is more shameful then for the old
Romans, since they were Ephesians. 4. 18.
ignorant, 2. Cor. 4. 4.
infidels, Ephe. 2. 12.
without God in the world; you are Scholars, Christians, chosen to be trained
up unto the Ministry; and Luke 12. 48.
unto whom much is committed, the more shall be required of him; Luk 7. 47.
they who have many sins forgiven them, should love much; it is a great
offense Amos. 2. 1^.
to give the Nazarites wine to drink, though to 1. Tim. 5. 23
drink wine be not unlawful. Wherefore that of Terence wherewith you
conclude, saying that you think it was a foul shame for noble men and Nero to
play, but to play noble men or Nero it is no shame for you; as Ter. Adelph.
act. 5. scen. 3.
he says in the Comedy, Duo quum idem faciunt, saepe, vt possis dicere, Hoc
liceti mpune facere huic, illi non licet; Non quod dissimilis res sit, sed quod
is qui facit: although you straiten the point (whether for shame, or for the
figure?) when you speak of playing noble men and Nero, your purpose being to
justify the playing of the Rivalib.
basest, drunkards, and Vlyss red.
whooers too; but if Terences saying would fit the point in question, the use
thereof must be to prove that they might lawfully come on the stage, you may
not. The truth is that it cannot be applied hereto, because L. 1. D. de his
qui not. infa.
the law speaks generally of stage players, as it does of bawdes, of
thieves, with the like; and common sense does teach us, that Vbi lex non
distinguit, nec nos distinguere debemus. Gloss ad li. (...). D de Public. in
rem act. li. 1.. quod autem. D. de aleatoribus.
we may not distinguish where the law distinguishes not. Else, if I should
say that by the same law our English thieves, who rob on Gaddes hill, are
infamous; one of their abbetters might answer, No not so: for the Law speaks
of such as Asc. Paedia. in Cic. orat. pro Aem. Scaur.
Lucius Tubulus, men of wealth and state, who robbed the whole world repairing
unto Rome; not of poor good fellows that rob a few Kentish men travailing to
Graves-end: and I think it was a foul shame for rich men and Tubulus to
rob; but to rob rich men and Tubulus, it is no shame for us: as he says
in the Comedy, that oftentimes, you may say, when two men do the same thing,
the one is not blameworthy for it, the other is, not as if there were
difference in the thing it self, but in the man that does it. Which Comicall
sentence, though it might be as well applied by Justice Graybeard to the excuse
of theft in poor men, as by Terences Non est flagitium (mihi creed)
adolescentulum scortari. Act. 1. scen. 2.
Mitio it is to the excuse of whoordom in a young man; yet were it unjustly
applied thereunto: because the law condemning theft in whomsoever without
respect of persons, be they rich or poor, does count it none of those things
which fall within the compass of Terences Saepe. Duo quum idem faciunt, saepe
ctc.
oftentimes. So considering, stage players are spoken of in like sort, as
thieves, by the law: you see how Terences saying may be applied unto them. But
if we might apply it unto them justly, we must infer thereof that it was no
shame for Nero and his mates to come on the stage, for you it is: as S. Paul
commands us 1. Cor. 5. (...)
not to eat with any that is called a brother, if he be a fornicatour; which,
ver. 10
with an infidel committing the same filthiness, he does not forbid. And thus
while you endeavor to unwind your self out of the nett of ignominy and
infamy cast upon you by the civil law, you are bound faster in it: to the
fulfilling of that proverb, which I wish you had marked in the Ter. Phorm.
act. 1. scen. 2.
Comedy rather, if not in the Act. 9. 5.
Scripture, It is hard to kick against pricks.

In the second head, to a reason drawn out of the law of God for the reproof
of stage plays as now you handle it, denying that you made it to prove that
men may lawfully put on wemens raiment therein, as I took it; though how just
cause I had to take it so, I have declared; but unto this reason grounded on
the Deuteronomy. 22. 5.
law of God in Deuteronomie, Whatsoever man does put on woman's raiment, he is
abominable to the Lord; But men did put on wemens raiment in your plays; you
must acknowledge therefore that you were justly blamed: you reply in like sort
as unto the former of the civil law; first, that the prohibition of men to
wear wemens raiment is not general, but touches certain cases only; next,
that your players did not wear wemens raiment. And because in treating of the
prohibition I showed out of the Scriptures, that it does belong not to the
ceremonial law, but to the moral; and no part of the moral law may be
transgressed, no, not for the saving of honor, wealth, or life: my proofs
hereof being so clear, strong, and pregnant, that you durst not deny the
thing to be prooved, you move a dout, as your term is, out of words of mine;
in deed you reason thus against it. I pray you give me leave to propose my
contrary dout. The moral law, as you truly say, is the law of love and
charity; to the which wheresoever the ceremonial law is repugnant, there it
gives place to the moral. The moral law therefore is never contrary to love
and charity, in commanding or forbidding any thing. But the place of Deutero
nomie, being taken strictly, absolutely, and in the rigor of the letter, may
sometimes hinder the actions of love and charity, both toward our selves and
others; as in those cases, which both you and I propose. Ergo in that strictnes
it belongs rather to the law ceremonial, though the equity thereof
pertains to the law moral, and so it is perpetually and simply to be
observed. Now, I have given you leave to propose your contrary dout. I pray
you give me leave to propose my contrary question. In the same book of
Deuteronomie it is written, Deuteronomy. 5. 17.
Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not commit adultery. These precepts being
taken strictly, absolutely, and in the rigor of the letter, may sometimes
hinder the actions of love and charity, both toward our selves and others;
as appears by the example of Joseph, and of David: Joseph, who Genesis 39. 20.
lost his liberty and put his life in hazard, because verse. 12.
he refused to commit adultery with his Masters wife; David, who 1. Sam. 26.
(...) and 27. 2.
cast his folowers and him self into sundry dangers and distresses, because 1.
Sam. 24. 7 and 26. 9.
he would not kill Saul. Hereupon I ask you, whether you think, that seeing
the moral law bound Joseph and David to Lev. 19. 18. Matt. 19. 19. Ephe. 5.
28.
love their neighbors, and themselves, therefore they should have made no
scruple of adultery and murder, in these cases, in which the forbearing
thereof did hinder the actions of love toward them selves and others: but ought
to have judged those precepts in that strictnes to belong rather to the law
ceremonial, though the equity thereof pertains to the law moral, and so it
is perpetually and simply to be observed. Which if you think not, as God
forbid you should, and you will profess (as I am persuaded) that you detest
such thoughts: then do you acknowledge that it came rather of a lust to cross
and contradict my speech, then of any dout you had within your self, that you
say, a precept, which being strictly kept might breed some disadvantage to
our selves or others, must in this respect be counted ceremonial, and not be
kept strictly, because the moral law is never contrary to love and charity
in commanding or forbidding any thing. And sure you might have reason to take
it not well, if I should suppose you to be so ill catechized, as that you knew
not that the moral law commands us to Deuteronomy. 6. (...). Matt. 22. 3^.
love God above all things, and man after him; that Deuteronomy. 6. 6. Ioh. 14. 15.
our love to Godward is proved by the observing and keeping of his
commandments; that if by keeping of them we should seem to hate man, we must
Genesis 22. 2. Luke 14. 26.
hate him rather, then not perform our love to God: that it follows not
hereof the law is contrary unto love neither, because to hate man so is to
Matt. 10. 37
love him less then God, in comparison, and not in deed to hate him; nay, it
is to love him, since it is to wish him and work him Matt. 16. 26 Romans 8. 13.
2. Cor. 4. (...).
greater good by loss of less good which he can not retain therewith.
Howbeit, had you doubted, yet might you have found enough to resolve you, if
you had read my writing rather with a mind to learn, then to gainesay, in as
much as I showed by Scripture touching Peter, that he should not have lied to
avoid the danger of whatsoever trouble: because to lie is evil; not allowed
in any case by our lawgiver, no not for the defense of the glory of God, much
less for the safety of man, a worm. Or, if, notwithstanding all that this
could teach you, there might some occasion of doubting still remain: should
you not have rather sought to be resolved by me in private conference, then
publikelie in writing (made common with many, even in the country also, not
only in our University) to affirm a point implying flat atheism, that we
are no farther to keep Gods commandments, then stands with our commodity?
and so conclusivelie to vouch it with an Ergo, as if it did follow necessarily,
that all the laws of God (for your reason holds by consequent in all) must
be set aside, like ceremonial matters, when our own, or other men's, honor,
wealth, or life, comes in question with them? and to add that the equity
thereof yet pertayneth to the law moral, and so they are perpetually and
simply to be observed? which seems by distinguishing their equity from
strictnes to stre^gthen them in sound meaning; in deed destroys them by
teaching their transgressors how to defend most gross iniquity: as idolaters,
for example, when, if Dan. 3. 6.
Nabuchodonosor do threaten he will burn al who worship not his golden image,
they may say, that albeit in Deuteronomie God says, Deuteronomy. 5. 9.
Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them, yet since the moral law
is never contrary to love in forbidding any thing, and the place of
Deuteronomie, being taken strictly, would hinder now men's actions of love
toward them selves; Ergo in that strictnes it belongs rather to the law
ceremonial, though the equity thereof pertains to the law moral, and so it
is perpetually and simply to be observed. A sentence so ungodly, that when
Peter only touched it a far off, or rather less then touched it, speaking
of a particular case, no general law; nor Ergoing against it, nor terming the
keeping of it strictnes, nor plaistering the breach of it with equity: but
when he tended toward it by saying to our Savior, Matt. 16. 22
Master, pity thy self, this shall not be unto thee, our Savior answered
him, Get thee behind me, Satan, thou art an offense unto me, because thou
savourest not the things that are of God, but the things that are of men.

Suitable to this new argument of yours is the defense of your old (the only
one you pressed before) from two examples. For whereas you had reasoned thus,
Some men of Macedonie, moved by Prince Alexander, did putt on Wemens raiment
to save the honor of Ladies; the like did Achilles, the son of Thetis, to
save his life; Ergo it is lawful to do it in such cases; and I made answer
thereto, that the reason is naught, because we are to live by laws, not by
examples; neither may we lie or forswear our selves to save our lives, or
benefitt others, though David and Peter did so, men worthier to be followed then
Macedonians, or Achilles: you reply, that the reason is good (this must you
mean by saying that the examples are alleged to good purpose in the
circumstances that you apply them for, or else you delude us with an other
sophisme;) and why? For Alexanders fact is commended (say you) as proceeding
from a most noble, and true heroical mind; and because it was better that the
Persian Ambassadors were slain, then that the chastities of so many great
Ladies should so dishonorably be either overthrown, or so much as assailed:
and Thetis might well hide her son Achilles in a maidens apparel in respect
of motherlie love and pity which she was to bear her son, knowing, as she
did, that he should be slain in that journey to Troy, whether he was
requested to accompany the other Grecian Lords. Touching the former whereof, to
admit, that Alexanders fact proceeded from a noble true heroical mind, and
that it was better the Persian Ambassadors were slain then the chastities of
so many great Ladies should so dishonorably be overthrown, or assailed: yet
does it not follow that men might therefore lawfully put women's raiment on to
kill them; the thing might be co^venient and good to be done, the means of
doing it not good. As Satius est impunitum relinqui facinus nocentis, quam
innocentem damnari.
it is better that a person guilty should be left unpunished, then a person
guiltless should be condemned: and Trajan the Emperor lib. 19. D. de poenis.
he, whose saying this was, spoke it of a noble true heroical mind. Yet were
the means naught to procure by bribes or by false witnesses the escape or
acquittall of a guilty person: and if any man, who had used such dealing,
should be commended for it, he should be commended amiss in that respect, as
Alexander is by you. Now, for the later, how prove you that Thetis might well
hide her son Achilles, as she did? You say, that you think not but she
might do it well. So. Your reason then is: I think she might do it well;
Ergo she might. A common kind of argument with you; but thin, and lean: nor
likely to prove better at the length in trial, of whatsoever plight it seem
in your writing. For let it fare as it may in Topickes, in Analytickes it must
fast: it can not away with mood and figure. And what if you think not that
she might neither? as I think you do not; unless you think contraries, or
speak otherwise then you think. For your self affirm, that the putting on
of wemens raiment which is termed an abomination to the Lord in the place of
Deuteronomie, is the wearing of it ordinarily, so to converse among men and
women, against the course of all natural and civil regard. But Thetis,
intending thereby to hide Achilles, did clothe him to converse so ordinarily
among men and women: even longer, then he would endure to converse so; though
Statius Achilleid. li. 2. Natum ante pedes projecit. Neoptolemum. De quo Verg.
Aeneid. lib. 2 Apollod. de orig. Deor. lib. 3.
he endured for certain years. Therefore that, which she did, you think to
be abominable: yea, pronounced in Scripture an abomination to the Lord. The
less material is it whether that be true which by the way I noted, that
Statius the Poet making Chiron, Calchas, and Achilles himself to reproove the
putting of that raiment on him, meant that men of wise, virtuous, religious,
ingenuous, valiant minds, did judge the thing simply in any case unlawful by
the light of nature. Though I wish our judges, unto whose arbitrament I refer
the matter, whether you control me therein well, or no, to mark that for
Chiron, in whom are represented wise and virtuous persons, albeit you affirm
he had a further reach then his words outwardly import: yet in setting down
that reach you add, perhaps, as staggering at your own conceit; and withal
acknowledge that his words outwardly, whereof you can not prove an other
inward meaning, import as much as I said. Beside that they may justly suspect
your partial censure, because, where I had likewise noted by the way that the
fact of Achilles, deflowring Deidamia by means and occasion of his conversing
so with her, does show what inconvenience and danger of uncleanness cleaves
to the cladding of men in wemens raiment: you do overthwartly and wrongfully
cross my note by saying that he was likely to do as much in his own likeness
any where else. For let malefactors be never so ready to practice any
wickedness of their own corrupt and lewd inclination: the circumstances of
manner, season, place, and so forth, commodious to perform it do more entise
them thereunto. Weapons them selves (says Odyss. li. 2^ (...).
Homer) do draw men to fight: and Occasio facit furem.
opportunity makes the eves. The force whereof in this thing I said enough to
open by that, as Ter. Eun.
Chaerea could not have defiled Pamphila, no not in Thais house, without his
Eunuchs raiment: so, if woman's raiment had not come on Sueton. Iulio, cap. 74.
Plutarc. vit. Caes. and Cicer.
Clodius, Caesar should not have put away his wife Pompeia so soon as he did;
perhaps never. Or are you of opinion that with us it skilleth not whether
scholars lodge in Colleges and Halls, or in townesmens houses? Yea, although
they be neither so much conversant, nor go in like attire, as Achilles used
with Lycomedes daughter? Our Savior said to his Disciples, Mark. 9. 4^
If thy foot cause thee to offend, cut it of; if thine eye cause thee to
offend, pluck it out: meaning that we must sever our selves from things and
persons that are most dear unto us, if they be an occasion unto us of sin,
and hinder us in the way of life. Yet a man that had heard him with your
disposition, might have said, What needs it? seeing though we cut off one
foot, or pluck out one eye, the other is likely to cause us to offend. Upon
Moses words in Genesis, touching Dina, that Genesis 34. 1
she went out to see the daughters of that country, and Sichem ravished her,
Calvin, Marlorat, Peter Martyr.
godly learned interpreters observe that her wandering and idle curiosity is
noted and reprooved as an occasion of the vilanie that was done unto her. Yet a
gadding humor and wanton eye of maidens loath to follow S. Tit. 2. 5.
Paul's rule and keep at home, might say that such teachers are puritans, who
can not abide whitson-ladies: for Sichem was likely to do as much to Dina,
though she had kept at home in her fathers house, and never come in Sichems
sight. The very fact in question, whereon you mislike that I made this note of
such occasions and entisements, has the same observed therein by the Statius
Achilleid li. 1.
Poet, the wise reporter of it: namely, that Achilles lust was first kindled by
seeing Deidamia; afterward increased by conversing with her; and finally
accomplished by coming through the falacie of his attire, like a woman, Lex
procal ire mares: iterat praecepta verendus Ductor, inaccessumque viris
edicitur antrum. Nec satis est: stat fine dato metuenda sacerdos, exploratque
aditus; nequis temerator ob erret Agmine faemineo: Tacitus sub^isit Apollo.
whither else in likeness of a man he could not. But whatsoever Statius judged
of the matter, or others shall judge of that I noted by the way; you grant it
was abominable by the law of God, for Thetis to put woman's raiment on her
son Achilles, as she did. And so you have rather confirmed, then confuted,
mine answer to your argument from the two examples of Macedonians and
Achilles. You come in now anew with half a dozen more: three of men, attiring
them selves in wemens raiment; three of women, in men's. And quoting Eucl. Mega.
Theop. rex. Spar. Antenor Cepha. Euphrosyna virgo Antioch. Theod. virgo and
Martyr. Eugenia Romana.
their names only in your margent, you say that if you had thought that these
two examples should not have been taken in your meaning, that is, only in the
circumstance for the which you alleged them, you could have used many true
stories of both sexes, to the which no such exceptions could have been taken.
Wherein, to pass over, that by giving the name of true to those stories, you
make it very probable that you meant Vlyss. red. resp. ad Momum.
before under the name of stories, the fable of Achilles, as I supposed you did
by the drift of your words, (speaking first in general of Id quod crebra
testari potest Histor.
stories prooving Quid si cogeret lethi metus Mutare vestem? publicum quid si
bonum Suaderet?
two points; then bringing Vest filius Amyntae indui Iuvenes muliebri dum
^bet, tot faeminis Claris pudore^ servat
one in special to prove the one of them, Vitam tuetur silius Thetidis suam.
Achilles to prove the other) which yet you deny to have been your meaning,
and charge me with untruth in effect for saying it: you do farther charge me
that I have not taken those two examples in your meaning. No have? Why? Meant
you not by them to conclude, that a man may lawfully put on woman's raiment, to
save his life, or benefit many, because in such cases Achilles and the
Macedonians did put on such raiment? And have not I expressly set this reason
down, affirming it to be your reason, and making mine answer accordingly
thereto? yes: but I have also in mine answer to it noted other circumstances
of the same examples, thereby to make plainer the badnes of your reason: and so
I have not taken them in your meaning, that is (as you expound it) only in the
circumstance for the which you alleged them. You are a merry man, and not much
unlike in this respect to one, who when he had taken up a waster and buckler
in Cheapeside at London to play with an apprentice, and the apprentice rapped
him, sometime upon the head, sometime upon the elbow, or shoulder, or side, he
cast them down again; saying, that if he had thought that the apprentice
would not have stricken upon his buckler still, he would not have played with
him. Yet in this you vary from the vain of his speech, that you say you could
have used many true stories of both sexes, to the which no such exceptions
could have been taken. Though you help your self no more by this varying,
then if his skill had served him to have warded all the blows with his
buckler; his weakness being nevertheless unable to resist, but that he might
have had his buckler beaten about his ears. For what if no such exceptions
could be taken against your six examples? Does not the same answer that I
made to your reason from the Macedonians example, and Achilles, beat down
these also to the ground: since none of them is equal to David, or to Peter,
whose actions notwithstanding are no sufficient warrants for us? Moreover, as
in beheading of noble personages, that are traitors, the executioner, having
cut of their heads, does hold them up in his hands, and show them to the
people: so I, having thus beheaded, as it were, these your six examples, I
mean, the reason drawn from them, perhaps (notwithstanding your confident
assertion that no such exceptions can be taken against them) might hold them
up in my hands, and show that they are dead, by the like or more absurd
consequutions from other circumstances thereof. For example, in one or two, the
chiefest of them, the first of each sex, Euclides, and Euphrosyna; the story
of Euclides is, that when the A. (...). noct. Art. lib. 6. cap. 10.
Athenians, having their neighbors of Megara in great hatred, had decreed that
if any of the men of that city were found within Athenes, he should suffer
death: Euclides being of it, and loath to lose the benefit of the school of
Socrates, with whom he used to be at Athenes and to hear him, before that law
was made, did cloth himself in woman's attire toward evening; went from his
house in Megara to Athenes, unto Socrates; enjoyed his speech and conference
some part of the night time; and when day approached, returned home again a
little more then twenty miles in the same attire.

Now, if this were lawfully done, because he did it: then Matt. Paris. hist.
Ang. in Ricardo pri.
William Bishop of Ely, who, to save his honor and wealth, became a Tunica
viridi faeminea indutus; capam habens ejusdem coloris, peplum in capite
muliebre porta^s.
greene-sleeues, going in woman's raiment less way then twenty miles, from
Dover castle to the Sea side, did therein like a man; although the women of
Dover, when they had found it out by plucking down his muffler and seeing his
newshauen beard, Mulierculae clamorem ad sidera tollentes, Venite, inquiunt,
and lapidemus hoc monstru^, quod sexum vtrumque deformavit.
called him a monster for it: then with us a scholar, who thinks of some man,
as Euclide did of Socrates, and can not well frequent his house in the day time
for suspision of lewdnes with his Xanthippe, or of Popery, may come like a
maiden thither in the night: then our University Statute of night-walkers
would be taken away, or qualified at least; and if our Proctors meet one like
a woman at midnight, they must not be suspicious; some studious youth, it may
be, come from Wickam or Beaconsfield, and daring not to travail by day for
thieves through Shotouer, is going to some learned man. In like sort, touching
Euphrosyna, a maid of Alexandria, (of Antioche Euphrosyna virgo Antioch
you name her, by slip of pen or memory) the story is, that Sim
Metaphrast. vit. S. Euphrosynes Alexandr. apud Surium, de probat. Sanct.
histor. Tom. 1.
she, desiring much to live in an Abbay like a monk, Cur metuum parentem
lugente^ and triste^ reliquisti? Non te ad hanc spem alebam, sed vt habere^
baculum senectutis, solatium imbecillitatis meae.
forsook not only her father, who had brought her up to be a staff in his
old age, a comfort in his weakness to him; but also a Pater vniqui praestabat
om nibus, opibus, gloria, and virtute, despondit puellam.
worthy, noble, virtuous gentleman, to whom she was betrothed; clad in man's
apparel she came unto the Abbat; and being asked of him who she was, from what
place, and for what cause she came, she answered, that Se vocari qui them
Smaragdu: esse autem ex aula Imperatoris.
her name in deed was Smaragdus, and she was of the Emperors Court, and came
to that Abbay to lead a holy life, if she might be admitted; and so finding
favor to be admitted as a man, she lived there Triginta and ^cto aunos.
eight and thirty years in man's apparel. Whereof if you infer again, as
you do, Euphrosyna did it, Ergo lawful; a better proof, I grant, then,
Achilles did it, or Mocedonians did it, because they were profane men,
Martyrolog. Roman. Ianuar. 1. Graecor. menolog Caes. Baron. notationib. in
martyrolog. Roman.
Euphrosyna is a Saint; but as you reason thus: likewise may an other in the
same mood and figure; Euphrosyna, through a desire of moonkish perfection,
refused to honor her father; Ergo Mark. 7. 9.
Christ did wrongfully check the Scribes and Pharisees for breaking Gods
commandments to keep traditions of men: Euphrosyna chose rather to be with
others then with him to whom she was betrothed; Ergo Moses erred in teaching
that a Deuteronomy. 22. 23.
maid bethrothed is a verse. 24.
wife, and that Genesis 2. 24.
the wife should cleave inseparably to her husband: Euphrosyna lied for a
vantage; Ergo St. 1. Ioh. 2. 21.
John was a precisian, who condemns all lies: Euphrosyna conuersed in men's
apparel, amongst men, eight and thirty years; Ergo D. Gager mistook the
place of Deuteronomie, when he gave it this meaning, that to go attired so
ordinarily is abomination to the Lord. See you now what manner if true stories,
of true all, you could have used of both sexes? and how bold you were in saying
that no such exceptions could be taken to them, as to the former? The which
notwithstanding, were it as you say, you do no more help your argument
thereby, then if a traitor being beheaded, whom you favored, you stayed the
executioner from holding up his head, and sowed it on again your self to his
body with close and hansom stitches. For although no such exceptions could be
taken to any of your examples, yet had I beheaded with the Heb. 4. 13.
the sword of Gods word the reason drawn from them: and with Justinians
sword too, in that I adjoined for your sake out of your law, that we are to
live by laws, not by examples: and to Non tam spectandum est quid Romae factu^
sit, quam quid fieri debeat. lib. 12. D. de Officio Praesid.
look, not so much what is done any where, as what ought to be done.

Hereunto you add an other new argument to show that the place of Deuteronomie
touches certain cases only, not generally forbids a man to put on woman's
raiment: and that is, the opinion and judgment of Divines. For after you had
delivered these expositions of it, as liked by your self, that to wear such
raiment of a lewd intent, the rather thereby, and the more safely to be in the
company of women to bring some bad purpose about; or of an effeminate mind to
suffer his hear to grow long, or to frizell it; or in speech, color, gate,
gesture, and behavior to become womanish; or ordinarily so to converse among
men and women, against the course of all natural, and civil regard, is
abomination to the Lord: and noted it moreover to be expounded by other thus,
that women are forbidden to put on the armor of men, and men the raiment of
women, because at that time it was superstitious, in as much as among the
Gentiles women woare men's armor in the sacrifices of Mars, and men woare
wemens ornaments and instruments, as distaffe, spindell, and such like, in the
sacrifices of Venus; and therefore is it added that he who does so is
abominable to God because abomination is taken in the Scriptures commonly for
idolatry, or some thing belonging to idolatry: but after you had set down
these expositions, you say that all the Divines whom ever you talked with of
this matter, do affirm the true meaning of that place to be contained in
these senses rehearsed. Wherein by alleging the consent of all Divines that
ever you talked with hereof, as making for you, first, you grant your self
never to have talked here of with S. Cyprian, Chrysostom, Procopius, Thomas
Aquinas, Liranus, Calvin, Hyperius, Beza, Bishop Babingto^; who making it a
point annexed (as I showed) to the seventh commandment, do imply the meaning
thereof to be larger then your rehearsed senses: never with Strom. lib. 2
Clemens Alexandrinus, De fide and legib. cap. 13
Gulielmus Parisiensis, In Deutero. artic. 23.
Dionysius Carthusianus, Declamat. in Deuter.
Ferus, Annot. Paraphr. Onkeli Chald. in Deutero.
Fagius, Ethic. Christian. lib. 2. cap. 14.
Danaeus; who by handling it in like sort as the former, do testify their
agreement with them in the conclusion: never with Tertullian, Divin. institut.
lib. 6. cap. 20.
Lactantius, Soliloquior. lib. 2. cap. 16
Austin, the Bishops assembled in the sixth general council to the number of
above two hundred and twenty: who partly by urging that place against
stage players partly by condemning the thing it speaks of, as lewd, do
evidently argue that they are of a different mind from you concerning it. Or
since you having had the most of these quoted in my letters to you, do grant,
for Cyprian namely and the general concel, that they make against you, and
therefore seem, in citing all that ever you talked with; to mean not such as
you have read and perused, but whom you have asked thereof by word of mouth:
then, why should you more enforce against me the sayings and judgment of all
that ever you talked with, then I against you the sayings and judgments of all
that ever I talked with? For as you report of them whom you talked with that
they are very godly and excellently learned: in like sort may I of them whom I
talked with. And of mine you can not but the rather believe me, because I named
you one, of whom your self answer, that you esteem him to be a good man, a
good scholar, and a good Preacher: you name me none of yours. Again, there
has not any of yours in public place, where men do speak with greater
advise to Christian auditories, avouched that which you hold: he, whom you
commend, and commend justly, has preached the same that I teach. But, you say,
he could not justify his speech, uttered so publicly, if it should come to
due trial. But, I say, this speech of yours so publicly uttered is come to
due trial, and you can not justify it. For he, having opened the words of
his text, Psalm. 119. 10
Let me not wander from thy commandments, and begone to show what a contrary
course unto the Prophets practice we take now a days, did prosequute it thus.
To let pass other things, let stage plays in the University, and Maygames
in the town, speak whether these things be so. In Deuteronomy. 22. 5.
Deuteronomie the precept is, The woman shall not put on man's raiment, nether
shall a man putt on woman's raiment; for all that do so are abomination to the
Lord: And it is the 1. The. 5. 22
Apostles precept to abstain from all appearance of evil. Whether the former
precept be broken in all plays, I know not. Sure very few or none there are,
wherein either the one, or both, is not broken: either through the vile
scurrilitie of the matter oftentimes unbeseeming chaste ears; or thorough the
time for the preparing for them; or through the unnecessary charges about
them; or through the manifold dangers coming both to actors, and spectators,
by them. Hereupon, having added somewhat touching maygames, he made this
exhortation. The Prophet prays unto the Lord, that he may not wander from
his commandementes. His action ought to be thine instruction: and art thou so
far from following him that thou treadest his law under thy feet, and castest
his words behind thee? Take heed, fear, and tremble; thou have not to deal
with man, but with God: who has left thee his law, not to dally withal, or
cunningly to deceve thy self with thine own glosses upon the same, but to be
the witness of his will, and rule of thy life. This is the same speech, and
all, that he did utter so publicly hereof; set down in writing by him self
before he uttered it: a speech, that in this present trial between us is
already justified, and shall be declared farther to be 1. Cor. 3. 12
gold, silver, precious stones, in the day of great trial. So shall the same
doctrine delivered by S. Cyprian, the sixth general council, and other worthy
men: when of the contrary side your wood, hay, stubble, shall be consumed by
fire. In the mean season your self do lay open your own corrupt affections,
and blaze your own shame sundry ways. One, in that you say, that you trust you
shall not seem to any man to wrong S. Cyprian and the rest, if you follow the
opinion of others both very godly and excellently learned, who do interpret
that text of Deuter. otherwise then he, or they do: specially in a case that
touches you so near, wherein you are to defend your self and many your good
friends from the reproach of open infamy. For you speak therein, as if the
question being of an other text, Deuteronomy. 23. 19
Thou shall not give to usury unto thy brother, D. Wilsons discourse upon
usury.
which some newer writers expound against unmerciful and cutting usury, as
they term it; not against all usury, as Austin with a number of ancient
Fathers does; an usurer should say: I trust I shall not seem to any man to
wrong S. Austin and the rest, if I follow the opinion of others, both very godly
and excellenly learned, who do expound that text otherwise then he, or they
do; specially in a case that touches me so near, wherein I am to defend my
self, and many my good friends, from great discredit and discommoditie. An
other, in that you add, that you well wot it little becomes you to say, Da
veniam Cypriane. In deed, for my self, whom in this you glance at, I must
confess I thought that it did become Praefat. these. de sacr. scrip. and eccles.
me to say, Da veniam Cypriane, upon the circumstances that I said it: which,
if it were a fault, though D. His answer to the preface of Gre. Mar.
discovery, sect. 15.
Fulke thought otherwise, but if it were, it was of error; and I will recant
it, if you confute the Set down in the end of my conference with Heart: in the
Defense of such things as Tho. Stapleton, and Gregory Martin have carped at in
my Theses.
reasons that moved me to think it did become me so to say. But you, who
wot well (by your own confession) it little becomes you to say, Da veniam
Cypriane, do thereby acknowledge, that although you are persuaded, as you
pretend, the proper natural sense of the word of God to be on your side, not
on Cyprians; in truth you are not so. For else you would think that it should
become you very well to say, Pardon me, O Cyprian: since you know, I hope, that
it became the Apostles very well to say, Act. 5. 29.
We ought rather to obey God then men. And if it do little become you to say,
Pardon me, O Cyprian, when yet you dissent from him and contradict him: then
you glozed in saying that with all humbleness you reverence his authority;
seeing, to crave Quod divinarum Scripturarum autoritati congruit in literis
Cypriani, cu^ laud eius accipio: quod autem non co^gruit, cum pace eius
respuo. August. cont. Cresco. gramma. lib. 2 cap. 32.
leave and pardon, in dissenting, is a sign of reverence. And if to use so
mild words, Pardon me, O Cyprian, it become you little: how much less, to
say, as in effect you do, Maledicta textum glossa quae vitiat bonu^. Vlyss.
red. resp. ad Mom.
It is a cursed gloss, O Cyprian, which thou make? And if unto Cyprian alone
it little becomes you to say so much: how greatly unbeseeming is it for you to
say it unto such a number, both of old, and new interpreters, besides him?
Finally, for an vpshoote, where you say that he, as a godly man, was carried
with a vehement and a perfect hatred against the detestable abuses of the
heathen spectacles in his time: you grant that the spectacles of plays set
forth by you have detestable abuses in them; since the Cothurnus est tragicus
prisca facinora carmine recensere: de parricidis and incestis horror antiquus,
expressa ad imagine^ veritatis action, replicatur Cypr. epist. 2 ad Donat.
tragedies, the playing whereof he detesteth, are such as your Ulysses; the Vt
ad scenae sales inverecundos transitum faciam, pudet refer quae dicuntur
pudet etiam accusare quae fiunt: agentium strophas, adulterorum fallacias,
mulierum impudicitias, scurriles iocos, parasitos sordidos; ipsos quoque patres
familias togatos, modo stupidos, modo obscoenos, in omnibus stolidos, certis
nominibus inverecundos. Cyprian. de spectac. cap. 5.
Comedies, as your Rivales: and so, how little care you have of being godly, who
are not only not carried with an hatred, I say not, with a vehement and perfect
hatred, against them, but also dote upon them, and write defenses of the^, I
judge you not, your own mouth judges you. As for those godly and learned
Divines, who being talked withal by you touching the true sense of the place
of Deuteronomie, did make that answer which you mention: what if they,
misliking your resolute intent, did follow the example of Michaeas the Prophet?
1. King. 22. 15.
who being asked by king Achab wheher he should go against Ramoth Gilead to
battle, or leave off; did answer him, Go up, and prosper; and the Lord shall
deliver it into the hand of the king. What if in a meriment, knowing why you
asked it, they spoke unto you, as Cassellius a lawier unto a certain Roman?
Macrob. Saturn lib. 2. cap. 6.
Of whom, when Uatinius having had stones thrown at him by the people, to whom
he was odious, did purpose to set forth a spectacle of fensers, and had gotten
the magistrates to make proclamation that no man should cast ought into the
place of spectacles saving an apple only; Cascellius being asked, whether a
pine apple were an apple, If thou mean to hurl it at Vatianus, it is, quoth
he. What if you mistook the sum of their answer, or a word therein? they
telling you perhaps that the true meaning of the place of Deuteronomie does
contain those senses which are rehearsed by you; and you misconstruing them as
if they had said that the true meaning thereof is contained in those senses
rehearsed, and so may in no case be extended farther. Of which three
conjectures (you force me to divine of them, and between them, because you
would not name the parties whom you cite, that by them selves I might learn
what they said, and why,) the last in my opinion seems most probable:
considering it is likely that godly learned men would look what had been
written upon the place by interpreters; and the interpreters, whose words,
even translated by you in a manner, are an evident token what your Divines told
you, do specify those things as meant, in such sort, that they deny not but
more might be meant; yea most of them affirm the general to be meant also.
For, of five particulars (so many you set down) Strabus, the autour of the
ordinary Gloss, has two: namely that a man Mulieris naturaliter diversus est
color, motus, incessus, vires
must not become womanish in color, gate, and so forth; nor Comam crispare,
torquere capillos: vndeApostolus, vir si comam nutrierit, ignominia est. illi.
suffer his hear to grow long, or frizill it. The other three, that he may
not put on woman's raiment, Posset intrare vir ad muliere^ sub habitu muliebri
thereby the more safely to be in wemens company, to bring about some bad
purpose; nor Quas natura sexu discreverat, discernat and vestitus.
ordinarily so to converse among men and women, against the course of natural
and civil regard; nor In sacris Veneris viri effaeminabantur. Or, as Liranus
speaks, whose words you express, portabant ornamenta and instrume^ta
mulieru^, vtpote colum, fusum and similia.
to be womanlike in the sacrifices of Uenus: these has Gulielmus Alvernus,
Bishop of Parise, and Carthusianus after him; Aquinas, and Liranus too, the
last of them. Now Strabus says not that those two things alone are meant: the
rest do say that so much more is meant then the other three, as prooveth my
assertion. For the Guliel. Pari. de fide and legib. cap. 13.
Bishop of Parise, cited and abbridged by Dionysius Carthusianus, among sundry
causes why the law of God should forbid a man to put on woman's raiment, gives
this for one, Vt occasio magna provocationi libidinis auferretur.
that a great occasion of provoking men to lust might be taken away. For Magna
provocatio libidinis viris est vestitus muliebris.
the apparel of women (says he) is a great provocation of men to lust and
leacherie: because a Vestis muliebris viro circundata vehementer refricat
memoriam and commovet imaginationem mulieris.
woman's garment being put on a man does vehemently touch and move him with
the remembrance and imagination of a woman; and Imaginatio rei desiderabilis
commovet desideriu^.
the imagination of a thing desirable does stir up the desire. The same in
Incentivum est concupiscentiae, and occasionem libidini praestat. 1a 2^.
quaest. 102. art. 6.
fewer words Aquinas does affirm. And Liranus farther, having declared what
moved him to prefer the last exposition (rehearsed by your self, though
somewhat confusely, which I was bold to mend in the recital of it, the better
here to be understood) says, that if the text be meant of common apparel,
Prohibetur hic talis vsus, vel potius abusus, quia est occasio libidinis.
then is such an use or rather abuse forbidden, because it is an occasion of
wantonness and lust. Wherein he has relation to that, whereas the Heb. CEL^
word, used in the former branch of the sentence touching men's furniture not to
be worn by women, does sometime signify common apparel, sometime armor; he
had said, that this place, he thought, the signification of armor fitted best:
induced thereunto because he had read that women in the sacrifices of Mars did
bear armor; and the reason added, for all that do so are abomination to the
Lord, might well enough agree, since matters of idolatry are commonly in the
Scriptures termed abomination. But seeing it appears not by sufficient proof
that women woare men's armor in the sacrifices of Mars, or men woare wemens
distaffes, spindles, and such like, in the sacrifices of Uenus; and the later
branch of the law forbidding a man to put on woman's Heb. SIMLAH.
raiment, does show that common apparel is meant in the former, as S. Hierome
also in the vulgar Non induetur mulier vest virili: nec vir vtetur vest
faeminea.
Latin translation has noted: it follows that Liranus rests and resolves
upon the general sense and exposition as truest. By consequence whereof the
word, abomination, must not be restrained to matters of idolatry, but taken
in his natural meaning: according to the like use thereof in like places, where
the Leui. 18. 22 and 20. 13. Deuteronomy. 23. (...).
law condemns those execrable villainies, to which this change of raiment
provokes and entiseth. Thus seeing that no one of all those interpreters, by
whom the expositions, which you rehearse, are set down, denies that the law
extends farther then your specialties, and most of them affirm it: I fear it
were a fault in me to believe you, that godly learned Divines, with whom you
talked thereof, should all avouch unto you the thing you father on them.
Howbeit, if they did, and you will needs enforce their testimony against me;
mine answer made to Cyprian, to them I must apply: The law forbidding men to
put on wemens raiment, says that all who do so are abomination to the Lord.
What? And have godly learned Divines said otherwise? Pardon me, ye godly and
learned Divines; I would believe you gladly, but that believing you I should
not believe the word of God. And I assure my self so much of their modesty,
that though you, with The preface of his discovery.
Gregory Martin, do taunt me for my presumptuous saying, Pardon me O
Cyprian: yet, since Retractat. lib. 2. cap. 18
Austin thought he might, without any disgrace unto Cyprian, allow of
Tychonius the Donatists exposition as better sitting a place of scripture, then
his did; they will not take it hardly that I prefer the judgment of Cyprian,
with Austin, and such, so many other both old and new interpreters, before
theirs in this point.

But you, to cut the cable of my cheifest anchor, (...), Chrysostom. homil. 4. de
Lazaro.
the sacred anchor, as they term it, which is, the generality of the law it
self, pronouncing all abominable who change their raiment so, betake your
self at the last to this desperate refuge, that though the proposition be a
general affirmative, All men are abomination who put on woman's apparel, yet
in your cases it suffers exception. I call this refuge desperate, because your
own handling thereof does seem to argue, that when you came unto it, you did
tread on thorns; and felt that you should be pitifully pricked, if you
stood long upon it. For when, unto the rules of law which I cited, that every
special is suspended when the general is suspended, and he who forbids
the general will not have the special practiced, you had replied that these
rules are to be understood of those generals that absolutely command, and
necessarily comprehend their specials sub potestate sua, not those which must
endure controlment as it were, and suffer exceptions to restrain their power;
you give this reason of it: For general propositions, both in Divinity, and
Law, do usually admit particular exceptions and limitations, quae derogant
generalitati: of which sort this proposition, that we have in hand, is; as
there are many mo of like nature, which you could allege (you say) to
illustrate these rules, but that they are plain to me, and you are weary
already, and have a great way yet to go, and fear that I am stark tired with
your tedious discourse. It is recorded by Appian. de bellis Parth. Plutarch.
vita Crassi.
historians that the Parthians used to fly from their enemies, and withal to
strike the^ with arrows shot backward. Whereupon Epistol. lib. 2. epist. 1.
Horace, affirming that he wrote no verses at al, when he wrote many, does
compare himself to Ipse ego qui nullos me affirmo scribere versus, Invenior
Parthis mendacior.
them, who fought most, when they pretended flight. You resemble the Parthia^s
in your Versis animosum equis Parthum. Horat. carm. lib. 1. od 19.
courageous flying: you will not seem to withdraw yourselfe, as overcome, but
as weary with killing, and having other exploits to do, and taking pity of
me. Only you differ from them, in that you shoot no arrows while you are
flying away; which else I might be afraid of, as Carm. lib. 2. od. 13.
Horace says their Miles sagittas and celere^ fuga^ Parthi.
soldiers were. For your axiom urged in manner of a proof, that general
propositions both in Divinity, and Law, do usually admit particular
exceptions; prooveth just nothing: unless peradventure you think that in good
Logic this argument will hold: Some general propositions, for the word
usually betokens some not all; some therefore do admit particular exceptions;
Ergo the proposition we have in hand does so. A shaft so unshapen without
head or feather, that although the stele, I mean the antecede^t thereof, be well
wrought, and many examples might you allege to illustrate it, if need were:
yet your self durst not as much as make a show of nocking, and drawing it, to
shoot it of with an Ergo. But I of the contrary side will so encounter this
devise of yours, that there shall no more life be left therein, then there was
in 1 Kin. 22. 35
Achab the evening after he was wounded. And that by means of this argument.
No particular exception is good against a general proposition in Divinity,
save only such as Scripture makes and warranteth. But your asseveration, that
men may put on wemens raiment in stage plays, is a particular exception not
warranted by Scripture, against the general proposition that all who do so
are abominable. Therefore men's wearing of wemens raiment on stages can not be
good in Divinity. The major of which syllogism the Law (to go no farther)
matched with Divinity by your self in this case of rules and limitations,
propositions and exceptions, will approove unto you. For if against a general
rule and proposition, as for example sake, that D. de just. and iure. lib. 10.
Cic. de Offic. lib 1.
right ought always to be done, a man of Cic. de Offi. lib. 3. Sueto. Iulio
Caes. cap. 30.
Caesar's mind should by way of exception and limitation say, that it ought in
deed, save when a kingdom may be gotten by doing injury and wrong: must
we allow this exception? No. And why? Because it is not warranted by any text
of Law. Hence is it that In si. 11. D. de in ius vocando.
Bartolus, and Glossa communis after him, affirming absolutely that where the
law distinguishes not, we may not distinguish, do show that they mean this,
not of any one law, but of the whole body, to weete, that Vbi lex non
distinguit, nos non debemus distinguere, nisi illa lex distinguatur per aliam.
we may not distinguish upon a law, unless that law by some other law be so
distinguished. Likewise, in Divinity, if against the doctrine of Psalm 106. 3.
doing righteousness at all times (to press the same example) a woman like 1.
Kin. 21. 8.
Iezabel, or men like the Elders and Governors, whom she wrote to, should say
that general rules may admit exceptions, and righteousness is requisite to be
done at all times, save when land may be gotten by suborning false witnesses,
or a king pleased by shedding innocent blood: this might be very justly called
a Maledicta textum glossa quae vitiat bonum.
cursed gloss, because the Scripture does not teach in any place that it is
lawful to do evil for advantage, or gratifying of Princes. Neither could the
2. Tim. 3. 17
Apostle rightly praise the Scripture, as serving to furnish a man of God
perfitly unto all good works, if a work therein commanded or forbidden
generally, as good or naught, were contrariwise abominable or allowable in
particulars not declared by Scripture. Which moved S. Austin, among lessons
given for the right expounding thereof, to make this one, that De doctr. Christ.
lib. 3. cap 28.
doutfull points of Scripture ought to be cleared by the Scripture it self,
because lib. 2. cap. 9
all such things as touch faith and manners are set down plainly in the
Scripture. True it is therefore that no particular exception, in Divinity, may
be admitted against a general proposition, unless the Scripture warrant it:
which was the first part of my syllogism. The next, that your assertion
touching men's wearing of wemens raiment in stage plays, is a particular
exception not warranted by Scripture against a general proposition: must
needs be granted also. Specially by you: who, having talked thereof with
Divines, both many, and excellently learned, perceive that none of them could
bring forth any warrant out of Scripture for it. Wherefore, the conclusion,
against your stage-play-wemen, may cause both them and you to dye your faces
with that color, which a Diog. Lae^rt. in Diogene.
Philosopher termed well (...).
the color of virtue: and I pray God it do.

So the commandment, that a man shall not put on woman's raiment, being prooved
to reach unto all in general, even such, as for the saving of honor, wealth,
or life, do it, much more whom nothing moves thereto but a playing humor: it
follows to be sifted whether there be truth and weight in that you add, that
your players did not wear wemens raiment. A thing avouched by you in like sort
almost, as if 1 Kin. 22. 34
Achab being wounded to death with an arrow sticking in his side, should have
said, I am not hurt. But this, which, if he had brought reason to persuade
men, he might have seemed desirous to be mad with reason, you labor to
confirm, saying that you may not in deed be said at all to wear wemens
apparel, because wearing implies a custom and a common use of so doing:
whereas you do it for an hour, or two, or three, to represent an others
person, by one that is openly known to be as he is in deed. For answer
whereunto, first, passing over your idle addition concerning the To represent
an others person.
end and By one yt is openly known to be as he is in deed.
circumstance of your using it; which I term idle, because if men should use
it still to whatsoever end, and openly known to be the same they are, as
Suet. in Ner. cap. 28.
Sporus was, they may indeed be said to wear it, you will grant: but first
if it be only for an hour, or two, or three, that you do it; where are your
women dressed? by whom? at what time? all at the same moment they come upon the
stage? and has none been dressed at noone, to play at night? and has it not
been toward midnight, ere some plays ended? Next, if it be true, that wearing
implies a custom and a common use of so doing: then belike it may not be
said that Nero the Emperor did ever wear any garment. For Nullam vestem bis
induit.
he did never put on any garment twice, as Nero. ca. 30
Suetonius writes: and therefore had no custom and common use of any.
Furthermore, suppose that you might not be said to wear wemens apparel; yet
are you not the nearer to that which you intend: since the Scripture says, that
a man shall not put on woman's raiment, and you do put it on (I trow) when you
play, whether you wear it, or no. Finally, the Prophets Heb. jilbosch
word, betokening this in the original text, is the very same with that
whereby 1 Samuel 17. 38
the armor of Saul is described to have been put on David. Now if David who
put off Saul's armor by and by, within half an hour, a quarter, or less
much; yet had it put on, after the phrase of Scripture: may it not be said,
that they, who went in wemens raiment certain hours, did that which Scripture
speaks of, English it as you list, put on, or wear such raiment? Alas, Quam
miserum est id negare no^ posse quod sit turpissimum co^fiteri?
in how miserable plight is he, says Phillipp. 2.
Tullie, who can not deny that, which to confess it is most shameful? I, with
a little change of his sentence, must lament your case, who dare not confess
that which to deny it is most shameful. For how many hundreds are there of
eyewitnesses, that your Euryclea, Melantho, Penelope, Phoedra, Nais, others,
did wear wemens raiment? How many did observe, and with mislike have
mentioned, that Penelopes maids did not only wear it, but also sat in it
among true women in deed, longer then David woare Saul's armor? neither were
more known to them to be men, then Achilles was at first to Deidamia; until
they suspected it, seeing them entreated by the wooers to rise and danse upon
the stage. I wish there had not been so bad a token to convince you; nor so
many beholders to testify thereof: though I am glad withal that they had such
mislike of the thing testified. And this commodity by it besides, that I might
fear else, least you, who did before deny that men playing on your stage, are
stage players; and do deny here that the players of wemens parts wear wemens
raiment; would at length deny that you had any plays at all; and so accuse me
of slaundering your friends for being on the stage, when they were in their
studies.

The third head of reasons, knit up under the title of losing time in Vlys^
^ed. (...). (...) Mom.
your speech, but containing loss of better things then time, I declared the
strength of, chiefly by this argument. To imitate and resemble wantonness,
scurrilitie, impude^cie, drunkenness, or any other misbehaviour, is a thing
unlawful: But sundry misbehaviours were imitated and resembled by Penelopes
wooers, her maids, Rivales, mariners, Phaedra, the Nurse, the Nymph, and
others in the playing of your tragedies and comedy: The playing therefore of
them is to be misliked. Whereagainst you say not much for the mayor. Only,
for as much as I, beside a number both of divine autorities, and humane,
avouching it, alleged your own consent too, in that you affirm that Virile
non est faeminae mores sequi.
it beseems not men to follow wemens manners: you say your meaning was, that it
does not beseem them to follow wemens manners in the common course of life, to
the perverting of the law of nature, honesty, and comelines; or for any evil
purpose; yet a boy, by way of representation only, may, not indecently,
imitate may denlie or womanly demeanor. Which answer though it seems to
deny your approoving of my reproof in part, about young men's imitating of the
manners of women: yet the greatest part thereof does it approve. For I found
most fault with imitating the manners of strumpets and bawdes, Melantho,
Phaedra, the Nurse: and, I trust, you will not say that the demeanor of such
vnmaidenly maidens, and vnwemenly women, is either maidenly or womanly. But
whatsoever you say touching your own sentence, and after your common course of
distinguishing interpret it as meant in the common course of life, to the
perverting of the law of nature, honesty and comelines, or for any evil
purpose: it suffices me, that you durst not apply these distinctions to the
Scriptures, Fathers, or foreign writers, by which I confirmed the major of mine
argument and you acknowledge it to be truly confirmed. The minor is the hedge,
whereat, as the lowest, you were in hope that you might leap over with less
difficulty. And in this confidence you ask What proportion there is between
those things, which I enlarge in my mayor; and those things which in
particular application against you, are used in my minor? To the which question
I will make no answer, till you have considered and told me what proportion
there is between an Elephant, and Maximinus the Emperor. But the minor of mine
argument, whereto I must hold you, and not give you leave thus to run at
riott upon every wandering conceit of proportions; the minor of mine argument, I
say, is most certain, and true, in every branch thereof. Though neither is
your cunning and art, by the way, to be passed over, that whereas I having in
general disclosed the hurt of amatorie dansing, did note in particular your
wooers dansing with their minions: you reply that they dansed only two solemn
measures, without any lighter galliard; and hereupon you ask me, What Herod
could be inflamed? What Propertius ravished? what flame of lust kindled thereby
in men's hearts? what wounds of love imprinted? whose senses could be moved,
or affections delited more then ought to be, or may honestly be? What enemies
of chastity made by this sight? what strong or constant heart vanquished; nay,
what reed shaken thereby? What so much as flax or towe set on fire? Great
cry, and little wool: as who say that I had applied all these things to
dansing alone; and not diverse of them to amatorie kissing, amatorie embracing,
and amatorie pangs expressed in most effectual sort, together with it. Or, as
who say farther, that none could be touched with any spark of lust by seeing
the supposed gentlewemen danse so small a time, so gravely with galant lusty
yoonkers; because you, a mavelous indifferent judge, and well seen in
things of this quality, do pronounce that none could. Divine. instit. lib. 3.
cap. 28
Lactantius, controlling a sentence, wherein De Offi. li. 2
Tullie had magnified the force of fortune, and given edge thereto with an
interrogatio^, Quis. inquit, nescit? Ego vero nescio.
Who knows not that Fortune is of great force both ways, either to
prosperity, or to adversity? forsooth, says he, I know it not. In like
sort they whose judgment herein is so much sounder, less daseled with
affection and prejudice, then yours, as in matters touching God and true
Religion, Lactantius was then Tullies, may answer your demaundes, that many
Herod's might be inflamed, many a Propertius ravished thereby. For your
partiality and weakness of sight does bewray it self, in that, where I had
noted how your new Nymph, by lively expressing of amorous panges, brought
fuel enough to heat and melt a heart of ice or snow: you reply, that she
has been worse reported of to me a great deal, then she did deserve, as I
and the world shall one day see. Now she was so reported of to me by
Lactantius, I mean, a man whose word I offer you no wrong if I believe before
yours; a man, that deserves to be as well esteemed of, as he, for sundry
causes, and for some, better, a man, who did report it, not of surmise, but of
knowledge; not of hearsay, but of sight; not of that which might be, but
which had happened in senses and affections moved and tickled with it. And the
thing which the world and I should one day see, whereby your meaning showed in
the words ensuing, is, that she did profer honest, lawful, virtuous,
mariage-meaning love, as Panniculus Hippolyto Se necae tragaediae assutus
Append Meleagr.
her speech committed now to print declares; does not prove that he reported
worse a great deal to me of her expressing those panges, then she deserved.
For that very Iugalem pariter ineamus torum Libamina ad te prima seruatae
affero Famae, and iuventae: tu pariter ad me tua Affer; and vterque carpas
vtriusque hanc rosam Prima^ integramque.
action, which she did insinuate her self to be Miserere amorem Naidis fassae
gravem, Nunquamque fassurae, nisi hanc furor vltimus vocem expulisset.
enraged and Sed vror intus, fateor.
burn with desire of, is Heb. 13. 4. (...).
honest, and lawful, belonging unto virtuous and mariage-meaning love. Yet if
one should say, that the open doing of it, like a Dio Lae^r. in Hipparchia.
(...)
Cynicke, or using of sweet words and gestures tending to it, like Xen.
convi^.
Bacchus and Ariadne, can not shake a reed, much less surprise or wound a
strong and constant heart: he might seem unworthy to be talked withal by
men of ingenuous modesty and judgment. Wherefore since the profer of nothing
else but honest and mariage-meaning love, made in words only by a hansom boy
apparelled like a woman did ravish a Propertius, and inflame an Herod;
notwithstanding you thought that it could not possibly work any such effect,
as I and the world also should perceive: your thick interrogations wherewith
you come upon me, as with so many foines and pricks of a sword, to make me
yield that youths attired in wemens raiment, and dansing a few solemn
measures like Salust. conjurat. Cai.
Sempronia, can not set flax on fire; in show they do brave it, as if no way
but one; in deed they draw not so much blood, as a needle would. But be it as
be may, for the forcible operation and working of the poison, which neither I
affirmed to be altogether so quick in every branch of the minor, concerning
your players, as in some alleged for proof of the mayor; nor do you
rightly judge of, who acknowledging it to be as poison in the major for bad
effects of such plays, would have it triacle in the minor for good effects
of yours: the minor of mine argument, as I said, is certain and true in every
branch thereof. One alone, amongst all that I specified, you take exception
at; which is the Nymphs part. And therein I mistook a circumstance, I grant.
How be it I must tell you withal that I mistook it so, and such a
circumstance, that the righting of it does not only not diminish the
certainty and truth of my minor, but rather much increases it. For when the
grave and godly man, whom I spoke of, had showed me his mislike of amorousnes
and drunke^nes expressed in your plays; and namely, for the former, had noted
the mischief of the representing those pangs so effectually by the Nymph, a new
part inserted into Seneca: I not being farther inquisitiue thereof, did think
that you supposing the person of a bawd was not set forth lively and
skilfully enough by Seneca in Phaedras Nurse, had brought in a Nymph to
persuade Hippolytus that which the Nurse could not; and thereupon I mentioned
the Nurses and the Nymphs bawderie. Now, by your publishing of that which you
inserted, I perceave you added a new bawd in deed, but a man bawd, Pandarus;
and gave the Nymph an other part almost as shameful: so that, I confess, I
was, through some negligence, doubly overseene; first, in naming Titius, or
rather Titia, for Seius; again, in imagining one naughty part added by you
unto Seneca, whereas you added two. For, whatsoever you say of your Nymphs
wooing and profer to Hippolytus: S. De Abrah. patr. lib. 1. cap. ult.
Ambrose, on the Genesis 24. 51
Scripture touching Rebeccas spousals, says that a woman should give unto her
parents the choice of her husband, Ne appetentiae procatioris aestimetur author.
least she be reputed too malapert and wanton, if she take upon her to make
her own choice: Expetita enim magis debet videri^ a viro, quam ipsa virum
expetisse.
for she must rather seem to be desired by a man, then to desire a man her
self. And you should have noted, that Epist. de colloquioru vtil. ad lectorem.
Erasmus words, alleged by your self to justify the Nymphs action, are, Si
res honesta est matrimonium, and procum agere honestum est. Procum agere, he
says, of the masculine gender; not of the feminine, Procam. A thing, from
allowing whereof he was so far; much more from terming them tetrica ingenia
and ab omnibus Gratiis aliena, who do disallow it; though you, not contented
to adioyne this also, enlarge it with comparison of your speech to Momus; as if
Erasmus likewise blamed us for Quibus impudicum videtur quicquid amicu^ est ac
festiru^.
accounting all matters touching love, and pleasant mirth, unchaste, iumpe as
your self do for Qui turpe, laetum, ludicrum, petulans vocat.
calling that dishonest and wanton, which is merry and light: but Erasmus was so
far from allowing a maid to be a wooer, or wooesse, what shall I name it?
that in express words Christiani matrimon. institut.
he disalloweth it as Turpe non est juvenibus ambire sponsam, quod vir ginibus
sit indecorum.
unseemly. By the judgment therefore of your own witness it was a
misbehauiour in Nais to be wooing. What? And was it not a misbehaviour also in
her to be railing? to say unto Hippolytus, that his mother was a Hirta duro
caucasi tigris jugo.
tiger, his father was a Aliquis taurus indomitus.
bull, him self a Superbe, dure, crudelis. Pensabit ista Nemesis, and pe^set
precor. Aspicrat altum barbari fastum viri. Vlciscere Dia: pessimo leto occubet.
proud, a cruel, a barbarous savage man? to banne him? to curse him? to wish
him the most horrible kind of death that might be? and all because he would not
leave his lawful liberty to satisfy her lust? Or would your Erasmus have
reprooved me as Quid facias istis ingeniis tetricis, and ab omnibus gratiis
alienis?
rigorous, to say no more, for blaming this in a maiden; and him self have
liked it, Christ. matrim institut.
who misliked in men that they feign and spread lewd reports of such as yield
not to their wooing? Truly, for mine own part, albeit Nais had not
transgressed any duty with so foul language, and might without impeachment
of maidenly modesty, have sued to be Hippolytus bedfellow: yet should I have
thought it a thing unbeseeming a youth of tender years to be inured, and
taught, how he may by amorous speeches, looks, and gestures, woo for a
husband, or a wife. But seeing she did that which can not be cleared of
wantonness and scurrilitie: my minor (notwithstanding the circumstance I
mistook) is most true and certame for the branch concerning her. Yea, it is as
certain and true, with alteration of the name only, even for the very crime
too wherewith I charged her in steed of her brother Pandarus: that is to say,
for bawderie. Which word why you should censure by terming it the broad name
of bawderie, I know not: since the Latin words, leno, and lena, have none in
our English correspondent to them (for ought that I know) but a bawd; and
lenocinium, bawderie. How comes it to pass then that my use of the English
name should be faulty: where Pannic. Senecae assut.
you do use the O blanda vox, turpisque lenonu^ fide^.
Latin without fault, I trust, and that in the person of modest, chaste,
Hippolytus? The truth is that I should have spoken brother, so to term it, and
used words of greater eagernes and sharpnes. For his practice is bawderie, who
entiseth any to single fornication. What is it farther to adultery? What
farther yet, to incest? And to do this simply, as incestuous 2 Sa^. 13. 11.
Amnon did, were abominable. What, to do it in such sort, as the Nunc luxus
rape; etc. Hippol. act. 2
Nurse in Seneca? but chiefly as your Amoris expers forma cui prodest nitens?
and, Nata fit cervo patri conjux: and vtero dama quein peperit, subit. Quanquam
feruntur esse quoque gentes, vbi Et nata patri nubit, and nato parens; Et
juncta crescit vinculo pietas duplo. Pannic. assut. Sen. act. 2.
Pandarus? My speech was too minsing, when I named bawderie. If I had termed it
most filthy beastly bawderie, my words had been brother, though not broad
enough yet. But to return to mine argument, the mayor and the minor being
thus confirmed, the conclusion follows necessarily, and should have been
granted by you in my judgment.

So many heads, so many wits: your fancy lead you an other way. And
therefore, according to the young Scholars axiom, that always when both the
praemisses are true, the conclusion must be denied: You deny that the playing
of your tragedies and comedy is to be misliked and censured as unlawful. To
the fine persuading whereof you take advantage by somewhat that I said: and the
point of my sword, which pearceth through the heart of your defense of plays,
you strive (though in vain, for want of strength) to draw out, and turn
against my self. For, because I amplified the unlawfulness of the thing by the
inconvenience and hurt which it breeds, principally to the actors, in whom
the earnest care of lively representing the lewd demeanor of bad persons
does work a great impression of waxing like unto them; next, to the
spectators, whose manners are corrupted by seeing and hearing such matters so
expressed: you encounter me herein with two disputes; one, that neither the
spectators of your plays, nor the actors, could receve any hurt thereby; an
other, that no evil affections could be stirred up thereby, but rather good.
Which points it is a world to see how you struggle to prove by shows of
reason; and it will not fadge. Besides, were they prooved: my conclusion
stands nevertheless entier, because neither of them does touch a hear of
the praemisses. The shows of reason first, whereby you would prove that
neither the spectators, nor actors could receue any hurt by your plays, are
these; that for your penning you are base and mean, as I see, (so you tell
me) and specially for womanly behavior you were so careless, that when one
of your actors should have made courtsie like a woman, he made a leg like a
man; and your spectators could not greatly charge your actors with any such
diligence in meditation and care to imprint any passions. Of which three
assertions the last is already disprooved in part by Nais: and your self,
qualifying it with the word greatly, declare that in your conscience your
actors might be charged with earnest meditation and care to imprint passions,
though not greatly charged. The midst, of one actor forgetting his woman
hoode, does no more argue that you were earelesse for womanly behavior, and
for other also, but specially for womanly: then the oversight of a Philostrat.
vit. sophistar. in Polem:
Greek stage player, who, when he said, O God, pointed to the ground; when he
said, O earth, cast up his hand to heaven ward, does argue that the Romans,
Roscius, Aesopus, but specially the Greeks, were careless for seemly gesture
on the stage. The foremost, like the rest; and worthy to be their ringleader
for untruth, or trifling. For neither do I see, that in your penning you are
base and mean, if you speak of all, and comprise loue-speeches too, as
Hippolyte nescis quod fugis vitae bonum: Hippolyte, nescis. Sed vror intus.
Libamin^ prima. Rosam primam. Mutua vramur face. O quam juvaret igne tam
pulchro mori! and quae sequuntur
that of Nais: neither if you were so, is it any proof that you could not
hurt; for base and mean writers may utter evil speeches, and 1. Cor. 15. 33
evil speeches corrupt good manners: and, beside your own, you played Seneca
too, whose penning neither Poetices li. 6. cap. 6.
Scaliger, nor Animadvers. in tragae. Sen.
Lipsius, nor Vlyss. red. prolog. and epilog.
your self, do vilify as base; so that the very style of somewhat, which you
played, might work strong impressions by your own verdict. Wherefore when of
those three assertions you infer, that neither the spectators, nor actors,
could receive any hurt by your plays: you dispute in like sort, as if to
control Nero. ca. 38.
Suetonius and Annal. li. 15
Tacitus, who say, that, when Rome was burnt in Neros time, some did of purpose
fire it, one should reason thus: The stuff which those incendiaries did use,
was Stupa, taedaque. Sueton. Faces. Tacit.
towe and firebrands scarce kindled, as you see: and specially for certain of
them, who brought that stuff, they were so careless of setting fire on
houses, that Vt raptus licentius exercerent. Tacit. Dio Xiphili. epit.
they fell to pillage, carrying things away out of houses unburned; and such as
they robbed and spoiled with sword and fire could not greatly charge them with
any such diligence in pains and care to burn the city: and so neither the
city suffered hurt by them, nor they did any hurt. Strange, that Suetonius and
Tacitus should say the contrary. But sometimes good Homer him self will fall
a slumbering. Now as you have prooved thus, that neither actors nor spectators
could receive hurt by your plays: semblably you prove that no evil
affections could be stirred up thereby, but rather good. For in Ulysse reduce
(say you) who did not love tho fidelity of Eumaeus; and Philaetius, toward
their master; and hate the contrary in Melanthius? who was not moved to
compassion to see Ulysses, a great Lord, driven so hardly, as that he was
feign to be a beggar in his own house? who did not wish him well, and all ill
to the wooers; and think them woorthily slain for their bloody purpose
against Telemachus, and other dissolute behavior, not so much expressed on the
stage, as imagined to be done within? And so you go forward with a troop of
questions, urging it as certain that all your spectators did admire the
constancy of Penelope, and dispraise the lightness and bad nature of Melantho,
and think her justly hanged for it; all did praise the patience, wisdom and
secrecy of Ulysses, and Telemachus his son; all were glad to see Ulysses
restored to his wife; and goods, and his mortal enemies overthrown and
punished: again, that in Rivates, all might be delited to see the fond
behavior of country-wooing, expressed by civil men, or the vanity of a
bragging soldier; all might detest drunkenness by seeing the deformity of
drunken mariners actions: that in Hippolytus likewise all young men did wish
them selves to be as chaste as Hippolytus was; all the spectators detested the
love of Phoedra; approved the grave counsel of the Nurse to her in secret;
none of them could be the worse for her wooing Hippolytus in so general
terms; all did wish that Theseus had not been so credulous; and were sorry for
the cruel death of Hippolytus. The most of which things you affirm they did,
not meaning to pronounce of their secret thoughts, but that your plays were
naturally to work these effects: as appears by that in some of the
branches you say that the spectators might do so, or so; yea, could not be the
worse. And the same appears farther, by that you add, that these and such
like passions were, or might be moved in your plays, without hurt, at the
least, to any man: as in other tragedies, who does not hate (say you) the
fury of Medea; the revenge of Atreus; the treason of Clytaemnestra, and
Aegysthus; and the cruelty of Nero? Contrariwise who does not pity the rage,
and death of Hercules; the calamity of Hecuba and her children; the infortunat
valor of Oedipus; the murder of Agamemnon; the banishment of Octavia; and such
like? You take your self therefore hereby to have prooved that no evil
affections could be stirred up by your plays in any: at the least, no evil;
and many good perhaps. But why in the particular point touching Hippolytus, in
which it most behooved you (because of your new piece of Pandarus and Nais) to
show that good affections might be stirred up by his part in all, and no evil
in any: Why demanded you, what young man did not wish himself to be as chaste,
as Hippolytus was, if he were not so already? Why asked you not generally, as
in the rest, who did not? was it because you thought, that some elder men did
not wish them selves as chaste, as he was: but were stirred up by Phaedras
pangs, and Pandarus reasons, to wish the like motion had been made to them? Or,
that any maidens were upon the stage, who could have been contented to become
unchaste in yielding to Hippolytus that which he would not grant to Nais Amore
ne^pe Thesei casto furis? Sen. Hippolyt.
chastely? As for the young men of our University who were present at it, I am
heartily glad if they were so minded: and do reap my self the greater comfort
of it, the more Oratione d^odecima.
I have commended his example to them. But if they wished so, when they saw
your play: it came more of somewhat which they brought thither, then which they
found there. For, by your instruction, the death of Hippolytus should have
served to teach them, that they must never deny unto a Nais, or Phaedra, such
requests: as Epilog. in Hippoly. Sen.
your self tell them, on speech concerning women; Quas ne quis vnquam spernere
dehinc audeat, Hippolytus ecce horribile documentum dedit; Impune temnat nemo
terrestres Deas. And what if all, who were present, not the young men only, did
admire the constancy of Penelope? Could no evil affection be therefore
stirred in any by seeing a boy play so chaste a part? Happy would Lucretia then
have thought her self. For she was not inferior in chastity to Penelope:
and when Tarquin saw her, he saw N^ s^a ded^am lanae inter Incub^a^tes
ancillas. ^ivi ^b. 1.
her employed as a Prove. 31. 10
most virtuous woman. Yet, for all the wonderment he had of her virtue: he was
more inflamed with love of her beauty. Yea, Tarqum^ mala libido Lucretiae
pervim stuprandae capit: tum forma, tum spectata castitas incitat.
the very sight of her chaste behavior stirred up his wicked lust. Moreover, if
Ulysses begging in his own house, did move all the spectators to have
compassion of him, and thereby grew no hurt to them: yet into the actor might
there grow some hurt by acquainting him self with hypocritical faining of
Vlyss. red. act. 1. and 3.
lies, Act. 2. and 3.
hunger, beggerie, Act. 2. and sequentibus.
wrath, and shedding of blood. As Plutarc. vit. Ciceronis.
Aesopus (...).
playing the part of Atreus in a tragedy (one of your examples of passions
moved, without hurt, at the least, to any man) grew to such a rage by thinking
and advising how he might wreake his anger, and be revenged on Thyestes; that
with (...)
his Mace royal he struck one of the servants running by, and slew him. And
beside this hurt that possibly might grow, there did grow the suffering of such
things at Melanthius and Antinous hands, or Vlyssem calce ferit.
one of their heels rather, as a At ego infelix neque ridiculus esse, neque
plagas pat^ possum. Ter. Eunucho
poor wretch in Terence thought too contumelious and base for him to suffer;
and a Nisi qui colaphos perpeti potis parasitus, frangique aulas in caput.
Plaut. Captiv.
Parasite in Plautus counted a piece of his trade. Which reproachful patience
if you think, I say not, that all who saw it, praised it (in saying so you
blemish your spectators much;) but, that is was no hurt unto your actor of
Ulysses, because (as you distinguished on Mamercoru^ alapas.
Iuuenals words thereof) he is a poor Scholar: you are not of Faciem
contumeliis alaparum sic obijcit, quasi de praecepto Domini ludat. Docet
scilicet and Diabolus verberandam maxillam patienter offerre. Tert. de spectac.
cap. 23.
Tertullians, and (...). Gregor. Naz. orat. in laud. Basilii Magni.
Nazianzenes mind, who note it for a stain in Scenici. Tert. ibid. cap. 22.
(...). Grego. Naz.
what soever players, even in rascal Heathens; how much more would they, if
not in Scholars, yet in Christians, whom Saint Paul exhorts to Phil. 4. 9.
do only those things which vers^ 8. (...).
adorn and set them out with coomly gravitie? Now, if some might be the worse
for beholding or playing of the best parts, the parts of Ulysses, and
Penelope: what harm might they receive by the parts of the Wooers; of
Melanthius, of Melantho, of a bragging soldier, of the drunken mariners, of
the Nurse, of Phoedra? In some of which number your general propositions, that
all the spectators must needs be moved thus or thus thereby, are untrue. In
the rest, nay, in these too, manifest is the weakness of your particular
conclusions, that because good thoughts might be stirred up in all the
spectators by this or that part, therefore those parts could hurt no man.
Besides, if by those parts no hurt could come to any, yet might there much by
other which here you mention not: and so you come short of your conclusion
general, that no hurt could come to any by the passions that were moved in
your plays. Your general propositions do fail in the women: of whom you
speak in such sort, that as 1. Tim. 1. 1^.
some by putting away a good conscience, made shipwreck of their faith: so it
may be feared that you, by putting truth and singlenes away, will hazard the
shipwreck of common sense and reason. For when married women do committ
adultery, all are not displeased with their lightness and bad nature, nor
think them worthy of death for it. David had an other opinion of Bathseba,
in the 2. Sa^. 11. 27
sacred story; the fool in the Prove. 7. 22.
Proverbes, of the strange woman; the Trojans, in Vly. red prolog. and epilo.
your Homers, Iliad. lib. 3.
Ilias, of Helena: and in his Odyss. lib. 8.
Odyssea, the supposed Gods, that is to say, great persons, specially Mercury,
thought otherwise of Uenus. How can it be then, that all should not only
dispraise the bad nature and lightness of Melantho, an unmarried harlot, but also
account her justly hanged for it? whom it is more likely that some would have
stepped forth to beg from the gallows, at least the loving wooer, who had
said unto her; Pulcherrim^ Melantho.
O most fair Melantho, Dulcis Melantho. Vlyss. red. act 3.
O sweet Melantho; if he had thought that she should have been hanged in
earnest. Like probability has it, that all would approove the Nurses grave
counsel given to Phoedra in secret: when the counsel given openly to men, by
the 2. Kin. 17. 13
Prophets, by the Act. 2. 40. and 13. 50. and 17. 30.
Apostles, yea, by Matt. 23. 37.
Christ him self, wherewith this So players are termed in Greek writers
commonly; sometime in Latin also. And parhaps dissemblers in faith and
religion had that name by a metaphor drawn from the stage: as if they were
playing other men's persons.
hypocrites counsel deserves not for gravitie to be named the same day, was
not approved by all. As for that concerning Phoedra you demand; who could be
the worse for her wooing Hippolytus in so general terms: ask Ael Spar^in
Ant. Ca^callo.
Caracallus the Emperor; in whose sight when his stepmother Iulia, being mad
with the same love to him-ward, that Phoedra to Hippolytus, did uncover and
make bare, as it were through negligence, the most of her body, his heart
conceived fire straight, Vellem, si lic^et.
his tongue disclosed it; and by her wooing of him Si libet, licet. An nescis ^e
imperatorem ^se; and leges dare, non accipere?
in more general terms, then Phoedra wooed Hippolytus, his consent was won
to her incestuous lust. But of all absurd speeches in this matter, that may
bear the bell, that having asked who could be the worse for her wooing
Hippolytus in so general terms, you infer thereon: The drift whereof if it
had been to procure an honest honorable marriage, as it was covertlie to allure
him to incest, he might very well have listened to it. As if one of them, unto
whom Prove. 1. 14.
Solomon attributes this speech, Cast in thy lot among us, we will all have
one purse, should say that none could be the worse for his entising in so
general terms: the drift whereof if it had been to draw men to lawful war
against enemies, as it was to unlawful spoiling of the innocent, they might
very well have listened to it. Your particular conclusions do fail both in the
women (for a surplusage of your former default concerning them) and in the men
also. For although Melanthos lightness and bad nature had been dispraised by
all: yet some might be corrupted by Melanthos loosenes and Domina Penelope sibi
Dum nescio qua^ gloriam captat leve^, Quot illa noctes perdidit fle^do bonas?
Mome^ta pulchri corporis spolium auferunt, Fragilisque res est forma: dum
licet, vtere, and Arce quu^ Dana^ procos Arceret alta, quum fores clausae
vndique In imbre venit Iuppiter tande^ aureo, Praedam que victor abstulit:
nulla aureo Resistet imbri: ferreas aurum trabes, Nedum puellas fra^git ac
sternit solo
bad lascivious talk, unless Saint 1. Cor. 15. 33
Paul erred. And the grave counsel given unto Phoedra by the Nurse in secret,
might hurt unwary lovely youths, as does a scorpion, with the Contemn
famam: fama vix vero favet, Pejus me renti melior, and pejor bono
rail thereof. And Phoedras general terms might be as 2. Sam. 20. 9
Ioabs right hand, wherewith he took Amasa by the beard to kiss him: when her
special drift being no more covered the^ Ioabs sword was, might in the mean
season wound Amasa to death, and shed his bowels to the ground. The same is
apparent in the scurrilitie of Melanthius, the lewd or fond tricks of the
wooers, the vanity of the bragging soldier, the beastlines of the drunken
mariners. For Politicor. lib. 7. cap. vlt.
Aristotle wishing a law to be made in all well ordered cities, that (...) he
says, meaning such speeches (used to be expressed in that kind of verse) as
there are a number uttered by Antinous, Eruymachus, with the like, in your
Ulysses redux, and commonly in all tragedies. Aristot. de poet.
young men should neither see tragedy played, nor Comedy, until in riper
years they be past danger of being hurt thereby, groundeth his advise on
reason and experience; because things which young men receave, do stick fast
by them: and therefore since principal care ought to be taken that they may
prove virtuous, (...).
they should be kept from hearing any ill speeches, and seeing any ill deeds;
chiefly such deeds and speeches, as are lewd or hateful. So that, where you
tell us in defense of the spectacle of your drunken mariners, that it was not
possible that any man should be provoked to drunkenness thereby: albeit this
were true, whereof yet I doubt, or rather I dout not, considering that many are
overprone to follow any vice or evil, which they see or hear, as an Sir.
Thomas Eliot in the Governor, lib. 1. cap. 4. and 6.
autour praised by your self observes out of daily experience in children
swearing great oaths, and speaking lascivious and unclean words by such
example of other; but if it were true, there might nevertheless a deaw of that
poison, which Aristotle mentions, infect some tender buddes, and anoy their
fruit by the drunken songs, by the drunken speeches, by the drunken gestures of
those drunken beasts. The greater is your fault, who say, the Lacedaemonians
are commended for causing their slaves, being drunk in deed, to be brought
before their children, that they seeing the beastly usage of such men, might
the more loath that vice: but you much better expressing the same intent, not
with drunken, but with sober men, counterfeiting such unseemly manners, are
the less therefore to be reprehended. Wherein how overthwarthly you affirm
your selves to have done much better then the Lacedaemonians, whose fact is
commended; and yet conclude that you are the less therefore to be reprehended,
as if your conscience told you that either your fact is not like to theirs, or
has some notable difference whereby it is made worse and worthy of reproof,
though of the less reproof, the liker it is to theirs in part: we shall the
more easily perceive, if we consider how the commender of it (why signified
you not his name, or place?) Plutarch, Antiq. Lacedaemon^or. institut.
does likewise by and by thereupon commend them for that (...).
they neither heard Comedy nor Tragedy, least they should in earnest, or
jest, lend ear to those who gain said the laws. For hereby I gather, that
they did not purposely make their slaves drunken; against Xenophon. de repub.
Lacedaem.
their laws had that been: but (...) Pl^tar. says, and not, (...).
when the slaves were drunk, they turned the example to their childrens
benefit, that, by seeing swine wallowing in the mire of vomit, and so forth,
they might detest dru^kennes. As with us when thieves are hanged, or hoores
carted, we show them to our children, to breed a detestation of theft and
hoordome in them. Whereupon if Seius should say, it were much better that true
men should feign them selves to be thieves, display some theevish pranke of
theirs upon a stage, and seem to be hanged for it; or that chaste maidens and
young men should cou^terfeit the misdemeanour of hoores and knaves, and openly
representing the filthy act of their uncleanness, be taken in it, and putt to
shame: your self, I am persuaded, would judge his better to be worse; at
least in the latter point of knaves and hoores, because the shame, that
lights on the^ after the fact done, may profit the beholders; but the doing
of it, and of things tending to it, has turpitude that may corrupt them. Which
censure if you will apply to your fact compared with the example of the
Lacedaemonians, you may see their drunken slaves do little help to justify
your mariners: because the (...).
rotton or stinking talk (as Ephe. 4. 29.
Scripture terms it) which your mariners used before and at their quaffing,
would not have been suffered among the Lacedaemonians to be soong or said in
their childrens hearing, no not by enterlude-players. Neither have you greater
reason to commend and extol the worthy play-felowes of your mariners by
Catos name and credit, in that you ask; What Cato might not be delited to see
the fond behavior of Country-wooing expressed by civil men, or the vanity of
a bragging soldier? For Cato, not the younger, whose Stoicall austeritie Orat
pro Muraen.
Tullie finds fault with, but whom without such note De senect.
he prayseth, the elder, Plutar. vita Caton. majo^s.
did put out of the number of Senators one Manilius, because in the day time
he had kissed his wife in his daughters sight: and him self took no less
heed of speaking filthy words in his sons presence, then he would have done
in presence of the Uestall virgins; nor ever would enter into the bathe with
him, least his son should see him naked. And can you think that any of this
man's disposition, what delight soever him self might have taken in that which
could not taint his gravitie and constancy, would have been delited, delited?
nay, contented to behold the filth of your country-wooers in the mouths and
actions of Scholars like his son, before so great a company both of sons
and daughters; in whose Nil dictu s^dum visuque haec li^nina ^angat Intr^ quae
puer est.
ears, and eyes, a Iuven^l. sat. 14.
Poet, no way comparable with Cato for severitie and care of virtuous nurturing
and training up of youth, detesteth the expressing of any one such foolerie, as
your country-wooers did express a number?

As for the vanity of your bragging soldier, I marvel that intending to
prove there could no evil affection be stirred up thereby in any, you durst
mention Cato: when I had showed that In prolog. Capuuor.
Plautus, a far looser person, and better experienced in matters of this
kind, does note that Profecto expediet fabulae huic operam dare. Hic neque
pe^iurus leno est, nec meretrix mala, Neque miles gloriosus.
men's manners are wont to be corrupted and made worse by plays which have a
bawd, or boore, or bragging soldier in them. The dissolute behavior of your
courtly-wooers, you say, was not so much expressed on the stage, as imagined to
be done within. Not so much on the stage: much on the stage therefore; and in
deed too much. Yet this would prove, I grant, that small harm could be done
by the playing of their parts, unless that were true which the Scripture
says: lam. 3. 5.
How great a pile of wood how little fire kindles? Melanthius alone of all the
sorts, or varlets, whom you namely specify, has no amplification of
Lacedaemonians, or Cato; no extenuation of not so much on the stage, to grace
the ungraciousness of his foul scurrilitie. The likelier is Aristotle's sentence
and authority to prevail with you, that young men might be stained by hearing
of his railing, his (...) such as these are; Eumoee impudens, Quo gurgite^ hunc
tristemque mensaru omniu vo^aginem ipsam ducis, and vere infimum Barathrum
macelli? liminibus humeros sibi Detriuit iste pluribus; quadram aptior. Purgare
lingua, quam quatere iaculum manu. etc. Vlyss r^d act. 2.
Iambicall speeches, as Aristotle terms them. At least Sir Thomas Eliots In
the Govern lib. 1. cap. 27.
words of playing at footeball, that therein is nothing but beastly fury, and
extreme violence, whereof proceeds hurt, and consequently rancour and
malice do remain with them that be wounded, may moove you to think that
there was danger of anoying our youth by Melanthius action, Vlysse^ calce
(...).
striking and girding (like Silenus Calce ^eritur aselh. Ovid Fastor. lib.
(...).
ass) at Ulysses with his heel. For boys affecting footebale, will argue
peradventure, that seeing such horseplay was used by Melanthius, and he might
strike Ulysses body with his foot; more lawful should it be for them to
strike a ball so: and what Cato would not be delited to see them break one an
others shinnes? or who was that vicechancellour, what a convocation, that made
our University statute to the contrary? Thus are your particular conclusions
overthrown, even by those passions which the parties mentioned might imprint
in others. How much more in them selves? Whose minds in what danger they are
of infection, by meditating and studying sundry days, or weeks, how to
express the manners of wantons, or drunkards, or country-wooers lively, the
seeing whereof played but an hour, or two, might taint the spectators: I wish
with all my heart, that I may rather seem in vain to have feared, then they
should by experience feel. Your conclusion general fails more and more yet,
because evil affections might be stirred up by other parts then these: as
namely, by your new parts of Pandarus and Nais. The former, after a sort
confessed by your self, in that you demand; who could be the worse for
Phoedras wooing Hippolytus in so general terms? For this does insinuate that
through Pandarus wooing him i^ special terms, so special, that incestuous
Fit equo sua filia coniux, Quasque cre^it, init pecudes caper. and, Gentes
tamen esse fe^ntur, in qui bus and nato genitrix, and ^ata parenti Iungitur; vt
pietas geminato crescat amore.
Myrrha went no farther (as Metamorph. lib. 10.
Ovid thought fit to describe it) not in her secret Et secu^, Quo mente feror?
quid molior? inquit. etc.
thoughts, some might be the worse. The later, most evident by that which is
Lucian. quo modo hist. scribend. sit.
recorded to have come to pass in the Citi^ of Abdera. Where, when at
midsummer, in very hottweather, Andromeda (a Tragedy of Euripides) being
played, many brought home a burning ague from the theater: about the seventh
day following, they were rid thereof, some by much bleeding, some by sweating,
but all, as soon as they were abroad out of their beds, did fall into a
strange distemper and passion of a light frenzy. The which exciting them to
say and cry aloude such things as were sticking freshly in their memory, and
had affected most their mind, (...).
they grew all to Tragedie-playing, and full lustilie they sounded out (...).
Iambicall speeches: their toungs harping chiefly on Euripides, Andromeda, and
the (...).
melodious words of Perseus touching love. So that the whole city was full of
pale and thin folk, pronouncing like stage players, and braying with a loud
voice. (...).
But O Cupido, prince of Gods and men, with the rest of that part: until at
length the winter and cold, waxing great, assuaged their distemper, and eased
them of their frantike folly. A word to a wise man is enough. That speech,
But O Cupido, Prince of Gods and men, uttered under Perseus, that is, a man's
person, was of all likely hoode less pearcing and patheticall, then yours, O
quam iuvaret igne tam pulchro mori, uttered by Nais, a woman, and a Nymph. It
was well that she played in winter, not in summer. For Herodo^. Polymn. Ovid.
Metamorph. li. 4.
Perseus loved Andromeda in the way of marriage too, as Nais did Hippolytus. But
the force of love-pangs, and the care of lawfulnes, join not their dwelling
houses together still in all hearts. Wherefore you are so far off from
having prooved that no evil affection could be stirred up in any by your
plays: that I can hardly remember any evil affection, which might not be
stirred up thereby in many; not only in the actors, but the spectators also.
And I think your self, if you peruse advisedly this which I have written,
and diligently compare it with your Ulysses redux, Rivales, and Hippolytus,
will take time of respitt before you name as much as one inordinate passion;
whereto I shall not quote, at least one players part, perhaps two, or three,
that may be as oil unto the fire. Howbeit, had you prooved the contrary
hereof, yet is my conclusion entier, as I said, and your plays unlawful:
because it is unlawful to imitate and resemble any misbehaviour; and your
self can not deny but sundry lewdnesses were imitated and resembled in each
of your plays.

Herein is that confuted withal by the way, which otherwhere you mention as an
intent sufficient to justify and warrant your coming on the stage: namely that
you do it to practice your style, either in prose or verse; to be well
acquainted with Seneca, or Plautus; honestly to embolden your youth; to try
their voices, and confirm their memories, to frame their speech; to conform
them to convenient action; to try what metal is in every one, and of what
disposition they are. For although you aimed at all these things, and hitt
them, which as I have showed in one branche to be false, so must you grant it
in some other; unless you will say, that to arm a youth with a I^. (...).
(...).
whoores forehead, is honestly to embolden him; or, by trying what metta^ is in
every one, you mean the occasioning of the^ to give proof whether their Esai.
48. 4.
brows be made of brass; but admitting all were even as you pretend: yet
your stage-playing being convicted of unlawfulness, your prete^ses for it are
grinded all to powder; Romans 3. 8.
just is their damnation, who say, Let us do evil that good may come thereof.
Our great and first parents, Genesis 3. 5.
seduced by the serpent, did eat of the fruit of the forbidden tree: to the
intent that they might become like to God, and know both good and evil. The
Heb. 5. 14.
knowledge of good and evil, is to be wished: but because the Genesis 2. 17.
means was joined with disobedience, it had been better for them to have
lacked that knowledge. Among the Lacedaemonians, Xenoph. de rep. Lacedaemon.
boys by their public order were instructed, and through want of vittalls
were provoked to steal meat: that being occasioned thereby to watch at night,
while others were sleeping, and to lie in wait by day time for their pray, they
might be the skilfuller to circumvent and spoil their enemies in war.

The end good and commendable, as he who 2. Sam. 22. 35. Psalm. 144. 1.
taught David to fight, assures us: but Deuteronomy. 5. 19. 1 Samuel 25. 7
David was not taught it by pilfering and stealing. Parmeno in Eunuch. act. 5.
scen. 4.
Terence tells what commodity Chaerea might purchase by coming into Thais
horse: to be acquainted with the nature and manners of harlots, that knowing
them betime he might for ever hate them. To hate the^, is a quality Psalm. 13^.
21.
beseeming virtuous persons: but who so by acquaintance with them do seek to
hate them, are likely to be evil qualified; for Prou. 6. 28.
can a man go upon coals, and his feet not be burnt? But here you will reply
percase that in Chaerea, beside the good effect which Parmeno did boast of,
some bad effects might fall out, Act. 3. scen. 5
through the seeing of Jupiters picture with Danae, and being near to
Pamphila: which in your plays ca^ not be feared. But I have prevented this
reply by showing that Arce quum Danae procos Ar^eret ^lta, etc. Vlyss. red.
act. 3.
your Danaes picture with Melanthos talk may breed some bad effects in a
Chaerea too, though he were a beholder only of your plays, much more if he be
a player him self. Wherefore if a dead fly does cause the sweet ointment of
the Apothecarie to stink, as the Eccles. 10. 1.
wise man says: what a loathsome savor must needs so great store of such
caraine breed in the perfume of eloquence, into the which you cast it? Beside
that, to come nearer you, the ointment and perfume itself commended by you,
has a rammish smell, and stinketh like a goat: as a good Apothecarie, and of
very quick sent, Quinuliane vagae moderator sum inventae, gloria Romanae
Quintiliane togae. Mart. lib. 2. epigram. 90.
Quintilian, I mean, acknowledges and avoucheth. For he, Orator. in^titut.
lib. 1. ca. 14.
requiring In primis.
chiefly that young and tender minds no^ modoqu^ diserta, sed vel magis qu^
honesta sunt, discant.
should not only learn such things as are well uttered, but, and that much
rather, such things as are honest; forbids them to read at all any poemes
of Vtique, qu^ ama^.
amatorie fancies, at least, Ad firmius aetatis robu^ reseruentur.
till they be grown to greater maturitie of years, and strength of age. In
which sort he allows them to read Menanders Comedies also, and others, Quum
mores in tuto fuerint. Vide li. 2. cap. 2.
When they be past danger of having their manners corrupted. And their Lib 2.
cap. 1 and 4. and. 11.
style he wills to be exercised in common places, either against vices, or
touching doubtful questions; in praising good, dispraysing evil: in reporting
truth; in defense of innocence; and the like matters that may serve an
Orator, vir. bonus. Lib. 1 in proaem. and lib. 12. cap. 1
honest man in use of life. Their Lib 2. ca. 8.
memory he wishes to be confirmed by learning without book, sometime
somewhat of their own, well penned; but principally, places elected and chosen
out of orations, or stories, or other kind of Dignorum ea cura voluminum.
writings worthy that care and study; that they Assuescent optimis.
may accustom themselves to the best, and have their style helped many ways
thereby. Finally, for Lib. 1. ca. 19
framing of speech, voice, and gesture, he would not have them imitate the
voice of Women, or old men; nor express the fautes of drunkenness; nor be
taught to play the slaves; nor learn the affection and passion of love, of
covetousness, of fear. Which things are neither necessary, says he, Oratori.
for an orator; and Mentem, praecipue in aetate prima teneram adhuc and rudem
inficiunt.
they do corrupt the mind, in childhoode specially, while it is tender yet
and unacquainted with things; because Freque^s imitatio transis in mores.
such as those are whom we imitate much, such our selves become. Behold the
great difference between a heathen man's conceit of the instructing of orators
for civil causes: and yours, of Christian Preachers, or what soever place your
Students shall be called to in Church or Common weal, at least of honest men
and Christians.

He would have no amatorie poemes, neither Comedies, no not Lib. 10. ca. 1.
Menanders, that is, the Omnibus ^iusdem operis autoribus abstulit nomen.
best of all to be read by his youth: you, as if Phaedras amorous speech
expressed by Seneca were nothing without a pe^ce of menstruous cloth sowed to
it, do occasion yours to make them selves familiar and well acquainted with
Plautus, Horat. de art. poet. vives lib. 3. de tratend. discipline Scalig.
poetic. lib. 6. cap. 3.
one far beneath the best. He would have his youth to practice their style in
good things, as in Arma sunt hac quoda^mo do praepara^da semper, vt his, quum
res poscet, vtaris.
weapons, which they may use when need shall be: you practice yours in
speeches entising men to Uenerie, to ribauderie, to scurrilitie, to hoordom, to
incest, to other abominations. He would have his youth to commit most excellent
things and words to memory; you pester yours with filth, such filth in
Rivales (I am ashamed to rehearse it) as can not be matched, I think, sure very
hardly, throughout all Plautus. He would not have his youth Femineae voc^s
exilitate frangi.
to counterfeit a woman's voice: you procur^ Minerva, Penelope, Euryclea,
Antonoe, Eurynome, Hippodamia, Melantho, Phaedra, the Nurse, the Nymph, besides
I know not whom in the unprinted Comedy, to be played by yours. He would Nec
vitia ^brietatis effingat.
not have his youth to represent the faults of drunkenness: yours must flant it
out in most immodest guise, with unseemly barbarous carousing songs and
speeches, and be defended too by the brave example of Lacedaemonian slaves. He
would Nec seruili vernilitate imbuatur.
not have his youth to be imbrued and tainted with slavish behavior: for
yours it is an ornament to play the goteheard Melanthius, or a bragging
soldier, or a clownish wooer. In fine, he would Nec amoris discat affectum.
not have his youth to learn the passion of amorousnes and love; Plu^imum
aberit a scenico gestu.
nor to be stage-player-like in action and gesture: you breed yours in
stage-playing, as conforming them to convenient action; and teach them to
resemble the panges of love in manner of most amorous Nymphs, with O quam
iu^aret igne ta^ pulchro mori.
burning exclamations, and Tu nostris, precor, Nym phas amare ^e puta in syluis
nefas. Aurora Cephalo, Salmacis puero suo, Adonide venus Latmio iuvene and tua,
Hippolyte, quondam exarsit (...) arcitenens Dea. In tam beato, quaeso ^umeremur
grege.
fancies of Poetical fables. St Confession. lib. 1. cap. 16 (...).
Austin reprooving the course of the world which traineth up their children in
Poets wanton tales of Jupiters adulteries, and uses to defend their custom by
saying, Hence are words learned, hence is eloquence gotten: forsooth, says
he, belike we could not know these words, imbrem aureum, and gremium, and
fucum, and templa caeli, and the rest there written, unless f Terence had
brought in a lewd young man proposing Jupiter to him self for an example of
hooredome, while he beholds on the wall a certain painted table, wherein
was this picture; how Jupiter sent a Imbrem ^reum.
golden shower, they say, of old time into the Gremium.
lap of Danae, Fucum.
under the color thereof to beguile a woman. And see how he stirs up
himself to lust as it were by the instruction of a heavenly master. But what
God? says he. Even that God which shakes Templa (...)
the sanctuaries of heaven with thunder. Should not I, who am a mortal wretch,
do the same? Yes in deed I did it, and gladly. Non omnin^ per hanc
turpitudine^ verba ista commodius discuntur; sed per haec verba turpitudo ista
confide^tius perpetratur
No, no, says S. Austin, those words are not learned the more conveniently by
means of this dishonestie: but this dishonestie is wrought the more
confidently by means of those words. Thus did that discreet and godly Father
judge of causing such devises of Poets to be learned by children yea although
the Poets were as good as Terence and the children as well inclined as
himself. For him self it is, of whom Aug. confess. lib. 1. cap. 15
he confesses that Didici in (...) multa verba vtilia: sed and quae in (...)
non vanis disci possunt; and ea via (...) est in qua pu^ri ambularent.
he learned many profitable words in vain, Poetical fancies; but such as
both may be learned in things not vain, and that is a safe way wherein
children ought to walk. On which consideration sundry men of note in our
memory also, not only among professors of purer religion, but even among the
Papists, have advised Scholemasters and instructors of youth either not to read
Terence to their Scholars, or if they will read him, not to read him all. De
tradend. discipline. li. 3.
Ludovicus Uives, having declared in general out of (...).
Plutarch touching the reading of Poets, that, unless you use it most warily,
it hurts; and therefore, if a child may be allowed to meddle with it, their
writings would be purged first, and filthy matters be wholly cut out of them:
Does wish the same concerning Terence in special for those things which might
defile the minds of children with such faults and vices, as naturally we are
prone to. Ignatius Loiola, a man no worse minded in certain points then were
the old Jewish Act. 23. 8.
Pharisees, whose Mark 7. 9.
sect in his offspring of Jesuits he has renewed, Petr. Man. vita Ign. Loi.
lib. 3. cap. 8.
did forbid Terence to be read in schools (unless he were purged) least
he should more anoy their manners by his wantonness, then by his Latin help
their wits. Epist. ad Augustum Ducem Saxoni^.
Georgius Fabricius, not seeing how he may be well purged to this purpose,
because the conditions of fond or bad persons, as of lovers, ^oores, murmurers,
mizers, fretters, ruffians, varlets, flatterers, boasters, bawdes, and
sycophants, that is, the most of those things which Comedies entreat of,
belong to stronger minds, and to an age confirmed and stayed with some
judgment, not to unskillful children, before whom they are better omitted and
concealed; Fabricius therefore grounding him self upon the judgment of
Politicor. li. 7 cap. v^t.
Aristotle, and Lib. 1. ca. 14
Quintilian, both applied to Terence, resolves that he is not to be read at
all to youths of tender years. Whereunto a light of our university and
country, D. Humfrye, subscribeth and agrees, in that upon occasion of showing
how Noblemens children and Gentlemen's should be brought up in learning, Laur.
Humfred. de nobilit. lib. 3.
he says that they may have Terence read unto them, but them, when they shall
be grown in age and judgment. Though douting least even then too the Si quid
insit obscaeni, fidelis diligentia boni praeceptoris medeatur: and alio^um
librorum l^ctio, tanquam pharmacum, pellat quicquid (...) est toxicu^.
poison of his filthiness may be more forcible then the cou^ter-poyson to be
used against it he adds that he would not grant him this place neither in
their education, but that Tullie had made good account of him, and prosited in
eloquence by him. Now the same reasons, that, in choice of autours to be read
by us, exclude so fine a Poet, and send us unto purer fountains of good
literature: do likewise in the practice of style, the frame of speech, and
employment of memory, exclude such points and matters as Terence is excluded
for, and commend unto us more commendable arguments to exercise our wits, our
tounges, our pens in. Which the wise Founders and Governors of the worthy
Colleges and companies of Students here among us did very well consider: taking
order therefore that by rendering and rehearsing of Aristotle; or Tullie; by
writing, pronouncing, declaiming, disputing, of questions in sundry faculties
and arts, the use whereof may serve them afterward to purpose, young men
should be made the readier and fitter to confirm the truth, to confute
errors, to dehort from evil things, and instruct to good. Neither does your
subtle matching and comparing of these scholasticall exercises with enterludes
and plays, in as much as you tell me that if I had but said that your plays
are toys, unnecessary, vaineit had been no more perhaps then is, in
strictnes, true, because L^k. 10. 4^.
vnum modo necessarium; and he, that had tried all things, of his own wise
experience pronounces, Eccles. 1^. 8.
vanitas vanitatum, and omnia vanitas, yea, even learning, and wisdom, and
all things else, except the fear of God which endures for ever, and you have
heard a godly and a learned Preacher in the pulpitt affirm, that our
declamations, oppositions, suppositions, and such scholasticall exercises, are
no better then vain things: but these three autorities, wherein you saw not
strength sufficient to persuade you that your plays are certainly
unnecessary and vain, (your speech concerning them you lay in water with
perhaps;) do not convince in deed our disputations, declamations, with the
like exercises, to be so. For when our Savior said that (...).
one thing is needful, speaking of Luke 10. ver. 42.
the good part which Marie had chosen in that ver. 39.
she heard (...).
his preaching, the word of God preached by him: he did not by commending the
needfulnes of the end, condemn the means, as needless, whereby the end is
attained to. Nay, he did imply rather that the means are consequently
needful: as if a natural man should say, We must live, his meaning were that
we must have sustenance to live by. And how shall men Romans 10. 1^
hear the word of GOD preached, unless there be Preachers to expound it? How
can Preachers expound it, unless they learn the way of 2. Tim 2. 15
cutting it aright and applying it? How can they learn the way ordinarily:
unless they be trained up in Logike and Rhetorike? The necessary use whereof
for the sound interpreting of Scripture, it may be that you heard Praelectioni.
in epist. ad Coloss. cap. (...) ver. 8.
me show against the Brownists, as well as you heard the Preacher whom you
speak of: or if you did not, Saint De doctr. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 31. and
seq^entibus.
Austin, or De rat. stud. theolog. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Hyperius, may serve to inform you. The a^tes then of Rhetorike and Logike are
requisite to preaching of the word. And the exercises of declaiming, answering,
opposing, do help to breed ripenes in those arts. Our Saviors sentence
therefore that one thing is needful, argues not these exercises to be
unnecessary. No more does Salamons saying that all things are vanity, prove
them to be vain. For out of Heb. HACCOL with HE (an article as it were)
expressed and expounded by Tremellius and Iunius, Eccl. 1. 2. and 12. 10
those all things him self does except, the Eccle. 12. 13
fear of God (as you note) and (as you should have noted) the keeping of Gods
commandments. Wherefore since our Students be commanded by God Luke 19. 13.
to employ the pieces of moony that he has given them, in trade and traficke
as it were, to make gai^e thereof; and the trade, wherein they must employ their
time, is, to get them selves all instruments of learning, by which they Tit.
(...). 9.
may be able to (...)
exhort with wholesome doctrine; and (...).
convince such as gainsay it: their practice of exhortatorie and convincing
faculties, of declamations, of elenches, of oppositions and suppositions, can
not be condemned, as vain, by his word, by whom Mat. 25. ver. 26.
the evil servant is condemned, as ver. 30.
unprofitable, for ver. 25.
hyding his talent in the earth. Well may you have heard a Preacher in the
pulpitt affirm that which you mention: but I doubt whether you understood him
well. For you allege him so, as if he had pronounced those exercises simply,
and in them selves, vain: Which it were injurious to think, that a learned
and a godli^ Preacher (such do you report him; and I, not knowing who it was,
do believe you) should purpose to affirm: feing Christ; Heb. 7. 27.
whose mouth was never defiled with toy or any vain thing, used certain of
them, as oppositions namely. For what are Aristot. Topic. li. 1. and 8.
oppositions but arguments objected against a point in question? What was it
but an argument objected so by Christ, when against the Mat. 22. ver. 23.
Sadduces, denying the resurrection, ver. 31.
he urged a text of Moses? and against the ver. 42.
Pharisees, holding no more of Christ but that he was David's son, a ver. 43.
testimony of David? Yea, in this later he did that which of all things in our
disputations might seem to be most vain, object ver. 45.
against a truth, although with purpose for the truth. It is not to be
thought then, that the Preacher, terming our exercises vain, meant that they
are such simply and in them selves; but as they are used by us, by many of us,
to sundry fruitless ends, not to make us fitter for the ^ph. 4. 29.
good and (...).
need full edifying of men: nor to advance 1. Tim. 4. 8.
godliness profitable for all things, but to increase or make a show of Eccles.
1. ver. 13.
that knowledge, which therefore is called ver 14.
vanity by the wise man, because it has ver. 3.
no permanent and lasting commodity, ver. 15.
nor brings us salvation and eternal life. Whereof it does no more follow
that the exercises are vain, as you conclude; then if one should reason that
the fear of God, (which you except) is vain, upon that place of Esaias, Esai.
29. 13.
Their f^are toward me is taught by the precept of men. For, if,
notwithstanding that Mat. 15. 9.
the Jews worshipped and feared God in vain, fearing him amiss according to
the precepts of men, not to his word, yet the fear of God is most
beneficial, and Mal. 3. 1^.
was to some among the Jews too: then may declamations, supposititions,
oppositions, and such schol^sticall exercises be profitable and fruitful, even
unto some among us also, though many of us make them vanity of vanities, as
vain as that 2. Tim. 2. 14
strife is which Saint Paul reprooveth, I mean, both (...).
void of wholesome juice, and (...).
full of poison. But to what purpose are these discourses, will you say, of
exercises fit for scholars, and Terence not to be read unto them, till they be
of riper years and judgment? To let you understand, that whereas you tell us,
you come upon the stage to practice your style, to acquaint your selves with
Plautus, to embolden your youth, to try their voices, confirm their memories,
frame their speech and action; you are so far from justifying your plays by
this defense, that you condemn the^ more. For if the tale of Jupiter with
Danae, in Eunuchus, should not be read to such as your Melantho and Nais: much
less should they be taught the same tale Nulla (...) ^esistet imb^i.
urged farther, in Ulysses ^edux; and less yet another tale of Ovid Metamorph
lib. 4.
wanton Salmacis Salmac^ puero suo.
with her boy; in Hippolytus. If they should not as much as salute Te^ence, the
finest Comicall Poet, for pureness of the Latin tongue in Limone, apud Dona^u^ in
vita Teren^.
Tullies judgment: much less should they be made well acquainted with
Plautus; and less yet with Rivales. If they should not be suffered to peruse
writings of base and filthy quality, nor to cast their eyes, as it were, upon
them: much less should they engraue them by heart in their remembrance,
express them with voice, commend them with action, deliver them with boldness.
If they should not exercise their style, their speech, their memory, but in
honest, virtuous, and commendable matters, which in use of lise may serve them
to good purpose: much less should they meditate how they may inflame and
tender youth with love; entise him to daliance, to hoordom, to incest; inure
their minds and bodies to vncoomly, dissolute, railing, boasting, knavish,
foolish, brainsicke, drunken conceits, words, and gestures. Wherefore to the
Timothees, that are among your Students, I must say in like sort as Saint Paul
to Timothee: 2. Tim. (...). (...).
Consider what I say; and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

Now, the inconveniences and mischiefs of your plays being so notorious and
manifold, as I have showed: the rest of mine answer opposed to your reasons
devised for their defense, will easily deliver it self from your cavills. For
where you having said that your Students did not misspend their time therein,
because they spent no more time then uses to be spent in sports, sleep,
talk, and learned releasing of the mind from study; and having added thereto
that, since there is a time for sportes, plays, danses, and man consisting not
of one part alone does need recreation, therefore you may be stage players; I
answered to the former, that by the like reason a student haunting a dicing
house, or tavern, or stews, might prove that he did not misspend his time
thereat; to the later, that recreation is necessary for Scholars, yet would
it not beseem them to play at stoole-ball among wenches, nor at Mumchance or
Maw with idle lost companions; nor at trunkes in Guile-halls, nor to danse
about Maypoles, nor to rifle in alehouses, nor to carowse in Tavernes, nor to
steal Dear, nor to rob Orchyards: you reply that to compare your plays to
these things, it exceeds the compass of any tolerable resemblance; and
thereupon eftsoons you surname them hard and incomparable comparisons. Wherein
how incomparably you lavish out of measure, and exceed the compass of any
reasonable speech, you may quickly see, now that I have prooved your plays to
be evil: si^h these things being likewise evil and disorderly, and so
agreeing with them in a general point, it is clear they may be resembled
thereunto.

The Scripture compares Mat. 25. 27.
our Savior to an (...).
usurer, who desires gain by the moony he lends; Luke 16. 8.
the children of light to an unjust steward, who makes him self friends with
his masters goods against a time of need, 1. These. 5. 2.
the coming of the Lorde^ day to a thief in the night, who comes suddenly and
unlooked for. Comparisons not tolerable, if the special qualities of usurers,
of unjust men, of the^ves, should be meant: but very good and fit, if we
mark the general points that they are matched in. Or, if Scripture-eloquence,
which yet St De doctrine. Christ. lib. 4. ^p. 6.
Austin magnifieth, seem base in your eyes; though, seem it never so base, I
trust you will not say that to compare our Savior, and so forth, to these
things, it exceeds the compass of any tolerable resemblance: but the
eloquence, the learning, the authority of Homer, whose wit ( Vlyss red.
Prolog. and epilog.
you say) Illuminatut and homines simul and Deos.
enlightened both men and Gods together, whose Dignetur humilem tanta maiestas
tua Induere soccum.
majesty you worship with Haurire ^yathum font^ nos largo sine.
prayer and Benignita^ gratias agimus ^ae.
thanksgiving, to Aeterna maneat gl^ria in terris tibi.
whom you wish eternal glory, and call him Nam quis aeterno seni Par esse
poterit?
the eternal old man, will suffice to open your eyes and stop your mouth.
For he compares Iliad. lib. 11. m lib. 16.
valiant Ajax to an ass, that being in a corne-field will not be driven out
with any cudgels of boys till he have filled his belly; the m Grecians and
Trojans about Sarpedons carcass, to flies about a milke-paile in a warm
springtime, all busy and loath to leave it. There are Hieron. vid. and Lud.
viv. lib. 3. de tra. discipline.
who find fault with these comparisons, I grant, as overbase and abject: but
your adoration of Homer does persuade me, that you will make more of Iul.
Scalig. poetic. lib. 5. cap 3.
his censure, who, for the general drift thereof, approoveth them. At least
you shall be forced to yield by your own words, in as much as having compared
our reproof of your expense in plays to Matt. 26. (...)
their speech who said of the costly ointment powered upon Christ's head, what
needed this wast? and being told the difference of that fact from yours; you
say, that though you know there is an infinite difference between yours and
the action against the which it was hypocritically first used: yet you think
it may also be applied against, either the niggardise, or the hypocrisy of
any Momus, that shall condemn all expense as cast away, that is sometimes
moderatly bestowed upon honest sports and pastimes. For how can it be chosen
but to compare your charges on plays to those on Christ, must needs exceed
the compass of any tolerable resemblance: unless things agreeing in a
general point, as you suppose (though falsely) these to do in honesty, may be
very well resembled each to other? And Quis tule^ Gracchos d^ seditione que
rentes? Iuvenal. sat. (...).
why should you reproove it in me as a hard incomparable deed: when you think
it comparable and soft in your own case? Chiefly, since you know, that even in
the degree of honest matters too, whereon expenses are made, there is an
infinite difference between the actions, which you match: I can not say so of
those that I compare. Nay, some of the things that I compare your stage plays
with, are less evil; as namely, for scholars to play at stooleball among
wenches: which to do by day light, in open streets, in their own likeness,
were not so unmeet and inconvenient for them, as to be attired in wemens
raiment, by women, within doors, in the night time, to go to and fro, and
come upon the stage, and play Melantho, or Nais. Contrariwise, the action
wherewith you match yours; was infinitely better, as your self acknowledge:
and had, as you must also acknowledge, (...), or (...), it was esteemed by
the^, who amplified it to the uttermost. Mark. 14. 5. Ioh. 12 5. And that may
amount to nine or ten pound of our moony.
less bestowed thereon, then yours had. So that your consequution does halt
here again; It was no wast to be at lesser cost in woorking a good work on
Christ; Ergo it is no wast to be at greater charges in setting forth of
plays. But mine is vnreprooveable; It beseems not scholars to play at
stooleball among wenches, though modest and chaste; Therefore it beseems them
not to play wanton women on the stage. The same may I say of the two
comparisons, which herewithall you check; the former, alleged out of
Salvianus, or out of Scripture rather; the later, adjoined by me for
illustrating and opening the former: to weete, that with the players of lewd
and naughty parts it fares as with ae fool committing wickedness in pastime;
and they are like a mad man, who casts firebrands, arrows, and mortal
things, and says, was I not in sport? For a mad man casting firebrandes, and
the like, endangereth bodies only: the players of lewd parts do endanger
sowles. And a fool commiting wickedness in pastime has seldom many admirers
and folowers to hurt: the players have as many, as a great Theater holds, and
can hear them say, But O Cupido, or, O quam juvaret. Wherefore when you
amplify hereupon, and tell me, you could have wished that such comparisons had
been forborne, if not for the plays them selves, though also they ought for
the plays them selves, being things that savor of some wit, learning, and
judgment; yet in respect of the actors, your whole house, the spectators,
approovers, autours, writers; all which points you load with patheticall
circumstances otherwhere entreated of: you force me to say I could have wished
also that you had forborne these Galba-trickes of seeking to prejudice the
truth and equity of causes with partial affections and respect of persons, a
Lev. 19. 15. Prove. 24. 23 (...). 2. 1.
thing condemned by Scriptire; and that you had considered that if plays
savouring of some wit learning, and judgment, ought not to be compared to
such things as I mentioned, then your self did ill in praising and allowing
that part of my discourse, wherein the fool and mad man served for
comparisons. For you gave testimony thereof, that I had written copiously and
truly against the bad effects of stage plays in general. Yea, specifying the
proofs that I made by sundry examples and autorities, among which the
authority of Salvianus was, you soothed it as containing a truth, and well
handled. But the stage plays spoken of by Salvianus, did savor of some wit,
learning, and judgment: as what play does nor? at least of all those that any
ancient Poet wrote. Your reason therefore brought from the savor of wit
learning, and judgment, to cross my comparisons; does cross your own
allowance of that which you acknowledged to be well spoken against the bad
effects of stage plays in general. And thus, as Apollod^ de o^g. D^. or. lib.
3.
Lycurgus the Thracian imagining that he was hewing down a vine with his
hatchet, is said to have slain his son, and maimed him self: likewise you
intending to show that my comparisons are hard and incomparable, and exceed
the compass of any tolerable resemblance, and should have been forborne, have
wounded unawares your eternal old man, and your self greevously.

A more greevous wound have you given your self in saying that you presumed
your plays to be lawful, when you made your simple assertion (so you term
it) that there is a needful time for sports. For this is in effect as much as
if you said, that you played the Aristo. de ^prehe^. Soph.
Sophister, (...).
begging the point in question, and taking it as granted. The which kind of
dealing, if it had any sinews to graple with an adversary, the Jesuits might
trooble us, by saying that the Catholic faith must be kept; and they presume
that Popery is the Catholic faith. Likewise the meanest advocate in a court
of law might speed all his clients, by saying that such as have wrong offered
them, ought to be releeved; and he presumes his clients have so. Neither had
you needed to write so long a reply of twelve leaves to me: twelve words might
have sufficed, that you presume my cause is naught, and naughty things must not
be credited. But your self acknowledge that this prooveth not the lawfulnes of
your plays. So that, in affirming you did presume them to be lawful, and
calling it a simple assertion which you avowed concerning sports, you speak
more truth then you intended. For it is a simple assertion in deed to say
that sports are needful, against a man's arguments who says that stage plays
are unlawful. And he may be justly noted of presumption, who, being unable
to prove a thing he fansieth, condemns them as Momes that are minded
otherwise and bring sound proof against it.

Howbeit, had you kept your self within the compass of such oversights, you
were more excusable. But it is a greater fault to play the sclanderer by
falsifying men's words, and fathering upon them an erroneous sentence, which
never came into their minds, nor fell out of their mouths or pens. And what
do you else, when having said that I use many words against dansing, you
reply that you love to see honest dansing; and, you see no cause in reason,
charity, or Christian liberty, why dansing should simply be condemned. For
hereby you insinuate, or pronounce rather, that I condemned dansing simply, and
honest dansing: whereas my words were that danses of Penelopes wooers, of
Melantho, of other of her maids, and simply all stage-dansing do savor of
dishonestie. Which differs as much from that you father on me, as the speech
of Christ, Ioh. 2. 19.
Destroy ye this temple, and in three days I will raise it up again, meaning
of his body, did differ from that which Matt. 26. 61
the false witnesses affirmed him to have said of the temple of God, Mar. 14.
58.
the temple made with hands. Nay, it surpasses that of the false witnesses:
it differs as much as if, where Christ said, that Luke 13. 3. and 21. 18.
all ungodly men shall perish, they had fathered on him that all men shall
perish. And your crime herein is the more blamewoorthy, because I had so
plainly excepted certain dansing, that you can not seem to have mistaken my
words, and read all dansing, for all stage-dansing; but wilfully and
advisedly to have misreported me. For I said expressly, I meant those danses
that I specified, and not 2. Sam. 6. 14
David's dansing, which St Depoeniten. lib. 2. cap. 6.
Ambrose does well distinguish from them. Now St Ambrose says that David's
religious and godly dansing is decent: but Saltationis lubricae histrionici
motus.
the dangerous dansing practiced by players, and the Scenae deliramenta.
foolish toys, the dotages, of the stage; Haec etiam in adolescentula aetate
vi^osa sunt.
are faulty even in youth too. So both mine own words, and the autour I
cited, do manifestly show, that when you took upon you to praise honest
dansing, and said you saw no cause in charity or reason why dansing should
simply be condemned, you could not but in reason and charity see cause, why
you should have dealt more simply and honestly, then so calumniouslie to raise
a false surmise of me. You know what creature it is, whom the Rev. 12. 9.
scripture names a (...)
calumniatour.

Beside, as you offend in charging me with that I said not: so in going about
to overthrow that which I said. For whereas I affirmed that dansing of
Penelopes wooers with her maids, and simply all stage-dansing, is disallowed
by the light of nature; and for proof thereof did allege the testimonies, of
Romans putt by Nero, of Philistines putting Samson to it, and of all ancient 6
Pastore^ saltaret vti Cyclopa, rogabat: Nil illi larva, aut tragicis opus esse
cothurnis.
laws in a manner, yea of reason it self, as Arias Montanus notes: you,
avouching two men's opinions to the contrary, do add, that to apply, either
the dansing of those noble Romans, whom Nero enforced to danse so publicly;
or, Samsons dansing among the Philistines; or, the note of Arias Montanus,
against your dansing only of two sober measures, is a comparison without all
measure. Wherein first, through negligence of marking my words, or desire of
crossing them before you understood them, you misreport my drift: and say that
I applied those things against your dansing only of two sober measures, (you
mean, the wooers dansing with the maids,) which I applied not against it
alone, but against the rest of your stage-dansing also, that is, all your
stage-playing. For this did I betoken by the name of stage-dansing, the better
to express the sentence, that I had in hand, of Saint Ambrose, who by
Saltationis lubricae histrionicos motus and scenae deliramenta.
dansing notes all histrionicall motions and playings on the stage, in like
sort as Satyr. lib. 1. sat. 5.
Horace says, Saltabat Hylas Oedipode^. Pylades: (...).
one was requested to danse Polyphemus, meaning to play his part; and
Caeruleatus, and nudus, caputque redimitus arundine, and candam trahens,
genibus innixus, Glaucum saltavit.
Plancus dansed Glaucus, in Lib 2.
Uelleius story; and g stage players dansed Oedipus, and Hercules, in Satur.
lib. 1. cap. 7.
Macrobius; and Adver. gent. lib. 7.
Arnobius speaks of Si Europa, fi Leda, si Ganymedes fuerit saltatus, aut
Dana. co^pescit motum irarum Iuppiter?
dansing Europa, Leda, Ganymedes. Neither was it hard for you to perceive that
I meant thus much, if you had better weighed the branches of my speech, and
proofs thereto answering, concluded with the note of Arias Montanus, touching
not only dansers, but persons of such shows and spectacles. Chiefly if you
had looked on the autour him self, and marked that in the persons of such
shows and spectacles, he compriseth stage players; as the Hujus generis
actiones ingenuo homine indigniffimas duxerunt, qui de virtute vera, deque
corruptis hominu^ moribus prude^ter loq^ti sunt. Vt ille de Nerone: In scena
nunqua^ cantavit Orestes. etc. Iuv. sat. 8
generality of his words, exemplified by Nero, makes plain.

An other injury is it, that you term those proofs of mine, a comparison;
and (which is more) a comparison without all measure. What Matt. 7. 2.
measure you did use in the meting out hereof, I can not guess: unless
peradventure, because that you had heard that comparisons are odious, you hoped
you should make all my proofs odious by naming them comparisons. For I, having
noted, against your argument drawn from sports and recreations, that sports by
the light of nature, are accounted unseemly, bad, infamous, and so is all
stage-dansing; did allege the judgments of Romans, of Philistines, of ancient
laws well nigh all, and of reason it self, as testimonies to prove that
proposition by; not as comparisons, but as testimonies And therefore in the
note of Arias Montanus, I did omit that he says of Divina vero lex minime
admittenda censuit, invulgaribus etiam ac vilibus capitibus; and quae sequuntur.
the law of God condemning stage plays likewise, because that might go higher
then the light of nature. Otherwise, you may be sure that I, who cited him for
men's laws, a thing of weaker proof, would not have omitted the law of GOD,
his strongest argument. But if I had joined supernatural light to the light of
nature, and had produced testimonies of the Scripture also: would you have
replied, that, to allege the Scripture, is a comparison without all measure?
You must by like reason. And what should stay you from it? All would have
espied that it were no comparison. Why more, then the note of Arias Montanus?
which yet, when you had cast my allegation of the Romans and Philistines in
such a mould, that it could not appear I brought them in as testimonies; you
named with them for company a comparison too. Though, seeing you are greeved
with my applying of it against your stage-dansing, and that induced you to call
it a comparison: me thinks you should have fastened that odious name rather on
the proposition prooved by those testimonies. For the proofs reach not you
immediately, they fight not nigh at hand: the proposition does; as being the
mayor of that argument, whereof your stage players make the minor. And the
proposition, condemning all stage-dansing, does give a deadlyer wound; nether
can it choose but light on your stage-dansing: the proofs might seem to be
more easily avoided; or, coming so far off, to raze the skin only.
Again, my applying of the proposition to you, by the assumption, would deserve
more woorthily the name of a comparison: and the assumption being particular,
or singular; the proposition universal; were not this applying of all against
some, a comparison without all measure?

The third injurious part offered me in this point, is, that you allege the
judgment of Homer and Sir Thomas Eliot, as making for that dansing, which I
did reproove. And bringing in the former of them by a Praeteritio.
figure, saying, To omit Homers judgment thereof; him self you call an
excellent observer of decorum in all things, and quote for his judgment Odyss.
(...).
the eight book of his Odyssea. Now, better had it ben^ ^or you to omit him
without a figure in deed: since he, describing there the life of King Alcinous,
and of his people, the Phaeacians, says, that (...).
they took pleasure continually in feasting, and music, and daunsing, and
braverie of apparel, and hott baths, and chambering: wherein a livelie pattern
of a wanton, riotous, voluptuous, Epicures life, being set forth by Homer, as
Epist. lib. 1. ep. 2. Alcinoique In cute curanda plus aequo operata iuventus.
Horace, Dipno sophist. lib. 1. (...).
Athenaeus, Iu Odyss. (...)
Eustathius may teach you: if I should not have blamed dansing in your plays,
because such an excellent observer of decorum says the Phoeacians used it;
then must the Phil. 3. 19.
belly be your players God, because such an excellent observer of decoru^
says the Phoeacians served it. Moreover seeing that the Music which the
minstrell gave the^ to their dansing, was a (...)
song of Mars taken in adultery with Venus Vulcans wife; and you commend in
dansing the number of the footing well expressing, answering, and as it were
acting the measure and meaning of the Music: you see what good instructions
you give men by extolling your excellent observer of decorum in all things.
Add thereunto that he, so good an observer of decorum, makes the Phoeacian
actors danse with (...).
others of their own sex, or (...).
single. Which how much, and why, it is more allowable, then men and women to
danse together: I wish you to consider, by weighing, with examples mentioned in
Exo. 15. 20. Judge 21. 21. 1. Sam. 18. 6
Scripture, the judgment of Pet. Mart. in lib. Iud. cap. 21. Hyperius de
feriis Bacchanalib. Aretius probl. theolog. tom. 1. loc. 14.
Divines thereon. So shall you perceive, that Homer in the eight book of his
Odyssea, has no sufficient warrant for Melantho to danse together with
Eurymachus, the maids with the wooers; no not though they were maids and
Melantho in deed; much less for boys attired like Melantho, and maids, to
danse with men upon a stage. The later of your autours you allege directly;
and, that learned Knight Sir Thomas Eliot, say you, among other things that he
writes in a book of his, in the praise of dansing, compares the man treading
the measures, to Fortitude, and the woman on his hand, to Temperance. You
add, that you have seen the book, and you remember he uses this comparison
in it. But did you not remember the name of the book too? or was it for some
special cause that you concealed it? your words might give a man occasion to
think, that he had written a book in the praise of dansing: which that he
did, I Baleus scriptorum Britann. centur. 8. cap. 77.
find not. I guess you mean therefore his book entitled the Governor.
Wherein Lib. 1. ca. 20
he prayseth Dansing, and utters somewhat like to that avouched by you, and
Cap. 22. 23. 24. and 25.
treats of circumstances (a point you touch also) which being all observed,
dansing may be honestly and honorably used: But his speech of Fortitude and
Temperance represented by men and maidens in a danse, comes nothing near
your maids and wooers measures, whereto you would stretch it. For, among
diverse manners and kinds of dansing used in ancient time, he rehearses one,
wherein (as De saltat.
Lucian says, translated word for word by him in a manner) (...)
dansed young men and maidens; the man going before, and expressing (...).
such motions as he might afterward use in war; the maiden following him
modestly and shamefastlie; so that it represented a pleasant conjunction of
temperance and fortitude. Now those warlike motions were (as De legi. li. 7
Plato shows, speaking of the like danse) gestures which resembled, partly
the avoiding all sorts of wounds and blows by (...).
bending aside, by (...)
going back, by (...).
leaping up, by (...).
bowing down; partly the enforcing of enemies by shooting (...).
arrows, and casting (...).
darts at them, and giving them (...).
all sorts of wounds. Wherefore this being it, that represented Fortitude in
the danse described by Sir Thomas Eliot: far was it from his meaning to make
your measures, your sober measures, warlike motions; or compare a wooer
treading them, to Fortitude. As far, as to compare a boy doing the same in
maidens likeness, to Temperance. Which, if you had otherwise expressed his sense
rightly, yet should you have forborne to apply to yours for the observing of
decorum, a thing that you commend so in Homer, and your self aim at: since
those maids and wooers, intended both by Homer and you, to be wantons, must
use lascivious danses; and the man (if you will needs have such resemblances)
be compared rather to Mollitude, or Cowardnes, the woman to Incontinencie.
Beside that, the praise which that learned Knight geveth unto dansing, he
gives it not simply; (for he says Lib. 1. ca. 19
some danses, do corrupt the minds of them that danse, and provoke sin:)
but with limitation, to weete, cap. 22. and 2^.
being used and continued in such form, and with such observations and rules,
as he specifieth. Whereof the first (to name one for example) is, that, by the
courtesy or reverent inclination made at beginning of dansing, the dansers and
beholders should mark and remember this to be signified, that at the beginning
of all our acts, we should do due honor to God, which is the root of
prudence. And in deed if dansers in treading of their measures had such
regards and meditations: then not Sir Thomas Eliot only, but the Fathers would
praise dansing too. For, when godly Bishops assembled in the Counsels of
Council. Laodicen. can 53
Laodicea, and Conc. Ilerd. can. ult. Concilior. tom. 2.
Ilarda, decreed that Christians ought not to danse at marriages; when St In
Matt. hom. 59.
Chrysostom blamed women for so doing, as being a stain unto their sex;
when St De virginib. lib. 3.
Ambrose cited and averred that of Orat. pro Muraen.
Tullie, that such as danse are drunk, or mad; when St In Psalm. 32. part.
(...).
Austin said that it were better to spend the Sabbat day in digging and
delving, then in dansing: they meant not to restrain men from marking, and
remembering, that at the beginning of all their acts, they should do due
honor to God; but they thought that dansers have commonly their minds on
things of an other quality. Which if your wooers and maidens also had; as (I
am persuaded) them selves will not deny, and you seem to have thought by
touching so nicely, or rather scarcely touching, the circumstances that you
say should be observed in dansing: you abuse the name of that learned Knight,
in urging his praise of a good danse that might be, against my disprayse of an
ill danse that is. It had been more reason, that when his conceit carried him a
little out of the way sometimes, as in that Lib. 1. ca. 20
he prayseth Lucians stage-danser, who dansed the adultery of Mars and Venus
with resembling of (...), says Lucian.
every act therein, (which I hope, your self would not allow on your stage;)
you should have acknowledged that through too great a love of dansing, he liked
too well of Lucians treatise: though otherwise he fansied not the autour much;
as Lib. 1. ca. 10
he well declares by noting of Huius impios and scurriles dialogos scho laru^
nostrarum censores volunt, si Deo placet, in puerotu^ scholis praelegi, etc.
Hyperius opusc. de sacrar. literar. stud non deferend.
his ribaudrie, and his too much scorning; and by saying farther, It were
better that a child should never read any part of Lucian, then all Lucian. Or,
if the sentence of a Knight, so worthy, had such credit with you; why did you
not consider Lib. 1. ca. 19
his religious wish, that the names of idols, of Paynim Gods and Goddesses,
were not used at this day in balades and dities, to the corrupting of many good
wits with godless fantasies? For though his reproof do specially touch the
most vile idols, Venus, and Bacchus, remembered so in dansing-songs as if the
danse were to their honor and memory; a matter most abhorring from Christ's
religion, and savouring of the ancient error of Paganism: yet as the Exodus
33. 13 Psalm. 16. 4. Hos 2. 17.
Scripture, the ground of his reproof, does generally condemn such naming
of other Gods, semblably he shows, that, if you had attributed so much to his
judgment, you should have eschewed that fault in your tragedy. At least, where
the words are uttered as it were in your own person: as Vlyss. red. prolog.
ad Acad.
those of Llluminavit Deos.
the Gods enlightened or beautificd by Homers fables are. Perhaps, where players
of other men's persons also speak: as Act. 1. and 5.
Ulysses, and Act. 2.
Eumaeus, adoring spirits of Nymphae Naides.
Devils, or of dead Iuppiter.
men, and Minerva.
women, with sacrifices and prayers; Act. 2.
Telemachus Per Iovem.
swearing by Iuppiter; Act. 4.
Philaetius, first Inique semper Iuppiter: nec enim est Deus Te pejor alter.
blaspheming GOD under Iuppiters name, then Magne regnator Deum ^am fateor
esse, fateor in coelo Deos.
confessing to him that there are Gods in heaven. Chiefly seeing that these
speeches are delivered by the flower of those persons, by whose parts (you
say) no hurt could come to any man: and Sir Thomas Eliot thought that such
speeches, savouring of Paganism, might corrupt good wits. But howsoever you
shall distinguish your Poem from the balades and dities, in which he
controlleth this irreligious custom of giving the honor of God to vile
idols: your self do bear witness that he comme^deth not the dansing of
Eurymachus and the rest of your wooers with their Melanthos on the stage. For
among the parts of their dissolute behavior imagined to be done within, you
rehearse their Regiam perdunt domum Luxu, choreis, scelete, dapibusque impiis.
dansing: and that in the person, not of a carping Momus, but of wise Act. 1.
Telemachus. Now look what was imagined to be done within, the same was
expressed on the stage in part, by your own confession: as Telemachus also
says, that in Quos jam reliqui more viventes suo, Tumultuantes, atque
saltantes domi.
their manners at home they kept their wont, Their dansing on the stage then,
your self acknowledge, was dishonest dansing. And the dansing praised by Sir
Thomas Eliot is honest dansing, you say. Therefore you do manifest wrong unto
us both, in alleging him as praising that which I dispraysed.

Plutarch. apophthe. reg. and imperat.
When the Lacedaemonians had accused the Thebans of many and greevous matters:
In deed, quoth Epaminondas, (...).
these have made you give over your short form of speaking. I wish I might be
short, as were the Lacedaemonians; but you constrain me to be long: you deal
so Theban-like continually with me. A doubtful word being used in a question
of yours, Senecamne tu recitare jacturam putes?
whether we account it a loss recitare, to recite Seneca; Whereunto I answered
that it is one thing Recitare.
to recite, another thing Agere.
to play, as I declared by sundry writers; and added that I would have been
content to hear your tragedy recited; had it been recited or pronounced
only; you reply that the word is used in Quintilian; not only de scripto,
but also memoriter recitare; and therefore you might use it indifferently, for
agere, in a general acceptatio^; moreover, that as Horace and Persius do
scoff bitterly at recitatores also, and the law in the generality of the
term notes also with imfamie, them, qui pronuntiandi, that is properly,
recitandi causa in scenam prodeunt: so the Universitie would have thought it a
more absurd thing to have heard you, or any other, openly reading your Ulysses
to them, then to have seen it acted as it was. Wherein to the intent you may
see how you play the Theban, I will use a comparison, and that within some
measure I trust. (...).
Plutarch has written a dialogue to prove that brute beasts have reason as
well as men have: in jest peradve^ture, seeing he makes it to be avouched by
(...) a pigge, or hog.
Gryllus: or meaning, that they have a natural sagacitie and understanding
like to reason, not reason capable of Religion, as in the (...).
conclusion he seems to insinuate, and a Vallesius de sacra philosophia, cap.
44. and 55.
certain Christian writer has maintained, though speaking not so fitly in
saying they have reason, since the 2. Pet. 2. 12.
Scripture terms them (...)
Creatures void of reason. But suppose that some man being of Gryllus mind,
(or let us call him Gryllus for more perspicuitie, and make Sempronius likewise
his adversaries name;) suppose then that Gryllus having asked this question,
Animalne tu rationis expers esse putas?
Do you think that animal, a living creature endued with sense, wants
reason? Sempronius answered him, that animal is one thing, and a beast an
other, as De legi. li. 1.
Tullie declares, affirming a Animal hoc providum, sagax, multiplex, acutum,
memor, plenum rationis and consilii, quem vocamus homine^.
man (whom he calls animal) to be full of reason, whereof he says, that
Solum est enim ex tot anima^tium generibus atque naturis particeps rationis,
and cogitationis, cum caetera sint omnia expertia.
no beast at all is partaker. If Gryllus should reply that the word is used in
Metamor. lib. 1.
Ovid for Pronaque cum spectent animalia caetera terram, os homini sublime
dedit.
all things that have life and sense, not for men only, and therefore he might
use it indifferently for beasts in a general acceptatio^: would not they, who
see, that belike he meant to comprehend men also under that general word,
thereby the more closely to fetch in beasts with them; and that, restraining
it to beasts, his question must be, Think you that beasts want reason? which
were an idle question, and openly implying a begging of the point in
controversy; would they not, I say, condemn him as a wrangling and
contentious Sophister? Now, if in the same vain, or rather in a worse, he
should add moreover, that as Epist lib. 1. epi. 1.
Horace and Satyr. 3.
Persius speak scoffingly of mad men too, and the L. 2. D. de postulando. l.
2. D. de curatorib. suriosor.
law appoints gar^ ^s for idiots, that is properly, for men wanting the use
of re^; so the grave Athenian bench of Areopagus would judge it more absurd to
say that men have reason, then that beasts have it, chiefly certain beasts,
as (...), says Gryll^ in Plutarch.
horses and oxen dansing upon stages in a more exquisit manner then men are
lightly able: would not this speech of Gryllus show that he deserves a
sharper commendation, then Plutarch by praising (...).
his sophistry meant unto him? Here your usual dealing causes me to fear
that you will ask whether I make you a Gryllus. As Theodoret. hist ecclesia.
lib. 2. cap. 16
when a Catholic Bishop, being rebuked by an Arian Emperor for standing alone
with Athanasius against the whole world, said that the doctrine of faith was
not impeached though he alone maintained it, seeing that of old time Dan. 3.
12.
three alone were found who stood against the Kings commandment: What? quoth
an Eunuche, (...).
do thou make our Emperor a Nabuchodonosor? But, I pray you, leave this
Eunuchs odious practice in racking my co^parisons: and mark the maine point
whereat I aim in them, and which I seek to open by them. For, as in Gryllus
question, and verse, framed like yours, the circumstances give, that he used
the general word comprising man, thereby to breed a fancy that if this kind
of animal have reason, why not the other? In like sort your express mention
of Cuius vel vnum simile carminibus me^ Benigna carmen malo posteritas legate:
legate, you say, not agat; though agat would have fitted the verse as well as
legate.
reading, I say, of reading, not of playing, in showing what a jewel you take
the reciting of Seneca to be; makes it probable that you meant to do by the
generality of the word recitare. The more, because you used it not only in
your verse, where your excuse might serve, that it stood better then agere
would in that place; as Gryllus might say likewise for versifying animal
rather, then bestiam: but in your prose also, the Tragoedia noua, in aede
Christi recitata.
title of your tragedy; as if Gryllus, setting down the point controversed
between him and Sempronius, should make it, vtrum animal sit rationis expers;
where the word In the larger sense, that Tullie gives it: Tusc quae. lib. 5.
De not. Deor. lib. 2. not in the stricter of your Lawiers: l. 1. removet. D de
postulando. l. 1.. in bestiis. D. si quadrup. pauper. sec. di.
bestia, would serve as fitly in prose; nay, (if plain dealing were meant) a
great deal more fitly. And if you intended not to make that reason which I
supposed you did, it is no loss to recite Seneca, Ergo no loss to play him:
but meant to use the general word for the special, and to ask Momus only,
Think you it a loss to play Seneca? the^ you begged at Momus hand, or took
as granted, the point you should have prooved; since the playing of Seneca was
condemned by him, and you undertook to confute his arguments. Again, as
Horace, Persius, the law, alleged by Gryllus, do show that certain men want
the use of reason, but neither prove that beasts have it, nor that mankind
wants it; and his presumed testimony of the Areopagus, brought in with a
particle of similitude, So, as hitting iumpe with Horace, Persius, and the law,
is too too absurd: in like sort the same autours, alleged by your self, do
show that some reciters are misliked by them, but neither prove that players
are liked, nor all reciters misliked; and the Universities testimony which you
bring in with the same particle, as hitting iumpe with those autours, I can not
say you bring it altogether as Gryllus, but you bring it strangely. For Satyr.
lib. (...). sat. 4. and. De art. poet.
Horace scoffeth at them, who In medio qui Scripta foro recitent, sunt multi,
quique lavantes.
recite their writings out of due place or time, and are Indoctum doctumque
fugat recitator acerbus.
importunatlie displeasant: Satyr. 1.
Persius, at Patranti fractus ocello.
wantons reciting Quum carnima lubum Intrant, and tremulo scalpuntur ubi in^ma
versu.
wanton verses, with an Liquida quu^ plasmate guttur Mobile collueris.
Quintilian. li. 1. cap. 14.
effeminate voice, and a Quo didicisse, nisi hoc fermentum, and qua semel intus
innata est, rupto jecore exierit caprificus? and vsque adeo ne Scire ^uu nihil
est, nisi te scire hoc sciat alter?
vainglorious mind. The law notes with infamy such as come upon the stage to
recite: belike, for their vainglorious desire of Populo, pexusque, togaque
recenti, and natalitia tandem cum sardonyche albus, Sede legens celsa.
being seen, and At pulchrum est digito monstrari, and dicier, hic est.
getting men's applause, which Persius iesteth at. Now in that you add hereto
the Universitie, and make us join with the former in opinion, saying; So the
University would have thought it a more absurd thing, to have heard me, or any
other, openly reading my Ulysses to them, then to have seen it acted, as it
was: what mean you by this term, So? That if you, or an other, had read your
Ulysses openly unto them, it had been done out of due place, or due time? or,
they should have heard wanton verses read? or wantonly? or by a wanton? or with
a vainglorious mind? or on the stage? In deed, they should have heard In
Melanthos part, and Eurymachus.
some wanton verses, I grant: and both out of due place, and time, if you had
read it Qui pronuntiandi causa in scenam prodierit.
where, and Die Dominico.
when it was acted. Neither do I doubt but the Universitie would have thought
such open reading, of such stuff, on such a day, absurd: though, whether more
absurd, then to have seen it acted as it was, I know not. But whatsoever they
would have thought in this comparison, wherein the L. 1. D. de his qui not.
infam.
law, that you cite, noting both with infamy, should give (me thinks) a
deeper print thereof to acting then reading, all things weighed: you are far
from hitting the mark, whereat you shoot; namely, from co^vincing by the
Universities testimony, and judgment, my sentence as absurd, that if your
tragedy had been recited only, I would have accounted it no more loss of
time to have heard you pronounce it, then my self to read it. For, I did not
mean, if it had been recited as those were, which the autours by you alleged,
do reproove: but as Lib. 1. sat 4.
Horace used to Non recite cuiquam, nisi amicis, idque coactus. Non vbiuis
coramve quibuslibet.
recite his own writings; as Quintilio si quid recitares corrige sodes Hoc
aiebat, and hoc. Hora. de art. poet.
poemes were recited to Quintilius Uarus; as Persii vita. Gloss. vet. (...)
Persium.
Persius did recite his book unto Cornutus, before he published it. Whereof if
you pronounce (as you do, if you speak to purpose) that our Universitie would
have thought it a more absurd thing, then to have seen it acted as it was: you
deal in like manner with our University, as Gryllus with the reverend bench of
Areopagus, if he should abuse their name and estimation, to persuade that brute
beasts have more reason, then the wisest men have.

Hereto would be annexed that, which in the fourth and, last head of reasons,
you urge again concerning our Universities judgment for the approbation of
your plays in general: if your interlaced defense of wastfull cost in setting
forth thereof (the only point remaining besides) were discussed. And this is
easily done, considering what has been already prooved against you touching
the inconveniences and mischifes of your plays. For having made Momus object
the great charges; which how great they were, you know better then I, who
summed them perhaps too much beneath the due when I did mention thirty pound;
but having made him say that it should have been bestowed on the poor rather,
you take him up with three answers: one, that the money was your own, not his;
an other, that the charge, though great to him, was mean to you; the third,
that none would give the less to the poor for that, none would have given the
more without it. All the which I showed to be of no force for warra^ting of
expe^ses on things of that quality, because, both dishonest spending of a man's
own, is wastfulnes and riott, condemned by our Savior in the prodigal son:
and, as Nero giving much to get a Plaudite, was the less able to help the
poor by so much, and the less willing too perhaps; in like sort may you be.
Hereupon you demand of me, What similitude is there, or can there be, between
the prodigal son, that in such a sort, as he did, spent all, and brought him
self to the extreemest misery; and between your expense? A question, which
you would not have pressed, as you do; for your unlikeness to him in that he
wasted all, and brought him self to extreme misery thereby: if you had
considered that (...).
word in the original text of the Gospel, whereto my quotation for Luke 15.
13.
riott did direct you. For usually it notes the quality of expenses made by
loose and wanton persons on their pleasures, as in foreign writers, Ethicor.
lib. 4. cap. 1. (...).
Aristotle and De finib. li 2
Tullie; so in Ephesians. 5. 18. Tit. 1. 6. 1. Pet. 4. 4.
Scripture likewise: and, to that effect in the same parable of the prodigal
son is it said Luke 15. 30.
afterward, that he devoured his goods (...).
with harlotts. Now, in Rome, of old time, there were common Diobolares
meretrices. Fest. Scorta diobolaria. Plaut. Poen.
harlots to be hired for Two oboli being the third part of dram, or
denarius; and eight dram, or denarii, weighing an ounce of silver.
two pence halfe-peny. The price in our days, by reason of the Io. Athon.
gloss. in constit. Othon. de concubin. clericor. remouend. Fr. Sansouin. de
administr. regnor and rerumpub. lib. 11. cap. de mareschallo.
tribute, which they are to pay the Pope, may be enhaunsed. But if one,
desirous of an harlots company, could have her so cheap, and should plead for
him self that the moony he spends on her is his own, and the charge not
great, neither would he geve the less unto the poor for that, nor more
without it: were this a lawful bar to stay us from accusing him of (...)
riott, I mean, of wastfull and dishonest spending; (give it a fitter English
name, if you know any; I took that which our best interpreters agree on;) but
might we not accuse him thereof upon the same ground that Scripture does the
prodigal son? Or, if some Preacher, more severe then Horat. satyrar. li 1.
sat. 2
Cato, should deal so strictly and rigorously with him; might he ask what
similitude there is, or can be, between his expense of two pence halfpenny,
and the prodigal son, who in such a sort, as he did, spent all, and brought
himself to the extremest misery? Much fault have you found with my hard
incomparable comparisons and similitudes; and some of them are Sed quid opus
teneras mordaci radere vero Auricolas? Pers. sat. 1.
hard in deed, though none incomparable: but I must say thereof, as the
Apostle of his boasting, 2 Cor. 12. 11
you have compelled me. For when I took a softer and more gentle course, as
here, to encounter that answer made to Momus, Thou say the charge is great;
but thou may come, and look on, Momus, and pay nothing, no man does ask
thee a penny; I resembled it to an answer which the prodigal son might thus
have made to his reproover, Thou blamest me for wasting, but I wast none of
thine; thou may drink with me scotfree, if thou be a good fellow, and
welcome: albeit the very word, wasting, might have showed I meant dishonest
spending, (for Luke 16. 9. 1. Tim. 6. 18 Tit. 3. 14. Reu. 14. 1^.
things spent honestly are not wasted,) chiefly since I used it in respect of
the riot noted by our Savior; and in the unthrifts speech, drawing good
fellows to drink with him, I pointed to his lusty, excessive, dissolute 1.
Pet. 4. 3.
drinkings with lewd companions like himself; yet you did reply, that, if he
had been as moderate and thrifty in spending at his board, as you were at your
plays, he might well enough have said to any niggard, that should have
unwisely found fault with him, as much as I make him say, not with the note of
a prodigal, but with the commendation of an ingenuous and liberal
disposition. Whereby you make me see, to what reprochefull contumelies of a
niggardly mind, and want of wisdom and discretion, I should have laid my
self open, if I had still endeavored to disclose unto you the weakness of your
aunswers by gentle similitudes. That similitude therefore of mine, the tender
smoothnes whereof occasioned you to mistake my meaning, and intertaine it so
coursly, I have now corrected with substituting a rougher, which may deliver
you from error, and me from such tantes. For seeing you perceve this to be my
meaning, that the threefold answer made by you to Momus is like as if Cie. de
finib. lib. 2.
Gallonius, or some other Epicure, reprooved by a Stoike for going to the
stews, should answer him; Thou blamest me for spending two pence halfpenny on
a wench, but I spend none of thine; thou may go with me thither, if thou be
a good fellow, and I will give her as much for thee too; the charge, though it
seem great to thee, is small to me; neither will I bestow a dodkin less upon
the poor for that, nor more without it: you will not reply, that if Gallonius
had been as moderate and thrifty in his spending at his bed, as you were at
your plays, (they cost a number of you more, you wot, in several, then twice
two pence halfe-peny;) he might well enough have said to any niggard, that
should have unwisely found fault with him, as much as I make him say, not with
the note of a prodigal, but with the commendation of an ingenuous and liberal
disposition. And so, by the other similitude likewise mended, and as it were
rough hewn, you may the better learn to discern my drift, and spare your
own replying. For when, to discover the poverty of your answer touching the
poor, I said, that Nero peradventure was either less able, or less willing
to help the poor, by reason of five or six thousand pownd given for a
Plaudite; which charge notwithstanding he might better bear, then some of your
students may five or six shillings: you replied, that, if Nero could have as
well spared such huge sums of moony, which he spent that way often, as your
House, with the company in it, and belonging to it, can once in many years
thirty powndes: Nero should have been wronged greatly, being an Emperor, to
have been noted of wastfulnes; and, if ever he had any such good mind, he
might nevertheless have releeved the poor. Now, altering and changing Neros
charge on Plaudite into Corn. Tacit. annal. li. 13.
his charge on Act (a harlot whom he loved better then his wife,) and telling
you that he was less able, or less willing (nay, both) to help the poor, by
reason of Quae Princeps furtim mulierculae tribuebat.
gifts bestowed on her: I shall not hear, I trust, that, if Nero could have as
well spared the sundry sums of moony which he spent that way often, as your
House, with the company in it, and belonging to it, can once in many years
thirty powndes: Nero should have been wronged greatly, being an Emperor, to
have been noted of wastfulnes. No, not, though in adding that clause, being an
Emperor, you seem to allude to Ethicor. li. (...).
Aristotle's saying, that (...).
Princes are not termed wastfull, or prodigal. For therein he respects (...).
the abundance of their wealth, which Nero could hardly exceed in gifts and
expenses: not the (...).
quality of the matters that they spend their wealth on, wherein as prodigal
persons may and do wast, so Nero. Neither will you affirm that Nero might
nevertheless have releeved the poor; for fear least you cause your reader to
suspect you of shamelessness, or sophistry. Shamelessness, if you say, that,
whatsoever it were which Nero gave to Act, he had no whit the less in his
coffers to give others. Sophistry, if by the word nevertheless, you mean,
notwithstanding. For Phoedria in the Terent. Eun.
Comedy, might have helped Parmeno, notwithstanding the moony that he spent
on Thais. Yet Nam quod nos capere oportet haec intercipit.
the greater charge he was at with his harlot, the less had he remaining to
give his poor servant. And your dout, if Nero had ever any such good mind,
will be as badly opposed unto my speech of his less willinglesse. For both
him self, Sueton Ner. cap. 10.
having so good a mind once, became Cap. 32. and 38.
worse minded afterward, when he was grown ca. 30. and 31.
wastfull such ways, yea, simply wastfull, prooving that to be possible which
Aristotle judges (...) in ye words alleged.
not easy to be done: and if he had always been equally ill-minded, yet
comes it otherwise to pass in man's nature, as you might have learned by
Caesar and Plutarch. Of whom the one, beholding certain rich strangers and
foreiners, at Rome, carrying whelps of dogs and apes in their bosoms, and
making much of them, did ask, Whether women brought not forth children in
their countries: Plutarch. vita Periclis.
the other says that Caesar herein gave a worthy and princely admonition to
them (...).
who do consume and wast, upon beasts, the natural affection and love due to
men. Both, evidently showing, that the more we spend on things of less
value, the less we are disposed to spend on things more precious; since, 1.
Ioh. 3. 17.
as a man's love is, so is his willingness to spend for love sake: and the love
of apes and dogs may better stand with the love of Children, Mark. 7. 27.
each of them being to be loved, though not alike; then expenses on plays
may with releeving of the poor, Prou. 19. 17. Mat. 25. 40.
the Lord accounting mercy had upon the poor, as had upon him self, and money
spent on plays, being as money spent on harlots. Wherefore, if you will be
suitable to your self, and as you deal for plays, so for the love of apes and
dogs, for which you may more reasonably; your threefold answer against Momus
in your own defense, is quickly turned against Caesar and Plutarch, for those
strangers: The love, which they did bear to the whelps of dogs and apes,
was their own love, it was not Caesar's, or Plutarchs; great might it be to
Caesar and Plutarch, mean to them; neither would they love children the less
for that, nor more without it. And as you assaulted Momus with the Scripture,
telling him that Judas his speech, who said, what needed this wast? is an evil
speech; and now, notwithstanding the difference between your plays and
Christ; us and Indas, do think that it may also be applied against either the
niggardise, or the hypocrisy of any Momus, that shall condemn all expense, as
cast away, that is sometime moderatly bestowed upon honest sportes and
pastimes, and not upon the poor: so, what lets you to think that it may
also be applied against either the clownishnes, or the hypocrisy of Caesar
and Plutarch, who condemned all love, as cast away, that is sometime, moderatly
bestowed upon sweet whelps of dogs and apes, and not upon children? For, if
you should answer, the case is unlike because you can not prove that men's
colling and dandeling of such whelps is seemly, which Caesar and Plutarch
saw good cause to reproove: you must be remembered that yet you may say, the
thing is seemly, though say it only, and deny their reproof to be just,
though not refute it; as you avouch against me that your plays were honest
and lawful recreations, whatsoever is rather objected then prooved to the
contrary. Nay, if Caesar, or Plutarch, had, beside their reasons to prove it
unseemly; alleged sundry testimonies of Romans and Grecians so esteeming it,
as I did the judgments of a Lacedemonian, of Horace, of Tullie of other
learned men, to show that they deemed such cost, as you were at, to be vain
and wastfull: yet, as you reply to me that all Paynim and heathen judgment you
have answered in the defense of your first reason; so might you to them, that
all the testimonies which they bring, you have answered in the Culpam prorsus
Hippolyto imputet, Iuveni protervo, caelibi, duro, truci.
prologue of your last play. I have read The copy of a French letter to Don
Bernardin Mendoze.
that when the Spaniards invincible navy met with ours, about some five
years since, upon the narow seas, it was published in print, at Parise, by
Mendoza the Spaniards procurement, that they got a brave victory, wherein my
Lord Admiral of England, with sixteen of the Queens great ships, were
sunk to the bottom of the sea, and the rest put to flight with the
Vice Admiral Francis Drake. But, God be thanked, we saw my Lord Admiral of
England alive at her Majesty's late being here with us: and now may the
Mendozians pick out of their own Lib. 1. ad ann. Christ. 1588.
Mercurius Gallobelgicus, that neither any one ship of the Queens navy,
were it great, or small, was sunk by the Spaniards, nor the Vice Admiral put
to flight.

And thus at length approaching unto the conclusion, I come to your maintenance
of that which you objected concerning the judgment of our University.
Wherewith (least I pass any thing of weight in your reply, as you do many in
mine) I will join that elsewhere you touch about the woorshipfull, and
sometimes honorable presence at your plays; and those reverend, famous, and
excellent men, for life, and learning, and their places in the Church of God,
who have been not only writers of such things them selves, but also actors,
and do think well of them (as you affirm) to this day. Our Universities
judgment therefore you avow that you produced rightfully to the approoving of
your plays, because the greater part of the Universitie did with their hearty
applause approove them. An argument, that neither lays sound foundation, nor
builds thereupon to purpose. For how prove you, first, that the greater part
did with their hearty appause approove them; seeing you acknowledge that many,
some absent, some present, disallowed them? Forsooth, you say, you are sure of
it. But your bold avouching things, you are not sure of, does make me dout
of your assurance. For, upon my speech that certain who came thither were
pressed thereunto by great importunity, you wish they had more truly, and more
charitably, for dansing, kissing, and other demeanor, reported to me of your
plays, with such a mind as you will forbear (you say) to speak of. Wherein
you do charge them, how charitably, judge your self; but questionless, most
untruly, with making false reports of your plays to me, to whom they made no
report at all thereof. Yea, you take upon you to pronounce of their thoughts:
and say they did it with such a mind, as in your Quintilian. lib. 9. cap. 2.
figurative forbearing to speak of, you speak most bitterly of, and raise a
very wrongful and vile suspicion of them. Again, where I told you how the
grave and learned man, our common friend, showed me his dislike of the
representation of amorousnes, and drunkenness; in the Comedy, both; the former,
not in it only: you say, that you know how far he did somewhat dislike some
Comicall action; but you are sure he commended much the plays to you, and
would be sorry that any speech of his should be, by mistaking, alleged
against you. And do you not in assuring us after this sort that he did like
of your plays, saving a little in the Comedy, imply that he disliked naught
in any tragedy? Or breed you not a sclanderous surmise of his integrity, as
if he had commended to you the very same, which unto me he discommended? Or
seek you not to make men think that I mistook him, in fathering that upon
him; when him self has sithence acknowledged unto me, that I mistook him
not; and (as I am persuaded) has certified you no less too?

Wherefore your pronouncing, that you are sure the greater part did with their
hearty applause approve your plays, may rather prove you to be rash, then
your assertion to be true. Chiefly, since you mention, not only their
applause, a thing that sense might judge of; but their hearty applause, a
circumstance presumed by your conceit peradventure. For as they did Nisi
displic^imus, vos gregi applausum date.
clappe their hands after your plays, so Iterum benignus vndique applausus
sonet.
after the appendix thereof touching Momus. Which yet some approovers of your
plays approoved not: as them selves have signified. How can you then be sure,
that all, who did clappe their hands, did it with liking; and that the
applause, which they gave, was hearty? Beside that, if their hearts joined with
their hands, how can you be sure they approoved your plays by such applause,
and not somewhat else? As Orat. pro P. Sextio.
Tullie declares that the Romans used it to show their love of gracious
persons: and in Vlyss. red. epilogo.
one of your plays Huic vos Elisae quem decet plausum date.
you wished it to be given to her gracious Majesty. Nether is it impossible,
but that, as a Horat. epist. lib. 2. ep. 1.
number gave it to the Lana Tarentino violas imitata veneno.
apparel and furniture of the stage at Rome: so lighter bodies might with you.
And what if the grauer sort did show the liking of your pains and charges
employed for their delight sake? or of the better parts; not of wantons, of
drunckards, and of the whole plays? Now, suppose the greater part of the
University approved them with their hearty applause: might you therefore
lawfully urge the Universities judgment as making for them? Yea, say you, if
the greater part may denominate the whole, Nay, by your leave, even so too will
you come short still, unless you add, that judgment and hearty applause is
all one: which Cicero, orat. pro Plancio.
he, who affirmed that In comitiis, praesertim aedilitiis, studium esse populi,
non ^dicium.
the people of Rome was lead with affection sometimes, not with judgment, did
put a difference between. And though the greater part denominate the whole,
commonly; and always may, if the word, greater, be well expounded: yet there
fall out cases when the lesser part in number shall denominate it, and the
greater shall not. For example sake, Synod. A^cyr. can. 2^. Basil. ep. ad
Amphil. can. 83. Greg. Nysse. epist. ad. Lat. can. 3
there were in the primitive Church certain Christians (as in ours there are)
who, having lost sowewhat, would go to a wisard, or a setter of figures, or
other such soothsayer, to know how it went from them, or by what means they
might recover it. Sext. synod. in Trul. can. 61.
One of the general Counsels spoke against this: and called it (...), says
the Council touching this and the like customs.
a pernicious and an heathenish custom. The number of Bishops assembled in
that Council was lesser of all likelyhoode (amounting Theodor. Balsam. de ea
synodo quae dicitur sexta.
not to twelve score) then the number of Christians, who either used that
practice them selves, or liked it in others. Yet, in my opinion, the Churches
judgment did control it: and to say the contrary, because the greater part
denominateth the whole, were most injurious to the Church. Or, if this example
satisfy you not, Can. 62.
the same Council made a decree, that (...).
no man should put on woman's raiment. Whereto, being pressed by me, when you
reply that the voice of the Church therein may be interpreted by them who are
of your mind; you acknowledge, that, taking it in the right sense, it is the
Churches judgment. And the sense thereof by Of the text of Scripture, Deuteronomy.
22. 5. where the Greek translation has, (...): the very words used by the
Council.
your interpretation of putting on, or wearing, must be that none may do it
commonly. So, the Council speaking of doing it in plays, you grant that the
Churches judgment is against it as common players use to practice it. But
greater assemblies of Christians then that Council, allow it in common
players: the Curtain and Theater can tell so much. Neither will you say, that
common players are approoved by the Churches judgment. For, the Churches
judgment you profess obedience too: yet Histrioniam accusas? Non defendo sed
famam, pudorem, atque innocentiam. Histrioniam vero ipsam, vel tecum accusabo,
si voles.
common players you condemn. The lesser part therefore in number may sometime
denominate the whole; and the greater may not. Which if we apply to the case
in question, it is plain you should not have urged the Universities judgment
for your plays, although the greater part thereof had approoved them. For, the
chiefest cause that moved the governors of our University, the
Uicechancellour and Convocation, to forbid by statute the use of common
plays among us, was, The University statute against common stageplayers: made
in the year 1584.
least the younger sort should be spectators of so many lewd and evil sports
as in them are practiced. Now, reason does give, that men of understanding,
who, through a godly care of the good training up of youth, restrained them
from seeing those plays, because of such sportes; must think it inconvenient
for them to see such sportes in what soever plays, even in your Rivales. And,
if inconvenient to see such sportes only, much more to play and represent
such: the representing of them being so far worse, then the beholding, in
De legib. lib. 7.
Platos judgment, that (...).
they would be seen and known, he says, because their contraries, honest
things and serious, can not be known without them, if one intend to be wise;
but (...)
practice both them, and their contraries, it is impossible, if one intend to
have as much as a spark of virtue. Our gouvernours might think more
hopefully, then Plato, that virtuous youths may do them both: and Plato
peradventure meant by impossible, very hard, as De Vniversi.
Tullie Plat. Timaeo; (...) cic. Difficillimu^ factu.
elsewhere does interpret him. But the duetifull reverence, which I owe unto
them, will not permit me to judge of them, that where Plato suffered his
citizens to see sportes of folly and scurrilitie, yet none (...).
beside bondslaves and mercenarie strangers to imitate and express them: the
guides of our Universitie should deem it convenient for youths to be actors of
loose and wanton prankes, whereof to be spectatours, they have pronounced it
unmeet and hurtful for them. Wherefore, what soever the greater part
approoved with their hearty applause, I am persuaded still that you did wrong in
urging the Universities judgment as making for your plays. No less in a
manner, then if one beholding a great number of Scholars playing in winter time
at footeball, should say, the Universities judgment does approove it. Which
I contrariewise should be so far from thinking, that if any graver man were
looking on them, or touched the ball with his foot, I would take it rather to
savor of affection borne to some playing thereat, then of judgment.

As for the worshipful, and sometimes honorable presence at your plays, you
might seem to press it against me with more credit, if honorable and
worshipful persons never used to grace any plays, save only yours, with
their presence. But if they be present at common plays also, such as our
Vniversitie-statute banisheth hence, and your self make offer that Histrioniam
ipsam vel tecum accusabo, si voles.
you will join with me in writing aginst the players thereof, if I will:
consider with your self what you would answer to this argument alleged by
those players, and let the same serve on my behalf to yours. For a supply
whereof I add, that worthy personages, who, upon intreatty, become your
spectators, perhaps think with Plato, that the seeing of Comedies played can
do no harm, of tragedies may be dangerous; perhaps incline to Aristotle, that
they both may safely be seen by elder folk, not by younger: and so, though
them selves behold one, or both, yet do they warrant neither of the points
you strive for; I mean, that either students of Christ-church may be actors,
or the youth of Oxford spectators of your plays. Plini epistolar. lib. (...).
ep. 22. ad Sempronium Rufum.
There were at Uienna, in the time of Traian the Emperor, by some bodies last
will and testament, certain solemn games and shows set forth yearly:
Placuit ag^na tolli, qui mores Viennensium infecerat, vt noster hic omnium.
the which, as Pliny says, had stained the manners of the inhabitants of that
city, in like sort as the games and shows set forth at Rome had stained the
manners of all the world. This corruption of manners was not bredde by other
exercises and masteries tried, in those games, but by the stage plays, as a
Petr^ Faber, agonist. lib. 1 cap. 26.
learned man of your profession judges: and Panegyrico Trajan.
Plinies own speech, concerning sundry kinds of games among the Romans,
makes it most probable, that he meant, the corruption grew from stage plays
chiefly, if not from them alone.

But when the Uiennians plays were taken away by Trebonius Rufinus, a
governor of theirs, and he was accused to the Emperor for it: Iunius
Mauricus, a grave and faithful Counselor, being asked by the Emperor, what
he thought thereof, said, Non esse restituendu^ Viennensibus agona.
it was not meet the plays should be restored again to the Viennians;
adding, Vellem etiam Romae tolli posset.
I would to God they might be taken away at Rome too. Which corollarie of his
sentence touching plays at Rome, it may be, that as Viennensium vitia intra
ipsos residunt: nostra late vagantur. Vtque in corporibus, si^ imperio
gravissinus est morbus, qui a capite d^funditur.
Pliny liked very well of, so the Emperor did: albeit he gave order for the
not restoring of the Uiennians only; and yet showed great mislike of plays
therein also, forbidding that to be done which by ones L. ult in sin. c. de
fideicomm. Nov. 1. in praefat.. Semper.
testament was required. Deceve not your self, Master D. Gager, with a vain
conceit, as if, because a Prince, far and far more excellent then Traian,
though surnamed Optimus, Plin. locis citatis; and Dio, Trajan. Xiphilini epit.
most virtuous, with Her counselors and Nobles more honorable then Mauricus,
did vouchsafe the last year to see that Comedy played, which being played a
few moonths before I reprooved, therefore you had gained against me the matter
in question between us. Her Majesty with their Honors, and Commons of the
realm, having made an Act of Parliament 14 Eliz. ca. 5
long since, and 35 Eliz. ca. 7
since that time renewed it, that common players in enterludes, not licensed by
special authority to go abroad, shall be adjudged rogues and vagabonds, has
taken away more plays, and in more places, then Traian did by giving order
that they should not be used again at Vienna. Whether the taking of them away
at Oxford too, have been wished by any of the Counselors, who might be
notwithstanding present with her Highness, as Pliny and Mauricus of likelyhoode
were with Trajan at the plays in Rome: you and I are not so near of their
counsel, that we can define. But thus much I may say, and say it upon
knowledge, that, if your Comedy had still as homely speeches (to say no worse)
as it had when your Prolog. in Rivales comaediam: actam Febr. 1591.
prologue praised it, there is greater cause why you should fear the check
which Non putaba^ me tibi tam familiarem. Macrob. Saturn. lib. 2. cap. 4.
Augustus gave one (were not our Augusta the more gracious to us) for presuming
to play it before a presence of such honor: then why you should mention to the
credit of your plays, and to my discredit, that they are things done by you,
in a worshipful, and sometimes honorable presence.

But reverend, famous, excellent men, for life, and learning (you say) and for
their places in the Church of God, have been not only writers of such things
themselves, but also actors; and to this day do think well of them: to whom
it were a great reproach (thus you amplify it) at any time to have been
acquainted with things of so vile and base quality; and much more, still to
allow of the^. August. de bapt. contr. Donatist. lib. 2. cap. 1.
When the Donatists praised St Cyprianus, cujus tantum meritum novimus,
tanta^que doctrina^.
Cyprians life, and learning, and spoke of Cum coepiscopis suis.
his place in the church of God, to countenance their error by the reputation
of such a Bishop and Martyr, S. Austin, answering the^, said that Non me
deterret autoritas Cypriani, quia reficit humilitas Cypriani.
the authority of Cyprian did not dismay him, because the humility of Cyprian
did relieve him. Which as Austin said, considering how Ad Quintu^, ep. 71.
edit. Pam.
Cyprian had set down in writing, that Peter, whom the Lord chose his Mark. 3.
16.
first Apostle, and Matt. 16. 18
upon whom he built his Church, did not, when Gal. 2. 11.
Paul afterward grew to question with him touching circumcision, take proudly
on him self, to say that he had the prerogative of being first, and that
new-sprong and later-come ought rather to obey him; neither despised he Paul
for Act. 9. 1.
having been a persequuter of the Church before, but yielded to the advice of
truth, and easily approoved the rightful way, which Paul contended for; giving
us a lesson of peaceablenes, and patience, that we should not obstinately love
our own conceits; but such things as sometimes are profitably and holesomly
showed us by our brethren and fellows in office, those should we account of as
our own rather, if they be true and rightful: whereunto Paul having a
careful eye also, and Christianly providing for concord and peace, said, 1.
Cor. 14. 29
Let the Prophets speak, two or three, and let the rest judge; and if any
thing be reveiled to an other that sits by, let the first hold his peace;
teaching therein that many things are reveiled better to particular persons;
and that every one, if any thing be found better and more profitable, ought
gladly to embrace it, not obstinately to strive for that which he has once
conceived and maintained: as these points (I say) noted thus by Cyprian made
Lib 2 ep. 5
Austin be persuaded of him, that seeing he knew, he might more easily err
then Peter, he would have been very well content to change his mind, if any
man by Satis ostendit, facillime se correcturu^ fuisse sententiam suam, si quis
ei demonstraret, and so forth; meaning this kind of proof, as appears by
that he adds, vnde multa jam diximus, compared with yt he points to, lib.
1. ca. 7. and by Cypri. ep. 47. ad Pompeium.
Scripture had prooved him to be overseene, or Gu^ and ipse sine dubio cederet,
si jam illo tempore quaestionis hu ius veritas eliquata and declarata per
plenariu^ concilium solidaretur.
the Church had sifted the truth in a general Council, and agreed of it; so
the knowledge of the same engraven in those learned and godly men, whom you
speak of, induces me to think that when they shall have weighed what grounds
of Gods word, what consent of the Church, what Councels, what Fathers, impugn
their opinion, they will not approove your obstinat striving for it. It may
be, that they will mislike of your art too, in that, for the surer uniting of
them to you, and stirring them up against me, you do not only affirm that
they are exceedingly tainted in honor, if plays, which they allow of, be
justly disallowed by me: but also, that it were a great reproach to them,
though not so exceedingly great, as is the other, yet a great reproach, at any
time to have been acquainted with things of so vile and base quality. For why?
Is the writing of Comedies, or tragedies, but what speak I of writing? in
mentioning whereof your art appears farther, since I condemned it not: is the
playing of them made by me a thing of so vile and base quality, as
persequuting, or blaspheming? Yet Saint Paul thought it no great disgrace for
him, 1. Tim. 1. 13
in former time to have been a blaspemer, and a persequuter, when ver. 12.
he was now become a faithful minister of Christ: no more then for the Romans
Romans 6. 17.
to have been slaves of sin, when they did now obey the doctrine of the
Gospel; or for Abraham Ios. 24. 2.
to have been in the land of Chaldaea and served other Gods there; when Gen 12.
5.
he came now to Chanaan. and s ver. 8.
served there the Lord. Not, Psalm. 119. 67 Luke 15. 10 1. Cor. 6. 11. Rev. 3.
18. and 7. 14. and 19. 8
to have been evil, is a reproach; but to be. Again, what reason have you to
say that a much greater reproach it were to them, still to allow of plays: when
you commend St Cyprian as a man of singular godliness, and zeal, Epist. 70.
sequen^ibusque: and conc. Carthag. de bap. baeret.
who did more then allow, an other manner of matter then plays, even
rebaptizing of men baptized by heretics? For as he followed Epist. 71. and 73.
his predecessors in this error, and therefore was the more excusable: so had
the reverend men, whom you allege, their predecessors that trained them to the
liking of plays. Neither is it probable that they have been advertised of
their oversight by any such man's writing, as Cyprian was by Vincent. Lirin.
contr. haer. cap. 9.
Stephanus. And Epist. 73. and 74.
Cyprian continued in his error still, notwithstanding that advertisement:
how know you that they have not changed their opinion? Or, if they have not
changed it, they may ere they dye: which none is able to say that Cyprian did,
for ought that Epist 48. and de bapt. cont. Donatist. lib. 2. cap. 4.
Austin could find, a man most likely to have found it, had there been ought
that could have showed it. Wherefore it savoureth strongly of a bad quality,
that you would persuade them, they must by my judgment be noted and disgraced
with a foul exceeding great reproach and infamy, if they allow of plays
still. Much worse does it savor, that you bear them in hand, although their
minds should alter and think hereof when they pray, Psalm. 25. 7.
Remember not, O Lord; the sins of my youth, it must be nevertheless a
great reproach unto them, at any time to have been acquainted with the writing
and playing of such matters. But what quality, nay, what canker shall I say it
savoureth of, that, unto the Prophets, whose judgment and authority the 1.
Cor. 14. 32.
spirits of these Prophets were likely to be moved with, I mean, unto the
Fathers and Councels laid in balance by me against your testimonies, you reply,
that, if they be rightly understood, their forces are not bent against you;
Whereas your own pen tells you, that you know the contrary. For, the first
and greatest Council that I quoted, is Sexta syn^ dus in Trull^.
that general Council of Constantinople, which (grounding it self upon the
place of Deuteronomie) notes men's wearing of wemens raiment in plays as a
heinous crime. Now this to make against you, even being rightly understood,
your self did acknowledge when I alleged it before: in so much that you
opposed thereunto the opinion of others interpreting that text otherwise then
the Council does. The same did you likewise confess of sundry Fathers upon
the same occasion, and namely of Saint Cyprian; whom here notwithstanding you
do namely mention as making not against you: yea, whom you moreover do set
down for a special pattern of the rest, to infer the general, that none of
all the Fathers or Counsels do reproove your plays. For, Saint Epistolar.
(...). 2. ep. 2.
Cyprian (say you) inveigheth most eloquently and godly against the abuses of
the Cothurnus est tragicus prisca facinora carmine rece^sere, etc.
tragike buskin in his time. So he does also against the evils of war, of
judgment seats, of judges, of advocates, of gold, and riches. Shall we
therefore conclude there should be no war, no tribunals, no judges, no
advocates, no gold, no riches; and likewise no tragike buskin in any sort?
Whereupon you add; No doubt the Fathers, as holy men of God, both in their
Councelles, and in their books, have decreed, and written, many zealous and
most godly things against the theatricall sightes of their times: but
distinguish the times, the places, the qualities of the sights and actors, and
the use from the abuse; and it is evident by that which is said before, that we
and our plays are not reproched by them. Thus labor you to face it out that
your plays are not reproched by the Fathers, as dealing forsooth, just like
Saint Cyprian against the abuses of playing tragedies, not the use; when yet
you had granted that Epist. 61. or (as your copy has it) lib. 1. ep. 10.
he condemns Cum in lege prohibeantur viri mu^iere^ induere veste^ and
maledicti eiusmodi iudicentur: qua^to maioris est criminis non tantum muliebria
indumenta accipere, sed and gestus quoque turpes, and molles, and muliebres,
magisterio artis impudicae exprimere?
the attyring of boys in women's raiment, and teaching them to Quemadmodum
masculus frangatur in foeminam.
play the women, the self same thing he does in the Evirantur mares; honor
omnis and vigor sexus enervati corporis dedecore mollitur; plusque illic placet
quisquis viru^ in foeminam magis fregerit.
place you quote: so that your tragedie-playing is reprooved by him in your
own conscience, because of your Melantho and Nais played by boys, although it
were true that he inveigheth only against the abuses thereof, as you
distinguish.

The truth is that he distinguished not so, neither for tragike buskin, nor
for comike stertvp, but inveigheth against stage-playing it self: in like sort
as he does against the games and sights of Paratur gladiatorius ludus, vt
libidinem crudelium luminum sanguis oblectet.
fensers, or sword-players, and of Quid illud, oro te, quale est, vbi se feris
obiiciunt quos nemo damnauit?
beast-players (so to term them) wherewith he matcheth this of Converte hi^
vultus ad diuersa spectaculi non minus paenitenda contagia: in theatris
conspicies, quod tibi and dolori sit and pudori.
stage players. So that the absurd conclusion which you frame, of no war, no
judges, no advocates, no riches, if no tragike buskin, is framed amiss on
error, and would have reason enough if it were framed rightly, as it should
be, thus, that, if no stage-playing ought to be allowed by Saint Cyprians
judgment, then ought there no. Homicidium quum admittunt singuli, crimen est:
virtus vocatur quum public geritur.
unjust wars, no perfidious advocates, no Patronus praevaticatur, and decipit.
Iudex sententiam vendit.
corrupt judges, no. Divites, continuant^ saltibus saltus, and de confinio
pauperibus exclusis infinita ac sine terminis rura latius porrigentes.
covetous encrochers on the poor, to be allowed: because he inveigheth as well
against the iniquity, treachery, briberie, and misery of these, as he does
against stage-playing. Or, if you will needs have him to reproove the abuses
only of stage-playing, not the thing: then by like reason he reprooveth not
the blooddy sport and game of beast-players, or of sword-players, but the
abuses of it. Which, I hope you will not affirm to be his meaning, no not for
the former, since (...).
the Church condemned it, as Advers. haer. conclus. compend. ver. doctr. de
fide cath. and apost. Ecclesiae.
Epiphanius witnesses: (...), translated venationem, meaning that hunting
which Cassiodore describes, variar. lib. 5. epist. 42. Quo muner^ venator
explendus est, qui, vt spectantibus placeat, suis mortibus elaborat. etc.
it, I say, the thing, not the abuses of it, as if it had a right use, allowed
by the Church. At least you will not make it his meaning for the later; which
Emperors, less severe then that holy Martyr, even Eusebius. lib. (...) vit.
Constant. cap. 25.
Constantine, Cod. Theod. lib. 15. tit. 12. l. 1.
Theodosius, Theodoret. hist. eccl. lib. 5. cap. 26.
Honorius, and C. de gladiatoribus penitus tollendis.
Justinian, took absolutely away by edictes and laws, as a thing faulty of it
self. Though, when I consider your speech, above rehearsed, of so many Circi,
Theatra, Amphitheatra, builded by the greatest and bravest Romans with huge
charge; and of games set out therein, referred by Aristotle to magnificence, a
goodly virtue: Your professed desire of approoving the Romans judgment so
far forth, as serves for the necessary defense of your own doings,
causes me to dout that seeing in (...). Epiphanius. in the place quoted.
Theatra, condemned by the Church, you distingush abuse from use, you will in
Ludi circenses: which he names (...).
Circi also, and (...). Dio. lib. 43. used not only to (...), whereof
Epiphanius; but also to (...) and gladiatoria certamina. Tertull. de spect.
cap. 12 and 1^.
Amphitheatra; and therefore say that Cyprian reprooveth not the use, but the
abuses only of beast-playes, yea of swoord-playes, unless there come some
other shift into your mind for severance of your stageplayes from them. And
sure if one possessed with Discors. sopr. live. lib. 2. cap. 2. Osor. de
nobilit. Christ. lib. 3.
Machiavells humor and love of blooddy sacrifices, as helping by the sight
thereof to make men valiant, should wish for blooddy games of swoord-players in
like respect: he might, by your example, not only challenge them from the mark
of infamy wherewith the Romans branded them, (for Satyr. 8.
fuvenal, August. cap. 43. Calig. cap. 30.
Suetonius, Annal. li. 15
Tacitus, and so forth, do reproach noble men and Knights for swoord-playing,
not base folk;) but also defend them from the reproof of Cyprian and all the
rest of the Fathers. For De spectac. cap. 4.
Cyprian inveigheth most eloquently and godly against the abuses of
swoord-playing in his time. So Epist. lib. 2. ep. 2.
he does also against the evils of war, of judgment seats, of judges, of
advocates, of gold, and riches. Shall we therefore conclude there should be no
war, no tribunals, no judges, no advocates, no gold, no riches, and likewise
no swoord-playing in any sort? No dout the Iren. lib. 1. cap. 1. Tertull de
spect. cap. 19. Arnob. advers. gent lib. 2. Minut. Felix in Octav. Lactant.
diuinar. instit. epit. cap. 4. August. confess. lib. 6. cap. 8. Prudent. con^r.
Symnach. lib. 2.
Fathers, as holy men of God, have written many Zealous and most godly things
against the amphitheatricall sights of their times: but distinguish the times,
the places, the qualities of the sights and actors, and the use from the abuse;
and it is evident by that which Machiavell says, that swoord-playes of our age
are not reproched by them. A very true sentence, that, no dout the Fathers have
written many zealous and most godly things against those sights of both sorts:
and likewise true, no dout, that it is as evident by Machiavels discourse,
that, if such swoordplayes should now be used in London, as were then at Rome,
the Fathers check them not; as it is by yours, that the Fathers do not
repoche the same stage plays of Plautus, Terence, Seneca, or worse (which
comparison Rivales may well bear) played here, of late, among us. Wherefore it
had been better for your credit to contain your self within generalities, by
saying that men mistake the Fathers: as Machiavell contented him self to say
in gross, that base and cowardly wretches have misse-interpreted our religion.
For then I could not have blamed you about particulars; your policy had
prevented me, as it has in Chrysostom: whose testimony, Homil. 56. in Genesis
(...).
quoted by me against your wastfull expenses on such toys, you make no
answer to, no more then to Clem. Alexandr. poedag. lib. 3. cap. 11. (...).
Salvian. de gubern. Dei lib. 6. Perditae expensae.
others whom I quoted not. Now, when you affirm that Cyprian, and the rest,
writing against the theatricall sights of their times, do not write against
such as in our time are used: I must needs tell you, that you show less
conscience and singlenes in your writing, then to whom you ought and easily
might excel in all religious duties, Bodinus, and Lipsius. Of whom Bodin. de
repub. li. 6. ca. 1
the one, declaring what need there is for Censors for theaters of our time,
alleges sundry Fathers, and namely Cyprian, against them: yea, that very
epistle of Lib. 2. ep. 2.
Cyprian, which you specify, and wring to the contrary. The Lips. de
gladiatorib. lib. 1. cap. 7.
other, observing how the Fathers have inveighed against games, as Libidinis
saevitiaeque fontes.
springes of lust, and cruelty; pointing, in the term of lust, unto theaters;
of cruelty, unto amphitheaters; does argue that swoord-playes, if they were
used in our time, might be as well denied to be reproched by the Fathers, as
stage plays of our time are. But, with whatsoever cunning or boldness, you
blind the eyes of children, and make them believe that these ancient Prophets
write not against your fancy: the praise given by you to our own Prophets,
those reverend and famous persons now living, causes me to fear I was too
faint when I said, They will not approove your obstinate striving for it; I
should have said, They will not approove your bare opinion or this, will, is
also too faint; They do not approove it. For, being excellent men in life,
they love modesty, and yield unto the known truth. Being excellent in
learning, they know that your theatricall sights are of the same kind, that
the Fathers have decreed in their Counsels, and written in their books
against. The things which the Fathers have decreed and written, are not only
zealous, but also most godly, as you say. Most godly; therefore consonant to
the holy Scriptures: on the ground whereof it is expressly noted by In the
place above quoted.
Epiphanius likewise that (...).
the churches doctrine and ordinances were framed. And how can it be thought
then with any likelyhoode, that those reverend persons do approove your
stage plays: which, by all presumptions, and your own verdict, they know that
the Church, the Fathers, the Councels, the Scriptures have condemned? In deed
if they were Papists, and such as would rather put on the shameless forehead
of the hoore of Babylon, then confess them selves to have been overseene: a
man might have reason to think, that their own doeings they would still allow
of. For, whereas the profane and wicked toys of Passion-playes, plays setting
forth Christ's passion, procured Magno scelere atque impretate sacerdotum, qui
eiusmodi fieri curant: faith Viues.
by Popish Priests, who, being 2 Cor. 11. 3
corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ, as they have transformed the
celebrating of the Sacrament of 1 Cor. 11. 20
the Lords supper into a Missale Romanu^: tit. de ritib. celebra^di Missam
Masse-game, and all other parts of Ecclesiastical service into Sacerdotale,
Po^tificale, and Ceremoniale Romanu^.
theatricall sights; so, in steed of 2. Tim. 4. 2.
preaching the word, they caused it to be played; a thing Epist. Iapanic. 18.
Io. Fernandis Bongo.
put in practice by their flowers, the Jesuits, among the poor Indians; but
whereas these bables were reprooved by Comment. in Augustine. de ciu. Dei, lib.
8. cap 27
Vives: the Index expurgatorius.
Purgatorie-censors commanded Deleantur cap. 27. litera D ab, Atqui mos nunc
est, etc. vsque ad E.
that reproof of his to be defaced; and the Autuerpiensi editione operum Aug.
Divines of Lovan have razed it out accordingly. Yea, though Council. Mediolan.
1. Constit. part. 1. cap. de actionib. and repres. sacris.
some Italian Bishops in a Council, under their Archbishop Cardinal
Borrhomaeus, have Statuimus vt deinceps Saluatoris passio nec in sacro, nec in
profano loco agatur.
ordered, for their Province, that the Passion shall not be played hereafter
any where: yet (for fear of breeding a scruple in men's minds that their
Church might err) they say, Pie introducta consuetudo repraesentandi populo
venerandam Christi Domini passionem.
it was a custom religiously brought in. So loath are ambitious spirits to
acknowledge their oversights and faults. But seeing that our reverend Pastors
and Doctors have an other spirit, as Numb. 14. 24.
he says of Caleb, and profess a purer religion then Papists: you must give
me leave to suspect rather that you charge them wrongfully, then that men of
excellent godliness and wisdom do allow and think well of so manifold evils,
as in your plays I have disclosed.

And thus, a great deal later then my desire and hope was, but as soon as
sickness and business would permit, have you that performed, which in your
conclusion, by words, you request me to forbear the doing of; in your whole
discourse, by deeds, you have induced and urged me to undertake. The reason
added by you to move me to forbear it, namely, that I have some thing else to
do, then to trouble my self, and my better studies, with a matter of this
nature and moment; I know not whether it would have seemed sound to others,
sure to me it did not. For, if I had lived among the Jews at that time, when
2. Maccab. 4. 14.
the priests neglecting the service of the altar, and sacrifices of the law,
made have to be partakers (...).
of unlawful games in the wrestling place: I should of all studies have deemed
that the best, which the Lord requires at his Prophets hands, Ezekiel. 13. 5.
to rise up in the gappe, and keep out Matt. 13. 25 Ephesians 6. 11. 1. Pet. 2. 11.
the enemy striving to enter in thereby, What study therefore could I account
so good, as this, to spend my vacant time in, when Christians, 1. Ioh. 2. 20.
anointed by God, 1. Pet. 2. 5.
an holy Priesthood, make have from spiritual sacrifices and service to be
partakers of stage plays; that is, of more unlawful games then were (...)
Plutarch. Symposiac. li. 2. quaest. 4.
those exercises in the wrestling place, as 1. Cor. 9. 25. Tertullian. lib. ad
Martyras, cap. 3.
the thing it self, and your own L. 4. Comparata cuml. 2. D. de his qui not.
infam.
law may teach you? Again, the Prou. 22. 6.
virtuous training up of youth among us, and the Matt. 5. 14. Ephesians. 2. 10. Phil.
2. 15.
godly life of all sorts of persons, are matters of great moment and weight in
his sight, 1. Pet. 1. 17.
who without respect of person judges every man according to his work. Now,
what hurt it is for youth to be seasoned with a liking of stage players; I say
not, to be stage players them selves, which is worse, but to have a liking
and love of such only; the autour of Dialog. de oratorib. Tacito inscript.
the dialogue (were it Tacitus, or Quintilian) touching the decay of eloquence
among the Romans, does show by Propria and peculiaria huius vrbis vitia,
histrionalis favor, and gladiatorum equoruque studia. Quibus occupatus and
obsessus animus quantulu^ loci bonis artibus relinquit?
their example. And, how the manners of all spectators commonly are hazarded by
the contagion of theatricall sights, I made plain unto you in my former
letters by the testimonies of learned men and noble nations; all granted by
your self, or as good as granted, in that you have either not answered them at
all, or vnsufficientlie. Wherefore, considering S. Confession lib. 6. cap. 7.
Aust. zealous care to reclaim Alipius (a young man who^ he loved, a worthy
Bishop afterward) from Insania Circensium, as S. Austin terms it.
the vain delight that he took in seeing games of chariot-drivers: I could not
but esteem it a thing of price, and worth, to seek to reclaim from a far
more vain and dangerous delight the Students of your house, among whom there
are many no less dear to me then Alipius was to Austin, and as likely (by
Gods grace) hereafter to prove well. With whom I have also greater cause to
hope that I shall prevail, then he had with Alipius, because your self tell
me, that you do and ever will most gladly embrace, not only my good will, but
also my judgment in this cause so far as I write in the general against
stage players. For I am persuaded that their opinions of me are as kind as
yours: and then do they agree with me in a manner about the point we treat
of. They will agree wholly, if they weigh advisedlie one rule, which L. 147. D.
de regulis iuris.
you can teach them, and I would I might entreat you so to do: namely, that
Semper specialia generalibus insunt.
the general does evermore comprise the special. The Lord behold both them,
and you, in his mercy: and give you all his grace to know the way that leads
unto life eternal, and to walk therein.

At Queens College, the 30th of May. 1593. Yours in the Lord John Rainolds.

IOANNI RAINOLDO doct. theologo clariss. Albericus Gentilis, S.
NON feres, opinor, aegre, missa haec a me in vulgus, quae unum habent, and
alterum aliter, atque tu senseris, and docueris. Neque enim ego contra te stare
volui, a quo steti semper, and Deo faciente stabo: sed adversus alios
disputavi, quos sequi non potui: eos etsi tu sequereris, and ad probares.
Rogavi te coram de utraque quaestione: nec tamen audire a te nisi nudam
sententiam tuam valui. Petii etiam a communi amico nostro Errico Cuffio, ut de
te ipsum hoc sciscitaretur, si mihi author esses, ut commentationes istas typis
mandarem. Sed aut te convenire ille non potuit: aut accepit nihil, quod
responderet. Audi, mi Rainolde: quaestionem de histrionibus public ego
tractavi antea quam tibi haec quaestio cum altero esset. Itaque ipsam demere
nunc de corpore reliquo, honestum non fuerit. Imo ad me spectare videtur,
defendere semper jus civil, quod profiteor, and quod semper iustissimum
observavi. In vestras autem si sedesque veni, non solum tutari conatus sum
nostras: tu illud nosti iuris esse, quando and tu invisere nos in nostris
sedibus voluisti. Quanquam de te ego cogitare nequivi, qui post meam
commentationem ingressus es istam disceptationem: at moralia, and politica
sacrorum librorum aut nostra existimavi, aut certe communia nobis, and
theologis: and vero etiamnum versor in eadem opinione. Uale, vir clarissime. Et
de meis his chartis, ^t literis sic facies, vt te in opere, quod nunc
aggrederis, arduo, et summo, ne tantillum quidem morentur: neque enim tanti
sunt.

Iul. 7.
ALBERICO GENTILI, I. C. professori regio, 10. Rainoldus S.
QVae duo per epistolam, erudite Gentilis, a me videris petere, ea tibi lubens
ambo concedo: alterum, ne aegre feram commentarium a te in lucem editum,
quimeam sententiam de Samuele pythonissae, and histrionibus oppugnet; alterum,
ut literas chartasque tuas sic accipiam, ne me in opere, quod aggredior, vel
tantillum morentur. Cur enim ego tibi magis irascar, quod de Samuele adversus
26. q. 5. c. nec mirum.
Augustinum, aliosque theologos a Praelectionib ad Eccle. cap 46.
me citatos disputes; aut quaestionem do histrionibus public tractaris antea
quam ego de iis cum altero controversarer: quam tu succenseas mihi, quod
probationes opiniones tuae a De purgatorio, li. 2. ca. 6.
Bellarmino propositas iam pridem convellerim; and a pestibus scenicorum
spectaculisque theatralibus Praefat. these. ad Acad. Oxon.
nostros dehortatus sim, prius quam tu cathedram istam, ex qua ludios laudas,
occupares. Nihil autem esse quamobre^ me chartae tuae remorentur, verissimo
colligis argumento: Neque enim tanti sunt, inquis. Huc accedit, quod actum
agere vetamur proverbio. Et ego, in meis adversus Bellarminum de Samuele
praelectionibus, rations omnes, quibus Comment. adl b. c. de malef. and
mathemat.
contendis Samuelem ipsum a pythonissa evocatum, satis superque refutavi. Binis
porro literis, quas ad familiarem tuum de ludis ludionibusque, uti scis,
scripsi, ea quae ex Platone, Aristotele, Tertulliano, Augustino, Aquinate,
aliisque citas, aut falso, aut frustra urgeri, planum feci. Quin and ipse, quum
fabularum, quales Terentianae sunt, verbis factisque inhonestis and improbis
aspersae, actores pronuntias jure improbari, sententiam meam astruis. Nam
Ulysses redux, Hippolytus, and Rivales (de quibus amici tui Momus hanc quae
nobis est litem excitavit) non minus illis vitiis laborant, quam nonnullae,
immo Rivales multo magis, quam ulla, Terentii. Itaque licet quaedam Comment.
adl 3. c. de professorib. and med.
addas refutatu forsitan non indigna, ut quod mimos asseris habitu muliebri
egisse personam viri, lenonis, adulteri, temulenti, ne temulenti in Rivalibus
eorum similes videantur; and Athenae. li. 1
Theophrasti exemplo, qui in schola docens, ita omnes gestus rei, quam
tractabat, congruentes adhibuit, ut exerta lingua labra circumlinxerit quum
heluonem describeret, histrioniam oratori concludas esse necessariam: tame^ cum
hoc redarguat Instit. Oralib. 1. cap. ^9
Quintilianus, illud Saturn. lib. 2 cap. 7 Inducto habitu Syri, qui velut
flagris caesus, etc.
Macrobius, alia alii, quorum ad fontes digitum intendi; and operam in minus
firmis refellendis, qui firmiora fregerim, a me sumi nolis; obsequor voluntati
tuae. Ac eo quidem facio libentius quae cupis, quoniam impetrare a te vicissim
aveo, ut, si qua deinceps typis excudes, in iis duarum rerum maiorem habeas
rationem; pietatis, and modestiae. Pietatis dico, non tam ob eam causam quod
theologoru^ autoritate in rebus religionis te valde moveri dicas, in rebus
morum non valde; quanquam ob eam quoque; nam Exodus 20. 2. 2. Tim. 3. 16
theologia, ut fidei, sic vitae est magistra: quam quod histrioniam colendam
esse statuis, non tanquam rem honestam, sed tanquam necessariam naturae
depravatae and medendis hominum vitiis. Et sicut nec medici a mendacio
refugiunt officioso, nec alii ulli (tua haec sunt verba) quod Lib. 2. de ju.
bell.
alias explicavi; and mendacium res omnium turpissima est tame^: ita hic medici
isti ab his indecoris imitationibus non subtrahent se: Et morbos corporis per
spectacula curari scribit Hippocrates. Vbi, cum Romans 3. 8.
fides doceat non facienda mala ut eveniant bona, primum, doleo te, quem fidei
causa exulare ferunt, and mendacium rem turpissimam esse confiteri, and
emolumenti gratia mentiendum contendere. Deinde, nullos esse qui officiosum
mendacium refugiant, nullos, non modo medicos, sed nec alios ullos, nollem
dixisses: ne cui videatis memoriam Sueton. Ner. cap. 29.
eius renovare, qui, impurus ipse, persuasissimum habuit neminem hominem
pudicum, aut ulla corporis part purum esse; verum plerosque dissimulare
vitium, and calliditate obtegere. Praeterea, quum adiungis te alias hoe
explicasse, amandas nos ad similem De jure bell. comment. a.
commentationem, in qua id confirmas Heliodori, gravis scilicet autoris,
iudicio, and isto Poetae nescio cuius versu, Quum vitia prosunt, peccat qui
recte facit. Qua sententia quid potest fingi flagitiosius, impurius,
execrabilius? Et tamen quo magis eam, eiusque scopum, adversus Dei verbum,
cuius memini, praemunias, Scito (inquis) in tota hac disputatione non me ullibi
dicere mala facienda ut bona adveniant, sed abusum malorum malum non esse, at
bonum. Ita, quia mendaciis curantur melancholici, ut ibidem adiicis,
quemadmodum hic and morbos per spectacula curari notas: distinguis, hunc
abusum, quem vocas, mendacii bonum esse, non malum; neque verbo Dei
disputatione tua contradici. Quo genere argutiolae, stuprum, adulterium,
incestum, and quid non? defendere licebit. Nam Appian. de bell. Syriac.
Plutarch. vita Demetr.
Antiochus, Seleuci filius, contrahendis incestis cum noverca nuptiis, e
gravissimo evasit morbo: ac licet incestus sit malus, nec committendus ut
adveniat bonum; tamen abusus malorum (ut tu doces) malus non est, sed bonus.
Hujusmodi fundamenta impietatis and nequitiae vehementer peto ne amplius nobis
iacias; praesertim in operibus quae typis evulgabis; idque in Academia nostra;
and viro clarissimo, insigni ecclesiae lumini, dedicatis; ac ita dedicatis, ut
etiam eius filio, lectissimo, and summae spei puero, Tobiae, legenda
commendentur. Vides enim quanto cum dedecore nostro fama, a comitiis nostris,
quoquoversum perlatura sit, pueros, quibus maximam deberi reverentiam profanus
Iuven. sat. 14
poeta sensuit, in nostra Academia public doceri ut de rebus morum quid
theologi sentiant non magnopere curent; neque vereantur mentiri quum erit
commodum; immo peccare se putent, si, quum vitia prosunt, recte faciant; and
malorum quidem usum Dei verbo condemnari credant, sed abusum malorum malum esse
negent, bonum contendant. Modestiae vero plus in tuis scriptis idcirco
desidero, quod Deuteronomy. 22. 5.
Deuteronomii locum interpretatus aliter ac theologi, ac patres, ac concilia,
quemadmodum declaravi, concludis hoc epiphonemate: Nihil facit lex illa Dei
adversus histrioniam; and minus nihilo aliud, quicquid theologi afferunt.
Dixeras paulo prius te theologorum autoritate in rebus religionis moveri valde:
and scripturarum interpretatio res est religionis. Quanto consultius veterum
Romanorum laudatam a M. Orat. pro Fonteio.
Tullio consuetudinem sequutus esses, ut arbitrari te diceres etiam quae
scires, quam ut tam fidenter quod nescis affirmares. Nam, quod legem Mosis, Non
induetur mulier vest virili, nec vir utetur vest foeminea, interpretaris,
contra omnes theologos, non proprie, sed figurate; non de vestibus, sed de
flagitio retectis vestibus commisso: hujus rei probationem, etsi petitione
principii tantum nixam, tamen fidenter item asseris percunctando; Nam additur
ibi, inquis, Abominabilis apud Deum est, qui facit haec; quod autem scelus hic
est, ut sit abominatio? Minime quidem miror, te, quem theologorum autoritas non
movet in re religionis, in qua te permultum illis tribuere profiteris verbo,
atque adeo in scriptis modo affirmaveras; ita eorum disputationes de
histrionia, re nimirum morali, floccifacere, ut quicquid theologi contra eam
afferunt, id omne minus nihilo esse asseveres. Quamquam hoc minus nihilo esse
aliquid, familiaris tuus, tametsi tuis istis magnis multisque adiutus, suo
fortasse ad meas literas, vel responso docebit, vel silentio. Sed utut haec
sese habeant, modestiam quidem certe in pronuntiando maiorem ut adhibeas,
praesertim quum de rebus religionis agis, tua te ipsius experientia, in rebus
morum, immo iuris admonere debet. Qui, cum affirms, atque ex Annal. li. 14.
Tacito doceas, in theatro publico vel orationes, vel carmina recitare,
probrosum Romae visum: satis demonstras te L. 1. D. de his qui nota^tur iusam.
Praetoris verba, Infamis est qui artis ludicrae pronuntiandive causa in scena^
prodierit, nimis sicco pede (quod aiunt) transiisse. Nam, ut concedatur quod
Alciato tribuis, artem non facere eum, qui semel, iterum, quid artis facit: at
pronuntiandi causa in scenam prodit, qui prodit semel tantum; ac proptera notam
and metuit Laberius, and subierunt de quibus Tacitus, tametsi gratis
recitarent. Vale: and meam admonitionem eodem quaeso animo, quo ego munusculu^
tuum, accipias, id est, grato, candidoque.

Iul. 10. 1593.
IO. RAINOLDO doct. theol. clariss. A. Gentilis S.
NEque grato, candidove animo munusculum meum accepisti, neque quidquam est in
literis tuis non long, lateque positum a veritate. Quid enim tu me impietatis,
and nequitiae dicis architectum in quaestione de mendacio officioso, in qua
ipsum hoc non intelligis, quid sit officiosum mendacium? Etenim meministi,
recensuisse te Petri illud in officiosis, quod contra omne officium fidei, and
religionis suit. Quid me impurissimo assimulas principi, si imo reliqui nullum
tibi in eadem quaestione scriptorem extra theologos, at alios omnes nec sine
theologis mecum facere explicavi? Te ad epistolas meas amando: caeteros ad
libros magis, quam ad commentationes, de iure belli; quos exituros aliquando,
praemonui dedicatione prima ad illustrissimum Comitem: and, Deo volente, edam
brevi. Tuae enim istiusmodi admonitiones non tenent me, quem aut in ea part
non improbant viri in Ecclesia, and republica vestra clarissimi, and
laudatissimi. Quid me modestiae laesae facis tu reum, qui nunc ex papistico
spiritu arces me a tractatione librorum sacrorum: Et, quod Erastus ait
similibus tui, non vides, tentare haec te cis, annos istos septuaginta? Non
vides, te cum eo sic agere imperiose, qui Papae imperium contempsit, and
exulare patria potuit, and universo regno Papali? Uerissima ferunt, qui haec
ferunt: et in his tu vinceris a me, qui pro pietate me obiurgas tamen. Communes
sunt sacri libri; and in his, quae spectant ad secundam tabulam, nostri magis,
quam vestri. Sic ut, autoritati theologorum valde nos tribuere hic, minime
necesse sit. Doce contrarium tu, si potes. Noli calumniari, me pueros docere,
ut de rebus morum non magnopere curent, quid sentiant theologi. nam de me, de
iurisconsulto scripsi, and re politica. De re religionis quod scripsi, id
sentio: and in ea serio theologorum valde tribuo autoritati. Sed res religionis
quid est? Scripturarum interpretatio omnis, aut omnium, non est res religionis.
Theologia fidei, and vitae magistra est. sed non omnis vitae. nec omnis pars
sermonum Dei in solidum vestra est. Ostende diversum, audiam. De rationibus
theologorum in quaestione ista de histrionibus sic censui, ut quas contra
histriones illos public mercenarios, and indignarum fabularum actores habent,
eae nihili non sint. Sed quae sunt adversus omnem histrioniam, eas minus nihilo
esse, asserui, and vero etiamnum assero. Pudet earum me, quas Tertullianus,
quem unum e nostris iurisconsultis opinantur, adfert adversus cothurnos
tragicos, and fictas scoenicorum personas. Quam etiam obtrudere pro
Potentissima videtur, esse nihili, demonstravi. Nec fidenter (ut tu ais)
adfirmo, quod nescio: sed tu reprehendis confidentissime, quae non capis. Audi,
audi. Quae in histrionia vitari peccata negotio nullo saepe solent, and possunt
semper; ea nihil contra histrioniam faciunt. Sed peccatum illud, si quod est,
promiscui vestimentorum usus vitari saepe solet, and semper potest. Ergo. Qui
sensus bonarum aliarum legum est prohibentium hunc usum vestium, idem
verisimiliter est and bonae legis Dei. Sed aliarum legum sensus nihil facit
contra histrioniam. Abomin tio ubi dicitur in Scripturis, ibi peccatum
significatur, quod facile superet flagitia pleraque omnia. Sed hoc
vestimentorum non est tale. Ergo ubi dicitur abominatio, ibi hoc peccatum non
significatur. Et ubi propria significatio non accipitur, ibi figurata fuerit,
vel aliter impropria. at in lege illa Dei propria significatio non accipitur.
Quae autem figurata locutio sic exponitur, ut verae sententiae conveniat, and
aliis similibus locis stabiliatur, ea been exposita est. Sed sic exponitur a me
figurata illa locutio. Utinam, utinam sic contenderes, and non reijceres
argumentis bonis fabulas non bonas semper: quibus illudere pueris potes, nobis
non potes. De Augustini sententia, and de sententia Aquinatis ad eundem locum,
quas recitavi, and falso, aut frustra urgeri adfirmas, nihil nunc dico, quando
tu me ablegas ad scripta tua Anglicana: nisi illud tacendum non sit, ex
sententia utriusque adfirmarique, peccatum vestiarium non esse
flagitiosissimum. Mea sunt reliqua. Et ea (falleris) non dixi nihili esse, quae
tu nunquam refutaveris, si tibi sententiam non pronuncias: sed quae aut te, aut
me, aut alium morari ab operibus maioribus tantillum non debeant. Nec morabitur
me sane quaestio haec. Itaque nec a te literas alias de ea expecto, nec expeto.
Ego cupiam a te iterum audire, quae a te primo convicia audivi in vita? cupiam
illa? priusquam tu cathedram istam, ex qua ludios laudas, occupares. Ego ludios
non laudo, sed tu cum convicio ludis genere istoe loquendi laudatissimo, and
per suasorias Senecae per suasissimo tibi. Ego cathedram istam non occupo, quam
bonis adprobantibus teneo de principis optima, and humanissimae largitate: and
in qua sic doceo, ut benignitatis suae reginam serenissimam, iudicii reliquos
non poeniteat. Magna ego horum nomina defendo in commentatione mea de
histrionibus. Si enim Tobias Matthaeus, si alii tot viri gravissimi, and
religiosissimi is it haec iuventutis aut exercitamenta, aut ludos adprobarunt,
praefecti, and moderatores collegiorum, atque totius lumina academiae: si
princeps sanctissima, religionis summum praesidium, and ^ulici eius, viri
spectatissimae sapientiae praesentia sua bonestarunt ludos: ludos tu apellare
pestes qui vales? Hic enim de Tertulliano rectissime, Cur liceat videre, quae
facere, flagitium est? Et de nostris in eodem proposito, par est culpa,
spectacula edere, and spectare spectacula. Neque bic me damnabit Matthaeus.
neque enim sic contaminavi nomen eius, ut put as tu, dedicatione libelli mei:
neque filium malis imbui volo, praeceptionibus a lectione commentationis meae.
Ne quaeso, ne te Matthaeum inter and me ponas non vocatus. Tota haec tua
epistola, praeter maledicta, aut his constat, quae ad te non spectant: aut his,
quae non spectant ad me: aut, quae non ad rem, quae in manibus est: aut si quid
habet aliud, id vnum est, quod tu meae commentationis verba non legisti, aut
non expendisti been. Nec enim scripsi ego, oratori necessariam histrioniam, sed
poematibus: and it a argumentatus sum, Si eius, quod leve, and importunum est
in oratoria, ut est actio, habetur ratio tanquam necessarii: eius etiam, quod
leve, and importunum est in poetica, habenda ratio est tanquam necessarii. hoc
autem histrionia est. Ergo in poetica habenda sic est ratio histrioniae. Rursus
dum docui ex Alciato, eum non facere artem, qui semel, iterum quid artis facit,
sic argumentor, Ars notata est edicto. Sed unaproditio non est ars. Ergo una
proditio non est notata. Alciato ego illud non tribuo: quanquam est erratum in
subnotato capite, quod esse debuit ccv II. De Laberio plus satis. De
oratoribus, and vatibus subieci, ut mores illius populi antiquos magis
ostenderem: de quibus sane illi apud Tacitum disceptaebant: and secundum quos
visum etiam crimen maiestatis laesae, si magistratus pro concione legisset
velcodices (ni male memini) eorum, quae ad magistratus spectabant tamen. Sed
and dixi, in scaena fuisse eos oratores, and vates. Sed and pretii, aut praemii
spe, atque fiducia recitationibus incubuisse, persuasum est mihi. Itaque,
tribus his convenientibus, censura a patriis moribus, recitatione in scaena,
and spe praemii, notati. Itaque falsum tu colligis, notatos semper omnes qui
etiam gratis recitarent. An sicco (quod exprobras) sicco nimis pede transi,
praetoris edictum, an tu in sicco es? Vale. Rog^ autem, atque obsecro te, si ad
aures tuas a me accidit nunc insolens aliquid, ut scias, ad meas etiam
accidisse insolentissimum a te: and ad tanta crimina patientem esse non
oportere. Et vale iterum. Londini. Idib. Iul.

Non me continere possum, quin de meis libris bellicis tibi, argutiolam
dicenti, quod de abusu mali in commentationibus adnotavi, exscribam Augustini
unum hoc, In nuptiis est bonus usus mali, hoc est bonus usus concupiscentiae
carnis. Ne quaeso, ne hominem tui studio sissimum sic tractaris pessime,
immerito. Vitia non sunt, quibus recte uti licet. hoc Lactantius. Sic possumu^
concupiscentia carnis. sic mendacio, etc.

Vale tertium.
ALBERICO GENTILI, I. C. professori regio, Io. Rainoldus S.
REGIVM est audire male quum been facias, inquit Plutare* vita Alexandr.
rex magnus: and beatos pronuntiat discipulos suos Matt. 5. 11.
Christus, quum homines conviciis eos affecerint immerentes, ipsius causa. Quo
aequiore animo, benevolentiae erga te meae, and veritatis eorum quae scripsi,
mihi conscius, tuam, Alberice, inhumanitatem ac maledicentiam, iniquissime
iustissimam amicissimamque admonitionem vellicantes, fero. Etenim, nec grato
candidove animo munusculum me tuum accepisse asseris: nec quicquam est in meis
literis non long lateque positum a veritate. Quorum alterius nullam certiorem
habes probationem, quam Galatae habuerunt malevolentiae Pauli; Gal. 4. 1^.
Number inimicus factus sum vobis, dum vera vobis loquor? alterum falso dici, tuum
de mimis aliisque multis silentium est indicio; nisi forte dubium sit quin ea
falsi convicturus fueris, si quidem potuisses, qui, quae non potes, conaris.
Atque (ut caetera, quae confuse carpis, ordine percurram) quod ego commemoravi
me a pestibus scenicorum spectaculisque theatralibus nostros dehortatum, prius
quam tu cathedram istam, ex qua ludios laudas, occupares; ut hinc
commonefieres, tibi, qui sententiam tuam in vulgus editam negabasaegre far me
oportere, quod quaestionem de histrionibus public tractasses antea quam ego de
iis cum altero controversarer, pari ratione ferendam aegre non esse meam a
sententia tua dissensionem, quod mihi periculosos videri ludios docuissem prius
quam hic tibi locus laudandi eos foret: in eo vociferaris te a me convicia,
quae nunquam a quoquam prius, audivisse. Quid ita? Quia cathedram istam (ut
ais) non occupas, sed tenes de Principis humanissimae and optimae largitate.
Ita, cum vocabula, tenere, and occupare, idem significent, quemadmodum ex
Trinumm.
Plauto, Aeneid. lib. 6
Virgilio, Hortens.
Cicerone, observavit De propriet. sermon. cap. 4.
Nonius; atque hoc sensu ego (quod sancte affirmare possum) illud usurparim: tu
absurdam mihi calumniam affingis, ac si dixissem te professionis locum, non
Reginae nostrae beneficio, sed vi, aut fraud, aut nescio quo modo, possidere.
Similiter affirmas te ludios non laudare, sed me cum convicio ludere genere
istoc loquendi laudatissimo, and per suasorias Senecae persuasissimo mihi. In
quo quid istoc loquendi genere significes, fateor, non intelligo: dicturus
alioqui ad illud quod e Seneca vitio mihi vertis. Sed errarunt turpiter in
laudationis tractatione and nomine Cic. de orat. lib. 2. and de clar. Orat.
Quintilia. li. 3. ca. 4. Aphtho. progym. ca. de encom.
viri eruditi, si tu non laudas ludios: quos poematum perfectioni, quos
oratoriae facultati, quos and corporum morbis, and animorum vitiis medendis
necessarios esse asseveras. Quaeris, cum Praefecti collegiorum, viri
gravissimi, approbarint ludos; cum sanctissima Princeps, aulicique eius, viri
spectatissimi, sua praesentia honestarint ludos, ludos appellare pestes qui
valeam: hic enim, ut rectissime Tertullianus, Cur liceat videre, quae facere
flagitium est? ita and de nostris dici posse asseris, Par est culpa spectacula
edere and spectare. Parem esse culpam non ausim tecum dicere. Nam De spectac.
cap. 17.
Tertullianus ibidem, and rectissime, Cur liceat audire, quae loqui non licet?
Neque tamen arbitror aeque peccare eum qui maledico aut scurrae praebet aures,
ac maledicu^ and scurram ipsum. Sed ego ad illorum luminum approbantium
spectantiumve ludos iudicia, and exempla, familiari tuo dudum Epist. 2.
respondi: ut, si tibi rursum respondeam, actum agam; quod me facturum negavi.
Tu, qui possis ludorum, Rivalibus nostris (ut docui) puriorum, non actores
solum sed etiam autores iure improbatos pronuntiare, ipse videris: cum scias
spectatores fuisse Rivalium sanctissimam Principem caeterosque; and in pari
culpa eos, qui spectant talia, cum iis qui edunt, ponas. Nam quod tu Terentii
simihumque fabulas verbis factisque inhonestis and improbis aspersas esse
scribis, ideoque earum actores iure improbas propter corruprelam and
contagionem: idem ego, pestes scenicorum nuncupans, per metaphoram dixi. Et
mihi figurate id exprimere nefas est, quod tibi proprie enuntiare ius est?

Affirmanti tibi, non esse tanti tua scripta quae remorari me deberent,
assensi. Hic me falliais: nec enim te dixisse ea esse nihili, quae ego nunquam
refutavero si mihi sententiam non pronuntiem; sed quae me morari ab operibus
maioribus non debeant. Quid ego aliquando refutavero aut refutaverim, iudicent
alii aequiores: nec mihi ius ferendae hac de re sententiae assumo, nec tibi
defero. Verum nihili esse tua scripta non dixi: tantum repetii tuum argumentum,
Neque enim tanti sunt; ac ex eo intuli, nihil esse (an inde emersittuum
nihili?) quamobrem ab opere, quod eram aggressurus, me distinerent tua scripta.
De familia liberata, inquit Ep^. ad fam. lib. 14. ep. 4.
Cicero ad Terentiam, nihil est quod te moveat. Non dicit familiam liberatam
esse nihili: sed nihil esse cur res ea moveat Terentiarn; neque enim erat
tanti. Nihil esse cur iuris interpres historias legate cognoscatve, De jur.
interp. dialo. 5.
te ipsum scribere meministi. An quod sentires eas esse nihili? Absit. Nam and
Hebraeorum, ex ore De^.
sacras divinasque historias eo nomine te complecti indicas. Caeterum,
nihilesse cur iuriusconsultis in illis tempus conterat, significatum voluisti.
Porro, quod adieci te Theophrasti exemplo histrioniam oratori necessariam esse
concludere, ais me tuae commentationis verba non legisse, aut non expendisse
been: nec enim te scripsisse oratori necessariamhistrioniam, sed Poematibus.
Itane vero? Poematibus tantum, non item oratori? Cur igitur, postquam dixeras
posse mulieris parts a viro, servi a libero, ebrii a sobrio, impuri ab
honesto, belluae ab homine, agi aliqua^tisper utilitatis and ioci causa, haec
verba subtexuisti. Oratori sunt omnes illae personae induendae saepius, nec cum
dedecore, quia necessario: Athenae. li. a
referunt Theophrastum and docentem in scholis gestu ornnia dicta comitari
solitum, etiam quum de ebrio, similiue oration incidisset? Cur, quod de oratore
nominatim dicis, non doces quemadmodum ad poemata referri accommodarique
volueris, and non ad oratorem? Cur omnem mentione^ exempli Theophrasti,
quioratorio genere sermonis usus est, non poetico, in reprehensione dicti met
supprimis? Atque (si permittis ut hoc a te quaeram more censorum) Ex animi tui
sententia: nonne quum Athenaeus in eius exemplo, non ebrii qui vino, sed Sic
Graeca Athenaei voce^, (...), expressit Dalechampius: Natalis Cotues gulonem
^ddidit.
heluonis and gulosi qui cib^ se ingurgitat, mentionem faciat; tu, mutata voce,
nominasti ebrium, ut, qui ebriorum egerunt parts in Rivalibus, nihil aliud
fecisse quam fecit Theophrastus, and oratores facere convenit, viderentur?

Ad illud quod asserui, non solum fidei sed etiam vitae magistram esse
theologiam; quo magis me optare, ut, qui theologorum autoritate in rebus
religionis te valde dixeris moveri, ne adiunxisses, in rebus morum non valde:
respondes theologiam magistram esse vitae, sed non omnis vitae, communes esse
sacros libros, and in his, quae spectant ad secundam tabulam, vestros magis
quam nostros; ut autoritati theologorum multum vos tribuere hic, non sit
necesse; meque iubes contrarium docere, si possim. Sane, si non possem: tu
tamen satis causae, cur mihi sententia tua displiceret, fuisse docuisses. Nam
si theologiam magistram vitae iudicas, licet non omnis vitae: debeas ergo
multum theologoru^ autoritati in rebus morum tribuere, tametsi non in rebus
morum quibuscunque. Verum, universae vitae magistram esse theologiam, tum
docui, quum asserui, si animadvertisses: notatis ad marginem Exodus 20. 2. 2.
Tim. 3. 16.
duobus Scripturae locis. Quorum ex priore id confirmant omnes ecclesiae
Christianae: quum in Eccle. refor. omn. immo and Pont.
cathechismo theologis committunt explicationem totius decalogi, non primae
solum tabulae; neque sensum a iurisco^sultis peri iubent. Ex posteriore,
scriptor tui ordinis, Chassanaeus, a De jur. bell. comment. 3.
te laudatus: quum, Chassa. catalog. glor. mund. part. 10. cons. 13.
distinguens alias cunctas scientias, in iisque vestram, a nostra, Theologia
(inquit) inserit virtutes, docet facienda, and omnia ad salutem pertinentia. 2.
ad Timotheum. Quin and De jur inter. dialog. 6.
ipse, quum Baldum, Bartolum, Accursium, co^mentariis ius universum illustrasse
perhibes, doces nullam partem sacrorum libroru^ (quid enim in Scripturas
Baldus, caeterique?) vestri iuris esse. Quid? Quum contendis Dialog. 3.
nullam literaru^ Graecarum peritiam in iurisconsulto requiri; Dialog. 4.
ex dialectica posse plurimum detrimenti and incommodi ad vos venire, nihil
boni; Dialog. 5.
ne historias quidem quicquam confer: nonne sacros libros relinquis nobis
integros, ad quorum cognitionem Aug. de doct. Christ lib. 2. cap 11.
Hebraea quoque lingua, non modo Graeca, opus esse; ac cap. 28.
historiam, and ca. 31. and 37
dialecticam plurimum adiuvare, declarat Augustinus? Mihi vero videris hoc
animo fuisse, quando, solis libris prudentiae civilis, iurisconsultos Dialog.
(...)
hortatus ut vacarent; id Dialog (...). and sequent.
te de solis Iustinianeis libris, and horum interpretibus, Accursianis and
Alciateis intelligere demonstrasti. Teque existimo, cum Dialog. (...).
ius canonicum Canonistis, ut suam messem assignaris; ac eos a Legistis, a
Theologis autem utrosque distinxeris: omnino, sicut illis totum corpus iuris,
alteris civiles, alteris canonici; ita nobis totum corpus Bibliorum
attribuendum censuisse. Quod si iam in aliam sententiam transiisti, and in his
quae pertinent ad secundam tabulam Scripturas non tam nostras esse putas quam
vestras: ostende mihi, quaeso, ubi eius tabulae lex ultima, Exo. 20. 17. Romans
7. 7.
Non concupisces, a iurisconsultis pertractetur; ut, utrae ecclesiae,
reformatae, an Pontificiae, saniorem tradant de concupiscentia doctrinam, ex
vestris, ad quos huius rei disquisitio magis quam ad nostros pertinet,
intelligam.

Quia non sine magna multorum injuria falso affirmaras, nec medicos, nec alios
ullos a mendacio officioso refugere; ut mihi videreris monendus ne memoriam
Neronis renovares, qui alios ex se aestimans persuasissimum habuit pudicum esse
neminem: impuro Principi te conferri, licet just, si injuste homines traducas,
quod a te factum res docebit, veruntamen indignaris; meque negas intelligere
quid sit officiosum mendacium; quippe qui Matt. 26. 7^
Petri illud recensuerim in officiosis, quod contra omne officium fidei and
religionis fuit. Equidem ignorantiam hac in re meam tantam esse fateor, ut ne
an sit quidem officiosum ullum mendacium cognoscam, immo nec esse credam: ne tu
me mireris quid sit id nescire. Sed, ne magni criminis loco mihi exprobres hanc
imperitiam, scito Senecam aliosque veterum Romanorum pari inscitia, in re
majori, laborasse. Nam, Sen. controv. li. 4. proo^
quum Aterius (libertinum reum defendens, cu^ obijciebatur quod patroni
co^cubinus fuisset, dixisset, Impudicitia in ingenuo crime^ est, in servo
necessitas, in liberto officiu^: res in jocos abiit, Non facis mihi officium;
and, Multum ille and hic in officiis versatur; ex eo impudici and obscaeni
(inquit Seneca) aliquandiu officiosi vocitati sunt. Ecce tibi distinctio
impudicitiae in criminosam, necessariam, and officiosam: cujus pars ultima quid
esset, ignorarunt isti; immo nec esse ullam officiosam impudicitiam rati sunt.
Itidem mendacium, nescio Sicut ipse putat, off c^osi mendacii. Aug de menda^.
cap. 8.
quis primus, Bonaventu. Scot. etc. Schola in 3. Sentent. did. 38. Ihom.
Aquin. 2a 2^. quaest. 110. art. 2.
quod fit nocumenti causa, perniciosum; quod ludi, jocosum; quod autem
utilitatis, officiosum vocavit. Ego vero, qui officium esse id quod fieri
debeat sum edoctus, unde nomen ipsum ab efficiendo ductum Donatus, Paulus apud
Pestum.
sunt qui notent nullum mendacium officiosum puto: quia 1. Ioh. 2. 21.
nullum mendacium est ex veritate, ut ait Tit. 1. 2.
Deus mentiri nescius; and Ephe. 4. 25.
deposito mendacio veritatem quisque jubemur loqui proximo suo; Romans 3. 7
mendaciumque peccatum esse, etiam quum redundat in Dei gloriam, edocemur. Sed,
ut tu mendacium utile commodumque officiosum nominasti, in ista conclusione,
Dejure bell. comment. 2.
Si ad utilitatem sermo datus est, ut censet Lib. 1. Politicor. cap. 2.
Aristoteles; quaeso, number improbemus mendacium officiosum? ita illud Petri, qui
utilitatis, non joci, aut nocumenti, causa est mentitus, in officiosis
recensui: ut and Matt. 27. 74
periurium eius (ex tua ratione) officiosum dixerim, quia sermo datus est ad
utilitatem, ut censet Aristoteles; and, Iusiurandum rei servandae, non
perdendae, conditum est, inquit Rudent.
Plautus. At Petri mendaciu^ contra omne officium fidei and religionis fuit.
Scio. Et omne mendacium (sicut docui) est contra aliquod officium: nullum
igitur officiosum. At officii nostri est ut iuvemus alios, dices fortasse:
itaque officiosum mendaciu^ te vocare quod hoc officium praestet. Esto. Sed ita
and incestum Antiochi officiosum appellaveris. Nam officii quoque nostri est ut
nostra^ ipsorum vitam tueamur. Quare, licet scirem Petri mendacium perniciosum,
and esse, and haberi a tractatoribus officiosi mendacii: tamen quia definiunt
mendacium officiosum, quod est pro salute and commodo alicuius; aut, quod
ordinatur ad aliquod bonum utile; quo intenditur iuvamentum alterius, ut ait 2^
2^. quaest. 100. art. 2.
Thomas, vel remotio nocumenti; perniciosum autem, quod fit ex malignitate;
aut, quo nocumentum alterius intenditur; tu me doceas velim quemadmodum sibi
constent, aut cur debuerim secus de Petro sentire ac scripsi. Neque enim fecit
ex malignitate, aut nocumentum alterius (nam cuius tandem?) intendit: sed,
timore lapsus, utilitatem, commodum, salutem spectavit suam; and intendit
nocumenti, peticuli nempe imminentis si ex Christi discipulis esse
agnosceretur, remotionem ac depulsionem. Iam iniuriose and falso tibi
excidisse, nullos improbare officiosum mendacium, tua ipsius confessio testis
est. Etenim theologos, quorum, in quaestione de iure divino, unius autoritatem
pluris aestimare, quam centum iuris humani peritorum Ad peri^ (...) art a
nostris illis legum conditoribus ablegamur. Dejur. inter. dialog. 1.
debes; theologos, and quidem eos theologos, quorum Petru^ Martyrem.
hunc maximum appellas, Thomam Aquinatem.
illum summum, Iustinum Mart. Ambrosium, Augustinu^, Calvinum, Zanchium, etc.
alios praestantes esse non negabis; theologos plerosque omnes, tametsi solos,
mecum facere concedis. Immo hoc quoque falso and iniuriose, quod solos
theologos; testantur epistolae tuae, ad quas me amandas. Quippe Iustum Lipsium,
and Tassum, mecum esse, ibi agnoscis. Aristotelem negas de nostro loqui
mendacio, quum Ethicor. li. 4. cap. 7.
ait mendacium perse malum esse and vituperabile, sed de arroganti, vano,
versuto, pravo, and id genus, aliis. Atqui de mendacio in genere eum loqui, and
propterea de nostro, tum ex iis apparet quae de viro bono and veritatis amante
subijcit: tum ex eo ipso quod ait, per se malum; ut te docere potest Thomas
Aquinas, 2a 2^ q. 110 art. 3.
is quem summu^ De jur. inter. dialog 3.
nominas philosopho theologum. Ciceronis dicto, De off lib. 3.
cadit in virum bonum mentiri emolumenti sui causa? nihil minus: opponis alia
eius tanquam repugnantia, quae minime repugnant, ut De off. lib. (...)
de Socrate simulatore, dissimulatore Q. Maximo. Nam Socratis ironia,
quemadmodum ab De orat. li. 2
eo tractatur in facetiis, and lib. 9. cap. 2.
Quintilianus docet in figuris, non fuit mendax sermo, sed Mar. 7. 9.
figurate verax. Quinti autem Maximi disssimulatio celautis erat, and tacentis,
ut Cicero exponit: quam nos Ios. 8. 3.
laudandam ducimus. Canonici iuris professores ex me sciscitaris utrum nominem,
an rideam: qui, Iacobum a mendacio immunem divinae obtentu concessionis
pronuntiatum, in titulo de divortiis legerim. Ego sane serio illos nominavi: a
Gloss. and interp. ad c. Super eo. extrade usuris. c. nequis arbitretur. 22. q.
2
quibus tradi video magno consensu, ne pro vita quidem hominis servanda mentiri
fas esse. Tu per iocum forsitan id de Iacobo citas e titulo de divortiis: nisi
furtum, homicidium, adulterium officiosum, aeque ac mendacium, iis probari
velis. Namque, ut Jacob Extra. de divort. c. gandemus.
illic, a mendacio: sic Israelitae, a furto; Samson, ab homicidio; Patriarchae,
and alii viri iusti, ab adulterio excusari dicuntur. Plures autores eiusdem
sententiae contra te producere magis proclive est quam necessarium. Quot enim
censes extitisse similes illius apud Satyr. 3.
Iuvenalem, qui mendacium, quod videri posset officiosissimum, inhonestum and a
viri boni officio alienum reputans, in haec erumpit verba: Quid Romae faciam^
mentiri nescio: libru^, Si malus est, nequeo laudare, and poscere. Atque haud
scio an medicorum exempla, melancholicos scilicet mendaciis curantiu^, aeque
falso De jure bell. comment. 2.
cites in tuam sententiam, ac Q. Maximi. Certe curationes tales quales iudicas,
a Alex. Trall. lib. 1 ca. ult. de plumbeo pileo, and serpente.
magno medico notatae, in factis positae, non in dictis carent signorum abusu:
quem Petr. Mart. in 1. Sam. 21. 2. Sam. 15.
nos in mendacio, uti scis, damnamus. Verum, cum habeas poetas, philosophos,
Canonistas, theologos, ac plerosque horum te ipso co^fitente, tibi repugnantes:
ignosce mihi si Neronis cote ad majorem modestiam and cautionem te acuere
volui; ne errati hujus toties admonitus, rursum non modo medicos, sed etiam
alios omnes, mendacii, Comment. ad l. 3 c. de prof. and med.
rei turpissimae, patrocinio inquinares.

Quod eo magis opus fuisse ut facerem jam sentio and cerno, quia, quae mihi
maxim omnium capitalis sententia vide batur, nempe, abusum malorum non esse
malum, sed bonum: eam tu significas te in libris bellicis denuo defensurum; and
ita defensurum, ut ab argutiolae, quam dixi, opprobrio distinctionem tuam
vindices Augustini and Lactantii autoritate. Quid igitur? An argumentum meum,
quo stuprum, adulterium, incestum, and quodvis facinus ac flagitium ea
argutiola defendi posse docui, Augustini etiam atque Lactantii autoritate
profligabis? Omnino, tanquam aliquid tale cogitares, postquam ex eorum altero
notasses, bonum in nuptiis esse usum mali concupiscentiae carnis; ex altero,
vitia non esse quibus recte uti licet: Sic, inquis, uti possumus concupiscentia
carnis; sic mendacio; etc. Vbi, si particula ista, etc. non referatur ad
incestum, and caetera mala a me commemorata; quod (opinor) abominabere;
quanquam quae ad alia referatut, non video; sed si ad ea non referatur:
argumentum igitur meum ab exemplo Antiochi and novercae, ita solidum and
firmum, ut ne attingere quidem illud ausus sis, satis adhuc habet ad mei dicti
veritatem de vanitate argutiolae tuae comprobandam. Veruntamen, ut idem
Augustini quoque, testis a te ipso and pro te citati, autoritate corroborari
scias: lege doctissimam gravissimamque Contra mendacium, cap. 7.
eius disputationem, qua tanquam ex professo tuam de malorum abusu (quem vocas)
sententiam refellens, quum ex ea consequens esse demonstrasset, nec falsum
testimonium, nec furtum, nec adulterium, nec ullum malum opus malum fore, sed
bonum, si bona intenione, bono fine, perpetretur; Quis ista dicat, inquit, nisi
qui res humanas omnesque conatur mores legesque subvertere? Clarissimum
documentu^ quam iniuriose, ne quid dicam gravius, and Patrum testimonia and
Scripturas tractes. Nam De nupt. and concupisc. li. 1. cap. 8. and lib 2. cap.
21.
Augustinus ait eos concupiscentiae malo been uti qui licite procreandis
liberis operam dant, Li. 1. cap. 7.
ut pede vitiato recte quis utitur quum ad aliquod bonum claudicando pervenit:
nec propter claudicationis malum mala est illa perventio, nec propter illius
perventionis bonum bona est claudicatio. Tu bonum esse mali usum sic contendis,
ut malum mendacii, ceu claudicationis, malum esse neges, quum eo quis ad bonu^
pervenit: and eum, cui Deus pedes dedit integros, se mutilare iubes, ut aliquo
accedat quo nulli nisi claudo fortasse datur aditus. Divin. instit. lib. 6.
cap. 16
Lactantius, ad errorem quorundam minuendum qui affectus vitia esse concedunt,
sed ea mediocriter temperant: assignandi, inquit, fuerunt affectus certis
temporibus, and rebus, and locis: ne vitia sint quibus recte uti licet. Tu
vocabulum eius, recte, ad omnes circumstantias relatum, de quibus Ethicor. lib.
2. cap. 4. and 6
Aristoteles quum distinguit iusta ab iis quae just fiunt, and virtutis
naturam aperit, ad unicam restringis: and mendacia in rectum finem destinata,
(quo modo possunt periuria, sacrilegia, blasphemiae,) recte fieri dicis, eoque
non esse vitia. Romans 3. 8.
Apostolus ait non facienda mala ut eveniant bona: concedens posse bona
intention fieri quae tamen mala sint, ut 1. Sam. 15. 15.
Saul exemplo suo ^ocuit. Tu mala esse negas quae fiunt ut eveniant bona: eum
enim esse abusum malorum; and abusum malorum malum non esse, at bonum. Ac
lectorem mones te in tota De jure bell. comment. 2.
illa disputatione non dicere ullibi, mala facienda, ut bona adveniant: in qua
tamen laudas istam poetae antiqui sententiam, Quum vitia prosunt, peccat qui
recte facit.

Haec si fundame^ta non sint nequitiae and impietatis; si te, quem fidei causa
exulare ferunt, atque, ut respondes, vere ferunt, deceant; si ^cclesiae lumini
rite dedicentur, ut illius quasi luce lucentia acceptiora sint in vulgus;
denique si nihil contineant veneni, quin pueris haurienda propinari possint:
errarim ego qui immerito, te, ne talibus, talia, sub talis viri nomine deinceps
commendes and excudas typis in Academia nostra, rogandum mihi censui. Horat.
epist. lib. 2. ep. 1.
Nil intra est oleam, nil extra est in nuce duri. Sed noli asserere me
calumniari in eo quod pueros a te doceri dixi ut de rebus morum quid theologi
sentiant non magnopere curent. Immo vero, inquis, de me, de jurisconsulto
scripsi, and re politica. De te? de jurisconsulto? Atqui, and Petrus, quum Gal.
2. 12.
subduxit sese ac separavit a Gentibus, respondere potuit se respectu sui,
Iudaei, id fecisse: cui tamen Paulus dixit, Cur Gentes cogis Iudaizare? quod
iis exemplo suo hac in re praeiret; ut tu, nec solum exemplo, sed etiam verbo,
pueris. De politica autem re, quid tibi vis? aut qui hoc ausus dicere? cum
Comment. ad l. 3. de prof. med. page 60.
verba tua typis excusa sic habeant; Ego ut theologorum autoritate in re
religionis valde moveor, ita in re morali, aut politica non valde. Adeone mei
reprehendendi aestu te transversum abripi, ut in eo mihi notam calumniae, in
quo calumniaris ipse, inuras?

Locum scripturae de vest viri a foemina, foeminae a viro non induenda, quem
theologi omnes interpretantur proprie, figurate a te exponi mirabar eo magis:
quod theologorum autoritate in rebus religionis te valde moveri dixeras; and
scripturarum interpretatio res est religionis. Hic tu scripturarum
interpretationem omnem, aut omnium, rem religionis esse inficiaris. Omnem,
quorsum addis? Nam ne legum quidem interpretatio omnis res est jurisprudentiae:
sed ea, cuius gratia, De jur. inter. dialog. 1.
scribis Canonistas, maiorum nostroru^ tempore, ad Legistas remisisse auditores
suos, si incideret argumentum ex legibus componendum. Et talis est quam nos
quaerimus: non qualem adhibeant qui a te ridentur, quod nunc, benigniori
scilicet coelo nati, non modo utriusque iuris doctores existunt, sed and
Medicinae periti, and Theologiae. Quum autem is inficias Scripturarum omnium
interpretationem rem esse religionis, and ad facultatem theologicam spectare:
perinde mihi loqui videris, acsi quis diceret, non omnes leges vestras and
totum ius civil ab Accursianis aut Alceiateis interpretibus exponi oportere.
Sed, ut hoc absurdum tibi visum iri dialogi tui docent: ita and illud debuit.
Quod, si mihi non credis, creed Comment. in 1. epist. ad cor. praefat.
Petro Martyri, quem theologorum maximum De jure bell. comment. 1.
appellas: and ab Orat, ad Acad. Argenti. de studio theolog.
eo disce facultatem nostram a vestra distinguere. Ac vide quam scienter huic
scripturae loco, cuius exponendi ius, abiudicatum nobis, tibi vindicas, sensum
figuratum and improprium affingas. Deuteronomy. 22. 5.
Ne esto instrumentum virile super foeminam, inquit Moses, neque induito vir
vestem foeminae: nam abominationi est Iehovae Deo tuo quisquis facit ista. Hac
lege, Ne induito vir vestem foeminae, tu, per nescio quam figuram orationis,
vis nefarium illud scelus denotari, quod Moses Lev. 18. ver. 22.
alibi verbis proprie sumptis damnans abominationem vocavit: and, sicut in
Levitico, verbo Ver. 6. 7. etc.
retectionis quasi vestimentorum significantur talia flagitia; ita in lege hac,
simili loquendi modo, par crimen proponi. Satis id quidem duriter, ut idem
plane sonet induere vestem, ac retegere: and hoccine est quod ais expositionem
tuam similibus locis stabiliri? Verum exponendam ita esse legem confirmas hunc
in modum. Vbi significatio propria non accipitur, ibi figurata fuerit, vel
aliter impropria. At in lege illa Dei non accipitur propria significatio. Quid
ita? Quoniam, inquis, Vbi abominatio dicitur in scripturis, ibi peccatum
significatur, quod facile superet flagitia pleraque omnia. Sed hoc
vestimentorum non est tale. Ergo ubi dicitur abominatio, ibi hoc peccatum non
significatur. Ac non esse tale hoc vestimentoru^, affirmari ais ex sententia
Soliloq. lib. 2 cap. 16.
Augustini. Quem, si consideratius animum attendisses ad inexcusabiles in quas
ait decidi posse turpitudines hac lege negligenda: vidisses minus causae
subesse, quam putabas, cur pro te citares. Sed unde tandem colligis, ubicunque,
id enim sonat tuum ubi, aut nihil agis; ubicunque igitur abominatio in
scripturis dicitur, ibi significari peccatum quod facile flagitia pleraque
omnia superet? Nam Deuteronomy. 7. 25.
abominationi Iehovae esse dicitur argentum and aurum, de quo idola facta sint:
and quicunque insert illum in domum suam, rem infer dicitur abominabilem.
Deuteronomy. 17. 1.
Abominationi Iehovae esse dicitur bovis aut pecudis ullum habentis vitium
immolatio. De quibus, si volueris tibi constare, and sententiam ei quam de
Deuteronomy. 22. 5.
nostra lege Quod tantu^ scelus hic est, ut sit abominatio?
tulisti, far similem, rogabis mirabundus: Quod tantum scelus hic est, ut sit
abominatio, si, cui desunt opes, aliquid e Baalis auro aut argento in usum suum
accipiat? si, qui meliorem victimam non habet, claudam, aut caecam Deo offerat?
Quod si prudentius and religiosius dices haec merito pro flagitiosissimis
habita fuisse, quod insignis sceleris, id est, impietatis, aut occasiones
e^ant, aut indicia: idem tibi puta responsum de muliebri vestitu in viro,
abomina^di sceleris illecebra and fomite, ut e Neronis Sporo and Heliogabalo
Epist. 1.
amicum tuum monui. Relinquitur idcirco sensum legis proprium, non figuratum
esse: ut omnes theologi, non ut tu exponis. Quod tuo ^uoque ipsius aliud
agentis dicto comprobatur, dum ais, qui sensus bonarum aliarum legum est
prohibentium hunc usum vestium, eundem verisimiliter esse and legis Dei. Nam
aliae bonae leges C. 6. did. 30.
Canonicae, L. 23. D. de aur. and arg. leg.
Civilesque, a teipso notatae, loquuntur de vestitu non figurate, sed proprie,
ut scis and confiteris.

Legem autem illam Dei nihil facere adversus histrioniam, quod fidentius aequo
a te dictum censui, conaris astruere duobus argumentis. Quorum alterum
superiore nixum fundamento, vitiose adiicit, sensum aliarum bonarum legum nihil
facere contra histrioniam; ergo neque bonae ilhus legis Dei. Nam primo lex
canonica, a Sext. synod. in Trull. can. 62.
multo ampliore synodo sancita, quam Synod. Began. can. 13. Gratian. c. 6. did.
30.
quae a te notatur, vetat in ludicris eum usum vestium, ut Epist. 1. and 2 ad
doct. Gag.
alibi declaravi. Civili vero jure idem interdictum existimasse videtur
Soliloq. lib. 2. cap. 16.
Augustinus, ad histriones accommodans quod jure infames and intestabiles
haberi, qui muliebri habitu se ostentant, dixerat. Atque adeo Orat. ad Grae.
Tatiani verba reprehendentis vestem muliebrem in scenicis actoribus, ut
indignam viro, Ad Iul. Pau. recept. sentent. lib. 3. tit. 6.
Cujacius arbitratus est cum vestrorum jurisconsultorum sensu congruere, and
post Cuiacium Ad l. 23. D. de aur. and arg. leg.
Gothofredus. Deinde, etiamsi aliae bonae leges diuturniorem and graviorem
abusum tantummodo vetarent, quem Tacit. anna. lib. 3.
ne lege quidem coerceri voluit Tiberius Imperator: tamen lege Dei, multo
meliore, notari possent and coargui, quilevius, quomodocunque, and
quantulocunque tempore, in ea re delinquerent. Nam L. 3.. 18. D. de acquir. vel
amitt. possess.
aliae bonae leges negant furtum animo posse committi, sine contrectatione:
Matt. 5. 28.
lex Dei vel affectu solo flagitia perpetrari asserit. Itaque errarunt
Antiquit. Iud lib. 12. cap. 13.
Josephus and In Psa. 66. 18.
David Kimhi, post Mat. 5. 20.
Scribas and Pharisaeos, qui malos animi motus and cogitationes peccata non
putarunt, nisi in opus exeant: quod de legibus hominum, non Dei, si dixissent,
nequaquam lapsi essent. Ac ipse verisimiliter tantum, non certo eundem legis
Dei atque aliarum sensum esse ais. Quamobrem adhuc salva est assertio mea,
consultius te facturum fuisse, si modestius, de re quam opinaris, non scis,
pronuntiasses. At altero argumento iugulasti hominem. Nam quae in histrionia
(inquis) vitari peccata negotio nullo saepe solent, and possunt semper: ea
nihil contra histrioniam faciunt. Sed peccatum illud, si quod est, promiscui
vestimentorum usus, vitari saepe solet, and semper potest. Ergo. Quid Ergo? Cur
reliquum non attexis, Ergo nihil facit lex illa Dei adversus histrioniam? Hoc
enim erat concludendum. Ac utinam, quod assumis vetari saepe solere promiscuum
usum vestium, eius rei testis fuisset nostra scena: viamque meliore^, qua
vitari semper possit, oste^disses quam mimas and scenicas inter histriones
introducendo: quod dedecus foeminei pudoris ac verecu^diaepeius esset paene
remediu^ ipso malo. Sed cuiusmodi syllogismo causam tua^ fulcias, agnosce ex
consimili, ad aliam Dei legem, Deuteronomy. 12. 3^
nequis liberos suos idolis sacrificet. Quae in idololatria vitari peccata
negotio nullo saepe solent, and possunt semper: ea nihil faciunt contra
idololatriam. Sed peccatum illud comburendorum filiorum and filiarum, vitari
saepesolet, and semper potest. Ergo ninil facit lex illa Dei adversus
idololatriam. Propositiogermana est and gemina tuae: non lac similius lacti.
Assumptio, luce clarior e varia Papistarum idololatria. Conclusio tamen falsa
videtur omnibus theologis: quorum hac in causa, ad primam legis tabulam
spectante, autoritas, per 2. Re. 23. 10 Psalm. 106. 39 Ier. 19. 5.
Prophetas saltem, assensum tuum impetrabit. Quapropter, cum ex veris nil nisi
verum consequatur, restat falsam esse propositione^: and posse peccatum in
idololatriam hanc aut illam cadere, quod in omne tamen idololatriae genus non
cadat. Ego quidem certe hoc iudicio fui, quum ob latriam imaginibus Christi and
crucis delatam, Papistas arguere^ idololatriae. Nam ipsi saepe solent
idololatriam committere, and semper possunt, absque imaginum cultu. Et tu, qui
histriones mimas habere and scenicas scripsisti, videris aliquatenus idem
sensisse. Cur enim non aeque putemus histrioniam, etsi non omnem histrioniam,
perstrictam a De spect. cap. 17.
Tertulliano mimas notante: ac tu asseruisti histriones mimas habere and
scenicas, etsi non omnes histriones habeant? Sed quia iam hoc tibi discrimen
ita displicet, ut me confidentissime reprehendere, quae non capio, propterea
affirms: docebis nos fortasse, exemplum 2. Reg. 18. 4
Ezekiae; serpentem aeneum confringentis quod filii Israelis incensum ei
adolerent, nihil facere contra Pontificiorum, Missal. Ro^. a Pio Quint.
reformat. tit. de ritib. celebr. Miss.
qui incensum adolent rebus similibus, idololatriam; quoniam est quaedam
idololatria, puta, liberos suos idolis immolantium, quae hoc peccato vacet.
Quin and Ier. 19. 5.
Ieremiam, istud Iudaeorum peccatum in Baale colendo increpantem, nihil
adversus idololatriam eorum dixisse: quoniam Papistae, Brevia. Romans in festis
inve. and exalt. S. crucis.
invocantes ligneam crucem ut Deum, and Council. Trident. Sess. 13 cap. 5.
sacrame^to cultum latriae exhibentes, committunt idololatriam, nec tamen suos
cremant liberos. An quaestuariorum item histrionum, quorum contagio and lues
apud nos nuper est grassata, negabis actiones histrioniae nomine traduci
oportere, quoniam exerceri potest histrionia, ut Cic. orat. pro. Q. Ros. com.
tandem a Roscio, sine quaestu? Luculenter vero probasti scholasticos, a quibus
apud nos fabulae aguntur, nullam labem contrahere, tametsi contra legem
muliebribus vestiantur, ut loquitur De spect. cap. 23.
Tertullianus: quoniam ostendisti posse foeminarum parts a mimis, scenicisque
foeminis, sine viris, agi. Perinde quasi dixisses nullam labem contrahi ab Pro.
23. 30.
immorantibus apud vinum, nec iis Joel. 1. 5.
ebrietatem merito exprobrari; quoniam esse potest Esai. 28. 7. and 29. 9.
ebrietas sine vino. Atque hoc modo rationem illam, quam Tertullianus obtrudere
videtur pro potentissima, nihili esse demonstrasti.

Porro, minus nihilo esse quicquid aliud adversus histrionia^ afferunt
theologi, quod mihi minus item modeste visus es asserere, tu contra rursum
asseris: and demonstras etiam, opinor; sed quemadmodum? Pudet me, inquis, earum
rationu^ quas Tertullianus affert adversus cothurnos tragicos and fictas
scenicorum personas. Age.

Sint De spect. cap. 23.
eius rations leves contra histrionicum istum ornatum: rem adeo putida^ and
insulsam, ut nullas rations ad eam explodendam desiderarint nostri, sed sua
sponte rejecerint. Etenim cothurnis (cuiusmodicunque demum id genus fuit
calceoru^) effereba^tur tragoedi quo altiores apparerent; and fictis ad eorum,
quos agebant, speciem personis tegeba^tur: ut Horat. satyr. lib. 1. sat. 5.
Sarmenti scurrae jocus in Messium docet; quem immani corporis proceritate, and
foeda cicatrice in facie deformem, rogabat Sarmentus ut Polyphemum ageret; Nil
illi larya aut tragicis opus esse cothurnis. E nostris autem nemo in scenam
cothurnatus and larvatus prodit. Quid igitur? An quia te pudet rationem quas
Tertullianus affert adversus ineptias histrionicas, quarum tragoedos and
scenicos nostros pudet: idcirco minus nihilo est quicquid aliud adversus
histrioniam Tertullianus affert? Ac, ut Tertullianus, unus e multis,
hallucinatus sit: idcirco minus nihilo est quicquid aliud adversus histrioniam
afferunt theologi? Quanto te magis pudere debuit conviciorum, quae in me
effundis; quia, ut modestiam in pronuntiando maiorem adhiberes, praesertim quum
de rebus religionis agis, amice te admonui? Sed praeclare Livi. lib. 34.
Cato: Nae simul pudere, quod no^ oportet, caeperit; quod oportet, non
pudebit.. Me namque ex Papistico spiritu a librorum sacrorum tractatione te
arcere ais: and haec cis annos istos septuaginta, quod Erastus ait similibus
mei, tentare: and imperiose cum eo sic agere, qui Papae imperium contempsit,
and exulare patria potuit, and universo regno Papali: atque adeo, etiamsi in
his a te vincar, obiurgare tamen te pro pietate: denique argumentis uti
eiusmodi, quibus illudere pueris possim, vobis non possim. Been factum, quod te
ipsum long a Papismo abesse profiteris. Nam ego multo minus te arceo a
sacrorum librorum tractatione, quam tu jurisconsultum, cui De jur. inter.
dialog. 1.
praecipis, ut nihil nisi ex Theologi praescripto enuntiet de re Theologica;
and solis prudentiae civilis libris vacet, reliquis omnibus valedicat. De
excom. mun prae^ad lect.
Erastus, notans quosdam quos ait petivisse ut alii professores iuberentur a
Theologorum fchola abstinere; Si hoc fuisset, inquit, ante sexaginta annos
petitum, tolerabile videri poterat. Ego, ex animo tibi exoptans ut scholam
Theologorum magis frequentes, adhortor tantum ut memineris, quod ante mill
annos Orat. 26. de ord^ confer. in disputat.
Gregorius Nazianzenus observandum tradidit, idque ex 1 Cor. 12. 29.
Apostolo, non omnia Christi membra iisdem facultatibus, and donis esse
praedita. Imperiose autem quid a me factum? Nisi ut 2. Tim. 2. 15.
arguere cum omni imperio ministros Dei decet. Neque put^am idcirco non licere
mihi te arguere, quod in nonnullis rebus me anteas. Nam David item praestitit
Nathani, Petrus Paulo: 2. Sa^. 12. 7.
Davidem tamen Nathan, and Gal. 2. 11.
Petrum Paulus reprehendit. Obiurgandi verbum haud scio an asperius sit, quam
mea meruit admonitio. Quanquam obiurgandos etiam amicos, non monendos solum,
author est De amicit.
Cicero: and ego te amicum meum opinabar; condona mihi hunc errorem. Argumenta
vero mea qualia sint, utrum ad falsum, an verum; malum, an bonum; cum viris,
tum pueris persuadendum facta: iudicium penes arbitros aequiores esto. A quibus
animadverti and expendi velim epiphonematuum, post tua argumenta (quae nostris,
uti spero, ne pueris quid^m illudent) his subtextum verbis: Vtinam, utinam sic
contenderes, and non reiiceres argumentis bonis fabulas non bonas semper. Ecce,
argumenta mea esse bona confiteris ipse, accusator meus; and tua, e contrario,
mala. Nimirum lingua lapso (ut est in (...)
Graecorum proverbio) verum dicit.

Postremo, quia L. 1. D. de his qui not. infam.
verba edicti Praetoris, sic a te exposita, ac si unius tantum rei, nempe artis
ludicrae, non duarum, id est artis ludicrae, pronuntiandiue, disjuncte,
mentionem facerent, nimis sicco pede te dixi transiisse: quaeris, an ego in
sicco sim, qui hoc dixerim. In sicco sane adhuc: and aqua tibi haeret, qua, ne
in sicco essem, conatus es me inundare. Nam ad testimonium Alciati, a te
citatum, artem non facere eum qui semel, iterum, quid artis facit; respondi, ut
concedatur hoc quod illi tribuis, pronuntiandi tamen causa in scenam prodire
qui prodit semel tantum: ac propterea Macrob. Saturn. l. 2. c. 7
Laberium, quo primum die prodiit inustam sibi notam infamiae censuisse; and
probrosum visum Romany (apud Annal. li. 14
Tacitum) vel orationes, vel carmina ita recitare, licet id gratis facerent.
Cuius responsionis ut parts, tuo more, quascunque potes carpas, negas te
tribuere illud Alciato: haberi enim apud Ad c. 207. D. de verbo. sign.
eum, quamvis in Ad. c. 66.
subnotato capite sit erratum. Ergone tribuere duntaxat ii dicendi sunt qui
falso tribuunt: non item qui vere? Profecto tu non L. 10. D. de instit. and jur.
tribuis suum cuique, qui tribuendi verbo significationem istam solam tribuis.
Ego vero, quia capite a te subnotato illud non reperi, and posse tamen alibi
extare cogitavi: verbo tribuendi de industria usus sum, ut vacarem culpa, seu
vere citasses, seu falso. Quanquam iam ex tui errati correctione falso citatum
esse deprehendo: teque interpolasse locum Alciati inserta voce, Iterum; cum
ille tantum dixerit, Qui semel emit pannos ut venderet, mercator non est: quia
in eo deficit exercitium.
Qui semel quid artis facit. Et quorsum (narra mihi) adjecisti hoc, Iterum? An
quia te videbas non satis probaturum nullam a ludionibus nostris labem
contrahi, si eos tantummodo artis faciendae nota liberares, qui semel quid
artis facerent? Quin igitur Alciatum scripsisti affirmare, artem non facere eum
qui semel, iterum, tertio, quid artis facit? Nam potuisti eodem iure: and hoc,
ad assequendum quod volebas, parum est. At eos saltem qui semel prodeunt, non
amplius, immunes esse notae, docuisse te ais ex Alciato, sic argumentando: Ars
notata est edicto; Sed una proditio non est ars; Ergo una proditio non est
notata. At haec argumentatio vide ne similiter statuminetur, ac si quis ita
disputaret: Faemina continetur appellatione hominis; Sed masculus non est
foemina; Ergo masculus non continetur appellatione hominis. Nam, ut L. 152. D.
de verb sign.
foemina quidem appellatione hominis continetur, sed non tantum foemina: ita
ars notata est edicto Praetoris, sed non tantum ars. Quod anim advertendum tibi
proposui, quam planissime potui in tanta brevitate, ex Praetoris verbis,
pronuntiandive causa, cum eo comparatis quod e Tacito citaras, de orationibus
carminibusque in scena recitatis. Et, quoniam non distinguit Tacitus
mercenarios recitatores a gratuitis, propterea probrosum Romae visum dixi
tametsi gratis recitarent: ut tu, qui Praetorem nullos vis notasse nisi
quaestuarios, iudicum Romanorum hac 2 bloquentiae primas nemo tulit: sed
victorem esse Caesare^ pronuntiatum. Tacit. annal. lib. 14.
in part etiam a tua commentatione dissidere attenderes. Tu contra affirmas
persuasum esse tibi incubuisse illos, de quibus Tacitus loquitur,
recitationibus, pretii aut praemii spe atque fiducia: itaque falsum me
colligere, qui notatos dicam tametsi gratis recitarent. Noe tu non sine causa
syllogismalem (quam De jur. inter. dialog. 4.
appellas) altercationem a iurisprudentia tua reiecisti, si ea ratione hoc
potes lucrifacere ut talla enthymemata, Persuasum est mihi te colligere falsum,
Itaque falsum colligis, vim idonearum probationum habeant. Sed quicquid tibi
sit persuasum, historia testatur eiusmodi recitatorum, quales (...) not abant
quorum verba refert Tacitus, nonnullos extitisse qui recitarent gratis: atque
hos eorum iudicio notatos, a quibus notabantur quicunque in scena recitarent.
Tales enim erant and 1 orationum and carminum recitatores, quorum nemo voluit
Orationis carminisque Latini coronam, de qu^ honestissimus quisque contenderat,
ipsorum concessu concessam sibi recepit Nero. Sueton Ner. cap. 12.
coronam accipere, 4 Carmen in scena recitat. Tacit. ann. lib. 16.
licet de ea contendissent. Talis erat (...) carminum recitator Nero: quem
(...).
mercede quicquam facere dedignatum affirmat, qui (...)
hoc narrat, Xiphi. epit.
Dio. Quid, quod ipse addis visum etiam crimen maiestatis laesae, secundum
antiquos Romanorum mores, si magistratus pro concione legisset vel codices (ni
male meministi) eorum quae ad magistratus spectabant tamen. Dissimile hoc
quidem: and memoriae tuae lapsui fortassis ex part tribuendum. Nec enim
maiestatis laesae accusatus est C. Cornelius. Cic. orat. pro Vatin. Asco.
Pedia. in Cice. orat. pro corn. Ant. August. de legib. cap. 12 and lege Corn.
majest.
tribunus plebis, quod pro co^cione codicem legisset; tanqua^ hoc perinde
turpe, immo turpius multo, habitum esset, quam orationes aut carmina in scena
recitare: sed quod, adversus intercessionem sui collegae, codicem, quem scriba
legere prohibitus est, legisset ipse, itaque violasset legem Corneliam
maiestatis. Caeterum, si antiquis Romanorum moribus tanti criminis reum fuisse
magistratum, qui vel codices rerum, ad magistratus spectantium pro concione
legisset, persuasum habes: fierine potest ut persuasum habeas non iisdem
moribus probrosam Romae visam vel gratuitam carminum orationumve in scena
recitationem? Nisi forte dices te existimare magistratus eos tantum modo
maiestatis crimen admisisse, qui mercedis gratia codicem legerent pro concione
Quod. mihi persuaderi prorsus non potest persuasum tibi esse.

Ita postulanti tibi ut eorum, quae inficiaris, quaedam, si possem, docerem and
ostenderem; non in illis solum, sed etiam in caeteris hoc gratificari studui,
ut potui. Maturius id facturus, nisi tu, omissa librorum and capitum, in quibus
Augustini and aliorum quos citas verba scripta sint, indicatione, coegisses me
tempus terere perlegendis nonnullis libris integris, quo loca, quibus certo
innixus videreris, explorate cognita compertaque haberem. Auxit meam huius
officii praestandi cupiditatem and desiderium tua sententia, sententiam non
dissimilem Hieronymi, epi. 61. epi. 1. advers. err. Io. Ieros.
gravioris autoris in memoriam revocans, ad tanta crimina patientem esse non
oportere. Quare, quod mihi obiicis concludens, te a me tractari pessime
immerito, hominem mei studiosissimum, crimen gravissimum omnium, si verum, non
modo in amore non respondere, sed etiam malefactis benevole^tiam rependere: id
immerito mihi a te obiectum esse, tua ipsius voce convinco, and concludo. Nam,
quum per epistolam olim me moneres eorum quae putabas perperam asserta in meis
praelectionibus ad primum Maccabaeorum, his verbis usus es: Aequi bonique haec
consules? Certe ea ipsa sunt, quae ego in donis amicorum pretiosissima ducerem;
and utinam mihi aliquis contigisset aliquando, qui in meis scriptis praestare
tantum voluisset. Vides ne ut ipse te a me non pessime, sed optime tractatum;
neque iniuriis affectum, sed donis; and iis non vulgaribus, sed long
pretiosissimis, carissimis, optatissimis, esse fatearis? Quod si plus aloes
quam mellis medicamentis meis admiscui, vel cum acrimonia potius maiore tanquam
ad secandum and urendum accessi: tamen hoc quoque a Cic. de off. lib. 1.
prudente morum magistro scis probari, quum nulla reperitur alia medicina. Ac
ego, medicinam aliam saepiuscule in te expertus frustra, hanc unam fuperesse
salutarem duxi; alioqui desperandum. Praesertim cum rursus in pristinum de
mendacio male officioso morbum recidisses: idque ita graviter and periculose,
ut novo typis excuso opere defenderes, quod in vetere (liberamne amici vocem
feres?) pessime affirmaras. Quantum mutatus ab illo, qui mihi esse videbare,
quum in epistola quadam hac de re scripta concluderes hoc modo: In controversia
hac sustinere, quantum ad theologos pertinet, deinceps assensionem, in animo
est. tibi scilicet, ut debeo, plurimum tribuo, qui me in contrariam vocas
sententiam: and cum Tertulliano tandem malim sapere in Scripturis sanctis
minus, quam contra.] Atque in alia, ad meam precationem, Qui Petrum erexit ut
agnosceret peccatum quum mendacio officioso negasset se novisse Christum, te,
ut ipsum recte fecisse sentias, excitet, neque tibi verbis defendendum putes
quod piis factis improbaris; respondisti his verbis: Ecce, in fine versor
tuarum literarum, nec tuam admonitionem, nec precationem tuam (mihi creed) sine
ingenti affectu animi lego; dixerim nec sine lacrymis, certe cordis: Deus me
dirigat in viam suam, and ab omni errore sartu^ tectumque servet, eo maxim,
qui animam spectat, and veram pietatem infuscat.] Et qua ego tande^, te, qui
aliquando hoc animo fuisti, oratione compellem, nisi qua ecclesiae Ephesinae
angelum compellavit Christus? Apoc. 2. (...).
Memor esto unde excideris, and resipisce, and priora opera facito.

Vale. Aug. 5.
FINIS.

