A DEFENSE OF THE IVDGMENT OF THE REformed churches. That a man may lawfully
not only put away his wife for her adultery, but also marry another.

Wherein both Robert Bellarmin the Jesuits Latin treatise, and an English
pamphlet of a namelesse author mainteyning the contrary are confuted by John
Raynolds.

A taste of Bellarmins dealing in controversies of Religion: how he depraveth
Scriptures, misalleag the fathers, and abuses reasons to the perverting of the
truth of God, and poisoning of his Church with error.

Printed ANNO 1609.

The Preface to the Reader.
GOod Reader, my love and revere^ce to the author living, and to his memory
being dead: and my desire to serve the church of God by other men's woorks, who
am not able to do it by mine own: have moved me to publishe this learned
treatise, which Doctor Rainolds left (as many other exquisit travels of his)
shutt up in the closett of some private friends as in a fair prison.

Because my testimony (or any man's I know) is of much less weight then the
only name of the author to commend the work, I will say nothing more in
praise of it, then that it is an vndoupted work of that worthy and holy man,
whose learning, diligence, abilleties, meeknes, wisdom, and piety made him
eminent to us, and may perhaps yield him more admirable to posteretie, which
without envy of his person shall view the marks of thies graces in his
writings, or take them by story.

Touching the argument I will only say, that it seems the more worthy such
a man's resolution, by how much it has been formerly, or presently is
controverted amongst the learned. And if any man be contrary minded to this,
which is the common judgment of the reformed churches, he (above others)
shall be my debttor, for helping him to so good a means of reforming himself:
In matters of opinion (chiefly divine) he that conquer eth and he that is is
conquered devide both honor and proffit.

If any man take good by it, let him give praise to God, if he take none, let
him bla^e none but himself: The next page will show the contents, and order of
the book,

The book it self will show thee how good it is. farewell.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
The first Chapter. The state of the question between the church of Rome, and
the reformed churches being first declared, the truth is proved by scripture:
That a man having put away his wife for her adultery may lawfully marry
another. The second Chapter. The places of scripture alleged by our
adversaries to disprove the lawful liberty of marriage after divorceme^t for
adultery, are proposed, exa^ined, and proved not to make against it. The third
Chapter. The consent of Fathers, the second pretended proof for the Papists
doctrine in this point, is prte^ded falsely: and if all be weighed in an even
balance, the Fathers check it rather. The fourth Chapter. The conceits of
reasons urged last against us are oversights proceeding from darkness, not
from light: and reason it self, dispelling the mist of Popish probabilties,
gives clear testimony with the truth of Christ.
An admonition to the reader.
ALthough the Printer has been careful, and supplied sometimes the defects
of his coppie, yet has he sometimes failed, not only in mispoyntinge, or not
poynting, or transposing, omitting, or adding, sometimes a letter (which the
readers judgment, and diligence must help) but in omission, or alteration of
words, obscuring, or perverting the sense; which the reader shall do well to
corect, before he read the book, as they stand herevnder.

It is like enough there may be more faults, especially in the quotations
chiefly in the greek words written in a lattin letter, concerning which I
only desire that the author whose skill, and diligence were admirable, might
take no damage by other men's faults.

The faults are omissive, or coruptions of words. The words omitted are in
the corrections following written in another letter,

Faults escaped in the Printinge.
Page 12. l. 1. read some other cause. Page 19. l. 29, read but incide^tly
touched. Page 21. l. 28. read own argument, 39. Marg. 1. Cor 17. 10. 34.
Marg. in the end. Judge: 5. 31. Page 59. l. 11. read yet has he not the
general consent, Page 74. l. 32. read, submits him self expressly, Page 80.
l. 6. read If notwithstanding.

The corruptions of words, correct thus,

Page 2. l. 18. read, Canonists. for Canoists Page 7. l. 24. read,
exceptions, for excepsitions, 16. Marg. in the quotation, out of Ioh' 9. read,
verse 41. for 21. Page 31. l. 8. read, Coumpts, in stead of Counsels of
money. Page 53. l. 10. read, the, for that papists.

Page 57. l. 10. read, Calumniously, for Calmuniously.

59. Marg. at the letter C. read not extra but tittulo, and so at the letter
D. for those places are not in the extravagants, but in the 4. book of the
decretals under those titles. page 60. l. 27. read yea, for yet sets down,
Page 60. l. 28. read specify them, for then. Page 61. l. 8. read through
error thought, for though, and mende there the poynting. Page 73. l. 22. read
of all, for by all the rest, Page 75. l. 2. read any Bishop ror my Bishop,
Page 77. l. 19. read one of theirs, for, out, of theirs, Page 78. l. 28.
read, convicted, in stead of corrupted by the text, Page 90. l. 13. read,
the weakness, for of weakness

The words corrupted are written in another letter.

OF THE LAVVFVLNES OF MARRIAGE UPON A LAVVFVL DIVORCE.
The first Chapter.
The state of the Question being first declared the truth is proved by
scripture: that a man having put away his wife for her adultery may lawfully
marry another*

THe duty of man and woman joined in marriage, requires that Genes, ^. 24,
Math, 19. 5.
they two should be as one person, and cleave each to other with mutual love
and liking in society of life, until it please God, who has coupled them
together in this bond, to set them free from it, and to dissociate and sever
the^ by death, But the inordinate fancies and desires of our corupt nature have
so inveighled Adams seed in many places, that men have accustomed to put
away their wives upon every trifling mislike and coffeehouse: yea, the
Jews supposed themselves to be warra^ted by Gods Deuteronomy, 24. 1. Math, 5. 31.
law to do it, so that whosoever put away his wife gave her a bill of divorce
me^t. This perverse opinion and error of theirs our Savior Christ reproved
teaching that divorcements may not be made for any cause save whoredom only.
For whosoever (says he) shall put away his wife except it be for whoredom
and shall marry another does commit adultery and who so marries her which is
put away, does commit adultery. Now about the meaning of these words of
Christ expressed morefully by on of the Math, 10. 9.
Evangelists, by Mar 10. 11. Luke 6. 18.
others more sparingly, there has a doubt arisen: and diverse men eve^ from
the primative churches time have bee^ of diverse minds.

For many of the fathers have gathered thereupon, that if a man's wife committed
whoredom and fornication, he might not only put her away, but marry another.
Some others, and among them namely S. Augustine, have thought that the man
might put away his wife but marry another he might not.

The Schooledivines of latter years, and the Cano^ists, as for the most part
they were adicted commonly to S. Austins iudgme^nt, did likewise follow him
herein and the Popes mainteining their doctrine for Catholic, have possessed
the church of Rome with this opinion. But since in our days the light of good
learning both for arts and tongues has shined more brightly by Gods most
gracious goodness then in the former ages, and the holy scriptures by the help
thereof have been the better understood: the Pastors and Doctors of the
reformed Churches have percieved and showed, that if a man's wife defile her
self with fornication, he may not only put her away by Christ's Doctrine but
also marry another. Wherein that they teach agreeably to the truth, and not
erroneously, as Jesuits and Papists do falsely and unjustly charge them. I will
make manifest and prove (through Gods assistance) by express words of Christ,
the truth it self. And because our adversaries do ween that the contrary
hereof is strongly proved by sundry arguments and obiecttions, which two of
their newest writers Bellarmin the Jesuit and a namelesse author of an English
pamphlet, have dillige^tly laid together: For the farther clearing therefore of
the matter, and taking away of doubts and scruples I will set down all their
objections in order, first out of the scriptures then of fathers, last of
reasons, and answer every one of them particularly. So shall it appear to
such as are not blinded with a fore-conceived opinion and prejudice, that
whatsoever show of probabilities ate brought to the contrary, yet the truth
delivered by our Savior Christ allows him whose wife commits fornication
to put her away and marry another.

The proof hier of is evident if Christ's words be weighed in the niententh
Chapter of S. Mathews gospel. For Math. 19. 3.
when the Pharisees asking him a question, whether it were lawful for a man to
put away his wife for every cause, received answer that it was not, and
thereupon said unto him, Why did Moses then command to give a bill of
divorcement and to put her a way: Our Savior said unto them; Moses suffered
you because of the hardness of your heart to put away your wifes: But from the
beginning it was not so. And I say unto you, that, whosoever shall put away his
wife, except it be for whoredom, and shall marry another, does commit
adultery: and who so marries her that is put away, does commit adultery.

Now in this sentence, the clause of exception [ except it be for whoredome]
does argue that he commiteth not adultery, who, having put away his wife for
whoredom marries another.

But he must needs commit it in doing so unless the band of marrirge be loosed
and disolved. For who so marries another as long as he is Romans 7* verse 2
bound to the former, verse, 3.
is an adulterer. The band then of marriage is loosed and dissolved between
that man and wife who are put assunder and divorced for whoredom.

And if the band beloosed, the man may marry another: seeing it is written 1,
Cor, ^. verse. 27.
Art thou loosed from a wife? If thou marry thou sinnest not. verse. ^8.
Therefore it is lawful for him who has put away his wife for whoredom to
marry another.

This argument does firmly and necessarily conclude the point in question, if
the first part and proposition of it be proved to be true. For there is no
controversy of any of the rest: being all grounded on such undoubted
principles of scripture and reason, that our adversaries themselves admit and
grant them all.

The first Bessa^min Tom, 2 contr 4 libr. de matrimonij sacr. cap. 5 16. et 7
The Pamphlet ter in his refutation of the discourse touching the law fullness
of marriadge after divorceior whoredom.
they deny to weete that the clause of ex^eption in Christ's speech [ except it
be for whoedome] does argue that the man commits not adultery, who, having
put away his wife for whoredom, marries another. And to overthrowe this
proposition, they do bring soudry answers and evasions. The best of all which
as Bellarmin avoucheth, is, that those words [ except it be for whoredome] are
not an exception. For Christ (says he) meant those words Nisi ob for nicationem.
[except for whoredome] not as an exception, but as a negation. So that the
sense is whosoever shall put away his wife. except for whoredom; that is to
say Extra cousa^ fornicationis.
without the cause of whoredom, and shall marry another does commit
adulteric. Whereby it is affirmed that he is an adulterer who having put away
his wife without the cause of whoredoe, marries another: but nothing is said
touching him who marries another, having put away his former wife for whore
dome. In deed this evasion might have some color for it, if these words of
Christ [except it be for whoredome] were not an exception. But neither has
Bellarmin ought that may suffice for the proof hereof and the very text of
the ^cripture it self is so clear against him, that he must of necessity
give over his houlde. For the principal pillar wherewith he under proppeth it,
is S. De adulte^ in conjug: lib ^cap. 9.
Austins judgment, who has so expounded it in his first book touching
adulterous marriages: Now of that treatise S. Retractat. lib. 2. cap. 57.
Austin says himself in his retractations I have written two books touching
adulterous marriages, as near as I could according to the scripturs being
desirous to open and loose the knotts of a most difficult question. Which
whether I have done so that no knott is left therein, I know not: nay rather I
perceave that I have not done it perfectly, and thoroughly, although I have
opened many creeckes thereof, as whosoever reads with judgment may discern.
S. Augustine then acknowledges that there are some wants and imperfectio^s in
that work which they may see who read with judgment. And whether this that
Bellarmin does allege out of it, deserve not to fall within the compass of
that ce^sure I appeal to their judgment who have eyes to see: For S. Augustine
thought that the word in the orignial of S. Mathews gospel, had, by the Proper
signification of it, imported a negation rather then an exception. As De
adulter. con^ug lib. 1. cap. 11.
he shows by saying that where the common Latin translation has Ni^i ob
Fornicationem
[ except for whoredome] in the Greek text it is rather read Piaeter causam
Fornicationis
without the cause of whoredom. Supposing belike (whether by slipp of memory
or rather oversight) P^^^ctos Logou porneias.
that the same words, which were used before in the fifth Chapter of S. Mathews
Gospel to the same purpose, were used also in this place: whereas here they
ei^my epi porneia
differ, and are well expressed by that in the latin by which S. Austin thought
they were not so well. Howbeit, if thy had been the same with the former: yet
neither so might Bellarmin allow his opinion: considering that the common latin
translation (which Papists by there Council of Trent are bound to stand to
under pain of ourse) expresses Excepta causa fornicationis
those likewise as a plain exception.

Which in deed agrees to the right and natural meaning of the Parectos.
particle, as Act 26. 29. Parectoe ton desmou so patex in the Septuagint Sam.
21 9. 1 Reg. 3. 18.
the like writers use it in like construction: even 1. Cor. 15. 27
then to, when it has as it were a link less to tie it unto that meaning.
Wherefore S, Ektos tou hypo taxanto^.
Austins mistaking of the word and signification thereof is noe sufficient
warrant for Bellarmin ^ to ground on, that they must be taken so. As for that
he adds, that, albeit Parectos ^ and ei mi ^. ei mi* Apo^ 9. 4. (...), 27.
both these particles be taken exceptively often times, yet may they also be
taken otherwise, sith^ one of the^ is used in the Revelation as an adversative,
not an exceptive: this makes much le^^e for proof of his assertion. For what
if it be used there as an adversative where the matter treated of, and the
tenor of the sentence do manifestly argue that it must be taken so? Must it
therefore be taken so in this place, whereof our questio^n is? or does
Bellarmin, prove by any circumstance of the text, that here it may be taken
so? No. Neither says he a word to this purpose. Why men^ioneth he then that
it may-be taken otherwise, and is in the Revelation, for an adversative
particle? Truly I know not: unless it be to show that he can wrangle, and
play the cavelling sophister in seeming to gainsay and disprove his adversary,
when in truth he does not. Or perhaps, though he durst not say for the
particular, that it is taken here as an adversative, which he could not but
most absurdly: Yet he thought it policy to breed a surmise thereof for the
general, that shallower conceits might imagine another sense therein, they knew
not what; and they whose brazen faces should serve them thereto, might
impudently brable, that our sense is not certain, because another is Possible,
eve^ as if a Jew being pressed by a Christian with the place of Esaias. 7. 14.
2. Gnalma.
Esaias, Behoulde a virgin shall conceave, and bring forth a Son should answer
that the Hebrew word translated Virgin, may be taken otherwise since that in
the Prove. to. 19.
Proverbs it signifies a married woman: at least one that is not a Virgin in
deed, though she would seem to be, But as the Jew cannot conclude hereof
with any reason, that the word signifies a married woman in Esaias; because the
thing spoken of is a strange sign and it is not strange for a married woman
to conceave and bring forth a Son: so neither can the Jesuit conclude of the
former, that the particle in Matthew is meant adversatively; because the words
then do breed noe sense at all; in which sort to thinkethat any wise man
spoke, were solly; that Christ the word and wisdom of God were impiety. Nay
if some of Bellarmins scholars should say that words must be supplied to
make it percit sense, rather than their master be cast of as a wra^gler: they
would be quickly forced to pluck in this horn, or else they might chance to
leap (which is worse) out of the frying pan into the fire. For adversative
particles import an opposition and contrariety unto that sentence against
which they are brought in Now, the sentence is, that who so put teth away his
wife and marries another, does commit adultery.

Wherefore, he by consequent, commits not adultery who does so for
whoredom: If the particle be adversative, and must have words accordingly
supplied, and understood to make the sense percttt. Thus the shift and cavil
which Bellarmin has drawn out of the double meaning of the Greek word, is
either idle and beats the air; or if it strike any, it strikes himself,
and gives his cause a deadly wound. Yea that which he principally sought to
confute, he has confirmed thereby.

For since the word has only two significations exceptive, and adverstive,
neither durst he say that it is used here as an adversative. it follows he
must grant it to be as an exceptive: and so the place rightly translated in
our English (agreeable to the other in the 5. of Matthew) except it be for
whoredoe, which as in their authe^ticall latin text also does out of
controversy betoke^ an exception.

Having al passages therefore shutt against him for scaping this way, he
sleeth to another starting hole: to weete, that if the word be taken
exceptively, yet may it be an exception negative.

And this ( he says) suffices for the maintenance of S. Austins answer. For
when it is said, whosoever shall put away his wife, excepting the cause of
whoredom, and shall marry another does commit adultery: the cause of
woredome may be excepted, either because in that case it is not edul^erie to
marry another; and this is an exception affirmative: or because nothing is
pres^tly determined touching that cause, whether it be sufficient to excuse
adultery or not; and this is an exception negative, which in that S. Austin
embraced he did well. I would to God Bellarmin had S. Austins modesty. Then
would he be ashamed to charge such a man with embracing such whorish silth of
his own fansing, as in this distinction of negative and affirmative exception
he does. For he handles it so l^wdly and porversly, by calling that
affirmative, which in deed^ is negative, and by avouching that to be negative,
which is not: as if he had made a covenant with his lips to lie, treadinge in
the stepps of those wicked wretches of whom it is written Esaias, 5. 20
woe unto them who say that good is evil, and evil good. For the proof
whereof it is to be noted that an excepton is a particular proposition
contradictorie to a general: So that if the general proposition be
affirmative, the exception is negative, and if the proposition be negative
contrariwise, the exception is affirmative.

As for exsamples sake Exodus 22. 20
He that sacrifices to any Gods save to the Lord only, shall be destroyed
says Moses in the law. The proposition is affirmative, He that sacrifices
to my Gods shall be destroyed.

The exception negative. He that sacrifices to the Lord shall not be
destroyed. Mar. 10. 18.
There is none good, but one, even God. says Christ in the Gospel. The
proposition is negative There is none good. The exception affirmative. One is
good, even God. Act. 26. ^^.
I would to God that all ( layth Paul to Agrippa) which hear me this day,
were altogether such as I am, except these bonds. The proposition affirmative.
I wish that all which hear me were such as I am altogether. The exception
negative. I wish not in bonds they were such as I am Phil. 4. 10.
No Church did communicate with me in the account of giving and receiving
^saving you only says the same Paul to the Phillippians. The Proposition
negative No church did communicate with me in the account of giving and
receiving. The exception affirmative You of Philippi did.

Likewise in all the rest of excep^tions adjoined to general propositions,
though the marks and tokens, as of generality sometimes lie hidden in the
proposition, so of denying or affirming do in the exception: Yet it is plain
and certain, that the proposition and exception matched with it, are still of
contrary quallitie, the one afirmative if the other negative, and negative, if
the other affirmative. Which thing being so: see now the Jesuits dealing, how
falsely and absurdly he speaks against truth and reason. For since in Christ's
speech, touching Divorcement for whoredom; the proposition is affirmative
Whosoever shall put away his wife, and marry another, does commit adultery:
it follows that the exception which denies him to commit adultery, who
putting away his wife for whoredom, marries another, is an exception
negative, But Bellarmin says that this were an exception affirmative. Yea
which is more strange in a man learned and knowing rules of logique (But what
can arts help when men are given over by Gods just judgment to their own
lusts and errors?) he e^titeleth it an exception affirmative, even then and in
the same place, when and where himself having set it down in the words going
immediarly next before, had given it the mark o^f a negative, thus, It is not
adultery to marry another. And as no absurdity does lightly come alone, he
adds fault to fault, saying that this is an exception negative, When no thing
is presently determined touching the cause, whether it be sufficient to excuse
adultery or no. So first to deny with him was to affirm: and next, to say
nothing, now is to deny. Yet there is a rule in L. Qui racet D. de regulis
juris.
Law that he who says nothing, denies not. Belike, as they coined us new
Divinity at Rome: so they will new Law and new Lodgique too. Howbeit, if these
principles be allowed therein by the Jesuits authority, that negative is
affirmative and to say naught is negative: I see not but al heretics and
ungodly persons, may as well as Jesuits, mainteyne what they list, and
impudently face it out with like distinctions. For if an adversary of the H.
Ghost should be controuled by that we read to the Corinthia^s 1. Cor. 2. 11.
The things of God knows no man, but the spirit of God: His answer (after
Bellarmins pattern) were ready, that this proves not the spirit of God to
know those things, because it might be a negative exception. importing that S.
Paul would determine nothing presently thereof. If one who dispaired of the
mercy of God through conscience of his sines, and trespasses should be put in
mind of Christ's speech to sinners Luke 13. 3.
Ye shall all perish except ye repent: He might reply thereto that the
exception is negative; and this, though not in the former point, yet here were
true; but to make it serve his humor. he must expound it with Bellarmin, that
Christ does not determine what shall become of the repentant. If a usurer should
be told that he Lovit. 2^. 37
is forbidden to Give forth upon Usury, Ezekiel. 18, 13.
or to take increase: and a thief that he is Ephesians. ^. 28
commanded To labor and work, and 2 Thessalonians. 3 12
so to eat his own bread; they might (if they had learned to imitate
Bellarmin) defend their trades both, the one by affirming, that to forbidd a
thing is to say nothing of it, the other, that to command be tokeneth to
forbid. In a word, whatsoever opinion were reproved as false, or action as
wicked, out of the scriptures, denouncing death eternal and pains of hell
thereto: the seduced and disobedient might shift the scriptures of, by glosing
thus upon them, that false is true and wicked holy: life meant by death, and
heaven by hell. Or if the papists them-selves would condemn this kind of
distinguishing and expounding places, as senseless and shameless: then let
them give the same sentence of Bellarmins that negative is afirmative, and to
say nothing is to deny. Which whether they do, or no, I will, with the
consent and liking (I do^bt not) of all indifferent judges, and Godly minded
men who love the truth and not contention, conclude, that these lying gloses of
the Jesuits do not become a Christian. And seeing it is proved that an
exception negative is not a pr^terition or passing over a thing in silence
(which if Christ had meant, he could have done with fit words, as wise men are
wont) but a flat denying of that in on case, which the proposition affirms in
all others: it remains that Christ having excepted out of his general speech
them who for whore dome put away their wives, denies that in them, which in
all others he affirms; and thereby teaches us that the man who putting away
his wife for that cause, marries another, does not commit adultery.

The next trick of Sophistry, whereto as to a shelter our adversaries betake
them, is that the exception ought to be restreined to the former branche of
putting away the wife only. To the which intent, they say that there are some
words wanting in the text which must be supplied and perfected thus; Whosoever
shall put away his wife (which is not lawful except it be for whoredom) and
marries another, does commit adultery. This devise does Bellarmin allow of
as probable, though not like the foresaid two of negation and negative
exception. But our English Pamphletter prefers it before all. And surely if
it were lawful to foist in these words which is not lawful: the Pamphletter
might seem to have showed greater skill herein then Bellarmin. But men of
understanding and judgment do know that this were a ready way to make the
scripture a nose of wax and leaden rule (as Hierar. lib. 3 Cap. 3.
Pighuis does blasphemously term it) if every one may add not what the
circumstances and matter of the text shows to be wanting, but what himself
lists to frame such sense thereof as pleases his conceit and fancy. The
sundry interlasings of words by sundry authors into this very place and the
wrestings of it thereby to sundry senses may (to go noe further) sufficiently
discover the fault and inco^venience of that kind of dealing.

For Quaest 76. in Math. 19.
the Bishop of Auila supplieth it in this manner who so puts away his wife,
except it be for whordome, though he marry not another, commits adultery,
and whosoever puts her away in whatsoever sort, if he marry another, does
commit adultery. Freier Alpho^sus Alphons a Castro advers hae^ lib 1 ^. tit
Nuptiae.
checketh and controlleth this interpretation, partly as too violent, for
thrusting in so many words; partly as untrue, for the former branch of it:
since he who puts away his wife, not for whoredom, although he cause her to
commit adultery, yet does not himself commit it, unless he marry another.
Whereupon the Friar would have it thus supplied rather. Whose puts away his
wife, not for other cause but for whoredom, and marries another, does commit
adultery. But this though it have not so many words added, as the Bishop of
Auilas, yet in truth it is more violently forced against the natural meaning
and drift of the text. For by adding these words Not for other cause, his
purpose is to say, that whosoever puts away his wife for noe cause but for
whoredom yet commits adultery, if he marry another; much more if he^e
marry having put away his wise for any other cause. And so is Christ's speech
made in effect clean contrary to that which his own words do geve: he
saying Whosoever shall put away his wife except it be for whoredom: and the
friar forcing him to say Whosoever shall put away his wife although it be
for whoredom, and shall marry another, does commit adultery. In Matt, 19
Nicolas ^f Lira being, as in time more ancient then the friar, so more
sincere and single in handling the scripture, says that other words must be
interposed to the supplying of it thus. whosoever puts away his wife except it
be for whoredom, sins, and does against the law of marriage; and whosoever
marries another does commit adultery. Wherein though he deal less
vyolently with the text, then do the friar and the Bishop: yet he offends
also in their lice^tious humor of adding to the scripture, where nothing was
wanting, and making it thereby to speak that which he thinks, whereas he
should have learned to think that which it speaks. yea Bellarmin him self
acknowledges that they all were overseene herein, albeeit censuring them with
gentler words, as he is wont his favorites and friends. For the explicationsl
(says he) which the Bishop of Auila, Alphonsus a Castro, and others have
devised, are not so probable.

But why should these be noted by him as improbable, yea denied unworthy the
rehersall, and that of his own, though adding in the like sort, which is not
lawful, be allowed as probable, yea magnyfied as most true by the pamphletter?
The reasons which they both, or rather which Ballarmin, for the pamphletter
does no more here but English him, as neither else where for the most part,
though he bragg not thereof: the reasons then which Bellarmin does press out
of the text to breed a persuasion in his credulous scholars that this
interposito^ is probable and likely, are pressed indeed according to the
proverb; The wringing of the nose causes blood to come out. For he says
that Christ did not place the exception after those words And shall marry
another, but straight after those whosoever shall put away Prove 30. ^.
and likewise when he added, and whosoever marrieeth her that is put away
commits adultery he did not join thereto; Except it be for whoredom: to
the intent that he might show that the cause of whoredom does only make the
putting away to be lawful, and not the celebrating of a new marriage too. And
how does he prove that Christ did so place the exception in the former clause
to this intent? or to this intent did omit it in the latter? Nay he proves it
not; it is but his conjecture, like a sick man's dream. Unless this go for a
proof, that Christ did not so place it before without cause, nor omit it
afterward without cause. Which if he meant it should, it was for want of a
better. For Christ did not these things without cause I grant Therefore he did
the^ for this cause; it follows not. S. Paul, having occasion to cite a place
of scripture does set it down thus. 2 Cor, 6. ^^
Come ye out from among the^, and separate your selves says the Lord, and
touch noe unclean thing. Herein he has placed the words says the Lord, not
after touch noe unclean thing but after, separate your selves. This did he not
without cause, What? for this cause therefore that he might restrain the
words, says the Lord, to the former branch as not pertaining to the later
also? No for it appears by the Esaias 52, 1^
Ptophet Esaias that they belong to both. It is to be thought then, that the
spirit of God who does nothing without cause, did move Paul for some cause to
place the^ so. (...)
perhaps for perspicuity and commodiousnesse of geving other men thereby to
understand the rather that both the words going before, and coming after were
qualified with says the Lord. which is to be likewise thought of the exception
placed by our Savior between the two branches of his speech. And that with
so much greater reason, in my judgment because if he had placed it after the
later And shall marry another, the words* Epi porneia.
Except for whoredom might have seemed to signify that it were lawful for a
man having put away his wife for any cause, Dia it is porneia,
to marry another, if he could not contain; as it is written ^1. Cor, 7, 2
because of whoredom, let every man have his wife: where now, the exception
being set before (the pharisees whose question Christ therein did answer) could
gather noe such poison out of his words: to feed their error: but they must
needs acknowledge this to be his doctrine, that a man may not put away his
wife for every cause, and marry another, but for whoredom only. As for
Christ's omitting of the exception afterward, Bellarmin himself will quickly see
there might be another cause thereof, if he consider how S. Paul repeating
this doctrine of Christ does wholly omit the exception, which nevertheless
must needs be supplied and understood. For why does S. Paul say that to
married persons, 1, Cor. 7. 10.
the Lord gave commaudement; Let not the wife depart from her husband, and
let not the husband put away his wife; without adding to either part, except
it be for whoredom, which the Lord did add? Bellarmi^s greatest Tho, Aquin in
1 Cor 7. ^ect. 2.
Doctor says that he omitted it because it^was very well known, most
notorious. If then S, Paul had reason to omit it wholly because it was so well
known: How much more justly might Christ in part omit it for the same cause,
having mentioned it immediately before, and made it known thereby? Chiefly
s^ing that as he framed his speech to men's understanding, so did he follow the
common use of men therein. And if I should say upon the like occasion whosoever
draws his sword, except he be a magistrate, and kills a man commits
murder; and whosoever abbetteth him that kills a man commits murder: what
man of sense and reason would not think I meant that the exception set down
in the former sentence touching ma^quellers pertains to the later of there
abbetters also, and uttered once must serve for both? yea, even in the former
too, who would not think that my meaning were the exception should reach, unto
both the branuches of drawing the sword, and killing a man; not to be abridged
and tied up unto the first, as if I had said, whosoever draws his sword
(which none may do except he be a magistrate) and kills a man, commits
murder? yet one who were disposed to play the Jesuits part, might thus
expound my speech, and say I taught thereby that Peter in deed was justly
reproved for drawing his sword though, Mat 26. 12.
he killed not: But magistrates are authorized to draw it, and noe more, not to
put men, to death, and Romans 13. 4
to take vengeance on him that does evil. Neithet should he do me greater
wrong* there in by making me to speak contrary to scripture, then Bellarmin
does Christ by the like depraving of the like sentence. But if all these
reasons will not persuade his scholars, that in Christ's speech the exception of
whordome is to be exte^ded to both the points jointly of putting away and
marrying: and that Bellarmin adding these words, which is not lawful, did
unlawfully sow a patch of human rags to the whole garment of Gods most
precious word: behold their own doctrine allowed and established by the
Council of Tre^t, shall force them, will they, nill they to see it and
acknowledge it. For if the exception be so tied only to the former point: Then
a man may not putt away his wife for any cause save for whoredom, no not from
bed and board, as they term it, that is, from mutual company and society of
life, although he marry not another. But the Council of Tre^t pronounces and
defines, Ses^ 24. ca^. 8
that there are many causes, for the which a man may put away his wife from bed
and board, wherefore the Papists (no remedy) must grant that the exception
cannot so be tied unto the former point only. And therefore whereas Bellarmin
says further that he thi^keth it is Gh 4. did 35. quaest an ^ct.
S. Thomas of Aquines opinion that Christ's words should be expounded so: and
adult.
Ierom seems some what to be of the same mind: the Papists peradventure
will be feign to say that Bellarmin was deceived herein. For else not only Ierom
of whom they reckon less but In Mat. 19.
Thomas of Aquine the saint of Saints and chiefest light of the Church of
Rome shall be conviuced of error, even by the Council of Trents verdict.

And these consideracions do likewise stopp the passage of another shift,
which this coosin german to the last entreated of, and Bellarmin prayseth it
alike. To weete that the words commits adultery, must be supplied and
understood in the former part of Christ's sentence thus: Whosoever puts away
his wife, except it be for whoredom, commits adultery, and whosoever marries
another commits adultery. King ^ 18
Solomon did wisely judge that she was not the mother of the child who would
have it divided; but she who desired it might be saved entier. Surely the
Jesuit has not those bowels of kind and loving affection toward Christ's
sentence that a Christian should, who can find in his heart to have it
divided; and of one living body, na^ely, Whosoever puts away his wife,
except it be for whordo^e and, marries another, commits adultery, made as
it were two pieces of a dead carkas, the first, Whosoever puts away his
wife, except it be for whoredom, commits adultery, the second, whosoever
marries another co^miteth adultrie. Which dealing, beside the inco^venie^ce of
making the scripture a nose of wax and lead^e rule, if men may add what
pleases the^, spetialy if they may also ma^gle sentences, and chop the^ in
sundry parts: but beside this mischief here it has a greater, that Christ most
true and holy, is made thereby to speak an untruth. For a man may put away his
wife for other cause, then for whoredom, and yet not commit adultery
himself. Yes, he commits it (says Bellarmin) in his wives adultery,
whereof he was the cause by putting her unjustly away. But I reply that it is
one thing to cause his wife to co^mitt it, another to commit it himself. And y
Christ when he was minded to note these several faults, did it with Poiei
autin moichastai and molcha^ai.
several words expressinge them accordinglye. Moreover, understanding the
term, to put away, not as Apolue in Lelusai. 1 cor. ^27,
the force thereof does yield, and Christ took it for loosing of the ba^d of
marriage, but for a sepe ration from bed, and board only, as Bellarmin
understands it: He cannot allow the sentence which he fathereth one Christ,
though so expounded, without either condemning of the Trent Council, or being
himself condemned by it.

For if whosoever seperateth his wife from him, but for whoredom, does committ
adultery in causing her to committ it: Then is it a sin to separate her for
any cause save for whoredom. If it be a sin: The Extra tit. de divortij^
Church of Rome erreth in houlding and decreeing that she may be separated
for sundry other causes. But whosoever says that the Church erreth herein,
is accursed by the Sess^ 4, can. 28,
Council of Trent. The Council of Trent therefore does consequently curse
Bellarmin, if he say that Christ spoke his wordesin that sense, in which he
co^strueth them. And does it notcurse Lib. contra Adimant, cap 3.
Austin also, and in Matt, 19.
Theophilact, who^ Bellarmin alleges as saying the same? at least it
declares that in the Councils judgment, the fathers missexpou^d the Scrip
tures sometimes, even those very places on which the Papists cite the^
assounde interpreters of the scripture. Now the speech of Christ being cleared
and saved entier from all cavils, the meaning thereof is plain, as I have
showed, that he who having put a way his wife for whoredo^e marries another,
commits not adultery. For so much imports the exception negative of the
cause of whoredo^e, opposed to the general affirmative proposition, wherewith
our Savior answered the question of the Pharisees touchcing divorceme^ts used
by the Jews, who putting away there wives for any cause did marry others.

The only reason of adversaries remaining to be answered, stood upon, and
urged by them as most effectual, and for cible to the contrary, is an
example of like sentences: from which, since the like conclusion (say they)
cannot be inferred, as we infer of this, the inferrence or this is faultye.
And faulty (I grant) they might esteem it justly if the like conclusions
could not be drawn from the like sentences.

But let the examples, which they bring for proof here of be thoroughly
sifted: And it will appear that either the sentences are unlike, or the like
conclusitons may be inferred of them. For of three sentences proposed to this
end, the the first is out of Scripture in S. James Epistle Iame^, 4. 17
To him that knows how to do well, and does it not, to him there is sin. A
sentence though in show unlike to that of Christ's, for the proposition and
exception both: yet having in deed the force of the like, if it be thus
resolved. To him that does not well, except he know not how to do well there
is sin. And why may it not be concluded hereof, that there is no sin to him,
who knows not how to do well, and does it not? because there are sins of
ignorance (says Bellarmin) and he who knows not how to do well, and does
it not, sins, though less then he that offends wittingly. I know not
whether this be a snine of ignorauns in Bellarmin, or no, that when he should
say (if he will check the conclusion) there is sin to ignorant he says (as
if that were all one) the ignorant sins. Ama^tia auto estiu.
Between which two things there is a great difference in S. James his meaning.
For S. James in these words, there is sin to him, does speak emphatically,
and notes in that man the same that our savior did in the Pharisees, when
(because they boasted of their sight and knowledge) Ioh 9, 41. Eicheteamarti^n.
he told the^ that they ^ had sin: meaning by this Phrase, as himself
expounds it, that their sin remained, that is to say, continued and stoodt
firm and settled. The custom of the Greek tongue wherein S. James wrote, does
geve this Phrase that sense, as also the Syriaque (the language used by Christ)
translating Christ's words after the same manner: and the matter treated of does
argue that he meant not generally of sin, but of sin being and cleaving to
a man in spetiall and peculiar sort. For as Luke 12, 47
the servant that knew his Masters will, and did not according to it, shall be
beaten with many stripes: but he that knew it not, and yet did committ things
worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few. Likewise in tra^sgression whereto
the punishment auswereth he that knows how to do well, and does it not,
sin is to him, he has it, he offends not ably: But he that knows not
how to do well, and does evil, has not sin sticking to him, his sin
remains not, he sins not so greatly and greivously. Wherefore when
Bellarmin draws out of that sentence such a conclusion as if S. James in
saying there is sin to him, had simply meant, he sins; Bellarmin
mistaketh the meaning of the sentence; which if the text it self cannot inform
him, Tho Aquin Hugo Card et Guilliand. in Jacob. 4
his doctors well considered may. But take the right meaning and the conclusion
will be sound. Whosoever does not good and honest things, except it he of
ignorance, he sins desperately and mainely. Therefore whosoever of ignorance
omitteth to do them, he sins not desperately. And thus our conclusion
drawn from Christ's sentence is rather confirmed the^ prejudiced by this
example. Yea let even. S. De adult. conjug. lib. 1. cap. 9.
Austin, whose authority Bellarmin does ground on herein, be diligently
marked: And himself in matching these sente^nces together bewrays an
oversight, which being corrected will help the truth with light and strength.
For to make the one of the^ like the other, he is feign to fashion Christ's
speech in this fort: To him who puts away his wife without the cause of
whoredom and marries another, Moechat^o est illi
to him there is the crime of committing adultery. Now Christ has not
Moicheia au to esti^
these words of emphaticall property, and strong signification, whereby he
might teach, as S. Angustin gathers, that whosoever puts away his wife for
any cause, save for whoredom, and marries another, comitteth adultery in an
high degree: and so imply by consequence, that who so marries another,
though having put away his former wife for whoredom, yet commits adultery
too, a less adultery.

But that which Christ says is simple, flatt, absolute; Moichatai.
he commits adultery. And therefore as it may be inferred out of S. James,
that he who omitteth the doing of good through ignorance, sins not with a
lofty hand in resolute stifnes of an hardened heart: So conclude we rightly
out of Christ's words that he who having put away his wife for whoredom,
marries another, commits not adultery in any degree at all.

The first sentence then alleged by S. Austin and after him pressed by our
adversaries out of the scripturs, is so far from disprooving, that it
prooveth rather the like conclusions from the like sentences. The second and
third are out of their own brains: The one of Bellarmins forging, the other
of the Pamphletters: Bellarmins, He that steals, except it be for need,
sins. The Pamphlctrers: He that makes a lye^ except it be for a Vauntagoe
does wilfully sin. Whereof they say it were a wrong and badd inferrence That
he sins not, who steals for need: and he who lies for a Vauntage,
sins not wilfully. A badd inferrence indeed. But the fault thereof is, in
that these sentences are not like to Christ's. For Christ's is from Heaven, full
of truth and wisdom: These of men, fond, and imply untruth. They might have
disputed as fitly to their purpose, and prooved it as forcibly, if they had
used this example: All foure-footed beasts except Apes and Monk^is are devoyd
of reason. or this All longeared Creatures except asses are beasts. For hereof
it could not be concluded justly that Asses are not beasts, and Apes are not
devoyd of reason. No. But this perhaps might be concluded, justly, that he had
not much reason, nor was far from a beast that would make such sentences.
Considering that all men who write or speak with reason, mean that to be
denied in the particular which they do except from a general affirmed. And
therefore since he sins who steals Prove 30, 9.
though for need, as the wise man shows, and he that lies for a vauntage
does wilfully sin, yea the more wilfully somtymes, because for a vauntage,
as when the s^ribs b^lyed Christ: It were a very fond and witless speech to
say, that Whosoever steals, except it be for need, sins: And whosoever
lies except it be for a vauntage does wilfully sin. Wherefore these
sentences are no more like to Christ's, the^ copper is to gould, or wormwood to
the bread of Heaven.

Neither shall they ever find any sentence like to his indeed, of which the
like conclusion may not be inferred, as we infer of that. And so the maine
ground of my principal reason proposed in the beginning, remains sure and
clearly prooved: that he by Christ's sentence commits not adultery, who
having put a way his wife for whoredom marries another. Whereof seeing it
follows necessarely, that he who has put away his wife for whordo^e, may
lawfully marry another, as I there declared: it follows by the like
necessity, of co^seque^ce, that the popish doctrine maintained by our
adversaries denying the same, is contrary to the scripture and does gainsay
the truth delivered by the Son of God.

THE SECOND CHAPTER.
The places of Scripture alleged by the adversaries to disproove the Lawful
liberty of Marriage after Divorcement for Adultery, are Proposed, Examined,
and Prooved not to make against it.

Saint Austin in his learned books of Christian Doctrine, wherein he geves
rules how to find the right and true sense of Scriptures, does well De doct^,
Christ lib. 2^. cap. 9.
advise the faithful, First to search and mark those things which are set
down in the Scripturs plainly, and then to go in hand with sifting and
dis^ussing of the dark places: that the darker speeches may be made evident by
Patterns and examples of the more plain and manifest, and the records of
certain and undoubted setences may take away doubt of the u^certayne.

This wholesome and judicious Counsel of S, Augustine if our adversaries had
been as careful to follow, as they are willing to show they follow him in
these things which he has written less advisedly: they would not have
alleged and urged the places of Scripture, which they do against the point of
doctrine hith^rto prooved out of the niententh chapter of S. Matthew. For Christ
in that place does open the matter and decide the question most plainly and
fully: of purpose answering the Pharisees. In others, either it is not handled
of purpose, incidently touch^d; or in gen^rallity set down more briefly, and
so more darkly and obs^urely. Wherefore if any of the other places had seemed
unto them to raise up a scruple, and show of some repugnancie: they should have
taken pains to explayne and level it by that in S. Matthew the darker by the
clearer, the brieffer by the larg^r, the uncertain and ambiguous by the
undoubted and certain. But seeing they have chosen to follow S. Austins
oversights rather the^ his best advises in like sort as Cicero lib. 2. de o^at.
Furius, an orator of Rome did imitate Fimbria whose force of speech and
arguments he attained not to, but pronoun^ed broadly and set his mouth awry
like him: we must say of the^ as Christ of the Pharisees Matt 15. 14.
Let them alone, they are blind leaders of the blind: and ourselves endeavor to
follow S. Augustine in that he followed Christ, who cleared Matt 19, vers^
the darker place of Moses by verse 4. et 8.
the playner word and ordinance of God. The which if we do, we shall (by
Gods grace) easily perceive, that none af all the places alleged by our
adversaries, does make against the doctrine already prooved and concluded.

For the first of them is in the fifth of Matthew Matt 5, 32
Whosoever shall putt away his wife, except it for whordome, does cause her to
commit adultery, And whosoever marries her that is put away does committ
adultery, These words (says Bellarmin; and look what Bellarmin says the
pamphletter says with him, so that one of their names may serve for both and
reason Bellarmin have the honor) These words. And whosoever marries her that is
put away does commit adultery, must be either generally taken without
exception, or with the exception. Except it be for whoredom. If generally,
Then he who marries her that is put away, even for whoredom too, does committ
adultery. The band then of Marriage is not d^solved and loosed by her putting
away: but company debarred only. For he that marries her should not commit
adultery unless she were bound yet to her former husband. And thus far
Bellarmin says well; but superfluously. For the words may not be generally
taken, since they have relation to the former sentence, whereto they are
coupled; and that sentence speaks of her which is put away except for whore
dome. Their meaning then must n^edes be that he who marries her which is so
put away does commit adultery. Neither could Bellarmin be ignorant hereof,
or doubt with any likely hoode, but that this is our judgment, and would be
our answer. Wherefore his two forked dispute about the words, was a flourish
only to make us a frayde: as if he fought with a two hand sword, which would
kill all that came in his way. But now he goes forward upon his enemies pike,
and lays about him on the other side. If the words must be taken with the
exception: then he that marries a whore put away from her husband, commits
not adultery. And consequently the whore is in better case then the innocent
and chaste. For the whore is free and may be married, whereas the innocent that
is unjustly put away, can neither have her former husband, nor marry another.
But this most absurd, that the law of Christ being most just, would have her
to be in better case and state, that is justly put away, then her that is
unjustly. For answer unto which reason of Bellarmin, I would spurr him a
question, whether by the Popes law, which forbids a man that Extra de
bigamis cap. Super eo.
has been twice married, or c de big amiss.
has married a widow, to take H. orders and admits on thereto that has kept
or happily keeps many concubines, a whormonger be in better case then an
honest man: and if a whoremonger be so by the Popes law, c, Quia circa
whether we ought to judge that this is most absurd or not. Here if he should
answer me that the Popes law is not most just and therefore noe marvel if it
have some such things as were most absurd to be imagined by Christ's law: I
must acknowledge he spoke reason. Well, I would spur him then another
question, whether he think that I am in better case then any Jesuit, yea,
then the best of them all. Phy he will answer, there is noe comparison. The
best? nay the worst of them is in better case then I am: Yet I may marry if I
list: and none of them may because of their vow. Belike this Vow-Doctrine was
not established by the law of Christ, which is most just, but by Extra. c. me
minimus. Quiclerici velvoventes.
the Popes law rather. Or it is most absurd that a poor Christian should be
in better case, then the proudest Jesuit. But here peradventure the man will
say rather that we are Heretics, and they Catholics, and the meanest
Catholic is in better case, even for his faiths sake, then any Heretic
whatsoever: which if he do as it is likely, neither can he say ought with
probability but to this effect, then has he confuted and overthrowen his own
argument. For by this answer he cannot choose but grant that the simplest
woman being put away unjustly from her husband is in better case for her
chastities sake, though she may not marry, then whatsoever whore that may.
And I hope he will not say that the stews and curtizans at Rome are in better
case then honest matrons there, divorced from their husbands. Yet may none of
these, while their husbands live be joined to others: whereas the curtizans
are free to marry whom they will, if any will marry them, who are so free.
Howbeit, lest any place of cavelling be left him, and of pretending a
difference between those, who having had the use of marriage lose the benefit
of it, and those who lose it not, having never had it: I will set before him a
plain demonstration thereof in married persons. Seianus (as the Corn. Tacitus
Annal. lib 4 Di^. lib. 7.
Roman History records) did putt away his wife Apicata unjustly: thereby
to win the rather the favor of Livia, which was the wife of Drusus. Livia
being carried away with the wicked entisements of Seianus was not only naught
of her body with him, but consented also to make away her husband Drusus with
poison, Now let Bellarmin tell us whether of these two were in better case
Apicata or Livia; Livia the adulteress and murderesse of her husband, being
free to marry, or chaste Apicata, being bound to live solitary. If he say Livia
should have been put to death by the Lege Pompeia de Parricidis
Roman law because of her murder and then had she not been in better case
then Apicata for liberty to marry: I reply that likewise by the law of Levit
20. 10
Moses the woman whom Christ speaks of, should have been put to death,
because of her adultery, and so the doubt here ceased too. But the law of
Moses being left vnexe^ut^d on the adulterous woman, as the Romain was for the
time of Livia: let Bellarmin answer to the point, not as of Livia only, but of
any whore that has wrought her husbands death, and for want of proof, or
through the Magistrates fault is suffered to live, whether she be in better
case then an honest, chaste, religious matron, that is put away from her husband
unjustly. Which if he dare not say, considering on the one side the plagues
that Deuteronomy 28 15.
in this life, and Revel, 21. 8
in the life to come are laid up for such mis^reants, on the other, the blessed
1, Tim, 4, 8
promises of them both assur^d to the Godly: then he has noe refuge, but he
must needs confess that his argument was fond. For the murdering whore is not
an adulteress by the law of Christ, though she take another man, her husband
being dead: and yet the chaste matron were an adulteress if she married while
her husband lives, who has unjustly putt her away. Wherein this
notwithstanding is to be weighed, that a chaste woman's case is not so hard in
comparison of the whores.

No. Not for marriage neither, as Bellarmin by cunning of speech would make it
seem, to ^ounten^unce therewith his reason. For he frames his Nam F^rmearia
libera est er nubere potest: innocens autem in just dimissa, nec Priorem virum
habere potest, nec al^ nubere.
words so, as if the ^hast had no possibility of remedy at all, neither by
having her former husband, nor by marrying another: and therefore were in worse
case the^ the whore who is free to marry, whereas the truth is, that by
Christ's law she not 1. Cor 7. ver 11.
only may, but verse, ^
ought to have her former husband.

And why should not she be as likely to recover her husbands goodwill, to
whom she hadd been faithful: as a faythlesse whore and infamous strumpett to
get a new husband?

Chiefly seeing that it is to be presumed they loved each other when they
married: and experience shows that Terenc. Andr.
Falling out of Lovers is a renewing of love. But if through the frowardnes of
men on the one side, and foolishnes on the other, the chaste wife could hardly
reco^cile her husband, the whore get easily a match: it suffic^th that the law
of Christ cannot be justly charged with absurdity, though it do enlarg the
unchaste and lewd in some outward thing, in which it enlarges not the chaste. No
more then Ier 17. 1.
the providence of God may be controlled and noted of iniquity though psalm 73.
5.
the evil and wicked enjoy certain earthly blessings in this life, which are
not granted to the upright and godly. Wherefore the first place of Scripture
out of S. Matthew enforcrd by Bellarmin, with his Dilemma Cornutus Syl logismus.
horned argument (as the Logitions term it) does serve him as much to annoy
our cause: a^ the Iron horns made in Achabs favor by Zedechiah the falce
prophet did stand him in stead to push and consume the host of the Aramites

The second place is written in the tenth of Mark. Mark 10. 1^
Who so puts away his wife and marries another commits adultery against
her: and if a woman put away her husband, and be married to another she
commits adultery. The like whereof is also in the sixteenth of Luke Luk 16.
1^
whosoever puts away his wife and marries another, commits adultery: and
whosoever marries her that is put away from her husband, commits adultery.
These words (says Bellarmin) do teach generally, that marriage co^tracted and
perfected between the faithful, is never so dissolved that they may lawfully
join in other wedlock. And whereas we answer that these general sentences
are to be expounded with a saving of the exception mentioned in Mat 19, 9.
Matthew, because one Evangelist does add oftentimes that another omitteth; and
Matthew else where contrary unto Mark and Luke, which (since they all wrote as
they were moved by the holy spirit of truth) is impossible: Bellarmin replieth
that the Evangelists in deed omit or add somewhat now and than, which other
EEvangelists have not omitted or added; but they do never omit in such sort
that the sentence is made false. A strange kind of speech As if all general
sentences were false from the which some spetialtie, though not expressed in
the same place, yet by conf^re^ce with others, is understood to be expressed.
Sure the Civil Law which in learned men's opinions has much truth, will then
be stained foully with untruths and lies. For how many sentences and rules
are set down in it with full and general terms, whereof notwithstanding
there is none L ^mmis definitio D. de regul. jur^s
lightly but suffers an exception. The Canon law also (whose creditt and
authority Bellarmin must tender, howsoever he do the Civil) has store of
such axioms, and Eod* tit in Sex^ c Generi per Speciem derogatur E Dig: l^in
toto jure.
teaches accordingly That a particular does derogate from the general. But
what speak I of men's laws? In the Scripture it self Job says that Job 20, 7
The hipocrite shall perish for ever, like the dung: and David, that the Psalm
9, 17
wicked shall turn into hell, all nations that forgett God. and Solomon that
Prove 16, 5
Every provd-harted man is an abomination to the Lord; though hand join in
hand he shall not be unpunished. These sentences of Job and David and
Solomon, are true in the belief of Christians; yet forasmuch as they must be
understood with an exception, according to the Doctrine of Luke 13, 3
Christ and Esaias, 16, et 55. 7 Luk, 3, 8. Act 2, 8.
his servants, saying unto sinners Except Ye repent Ye shall all perish: in
the Jesuits judgment they are made false. And Jonas semblably, when he
preached to the Ninivits, Jonas 3, 4
Yet forty days, and Niniveh shall be overthowen, abvsed the^ with an untruth:
though Aben Ezra on ^er 18, 7 Nic Lyranus. 10. Ferus. Trein ^ et Iun. in ^onam.
learned men do find a truth in his speech, as being to be thus taken that
Niniveh should be overthrown except it repented. Or if Bellarmin also
acknowledge the same, which he may not choose, unless of a Jesuit he will
become a Julian, and quite renounce the Christian faith: then acknowledges he
that he plays the part of a guilefull Sophister or a malicious Rhetoricia^,
in signifying that the sentence of Christ is made false, if it be expounded
and understood with an exception otherwhere expressed. And withal by
consequence he acknowledges farther, that it is an idle and braynsick
amplification which herevppon he^ lavisheth out Jesuit like and vaynely
mispendeth pains and times about it, by saying, that else ( if the sentence
forsooth were false) the Evangelists had deceived men to whom they delivered
their Gospells making noe mention of other Evangelists and that when Mark
wrote his gospel at Rome received by the preaching of Peter, he did not send
the Romaeines back to Mathews gospel, as to a commentary: Nay if Mathews
gospel hadd been then at Rome in the hands of the faithful, it may be well
thought that Mark would not have written, and that Mark wrote not to add
ought to Matthew, as John did afterward, but only that the Romans might the
better remember that which Peter taught: For lib 3 cap ^
Irenaee lib 2. hist. cap. 15
Eusebius and lib de viris illustrib us in Marco.
Ierom geve this cause; and that Luke wrote his Gospel for those nations to
whom Paul had preached, and unto who^ the book of Matthew and Mark were not
yet come, but certain false writings of False Evangelists only: as Luke 1. 1.
himself shows briefly, and it is more clearly gathered out of Commen in Luc
cap 1.
Ambrose, lib 3. hist. cap 24.
Eusebius and l^b de viris illustribus in Luca.
Ierom.

And in conclusion, that the things therefore which Mark and Luke say, must be
absolutely true, and not depend of Mathews words, unless our meaning be that
they were deceived, who did read Mark or Luke without Matthew. For by this
reason of Bellarmin the words of Job, David, Solomon and Jonas, must be
absolutely true, and not depend of Christ's words in Luke or by Esaias: unless our
meanig be, that they were deceived, who read the Psalms of David or Salomons
proverbs, or heard Job or Jonas speak without Christ: which likewise might
receive a gay show by saying that else (if these sentences were false) these
holy men had deceived them to whom they spoke or wrote, making noe mention of
other holy teachers: and that when Job. and David, and Solomon, and Jonas did
either write or speak, they did not put me^ over unto Luke or Esaias as to a
comentarie; Nay Jobs words were uttered, before either of them, or any of
Christ's penmen of the whole Scripture wrote, as Origin in Job lib 5. Athanas
in synops. sacr. script August de civitat. Dei lib 18. cap. 4^. Theodore^ in
Ier Q^ae ^ 92 Chrysostom poly chron
sundry of the Fathers do probably teach: and Iona^ 4. 5.
Jonas did look that Niniveh should be over throwe^ according to his absolute
speech, so far was he of from se^ding the Ninivites to such as specify the
exception, besides that, had he sent them, whither should they have gone, who
neither knew the Scriptures, and 2. King 14. 25
lived before the time of Luke and Esaias both? David too, and Solomon, were
their ancients far and each did set forth the one his Psalms, the other his
Proverbs (even those which they did writ) not all at once but by parts; and
partly psalm 9 8. 30 5 et ^o. Prove ^o et. 25. ^ et. 3 ^
their own titles, and 2 Chronicles 16 ^ 1 King. 4. ^1.
other Sciptures argue, partly Synops. Sacr Script,
Athanasius, Argum in Psalm. David^
Theodoret, and comment. in psalm. praesat.
Bid signify: neither did Luke or Esaias write to add ought to the Psalms or
Proverbs, or to the words of Job or Jonas, as In the books of Ghronicles.
Ezra did to the book of Kings; But Esaias to publish only his own Prophecy,
and the story touching it, Luke the Gospel of Christ, and Acts of the
Apostles. Here were a trim tale, which might be very forcible with a man
forlorn, like Judas Iscariot, to persuade him, that the sentences of Job, of
David, of Solomon, of Jonas concerning the destruction of hypocrites and all the
wicked, are not to be expounded out of Luke or Esaias, with an exception of
Repentance. Yea, this should of reason have greater force and weight then
Bellarmins of the same spinning. For he says that Mark did not write his
Gospel to add ought to Matthew. Which thing being granted, yet Mark
notwithstanding might be expounded by Matthew, and so much the rather, Matthew
having specified an exception, that Mark omitteth: as L. Regula est. D. de
reg. ^uris,
the Lawiers teach that their General rules were not written to add ought unto
the former, yet must be expounded with the exceptions touched in the former
Laws. But in the spider-webb that I have woven after Bellarmins pattern, it
is contrariewise; that Esaias and Luke did not write to add ought to the Psalms
or Proverbs, or to the words of Job or Jonas; which has greater color to
prove that their sayings should not be absolutely true, and not depend of
exceptions mentioned so long after, neither mean to be joined to them:
Chiefly for alianes from the Commonwealth of Israel, such as they that heard
Job and Jonas were, who lived not to read the Doctrine of Christ in his
Prophets and Apostles. Wherefore seeing Bellarmin is forced to acknowledge it
were a lewd part to reason and conclude this on general sentences of Job,
David, Solomon, that an hypocrite, a wicked, a proud-harted man, shall not be
forgiven and saved though he repent: much more must he acknowledge a fault, in
his disputing and gathering out of Mark and Luke that a man having put away
his wife may not marrye another, though he have put her away for whoredom.
And hereby we may see what honor they both, himself and the pamphlet ter, who
in this whole discourse goes with him soote by foot, save that by enterlacing
more fond unsavory words, h^e over-runneth him sometimes: a cover well
beseeming and worthy such a cup, only somewhat broader; but hereby we may
see what honor they have done De adulterin conjug. li. 1. cap. 9.
S. Austin in knitting up their tale with his words, Who are we, that we
should say, Some putting away their wives, and marrying other, commit
adultery: and some doing so commit it not, whereas the Gospel says, that
every one commits adultery, who does so? Even as much honor as themselves
should gain, if in the forlorn man's case, which I spoke of they were his
ghostly Fathers, and put him in this comfort Who are we that we should say,
some wickedmen shall go to hell, (namely the unrepentant) some (the repentant)
shall not go, whereas the Scripture says that every wicked man shall go to
Hell. Let this kind of dealling in refuting matters be once allowed for
current: and every priest and Jesuit as well as the Pope will have more Royal
power, even over Princes: what should I say over common Christians? For whereas
it is written in the Epistle to the Collosians Col 3. 20
Children obey your Parents in all things: and Prophets were honored with the
name of Fathers, not only by their 2 King 2. 12
scholars, the children of the Prophets, but also by the 2 Kin. 6. 21. et 13,
1^.
Kings of Israel: the Bell. tom^ cont 3, lib, 2. cap, 31.
title of Father geve^ to all priests though not in such degree as to Papa
pater patrum. ^0: Andr in Clementinar, procem.
the Pope, yet to all priests and to Jesuits especialy, insomuch that a Allen
in his Apology of the English seminaries chap, 6,
great person of Rome does term them not Fathers only with the people, but
the Reverend Fathers, the Catholic Fathers, the good Fathers of the society
of the holy name of Jesus: this title then applied and geven to them all will
quickly win their scholars to think that the Heb 13. 17 Allen Apology chap
4.
obedience commanded toward them is obedience in all things. Now we
protestants teach that nevertheless supposing they were in deed Fathers not
caterpillars of the Church, yet if Priest or Jesuit or the Pope himself should
command a man to commit murder or whoredom, or theft, he might not be
obeyed, because it is written in the Epistle to the Ephesiaus Ephesians, 6. ^
Children obey your Parents in the Lord, whence that to the Collosians ought to
be expounded, that Parents must be so far forth obeyed, in all things as
stands with the dewty which children owe to God, and in piety they may. But
if some Catholic Father should deny this, and say (like Father Robert) that
S. Paul in deed ommitteth or adds somewhat in one Epistle, which he has
not omitted or added in another, but he does never omit in such sort that the
sentence is made faulse: for else S. Paul hadd deceived the Collossians to whom
he sent that Epistle, making no mention of that other to the Ephesians: And
surely when he wrote to the Collosians from Rome, he did not send them back to
his Ephesian Epistle as to a commentary; nay if that Epistle had been in their
hands, it may be well thought, that he would not have written to them. Eor
he did not write the Epistle to the Collossians thereby to add ought to that
which he had written unto the Ephessians, as he did the later to the
Corinthians, or Thessalonians, after the former, but only to reclayme the
Collossians from their error, that man is reconciled, and has access to God
by Angels, and to corect their Jewish and Heathenish observations; for Him. ^
in epist ad colloss.
Chrysosto^ Argument, epist,
Theophylact, and Argum. 2 e Theodore^^.
Oecumenius geve this cause. That which Paul therefore says to the
Collossians must be absolutely true, and not depend of that he says to the
Ephesians, unless our meaning be that they were deceived, who read the
Epistle to the Collossians without the other. If some Catholic Father (I say)
should speak thus, against our interpreting of Scripture by Scripture, would
not his children (trow ye) think it strongly and invincibly proved, that they
must obey him absolutely in all things? Chiefly, if as Father Robert brings
Austin, so he brought Monast. in stitut lib. 4. cap. 27. ^ F^r so the Syriaque
word Abba (whence Abbat comes) does signify Rom 8. ^5.
Cassianus S. Chrisostoms scholar in, who prayseth one Mutius (a novice of an
Abbey in Egypt) as a most worthy pattern of obedience to his Abbat or, Father,
as you would say, for that he was ready to cast his own natural son a little
child, into the River at his commandment and so as much as lay in him did
murder his son, but that some by the Abbats appoyntement did receive him being
cast out of his Fathers hands toward the River, and saved him from drowning.
For he cassian li 4 cap 2^.
who extolleth this Novices faith and devotion to Heaven, affirming that the
Abbat was by revelation straightway advertised, that Mutius hadd performed
Genes^^. 10
Abraham the Patriarks work by the obedience, as if there were noe difference
between the Genes. 22. 2
Lords commandment and an Abbats might have formed a sent^n^e like Austins in
defense thereof: Who are we that we should say, Children in some things must
obey their Parents, and in some they must not, whereas the Scripture says.
Children obey your Parents in all things. By the which construction whatsoever
a man's mother should command him, must be obeyed too, she being comprehended
in the name of Parents: and what soever a man's 2. King ^. 1
Master should command, he being also a Father, and whatsoever gen 45. 8.
Job. 29. 16. ^, Tim 5. 1. Act. 7. 2 et. 22. 1.
any Governor should command, or friend that has done good, or an old
Gray Headed man they being Fathers all, though not by nature, yet by office,
benefit, or age. And then had King 2 chronicles. 15. ^6.
Asa done evil in putting down his mother Maachah from her state, because
she hadd made an Idol in a grove; and in breaking down her Idol; and
stamping it, and burning it. And 1. Sam. 22. 17.
Doeg the Edomite had deserved greater praise then Saul's servants: since they
Would not move their hands to fall vpom the Lords Priests, when their Master
bidd them: which Doeg did and ex^cuted his wrath to the uttermost. And the Act.
4. 5. et. ^ 29.
Apostles hadd overseene themselves, when they disobeyed the high Priest, and
rulers and Elders of Israel; and gave this reason of it We ought rather to
obey God then men. Yea that wrecthed impious and execrable friar, who did more
then barbarously murder his Sovereign Lords the HENRY the third 1589. August
2.
French King the anointed of the HIGHEST, may then be excused, excused! nay
commended and praised by trayt^rous papists, as having done that which he
ought: seeing it is likely that either Pope or Priest, or Jesuit or Abbat, or
some of his superiors commanded him to do it. Such absurd consequents of
Bellarmins affirming that Marks and Lukes words must be absolutely true, and
not depend of Matthew, do show what great reason he had so to speak. For it
is written of the City of Jerusalem, compared with the Canaanites, Amorites,
and Hittites ^zek. 6. 44.
Such mother, Such daughter: in like sort may it be said of this constructio^
of the holy Scripture compared with Bellarmins. Such consequence, such
antecedent. And thus far of his second place.

The third is in the Epistle to the Romans the seve^th chap. Romans 7. 1.
Know ye not brethren (for I speak to the^ that know the law) that the law
has Dominion over a man as long as he lives? For the woman, which is in
subjection to a man, is bound by the law to the man while he lives: but if
the man be dead, she is delivered from the law of the man. So then if while
the man lives, she take another man, she shall be called an adulteress: but
if the may be dead she is free from the law, so that she is not an
adulteress, though she take another man. Out of which place and 1. cor. 7. 39
the like in the seventh of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, We gather
(says Bellarmin) that the band of marriage is never loosed but by death: and
that seeing it is not loosed, it remains after divorcement too, for whatsoever
cause the divorce be made. This does Bellarmin gather: but gathering so, he
reapeth that which the holy Ghost sowed not. For S. Paul's meaning in those
words to the Romans and Corinthians was, that the band of marriage is not
loosed commonly and ordinarily while both the parties live; not that absolutely,
it is never loosed till one of the^ die. As in the like case (to open the
matter by his own examples) he 1 Cor 9. 7
says Who goes to Warrfare any time at his own cost? Now some have servd at
their own charges without pay sometimes. For so did the Dionys, Halycarn ant
Roman li. 9.
Roman stock of the Fabij against the Vientians and Herod li. 8
Clinias an Athenian Citizen against the Persians. But men for the most part
are waged publicly thereunto. And that is the point which S. Paul respected.
Again 1. Cor 9, 7 4. Aneaeus or Agape^or, Isac Tzerz in Lycopht.
Who planteth a Vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof? ^ He on who^
they father the first occasion of that proverb Many things do happen between
the cupp and the lipp; is said not to have drunk of the fruit of the Vineyard
which himself had planted, nor to have eaten thereof belyke. At least seeing
Cic. de senectu^e.
old men plant trees for their posterity, neither might Levit 19. 23.
the Jews eat of their fruit in certain years: It is more then likely that
many of them did not. Some did not questionless: they namely, who sustained
the curse which God denounced unto them by Moses. Deuteronomy 28. 30
Thou shelt plant a Vineyard, and shall not use the fruit thereof. Yet S.
Paul said well, because such as plant Vines do enjoy them commonly. Again 1.
Cor. 9. 7
who feeds a flock and eats not of the milk of the flock? They eat not
of the milk, who do not milk their sheep at all: and Varr lib. 2. c. 2 de
re Rust Columell. l. 7. c. 4.
there be who do not, for fear of impayring thereby the lambs or woole. But
it is sufficient for S. Paul's purpose, and the truth of his speech, that men in
most Deuteronomy 3^. 14 Hom odyss. li 9. Arist. de hist a^alium lib. 3. Cato de re
rust. cap 13. virgil. Elag. 3.
cuntreis are wont to have the^ milked: and they who undertake the pains of
feeding flocks, are accustomed to eat of the milkes of the flocks. Again
Ephesians 5, 29
No man ever hated his own flesh but nourishes and cherishes it* Cato the
younger, who slew himself at Vtica, Plutarc Cato
was so far from nourishing and cherishing his body, that when his bowels
being gushed out thereof, he was not yet dead, he tore them in pieces with
his own hands as 2 Machab. 14. 46.
Rasias also did. Neither would S. Paul have denied this: who knew that 1,
Sam 31, 4 2. Sam* 7. 23. Mat 27. 5.
many hadd killed themselves, and taken away all joys of life from their
flesh. Only he meant that noe man has ever lightly hated it, but every one
does nourish and cherish it rather. 2. Tim ^. 4.
Noe man that warreth entangleth himself with the affaiers of life, because he
would please him that has chosen him to be a Soldier. What? is this false,
because Plutare. Crassus.
the rich Crassus being chosen by the Romans to be their General in Syria,
did without all care of pleasing them, who chose him, play the merchant man
and occupied himself in councels and money matters? Or because a Poly. lib ^.
band of Campanian souldyers, who served the king of Sicilie gave themselves to
citizens trades and occupations, having by treachery seized on Messana,
dispossessed the townsmen, divided their wives, goods and lands among the^,
and a ba^d of Romans did the like in Rhegiu^, to the disco^tentme^t of such as
chose the^ to be soldiers, No. for the Apostle who exhorted Timothy 2 Timothy ca.
2. ^
to behave himself as a good and honest sold yer of Christ, was not to learn
that there are some dishonest sold yers and retchlesse of their duty. But his
meaning was, that soldyers usually do employ themselves on warrlike exercises,
not on civil affayers, or domestical business, when they are chosen once to
serve, and in the same sense did he likewise say, that a married woman is bound
by the law unto her husband while he lives: because the band of marriage is
not usually and ordinarily loosed, but by death, though it may be loosed, and
is sometimes otherwise, on rare vnwontted causes. Which is apparent to have
been his meanning by that he teaches 1 Cor 7, 15
that if an unbelieving man, who has a Christian wife, do forsake her, then
Lu ded^culo tas Eleutera estin.
she is not in bondage. For if she be not in bondage, she is innocent. ta. ^,
c. quant^ extra de divortijs,
free to marry: as the words of Scripture imply by the contrary, and the verse.
39.
Pope declares. If she be free to marry the band of the former marriage is
loosed, else were she bound and not free. Wherefore since the popes authentical
record does prove out of S. Paul, that a wife in some case is free to marry
another while her husband lives, the Papists must acknowledge that S. Paul
meant, the band is not commonly loosed but by death, not that it is never at all
loosed otherwise absolutely and simply. Bellarmin to frustrate and avoyde this
answer, says that it may be proved by four reasons: which he brings
forth poor, unarmed, weak ones of his own mustering, and with a strong hand
puts them to flight: that so men imagining these are all that can be
alleged on our side for the proof thereof, might think that our whole force
is quite discomfited and Bellarmin has wone the feilde. I have heard say that
there is cunning in daubing. Surely there is cunning in this kind of dealing.
Neither is it for nothing that Birstow, Motive. 31.
one of their Glorious Champions does vaunte that the common sort of
Catholics are able to say more for us, the^ we can for our selves. In deed
they would bear the common sort in hand, that their learned men in handling
of questions and controversies of religion do set down all obiectio^s that
can be made of our part. And I grant, they set down more then often times
themselves can soundly answer. Yet they use discretion therein by their leave:
and many a strong reason which would trouble them fowly if it came in place,
they are content to winck at and say nothing of it, whereto they join this
policy now and the^ also, that they take upon them to be as it were our
proctours and at turneys, in showing what may be said for us. Under which
pretense they bring in such things as having a ready solution with the
objection, and proving unsound, may turn to out causes discredit and to ours.
So the Jesuit here his argument being grounded upon two places, the one to the
Romans, the other to the Corinthyans, we countermyning the whole with one
answer: he says that our answer may be proved by four reasons, which he
gathers out of circumstances of the former place, all such as the later has
neither any kindred with, and discoverceth them to be of no value. But of the
reasons, which I have brought to prove our answer fitting both the places, and
partly confirming that S. Paul might well mean the same in these, which in
the like he meant; partly demonstrating that certainly he did so, because it
were not true else that he teaches of the liberty of Christians forsaken by
the unbelievers; these reasons Bellarmin does, not touch. No marveil: for they
are too hot. And it is likely that he studied not what might be most strongly
said in our defense, but rather what most weakly: that so he might seem to
join battle with us, and yet might be sure to do himself no harm, Letting
pass therefore the help which he offreth in like sort to us as the Ezra 4. ^.
Sa ^^ritanes did unto the Jews: I come unto the unjust and false accusation,
wherewith Ezr^. ^. 9.
they sought to hinder the buylding of the Temple, I mean to the reasons which
he untruly says, do witness our answer and exposition to be faulse. Those
he draws to three heads, whereof the first has two branches: one that S.
Paul's words are plain; the other that they are often repeated. For what is more
plain (says he) then thet Rom 7. ^.
if while the man lives, the woman take another man, she shall be called an
adulteress? and that 1, (...). 7. ^9.
the woman is bound by the law as long as her hus^and lives? Plain I deny
not. But this proof how pithy and strong soever he thought it to set it his
forefront, is already showed to be no proof at all: since there are as plain
words in like sentences, which nevertheless must be expounded, as these are
by us. For what more plain then that 1 cor, 9, 7.
Who goes a warrefare any time at his own Cost? and that, Who planteth a
Vineyard, and eats net of the fruit thereof? and that Whofeadeth a flock
and eats not of the milk of the flock? and that, Ephesians. 5. 29.
No man ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it? and that
2. Tim. 2. 4.
No Warre-faring man entangleth himself with the affairs of life? and Mark.
2. 22. Luke 4. 24. John. 2. 10. Gal. 3. 15.
many other such, that might be aleaged, if in a thing so clear it were not
superfluous? Nay in these sentences the words are more plain, then in those
we speak of, because those have noe such mark of generality expressed as
these have. Wherefore if so great playnnesse of words signed with general
tokens as it were importing that they are true in all yet convinces not that
they are meant of all without any exception, fully and universally: how can a
lesser playnnesse wanting such efficacy, convince the same of those in
question? Or if it should elsewhere by reason of some difference which might
supply, by other weight that this wants: Yet here it cannot possibly,
because S. 1. cor. 7. 15.
Paul himself as I have declared shows that in one case the sayings could
not so be true Moreover the cap. verum. Extra. de con^vers. conjug c.
commissum. despo^^a^ ^ bus. Council. Tride^t. Sess. 24 can. 6. Bell. tom. 1.
cont. 5 lib. ^. cap. 3^.
Papists hold that if a married man become a monk before he know his wife
carnally, she may lawfully take another husband, while he lives. Perhaps
further, also that the Pope for any very weighty cause, may upon the same
circumstance dispense, and loose the band of Marriage. At least Covarru. epet
in 4. decre tal. par 2. cap. 7. 9. 4. Catharin. de (...) mo^ quart. utrum
matrimo^. ante cop. sit Sacramentum et alibi quae in arch^typo.
them-selves tell us that sundry Popes have done so: and Hosticus. Panormita^.
et ali^ (...). in. c. expublicode convers. co njugator. Card. Cajet. opusculo
de mattim Mec. Medium. de Sacror hom. contin. lib. 5. Mar^in Navar. Consilior
lib^ 3. (...) convers. infid. cons. 1.
their great Doctors hold we may. Yet is the woman his wife who has wedded
her, or espoused her only, though she has not entered into his bedchamber.
For she that is betrothed, is accounted a wife by the law Deuteronomy 22. 24. Matt 1.
20
of God: and consent, not carnal company makes Marriage as the civil L.
cuifuerit D de condits et domo^strat. L Nuptiarum D. de reg sa^.
Lawiers, Ambros institut virg cap* 6 Aug. de nupt et* concup. lib. 1. cap. II.
Chrysosto^, Isodor Gregot. c omnis, ^ conjugo c qui desponsatam. 27. 4. 2.
Fathers, and si inter Extra desponsalib. c licet, c. tuas dudum. despons.
duotum.
Popes do teach. The Papists then of all men may worst enforce the playnesse
of S. Paul's words against our exposition the^ selves condescending in cases
more then we do, that a woman may take another man while her husband lives,
and be noe adulteress. Whereby again appears how wisely and discreetly the
Jesuit Triumphs with. De adulter. ^^njug. lib. 2. cap. 4.
S. Austins words, These words of the Apostle so oftentimes repeated, so
oftentimes inculcated, are true, are quick, are sound, are plain. The woman
begins not to be the wife of any later husband, unless she have ceased to
be of the former, and she shall cease to be of the former, if her husband
die, not if he play the whoremonger. The wife then is lawfully putt away for
whordom, but the band of the former lasts; in so much that he becomes guilty
of adultery, who marries her that is put away even for whoredom.

For if these words of Austin be quick and sound against us, then touch they
Popery at the quick: since it may be said by the same reason: The woman
begins not to be the wife of any later husband, unless she have ceased to
be of the former: and she shall cease to be of the former if her husband
die, not if he wax a Monk.

Admit then that the wife be put away for monkery, yet the band of the former
lasts: insomuch that he becomes guilty of adultery, who marries her that
is put away even for monkery. And likewise whatsoever those weighty causes
were, for which so Martin thee 5 Eugenius* the 4. Alexander the 6 Julius the
third. Paul the 4. and Pius the 4. as Covarru. Catharin. Cajetan, and Navat do
(...).
many Popes have loosed the band of Marriage, they are all controlled by the
same censure The woman begins not to be be the wife of any later husband
unless she have ceased to be of the former; and she shall cease to be of
the former if her husband die, not if a better match be offered, or some
mislyke be conceived, or the Pope dispense and be well freed from it. Nay S.
Paul himself must fall within the compass of Austins reprofe, by construing
his words so without exception, because they are true, and quick, and sound,
and plain. For against his doctrine towching a Susters liberty to marry, if
she be forsaken of her unbelieving husband, the force of S. Austins
consequence would infer in like sort: The woman begins not to be the
wife of any later husband, unless she have ceased to be of the former: and
she shall cease to be of the former, if her husband die, not if he forsake
her. The Jesuit, who uses so often to repeat, so often to inculcate the
testimonies of the Fathers, should deal peradventure more considerately, more
charitably out of doubt, if, before he cite them, he weighed their words
better, whether they may stand with the truth of Scripture, and with his own
doctrine. For else as Genesis 9. 22.
Cham discovered the nakedness of Noah, so does he their blemishes: he, who
aleageth them; not we, whom he enforces to show why we dissent from them:
least our Saviors sentence be pronounced against us Math. 10. 37
He that loves Father or Mother more then mce is not worthy of me. But the
Jesuits meaning (you will say) was not to discredit them by laying a necessity
on us to refute them, what? was his meaning then by their credit to discredit
the Scripturs, with the truth whereof their sayings do not stand? For (I
trust) he meant not to overthrowe the points of his own doctrine, which their
sayings cross, unless he be of that mind which P^o. Dejo^^ 10.
Tullie condemns as barbarous and savage expressed in an heathnish verse LET
OUR FRIENDS FALL, SO THAT OUR FOES DIE WITHAL. Howsoever it be, it is plain
that the plains of S, Paul's words neither does prove the sense thereof to be
simply and absolutely general, the Scripture noting an exception, neither cann
be said by Papists to prove it whose doctrine both allows that exception of
Scripture. and adds more thereto. Thus one branch of Bellarmins first and
principal reason being cut of: the other, and the rest of his reasons also
are cut of with the same labor and instrument. For whereas he says Certes
it were marvel that the Apostle should never ad the exception of whoredom, if
it were to be added, seeing he repeated and inculcated these things so often.
Certes we may say as well of those exceptions which himself approves that it
Were marvel the Apostle should never add them, if they were to be added.
Though what marvel is it, if S. Paul omitted the exception of whoredom in all
those two places, which he Has repeated and inculcated these things so often,
as Bellarmin so often tells us: when the thing is mentioned in the Romans 7.
verse. 2,
former of them by way of a verse 4.
similytude, wherein it had been fond and beside the purpose to speak of any
exception: and, for the 1 cor. 7. verse 39.
later S. Paul has omitted the same exception verse. 10. et. ^
twice, where the Math 5. 32. et. 19. 9.
Scripture shows and Bellarmin. confesses, it should have been added* or (to
speak more properly) where although it needed not to be added, yet must it
needs be understood. Now to that Bellarmin does next alledg the Fathers In
utrum que locum Pauli.
Ambrose, Chrysostom, Theophylact, Theodoret, Oecumenius, Primasius, Anselmus
and others over and besides Loco citato
Austin, In math 19.
Origin, and In epist. ad Amand.
Ierom, all as bearing witness that we expound the places falsely: I could
reply that some of these whatsoever they witness, have small credit with
Bellarmin, as Ambrose specially: some, namely Chrysosto^, Theophylact,
Theodoret, Oecumenius, and Primasius do not witness that no more then Paul
himself does: Nay they all save one are contrary minded rather, as shall
appear in in the third Chapter.
due place: But that which I have said already touching Austin, may serve for
answer to the rest: chiefly since the Papists in whose behalf they are aleaged,
will rather yeald that all the Fathers might err, the^ any of their Popes,
Alexander (...) third Pius the fourth etc. in the canons above cited out of the
decretals and the council of Tren^.
who yet must have erred in more, the^ one Canon, if this were true which
Bellarmin fathereth on the Fathers. Finally, concerning that for the vpshoote
he urges Paul's similytude as if the Romans 74
drift of it did absolutely require that the man and wife can not be made free
from the band of Marriage by any seperatio^ but by death only, because while
the law had life as it were and stood in force till Christ the Jews could
never shake off the Yoke thereof from them, although they endeavored to separate
them-selves from it by committing whoredom with sundry laws of salfe Gods: the
rest of S. Paul's similytudes which I mentioned, do bewray the lamenesse and
halting of this inference: seeing that the drift of the^ requires absolutely by
the same reason that noe man went to warfare at his own cost, or planted
Vynes, or fedd sheep, without relief thereby, because 1 Cor 9. verse 6.
all they verse. 14
Who preach the Gospel are allowed to live of the Gospel. And likewise that no
man did ever hurt his own body, because Ephesians 5. 3^.
Every husband ought to love his own wife Ephe^. 5. 25.
as Christ loved the Church: and likewise that no soldier has ever entangled
him-self with the assayres of life because Tymothee should be 2 Timothy 4. 2.
still about those actions, whereto the Lord 2. Tim. 2. 3.
who choose him to he a soldier, did call him. Nay to go no farther then the
drift it self of the samilytude, which Bellarmin does urge, if it requier
absolutely that the band of Marriage may be no way loosed but only by the
husbands or the wives death: then neither is it loosed, if the unbeliever do
for sake the Christian: neither if the husband become a Monk or the wife a
Nun; neither if the Pope see cause to dispense with either of them. And will
not this fancy of his about that drift drive him into greater inconvenience
yet: to weet, that every woman, whose husband is dead, ought to marry another,
because the Jews were bound to become Christians after the death of the Law?
or of the other side, that the Jews are not bound under pain of damnation to
become Christians, because no widow is bound under pain of death to take
another husband? or (if these absurdities be not great enough) that dead men
ought to marry, because Rom 7. 4.
The Jews by duty should be unto Christ, when they were dead to the Law? or
that the men of Rome to whom S. Paul wrote, should rather not believe in
Christ, because 1, Cor. 7. 8.
he wished widows rather not to marry? Of the which consequences if some be
esteemed erroneous by Papists some not esteemed only, but are so in deed, the
most have impious folly joined with untruth: Let Bellarmin acknowledge that
similitudes must not be set upon the rack, nor the drift thereof be
stretched and pressed in such sort, as if they ought just in length breadth and
depth to match and fitt-that whereto they are resembled. It suffices if in a
general analogy and proportion of the principal point wherein things are
matched, and compared together, they be each like to other, and both agree in
one quality. Which here is observed in S. Paul's comparion of the state of
Marriage, with the state of man before and after regeneration: because Romans ^.
verse. 2. 3.
as a wife her husband being dead does lawfully take another, and is not an
adulteress in having his company to bring forth fruit of her body, to him:
so verse. (...).
regenerate persons, their natural corruption (provoked by the law to sin)
and flesh being mortified, are joined to the Spirit (the force of Christ
working in them) as it were to a second husband, that they should bring forth
fruit (the fruits of the Spirit) unto God. And thus seeing neither the drift
of the similytude, nor the judgment of the Fathers, nor the playnnesse of the
words so oftentimes repeated, do disprove our answer and exposition of the
place: our answer proved by Scripture stands firm and sure and therefore the
third place urged by our adversaries, is suitable to the former.

So is the fourth and last; taken out of the first* to the Corithians the
seventh Chaptera To them who are Married, it is not I that give commandment,
but the Lord: Let not the wife depart from her husband: but if she depart too,
let her remain unmarried. or be reconciled unto her husband. Wherein (as
Bellarmin reasons) the words of S. Paul, If, she depart, and so forth are
meant of a woman, which parts from her husband upon a cause of just
divocement, as namely for whordom, haeresie, and the rest whatsoever they be,
and not of her which parts without any such cause. But concerning her of whom
the words are meant, S. Paul says most plainly she may not marry another.
Therefore even a cause of just divorcement loses not the band of Marriage
neither is it lawful for married folckes to marry others, although they
beesevered and put asunder by just divorceme^t.

And of this argument Bellarmin does say that it is altogether insoluble. In
saying whereof he seems to confess that none of the former arguments were
so, but might be answered and confuted. His confession touching them has
reason with it: I must needs approve it. But his vaunt of this is like that of
1 King. 20. 10*
Ben hadads that the dust of* Samaria would not be enough to all the people
that followed him for every man an handful. To whom the King of Israel said,
Let not him that girdeth his harnies, boast himself as he that puts it off.
Bellarmin has skarcly girt his harneis yet, and that which he has girt, is
vnservisable bad harneis too.

For the foremost part thereof, his proposition a vouching that the words If
she depart, and so forth, are meant of her only which parts from her
husband upon a just cause of divocement, as namely for whordom heresy, and
such like, is faulty sundry ways: seeing they are neither meant of her only
which parts for a just cause; and though* they be also meant of her which
parts for any other just cause, yet not of her which for whoredom.

Moreover the conclusion knitting up his argument with Therefore even a just
cause of divorcement loses not the band of Marriage, is guilfully set down:
being uttered in the form of a particular, and true so, taking divorcement as
he does; but intended to carry the force of a general, so by fraud and
faulshood to bear away the point in question. Of both the which to treat in
order, his proposition he presumes of as most certain, because in (his
judgment) Paul would not have said of her who departed without some such
cause, Let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled unto her husband; but he
would have said, Let her remain unmarried till she be reconciled unto her
husband, and let her come again unto her husband in any case. And why does
Bellarmin think so? His reasons follow. For Paul could not permit an unjust
divorcemnt against the express commandment of the Lord.

And, if in the same Chapter Paul permits not the man and wife to refrain
from carnal company for prayers fake, and for a time, except it be with
consent: How should be permit the wife to remain separated from her husband
against his will, without any cause of just divorcement. In deed if it had
lain in S. Paul's power to stay and refrain the wife from remaining so: no
doubt he neither would, nor might have permitted it. which himself
sufficiently showed in ^, 1. Corn. verse. ^ and 10,
forbidding her to depart at all, much more to continue parted from her
husband. But verse. ^.
if notwithstanding this charge and prohibition she did leave her husband upon
some lighter cause; or perhaps weightyer, though not weighty enough for a just
divorcement: then Paul in duty ought and might (I hope) with reason requier and
exhort her to remain unmarried, and not to join her self in wedlock with
another, a thing that Di^dor, Sicul. lib. 12.
Greeks and Iuvenal. Satyr 6. Sic fiunt octo mariti. Quinque per autumnor.
Romans (whose offspring the Strabe Geograph lib. 8. Pausanias Corinth.
Corinthians were) used to do. as (to make it playner by the like examples (S.
Paul neither might neither would have allowed a man to be rashly angry with
his brother: for Math. 5. 22.
Christ forbids it. But if one were suddenly surprised with rash anger S.
Paul would advise him Ephesians. 4, 26.
not to let the sun go down upon his angry wrath. neither might he
thereupon be justly charged with permitting wrath until the sun set,
against Christ's commandment.

No more might he with granting liberty to lust, because he Calat 7. 16
wills men not to fulfill the lusts of the flesh: whereas Math, 5 28
Christ commands them not to lust at all. For S. Paul also Romans 7. 8.
condemns all lusting of the flesh as sin. But seeing that Gal 5. 17.
the flesh will lust against the Spirit, as long as we are in this mortality:
he sturreth up the faithful that they Romans 6. 12.
let not sin reign in their mortal bodies, nor do fulfill the lust of the
flesh. In the same sort therefore he gives charge with Christ that the wife
depart not from her husband. Yet in consideration of human infirmity he
adds, But if she depart too, let her be unmarried. And to meet with a
doubt which hereupon might rise, since in the next words before he had affirmed
that they who have not the gift of continence should marry, and what if she
have it not? he adioyneth farther. 1. Cor. 7. 9
or let her be reconciled unto her husband. So that although the words may
seem to be uttered in the same sort, as if they did imply and import a
permission, yet are they not permissive, but imperative in truth, and an
express precept, that the wife having forsaken her husband and therein done
evil Moneto agamos.
forbear to marry another, for that were far worse, yea though she can not
contain: in respect where of or of any thing else, if she mislike to live
unmarried, she may not use the liberty that single folk may, who rather
ought to marry then burn, but she (...).
must reconcile her self unto her husband, whose wife she is by duty still.
And I may say likewise doubtless unto Bellarmin that he and his pamphletter
should not have mayntained their error in writing: but since they have done it,
let the^ write no more in defense of it, or let them acknowledge that in this
point they were deceived. For whereas Which Bollocmin does not only in this
quaestion cap. 16 but also in the next before, cap. 14
they gather of the disjunctive particle Let hor remain unmarried, or be
reconciled, that S. Paul has put it in the woman's choice and left her at
liberty, either to live separated still from her husband, or to be reconciled
unto him: they might as well ground upon Christ's words to the angel of the
church of the Laodiceans Revel. 3. 15.
I would thou werest cold or Zestos,
hot that he has put it in our choice and left us at liberty either to be
cold in faith and love, as flesh is, or to be fervent in the spirit. Yet
Christ had no such meaning. For he commands us to be Zeontes. Rom 12. 11.
servent and that very angel he says to every faith full men Zeloson. Rev.
3. 19.
Be hot and Zealous. But because the party was luke warm, a wordling Math.
13. 22.
who had receyved the seed of the word but bare not fruit, who Luke 12. 47.
knew his masters will, but did it not and there by sinned most grievously:
Christ wishes that he were cold and sinned less; since he did sin; or that
he were hot and free from both these faults, the later wish made simply the
former in comparison. After the which manner seeing Paul might well, and did by
all likelihood of circumstances of the text, wish simply and chiefly that the
wife estranged were reconciled to her husband, next that she continued rather
parted from him, then married to another as a less evil in comparison: the
uttering of his sentence with a disjunctive particle Let her remain unmarried,
or be reconciled, does not prove he put it in the woman's choice and left her
at liberty to do whether she listed. And thus it appears how certain and
undoubted that principle is, which L^quitu^ ergo sine vil^ dubio etc.
upon this proof Bellarmin avoucheth to be most certain and undoubted: that
S. Paul's words touching the wife If she depart, are meant of her only which
parts from her husband upon a just cause of divorcement. Howbeit if they had
been meant of her only: yet must they have touched such wives as leave their
husbands for any other just cause, and not for whoredom, An other and greater
oversight of Bellarmin, that in exemplising the causes of divorcement to which
in his opinion the words should be restrained, he names whoredom first, as
prncipally comprised in S. Paul's precept; whereas S. Paul meant that it and it
alone, should be excluded and excepted.

For these are his words. 1. ^or. 7. 10.
To them who are married, it is not I that geve commandment but the Lord, Let
not the wife depart from her husband; but if she depart too, let her remain
unmarried, or be reconciled unto her husband; and let not the husband put away
his wife.

Where in the last branch Let not the husband put away his wife, must needs
be understood except it be for whoredom because S. Paul says it is the
Lords commandment, and Mat. 5. 32. and ^9. 9.
the Lord gave it with that express exception. This Bellarmyn does grant.
Well. Then as the last branch so the first too, Let not the wife depart from
her husband. For the analogy is all one: and yeche having interest in the
others body, she may as lawfully depart 1. cor. 7. 4.
from an adulterer, as he from an adulteress. And this does Bellarmin grant
also. But the middle branch is to be understood of the same departing, and
likewise qualified as the first. Therefore. If she depart too, is meant,
except it be for whoredom. Nay, not so, quoth Bellarmin: for the same
departing is not meant in both, but a far different, in the first an unjust
departing, in the next a just; and this must be the sense of the Apostles
words. Not I, but the Lord geve commandment, let not the wife depart from her
husband, to weet without a just cause: but if she go away, to weet having a
just cause, let her remain unmarried, and so forth. In the refutation of which
wrong and violence done unto the sacred text, what should I stand? when the
only reason, whereby out of scripture he assayeth to prove it, is the
disiunctive particle, which as I have showed already, has no joint or sinew
of proof to that effect. And August (...) de a^ult con j^g cap, 1. 2, 3 et 4.
the only father, whose testimony, he cites, for it, does ground it on that
disiunctive particle of Scripture: So that his reason being overthrow^n, his
^reditt and authority, by August epi. (...) Hecion
his own Dict. ^ c. Eg^ s^lis.
approved rule may bear no sway. And on the contrary part, (...)
many other fathers do expound the second branch as having refere^ce to the
same departing that is forbidden in the first. And (which is the chief point)
the natural drift and meaning of S. Paul's words does enforce the same. For
the terms; ^an de ^ai
But, if, too, importe that doing also of that which in the sentence before he
had affirmed ought not to be done: As Cor 7 ver. 9. (...) 3^ et 39
the like examples in the same discourse (to go no farther) show, yea some
having one Namely. Kai.
particle less then this has to press^ it thereunto. It is good for the
unmarried and widows, if they abide even as I do: Eide.
But if they do not contain, let them marry. The woman which has an
unbelieving husband, and he consents to dwell with her, let her not put him
away: Eide,
but if the unbelieving depart, let him depart. Art thou loosed from a wife?
seek not a wife: Ean de kai.
But thou marry also, thou sinnest not, This I speak for your profitt, that
you may do that which is comely? Eide.
But if any man think it uncomely for his virgin if she pass the time of
Marriage, let him do what he will. The wife is bound by the law as long as her
husband lives: Ean de.
but if her husband be dead, she is at liberty and so forth. In all the which
sentences since the clauses brought in with those coniunctio^s have manifest
relation to the things spoken of before, and tou^h the^ in the same sense, the
branch that is in question having like dependence, must in all reason be
conserved of the same departing that the former. Thus it being proved that S.
Paul commanding the wife to remanie unmarried if she departed from her
husband, did mean. Except it were for whoredom it follows that Bellarmins
proposition is faulty even in this also that he names whoredom among the just
causes of the wives departing here meant by S. Paul. Now in his conclusion
inferring hereupon that even a just cause of divorcement loses not the band
of marriage, he is as deceitful* as he was false in his proposition. For the
word Divorcement, being understood, as it is by him, for any separation and
parting of the man and wife, though from bed only, and for a certain time:
There may be sundry causes why, such a separation should be allowed or
tolerated, when as the band of marriage shall nevertheless endure still. And
so the simple reader were likely to imagine that Bellarmin had concluded a
truth and to purpose. But the point where with he should have knitt up his
dispute, and which he would have men conceyve and bear away as if these words
employed it, is that no just cause at all of any divorcement does loose the band
of marriage, and therefore neither whoredo. The falsehood whereof would have
been as clear as the sun shine at nooneday, the proposition being so
evidently false whereon it is inferred. And this is the argument that Bellarmin
set his rest on Argumentu^ plane insolubile.
the insoluble argument, eve^ altogether insoluble, the ground whereof he
terms Invictissima demonstratio
a demonstration a most invincible demonstration: against the which nothing (he
says) can be objected, but an insufficie^t reply, made by, Er^smus, to weet,
that Paul speaks of a^ Vnum et ta^tum quodobijci pusset.
adulterous wife, who therefore being cast out by her husband is charged to
stay unmarried, the innocent party not so charged. Which speeches of the
Jesuit come from the like vein of a vaunting spirit as those did of his
accomplices, who boasted that In the year of Christ 1588
the Spaniards Armadoes and navy should find but weak and seely resistance in
England; and called their army sent to conquer us, an invincible army. For as
they diminished by untrue reports the forces prepared: To meet and encounter
with the Spanish power: so Bellarmin by saying that naught can be objected
beside that he specifieth; yea farther by belying and falsifying of Erasmus,
Annot. in 1. Cor 7.
who contrariwise replieth that Paul does seem to speak De leviotibus
offensis non de gravibus Flagit. ^s.
of lighter displeasures for which divorcements then were usual, not of such
crimes as adultery. Moreover by the substance and weight of my reply to his
insoluble argument, the godly wise indifferent eye will see (I trust) that the
knots and strings thereof are loosed and broken: even as the invincible army
of the Spaniards was by Gods providence showed to be vincible without great
encountering; the carkeises and spoils of their ships and me^ up o^the
English, Scottish, and Irish coasts did witness it.f So let all thine enemies
perish, O Lord, and let them who love him be as the sun when he goes forth
in his strength.

THE THIRD CHAPTER.
The consent of Fathers, the second pretended proof for the Papists doctrine
in this point, is pretended falsely: and if all be weighted in an even balance,
the Fathers check it rather.

AFter the foresaid testimonies of scripture urged by our adversaries in the
first place for the commending of their error: Secondly, the same truth (says
the Jesuit) may be proved by tradition. By which his own speech, if we should
take advauntage of it, he grants all that I have said against his arguments
drawn out of the scripture, and so far forth agrees with us. For what
understands, he by the word Tradition? A doctrine not written, as Tom.
^^eont 1. lib. 4. cap. 2
him-self professes in his first controversy. Where having noted that al
though the word tradition be general and signifies any doctrine written or
unwritten, which one imparteth to another, yet divines, and almost all the
ancient fathers, apply it to signify unwritten doctrine only: And so will
we hereafter use this word says he. If the point in question the^ may be
proved (as Bellarmin affirms it may) by tradition: We might conclude it is
not written in the scriptures, by his own verdict, and therefore all the
scriptures alleged by him for it are alleged falsely. But he seems to use
the name of tradition in like sort as cont here is. cap. 1. et 41
Vincentius Lirmensis does, calling the doctrine delivered by the church the
Churches tradition. This to be his meaning I gather by the reason that he
adds saying for there are extant the testimonies of the fathers in all ages
for it. The Pa^phletter in other words, but more pere^ptorily to avouch the
proof thereof by the opinion and censure of all ages, affirms, he will show
that it was never thought lawful since Christ, for Christians divorced for
fornication to marry any other while both man and wife lived. That it was
never thought lawful since Christ, is a boulder speech them Bellarmin does
use: though to hitt the mark as it were with his shaft, he must and does
imply as much in that he says it may be proved by tradition. For tradition
has not force enough to prove a thing to be true, not in the Papists own
judgment, unless it have been always approved and agreed on by the general
consent of Fathers, (as we term them) Pastors and Doctors of the Church.
Which I affirm not upon the general rule of cap. 3 et 40.
Vincentius only so greatly, and so often praised by them as golden: But upon
the Canon of the Trent council and pillars of the Popi^sh church subscribing
to it. For the Session 4.
council of Trent commanding that no man shall expound the scripture against
the sense that the Church holds or against the Fathers co^senting all in
one, does covertly grant, that if the Fathers consent not all in one, their
opinion may be false, and ^onsequently, no sure proof of a point in question.
Defen Fide Tride^t lib 2.
Andradius does open and avouche the same in his defense of the Council: a
work very highly commended by Epist. ad vni versam Christianam re^pu. prefixa
A^dr.
Oseruis. And Loco^. Theolog. lib. 7. ea. 3.
Canus sets it down for a conclusion, that many of them consenting in one
can yield no firm proof, if the rest though fewer in number do dissent. Yea
Tom. 2. con 3. lib. 4. cap. ^0
Bellarmin himself says that there can no certainty be gathered out of their
sayings, when they agree not among themselves. It is a thing granted the^ by
our adversaries that the Fathers have not strength enough to prove ought
unless they all consent in one. But the fathers do not all consent in one
about the point we treat of, as it shall be showed, Our adversaries therefore
must grant that the opinion which they hold in this point, cannot be proved
by Fathers. Nay they are in danger of being enforced to grant a farther
matter, and more importing them by the consequent hereof. For through a decree
of Septimi decretalium lib 3. tit 5. cap. 2.
Pope Pius the fourth, the professors of all faculties, and all that take
degrees in any poopish school are bound by solemn oath that they shall never
expound and take the scripture Nis^ juxta vnamimem consensum pa^^um,
but according to the Fathers co^se^ting all in one. Wherefore how will
Bellarmin, perhaps the Pamphletter also if he have been amongst them and taken
any degree, but what shift will Bellarmin, and his As Parsons by name: Epi tom
con. part 2. con. 5. quest 4. and canilius catechism. de matrimon. sacram
quest. 3* and Navarrus in cap divort* de peint did. 1 and their
seminarieschollars.
puefellowes find to save themselves from perjury, when it shall be showed
that many of the Fathers gain say that opinion, which him-self and his expound
the scripture for? And what if it appear, that the greater number of Fathers
do so? nor the greater only, but the better also, and those whose grounds are
surer? Then all the probability, which Fathers can yield will turn against the
Papists: and that which our adversaries would prove by tradition, and the
consent of all ages will rather be disproved thereby. But howsoever men be
diversely, persuaded touching the number and quality of Fathers enclyning this
or that way, by means of sundry circumstances which may breed doubt both
particularly, of certain, and of the whole sum in general: the maine and
principal point remaining to be showed, namely that the Fathers consent not
all in one for the Papists doctrine, is most clear and evident out of all
controversy. In so much that many even of them also whom Bellarmin alleges,
and the Pamphletter after him, as making for it, make in deed against it: and
those of the chiefest and foremost ranks spetially, in the first, the second,
the third, the fourth hundred years after Christ. All the which agree and
teach with one consent that the man forsaking his wife for her adultery, is
free to marry again: save such of them only, as in this very point of
doctrine touching, marriage are tainted with, error by the judgment and
censure of Papists themselves. A token of the vanetie and folly of our
adversaries Bellarmin and the Pamphletter: who by naming one at least in every
age, would needs make a show of having the consent of all ages with them,
whereas it will be seen hereby, that in many we have the most and best; and
they, either none at all, or none sound. For in the first hundred years after
Christ all that Bellarmin says they have, is the testimony of Clemens in the
Canons of the Apostles Canon. 48.
where the man is willed without any exception to be excommunicated, who having
put away his wife does marry another. Now beside that Clemens upon whom
Bellarmin fathereth, those canons, is injured therein. As for the later part
of them Tom, 1. L. conti ^. ca. 2^
himself shows, Fr. Torrensis (otherwise called Turria^) a ^esuit lib de 6.
7. et 8. Synod.
his friend for the former, neither are they of Apostolic antiquity and
authority notwithstanding their title, as Pope Ge^asius the first, with 70. by
shops assembled in a counsel c Scta Romana did. 3.
many Fathers testify, and Papists will acknowledge when they are touched by
them: G^sar Baronius Annalus Eccle. tom. 1. ad ^nnum Christi ^8.
The author of the Canon had respect therein (by all probability) to the
Apostolic doctrine receyved from Christ, and therefore though he made not an
express exception of divorce for whordom, might as well impply it, as I have
declared that some of the Evangelists, and S. Paul did. Which the interpreters
also of those Canons Comme^ti^ Canon. Apost
Zonaras and Balsamon, thought to be so likely and more then a conjecture, that
they expound it so without any scruple. Balsamon in saying that he who puts
away his wife without cause may not marry another; and Zonaras that he who
marries a woman put away without cause by her husband does committ adultery.
Or if these writers mistook the authors meaning, and in his opinion no man,
howsoever his wife were put away, without or with cause, might lawfully marry
another: th^n take this with all, that Apost constable lib. 3 cap, 2
he skarse allowed any second marriage, but controuled the third as a sign of
intemperance, and condemned flatly the fourth as manifest whoredom. Which
although Ft. Turrian, an^ct. in Apoconst Clement
a Jesuit go about to cover and salve with gentle gloses like Ez^k. 13. 10.
the false prophets. Who when one had built up a mudden wall did parged it with
unsavory plaster: yet since that counterfeit Clements work did flow out of
the fountains of the Gretians, as a Baronius Annal eccle. tom 5 ad annu^
Chris^^ 57
great historian of Rome has truly noted, and among the Gretians many, held
that error, as it is likewise showed by a Espencae^^ li. ^. de contine^t ca 9.
^t 16
great Sorbonist; the likelihood of the matter, and spring whence it proceeds
agreeing so fitly with the natural and proper signification of the words, will
not permit their blacknes to take any other hew, nor suffer that profane
speech of I know not what Clement, to be cleared from plain contradiction to
1. Cor. 7. 9
the word of God. Wherefore the only witness that Bellarmin produces out of
the first hundred years, does not help him. Apolog* ad Anto impera
Out of the second hundred he produces three; Justinius, Athenagoras and
Clemens Alexandrinus. The first of whom Justinius praising the compendious
briefnes of Christ's speeches rehearses this amongst them: Whosoever marries her
that is divorced from her husband, does commit adultery. Meaning not as
Bellarmin, but as Christ did: who excepting whoredom in the math. 5. 32. et
^9. 9
former branch of that sentence, understood it likewise in this, as I have
showed. And how may we know that Justinius meant so? By his own words, in
that Apolog* ad senatu^ Roman to le gomeno^ par kumi^ repodi^n.
he commends a godly Christian woman, who gave to her adulterous husband a
bill of dirorcement L. dirimite^ I divorti^^. D. de divortijset repudijs.
such as did loose that band of matrimony, and says concerning him that ^to de
ta^tes pote aner. Eu seb eccl hist. lib. 4 cap 17
he was not her husband afterward. The next Apolog. pro Christianis.
Athenagoras, affirms (I grant) that if any man being parted from his former
wife do marry another he is an adulterer. But Bellarmin must grant with all
that Athenagoras affirms it untruly: considering that he speaks of parting
even by death too, as well as by divorcement, and tea^heth with the Tertull. de
Monegam. Epipha* haere. 4^. August de haeres cap. 26.
Montanists that whatsoever second marriage is unlawful. Whereupon a famons
Parisian Divine De contine^t lib. 3 cap. 17
Claudius Espenseus says of this same sentence of his which Bellarmin cites,
that it favors rather of a Philosopher then a Christian: and may well be
thought to have been inserted into his work by Eucratites. A censure, for the
ground thereof, very true, that the said opinion is a Philosophical fancy,
yea an heresy: Though the words seem rather to be Athenagonas his own, as
Noted in part by Espen caeus himself ibid. ca. 9 10.
sundry fathers speak dangerously, that way, then thrust in by Encratites,
Epipha. here 46 et 17. August de here is. c^p 26.
who generally rejected all marriage, not se^ond marriage only. Athenagoras
therefore works small credit to the Jesuits cause. As much does the last of
his witnesses Strom li 2.
Clemens Alexandrinus. For both in this point about second marriage Strom. lib.
3.
he matcheth Aethenagoras and otherwise his writings are tainted with
vnsoundenes, and stained with spotts of error. Which judgment not only Hist
Eccle. Magdeburg ce^^. 2 cap (...)
Protestants of German have in our remembrance lately, geven of him, though a
Edm. Camp^an ^at ^.
Iesuitical spirit do traduce the^ insolently, for it: But cap Sancta Romana
did 15.
an ancient Pope of Rome with seave^tie bishops assembled in a Council above
a thousand years since, and a Bishop of Spain a man of no small reputation
with Papists for skill both in divinity and in the Canon law Variar ^eso. lib,
9 cap, 17
Didacus Covarruvias does approve the same. Now in the third hundred years (to
go forward) Tertullian and Origin are brought forth to aver Bellarmins
opinion, of whom one questionless controlleth, perhaps both. For Advers Mar
cion. lib ^
Tertullian disputing against the heretic Marcion, who falsely objected that
Christ is contrary to Moses, because Moses granted divorceme^t, Christ
forbids it, answers that Christ saying, whosoever shall put away his wife
and marry another, commits adultery, means ex eadem vtique causa qua non
^^cet dimitti. ut ^li aducatur
undoubtedly of putting away for that cause, for which it is not lawful for a
man to putt away his wife that he may marry another. And likewise for the
wife, that he is an adulterer, who marries her being put away, (...) dimiss^m.
Mane^e^ mat^imoni quod non (...) d^e^pt* um est.
if she be put away unlawfully: considering that the marriage, which is not
rightly broken off, continues; and while the marriage does continue, it is
adultery to marry. Which words of Tertullian manyfestly declaring that a man
divorced from his wife lawfully, for the cause excepted by Christ, may marry
another, Bellarmin does very cunningly and finely, cut of with an et caetera,
and says that there he teaches that Christ did not forbid divorcement, if
there be a just cause, but, did forbid to marry again after divorcement. So
directly agaisnt the most evide^t light of the words and tenor of the whole
discourse: that learned men of his own side, though houlding his opinion yet
could not for shame but grant that Tertullian makes against them in it. For
Epit in 4. lib. decretal. part 2. cap. 7. D. 6.
bishop Covarruvias mentioning the fathers who maintain that men may lawfully
marry again after divorceme^t for adultery, names Tertullian (quoting this
place) among them. And Bibleoth. sca^^ae lib. 6. Annot. 81.
Sixtus Senensis a man not inferior in learning to Bellarmin, in sincere
dealing for this point superior, confesses on the same place, and on those
same words (but recited wholly, not clipped with an etcetera) that Tertullian
makes a certain and undoubted assertion thereof. Annot in lib advers Marcion
cap. 34. et paradox Tertul 30.
Pamelius in deed through a desire of propping up his churches doctrine with
Tertullia^s credit, says that though he seem here to allow divorcement for
adultery in such sort, as that the husband may marry another wife: yet he
opens himself, and holds it to be unlawful in his book de Monogamia.
of single marriage. Wh^rein he says some what, but little to his advauntage.
For Tertullian wrote this book of single marriage Hieron in catalogo script.
eccles. et in epist ad Tit cap. 1 Pamel. argum. lib de Monogam et annotat. cap
9.
when he was fallen away from the Catholic faith unto the heresy of
Montanus: and so does hold therein agreably to that heresy, that is unlawful
to marry a second wife howsoever a man be parted from the former by
divorcement or by death. But in that thee wrote, while he was a Catholic,
against the heretic Marcion, he teaches co^trarywise the same that we do,
as Sixtus Senensis and Covarruvias truly grant. Yea Pamelius himself if he
look better to his own notes, does grant as much. For Annotat in lib. 4.
advers. Marcion cap. 34.
he says that Tertullian uses the word divorcement in his proper
signification, for such a divorcement by which one puts away his wife, and
marries another. But Tertullia^ says Habet Christum assertorem justitiae
divortij.
that Christ does avouche the righteousness of divorcement. Christ therefore
avoucheth that for adultery a man may put away his wife and marry another by
Tertullians judgment. Which also may be probably thought concerning Origin:
Although it be true Tract. 7 (...) Math cap. 19.
he says (as Bellarmin cites him) that certaeine bishops did permit a woman
to marry while her former husband lived, and adds, they did it against the
scripture. For he seems to speak of a woman divorced from her husband, not
for adultery, but for some other cause, such as the Jews used to put away
their wives for, bygiving the^ a bill of divorceme^t. The matter that he
handles, and cause that he geveth thereof do lead us to this meaning;
Approved by the opinion of certain learned men too. For after he had said
(according to Math. 19. 8.
the words of Christ which he expounds) that Moses in permitting a bill of
divorceme^t did yield unto the weakness of the^ to whom the law was geve^; he
says that, the Christian bishops who permitted a woman to marry while her
former husband lived, did it perhaps for such weakness. Wherefore since in saving
that, this which they did, they did perhaps for such weakness, he has relation
unto that of Moses, and Moses (as he adds) did not grant the bill of
divorceme^t for adultery, for that was punished by death it follows that the
Bishops who^ Origin charge, with doing against the scripture did permit the
woman, to marry upon divorceme^t for some other cause, not for adultery and
so his reproving of the^ does not touch us, who grant it for adultery only.
Thus does Annot. in ^. Cor ^.
Erasmus think that Origin meant: concluding it farther, as clear, by the
similitude which Orige^ tract. 7 in math.
he had used before of Christ, who put away the Synagogue (his former wife as
it were) because of her adultery, and married the church. Yea Explicat
^^ticulor. Lov^n a^t. 19.
Tapper likewise a great divine of Lova^, and of better credit with Papists
the^ Eros^nus says that the divorceme^t permitted by those Bishops, who^
Origin co^trouleth was a Jewish divorceme^t. Wherein though he aimed at another
mark, to prove an untruth; yet unawares he hi^ a truth more the^ he thought
of, and strengthened that by Origin, which he thought to overthrowe. Howbeit if
Bellarmin or Bellarmins Interpreter ca^ persuade by other likelyhoods out of
Origin (as he is somewhat dark, and I know not whether irresolute in the
point) that the thing reproved by him in those Bishops was the permitting of
one to marry again after divorcement for adultery: our cause shall be more
adva^taged by those sundry Bishops who approved it, the^ disadva^taged by one
Orige^, who reproved the^ for it. Chiefly seeing Orige^ impaired much his credit
both by other heresies in diverse points of faith, for which a Synod 5 Co^stan
(...) collat 8 cap ^^. Nicephor lib. 17 cap ^8.
general Council with Tom. 1 co^^. 6 lib. c. cap. 1
Bellarmins allowa^ce count (...) a damned heretic: and in this matter by
Hom* 17 in Lucam.
excluding all such as are twice married out of the Kingdom of heaven, which
Genebrad. annot marg* in eum locu^. Espenceus de continent. lib* 3 cap 9.
divines of Paris observe and check him for. Whereas those Bishops of who^ he
makes mention, were neither stained otherwise, for ought that may be gathered,
nor herein did they more then the right believing and Catholic Church all
that time thought lawful to be done, as appears by Tertullia^ and Iustine
the Martyr. In the which respect Tractat de in^^^cut Sacerd c. de matrimon.
lect. ^^
Peter Soto (a freir of great account in the Trent Council) (...) said that it
is plain by many arguments that the case which we treat of was doubtful in
the ancient church al^eageth this for proof thereof out of Origin, that many
bishops (...) married me^ to marry again after divorcement. This if the two
of others who^ Bellarmin alleges out of the third hundred years as making for
him, do not make against him, which perhaps they do both: yet one of the^
does not out of all controversy, and bishops, more in number, in credit
greater the^ the other, agree with him therein. Out of the fowrth hundred, the
(...) which Bellarmin makes, is a great deal fayrer the^ out of the third:
and a number of Fathers, the council of Eliberis S. Am (...) S. lero^, a Roman
Bishop, and S. Chrysostom are affirmed the^^e to join themselves with him.
But they are affirmed in the like manner as the former were: skarse on of the^
avouching the same that he does, the rest in part seeming to be of other
opinion, in part most clearly showing it, and such as show not so much, yet
showing their own weakness, and that in this matter their opinion and judgment
is of small value. For the foremost of them Canon. 9.
the Council of Eliberis, ordained that a woman which forsook her husband
because of his adultery and would marry another, should be forbidden to
marry, and if she married, she should not receave the communion till he
were dead who^ she forsook, unless necessity of sickness constrained to geve
it her. Wherein it is to be noted, first that the Council says not. Slquis L.
(...) D. de ve^ ber (...).
If anieman, so to comprehend and touch generally all both men and women: but
they speak peculiaritie of the woman alone, and so do not forbid the man to
leave his adulterous wife and marry another. Secondly, that the woman is
excommunicated, if when she is forbidden by the church to marry, she marry
nevertheless, not if before she be forbidden: As it were to punish her
disobedience rather then the fact it self. Thirdly, that sh^e is not d^barred
all her life time from the communion, but for a season only, and in time of
need, in dangerous sickness does receive it: yea, even while the party, who^
she forsook lives. Of the which circumstances the first though it might
argue the Counsels oversight who made the woman's case herein worse then the
man's, both being free alike by Gods law: yet for the man it shows that they
allowed him to marry again after divorcement according to the doctrine of
Christ which we maintain. The next yeildeth likeliehood that the Council did
forbid the woman this not for that they thought it unlawful, but unseemly
perhaps or inexpedient, as Council. I^e^d. c Non oportet a leptu ^gesima. ^3 q,
4.
another Council is read to have forbidden the celebrating and solemnizing of
marriages at certain times. But the last puts the matter out of doubt, that
they were persuaded of the woman also marrying in such sort, that her fact was
warra^table by the word of God. Forels had they, not judged her marriage with
this latter man to be lawful, they must needs have judged her to live with
him in perpetual adultery. Which if they had thought, it is most improbable
they would have admitted her to the communion in case of dangerous sickness:
seeing at the point of death can. 64.
they deny it to women so continuing, yea Can. 3. 7. 17 18. 47 65 70. 73, and
75.
to men offending less heynously then so. With such extremity of rigor
therein that Annal. Eccles ^om. 1 ad anu^ Christ. 57.
Baronius notes their decrees as savouring of the Novatian heresy: and Tom.
1. ^ontr. 7. lib, ^. cap. 9.
Bellarmin lays it almost as deeply to their charge. So far from all
likeliehood is it that they would admit her in necessity of sickness to the
communion had they been persuaded she lived in adultery still. Therefore it
was not without cause that Bellarmin did suppress this circumstance together
with the former, in citing the decree of the Elibernie Council: least his
false illatio^, to weete that they accounted such marriage unlawful even for
the innocent party, and in the cause of adultery, should be discovered and
controlled thereby. Next is Ambrose brought in, who upon the 16 chapter of
Luke, writes much against the^ that putting away their wife do marry
another, and he calls that marriage adultery in sundry places: neither does
he ever except the cause of whoredom in that whole discourse as Bellarmin
says. But what if Bellarmin here be like himself too? Certainly S. Ambrose
speaks Dimletis ^uxorem qua^i jura sin^ crimine
of such wives as lived without crime and Putas id ^ibi l^cere quia ^ex humana
^^on pr^hibet sed divina pro ^ib. ^. ^.
whom their husbands were (as he adds) forbidden by the law of God to put
away. So that he reproving men for marrying others after they had put away
their chaste wives, does evidently show he meant not of marriage after
divorceme^t for whordo^. And if it be ^ufficie^t proof that he supposed they,
might not marry again after they had put away a whorish wife because he
never excepteth whoredo^ in that whole discourse of marrying again: then by as
sufficient a reason he supposed that Noli crgo vxorem dimit tere. Qui dimittit
uxore^ facit eam m^e cham.
they, might not put away their wives at all, no not for whordom, because he
never excepteth it in that whole discourse of putting away the wife. But tha^
Papists will grant that a man may lawfully put away his wife, if she committ
whordom. As Bellarmin then will construe S, Ambrose in this branch, so let him
in the former. And if he say, that S. Ambrose thinking upon Luke alone who^ he
expounded, or trusting his memory forgot the exception added by Christ in
Matthew, for Math. 5. 32.
putting away the wife: the same slipp of memory might loose the same
exception for Math. 19. 9.
marrying another. If he think that Ambrose did not forget himself, but
understood the exception in the former point, as the 1. Cor. 7. ^1.
Apostle did, though neither mention it expressly: what reason why, it might
not as well be understood in the later also? As for S. Ierom no marveil if he
wrote against second marriage after divorceme^t for whordom Epist 9 ad
Salvinam. et n ad Age^uch^a^ et adversus Iovinian.
who wrote against all second marriages in such sort, that De contine^t lib. 3.
cap. 10.
Espe^ceus asks what could have been said more greivously against them by the
impure Who condemned second marrig^s Epiphan. ^aerel. 59 ^ugust ^e hae resib
cap. 38.
Catharists, then is said by him? And In August de civit. dei lib. 16. cap 34.
The divines of Lovan in in their ed^tio^ of Austen, printed at Antwerp and
Paris have lest this sentence out beyond the prescript of index expurgatorius.
Vives pronounces, that he did not only detest second marriages, but also
had small liking of the first, nor did much favor matrimony; Beside that
himself too, as far as he exceeded the bounds of Godly modesty and truth
herein, even by these men's judgments who^ Papists do repute learned and
Catholic allayeth and corecteth in one of the places, which Bellarmin
alleges, his peremptory censure geve^ in the other. For whereas he says in
his Epistle to Amandus, that the wife who divorced herself from her husband
because of his adultery and marri^d another Si non vult adultera reputa^i.
was an adulteress for so marrying, and Non Apellat^r vir sed adulter.
her new husba^nd an adulterer: In his epitaph of Fabiola (a noble godly
gentlewoman of Rome, who did the like and was poenitent for it after her second
husbands death) he says, that she lamented and bewailed it so, as if she
had committed adultery. By which kind of speech and others suitable to it, as
that he te^^meth her state after divorcement from her first husband Widdowhood;
and adds, that she lost Vidutiatem (...) non poterat.
the honor of having had but one husband by marrying the second; ^ Sub gloria
(...)
and says, she thought it better to undergo a certain, shadow of pitiful
wedlock, ^ po^ morte^ secundi viti ^ Opera exerce^e (...).
then to play the whore, because it is better (says Paul) to marry then to
burn: S. Ieron declares that although it were a fault in his opinion to do
as she did: yet not such a fault, a crime, a public crime, as Bellarmins
doctrine makes it. No more may it be justly thought in the opinion of that
Roman Bishop, of who^, because he put Fabiola to public penance after her
second husband death, Bellarmin concludes that it was accounted a public
crime in the Catholic Church at that time, if any man whilst his wife yet
lived, married another yea, albeit for whordo^. For men at that time were put
to some penance in the Catholic Church, for marrying again after their first
wives death, as Bellarmin observes out of the Catholique^Councels: adding
therewith al, that although they knew second marriage to be lawful, yet
because it is a token of incontine^cie they chastised it with some penance.
Wherefore since it might easily be that they who laid some penance upon no
fault, would lay public penance upon a small fault, spetially in women, to
who^ in such cases they were more severe and rigorous the^ to me^: the penance
which the Bishop did put Fabiola to for her second marriage does not prove
sufficiently that it was accounted the^ a public crime in the Catholic
church. Howbeit if the term of public crime be used in a ge^tler sense the^
(...)
commonly it is, or the Bishop of Rome did never put any but grievous offenders
and finners to public penance: yet perhaps even so too will Bellarmin come
short of his conclusion still. For thereby (says he) we do not understand
that ^ if any man while his wife yet lived, married another, yea albeit for
whordo; it was accounted a public crime in the Catholic church at that
time, if any man did it. As who say the Bishop of Rome must needs hold that,
if women were not licensed to marry after divorcement for whordom, men could
not be neither. Whereas he might be of the same opinion, that an ancient
Council, (...). 9.
Council s^emeth (as I showed) to have been before him; and an ancient
Ambros^a. (...) p. 7
Father (living and writing as Ce^^^^^ Theologorum Lovan in (...). gust lib
(...) et nor testam To^ --
some think, in Rome about the same time) was; I mean, that this liberty and
freedom should be granted to men but not to women. Moreover the delay of
Faebiolas penance, in that she was not put thereto until Hieron epist. 30. ad
Ocean.
after her second husbands death, yeildeth very strong and probable conjecture,
that it had not been before the^ accounted any crime at all in the Catholic
church, not for a woman neither to put away her husband because of his
adultery, and to marry another. For that which Fabiola did, she did Melius
(...)
openly. Her self was religious, godly, well instructed; and thought it to be
lawful. Her husband by all likelihood of like mind and judgment: the church
of Rome called not their marriage in to question; The Bishop did not execute
any Church censure on them. Nay, since she was (...)
very young, when they married, and never heard of any fault therein committed
as long as her husband lived: it may be Rome had many Bishops in the mean
time, none of who^ saw cause why they should blame her for it. The example of
Fabiola therefore, and the Roman Bishops dealing in it, makes more a great
deal with us then against us, if it be thoroughly weighed. Now S. Chrysostom
makes absolutely with us: Howsoever Bellarmin affirms that he teaches the
same with S. Ierom yea, with Epist. (...)
S. Ierom simply condemning all such marriage. For what does S. Chrysostom
teach in the (...) Math. cap ^.
sermon that Bellarmin quoteth upon Matthew? Forsooth, that by Moses law it was
permitted, that whosoever hated his wife for any cause, might put her away, and
marry another in her room: But Christ left the husband one cause alone to put
away his wife for namely whoredom. What? and does it follow hereof that
Chrysostom, meant that the husband putting her away for whoredom, might not
marry another? Rather the clean contrary: Seeing that he speaks of such a
putting away, as Moses did permit, and makes this the difference between
Christ's ordinance, and the law of Moses, that Moses did permit it for any
cause, Christ but for one. Which to be his meaning he shows more plainly
Ho^ (...) Cor. ^.
upon the first to the Corinthians, saying that the marriage is dissolved by
whoredom, neither is the husband a husband any longer. For hence it appears
that he thought the ba^d of marriage to be loosed. when they, are severed for
whoredom: and therefore consequently the parties free to marry according to
the 1. Cor 7. 28
Apostles rule. And Homil de libell repudij
other where also, though somewhat more obscurely yet conference with this
place will show him to have taught. But what should I stand on farther proof
thereof, it being so undoubted, that Epitom in 4. lib decretal. part. ^. cap.
7. D. 6.
Bishop Covarrisvias an earnest adversary of marriage after divorcement, and
bringing all the Fathers that he can against it, confesses S. Chrysoctom to
stand on the other side against him for it. And this in four hundred years
after Christ, Bellarmin cannot find one of the Fathers, that he may justly
say is his: excepting them which make as much for the Encratites, Montanists,
and Catharists, as they do for Papists. In the ages following he finds
better store: now one, now more in each hundred. Yet among them also, look how
many he names of the Eastern Bishops, whether expressedly, or implyedly:
he plays the Jesuit with him. For the first of them Theophylact he
alleges with the same faith and truth, that he did Chrysostom, whose scholar
Theophylact being (after Tom. 7. Contr. 7* lib. 1. cap. 4.
Bellarmins own note) did follow his master. And this the two places
themselves that Bellarmin quoteth, do insinuate clearly: Theophylact in Math.
cap. 1^.
the former by opening how Christ permits not that putting away which Moses
did, without just cause, nor allows any cause as just but whordom ^n. 1. Cor.
7.
the later by omitting mention of whordo^, in spesifying the causes, for which
if a woman depart from her husband she must remain unmarried. Whereto (if
Bellarmin need more light to see it by) we may add a third place: in which In
Luc. cap. 16.
Theophylact saying that Luke rehersing Christ's words against men putting away
their wives and marrying other must be understood with the exception out of
Matthew, Parectos logou porneias delade. obscured by the Latin tra^slator
omitting delade.
Unless it be for whoredom, does show howfarre he differs herein from
Bellarmin, who denies flatly that Christ's words in Luke must be supplied
with that exception. The rest of the Eastern Fathers whose testimony is
alleged by Bellarmin though their names not mentioned: are such as were
assembled in the Council of Florence. For there came thither to confer with
the Pope and the western bishops, albeit many of these houlding a general
Council at Basil the same time, refused to change the place for the Popes
pleasure, who sought his own advantage therein, not the Churches, and
undermined the actions of the Council of Basil Council Basiliens ^ess 3^. et ^4
Enias Sylviu^de gest. council. Basil, lib 1.
which condemned him of heresy, and deposed him; but there came thither
Synodus Fl^rentine proce^. et subscript in literis vn^onis
the Patriarchs of Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioche, and Jerusalem, either
themselves in person, or by their deputies, with many Metropolitanes and
Bishops of Greece of Asia, of Iberia, and other countries of the East. Whose
creditt and consent how untruly Bellarmin prete^deth, for the proof of his
false assertion, it is plain by that he says the Council of Florence did
decree the same in the instruction of the Armenians. A chapter which is
fathered in deed upon the Council by the schisimaticall Pope Eugenius the
fovorth, the deviser of it: but fathered unjustly and calmuniously as the time
argues, wherein it was begotten. For it is recorded in the same decree, that
it was made the Decimo calendus Dece^^bris.
two and twentieth of November, in the year of Christ a thousand four
hundred, thirty and nine. Now the Council ended in July the same year four
months before: As both Synod Florent. sess. ult.
it self witnesses, and Ounphr. in pontif. max. et card Genebrad. Chronograph.
lib 4
Popish stories not^. Wherefore the Council could not be the father of that
decree and chapter: no more then a man can be of that child which is borne
fourete^ months after his death. And the Pope, whose bastard in truth the brat
is, by the acknowlegment and record of Papists themselves in the Decretum
Eugenij papoe quarti.
Tomes of Counsels, was so much the more to blame to father it upon the
Council of Florence Praesens, sanc at atque magna et vnivers^ lis Synodus.
the great and general council, and Florentiaei^ publica sessione Synodali
solennitercele brata.
date it in a public solemn session thereof; Because neither was it debated
in the Council whether marriage after divorcement for adultery were lawful
or no; and the Synod Florent sess. ult.
Eastern bishops mainteyned it to be lawful, when the Pope after the end of
the Council did reprove them for it: neither is it likely the contrary was
decreed by all there present of the west. Chiefly seeing that more the^ half of
them were gone when both parts the East and West, subscribed to the decrees of
the Council in the letters of agreement: as appears by conferring In proamio
their number with Sess. ult.
their names and the note thereof. Yea the Council being ended the sixth of
Iulie, had their subscriptions added unto it the one and twentieth. Then if of
seve^ score or perhaps upward, scarce threescore were remaining at Florence,
fourteen days after the Council ended: What may we think there were above
four months after? But how many soever were present of the West, as the There
are about o^ by shops seas in Italy, Leand. Al^ert in descript, Italy.
Pope can quickly muster an hundred Bishops or more, if need be out of Italy
alone, Eneas Sylv^us de ge^^s Basiliensis council. lib. Cla^dius Esp^ceus in
epist ad Titam cap 1.
to carry away things in Council by multitude of voices, such policy has he
used for that; but how many soever Italians he banded to countenance his
decree, the Bishops of the East agreed not thereto, neither was it the
Counsels act. Thus all the Fathers of the Eastern churches, whom Bellarmin
alleges, and may urge with creditt their doctrine touching marriage, do not
only not say with him, but gainsay him. Wherein their have so many others
follow them from age to age till our time, that it is apparent they allow
with greater consent a ma^s marriage after divorcement for adultery then
Fathers of the western churches disallow it. For Hist. eccl lib. 4 cap. 17.
Eusebius treating of Iustine the Martyr sets forth with the same praise
that he had done, the story of the Christian woman, who divorced her self
from her adulterous husband. And S. Can 9. et 21.
Basils canons approved by Synod sext. in Trull can. 2 c Quoniam (...) Synod,
sept can. 1.
general Councels, do not only authorize the man to marry another, whose
wife is an adulteress, but also check the custom which yielded not like
favor in like case to the woman. And Here Is. ^9.
Epiphanius says (his words are read corruptly, but the sense th^reof is
plain of our side, as Epis in 4 lib decreta p^rt. cap. 7. 6.
Covarruvias grants, Epiphanius therefore says that Seperatio^ being made
for whoredo, a man may take a second wife, or a woman a second husband. And the
same avoucheth Decur graec affect lib ^
Theodoret in effect, affirming that Christ has set down one cause: whereby
the band of Marriage should be dissolved, and wholly rent a sunder, in that he
did except whordom. And a Sext Synod. Constant. no in Trull ca^. 8^ Nomon synap
theisan translated otherwise by some but me^t thus by the council as men^oi
with the antithelis going before it shows, and their use o^ the word Synap
testes Can. 13. d^t. ^ c Q^o^niam
general Council, wherein there were above two hundred and twenty bishops of
the East gathered together, does imply as much; in saying that He, who his
wife 2 having kept the law of wedlock, and being faithful to him, yet
forsakes her and marries another is by Christ's sentence guilty of adultery.
So does ^n prior ad cor. can 7
Oecumenius in applying the precept of abiding unmarried to such as should not
have departed, and in abridging Chrysosto^s words after his manner, whose
scholar ^om cont 7 cap lib.
Bellarmin therefore terms him. So does In math ca. 5
Euthymius Chrysostoms scholar too, in ^harging that man with adultery, who
marries a woman divorced for any cause but whordo^ from her husband. So does
Nicephoras, in copying and commending that out of Eusebius, which he had out of
Justin the Martyr. To be short, the Grecians, Decretum Eugenij ^^pae
which nam Hist eccl. lib 3 cap. 53.
compriseth many nations of the East, all who^ the In p^oaem.
Florentine Council calls the Eastern Church do put the same doctrine
receyved from their ancestors in practice even at this day, allowing married
folk not only, to sperate and divorce themselves in case of adultery but
also to marry others, as Bellarmin confesses. Wherefore his opinion has not
the consent of the Eastern bishops: neither has had it any age since Christ.
Much less can he show the consent of the South Faulus Iovius hist fur t^p.
lib. 18 Fran. (...) Alvar descript Ethi^p. ao ^1
the Aethiopians, and Abessines, or of the Alexan Guaguin in descript. Sarmat.
Europ. Ant. Pessov cap. quib Gr et Rut. a latin. dissent
Moscovites and Russes in the North: both which as they receyved their faith
from the East, so use they like freedom and liberty for this matter. No, not
in the west it self, though he have many thence agreeing with him, yet has he
the general consent of all the Fathers perhaps not of half, if an exact count
might be taken of them. For besides Tertullian, the Council of Eliberis and to
let pass Ambrose) one Bishop of Rome, or more already showed to have thought
that a man being divorced from his wife for her adultery, is free to marry
again: there are of the same mind Divin instit. lib. 6 cap 23 et epis cap 6
Lactantius, In mat. ca. 5.
Chromatius, Can on. 4. in math.
Hilaric, Augustine de adulier co^jug. ad Pollent. lib. 2 cap 1 et lib 2. cap. ^
Pollentius, In Ep^st 1, ad cor cap 7.
the author of the Comentaries in Ambrose his name upon S. Paul's epistles, can
^0.
the first Council of Arles, cau. ^
the counsel of Va^nes, they who either were at or agreed to the Co^^antinop
in Trullo can. 8^. gr 8^ lat.
sixth general counsel the second time assembled Epist 4 ad Bo^sacium
Pope Gregory the third 32. q 7 c. co^cubuisti.
Pope Zachary, the council of cap. 3. et 10. Bu^chard. decretor l6. c. 4^ et
l. 17. cap. 17. et 10.
Worms of 32. q. 7. c. Si quis cum noverca Burchar. lib. 17. c. 17. et 18.
Trybur, of ca. 5 Burchar lib. 17. c. 15.
Mascon, a council alleged by 32. ^ 7. c quae dam
Gratian without name, and other learned men alleged likewise by Sed illudead
cause et quest.
him, ^ Vemens 1. extt. de eo qui cogu consang vxoris suae.
Pope Alexander the third, ^ Quanto. extra. de divo. tljs
Celestin the 3, de concord Euang. cap. 100.
Zachary and Addit 2. ad Lyran in mat. 19.
Paul bishops, the one of Chrysopolis, the other of Burgos, Christ matrimon
instit. et annot. in^. cor cap. 7.
Erasmus, In mat. cap. 9.
Cardinal Cajetan: Tract, de matri quest an proptor crim. adult conj. lib a
vinculo.
Archbishop Catharinus, Enartatim epist ad To c. 7
Naclantus bishop of Clugia, finally the teachers of the reformed churches in
Tindal. on mat 5 Bucer. de regno Christ lib 2. ca 43. P Martyr in 1. cor. 7
Bea^on et?
England, In the confession of their faith pref.
Scotla^t, Luther inarrat. in mat. 5 et cor 7 conf Saxon in Harmo^ conf. sect.
18. art de conj. conf. wirte^b ibid hist. Mag deburg. cent. ^ li. 1 ca. ^,
Ke^nic exam, conc Trident part*
Germany, calvin Instit. Christia^li* 4, ca. 19, ult. eccl. gall, in Harmou
conf.
France and Eccl. Belg. in Harm. co^f. Muscul in mat. 5. Bullin, decad. 2.
sermon, 10. Saeged in lacorcom de divor (...)
other countris, for why should not I name these of our profession and faith
among the Fathers as well as Bellarmin names the Popish council of Tre^t on
the contrary side? But the Papists (will some man peradventure say, do not
grant that all, whom you have rehearsed, were of this opinion. But the Papists
(I answer) do grant that sundry of them were? and such as they grant not,
the light of truth and reason will either make them grant, or shame them for
denying it. As (...)
Sixtus Senensis, namely does deny that Hilarie and Chromantius allow a man to
marry another wife after divorcement: or teach that he is loosed from the
band of matrimony, while his former wife though an adulteress lives. Now
weigh their own words, and it will appear that Sixtus iniurieth them
therein. For In math. cap 5.
Chromatius says that they who having putt away their wives Absq.
fornicationis causa
for any cause save for whor^dom, presume to marry others, do against the
will of God, and are condemned. Wherein, with what sense could he except
whoredom, unless he thought them guiltless, who having put away their wives
for it do marry others? And Can. 4. in Math.
Hilarie affirming Christ to have prescribed no other cause Desinendi^a
conjugio.
of ceasing from matrimony, but that; she weth that the band of matrimony is
loosed thereby in his judgment. Chiefly since he knew that they might cease from
the use thereof, for other causes: and the occasion and tenor of the speech
do argue that he meant of such a separation as yields liberty of new
marriage. In like sort, or rather more plainly and expressly did Pollentius
hold and maintain the same: As Austin (whom in this point he dissented from)
does report and testify. Yet Bellarmin (a strange thing in a case so clear,
but nothing strange to Jesuits) says that Pollentius Non contra dixit
Augustino sed eum consuluit.
did not gainsaie Austin, but asked his judgment of the matter: and for proof
hereof refers us to the beginnings of both the books of Austin. Even De
adult co^jug ad Polle^t. lib 1. cap. ^. et lib. 2. cap 2.
to those beginnings in which it is declared how Austin having labored to
prove that a woman parted from her husband for his fornication might not marry
another, Pollentius wrote unto him Tanquam consulende says Austin. In steedew
e^of, Bellarmin says co^sule^do and drowneth ^anquam.
as it were by way of asking his judgment, and showed he thought the
contrary: yet showed it in such sort, that Austin setting down both their
opinions, does specify then as flatly crossing one the other: You are of this
mind, I of that: and says of Pollentius again and again that Id enim sen
it is and videtur tibi et existimas, and putas, et eft stoones, tibi videtur et
existimas.
he was of this mind, which Bellarmin denies he was of. Wherein the Jesuits
dealing is more shameful, for that beside the evidence of the thing it self so
often repeated in the very same places that he cites Biblioth, sen tae lib.
2. verb. Repudij humani libellus
Sixtus Senenses a man as unwilling as Bellarmin to weaken any of their Trent
points with granting more then he must needs confesses that Pollentius
thought hereof as we do. Belike because Sixtus Senensis honoreth him with the
praise and title of a Pollentium. religiosissimum vi^um.
most godly man: Bellarmin thought it better to lie, then to grant that they
have such an adversary. He would feign avoid too another ancient father
bearing the name of Ambrose; and In epist. (...) cap. ^.
Ambrose might his name be, though he were not famous Ambrose Bishop of Milan.
But whether he were named so, or otherwise (which As it is probably gathered.
out of Austin cont, duas epistolas Pelagian lib. 4. cap 4
perhaps is truer) unto his testimony pronouncing it lawful by S. Paul's
doctrine for a man justly divorced to marry again (though not for a woman, as
he, by missetaking S; Paul, through error, In epist. (...) cap. ^.
though Bellarmin replieth with a threefold answer. First ^^ 9. 7. d sed illud.
Gratian (says he) and Peter lib. 4. sent. did. 35.
Lombard do affirm that those words were thrust into this authors
Commentary, by some corrupters of writings. Indeed the one of them affirms:
dicitur,
it is said so; the other, creditur.
it is thought so. But if it be sufficient to affirm barely, without any
ground of proof or probability, that it is said or thought so: what error so
absurd that may not be defended by perverse wranglers? what cause so unjust,
that unrighteous judges may not geve sentence with? For whatsoever words be
enforced against them out of the law of God or man, out of any evide^ce or
record of writers and witnesses worthy credit: they may with Peter Lombard and
Gratian reply that the place alleged is said or thought to have been thrust
into those momuments by some corrupters of writi^gs. And in replying thus they
should speak truly, though it were said or thought by none beside
themselves: but how reasonably they should speak therein, let men of sense and
reason judge. Surely though Peter Lombard rest upon that answer; for want of
a better, yet Gratian (whether fearing the sickly state thereof) does leave
it, and seeks himself a new patron, saying that Ambrose words are thus meant,
that a man may lawfully marry another wife after the death of the
adulteress, but not while she lives, which answer is more absurd then the
former. In so much that Epis* in 4 lib decretal par 2 cap. y. 5. 6
Covarruvias speaking of the former only as uncertain, says that this
repugneth manifestly to Ambrose. A very true verdict, as a^ie man not blind
may see by Ambrose words: And Bellarmin confesses the same in effect, by
passing it over insilence as ashamed of it. But others (says he secondly)
do answer that this author speaks of the Civil law, the law of Emperors:
To weete, that by the Emperors Laws it is lawful for men, but not for women,
having put away their mate, to marry another: and that Paul therefore least he
should offend the Emperor 1. cor. 7. 1.
would not say expressly. If a man put away his wife, let him abide so or be
reconciled to his wife. Now Gratians second answer was no less worthy to have
been mentioned, then this of Panopl, Evang lib. 3. (...) 95.
William Lindan, patched up by Bellarmin. For the s ^. D. de divort et. repud,
^ si ex lege ad lege^ sul de adul^ l Co^sensu^ si constan ^e c. de repudijs.
civil law pronounces the band of marriage to be loosed as well by
divorcement as by death: and allows women to take other husbands, their
former being put away, as it allows men to take others wives. So that it is
a fond and unlearned conceit to imagine that Paul would not say of husbands as
he did of wives, least he should offend the Emperor by speaking expresselie
against that which his law allowed. For 1. cor. 7. 11.
he did expressly control the Empero^rs law in saying of the wife. If she
depart from her husband, let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled to her
husband. And the authors words do show that he meant to speak, not of
human laws, but of divine: of the sacred scripture wherevpo^ he wrote, and
what was thereby lawful. Which seemed so evident unto, Instit sacerd ca de
Matrim Lect. 3.
Peter Soto, Biblioth sare lib. 6. annot 8
and^ Sixtus Senesis, and Annot. in cap. v^ot. a vro. 32. 97.
the Roman Censors, who oversaw Pope Gregory the thirtenths new edition of the
Cannon law, that they confess that Ambrose (meaning this author) does aprove
plainly, certainly, vndoubtely, men's liberty of marrying again after
divorcement. Bellarmin therefore coming in with his third answer. Yet says
he if these be not so well liked, it may be answered easily: that the author
of those Commentaries is not Ambrose, nor any of the renowned Fathers, Quod
er^di^i non ignorant.
as learned men know. Thus at length this author, if men will not believe that
his words are corrupted, or that he spoke of the Civil law, shall be
granted us with Bellarmins good leave: But then we shall be told that he is
not Ambrose, nor any of the renowned Fathers as learned men know. And why
could not Bellarmin answer this at first? Why was he so loath to grant that
such an author, base, obscure of sclender credit, makes with us? Herein there
lies a mystery. There is In epist. 1. ad Tim cap. 3.
in this authors Commentaries a place, a Cujushodie ^actor est Da^^^^.
piece of a sentence, which seems to speak for the Popes Supremacy: Though
perhaps never written by this author, or not with that meaning, as I have
showed elsewhere. To. 2. conte. ^ lib. 1 cap 6.
Bellarmin had cited that place for that in Beatus Ambrosius where by he meneth
famous Ambrose, bishop of M^^a^ as the quotatio^s following show.
S. Ambrose his name: and The English college of Rheimes. Annot. on 1. tim. 3.
15
ma^ie make a feast thereof, as being sure S. Ambroses. Now if he should say,
that the author of those Commentaries was neither Ambrose nor Saint: he
should gainsaie himself. And since he was learned, when he did cite it so, and
therefore knew (by his own words) that it was not Ambrose nor any of the
renowned fathers who writ it: men would see thereby, that he had for the
Popes sake against his own knowledge, fathered on S, Ambrose that which is not
his. No marveil then if Bellarmin came to this answer as a bear to the
stake. At the which though he seem to cast us o^, by saying that the author
was no renowned Father, and erred in mistaking S. Paul, as having geven more
liberty to men then women, wher^of in due place afterward: yet in the mean
season he is forced to grant that this ancient Father took it to be lawful
for men to marry again after divorcement for adultery. The sundry evasions
and shifts whereby the Papists have labored to wrest the credit of this one
^ather out of our hands, do geve me occasion to suspect that they will
wrangle much more to withdraw from us the first Council of Arles Held in
Constantins time about the year^ of Christ. 3^0
being more ancient in time, in credit greater, and (as Bart caran^^ in somma
co^ciliorum.
one of themselves does probably conjecture) confirmed by the Pope also.
Hereunto the Councels wishing of certain persons not to marry in the case we
treat of might serve them for a color in as much as Can. 10.
it says concerning them whose wives are taken in adultery, that if they be
young men and forbidden to marry, Confiliu^ eis detut.
advise should be given them, as much as may be not to take other wives while
the former live, though adulteresses. But this giving of advise is in truth an
argument that the council judged a man no adulterer, if he took another
wife. Else would they have given not advise and counsel, but charge and
commandment to refrain from it; and (as it is likely) restrained men's
transgression therein with sharp discipline, spetially considering can. 3. 4.
57. ^ 1. 12. et 14.
they punish lesser faults with excommunication. Neither it is nothing that
they temper also this counsel and advise to be geven such, with In quantum
potest.
as much as may be. And a farther circumstance yet of more importance, they make
not this restraint for all men, but for Adolescenses exprohibentes. nubere.
young men: nor for all young me^, but such as are forbidden to marry: meaning
(as it seems) those who being under the care of their parents were by them
forbidden, and could not honestly disobey. For had not this respect or the
like moved the Fathers of the Council, why should they have restrained such
young men and not other? Nay, why only young men, not rather men, not aged men,
or them also? Since in 1. Tim. 5. 9
Scripture elder women are chosen to be widows, and younger willed to marry.
Our adversaries therefore must yield that the Council of Arles is of our side
for the point in question. Whereto they shall have greater reason to induce
them, if they note with all that the Council, Vanatle, in Gallia ^und. 2.
Council of Vannes in the same country, About the year of Christ 460.
the age following made this canon. We appoint and ordeine, that they who
having l^ft their wives, except for whoredom (as it is said in the Gospel) or
upon proof made of adultery, marry others, shall be excommunicated; Least
(...).
sins being suffered by our too much gentleness do provoke other men to
loosenes of transgressing. And this decree I find not any of the Papists that
goes about to shift of* Neither can I see how they may possibly: The Council
expounding so plainly Christ's words of marriage forbidden after divorcement
unless it be for whoredom, and accompting marriage after such divorcement not
a lesser sin, but no sin at all, as the reason added for strength of their
decree shows, Now for the next, the general Council assembled in the
Emperors palace of Con^^antinople which made the like decree and taught the
same doctrine, as I have declared: Bellarmin would persuade us (upon other
occasions touching Popery nearer the quick, then this does) that the western
Bishops neither gave countenaun^e thereto with their presence, nor approved the
Canons thereof with their consent. To this end he denies that the said
Council was a general Council, and striveth in his De To. pont, lib. 2. cap.
27
third controversy to answer some of our reasons which confirm it. But he
eases us of pains to fifth his aunsweres by means that himself in the De
eccles mi lit. lib. 1. cap 7
fourth controversy, discoursing of general councels purposelie, does recke^
it amongst the^. For as in l. fin, D. de constitut princip^m.
men's laws when they are repugnant one unto another, the later derogateth from
the former: so (I trow) when Bellarmin does contradict himself, his last word
must hold. And the more reason it should so in this, because both lib. 1 d^
imaginib. ad Carol Magn c^p. 35 post N^^caen synod 2. et ejus synod^ act 2.
Pope Adrian the first of ancient time did call it the sixth Council,
declaring thereby he took it to be one of the Ge^eral Councils whereof he
termed it the sixth, and in Nicaen synod. 2. act. 4. et 6.
the seventh general Council sundry Fathers alleged it by the name of the
sixth General, and avouched it to be justly called so. Which sentence of
theirs being not controled by any of that Council, and the Nicaen. synod. a.
can. 1.
Council it self afterward approving the decrees and Canons of the six
general Councels: it is very probable that the western churches yielding
their consent to the seave^th Counsel, and taking it for sound, accounted (as
Zonaras et Balsamon prae fat. in synod 6 Nilus et Batla am de pr^matu Papae
C^sura orientatis eccels. c. ult.
the Eastern still have done and do) that which they entitled the sixth to be
General. Specially seeing that in the West, men of great credit Decreti part
4. c. 121. et sequent
Ivo and Did 16. c. Habeo libr^^.
Gratian and c A multis extra de aetat. et qualit et. ord. prae^iciend.
Pope Innocentius the third and their disciples, the whole school of
Cannonists have on those authorityes of the seventh Council made like
reckoning of it. And although our younger papists for the most part and some of
the elder, perceyving what advantage may be taken thence against many grounds
of popery, do cross their predecessors herein with Urged by Bellarmin of
Canus etc. lib. 2. de Rom pont cap. ^7.
seely reasons, such as where of the b^st would infer more forcibly that
their Council of Trent was no General Council: yet among the^ also there are
who allow the ancient opinyon, as In su^ma co^cilioru^, chro^ograph. lib. 3.
co^cilioru^ co^sta^tinopolitanum finitur sub Justinian. Rhinotmeto colectis
227, episcopis in eius palatio. The one of coolen in to^ ^ the other at Venice
in 5.
Caranza namely, andf Genebrard and Surius, with whose preface te^ding to the
proof thereof it is recommended and published by papists in the two 5 perfitst
and last editions of the Councels. Wherefore whether any of the West were
present in person, or by deputyes, prefat. syn 6 ad ^ustinian.
and subscribed to it which 9 Balsamon and de prim^^ (...)
Nilus, learned Greek Fathers avouch by old records; or whether it were
celebrated by Eastern bishops only, as the Thod, Hist, eccles lib. 5 c. 7, 9,
second General Council also was in the same City of Constantinople the
consent of the west approving it for General averreth my sayings by a cloud
of witnesses of the western Churches. Pope Gregory the third follows, epist
4. ad ^onif, 32. q 7, equod propo^u^^.
He grants that if a woman by reason of sickness wherewith she were taken
could not perform the duty of a wise to her husband, her husband might put her
away and marry another. More then by the doctrine of Christ he had learned to
grant for any sickness: but so much the likelyer that he thought it should be
granted for whoredom expressly mentioned by Christ. Whereupon (...) eccles ^l
^. 2 sect, 2.
Ioverius a Sorbonist in a work approved by Sorbonists, matcheth his Canon
with the like of Councels, who gave the Innocent party leave to marry again
after divorcement, while the other lived. Neither does Bellarmin deny the
illation, but the proposition, which the point inferred is grounded upon. For
the Doctors (says he mea^ing the Canonists) expound the Canon of such
sickness as makes a woman unfit for Marriage: and so is an impediment
disolving matrymonye contracted, by showing it was no true matrimonye. But the
Doctor of Doctors sed illud. Qua^vis 3., q7 nubat,
Gratian himself understood it otherwise; of sicknsse befalling to her, who was
an able wife. And those his gloss writers use most that exposition which
Bellarmin would have us recieve for authentic as the fittest salve; yet rest
vel intellige vel dic. In c quod proposuisti verbo
they not upon it. And Hist, part 2, tit. ^ Ca^. 1, quamvis. where he names
Englshme^ in sted of Germans, and Gregorye the 1. instead of Gregory the 3 or
2, as Antonins took it.
Antonius a great Canonist: Archbishop of Florence correctingp Gratians slipp
of memory for the persons, concludes with him for the matter. And the flower
of Lovan Explicat articul. Lovan. art. 19.
Tapper, the Chauncelour of their viniversity, approves this of Antonius. And
Co^cilior, To^. 3. annotat mar. ad liu^c locum,
the learned men who were overseers of the last edition of the Councels do
witness by co^trolling it as a thing which now the Church observes not' Istuc
he die ecclesiae non servat.
that Gregory meant of sickness happ^ning unto lawful wives in their
judgment And the Pope himself (as Tom 1 cont 3 lib. 4 Cap 12. 3. q^. c.
concubuisti.
Bellarmin noteh else where) declares that he took it to be true matrymonie,
by saying that the man ought not to bereave the former wife of aid, that is,
ought to maynteyne, and find her as his wife still. Wherefore if no Catholic
bishop would imagine that a man may lawfully put away his sick wife, and marry
another, unless he thought the same much more to be lawful in an adulterous
wife, as we are to presume: then must the Papists by consequent acknowledge
that the point in Question is prooved and allowed by Gregory the third. A
playner and directer allowance thereof, appears in a Canon of his successor t
Zachary, who when a certain man had defiled himself incestiously with his
wives sister, granted that his wife should be divorced from him: and (unless
she were privy to that wicked act by counsayling or procuring it) might marry
in the Lord if she could not contain. This so clear a testimony of an About
the year of Christ 740
ancient Pope authorizing the divorced woman to marry, Bellarmin would elude,
by saying that he meant she might marry another, after the former husbands
death. As who say, the Pope inioyning the Sinespe co^jugij permane atis.
man and the whore for a punishment to stay and abide without hope of marriage,
were likly to mea^e by liberty of marriyng granted the guyltlesse for a
benefit, that while the guilty lived, who might overlive her, she should not
marrye no more then he. Or as though there had been need for the Pope then to
grant it with exception, Si se continere no^ vult.
If she will not contain Let her marry in the Lord. Whereby it seems that
he rather wished her to refrain from marriage, if she might be induced
thereto, which he had no cause to wish on this occasion after the man's death,
she being v then simply free, 1. Cor. 7 39
and willed to marry 1. Tim. 5. 14
such might her age be. But what do I reason out of the circumstances in a
thing so certain and clear of it self, that although the Peter Loma^nd
Gratian.
great masters whom Bellarmin alleged before and followed here, have assayed
to darken the light thereof by this mist: Biblioth fa^ct ^^b. 6. Annotat. 8.
yet Sixtus Senensis confesses that Pope Zachary decreed that the women if
she would not contain, should marry another husband while the former lived.
It is true that Sixtus seeks to help the matter another way somewhat, by
yoking the Pope with provincial Councels: who (he says) allowed and decreed
it, not by a general and perpetual ordinance, but for a time, and to certain
nations; and that in such heinous crimes as incest only, But will the Papists
stand to this doctrine, that the Popes decrees bind not al nations generally,
nor are perpetually to last? The^ must they acknowledge (which would touch the
Papacy and Popery verry nearly) that the Popes supremacy is falsely
pretended, he has his certain limits as Metropolitanes have: and some will
reason also that the laws of Popes were to last for a time until Luther rose,
but for a time only, there date is out now. As for the crime of incest,
whereupon the Pope allowed the innocent party to put away her husband and to
marry another: that confirms rather the point in Question then disproveth
it. For he had no warrant to allow this by, but our Matthew. 9^
Saviors doctrine forbidding such divorcement, except it were for whoredom: so
that he might not have granted it for incest, unless he had thought it
lawful for adultery; Exodus 20. 14 Math. 5. 28.
Neither did he consider the crime but as comprised under adultery too:
Whereof (in a general sense meant by the adultera.
law) incest is a kind. And therefore in speaking of her with whom the
detestable act was committed, he termed her ^ cap. ^ B^rch ^rd decretor. ^ib.
c. cap 41.
the Adulteress not the incestious person. Thus it is apparent, that in this
matter Pope Zachary was no papist. No more was the Council of c Worms which
showed their judgment to the like effect to weet, that a man who could prove
his wife to have been of counsel with such as sought his death, might put her
away and marry another if he would. Presuming that belike, which they might
justly, as of Livia Drusi in Cornelius Tacitus M^es A^den Mres Sanders in our
English Chroniclas.
examples teach us, that she was naught of her body with some of the
conspiracy. For else had the Council expressly authorized the same that Math
19 9
Christ conde^neth, if for any other cause then for adultery they had allowed
the man to marry. Therefore Epit in 4. lib. decretal. part 2. cap. 7. D. 6.
Covaruvias reckons Elibertnuom he call thit through an error of ^ouie
dit^ o^ of Gratian.
up this Council among the^ who held that a man having lawfully put away his
wife for her whoredom, might take another while she lived. Yet a certain
Spanish Friar named Raymund, one of Pope Gregory the nynthes special
State-men, the compiler of his Decretals, cap. Si qua mu. ser extra de
divortijs,
would avoid it also after Gratians manner, by false exposition as if the
Council had meant, a man might take another wife after the death of the
former. To the more effectual persuading whereof, that questionless they
meant so: he uses a special trick of popish cunning. For, making show of
registering the Councels own decr^e, in steed of those words Potest ipsa^
uxorem di^it tere e., si vosuerit al^^m ducare^
He may put away his wife and marry another, if he will: the Friar sets
down these Potest ipse potest axoris li voluer^t alid ducere
He may after his wives death marry annother, if he will. And whereas the
Council had said, Vt vobis videtur.
as we think, which words had been absurdely put in, if they hadd meant after
his wives death he might marry another, a thing agreed on and undoubted: The
Friar (as thieves are wont to deface and suppress the marks of things which
they have stolen, least they be taken thereby) leaves that clear out. But by
the mouth of two witnesses Dere^or. lib 6. cap. 41.
Burchardus Bishop of worms, and ^i, ua mul^e^ 3. q. 1.
Gratian or (...) it were a Cardinal or other author so named: as they who
wrote the notes on Gratian of Gregory the 13 editio^ al^ag out of sundry
lawiers that it was praesoliu^ lect sacer ec^lessiast. class. sect ^ praemo^
it. de Can. Conc apud Vermer.
Palea, both elder then the Friar, and from whom of likelyhod he received this
Canon of the Council of Worms his false and irreligious dealing is bewrwayed.
Whereto may the confession of the third be added, though in years younger, yet
greater in credit for things against Papists, himself a popish Doctor and
burning light of Paris, i Ioverius I mean: who says of that Council, that it
allowed the innocent party to marry again after divorceme^t, the other being
yet alive. And the Council it self makes farther proof that they are not
unjustly charged by Ioveruis and Covariuvias with this judgment.

For if any man had committed wickedness with his daughter in law, the
daughter of his wife by her former husband: cap 10. Butchard. lib. 17. cap. 10.
they agreed that he should keep neither of the^: but his wife might marry
another if she would, if she could not conteyne and if she had not carnal
company with him, after that she knew of his adultery with her daughter. The
last clause whereof shows that they meant of liberty granted her to take
another husband while the former lived: since it cannot be thought with reason,
but they judged she might take another the former b^ing d^ad: though she had
continnued with him as his wife, after she knew of his adultery. The 32. p.
7. c. fi Quis cum No verca.
Council of Tribur did maynteyne the same: ordeyning that if any committed
vilany with his mother in law, her husband may take another wife if he will,
if he cannot contain: and the like order is to be observed, if with his
daughter in law or his wives sister. Bellarmin like the Horat de art Poet.
paynter, who being good at purtraing of a Cypress tree, when one gave him
money to draw and represent a shipwreck in a table asked if he would have a
Cypress in, dispairing to do ought worth perhaps, unless that helped: says
that all such Canons (all not only this of the Triburian Council) are
understood of marriage granted to the innocent party after the death of the
former wife or husband. An answer no fitter for this and all such Canons, then
a Cypress tree is for a shipwreck, as those of Pope Zachary and the Council
of worms the former whereof he garnisheth also with this Cypress tree, do
argue. For the same reasons which proved Zacharies Can on to be meant of the
woman's marriage while the man lived, prove the Council of Triburs to be
likewise meant of of the man's in the woman's life-tyme. The punishment inflicted
therein Neuter ad co^jugiu^ potest pervenire
on the offe^ders do equally enlarge the benifit to the Innocent. The si se
co^tinere non potest
exception added to the enlargeme^t, is stronger: implying they would have him
stay unmarried rather, if he can conteyne. The testimonye of n Sixtus is all
one for both: neither does the quallity of the crime of incest more infringe
the argument here then it did there. And this extenuation that the Council
beeng a provincial Council ordained it for men of their own province, and
for that time only, increases the authority thereof, if the precious be
severed from the vile, the truth from the falsehood. For why affirms he that
they did ordeyn it for that time only? The form of their decree touching Si
quis dormie^ it
all generally that should offend so, not some particular person, who presently
had; they speaking of the thing as Potest for id ^ossumus qu^d ^ureposssu^us
lawful in it self, and Sim literob se^andu^ est.
to be observed alike in like cases; their making of cap 1. et 1. Burchard
lib 7. cap 7. et 18.
other Canons to that effect: yea Council. Tribur, can. 4^.
another Council also peradventure, and no limitatio^ of time in any of them;
do persuade the contrary. Now, whereas they ordained it for men of their own
province, their modesty was the greater: who did not take upon them as Popes to
make laws for men of all nations, but looked as Bishops to their own diosaes.
And the greater modesty, the liker to Math 11 29
Christ, and the better to be liked of Collo^ 3 12
Christians, the more reverence to be Anachor. apud B^dam lib ^ccles, hist.
ge^t Anglo^ cap ^.
heard with, and their judgment had in greater estimation. Beside that, this
self-same decree of theirs was establyshed also by cap 1 Butehard 7. cap 1.
the Council of Worms.

And ^9. 42. c. Si quis in genuus
at that time Pipinus (King of France, and of a great part of Germany) was
present. Who as he did keep a general assembly of his people In wormatia
civita^e Almein de gestis Francor. lib. 4. cap 66.
there: so by all likelyhoode called Bishops thither out of his whole realm,
to make decrees for the whole. A province of such largeness, that Council
Carthag 4. et Milevet in (...) conc. African. Epist. ad Celestin Co^c Tolet 3.
cap. 18
Counsels consisting of Bishops assembled, out of no greater, have been
termed General: and woorthely (as Tom. contr, 4, lib (...) cap. 4
Bellarmin confesses) in comparison of Provincial Counsels commonly so
called, wherein there were not Bishops of a whole Nation or Realm. Thus Sixtus
by striving to lessen and diminish the credit of the cano^ of the counsel of
Tribur, has give^ us occasion to make the more of it: considering on the one
side the modesty of the Bishops who were assembled there, and made decrees for
their province; on the other the Province which that decree was made for, so
large that all the Provinces of Italy cannot match it, though they were
lincked in one. Had it not been better for him, with out this Retorique to say
directly and flattly as Sanction. ecce^s, clasi 2. sect 2. ad Come ve^in.
Ioverius does, that the Council of Tribur made the like decre to the Council
of worms, which now the Church (he means the Popish Church) receyveth not?
whether any Papist will take excptio^ against the Council of Mascon, cap. ^
Bur^hard lib. ^ cap. 15.
which allowed likewise a certain man, whose wife had been defloured by his
brother before he wedded her to put her away and marry another it may be we
shall know hereafter. But unto a Council that made another such decree, as 32
q 7 c. Quaedam
Gratian shows alleging it without name, Bellarmin takes two exceptions:
one, that it is lost; the other of the Cypress tree. Touching the former, not
as much as the name thereof (says he) is extant: therefore it might be easily
contemned and set at naught. Why? Is it therefore worse then all that have
names, because it is namelesse? Then have Cardinal Pole Sadoset contaren er
consdele^ card. conc. lior To^. ult. Baptist Mantuan Syl. lib. 1. ed. ult Erasm
adag. Qui probet Atne niensis.
many Cardinals with other learned reverent men been much to blame, for
writing so of Rome as if it had a number of wicked lewd profane in-habitants.
For by there report the Romans having everye one a name or two, should be
worse for the most part, then were the Atlantes, a people of Afric, whom
Biblioth, hist. lib ^
Diodorus Siculus commends very heighly for Godlynes and Humanity, yet non
of the^ had any name, In Melp^m
Herodotus says. Or if this be a fable, as Hist. natura. lib 5. Cap 8.
Apoe^egm Lacon. and ^aconar
Pliny seems rather to think, and well it may be; yet is it most certain
that ^ Plutarch records as grave and wise sayings of Lacedemonyans without
names, as of any whose names are known. And Bellarmin (I trust) will grant
that in the scriptures there is no less account to be made of the book of
Joshua, then of Nehemias, of Job, the^ of the Proverbs: though their names who
wrote the one be not set down, as theirs who wrote the other. But he will
say perhaps that of this Council not only the name is unknown, but also the
work it self lost. And what if it be? were not de civit, Del lib 9, cap 2
those of Varroes works, which we have not, as learned as the work Dominicus
Floceus Floren tinus ser forth under the nam of L (...) and sacerd it is Romainis
of Floccus which we have? Of Tullie, of Polybius, of Livie, Dio, Tacitus, of
infinite writers more, are there not as good books lost, as there are extant.
The writers of the Notes on Gregory's ed^tion-xtra de and qui c^gn consangu
uxoris suae, ^si quis verbo Metiam.
The same has fallen out in Eclesiasticall authors specially in Councels:
whereof a great many are not to be found: as they who by occasion of Canons
cited thence in the Decrees and Decretals, have dilligently searched through
the chiefest liberaaies of Europe, do note. And a certain famous and ancient
Council of Ments being commended and praised above the other, by chro mo^ast.
hirsan^g.
Tretenius and Surius, ^ co^cilior. rom 3 post syuod. Mogu^t sub Rubano.
who wishes he might have gotten it to be publyshed, shows that some
extant, are not to be compared with some that are lost, wherefore Bellarmins
former exception to the Council that it is not extant, no nor the name of it,
was not worth the nameing. The latter that the Councels Canon was meant of
Marriage after the former wives death: is like to prove as false as the proof
thereof is frivolous and fond. For quedam 32 ^ 7,
these are the words of the Canon: A certain woman lay with her husbands
brother: it is decreed the adulterers shall never be Married: but lawful
Marriage shall be granted unto him, whose wife the vilenie was wrought with.
Which words are well expounded (says Bellarmin) by the Doctors, and their
meaning gathered c, Hist vero eadem quaect.
out of the like Canon following a little after: wherein it is ordained, that
When the adulterous wife is deceassed, her man may marry whom he will; but
her self the adulteress may not marry at all, no not her husband being dead.
Gratian in deed, and the Glosse-writers on him (the Doctores meant by
Bellarmin) does them wrong in saying they expound it rightly. For this Cano^
following, out of which they gather that to be the meaning, being a Canon of I
know not what Gregory, at least Fathered on him, does noe more prove it then
quod prop^ suisti, ead. q
the above alleged Canon of Gregory the third permitting marriage to the
innocent party while the other lived, does infer the contrary. And the
Counsels words mentioning expressly the Innocent parties freedom and liberty
to marry, which had been superfluous if they meant of marriage after the others
death: make it most probable that the Council uttered them with the same
meaning, wherewith others uttered the like, as has been showed. Hereunto the
judgment of Bibl, Sanct lib, ^ an not^^ under the name of Synodus ^ libe^ima
the author t^es thought of this Canon
Sixtus Senensis does add no small weight, since he albeit striving to weaken
the strength and cut the sinews of it, acknowledges notwithstanding that it
was of one mind with the council of Tribur. ^ e Veniens. 1. de eo qui cog
co^sang. ^ ^xoris suae
So was Pope Alexander the third too some time, though Bellarmin allege Ex
part extra de spo^s et matrim.
him as of another mind. But let Bellarmin say whether he had two minds and
erred in on of them: seeing it is certain he was of this mind once, unless
he wrote against his mind. For where as a man that had wedded a wife, did,
before he entered the marriage bed with her, enter her mothers bed: Pope
Alexander said, that he doing some penance might be dispensed with to
marry another wife. Here the Popes favor toward the offender; does favor of
that which Fran^ Victoria relect 4 omne^ qui petunt afferunt dispe^sationes. In
petunt Lee co^priseth pendunt, Cie in ver lib. ^ et. ^.
has been missliked in Papal dispensations. But he that granted thus much to
the incestuous husband, would (I trust) have granted it to the guiltless
wife: as Epist Alexand. (...). ad pict. episc Append Conc, Lateran.
he did also to her that had this injury. The only evasion whereto a
Bellarminian might by his Masters example have recourse, is that the Canonists
expound the Popes words not of a wife but of a spouse, and her espoused also by
words of the time to come, not of the time present.

Which exposition may seem the more probable, because the Popes words set
down in the Decretalls geve her the name of spouse without signification that
the man had wedded her. But hereof Friar Raymund who compiled and clipped the
Decretalls must bear the blame, as Annot^t. de varijs decretal. Epist.
co^pilat e^^in praesat Gregorij noni.
Antonius Contius a learned Lawier of their own has well observed. For the
Popes Epistle which is extant whole in the Appe^d Co^c Later sub Alexand. tert.
part 12. cap. 4.
Tomes of Councels, declares that the woman was the man's wedded wife, though
he did forbear her company a while. No remedi^e there-fore but it must be
granted, that in this matter Pope Alexander the third subscribed to the former
Councels. Now by all the rest whom I aleaged there is none excepted against by
any Papist, for ought that I know, or as I think will be. For Diomar
Institut lib 6. cap. 23.
Lactantius first avoucheth, so the lawfulnes of putting away ^ ma^s wife for
adultery even with intent to marry another that both Epit. (...) lib. 4.
Decretal. part. 2, cap. 7. D. 6.
Covaruvias and In 4. sent. did. 36. art. 6.
Dominicus Soto grant him to be clear from it. Next c. Quedam sententiam
Ambrosij servare cupie^tes 32. q 7. Sed illud.
touching the authors mentioned by Gratian as holding the same for one kind
of adultery: who doubted but there were certain so persuaded, when such an
adversary confesses it. Then for Pope Celestin the third, since Innocent, the
third cap. Quan^o extra de divortiis.
a Pope says he thought that a man or wife might lawfully forsake their
parteners in wedlock for haerisie, and marry others: I see not how the Papist
may deny he thought it lawful for adultery, more then I showed they might of
Gregory the third. And albeit De concord. Eva^g cap. 109.
Zachary bishop of Chrysopolis, may seem to show rather what other men's
opinion was, then what his own, yet it is apparent by his manner of handeling
that he joined with In epist. ad cor cap. 7.
Ambrose therein, whose words he cites, and fenseth them against authorities,
that might be opposed. As for the Bishop of Burgos, Paul commended heighly by
Aust Steuc. recogn vet. Test ad ver Hebr. in Gen 37 Sixth seue^s bibl. Sanct.
lib. 4.
learned men for learning, Addit. 2. ad ly^ in M^ ^9
he says that it is manifest by Christ's doctrine, that whosoever puts away
his wife for whoredom, commiteth not adulterye though he marry another. Enarat
in epist ad Rom cap. 7.
Naclantus, who was present at the Council of Trent, a Bishop of principal
name and price among them, affirms as directly, that a wife being losed from
her husband by death or by divorcement, is not an adulteress if she marry
another. To conclude Bellarmin confesses that Erasmus, Caietan, Catharinus,
Luther, Melancton, Bucer Calvin, Brentius, Kemnitius, Peter Martyr, and in
aworde all Lutherans and Calvinists, (as it pleases this Roman Tertullus to
name us poor Act^ 24. 5.
Nazarens) agree that our Savior does allow marriage after divorcement for
adultery, Howbeit fearing much what a deadly wound he might geve his cause
by granting that Erasmus, Caietan, Catharinus three so learned men, and two of
the^ such pillars of the Romish Church a Cardinal and an Arch bishop agree in
this point with Lutherans and Caluinicts: he adds that those three differ
much from these hertiques (mea^ing By heretics the Nazarens I spoke of, Te^
ton Nazora^en (...) protestatia
whose ringleader was Paul) in as much as they submitt themselves expressly
to the churches judgment. And because the church (says he) has now opened
her mind most evidently, as appears by the Counsel of Tre^t the 24. sessio^
the 7 Cano^, where all who think the band of marriage may be loosed for any
cause are acursed: therefore it seems that those three also, and chiefly the
two later, must be thought no otherwise minded in this matter, the^ reliquoru^
omiu^ The o^og or catholicoru^ co^munissima sente^
all the rest of the Catho-Divines are and have been with great agreement and
consent. which dispute of Bellar. if it have sufficient ground and strength of
reason Erasmus must be counted a catholic in all things For Vbiqne test atu^
esse volumus nos nusquam a iudicio ecclae catholicae velungue aut digit um
latu^ velle descedere. Quod si quid usquam ejus modideprehe^datur id jam nu^c
pro^ecantat volumus haberi, In capitu^ Arg ume^t, co^tt. moros^s quosdam et
indoctos prefix nov Test. excus cu^ Aunot. edict 4. et 5 Ibide^ in 1. cor. 7.
ad hu^c ipsu^ locu^ semper inquit illabefacto. eccl catholicae uidicio
in all his writings he submits himself to the churches judgment. The^ why
does To^, ^. co^t, ^, lib. l. c. ^.
Bell. call him a demie Christian, ex semichristia^. l. To^. 2. Iud. sectar. and
haeret.
and enrol his name among sectaries and hertiques? what are the Fathers of the
Counsel of Tre^t Demie-christia^s, sectaries, heretics; thy are (by Bellar.
logique) of one mind with Erasmus. Moreover S. Austin the ciefeft man of
Bellar. side in this question must be counted ours by the same logique. For de
Bapt co^t. Do^a. lib 2, c^.
he taught expressly that himself; yea any bishop eve^ S, Cipria^, yea
provincial Cou^c. too, should yield to the authority of a general Cou^. And the
6 general Cou^. granted liberty of marriage after divorcme^t, as has been
declared: wherefore if Caieta^ must be thought no otherwise minded then Papists
are, because that church whose judgment he did submitt himself to, defined so
at Tre^t In the year 1563. caj^tan being dead a 30 years before Sixtus
se^e^st^ bib sact. lib. 4.
a good while after his death: S. Astin must be thought no otherwise minded
the^ we are, because our assertion was confirmed likewise by a General
Counsel, whereto he would have yielded. Chiefly since of liklyhood he would
have more easily yielded theru^to, the^ Caietan to his churches because In Mat.
16.
Caieta^ shows he was stiff in holding fast his own opinion, Quon am no^
audeoopponerem^ co^tra torte^ e^ doctrou^ and ^u d^ticru^ ecclsiasticoru^,
idio^ dixi etc'
when for fear of Church-me^ he durst not say all that he thought; and in this
very point, though prefat co^^ntarior. in Eva. ad clement 7
submitt^ig himself to the Sea of Rome as well as to the church, In Math. 19
he eludeth decrees of ex part extra de spons, et matrim. ^ga^^ deam^, de di
vortiis.
popes that make against him, Epist 7 ad Marcellin. and prolog retract
so resolute he was in it. Sr. Austin contrariwise used very modestly and
willingly to retract things that he had written, eve^ when Retract lib. 2 cap,
18.
he lighted on ought in an heretic that seemed better and truer, and this
point he thought De fide et op^tib. cap. 19.
so dark in the Scripturs, and hard to be discerned, that his opinion was not
hard to be removed; if he had see^ stronger reason brought against it, or
greater authority. Now if S. Anstin come over to our side by that quirck of
Bellar. ^ a band of Bellar. witnesses is like to come with him: namly the
counsel of Melevis and Affrique, Cou^cil milevit. cum. 27. carthag. sent.
prefat. 7.
which he was present at, and swaied much with: perhaps Primasius also ( Trite^
catalo. scriptor eccl.
were he Austins scholar) and Bid with a number of Cano^ists, and schooleme^,
who followed most S. Austin. But Bellarmin will never resign all these unto us,
to gain the other three from us. For ( The English translatour of the Beehive.
lib. 6. chap. 4.
as our Bee-hive says) Men live not by losses. He must suffer therefore
Erasmus, and Caietan, and Catharinus specially, who (beside the Annot in eo
me^t cajctan. lib. 5.
place that Bellar. has quoted) does avouch the matter in a treatise written
purposely thereof, more thoroughly and exactly then Erasmus or Caietan;
Bellarmin I say must suffer them to be counted of that mind which they were
of, while themselves lived; not cavil as if they were of that which
peradventure they would have been catharinus, died in the year 552. Sixtus.
sene^s. lib. 4. Erasm. in the year. 1^36, ^le^d. l. ^^.
had they not died before the Council of Tre^t taught so. Unless he think
(which he may by as good reason that whereas they were deceased above x. years
yer the C. Trent made that new canon, we ought to count them alive all that
while, because they did submitt them-selves to Physitia^s and would have lived
perhaps till then, had art been able to cure disseases. How much more
agreablye to singelnes and truth do Bibl. Sanct lib. 6 Annot 81.
Sixtus, Epit in 4. lib decretal part, 2. cap. 7. 6
Covarruvias, and In 4. Sentent did. 36. art 5.
Domenicus Soto acknowledge (the two former touching Catharinus the last for
Erasmus, all concerning Caietan) that in this question of marriage again after
divorcement for adultery, their doctrine is the same with those ancient
Fathers whom our younger teachers of the reformed Churches follow. And thus if I
should e^ter into the comparison of Divines on both sides: first, for the
number it is more then likely, that we prevayle much. For all whom Bellarmim
and the Pamphletter after him do muster out of the west, I mean who^ they
claim justly, not who either say against them as Advers. Ma^^tion lib 4.
Tertullian, or not with them as in 4. sent did 35.
Scotus, all therefore whom they muster so out of the West, are Epitaph Fabibl.
et epist ad Amand.
Ierom the Councils of can. 17.
Milevis and can. 69.
Afrique Epist 3. ad Exuper. can. 6
Innocentius the first De adult conjug et de bono conjug.
Austin, In epist 1. ad Cor. cap 7.
Primasius, De divin offic lib. 2. cap 19.
Isiodore, In Mar. cap 10
Bid, the Council of Can. 10.
Friouli and Can 12.
Nantes, In Math cap. 5. (...). 1^.
Anselme, ^. ex part des pons. et, matrim.
Pope Alexander the third can gaudemus de divor tijs.
Innocentius the third, in 4 sentent did. 35.
Thomas, Bonaventure. Durand; and other Schole-men, In instruct Armeniotu^.
Pope Eugenius with his Florentines and sess. 24. can. 7
the Council of Trent. which though ^2 q. 7. sed illud 2. Sent. lib. 4. did 35.
Gratian, Lombard and whomsoever he might bill, were added to them yet ours out
of the west alone pehaps would match them. What if the North, the South, whence
Bellarmin has none? what if the East, whence he has two or three at the most
for hunderds of ours be joined thereunto? Then for Quality cor. 14. 36
Came the word of God out from you? says Paul to the Corinthians; or Came it
to you only? Meaning that they ought to reverence the judgment of other
Christian Churches being more then they were: but of those chiefly and first
(as he places them) from who^ the Gospel came first. Now Esai 2. 3. lue. ^4.
47. act. 1. 8. and the whole story.
the Gospel came first out of the East: whose consent we have in a manner
generally. and as we have the first in Country, so in time the auncientest
and eldest: our two first Councels in At Eliberis the firm City. ^at now is
called Granade, or near there unto
Spain, and in France elder an hundred years then their two in Africque, our
next far elder yet then their next; and so unto the last: yea, for several
Fathers, ancient on both sides, there are more with us in the four or five or
six for-formost ages then there are with them. Of soundnes in docttrine, of
learning, of virtue, of constancy, of consent, it is hard to speak by way of
comparison whether excels other. Saving that for ^' Tim. 3. 3. Tim. 2. 14.
gentelnes and meekenes. a special orname^t of Bishops, weigh both parts
together, and ours surpass our adversaries. Amongst whom the Council of Trent
accurseth what? our Savior also ^ who says it ^ by his word Math. 19. 9.
all such as say that that they do err in this point, into which outrage none
of ours has broken against the contrary minded. As for other graces of the
holy Ghost, though Bellarmin have noted sundry spotts and blemishes whereby
some of ours are touched in credit, and their authority is impeached: let him
cast his eyes upon his own witnesse's without partiallitie, and he shall
find that we have a Rowland for his Oliver. For where he tells us that
Ambrose did err in yielding greater freedo^ to men then to women; Luther and
Bucer in granting second marriage after divorcement for more causes then
whoredom; Pope Bell. tom. 1. cont. 3. lib. 4 Cap. 12.
Gregory the same for sickness: Ibid, Ca. 14.
Cellestin the same for heresy: we tell him again that In the place abo ve
quoted
Clemens Alexandrinus^ Athenagoras, Origin (if he be out of theirs) Ierom and
In Marc. C. 10.
Bid, did likewise err in speaking against all second marriages, and Did.
Covat variatu^ resolut. lib. 4. Ca. 7^. Sixth sene^s. bibl. sanct lib ^. Annot.
77. and lib. 6. Annot. 119.
Clemens with Sixth. sene^s. lib. 5, and 6 Gebrad. collect. de Orige^ vita Cap,
vit.
Origin insundrie weighty points of faith. Where Tom ^eo^^. lib. 1 cap 5.
he tells us that Lactantius fell into a number of errors, as being more
skillful in Tullie then in the scriptures, we tell him again that some of the
Scholemen were, though not more skillful in Tullie, then in the scriptures, yet
as unskillful in the scriptures, Melch C^us locorum, Theolog. lib. 8. Cap. 1.
as in Tullie; and there graund-maister Articulis in quibus Magister non tenetur
the Master of the sentences is charged by themselves with above a score of
errors. Where he tells us that Luther varieth from himself Melancton
agrees not with him, nor Kemnitius with either of them, because Luther allowed
divorcement for more causes afterward then at the first, and Melancton thinks
that both the divorced parties are free to marry, Ke^nitius that the Inoc^et
only; we tell him again that neither does Pope Innocentius the third agree
with Pope Alexander, nor Alexander with himself nor neither of them with
Athenagoras, seeing Athenagoras condemns second marriage which the cum secu^d
um. Capellanu^: extra de secu^d^s nuptijs.
Popes allow, though^ Alexander punished one who blessed it;o Innocentius
checketh a decree of Alexander that deprived the Innocent party of his right,
because the offendour had sinned thus, or thus: and Alexander, whether in this
decree I know not (for it is razed out of the Gloss in die tum c^discretionem
and in sed illud 32 q7
Decretals) but in other extant overthwarteth himself, as his words aleaged on
both parties, for Bellarmin and for us, do testefie. So Bellarmins objections
of human infirmities and wants notwithstanding, they which are of our side
excel in estimation those which are of his, for diverse circumstaunces and
respects. And (the most important respect of all others) the ground whereupon
Tertul chro mat. Hilar. pol lent conc. Ven et. etc.
ours do buyld their doctrine, is the plain evidence and express testimony
of our Savior Math. 19. 7.
Christ, excepting whoredo^ namely out of the causes for which he denies a man
may put away his wife and marry another. Contrariewise the ground that our
adversaries buyld on is their own conceit, not able to stand without violent
wresting, suppressing, or corrupting of Christ's exception the proof whereof is
seen in three the most peremtorie men for this matter, and best accounted of
among them, Innocentius the first, the third, and Thomas of Aquin. In 4. sent.
did. 3. quaest. 1. Art. 5.
Thomas in that he answers that Christ's exception pertains to the putting
away of the wife, and not to the marring of another, also Innocentius the
first, in that he omitteth the exception quite, Epist. 3. ad Exuper can. 6,
and cites Christ's words thus: whosoever puts away his wife for whoredom, and
marrith another does commit adultery c. gaudem^s extra de Divorti^s.
Innocentius the third, in that he depraveth and alters the exception,
affirming that Christ says Quicsique dimisserit vx. orem suam ob^ornicatio nem.
whosoever puts away his wife for whordom, and marries another, does commit
adultery: whosoever putieth away his wife for whoredom. A notable corruption
by scraping out of the sentence Nifi ei m^ or me. as some read it.
the exceptive particle having the force of a negative, to change for this
point into an affirmative: and so easily to be corrupted by the text of the
Scripture it self, that I doubted whether it were not the Printers or
bookewriters error, until I perceived that all the printed copies, which I
could get the sight of, did agree therein; even the new one too of Gregorye
the thirtenth conferred with all the written copies in the Popes liberarie,
beside many other, and corrected by them. But of such buyldings such must be
the groundworkes, or equal unto such in force; An untruth will never cleave
unto the truth by other kind of mortar. in probabillity therefore it is to be
presumed that not only the greater part of the fathers but the better also,
and they whose grounds are surer do maintain our doctrine. So the weapon
which Bellarmin draws out of their sheath against us, does bend back and
turn the point against himself: and the wound it may geve, it can not pearce
so deep as Heb 4. 12.
that which is sharper then a^y two edged sword, but the wound it may geve, it
geveth to his own cause, Howbeit if any shall conceive otherwise hereof for
the number and quality of the witnesses, as some peradventure will and may by
reason of broken conjectures, which the variety of circumstances yeel death, yet
no man will (I trust) sure no man of modestye and sense can deny, but the
main and principal point I hadd to show, namely that the Fathers consent not
^ll in one for the Papists doctrine, is showed to their sha^e, whose face and
conscience served the^ to avouch the contrary. Wherefore since our adversaries
do grant that the Fathers have not strength enough to prove a point in
question unless they all consent about it: Bellar. with his Pa^phletter must
co^seque^tly grant, that their cursing Tre^t assertion in this point cannot be
proved by Fathers And so the second staff which they have framed themselves to
lean upon, is like to that broken staff of reed, Esaias. 36. 9^. (...). 2.
Egypt, whereupon (says the scripture) if a man lean, it will go into his hand
and pearce it.

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER.
The Conceits of Reason, urged last aganst us, are oversights proceeding from
darkness not from light, and Reason it self, dispelling the Mist of Popish
probabilities, geveth clear Testimony with the truth of Christ.

THe third and last objection, whereupon the I^suit and his scholar stand, is
Argumentum a ratione petitum.
conceit of reason: divided into five branches as it were, or Riverets issuing
from one spring. The water whereof how unlike it is to Esaias. 8. 6. Ioh. 9. 7.
coll. ^. 16.
the water of Siloah, and savoring of that puddle of which the Roman Deputy
Gallo did draw when having undertaken to do Act. 18 verse 14.
according to reason verse 15.
he spoke profanely of Religion, and verse. 17.
suffered one to be wrongfully vexed for regarding it, as if to do Justice in
that case were against reason, I leave it to be judged and considered by them
who say that Ioh. 1. 5.
our reason is naturally dark, and Romans ^. 21
leads her wise men into sottish follies, neither can discern the things
which are of God till it be lightened by his spirit. 1 cor. 2. 14.
For although the Papists have some glimse of light and see more then the Ioh.
1. 9.
Heathe^s, as Ioh. 9. verse, 39.
the Pharisees did verse. 40.
whose words (I am afraied) they will use likewise: are we also blind? yet
as Ioh. 3. 4. et. y 4^. et. 11. 48.
the Pharisees were overseene fowlly in many of their arguments grounded upon
reason, so the Papists may be. And that they not only may be overseene, but
are in the reasons which their puddle-water has yielded unto Bellarmins
cisternes in this point: the bea^es of reason lighte^ed from above shall open
and descrie; let such as love not darkness more then light be judges. For he
reasons first thus: The Marriage of the faithful is a singe of Christ's
conjunction with the Church, as St. Iphe. 5. 32
Paul teaches. But that Conjunction is indissoluble, and cannot be loosed,
The band of Marriage is threfore indissoluble too. As if a rebel should say.
The joining of the Head with the Body in man resembles the Coniu^ction of
Christ with the Church as St; Ephesians. 4. 15
Paul teaches. But Christ and the Church can never be parted, there fore the
head may never be cut from the body. A happy conclusion for Traitors, if it
were true. But if it be faulse where then is Bellarmyns reason? which will
take the greater overthrow by this because look Ephesians. ^. 2.
how Christ is the head of the Church, semblably the husband is the wives head.
So that notwithstanding the similytude of Christ's head-ship, the joint whereby
a traytorous head is knit unto his body may feel the axe of Justice, as Bell.
will grant: the marriage band that coupleth a man to an adulterous wife may be
loosed by ^he like reason, notwithstanding marriage is a sign of Christ's
co^iunctio^ with the Church. And if this suffice not to make him acknowledge the
loosnes and fondnes of his sophistical syllogism, let him observe farther that
the seperatio^ which themselves allow in case of adultery is condemned by it.
For Christ dot continue with his Church Mat, 28. 20
always, and cherishes her Ioh. 4. 16.
for ever with his spirit of comfort, and he is so far from dispoyling her of
her own wealth, if she had any, that of Ier. 32. 39. Heb 8 9 Ion. 13. 1
Ephesians. 4. 8, 1. Ioh. 2, ^7. and ^. 9. and 413. and 5. ^0.
his gifts and graces still he leaves with her. Now the Bellar de ma trim'sac^
Cap. 14. e jure can et Conc. Trident.
papists teach that a man may lawfully withdraw himself from ever dwelling with
his wife, and from yielding husband-like love and duty to her, yea ^ pler^^que
extr^de dote. inter ^xo^e^ and virum
may still with-hould her own dowry from her, if she be an adulteress. Which
doctrine how could Bell. cleanse from stayn of error, if some whore of Rome
should touch it with this reason. The marriage of the faithful is a sign of
Christ's co^iu^ction with the Church, as Pavl Ephesians. 5. 32.
teaches? but Christ does still assist relieve, and enrich the Church with his
graces: therefore must the husband dwell still with his wife and find her
maintenance and wealth. Would De mat^m. sacra^. Cap 4.
he Seff. 24 C. ^
say the C. of Trent accurseth al who make such Iesuitical syllogismes and
sophymes against their sacred cano^. Certainly the harelots reason must be good
unless the Jesuits be naught. But he goes onward, and adds that albeit some
parts of the Church, to weete, some faithful folk do commit spiritual whordo^
now and then, and make a divorceme^t yet it is not lawful for them to change
their God. What a spech is this? As who say, our Savior could deserve at our
hands that we should forsake him, and g^t ourselves a new bridgro^. Neither
does God cast the^ so away (says Bell) that he will not be reconciled, nay he
does exhort to reco^cileme^t semper.
still; Still? To whom then Heb. 4. 13.
swear he, they should not enter into his rest? what Nub. 26. 65
were they whose carkeises fell in the wilderness? whence came the man of God
Deu^. 13. 13
who willed the^ that commit idolatry to be slain? where lived the Psalm. 7^.
2^.
Prophet who says Thou distroyest all the^ that go a whoring from thee: The
Israelites who^ God did shut out of the promised land, of who^ he took many
thousa^ds away by sundry plagues, to who^ Rom 3. 19.
the law speaks as being under the law, did they not profess that faith and
use those Sacram. which all that do are faithful folk and parts of the church
in Tom. 1. co^t. ^. lib. 3. cap. 2. (...) 10.
Bell. phrase and meaning? I grant that Hosea. 2. 2. Rev 2. 21.
God offers to be reconciled somtymes to such offenders, and waits in
mercy long for their ame^dement. which if it be a pattern for us to follow
herein, I say, if it be, for God gave time of repentance to 2. Sam. 3. 27,
(...). 20. 10.
Ioab a will-full murderer, who^ the Gen 9. 6. Exo. 21. 14. 1. King. 2. 31.
magistrate should have put to death Eccles. 8. 11.
presently: God gave time of repentance to Ier. 44. verse. 15 et. 19.
idolatrous wives of the Jews, whom Deuteronomy. 13. 6.
their husbands ought not to have spared so: if therefore Gods actio^ herin be
set down for our imitatio^, the man that can conteyne, and be without a wife,
as God without our service, may likewise in mercy wait for her repentance,
and when he perceyveth it to be unfeigned, take her again to be his wife. But
he who can not, or will not render such kindness for such unkindness and
wickedness, may in justice also put her so away that no place or hope of
reconcileme^t be left her, as Bell. own reason in this similitude teaches.
For God is not bound to give unto profane dispisers of his grace and breakers
of his covenant place of repentance and reconciliatio^: Nay he may in justice
absolutely deny it them, and oftentimes does as the examples of Gene. 4. 11
Cain, of Heb. 12, 17.
Esau, of Number. 16. 27
Corah, Dathan and Abiram, of Number. 25. 6.
Zimri. of Ios. 7. 25.
Acan, of Act 5. 6.
Ananias and Saphira, of sinfinit other, that have either presently dyed in
their Exodus 32. 28. Number. ^1. 1. et. 14. 29 et. 17. ^. 14. et. 21. 6. et. 25 ^.
innes, or had sentence of death pronounced irrevocably against the^, do
argue. wherefore when Bell. concludes this reason with saying that S. De bone
co^jug cap. 7. 15. 18. et. 24.
Austin urges it greatly in his book of the Good of marriage: he deals as
Cooks do in larding leane-meate to give that a relish, which of it self would
be unsavory. Though even for the lard too perhaps it agrees not half so well
herewith, as this Italia^ cook would have us think it does. For why did not S.
Austin urge the same likewise in his De adulter. conjug ad Pollentium.
books of adulterous marriages written Retractar, lib. 2 cap. 2^. et. 57.
afterward and purposely maintaining this Point against Pole^ti^^s who
gainsaied him in it? was it because he saw that he had urged it more the^ it
would bear well? or that he perceived it would not hold against an adversary:
though without an adversairye it were a pretty allusion? At least whatsoever
men d^eme of the lard, the meat is naught questi^les: and such that though the
cook be content to eat the driest morsel of it, yet must he needs grant that
it has not taste, not as much as Job. 6. 6.
the white of an egg has. For Tom 1. co^t. 5. lib. 2. cap. 3^
himself says that marriage betokens and signifies Christ's coniu^ction with
the faithful soul, as In 4. sent. dis. 27 ^. 1. artic. 3 c 2.
Thomas and Innoce^tiue. the third ^. debitum. extra de digamis.
the Pope teach. But Chricts coniunctio^ with the faithful soul is not
indissoluble, as him self also says: the ba^d of marriage therefore (by his
own co^seque^ce) may be dissolved and loosed. And thus far of his first
sophisme.

The next is that if other marriage were lawful, Injuria a^^ceretur proles.
the offspring should be iniuried: for the children borne already (says he)
should be evil provided for, who should begin to have a stepfather in steed of
a father, a stepmother in steed of a mother. where hence the conclusion
secretly inferred, to weere that^ other marriage therefore is not lawful, would
very well follow if his foremost ground and proposition were true, that the
children should be iniuried thereby. For it is not lawful to deal injuriously
with any he Col. 3. 25.
that does wrong shall receive for it. But how proves Bell. that they should be
iniuri^d? His reason ensues. for they should be evil provided for. what?
therefore injured? Is God unjust then, who by taking men out of this present
life, does leave their wives widows; and their children fatherless; both
often destitute of help? God forbid (says Romans 3. 6.
the Apostle) else how shall God judge the world? But the children should be
endamaged thereby; and that perhaps will Bell. say was his (...). well. They
should be endamaged and evil provided for. Why? Because they should have a
stepfather in steed of a father or stepmother in steed of a mother. Then belike
Romans 11. 24
the branches cut of the Olivtree which was wild by nature and graffed
contrary to nature in aright Olivetree, are evil provided for and endamaged by
it. For as when a gardener asked why the herbs which he set or sowed do grow
and shoot up slowly, where weeds which the earth brought forth of her own
accord increased apace, Max Pla. nud. in Aesopi vita.
Aesop said that it was because the earth is the weeds mother, and the herbs
stepmother: so the wild Olive tree was the mother that brought forth those
branches: the right Olive tree whereinto they were graffed, is their step
mother. S. Paul, Romans 11. 17
who thought it better for us of the Gentiles to be graffed so, the^ to
continue as we were Ephesians. 2. 3.
the children of wrath by nature: declares that 1. Cor. 7. verse. 15.
a Christian whose wife being an infidel, an vnbeleelever, forsakes him, is
free to marry another. Which (considering that he had an ey to verse. 14.
the holy seed, their offspring also) what lets him to have done with this
persuasion, that the children, should receive more good and benefit by a
believing stepmother, then by an unbelieving mother. Doubtless Ephesians. 6. 4.
his care of having them brought up in godlynes, a thing that Prove. 31. 1. 2,
Tim ^. ^.
godly mothers do further very much, and ^. king, 8, ^6, 2 Cor. ^2.
ungodly hinder, is a great argument he was of this mind. And the son of
Catiline, whom that Cie co^tr, Ant et Cat^l ^n toga cand.
adulterous wretch Cic. in Cat^l ^rat ^, Sa tust. ^o^ju^ cat^l.
his father murdered to compass the more easily the liking of a woman whom he
lusted after, has left sufficient proofs that some havi^g fathers are no
better looked to for things of this life neither, then they should of
likelihood, if in steed thereof they had stepfathers. Wherefore since experience
verifieth the same in me^ which Neque femi ^a am^ssa pu^icitia al^a ab ^uerl^
Corn^ac^tus anual ^. quarto
in women, that when they have made shipwreck of their chastity, they will
not stick at any wickedness: the argument that children should be endmaged and
evil provided for, because in steed of adulterous fathers or mothers, they
should have stepfathers, stepmothers, chaste, and honest, is Adulteroru^ irgo de
serui omn^ Sen. is ^gamemnon,
worse provided for by Bell. then he thought. But suppose it were good, and
proved that the children should be endamaged how follows the conclusion? The
children should be endamaged by another marriage: Diodor Sic ^er 12. Iul.
Capitol ^ M. Anton. ^ilos.
therefore the marriage is not lawful? for by this reason a believing husband
forsaken by his wife being an vnbelever, may not take another if he had
children by the former. Nay no wife or husband having any children may lawfully
ever marry again eith Epist, 10, ad ^uriam de vi ^^it servand.
of the^ after the others death. And in deed by a law that q Charondas made
for his Thurian Cityzens, the men who did so were punished. And Marcus
Antoninus, an Emperor of Rome, because he was loath to wedd a stepmother to
his children his wife being dead, kept a concubine. And S. ^ccum secu^d (...)
extra de ^cu^dis nupt. 1 cor. 7. 9.
Ierom speaking as the Catharists did, against second marriage, does by
detestatio^ of a stepfather dissuad a widow from it. But Sent. lib. 4. ^it,
39. e,
the Papists hold agreeably to ^anto extra ^ divortis,
scripture that the man is at liberty to marry in the Lord after the womans
death, the woman after the man's: yea The later ^ap 12, ^e former ^ap. 16, lib.
(...), sa ^am.
in life time also, if either of them being an infidel and unbeliever forsake
the other being a Chistia^. And Bell. acknowledges that they hold both these
points, and ought to hold them. Bellar. shall therefore do well to acknowledge
that his step-reason, which oppugneth both these points of sound doctrine,
savoureth of heresy, neither makes more for him against us, then for the
Catharists against the Catholic fathers. Wherewith he may confess too that
he has abused Ambrose in affirming this to be his reason: and avouching him to
say, that the Father ought to pardon the Mothers fault for the childrens sake.
For S. In caput ^6. Lucae.
Ambrose blaming the man, who Dimitis (...) r1 quafi jure five crimine
puteth away his wife without crime, and marries another, an adulteress by so
marrying; mislyketh that the children should have such a stepmother having such
a mother under whom they might be. And if the mother, being put away so, took
another husband, who in this case were an adulterer: S. Ambrose wishes the
children to be under their father, not under such a step-father. And if the
Father casting out his wife so, cast out his children with her: S. Ambrose
says the children should ratherpurchase pardon for culpam which he see^eth
also to distinguish from crime, neither to mean adultery thereby but lighter of
fences: such as honest wives sometims do co^mitt through oversight of
shrewishnes noted by S. Ambrose before in these words, u^ori os debes toller
are et emenda re mores and by antquity in the Proverb Qui no^ litigat caeleb.
est.
their mothers fault at their fathers hands, then be cast out for her sake.
Wherein he does no more say that the father ought to pardon the mothers
adultery for the childrens sake; then Abraham said that God ought to forgive
the Sodomites abhominatio^ for Genesis 19. 29. 2. Pet. 2. 7.
Lots sake, when he said that Gen 18. verse. 24.
the wicked should rather be spared for the righteous, the^ the verse. 23 ^^. 25.
righteous should be destroyed with the wicked. But here peradve^ture the
Pa^phletter will reply that although Bell. author and argument (as himself
observed, who there upon cut Bell. shorter) prove not his intent, to weete that
another marriage is unlawful: yet they prove such marriage to be inconvenient
in respect of the children, to whom there rises hurt and discomodity by it.
For answer whereunto and to the like reasons drawn by him and Bell. from other
inconveniences, seven things are to be noted: al such as our adversaries
themselves must needs yield to, and yielding thereunto shall set on fire their
own chafe. The first that the man whose wife is an adulteress: may putt her
absolutely away, for all his liftyme: nor is ever bound to let her dwell with him
again, noe not though she repent. Which point being plainly implied in our
Matt 19. 9.
saviors answer to the Pharisees, De Matrim. Sacram. lib. 14.
Bell. avoucheth and maintains thence: agreably to the doctrine of his chiefest
guids the ^ de Benedicto. 32. q 1. c. gaudemus, extra de convers conjugat; c.
Significasts, de divor^i^^,
Popes and Im 4 Seut. did 35 art. 6.
Thomas of Aquine. The second that if the woman continue in her wickedness,
without repentance and ame^dement, the man is by duty bound to put her away. S.
Matthew reports, of the blessed virgin, that when she was found to be with
child of the holy Ghost, before her husband Joseph and she came together, Matt.
^. 1^.
Isoseph being a just man, and not willing to make her a public exaample, was
minded to put her away secretly. Of which words importing that justice moved
him to put her away, goodwill to do it secretly, it seems to follow, that
such a woman as Joseph misdeemed her to be, to weete an adulteress, cannot be
kept without sin, whether she repent or no. And Comment. in p^roverb. cap 18.
Cornelius Iansenius a learned bishop of the Papists grants hereupon, that
it was so in the old Testament. But in the new Testament, he says, if she
repent she may be kept with out sin: acknowledging that she may not in the
new Test. neither unless she repent. Whereunto the Canonists and Schoolmen do
accord; expounding a sentence cited by many Hieron. in Matt. cap. 19. Basil and
Amphiloe. can. 9. et ^1. Sent. synod. in Trull. can. ^8 Innocent. ter^. lib. 1.
de contempt. mundi. cap. 18
Fathers out of the Proverbs of Solomon, Proverb. 18. 22.
He that keeps an adulteress, is a fool and a wicked man; a sentence found
in the Greek text of the Proverbs albeit not expressed out of the Hebrew
Fountain, but added by the Seventie Interpreters, or other, perhaps to show
that Solomon commending a wife, did mean a chaste wife in their Judgment, but
added in the Greek, and thence translated also into the common Latin edition
called S. Ieroms, so that it goes for Scripture with Papists by their Council.
Trident, sess. 4
Trent Canon; this sentence I say, and C. sieut crudelis. c. Dixit. Dominus 32.
q. 1.
the Canons of the Fathers that urge it vndistinctly against whosoever keeps
an adulteress, whether repenta^t or vnrepenta^t, in like sort as the L. 2
Lenocinij De ad Legem Iuliani de adult. l crimen leno cinij, c, eo.
Civil Law condemned all such, In subaudi tur. quod si 32 q. 1.
the Canonists and In 4. sent. did 35.
School-me^ distinguish and expound of such as keep adulteresses, which do not
repent and amend their lives. Now granting that a man may keep an adultereffe
in matrimony if she repent, or being divorced from her, may take her again:
yet (which is the third point) he may not do it often least impunitie
increase inequitie. And this is agred on by the same pillars of the Church of
Rome, the In c sivir sciens extra de adulter.
Cano^ ists and In 4. sent. did. 35.
Schoole-me^. Pastoris. lib. 2, mond, 4, 9 Sed non sae peservis enim Dei
poeniren tia una est,
Hermes out of who^ the Master of the se^tences aleageth and avoucheth it,
meant (as his reason brought to prove it argues) that the man may take her so
again but once. Which doctrine the Papists can make Canonical if they list,
unless princip, fid, doctrinal, lib, 9 Cap ult.
Stapleton lie, who says their Catholic Church at this present may add to
the Catalogue of Ca^onicall Scriptures that bool^ of Hermes, written in the
Apostles time by S. Paul's scholar, not only cited much but commended too by
many and most ancient Fathers, Clemens, Ireneus, Origin, Athanasius,,
Eusebius, and Ierom. At least the chiefest part of the Canon Law Prefat, Grec
9. in libro S quinque Decretalium,
co^piled by the direction and ratified by the authority of Pope Gregory the
ninth, setting down the very same out of a The Counsel of Arles as most
copies read: or of Orleans as otner.
Council that Peter Lombard out of Hermes: the Papists though they will not (I
trow) be of Stapletons mind for Liber qu^ appellatur Pastoris, Apocryphus
did. 15 c. Sancta Romana B^l, Tom. ^ cont. 1 lib, 1. cap. ult.
Hermes book, yet may think it likely that the Counsel and Pope approved his
meaning in this point. Chiefly since In c. si vir sciens de adult.
Panormitan, the flouer of the Canonists having noted on it that one offending
often must not be pardoned, because sins vnpu^ished do become examples,
cites an excelent proof and light thereof a law of worthy Emperors,
Vale^tinianus, Theodosius, and Arcadius. L 3. c. de episcop audie^t
who grau^ting a general pardon for smaler trespasses extended it to none
Remissione^veniae crimina nisi simel commissa non habeant.
committed oftener the^ once; accou^ting such unworthy of their Princilie
favor, as grew by their former forgiveness to a custom of sinning rather
then to amendment. But whether the Papists will judge those Christian
Emperors to have been to strickt, and say that adultery deserves pardon
oftener the^ lesser faults with the^, or whether they think it sufficient to
pardon once so great a crime, which the Emperors excepted by name out of their
pardon, and willed it to be punished even the first time: the Papists do agree
that a husband must not forgive it to his wife often. The fourth thing to be
noted is, that the woman being putt away so, does lose her dowry too by law.
Which pu^ishme^t as Hos. 2, 9.
God has threatened by his law to men that go a whoring from him, though they
have not any dowry of their own neither, but of his gift: so the Authens.
utliceat ma^^ et aviae Quia veto plutim, collat 8.
Civil Law has i^sticted it on adultrous wives, and c pierunq extra de donat.
inter. virum et uxore^,
the Cano^ Law i^ looser times also. The fifth, that many persons mistake the
Genesis 2. 18.
help prepared of God, and marry or do worse: considering that some cannot
contain, as Pope c. Quod proposuitti. 32. q. 7.
Goegory notes touching men S. in. 16 cap. Lucae Necessitas illius tuu^.
crimen est. Cor. 7. 37.
Ambrose touching women, the Mat. 19. 11. 1 Cor. 7. 7.
Scripture touching both; some, though they could perhaps, yet should hurt
their bodies by sickness, if they did, as Hippoer de morb popular lib. o Sect.
5. Galen. lib. 6. de locis affect. cap. 5. Paul Aegenet, lib. 1. cap. 35.
physique and Plato de legib. lib. 11. Aristot Proble^, sect, 1. quaest. 51.
sect. 4. quaest. 17. 30. et. 31.
Phylosophie teach; some though neither chastity nor health enforce the^ to
marry, yet need it for their state of living, as In. 4. Sent. did. 35. art. 2.
Dominicus Soto does prove by certain poor husba^d-men and laborers. The
sixth, that if a man die and have no son, his inheritance ought to come to
his daughter by the Nura 27. g.
Law of Moses and if he have no daughter, it ought to come to his brethere^;
and if he have no bretheree^, to his Fathers brethere^, and so forth to the
next kinsman of his family. Unto which ordinance: the laws of al well Of the
Gr^tians, of the Romans, of our own country and the rest.
ordered states and common weaks are, though in certain circu^staunces
different, yet in substance suitable. The seave^th, that it is sundry ways
inco^modious for a child to be unlawfully begotten, and (as we term it) base
borne because both the Esaias ^7. 3. Chrysostom in e^ is it. ad Romans hom. 24.
ignomenie thereof is a blemish, and Plutarch de liberor eo^^^at
that blemish bredeth baseness of courage; and Heb 12. ^. Ch^ysostom in epist ad
Hebr. Romans 29 c si gens Anglot. did 36.
bastards are not brought up so well by their parents as lawful children use
to be: neither are they privileged a like; and preaferred to Deuteronomy. 12. 2.
Conc. Pict, c. 1. extra. de filijs presbyt Council. Lateran. sub. Alexandro
Tertio cap 3. L generaliter. Sparios D. de Dceurionibus
place of public government, or Judge. 11. 2. L. 3 D. de lib et past L ult c.
de naturalib. lib. 1. l. ex co^plexu. c. de incestis nuprijs
Benefit of inheritance, by Laws divine or humane. And these things being
weighed well show that Bellarmins reason corrected by the Pamphleter needs a
new correction: and if inconveniences might decide our question which they
cannot do for Cor. 6. 12.
many things are lawful that are not expedient but if they might decide it,
they would swaie with us rather then against us. For in case the man, burning
with jealousy and rage Prove. 6. 34. Lysie apolog pro Erastesthems caede.
which is usual in this kind of injury or the woman being (as Proverb. 6.
^4. et. 7. 11. et 30. 20 c Se. mel malus. de regul is Juris. in Sexto.
adulteresses commonly are) wicked, impudent, once naught and always naught,
he will not, or may not keep or take her again, the children missing her,
are destitute of a mother to look to their education. And then it were better
for the^ that their father took a second wife to bring the^ up, as Delegibus.
lib. 11.
Plato thought. Wherein another man might have the like success that Poris (a
gentleman of Macedo^ia) had, Live. lib. 40.
whose former wives children were brought up as well and carefully by their
stepmother as her own children were. But if it fall not out with many as with
him, and the childrenfind more sharp and hard usage at their stepmothers hands,
who knows whether it may not turn to their more good. Chiefly fith the
tender indulge^ce of Parents does 1 Samuel 2. 29.
nourish wanton wickedness, in the sons of Eli, 1. King. 1. 6.
ambition in Adonia, Prove ^. 18. et, ^3. 3.
tra^sgressions in who^ not? and Ephesians 6. 4.
moderat severitye would restrain the same? as virg eclog. 3
one who said he had a cruel stepmother and a father, Theocii^t. Idyll 8.
another who found like fault with his father and mother, both for fear
restrai^ng themselves from tricks of u^thrifts did show by their examples. Here
is a farther help too for the childrens benefit, that their father having their
mothers whole dowry, beside whatsoever the second wife brings is able to do
more for the^. Whereas contrariwise; if by means he cannot live single and
u^married, he be constrained to keep the adulteress still, or after
separation to receive her again: she is likely to Ezekiel. 6 33.
geve her own and her husbands goods to her lover, as Cornel Tacit anual. lib.
11.
Messallina did to Siluis; or though she take gifts and rewards of him, to
Proverb 7. verse. ^. 14, 26. et 17.
wast all in riot, as the Salust. co^jur, catil.
whores of Cattilines co^federacie did. Moreover a woman that can have no
sons, but daughters only by her husband, may have sons by another man, as
de genit.
Hippocrates shows. Which if the adulteress have by her lover, the daughters
to who^ the inheritance should come are defrauded of it, And if she have but
daughters or yo^ger sons by him, the bastards; presu^ed to be lawful
children, defraude the lawful children of so much as them selves get. The
Cuckoo hatcheth her eggs in other birds nests, and the eggs she finds of
theirs, she devowreth, as de hist, a^ial lib 6. cap. 7.
Aristotle writes: or, as Nature. hist. lib. 10. cap. 9.
Pliny says, the birds that sitteh abroad upon her own eggs and the
Cuckows, when both their young are bred up, likes the Cuckows bird better then
her own, and suffers them to be devoured of him in her own sight. A term
in reproach drawn in many languages from the Cuckows name to note their
Vestigia (...) alieni, Collatine in locto sunt tuo. Li^. lib. 2.
calamity, or (if they suffer it will lingly) dishonesty, who receive other men
into their bedds and foster up their children, may be a sufficient leso^ for a
father what comfort and benefit his children are to look for by having such a
mother to feed and oversee them. Beside to omit suspicio^ of bastardy, where
by his children also may be discouraged and stained) himself L. crimen
Lenocinij. c. ad leg. Iul. de adult. 32. q, 1. D Quodsi.
shall be counted a bawd unto his wife, and must (by a Canon of the c 12.
C. of Nantes) do seven years public penance, and be shut out all that while
from the communion, yea want the comfort thereof even at his death too, (by
another Council. Eliber. can. ^5.
Co.) if he be of the Clergy. And how can he choose but live still in fear
and anguish of mind, least she add Deuteronomy. 29. 19
dru^cke^nesse to thirst, and murder to adultery: I mean least she serve him
as Senec Agamemnon.
Clytemnestra did Agamemnon, as Corn. Tacit. Annal. lib, 4.
Livia did Drusus as Holl^she d^ Chron in K. Edward the sixth.
Mrs. Arden did her husband? or if to avoid these griefs of shame and danger
he put her quite away and resolve never to come again in house with her: he
may incur as great danger or sha^e, or both, nay greater, on the other side,
by lack of a necessary help for his living, or by state of body subject to
certain sicknesses or by inco^tinecie, whether co^su^ing 1. Cor. 7. 9.
and burning him without remedy, or forcing him Prove. 5. 20. et. ^, 32. et. 7.
27.
to damnable remedies of whors Levit. 20. 13
or worse. Further more his wife, the adulterous mother, may be the boulder to
sin, and to return 2. Pet 2. 22.
as the dog to his vomitt, and the sow washed to wallowing in the myer, if she
know her husband cannot want a wife, and must have her or none, which perhaps
moved that Ge^tlewoma^ of Rome to be the more lic^etious, Sueton Tiber cap. ^5.
whom her husband found plaing the incestuous whore with their son in law:
Quamse ^^uquam repudiaturum ante jurevarat.
after that she had her husband bound by oath that he would never separate and
divorce her from him, so to be free to marry another, And why may not she live
too in perpetual heaviness and fear, least her husband being chayned with
such necessity, should seek to get himself libery of marrying by making her
away? There was a certain Spanjard, whose wife drive^ out by him for her
adultery and eftsoons reconciled, was, when she offended again, divorced from
him by an Ecclesiastical Judge, at his suite, and shutt into a monastery. The
husband saying afterward that he loved her, and that he agreed for fear to the
divorceme^t, desired that he might be reconciled to her, and she restored to
him, according to the Authent. Sed hodie c. ad leg ^ul. de adult.
Civil Law Consilior. lib 3. de regu^^^ib cons. 8.
Navarus (as famous a man for skill in cano^ law, among the Papists, as Bell.
for Divinity) being asked his judgment what should be doneheriu, made answer,
Iuxtragloss. cap Agathosa 27. q. ^.
that the wife divorced in such sort, is not bound to return again unto her
husband, and that the husbands speech of his affection must not be easily
believed, because he may feign it to the intent to allure her thereby to dwell
with him, that he may slay or poysen her, Ex amore con^tahendi cum al^a post
e^us ^or^e^ ^ A Marquis
through desire of marrying another wife, after her death. Of which thing
(says Navarus) there may suspicio^ and conjecture rise out of the
circumstances of her offense; and his suite: chiefly in a man of the Spanish
nation, which is more inclined to bear small love to their wives yea being
chaste, then to be reconciled to the^ being adulteresses, specially after the
first time. Now though Spanjards chiefly be prone to work such feats of
slaying or poisoning, as this man who knew the^ (himself a Spanjard)
witnesses: yet an Italia^ Ferrara. Laon. Chaco^end derebus Tu^e lib. 6.
Marquis, who put to death his wife taken in adulttry and married another,
declares that E. mounol phileous a^ox ous meropon anthropon Atreidas (...)
omer lliad ^. L. si. uxor D. ad leg. ^ul. de adulter.
not only Spanjards will adventure to make their wives away, if finding the^
unchaste, they must have some and would have better. Pollaki ka i ^umpasa p^^is
kahou a^dros e paurel. Hefiod. ope^ib et d^eb.
Finally if the wife, not able to have any children by her husband, have some
by an adulterer Hippocras de ge^^is.
(for this may come to pass also) the brethren, ^ pollaki Ka i ^^^m pasa
po^^is Kahou an^dros e paurel. Hesiod ope^^ib et dieb.
or the next of kin to the husband, shall loose his inheritance: and that
which they ought to enjoy by right the adulterous seed will intercept and
putloine. I let pass the public harms and disco^moditis which by los. ^. 11.
^udg. 19. 25. et 20. 3^. Hos. 4. ^.
such iniquities of private persons were likely to accrue to the common weal.
These that I have touched suffice to overweigh our adversaries reason drawn
from inco^venie^ces. For if I should stand on the children alone, eve^ those
already borne whom Eilij s jam (...)
Bell. expressly me^tioneth and names: the hardness of a stepfather or
stepmother lighting on them by the second marriage, cannot co^uterpeise the
loss in educatio^, wealth, inheritance, honor, which an adulterous parent
brings. Beside that the children to be borne afteward (as Bell. by naming
those already borne seems to confess) should be evil provided for: whose
baseness of birth and disco^modities following it Proceeded from restraint of
maring again after divorceme^t for adultery. Wherefore if we put withal in our
balla^ce the detrime^ts and harms, that grow to the father, the mother, the
brethren and kinsme^ of the father I might say to the common weal too: the
bala^ce of out adversaries will be tilted up so high by the weight of ours, as if
it were lighter then vanity it self.

And thus by the way, of weakness of Bell. third and fourth reasons is descryed
and dau^ted. The third that if the marriage we treat of were lawful, a gapp
would be ope^ed to infinite divorceme^ts, yea uro^gful and unjust. The fourth,
that if the innocent party may marry, the nocent also may, who the^ should
gain by his sin, and many would sin of purpose that thy might marry
others. For as one of the wisest, and best learned Popes Platina de vitis
p^ntificum. in Pio. ^
Pius the 2 said, that marriage was taken away from Priests for great cause,
but ought to be restored to them for greater: so may a judicious and discrete
Papist supposing these reasos of Bell. to be sound, say that marriage after
devorceme^t for adultery was taken away from men upon many and good
co^sideratio^s: but ought to be restored unto them again upon more and better.
Howbeit I must add thereunto that although his reasons be confuted sufficiently
with this supposali, let them be tried also by the rules of reason, and it will
appear they are a great deal sou^der in show then in deed. For In nocen^
quart in. c. si se duxerit. extra de adult Hostiens sum de adult. 7.
the divorceme^t of an adulteress from her husband is pu^ishme^t of her sin:
as ha^ging with us is a pu^ishme^t of thieves, of cutpurses, and burning
through the ear of rogues. So that Bell. reason co^cluding the marriage in
question to be unlawful, because a gap would be opened to infinite
divorceme^ts, is like as if a libertine or vagabond should say, that it is
unlawful for Judges to do justice on rogues, thieves, and cutputses, because
there would be opened a gap to infinite hangings, and burnings through the
ears. But some men (says Bell.) would sow debates, pick quarrels, devise
faulse accusatio^s against their wives being innocent: and so a gap would be
opened to wro^gfull divorceme^ts, not to divorceme^ts only. What? must no
offen no traitor, no blasphemer then be put to death because many thousands of
1. King 2. 13. Act. 6. 13. et. 7 58. The magtirs spoken of in the books of
Machabees, Eusebius, Victor Mr. Fox. and others.
innocent persons, yea Matt. 26, 66. et. 27, 24.
innoce^cie it self, have been accused falsely, and putt to death wro^gfullie?
Or if Bell. grant, that although some Act. 23. 3.
sitting to judge according to the law, do manifest wrong to guiltless men
against law, yet must wicked miscreants be exequ^ted by the Magistrate Romans 13.
4
who bears not the sword in vain: he grants it is cavilling captiousnes
and sophistry to conclude that me^ divorced lawfulie may not marry because
some would therefore be divorced unlawfully. The greater was his fault to say
that this reason is touched by, S. In 19. caput. Matthel.
Ierom: whose oversight he should have done better to acknowledge and friendly
to excuse it by his haste in writing; for haste is unadvised and blind (as
Livij lib. 12
one said well) the^ by his name to countenance so weak a reason in it self,
so dangerous in consequence, which overtroveth all administering of Iuctice and
judgment. And since De matrim. Sacram. cap. 14.
himself teaches against S. In eundem locum Matt.
Ieroms judgment that a man whose wife entiseth him to heresy, or to wicked
deeds, may be divorced from her because although the woman's chastity should
come thereby into hazard, yet less is the peril and hurt of her adultery
then of his wickedness or heresy, and the church provideth rather for the
innocent party, then for the nocent: he might with a little indiffere^cie and
equity of an impartial eye, have seen that the Church should by the same
reason allow the innocent to marry: at least that S. Ieroms creditt cannot
prejudice us more in the one point the^ him in the other. True is that (I
cannot deny) which he adds true, most true and certain, that the Commodu^
ex peccato suo adulter repor ta^et.
offenders should gain by their sin, if they might also marry, as well as
the innocent. They should gain in deed. But as Dan. 4, 16.
Daniel said unto Nabuchodonosor; the dream be to the^ that hate thee and the
interpretation thereof to thine enemies: In like sort may I say, this gain be
to the enemies of God and of his Church. For adulterers and adulteresses do
gain. first, dishonesty, 1, Cor. 6. 1^.
defiling their bodies and souls with an heinous and detestable crime. Then
Prove. 6. 26.
hardely escape they, but they gain beggary too: the man if he be a whormo^ger,
wasting all commonly as the Luke 15. verse. 13. et. 30.
prodigal child did; the woman losing her dowry. Beside Prove. 6. 33.
they gain infamy; a gain of greater value the^ beggary by much: for Prove.
22. 1.
a good name is to be chosen above great riches. Last of al they Prove. 6. 29.
^. Cor. 69. Heb. 13. 4.
gain the heavy wrath of God, and his just ve^gea^ce: they lose the
inhertta^ce of the kingdom of Heaven, and purchase to to themselves the chains
of darkness for ever Lueretia a matrone of Rome in time of paga^isme, having
suffered violence of Sextus Tarquinius, when her husband being sent for to come
unto her Quae^enti vito Satin Salvae mineme inquit. quid enim salvi est mu^eri
amissa pud. citia? Live. lib. 1.
did ask her Is all well? No quoth she; for what is well with a woman, her
chastity being lost? yet she if better judgment might have prevailed with her,
had not lost her chastity: her body being only defiled by force, her mind
undefiled. But now a Christian man, if yet a Christian; sure a Jesuit, the
chiefest instructor of the youth of Rome and of the Komanists through al
Christendo^, does mainteyn in print that Lucretia, not she I spoke of but such
Lucretia (...) mine sed re Thais Alexandri filia sponsa nuru^ Sanazor in
epigram^.
a Lucretia as the Pope Alexander the Sixth of who^ the Epigra^ goes. Sextus
Tarqu^ n, Sextus Ne to Sextaset fu^ est Sempere^ a Sextu. diruta Roma face
Popes daughter was having lost not only chastety but also wealth, good name,
Gods favor, 1. Tim. 4. 8.
the promise both of this life and the life to come, yet if being put away from
her husband she may take another, has gained by her losses, because she may be
married to her Tarquinius, and match a graceless whore with a shamlesse beast.

As for the last of Bell. points of inconve^ce that many would co^mitt adultery
of purpose to the intent of being set free from their former wives, they might
marry others: it may be some would. And I have read Sigismund commentar, rerum
Musco vitar.
of a woman that had a desire to be beaten of her husband: which she found
means also (as she was witty) to obtein, in so much that she put it often in
practice, till having cruelly beaten her at length he killed her. The man who
of purpose to get a new wife would co^mitt adultery, should desire Luke 12, 47.
more strips then that woman meant and Rev. 21. 8.
die a death infinitely more grievous then she did. But if some as wise almost
as she was should long after scourges: must they who deserve by law to be
whipped be denied it, because a fool desired it without desert? The Romans had
an ancient leg duodec^ tabular.
law that whosoever did a man injury, should by way of punishment pay him
Viginti quin que (...) paen^ sun^ for the viginti quinque asses. which some
think to be a third part more, then so many half pence: some alitle less
upon a difference of weights, not material to this point.
about a shilling. There A Gell. Nect Actic. 1. 20. (...)
was a lewd losell, a youthly, harebraynd Ruffian, who having wealth at will
and taking a delight in geving honest me^ boxes on the ears, would walk up
and down with a pursefull of shillings, which his slave attending on him did
carry and geving one a box would bidd his slave geve him a shelling, another
a box and ashilling. What was in this case to be done for remedy? If
Bellarmin had lived there and been of Counfail to the state, we see the advice
he would have geven: namely that the amerciement should be taken away because
some would do men injury of purpose to fulfill their lusts with paying of a
shilling or two. But the Roman governors took contrary order, to increase
the amerciement, according to the discretion and arbit reme^t of Judges: that
evil disposed persons might be deterred from trespassing by sharpnes of the
punishment to be inflicted on them for it, Whose wisdom therein it is to be
wished that Princes and rulers remembering themselves to be ordained as David
betimes to destroy all the wicked of the Land, would follow by increasing the
punishment of adultery: And then should Bell. mouth be the sooner stopped for
his fourth reason. Which yet in the mean while does no better prove that
faithful husbands separated from adulterous wives may not marry again, the^
vserers and extortio^ers procuring wealth by wicked and ungodly means do prove
that honest-men may not enjoy the goods which by lawful trades and virtuous
industry they get.

The fifth and last is, that even among the Heathen too, where good orders
flourished, no divorces were made. For no bill of divorcement was written as
Rome, for the space almost of six himdred years after the City was buylt: but
afterward, good orders being overthrowen, divorces also were brought in with
other vices. And this reason Bellar. does lard after his manner with Apologet.
cap. 6.
Tertullia^s name, to season it there, by and give it some verdure. But it is
such caraine that the lard is lost, and all the cookery cast away. Valerius.
Max lib. 2. cap. ^. Au^ ^^. lib 4, c. 3 e. severus Sulpirius, Plutareh in
Romulo. who (both there and in N^ma) misreckoneth the years unless it were the
(...) or book writers fault which is mo^^^^kely.
For the first divorce which was made at Rome, was of a chaste wife put away by
her husband because she was barrein, and did not bear him children. Now to
separate husbands and wives for such causes (we grant) it is unlawful: Matt.
9. 9
our Savior allowing it for whoredo^ only. The example therefore of the well
ordered Romans is in vain alleged out of Tertulian against us. But neither was
there any divorce for adultery made above five hundred years among them, will
Bell. perhaps say. I grant. And I will help with a stronger argument: that
among the Cians (a state well ordered too) seven hundred years did pass
before any divorcemet was made for adultery. For (as De (...) mulieru^.
Plutarch writes) there was no adulterye committed by the space of so many
hundred years among them. But among the Romans (will Bell, perhaps reply) it
is likely that some was committed within five hundred years. True. But D^onys.
Halycarn Annal. Roman. lib 2 (...) Tranquil Tiber. Cap. 4.
the husband then might put his wife to death (being convicted first of
adultery) In adulteri^ vxore^ tua^ si deprehe^d isses fine judicio minime neca
ris. Cic Orat de (...). A Cell. lib. 10 Ca. 23.
without al public judgment. So that if Bell words have any force, this is
their effect, Among the Heathen Romans while good orders flourished, the woman
that committed adultery suffered death: afterward good orders being
overthrowen, she was divorcend only. But whether she were put away by death or
by divorcement, the man might marry again. Wherefore the example of the Heathen
Romans, both well and evil ordered, fights against the Popish Romans, and
their Champion. Hereto the example of The Greeians Aegiptiaus Perstans and the
rest.
all other Heathens, whose orders were but so good that they allowed second
marriage, may be adjoined, Which I do not affirm so much on mine own
knowledge (though for ought I have read and remember it is true) as on
Bellarmins secret confession and silence a man of greater reading, and having
used many men's pains in search of these things. Beside, when Christian faith
came among the Heathens the Institut de public. judic. Ite^ lex Iuha de. adult
for lex Iulia spoken of there, is not the law as it was made first by Augustus.
but as it was corrected afterward by Constantine or by some other Christian
Emperor
Emperors did punish adultery first by death: afterward Justinian mitigating
that law did punish it by divorcement. But in Cod. de secu^dis, nuptijs de
repudijs.
both these cases the man being severed from his adulterous wife was free to
marry again. Bellarmins speech therefore towching well ordered Heathens came
in evil season, to raise both them and others yea Christians too, against him.
So his last reason, nay his reasons all are grown to be in worse plight, then
were the seven later kyne in Pharaos dream, the seven poor, evil favored
and lean fleshed kyne, Genesis 43. 2^.
that devoured the seven former fatt well favored, and there by saved their
life. For the thin carkeises dreamed of by Bellarmin have not strength enough
to overmaister and eat up the sound bodies of reasons standing there against,
but gasping after them in vain they die with famine. And thus having proved
that neither light of reason, nor consent of Fathers, nor authority of
scripture dispro^eth our assertion. I conclude that point demonstrated at first
by the word of truth, the doctrine of Chrict, That a man having putt away his
wife for her adulterye may lawfully marry another.

(...).


