a large cock struts by smaller birds that are pecking at the ground

THE GLORY OF MAN Consisting in The Excellency and perfection of Woman,
Gathered out of Holy SCRIPTVRES, and most Renowned Writers; as well Ancient,
as Modern; Ecclesiastical, as Moral.

Whereunto is annexed The duty of Husbands.

ABERDENE, Printed by the Author, June 6, 1638.

To the Right Honorable, and Jllustrious LADY, ANNA CAMBEL; LADY MARQVES of
HVNTLEY, COUNTESS of AENZIE, BADINACH, LOCHABRE, STRADOWN, AND STRABOGIE;
LADY GORDON etc.
MADAME,
TO Vindicate, and deliver my self, from the imputation of Sarcastick, bitter,
too loose, and liberal speeches, against the most Noble, Worthy, and
Transcendant Sex of WOMEN, (which some, knowing their own imperfect weakness,
may apprehend to be Calumnies, and detractiue to the whole Sex) I here make
humble Oblation; and, with all Reverence, present unto your Ladyships Honorable
Hands, this little TREATISE; as a part of my Study, in my wearisome Journie,
this half year bypast, in forraygne Countries.

Which, indeed, MADAME, I aimed for Your La: the last New-years-day; if
distress of weather, and contrary winds, had not hindered.

But, through the mercy of GOD, your La: Servant being safely arrived, I
desire no more, but that this Abortiue may shelter it self under the shadow of
Your La: Honorable Affection. Then may I think my self happy, and the payns
well bestowed.

Not doubting, but that it shall so plead for me, that by a just judgment of
all Your La: most Glorious, Noble, and Gracious Sex, I shall be pronounced
guiltless, quyte, and free, from all Aspersion, and Imputation, vnjustlie here
to fore laid to my charge.

How-so-ever, Madame, if either this Subject may any ways seem pleasing
unto Your La: or my self serviceable; all my cited Authors never thought
themselves half so GRACED; as I will continually confess MY FORTVNES
HONORED.

And, thus, MOST NOBLE, AND GRACIOUS LADY,

With humble Heart, true mind, and tempred Brain,
NED vows, Your Sex poor PRINTER to remain.
The Prologue.
SOme Men are so uncharitable, says Master Feltham, RESOL^ page 10^ 100.
as to think All Women bad: and others so credulous, as they believe, They are
all good. But, surely, although every man speaks, as he finds; yet there
is Reason, to direct our Opinion, without experience of the whole Sex: Which,
in a strict Examination, makes more for The Honor of Women, than most men, as
yet, have acknowledged.

At the first, She was created his Equal. Only the difference was in the
Sex. Otherwise GENESIS 5.
they both were Man.

If any will argue from the Text, That Male and Female made Man; so the Man
being put first, was therefore the worthiest: I answer; So the Evening and the
Morning were the first day, says the Scripture: putting ever the Night before
the GENESIS 1
Day: otherwise the Day was imperfect.

And, although Peter Martyr, absurdlie, would seem to affirm, That, before the
Fall, Man had Prioritie: Yet Saynct Chrysostom, strongly, and truly,
confuteth his Gross Opinion.

Now, all must grant, Her Body to be more Amiable, Admirable, and Beautiful,
than Man's. She is fuller of Curiosities, and Noble Natures Wonders: both for
Conception, and fostering the producted Birth.

And, who, then, dare think, that GOD would put a worser Soul, into a better
Body?

It is certain, that Women are of colder Constitution, than boiling Man: and,
so, more temperate.

Heat it self transporteth Man to Immoderation, and Fury: and hurrieth him
to a Savage, and Libidinous Violence. But Women are, naturally, more modest.
And Modesty is, indeed, the very Seat, and Dewlling Place, of Virtue: And
Fond Fortunes blasts cannot prevayle,
To overthrow Dame Virtues Sail.


Whence, I pray you, proceed the most abhorride Villainies, but from a
Masculine vnblushing Impudence? And what a deal of Sweetness do we find in
a mylde Disposition? For When Rage runs swiftly, step aside, and see,
How hard the Approaches of fearce Fury be.


If a Woman grows bold, and daring, we dislyke her, and say, She is too
like a Man. And yet, in our selves, we magnify, what in her we condemn. Is
not this great injustice?

Every Man is so much the better, by how much the nearer he comes unto GOD.
And in nothing can Man be more like unto GOD, than in being Merciful. Yet
Woman exceeds Man very far, in Mercy, Pity, Piety, Chartie, and Rueth.

And, whereas we are still exhorted to love, I am assured, that Women are
every where spoken of, for transcending in that Quality.

Men, indeed, have ever holden Parliament, and been Judges in their own
causes: inacting their own Wills, and not bearing the Women speak: whereby,
very easily, they may be concluded guilty. But let Men know, that Who
judgment gives, and will but one side hear,
(Though he judge right) is no good Iusticiere.


How-so-ever, for my part, I would gladly honor Virtue in every Sex. And, I
think, in the General, I shall find it more in Women, than in Men; though
weaker, and more infirmlie guarded.

And, though Women be the Better, yet may they be wrought (by wicked Men) to
be the worser.

Neither shall the faults of many, make me uncharitable to all: nor the
Goodness of some, make me credulous of the rest.

Yet, hitherto, I confess, I have found more sweet, and constant, Goodness,
in Women, than in Men: for, of such men as are constant in true Goodness, I
have found no great Number.

And thus I end my Prologue, which begins not with Apologies; neither do I
end it with any entreaty of a kind censure, which might seem to disparage
this Work, and beg partiality. But if in these weak Extractions, the
Judicious and Godly Women, may be any ways pleased in their increasing
affections still toward Godliness and Virtue, (all by-Respects put away) my
Petitions shall ever be to the GOD of all Goodness, to perpetuate their
Happiness; I ever remaining

Their ImmutablE HonoureR. HAUD INFERIORA SEQUTUS. sun shining on a plant

The Authors, from whom this little Treatise has its original; Beside the
Holy Scriptures, and Chronicles of all Nations, and in all Languages.
1 AMmianus Marcellius. 2 Aristotle. 3 Aulus Gellius. 4 Boccace. 5 Bohem. 6
Carter. 7 Cato. 8 Cicero, 9 Chrysostom. 10 Curtius Solinus. 11 Diodorus
Siculus. 12 Epigenes. 13 Erasmus. 14 Eusebius. 15 Feltham. 16 Giero. 17 Gorgias
Leotanus. 18 Grantzio. 19 Gybson. 20 Herodote. 21 Hieronymus. 22 Hortantius. 23
Johan Marconville. 24 Justinius. 25 Lactantius. 26 Marcus Varro 27 Mercurius
Trismegistus. 28 Munsterus. 29 Origin. 30 Orosius. 31 Ovid. 32 Petrus Cirnitus.
33 Periander. 34 Pindar. 35 Plato. 36 Plinius. 37 Plutarch. 38 Pompeius. 39
Pomponius Mela. 40 Pythagoras. 41 Siculus. 42 Scotus Subtilus. 43 Socrates. 44
Solinus. 45 Stesichoris. 46 Symphrorian Champer. 47 Tailor. 48 Theophrastus. 49
Thevet Angonozin. 50 Thomasius. 51 Trogus. 52 Virgil. 53 Xenocrates.
And others.

To the Author.
IN representing to the whole Worlds view,
The lyuelie Pourtrait of the Worlds Admired:
Yea, Natures Darling, with Her Praises due:
With lovely Grace, and Merits Rays attired:
The Worth and Virtue of that Sacred Frame,
Thy humble Service does thy Press compel,
To vindicate, and blaze abroad Her Fame.
Each one must say, Thou have deserved well.
M. I. G.

The glory of Man, Consisting in The Excellency and Perfection of WOMAN.
CHAPTER I. Of the Creation of WOMAN, and Her Perfection.
HOwbeit THVCYDIDES, THVCYDIDES.
the Philosopher, (out of an heathnicke humor) was of opinion; That as the
Women ought to be good Housekeepers, and seldom seen abroad; neither should
their good Name, Fame, nor Beauty, go farther than the threshold of their
doors: Yet worthy Plutarch, PLUTARCH.
(a Man far more excellent in Wit and Learning) treating of the Excellency
of renowned Women, agrees with the learned Gorgias Leontanus, and Gorgias
^eontanus
says* That not only Her Beauty, but also Her rare Virtues, good Behavior,
comely Manners, and other angelical Perfections, should no ways be
smoothered: But, in the Orations of learned men, made known; even to the
encowragement of Posterity; according to the Laws of the ancient Romans; who
held it for great impiety, only to make the grossest half of Mankind
renowned, and let the more excellent deeds, of the Nobler sort, be buried in
oblivion.

And, therefore, according to my slender Skill, and ability, I vow to do my
best herein: though I presume nor to be called absolutely the Author hereof;
but by way of gathering together, and truly translating, of learned men's just
Trials, and sound Judgments, in the praise of so rare, glorious, comely,
wise, lovely, perfect, amiable, and precious a Creature, as is WOMAN, the
Crown, and Glory, of MAN, even the Mother of all living Souls.

Neither will I speak only of late times, since the days of Annacus, or
Annac. Deucals
Deucalion; but even from the beginning, and first creation of WOMAN: whereby
Her splendant Brightness may shine the clearer, dazeling the dustie deeds of
slalow-witted Man.

NOw, it is said in the first and second Chapters of Genesis, That the LORD
created the first man [Adam] even of the dust and slyme of the earth, breathing
into his nostrils the breath of life: and so he became a living soul; being
innocent, and perfectly holy, eve^ according to the Image of GOD.

Then, mark, That Man was made of a dead lump, and of the worst of the earth.
And, when GOD had put His own Spirit therein, and made it a comely, fair,
yea, holy, and divine Creature; then, out of the same purified substance, He
made a more excellent Angelical Creature; even EVAH, the Woman, and Mother of
us all.

Here might justly be shown innumerable Testimonies, for the Honor and
Praise of Women, from the very creation, until this day: 1. That every work
of GOD exceeds, excels, and out-reacheth each other, in greatness, and
goodness; and still the last, for to be best. 2. That Man was the cause of
the Woman's fall; by neglecting her company. 3. That the Woman made denial, to
eat of the forbidden Fruit; and was overcome, by great and subtle
temptations: and, that Man, very impudentlie, and vnadvysedlie, without any
gayn-saying, at the first offer, took, and ate; and so very rashly brake the
LORD'S Commandment. 4. That whereas the Scripture says, that Wives should
be subject to their Husbands; is not meaned, That therefore, the Men are better
than Women: but in respect of Her Fall. 5. That the fall of Evah, was greatly
to the manifestation of the Glory and Power of GOD: yea, and a most happy
Fall, to the Elected people of the LORD.

These, I say, with thousands more, might here, truly, and playnlie, be
proven: but I omit the rest, until my second work of this quality: which,
(if this be jangled against) shall shortly compeare, even to the utter shame
of all the Fame-stayners of Women. And thus I proceed in Their due and just
Praise.

Now, it is said, (Genes. 3.) that the seed of the Woman, should bruize the
head GENE SIS 3.
of the Serpent. And by this Seed, is meant our gracious Redeemer, JESUS, our
Savior: Blessed for ever: Amen.

And, who so would rightly understand what Woman is unto Man; She is, in
very deed, the first and chief essential Good, and Perfect Benefit of GOD,
unto Man. For, without that goodly Creature, Man had never been perfected: but
in more miserable state, on earth, than any beast: for each of them had his
Maike, for his solace, recreation, and procreation.

Thus, to conclude our first Chapter, let none deny, But that Woman is Man's
Equal (and more) in every good point; and foremost part-taker of every
Heavenly Gift and Grace from Above: Being, as said is, composed both of the
more excellent Substance, and Q^alities. And, in Her, as in a rare, sumptuous,
costly, and precious Boothe, or Shop, (and from Her) do shine the beams of
Beauty, Comelinehe, Constancy, Virtue, Prudencie, Piety, Charity, and
practice in good manners: Far exceeding gross Man: except, indeed, in
strength, wherein he exceeds Woman mightily, to commit all manner of
Cruelty and Naughtiness: and She the weaker Vessel, both in body and mind,
to commit any evil. And, though Man seem to brag of his strength, yet let
him know, That what Man holds, hanges but by slender Twyne.
By sudden chance the strongest things declyne.


CHAPTER II. Of the fair and goodly Privileges, granted and given unto
Women, even from the Beginning.
Although WOMEN had no farther Advantage of Men, than said is already; to wit,
That She is made in fair Paradyse, and Man there-out: and, Of a good,
purified, and lively substance; and he of a gross, heavy, and dead matter:
This, I say, might be sufficient, to stop the injurious wicked mouths, of
such calumniators, as are not worthy to be called The Sons (but The Shame)
of Women. And yet there will remain a world full more of perfectious
Excellencies, and virtuous Qualities, to be found in Women, far excelling the
gross, and churlish conditions of Men. The smallest part whereof, to collect
together, and set down in Print, would be a Labyrinthiall, and Herculean
Travel. Neither could all the Paper in the world contain Their Worthiness;
nor the world contain the Books, which, rightly, might be written, In Their
just Praise.

And, therefore, I request you, at this time, to accept only of this my
little Knot, drawn out of other men's great Gardens: No more but to signify
unto the world, the pretense of my good Will, if possibly my Power could be
amounted to the Sphere of my soaring Mind.

Then, for Brevities cause, hearken well unto these few (yet notable)
Remembrances, of Honorable Women, in times past; even to the encowragement of
our gracious Matrons now-a-dayes, yea, and to Succession hereafter: together
with a strong Confutation of all graceless Vilependers of this renowned Sex
of Women. Which sort of men, may fitly be compared with the worst sort of
Serpents, or Vipers: which, after generation, having received life, in their
mothers bellies, gnaw, and eat through their mothers side, and so come forth:
whereby, of necessity, she loses her life.

Firstlie, then: There was never such a wicked, and unjust Deed, wrought, by
all the Women that ever were, as was shown on our Savior; flat, and directly
contrary, to the will, counsel, and disposition of Women.

Read, consideratiuelie, and behold, how the Women advertised, forewarned,
yea, exhorted the Men, and expresslie forbade them, To lay hands, or MATTHEW.
26. 19.
have ado, with JESUS: proclayming and avowing Him, To be righteous; even as
the truth was indeed. Yet, unhappy men would give no credence to the Truth:
but, most madlie, wickedlie, and impudentlie, even against all equity,
justice, and reason, they furiously proceeded in their madness: and did not
only Lay hands upon the Just, as it were, to hold Him: but, for-sooth, they
bound Him, buffeted Him, mocked Him, spitted upon Him; and, with all the spyte
the could, they crowned Him even with a Crown of sharp Thorns: Yea, and left
not off, till, as shamefullie, and with the greatest ignominy they could
invent, They crucified the LORD of Glory; even betwixt two evill-doers, He
Himself having done no evil at all: but was vnjustlie accused, by such false
men as themselves, whom they had suborned to be false witnesses.

Hearken well, ye Monsters: because your sex rejected CHRIST, betake you to
your brother Barabbas; who being guilty, ye saved, and condemned the
innocent JESUS; who is the Brother of WOMEN. For they cried, Save Him, save
Him: but ye cried, Crucify Him, crucify Him.

Ye proud, faynt-hearted men! Matthew. chap. 26. verse 69. 70 71. 72. 73. 74.
Mark chap 14. verse 66. 67 68. 69. 70. 71. Luke chap. 22. verse 56. 57. 58.
59. 60. John chap. 18. verse 17. 18 25. 26. 27.
what think ye? Was it a fit time for His Disciples to forsake Him in the
Garden? And did not His most boasting Disciple, Peter, deny Him thryse in
short time? yea, with cursing, and swearing, that he knew Him not.

2. The Innocence of Women, and Guiltiness of Men, in this exceeding great
Wickedness, is yet very probable, by these following Consequents. Because the
men were found too light, and unworthy, therefore the LORD made choice of
Women, to be the first Proclaymers, and sounding Trumpets, of His Glorious
Resurrection. The mean time His Men-disciples being too too forgetful of
what CHRIST had said unto them many times before, concerning His
Resurrection: yet were they saythlesslie forgetful, and believed not. But, on
the contrary, His Women-Disciples had great says, remembered well His words,
waited earnestly for His rising again, and departed not from the Grave: when
as Matthew. 18. Mark 16. John 20.
the light-brayned, and shalow-witted men, thought all was done, and never to
have heard any more of their Lord: Dispersing themselves, some to their former
Trade of Fishing; others took John 21. verse 3.
their journey into the Country, and that upon the Sabbath Day. Yea, some
Mark chap. 16. verse 12. 13
of them would not believe that the LORD was risen from the dead* when it was
told them of the rest: no, not when they saw the LORD Himself; except they
put their hands into His precious wounds: and so, if it had been John 20.
verse 24. 25. 26. 27.
possible, to have holden the LORD still in agony.

3. Behold still the fair Privileges of Women, by the example of Rachel,
Leah, and many others; who were preferred before their husbands* and had the
preeminence to name their children even as pleased themselves: the great
Patriarch Jaakob himself, father of the twelve Tribes, and many other
Worthies, being thereto silent.

4. How can I worthily anough express the praise of Jaill, the wife of IAEL.
Heber the Kennite? who, with her own hands, and alone, slew Sisera, the
Captain of the Canaanitish host: who, in JUDGES 4. 18.
deed, had made great spoil of the LORD'S People. Behold, I say That which
many thousands of men could not atchieue unto, it pleased the LORD to perfect
by a Woman, as another worthy Penthesilia.

5. Gracious Deborah judged Israe^ DEBOHAR.
at that time: bearing prerogative, an^ commandment, over all Israel; as we^
JUDGES 5.
Captains, and Priests, as common people. And the LORD blessed Israe^
mightily in her days.

6. Look how far more excellently JUDGES 13. 1. SAM. 25.
the Mother of Sampson behaved he^ self, both toward GOD and Man^ than did
her churlish husband. And with her, let us also join Gracious Abigaill.
ABIGAILL.


7. See wise Iudeth, how cowragiouslie, IUDETH
and valiantly, she slew Olofernus: and, by that means, discomfited hundredth
thousands of the Assyrians: while as the silly faynt-hearted men were
howling, and lamenting, within the besiedged City of Bethulia: not once daring
to offer to come forth: no, not so much as once to look over ^he Wall. Silly
Cowards.

8. Hearken, yet, unto the true Records, of the Royal Privileges of Women.
Look to the Country of Campaigne; where that excellent order is yet, from
ancient times; That if it please a Gentlewoman to marry with any mean man,
by force of that marriage he is inacted a Gentleman. But if a Gentleman
marry with a mean woman, it is nothing so.

9. Also, worthy Plutarch reports, PLUTARCH.
That it is ordained in Gallia Celtica, (to the Honor of Women) in respect of
a League, betwixt Hanniball and the Celts; That, when as a Celt, or Gall,
should complain of any injury done unto them by a Carthagenian, the lords of
Carthage were obliedged, to hear the cause, and make restitution for the
wrong. But, on the contrary, when Carthagenian had wronged a Gall, o^ Celt,
the Celtish women were judge therein, even according to their worthy
Discretion. Thus were they ho^den in high and deserved Honor, an^ most
worthily preferred before the men of that Country.

10. More-over: The Troglodites of Aethiopia, though a barbarous people (as
says Bohem) yet, being governed BOHEM.
with Women, as well at home, as abroad in the Wars, are victorious rich,
renowned, and feared of their neyghbouring enemies, who are governed but with
the vicious, faynt-hearted, effeminate, cowardly, and luxurious men.

11. Here (to the praise of women) I cannot omit to rehearse what one truly
speaks of the most Happy Reygne of our Sacred Soveraygne, ELIZABETH, Queen
of England, France, and Ireland true Defender of the Faith, etc. Blessed Queen
ELIZABETH (says he) a Princess of Immortal Fame, the Admiration of Her
Sex, the Helper of all Nations, the Pattern of Princes, the Delight of Her
People, and Terror of Her Enemies: Borne to wear a temporal crown on earth,
and to be crowned with Eternal Glory in Heaven: Restored, John Tailor, the
Water Poet.
and mayntayned, the true Religion constantly: Reposed Her only Trust in GOD
confidentlie: Held the Jesuits, all Papists, and other Hyrelinges, at the
Staffs end steadfastlie: Put Her Laws in Execution resolutelie, (and yet
without all cruelty:) Reigned many years gloriously: Departed this life
peaceably: And lives in Heaven triumphantly.

HER EPITAPH.
The Griefs, the Fears, the Terroures, and the Toils:
The Sleightes, Tricks, Snares, that for Her life were laid:
Popes, Prisons, Poisons, Pistoles, bloody Broils:
All these incompast Her, poor harmless Maid.
But She still trusting in Her Maker's Aid,
Was aye defended, by His Power Divyne.
Her Glory, and Her Greatness, were displayed, QUEEN ELIZABETH.

As far as Sun and Moon did ever shine.
GOD'S mingled Service, She did re-refyne,
From Romish Rubbish, and from Humane Dross.
She yearlie made the Pride of Spain declyne:
France and Belgia, She saved from Loss.
She was Arts Pattern, to Arms She was a Patron.
She lived and died a Queen, a Maid, a Matron.
CHAPTER III. Of the Excellency of WOMEN, whom GOD has made the first Mothers
of VERTVE, and Isntrumental Findersout, of the most excellent, and needful
things, in the world.
MARCUS VARRO MARCUS VARRO:
testifies, That Women were the first Instruments, and Finders-out, of the
most excellent, and needful things, belonging unto Mankind: to wit;

1. The Unity, and Fellowship, to dwell together, in Towns, Villages,
Freedoms, and Congregations.

2. That WOMEN were the first Inventers of LETTERS, and Art of Writing.

3. That WOMEN are the first Inbringers and Ordayners, of Laws, and Statutes;
Politic, Civil, and Moral.

4. That the comely Art of Barbarizing, Shearing, or Trimming of men's heads,
and beards, first begun with Women, in Sicilia; and brought from thence, to
Rome, by Tirinius; Rome having then been inhabited 554 years, without the
seemlinesse of this Art.

5. That WOMEN are the first Inventers of Horologies, Dialls, and Clockes;
which most comfortablie measure unto us the Day and Night, into 24 parts,
Winter and Summer.

Then, next unto GOD, to the glory of Women be it said, That no more
excellent, and worthy things, than these, can be in the world.

What can be more precious unto us, than LETTERS; For, without Letters, the
life of man, yea, and his whole pilgrimage on earth, would be but a continual
death, and an oblivious burial. Because nothing can be done without Letters.

Letters are the pillars of everlasting Memory.

Letters keep fresh to our rememberance to day, what has been done so many
thousand years ago.

Letters preserve all things done in our times, even unto our posterities
posterity, for ever.

Had it not been for Letters, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Cato, Theophrastes,
Virgill, Ovid, Cicero, with the rest of the goodly fellowship of Philosophers;
yea, most holy and wise Fathers, had not so highly been in estimation with
the world, nor the world have reaped such great beneficial knowledge, as it
has pleased GOD, (next unto His great Mercies) by their paynfull studies, (to
our great ease) to bestow upon us.

But what need I to speak of mortal men? and of late times? Are not the
works of GOD, even from the beginning, and His miraculous Wonders, yet extant
amongst us? yea, together with His revealed Word and Will; and all by the
means of Immortal Letters? whereof it pleased GOD to make illustrious WOMEN
the first CARMENTA.
Author; even Renowned Carmenta, (or, by some Writers, named, Nicostrata) the
mother of Evander, king of Arcadia. For whose sake, all men are bound to love
and honor Her Sex: giving GOD the praise, who has lent unto Mankind such an
excellent exceeding great Benefit, as are immortal Letters.

If any would here allege, that PLINIUS.
Plinius, with the authority of Epigenes, would maintayn Letters to have been
from the beginning of the Creation; yet abundance of ancient Writers are of
the contrary opinion: amongst whom is the worthy, and learned Theophrastus:
who thinks it no shame to THEOPHRASTUS-
confess, that the Lady Leontia, withstood him, in the face, in disputation,
before an Assembly, and quyte overthrew him: and that by reason, says he,
she had the knowledge, and practical use of Letters: which himself was
ignorant of, at that time.

And Saynct Hieronymus confesses HIERONYMUS.
the like, of a woman, called Eustachius: to the glory of GOD, in His great
Mercies toward Woman's Sex, be it said.

And Aristotle says, that as Man ARISTOTLE
comes of the Woman; even so do all good things, and all excellency in
knowledge of Sciences, Learning, and Virtue, proceed also from the Woman, unto
Man; for his comfort. And therefore, Glory be to GOD for Her.

To proceed, then, in the just praise of women. Women have not only been
the first isntrumental finders of such things as are indeed the Royal
Ornaments of Mankynds inward understanding, (as were Letters aforesaid:) but
also many other necessaries; without the which, man had yet lived, as in
former times; that is, more like brute beasts, than reasonable creatures, had
it not been for the witty help, and painful hand, of virtuous woman. For
not only from the Creation, till Noah; but long after the Deludge, Man lived
on Achornes, roots, barks of trees, and meal of such like things. Till, at
the last, Dame Ceres CERES.
found out the precious grain of Corn; and, consequently, invented the
making, and baking of bread, in the countries of Greece, Italy, and Sicilie.
And therefore was she called a Goddess; yea, and holden for the same of all
our learned Poets, even till this day.

Moreover, it is soothlie said of the same Dame Ceres, that she was the first
ordayner of good Statutes, and maker of Civil Laws: without the which, no
Kingdom, Commonwealth, Congregation, or Household, could stand. And yet all
this comes immediately from GOD, unto Woman; and GOD makes her the
Destributer thereof, unto man, her other half. And for my proof concerning
Dame DIODERE. OVID. HERODITE. VIRGIL.
Ceres, I take to witness worthy Diodore, in his sixth Book; Ovid, in his
fifth Book of Metamorphoses; and Herodote, the father of all Historicians, in
his sixth Book. And therefore Virgil, in his Book of Aeneids, calls Her
Legifera; that is, Lawgiver. And this also does Plinius maintain, and
avouch, PLINIUS.
in his seventh Book of Natural History.

Now, as the Corn, and Meal making, and Bread baking, was first found by a
Woman, Dame Ceres, as said is, so CERES. ISIS.
is there another rare Dame, called Isis, who found out the way, how to manure,
and plow the land. And, shortly after, other virtuous Women, in Gallia, have
invented the Sieve; and some others, in Spaygne, the Bolting-cloath: as says
Plinius, in his eyghteenth Book.

More-over, in the beginning Men lived most Barbarously, Grosslie, and
Brutishlie, having not wherewith to cover their nakedness, but the Shins of
wild Beasts, and barks of Trees: until the time that the Women found out the
making of Cloth. In which Art Dame Tannaquil, (or, as some TANNAQUIL.
call her, Caja) was extraordinary painful, and expert: and, therefore, is
called the Goddess of good House-wyues. But the first that ever began to
spinne Wool, was a comely, fair, and virtuous Virgin, in the Country of
Lydia, called Arachne: as testifies Plinius, ARACHNE.
and Ovid, in his Metamorph.

But I know not what would have become of silly Man, had not Dame Pallas found
our Flax and Hemp, and PALLAS.
the invention of making of Linen Cloth. For, I am sure, that, without
Linen, Men would be much fouler, and vncleaner than Beasts: so that his
Habitation would be more odious, than the stall of Augia. And these enormities
are all prevented, even by Women. Thus Men may understand, that all Heavenly
Gifts, and Graces, show themselves far more excellently in Women, than in
Men.

And, I need not to make much ado, to prove, that the Women are, in no
degree, so greedy, and avaricious, as are unhappy Men. And thus I durst
appeal to every honest Man's Conscience: yet, never-the-lesse, I can hardly
pass by here, to tell you how Queen Semiramis approved this SEMIRAMIS.
DARIUS.
on King Darius: for she caused build a costly, and Sumptuous Tomb, upon the
which she caused write this Poesy.

Who so desires gold, and silver much, (such. Break down this Tomb, and he
shall find all

And, as King Darius happened to come that way, and beholding the Tomb, and
reading the superscription, he caused open the same: and on the innerside of
the same stone was written thus; Thou Graceless Man, and full of Greediness,
That Women do surpass thee, now confess.
Had thou been other, but a catiue Wretch.
Thy Hands on dead Men's Tombs thou would not stretch.


And so finding nothing within, but dust and clay, and seeing himself so far
deceaved, this greedy Gluttonous Man departed, looking as angrielyke, as a
March-Hare.

Eusebius, in his Church Histories, EUSEBIUS.
writes greatly to the just Praise of Women, by the example of the Mother of
Origin: for, many Martyrs on ORIGIN
a day being condemned to be burnt, by the Enemies of the Gospel of CHRIST,
this Origin was in the mind, voluntarily, and vnaccused, to have suffered
death with them, on the morrow. But his Mother, (happy Woman) being aware
thereof, came quyetlie into his Chamber, the night before, and took away all
his Clothes. So that when Origin rose in the morning, with full resolution, to
sacrifice himself, with the other Martyrs, he had nothing to put on: and so
was feign to tarry in his Chamber, a day or two, till GOD changed his mind:
and lived many years after, and proved an excellent instrument in propagating
the Gospel of GOD; as appears till this day, by his worthy, and holy
Wrytings.

Yet, before I conclude this Chapter, I must rehearse unto you two worthy
Women, who in excellency of learning, and Governament, were not behind any
Men that ever we read of.

The first of these was a Woman borne in England, of Heroicke Parents, and her
self of a lofty spirit, and subtle ingenious wit: and having passed the
English Schools, at home, she departed from England, in Man's Clothing and
came to Athens; which City at that time, flowrished, above all others, in
Learning, and Policy: in which she extraordinarily studied, and profited
exceedingly, calling her self POPE JOHN.
John. And afterward, coming to Rome, she taught, and disputed, openly, in
the Schools, in the habit of a most grave Doctor: and was so well lyked of,
that they thought her the paragon of that Age. And after the death of Leo, the
fourth of that name, Pope of Rome, about the year of our LORD 852. she was
chosen Pope of Rome; and governed that Place, with great wisdom, in good
Civilitie, and happy Peace, the space of three years, two months, and four
days: and ended her life with great Renown.

Another rare, wise, and excellent Woman, was Theodosia, Empress of
Constantinople: who through the baseness of the Emperor, her Husband, who,
seeing Disturbances lykelie to fall out, in his Empire, cowardly, left all,
betook himself to a Closter, and became a Monk: and likewise her Brother Zoc
being slain, she governed the Empire her self; and that so valiantly, and
judiciouslie, that she was (out of measure) beloved of her Subjects, and feared
of her Enemies, all the days of her life: and departed this life in peace,
about the year of CHRIST 1050.

And, to conclude this Chapter, I speak thus much, with pardon to the Women of
these times, to follow the Virtue of these their aforesaid predecessors.

To Virtue, and to Honor, once in Rome,
Two stately Temples there erected was:
Where none might unto Honors Temple come,
But first through Virtues Temple they must pass.
Which was an Emblem, and a Document,
That we by Virtue must true Honor win;
And that, that Honor shall be^ permanent,
Which only did from Virtue first begin.
Then since these Women have tru^ Virtue wun,
See ye with them the paths of Virtue run.
CHAPTER IV. Of the Valiantness, Boldness, and Cowrage of Women; and of their
Victorious Battles; far surpassing the engine, or Cowrage of Man.
SUch Striplings as take pleasure, as far as they may, to impeach the Honor
and Credit of Women, and to deny their rare perfection in every excellent
thing, even above Man; let such stand abacke, I say, and withdraw themselves,
unto these learned Authors, who prefer the Valor, Cowrage, and
bold-heartinesse of Women, to all the Men that ever were: and, for this
purpose, let them, with great reverence, read Ammianus Marcellinus, Trogus
Pompeius, Justinus, Orosius, Diodorus Siculus, Plinius, Herodotus, Curtius,
Solinus Pomponius, Mela, and many others, in the renowned Histories of the
Amazones; where it is clearlie shown, that the just praise of Women, in
Martial affairs also, far above Men, has sounded through the World.

Now, these Amazones dwelt in Scythia; this Scythia lying in North -Asia; the
which, now-adayes, is called Tartaria; whereby it is known from that Scythia
which lies in Europe. And the Amozones having no King, but a Queen, called
Orithie, together with ORITHIE.
a valiant Lady, whom the Queen made her Vicegerent, called Antiope. These
two Women governed the Amazones so wyselie, and valiantly, that they were
feared of all their neighbors: So that Euristeus the Athenian King, was
compelled to entreat Great Hercules himself, to put on his Armor, and to
help him against two Women, forsooth, who then so wisely governed the
Amazones, that his bowls quaked for fear of them.

Now, this Hercules, being pricked with Ambition, jealous of Honor, and
greedy for preferment, (as, commonly, Men have ever been) he assemall the
forces that he might: and taking with him Theseus, and other mighty Friends,
and assistants, they embarked themselves to sail toward Scythia, against the
Queen of the Amazones: and after great Skaithe of their own people, are
returned without victory; not daring to bide bargain, when the Queen in
proper person came to give them Battle: but destroyed some of the Country
with fire, and so fled away, like Men. But soon after that, the Queen, and
her Forces, followed over, into Europe, to be avenged on the Gricks, and on
Euristeus; where they made such havoc, on the Borders, and Frontures, of the
Athenians, that their King was feign to compone with the Queen, and to buy her
out of his Country; Great Hercules being slain: In token whereof, the
Athenians hold him for their Patron till this day.

And a long time, thereafter, the Grecians going into Asia, against the
Trojanes, and Penthesilia, then being successiue PENTHESILIA.
Queen to Orithie, Queen of the Amazones, she levied a gallant Army, more
Women, than Men, and came over, and assisted the Trojanes; in such sort, that
through her stratagems, and feats of Arms, she so defeated the Grecians, that
they were almost utterly undone; had it not been for Achilles, who subtillie
deceaved that valiant Queen Penthesilia, and she PENTHESILIA.
was slain in Battle: wherethrough the rest returned home; to their own
Country of Amazone, choosing another Queen, called Thalistris. And this
Thalistris governed, and reigned, THALISTRIS.
in great Wealth, and prosperity, over the Amazones, even in the days of
Alexander the Great, when as he had Wars against the Hircanites.

And, whether for fear, or love, I know not, yet Alexander never molested the
Amazones; but held their Queen in great estimation, and reverence.

But, after her decease, when Men, forsooth, came to govern the Amazones, all
things went backwards against them: so that their Enemies prevayled: and,
within short time, that Kingdom was brought to nothing.

Again, the Emperor, Claudius the second, having Wars against the Goths:
and on a day, being victorious over them in Battle, himself in proper person
perceaved some valiant fighting Souldioures amongst the Goths, exceeding many
others, in cowrage: which he caused take alive, as prisoners; but only ten in
number. And when their Armor was laid off, these ten were perceaved to be
Women. Whereat the Emperor stood greatly amazed, and gave them great praise,
and rich Gifts, judging them to have been descended of the valiant Amazones.

And, likewise, the Country of Francia Antartica, is extraordinarily well
governed, and defended, even by Women, till this day: as writes Thevet THEVET
ANGOMOZIN.
Angomozin, in his Diversity of Histories.

Hearken yet unto Lactantius, who famouslie commends the women of
Lacedemonia; who issued forth of their City, when their Enemies had most
strongly besiedged them: and behaved themselves so victoriously, that few of
their Enemies escaped. In testification whereof, those worthy Lacedimonian
Women, even of the Golden Treasure of their Enemies, they made a large Image of
Venus, in complete Armor, in token of their Victory; to an everlasting
remembrance, and encowragement, to all succeeding Ages.

Neither ought we to pass by the Valiantness, and Cowrage, of the Women of
Cimber; who, although their men were slain, to the number of one hundredth
forty thousands, by Catulus, and Marius of Rome; yet the Women proved more
valiant, and avenged the death of their Husbands; choosing, rather, with them,
to die, than to be deflored of their Enemies. And this came to pass more than
90. years before the coming of Christ.

Yet to proceed, in the just praise of Women: Petrus Cirnitus, writing of
PETRUS CIRNITUS. ZENOBIA.
Worthy Discipline, in his 26. Book, and 14. Chapter, says, that Zenobia,
Queen of Palmyren, fought a cruel Battle, against the Emperor Aurelian, and
obtained great victory. Yet, because he thought her but a Woman, he made no
great matter of it; but wrote unto her, and bade her yield. But, she, having
received his letter, with a smiling Countenance, and Cowragious mind, answered
him thus; It must not be with Messiues, but with might of Arms, if thou shall
obtain aniething at my hands: For, let thy gross understanding be assured,
that Cleopatra had rather want life, than CLEOPATRA. AENEAS SYLVIUS.
Honor.

And Aeneas Sylvius, who afterward was Pope, and great Bishop of the holy
City of Rome, called Pius the second, declares at length, that the land of
Bealme was long time happily governed by Women.

But, because all Histories, both Spiritual, and Temporal, as well old, as
new, make so much mention, of the Valiantness, and Cowrage of Women, I need
not to tarry any longer heerevpon; but to go forewardes, in the due praise
of Women; declaring to the World, their other rare perfections, also; even to
the astonishment and bashfulnesse, of all their Gainsayers whatsoever: And so I
conclude this Chapter, proceeding to another, with this great encowragement, to
the Women now of our times, and hereafter for ever.

Let their Example be a Spur to you,
That ye their worthy Virtues may pursue.
Women they were, and you are even as much:
They were Victorious, you may even be such.
They had great Cowrage, guarded with good Skill:
Which Skill and Cowrage, Fortune, Grace, and Will,
I do implore the Almighty to bestow,
On each of you, the High, and eke the low.
CHAPTER V. Of sundry good Women, who wittily, and valiantly, have cleansed
whole Countries, and Congregations, of cruel Tyrants, and Heretics.
ANd if men have obtained any praise and glory on earth, by mayntayning their
Kingdoms, Countries, Towns, and other things of this world, by the loss of
limbs and lives; then, I am assured, that our worthy women have deserved
far more happy fame, praise, and renown, who have not spared their
uttermost endeavors, painful travels, their goods, children, limbs, nor life,
in the defense of things Above, as GODS true Religion, and the holy Gospel of
JESUS CHRIST.

It is said in the Book of Judeth, that when the pride of Nabuchodonozor was
puffed up even to the Heave^s, giving commandment unto Olofernes (chief
captain of his army) to bring the whole world under his subjection. Where was
ever heard tell of such like pride in Women? But what followed? Forsooth, the
LORD sent holy Judeth, into the camp of the Assyrians, (lying before
Bethulia) and took off the head of the tyrant Olofernes, even with his own
sword: whereby she discomfited the hudge army of the enemies of GODS People,
and preserved her city. But, because I have said somewhat hereof, and of
Deborah, and Jael, before, in my second Chapter; therefore I go forwards, to
others more; whose number is so infinite, that this little volume can not
contain the hundredth part: only I shall recite a few, and so proceed to
another subject, even in the just praise of Women be it said.

Abimelech, that Arch-tyrant, murdered his threescore and ten Brethren,
destroyed the City of Sechem, burnt JUDGES 8. 35. and 9. 1. 2. 3 4. etc.
the Counsell-house, and sowed the City with salt. And, not content with this,
he presently besiedged the City of Thebes: and having chased the people into
a strong Tower, he came to the door thereof, of purpose to set it on fire,
with his own cruel hands. JUDGES 9. 56. 7 53. 54. 2. SAM. 11. 21.
But a certain woman, says the Scripture, threw down a piece of a Millstone
upon Abimelech's head; so that his brain pan was broken. Then caused he a
young man to thrust his sword through him: and so he died shamefullie.

In this same manner died also King Pyrrhus: who lying in siedge before the
Town of Argoes, a woman threw a stone upon his head. And being blinded with
blood, a woman caused a Soldier, called Zopyrus, to run him through with a
Spear.

And Plutarch, in his book of famous Women, speaks very laudably of
Aretaphilia; who marvelouslie, and ARETAPHILIA
very periculouslie, delivered her own Country, from the tyranny of
Nicocrates, and Leander: both which she put to death, and caused Calniam to be
burnt, being the occasion of their tyranny.

Stand yet abacke, ye Despysers of WOMEN, and take example by Cyrus the
Emperor: who (as long as his Emperesse lived) being a good and merciful
Prince, afterward became a cruel and unmerciful Tyrant. But what followed?
The History says, that Thomyris, Queen of Scythia, waged Battle THOMYRIS.
against him: whom she took, and caused cut off his head. And, for a reward of
his bloody cruelty, she put his head into a vessel full of men's blood;
saying, Satisfy now thy self with blood; which, here-to-fore, thou could
never get anough.

More-over: Amongst the rest of worthy Women, let us speak somewhat of Ieane
of Orleans, or of Arc, IEANE of ORLEANS.
(for whom the Frenchmen have great cause to praise GOD:) for by her godly
Skill, and willing forewardnesse, the kingdom of France was fred from
conquering Englishmen: who had imperiously possessed that kingdom above
forty years together.

But yet, as the Englishmen were always valourous Conquerours: so also have
they ever been known to be very merciful Enemies, and friendly Foes. For,
though they had conquered all; yet, of their courtesy, they suffered the King
of France to possess Bourdeaux, with some other adjacent little Towns, for
his mayntaynance: whereby he might spend every day a Sheep, (at the least)
and two Capons, besides Leekes, Salats, etc. as says John Marconville, in his
book of the Praise of Women, chap. 7.

Now, I will not lose my time, for the prseut, to argue the matter, (with
William Bellay of Lange, in his learned Book Deremilitari) concerning the
aforesaid Ieane, (named from Vacolours, and called The Maid of France, or The
Maid of Help) whether through the hand of GOD, or by Witchcraft, she brought
such great things to pass. How-so-ever, true it was, that France, by her
means, was set free at that time, all, except Cales, which the Englishmen
kept still, from the days of Philip of Valoys, till the Reygne of Heurie the
second: which was two hundredth, and eleven years.

But at last, the English Army lying in siedge before the city of Campaigne,
and Jeane making her self thither-wardes, to relieve the Frenchmen, she was
betrayed by John of Luxemburgh, and delivered unto the English; who burnt her
to powder at Rowane, in the month of May, 1340.

To testify She had done good,
Her deeds were sealed with her blood.
And therefore,

Let FORTUNE smyle, or frown, be still content:
In all Essays bear still an Heart true bent.
CHAPTER VI. Of the wonderful goodness of GOD, toward Man, whicth He has
wrought by Religious Women: And how by a Woman, Britayne first received the
Christian Faith.
IT is manifest unto all men, who are not bereaft of their wits, and altogether
void of Understanding, That the greatest Benefit under the Sun, is THE GIFT
OF FAITH, and TRVE BELIEF; whereby we come near unto GOD, frame our selves
to love and fear Him; and so attain to the knowledge of His just Judgments,
and tender Mercies. And this great and excellent Gift of GOD, is manifested
unto Mankind, (next unto His Sacred Word) even by chosen and holy Women; whom
it pleased GOD to make the first Heralds of Christ's Glorious Resurrection, as
said is before, in our second Chapter. And also many worthy Ecclesiastical
Writers testify, That Marie Magdalene, Martha, etc. did first publish the
Gospel, and preached CHRIST Crucified, and His Resurrection, and Ascension, in
the Country of Illyrica, which is now called Slavonia, and also in the Land
of Provence: where they converted the people, and brought them to the true
Faith.

We read of Apollos, a learned Jew of Alexandria, an eloquent Man, and
mighty in the Scriptures: And although he was already well instructed in the
way of the LORD; yet Aquila, by the ACTS 18. 24. 25. 26.
help of Priscilla,, his wife, expounded unto him the way of GOD more
perfectly, than ever he knew of before.

And, the great King Agrippa was ACTS 26. 27. 28. 29.
but almost persuaded by Paul, to be a Christian.

But, to the contrary, GOD had mercy on good Lydia, opened her ACTS 16. 14. 15
heart: and not almost, but altogether made her His chosen Vessel.

Read the Chronicle of fair England, and you shall understand, that in the
days of King Egilbert, the whole Realm was infected with the damnable Heresy
of Pelagius. And Saynct Augustine coming thither, to preach the Christian
Religion; by mediation of the Queen, after great, and serious pains, and
loving entreaty, the King gave ear, and was converted, together with his
People. See, thus did England, first receive the true Faith, by the means of a
Woman; says Gaguinus.

Hermigidus, King of Goths, being GAGUINUS.
infected with the Heresy of Arrius, is also converted, and brought to the
true acknowledgement of CHRIST crucified, even by his Wife, Nigegond; as says
the same Gaguinus, in his second Book.

Also, through the earnest travel, of Clotildis Queen of Perthan, the King
Clowis, her Husband, was baptized, and greatly rejoiced, with thanksgiving
unto GOD, who had brought him from Darkness, to Light, and that by the means
of a Woman, says John Marconville.

Amongst abundance of other worthy Authors, it is manifest by Plutarch,
Boccace, and Symphorian Champer, That many men, both mighty and wise, have
gotten their best Education even by Women; and received from Them, next unto
GOD, their best and most wholesome Benefits: as well concerning the good of the
Soul, as the profit of the body. And this was more than manifest on Flavius
Clemens, in the days of Domician the Emperor. But now I will not tarry upon
such an extraordinary Subject, lest our pievish Disgracers of Women, should
run mad, and altogether despare of their Pardon, for their misbehaviour in
chatting against Women. MERCURIUS TRISMEGISTUS.


Mercurius Trismegistus, duly considering the wonderful Goodness of GOD
toward Man, in Women, says, That such a Man, as in all manner of ways,
showed not his full endeavor in the Honor, yea, service of Women, let him be
accursed. And, that such a Man, as avoydeth the Company of Woman, let him be
buried quick.

But, foolish, senseless, and irregular Man, who will not be persuaded
neither by Reason, nor Truth, to shun his objections, That they are but Men,
and dead long ago, whom I cite for my Warrandize, in the just praise of Women;
let him hearken then, what GOD says unto Righteous Abraham, In all that Sarah
says unto thee, GENESIS 21. 12.
hearken unto her voice, says the Lord. Then, thou that wilt not hearken unto
the voice of thy Gracious Wife, I deny thee to be a son of Abraham, but
rather of Satan, the Enemy of all Love, Concord, and good Connsell.

Thus do we find, that Women, in all things, Health, happiness, unto the man
still brings: And yet envious unbelieving Man, His hardened heart, he never
settle can, For to implore the Heavens, to be so kind, To keep her state,
according to her mind,

CHAPTER VII. Of the Wisdom, Learning, Discipline, and good Manners; wherein
Women have proven far more excellent, and perfect, than Man.
THE great Study, Care, and Pains, which silly man has bestowed, to attain
unto Wisdo^e, Knowledge, Learning, and Good Manners; whereby their Names and
Honors, might be immortalized; is nowayes to be compared with the wise,
curious, zealous, upright, pious, and religious industry of Women.

For, indeed, Women have excelled and exceeded, not only the Men of late
times, and our recent Doctors; but also the eldest, and wysest Fathers, and
Philosophers; the which, to the just praise of Women, I dare take in hand to
prove, as thus:

And, because the Sybills are of the most Renowned Rememberance, from ancient
Times, therefore, I think it not amiss, for the present, to give the^ here,
the first place, and that very shortly, since Lactantius, Eusebius,
Hieronymus, LACTANTIUS. EUSEBIVS, etc.
Orasius, and others have more worthily set down their praise, than it is
possible for me to imagine.

Now, the word Sybilla, is not the name of any particular Woman; but does
signify, Prophetess, or Soothsayer, or, as Thomasius says, a Woman
THOMASIUS.
which has the spirit of prophecy.

And of these Sybillaes were ten in number; the first was called Persica, 2.
TEN SYBILLS.
Lybia, 3. Delphica, 4. Cumaea, 5. Erythraea, 6. Samia, 7. Cumana, 8.
Hellespontia. 9. Phrygia, and the 10. Tyburtina. And all these, even long
before the coming of our blessed MESSIAH did prophecy no less, than was set
down by the holy Prophets, in the old Testament, concerning the Hebrew
Child, even CHRIST, our Redeemer.

But, amongst these Sybills, there were two far more renowned than the other,
to wit, Cumana, and Erythrea. CUMENA ERYTHREA.
These two were in the days of our Ancient Fathers, and excelled all the Men
of those days, in perfection, Knowledge, Learning, and Divination, as can
testify their goodly books, decored with golden Sentences, extant till this
day; telling, of the end of the World, of the day of Judgment, of Empyres,
and Kingdoms, of Commonwealths, Congregations, and Politic Governament, and
many other worthy things, even in the Book of Revolution; whereunto the wise
and ancient Romans, had ever their recourse, and took counsel thereat, as
witnesses Cicero, in his second Book of Divination; CICERO
saying, that the Sentences of the Sybills, in those days, had as much
authority, as now-a-dayes the holy Scripture.

Aulus Gellius speaks of an old AULUS GELLIUS
Woman, which came to the proud King Tarquin, and brought with her TARQUIN.
nine Books, asking him, if he would buy them? Tarquin asking the price of
the Books; she said 300 Ducates. And whiles he Skoffed at her, she took
three of the Books, and burnt them in the fire. Then she asked, if he would
give 300 Ducates for the other six? But seeing he regarded her not yet, she
burnt other three. Then he began to repent, and said, Woman, thou have burnt
six Books; what will thou have for the other three? No less, said she, than
the price of the whole nine; taking the hinmost three up, to throw them into
the fire. But he stayed her, and gave her the money for them. And when he
perused, and considered the Books, he was almost besides himself, for want
of the other six. Yet, through those three Books, he became a better man than
of before.

Besides these Sybills, we ought to keep in rememberance the worthy Queen
of Sheba, which some call Nicaula, and others Mangueda; who MANGUEDA.
bare such a love to Wisdom, and Virtue, that she came from the uttermost
parts of the world, to hear the wisdom of Solomon; as you may read in
SOLOMON. 1. KINGS 10.
the first book of Kings: and is greatly commended in the Gospel, even by
CHRIST Himself; who sharply reproved those wicked Men, Scribes and Pharisees:
and, (even in the just praise of Women be it said) He says, That that one
Woman, should MATTHEW.
rise up in judgment, and condemn that whole male generation.

Now, this Queen of Sheba, (or of the South) put the wise Solomon to his
uttermost shifts in disputation: for she reasoned with him, from the Hysope
branch, unto the Cedar trees: that is, concerning the virtue and quality of
the smallest Herbs, to the tallest trees in Lebanus.

And yet I proceed in this subject, to the just praise of Women, thus.

The learned writings of Pythagoras PYTHAGORAS. DAMA.
had never come to light, if his daughter Dama, had not been of learned Skill,
to interpret the same, after the decease of her father. ARETA. ARISTIPPUS.
METRODIDACTUS.


Queen Areta was so wonderfully well learned, that her son Aristippus, had
no other to teach him, but her self: and therefore was he called
Metrodidactus; that is to say, Taught of his Mother.

Hortensia, the daughter of the renowned Orator Hortensius, made such a
learned Oration publicly in the City of Rome, and with such a comely
gesture, and excellent modest behavior, that she is registrated in the
imperial Annalls of statelic Rome; even to the example of all ensuing Ages,
Thus may we know, That

Good Women, then, were never yet combynde;
But evermore have borne as brave a mind,
As did the men in Ages whatsoever.
Their Cowrage, Skill, and Will, was conquered never.
Therefore I Will forwards, in our Mothers praise,
Of whom, next unto GOD, we hold our life and days.
CHAPTER VIII. Of Women, who not only surpassed Men in Poesy: but also
overthrew the learned Doctors, and Philosophers, in Disputation.
CORINNA.
AMongst other worthy learned Poetical Women, Corinna is said to have
surpassed the Poet Pindar, very far, in compiling of lyricke verse. PINDAR


THEANO
Also Heroicke Theano bare away the praise from all the poetical Men in her
days; which were not a few, neither inexpert.

SOCRATES.
The Renowned Socrates thought it no shame to confess, that he had gotten
great Knowledge in Poesy, by the instruction of the famous Lady Aspasia.
ASPASIA LEANTIA. THEOPHRASTUS.


And Lady Leantia overcame that great Philosopher Theophrastus, in Disputation.

Now, because Plato saw, that Wisdom, Learning, and Knowledge, grew to such an
height in Women, he envyed their aspyring estate; and procured a Law, and
Ordinance; That no Woman-kynde should frequent the Schools, or be brought up
in learning. But, silly man, that he was! the means that he made to hinder
women of learning, proved but a Motive, to stir them forwards thereunto. For
then, more eagerly than before, many worthy Virgins, (such as Lascenia,
Ariota, and others) neglected LASCENIA. ARIOTA
not carnestlie to haunt the School of Plato himself, in man's clothing; and
profited greatly.

Cornelia, the wife of Scipio, was so CORNELIA.
excellent well learned, that she has left behind her, even to the due
praise of Women, many excellent and learned verses, called Cornificia; which
CORNIFICIA.
being justly interpreted, signifies as much, as she was a shyning, and
glancing Light, or Lamp, yielding Light, in Learning, to the darkened men of
her age.

Caria and Afrania, being but poor CARIA. AFRANIA.
Women, yet grew so expert in the Laws, that the Magistrates compelled them to
lay away their Distafs, and spindles: and they so discussed the hardest
matters, which came before the Counsel, that they were holden in great
Reverence, and honored of all: and gained more love, and benefit, than all
the Men-lawyers in that land.

Diodore of Sicilia had five Children, DIODORE.
and all were daughters: and each of them so exceeded other, in Learning,
Behavior, and good Manners, that certain good Laws of their making, are yet
in full effect in that Country.

But, to shun the objections of the Calumniatours of Women, who may seem to
say, that I produce too many examples of Heathen Women: and the Heathen set
their only Felicity, and Summum Bonum, in the attayning to the perfection and
knowledge of things of this life: therefore, I turn again, to the worthy
testimonies of our Ecclesiastical Writers, and good examples of Christian
Women.

The worthy Eusebius witnesses, in EUSEBIUS. IEMNA.
his Church Histories, that Memna, mother of the Emperor Alexander Severus,
had such an earnest zeal to Godliness, Learning, and Virtue, that she sent to
Antioch, desiring holy Origin ORIGIN
to come unto her, even to instruct her yet farther in the way of Salvation: of
whose coming she rejoiced greatly, heard his doctrine, and proved a worthy
Matron in true Religion, and mightily instructed others.

Tecla, a Mayde-Disciple to Saynct TECLA.
Paul, excelled many of his Man-Disciples, in Wisdom, Learning, and
Godliness, says the same Eusebius.

Saynct Katharine, a Virgin of Alexandria, SAINT KATHARINE.
overthrew fifty learned Philosophers, in weyghtie matters of disputation.

Amia, and the four daughters of AMIA.
Saynct Philip, were prophetesses of the new Testament, in the Churches of
Philadelph.

In the days of Saynct Jerome, were abundance of learned, wise, and religious
GERONTIA. FABIOLA. andC.
Women, such as Gerontia, Fabiola, Furia, Marcella, Demetridis, Salvia, and
many others: unto whom Saynct Jerome wrote many learned Epistles; and they to
him again.

Here may Dumea Angia, a Virgin, DUMEA ANGIA.
Lady of Honor to the Queen of Portugal, of 22 years old, take place; who
wrote unto Pope Paulus, (the third of that name, Bishop of Rome) in five
languages; to wit, in Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Chaldaicke, and Arabicke. So that
that Pope seeing her to be such an excellent Scholar, indeed, was feign to
use the help of interpreters: otherwise, it had been impossible for him to
have sent her any goodly Answers. This happened about the year of GOD 1548.

And in those days dwelt a Spanish woman in Rome, called Isobell Rosier;
ISOBEL ROSIER. SCOTUS SUBTILUS.
who in public audience constructed, and interpreted the books of Scotus
Subtilus: who in those days was holden for the subtilest Fellow in the world.

Also we read of many Noble Women, yea, and of Queens, who have so highly
excelled in Learning, and so skillfull in sundry Languages, that they
themselves answered the Ambassadors sent from any Nation whatsoever. Which
their block-headed Husbands could not do: and therefore must hold themselves
as mute, as do the Myce in presence of the Cat.

And thus, in the just praise of Women, I conclude this Subject, hastening
toward another: for Their excellent Perfections are so many, great and
wonderful, that I must needs confess,

The more I gaze against the Suns clear light,
The more am I distracted of my sight.
CHAPTER IX. Of the Chastity, Modesty, and Temperancie in WOMEN, both Wives
and Mayds: to the example of luxurious, vicious, and libidinous Men.
AS amongst the innumerable Imperfections of men, there be some more gross and
shameful, than others: Even so amongst the beautifying perfectious Graces in
WOMEN, there are some more laudable, and of greater estimation.

And as Leacherie is a capital Imperfection in Man, and rules in him as a
Prince of all other Vices: Even so CHASTITY in WOMAN, is the greatest point of
Her Perfection, and rules in Her, as the Princess of all other Virtues.

Xenocrates says, that although a XENOCRATES HELENA
Woman had the fayrnesse of Queen Helen, the wisdom of the queen of the
South, and the riches of Craesus; yet if she want Chastity, and purity of
body, she is of no value, but like the blasted slowre, and withered grass,
which is trodden under feet.

Yea, Chastity is a Woman's own element, without the which she cannot be
substantial, no more than the fowls without air, and the fishes without
water. For as long as a Woman has Chastity, (says an Ancient Father) she
has all good things, and is all things: but wanting That, she has no good
thing, nor is nothing.

And, this is almost the saying of chaste Lucretia, that in Woman all virtues
LUCRETIA.
were fled away, when she was once defiled.

And, it is true, that Lucretia spoke not this in an vnadvysed manner, or
lightly, in a spleen, or that she said the thing she thought not: no, no;
for she sealed her words, even with her own Blood, GOD wots, after that
TARQUIN.
proud Tarquine had violently defiled her.

But, our Christian Women have no fayrer example of cleanly Chastity, than in
Susanna; who choosed rather SUSANNA
to lose her life, than to commit such unclean wickedness. THE chaste
Countess of SALISBURIE.


Also, it is steadfastlie affirmed in the Chronicles of England, that one of
their Kings, at the sight of the fair Countess of Salisburie, desired her, to
his lustful appetite, her Husband being in France. But, that good Woman,
being readier to end her life, with a Dagger, than to satisfy his filthy
desire, the King stayed her hand. Then she besought the King, that she might
first slay her Husband; and then she would be ready to pleasure him in any
thing. Thy Husband, said the King, is in France. Nay, quod she, he is lodged
here in mine Heart; therefore let me kill him, that he bewray us not. Which
words, and chaste behavior of the Countess, put the King in astonishment; so
that he feared GOD, left off his Devilish purpose, and held that Lady in
Honor all his days.

The Tyrant Maxentinus, (says EUSEBIUS.
Eusebius, in his eight Book, Chap. 17) sent his servants for a comely
Virgin, in Rome, named Sophrania, to deflore SOPHRANIA.
her of her Virginity. And when the Servantes had told her their message,
she desired them to stay, till she attyred her self in her best array, that
their Lord might the better accept of her. And going to her Chamber, she fell
down on her Face, and cried to the GOD of Heaven, to delyver her from any
such filthy action. And whiles the wicked Sergeants would not stay, but beat
upon her Chamber door, to take her speedily forth, by violence; she lifted
up her Eyes, Heart, and Mind, toward Heaven; and with pen-knyfe, bereaft her
self of life: choosing, far rather, to offer her cleanly Soul to GOD, and
undefiled Corpse to the Grave, by Death, than to live, and abide the wicked
Pollution of filthy leacherous Man.

Yea, the same holy Eusebius, writes EUSEBIUS.
of an infinite number of other Women, who wyselie, and valiantly, have
preserved the cleanness of Body: and have not only ventred, (but also lost)
their lives therefore.

And not only is this probable of Christian Women: but also amongst the very
Heathen, and Pagans, are registrated abundance of Women, who did, far
rather, lose all the World, yea, life, and all, before they would lose their
Honor.

Saint Hieronymus, writing against HIERONYMUS.
Joyinian, tells of very many Women, who were of such cleanly Condition,
Disposition, and Quality, that neither Goods, Life, nor Death, was in regard
with them, to their undefiled Honesty. A THEBAN MAID.


And a Maid of Theban, being ravished, by a Macedonian, corbed her heavy
passions, for a day or two, till she got occasion to slay him: which she
valorously performed with her own hands. Then, rejoicing greatly, that GOD
had given her strength to be avenged on such a Villane, she withdrew her
self to the Wilderness, where she lived solitarilie all her days.

Chiomara, the wife of Ortiagent, was CHIOMARA.
taken in battle, by a Captayn who violently abused her. But shortly after
her ransom was sent, and she was to depart homewards. Now she requested this
Captain, to convoy her a little piece of her journey: which he did very
willingly. And, she having conspired his death with her servants, she drew him
a little from the way, (whereof this Leacher grew very amorous, thinking to
take his lustful leave of that fair Lady) where four of her servantes lay
privilie, who held him fast, while she took off his head, which she carried
to her husband, and threw it at his feet. Whereat he being amazed, said, Thou
wicked woman, wherefore have thou committed this treason? Truth and fidelity
ought to be kept with our very enemies. Yes, quoth she, you say true: but it
is neither Truth nor Honesty for me, to let any man live that has lain with
me, except mine own Husband. Then her Lord understanding the matter rightly,
he loved her the more entirely; and he, together with the whole Country, hold
her in great honor, all her days.

A Lacedemonian Wife being straightly persued by a leacherous Lubber, answered
him, that she could not give that which was never her own: For, quod she,
while I was a Damsel, my Virginity pertayned to my Parents, and now it is
mine own Husbands. So this leacherous Logger-head left off his suit, and
took his Leave without Farewell, looking as though his nose had been bleeding.

Read, I pray you, Munsterus, in MUNSTERUS. GRANTZIO.
his Description of the World, and also worthy Grantzio, in the Chronicles of
Germany: where men shall find such plenty of the praise of Women concerning
Chastity; and such loathsomeness in men concerning their detestable filthy
viciousness; that if there be any spunke either of Grace or Shame left in
them, let them bow to women, and cry Pecaavi; and let all such as unhappily
are fallen into that damnable fact of Blasphemy, or railing, or scoffing
against Women, either in word or writ; let all such, I say, blush, and be
ashamed: and, without speedy and public repentance, not only confuted, but
confounded for ever. And thus, in the just praise of Women, we proceed to
another Subject. For, though I should ask ungrateful man,

Wherein have Women not surpassed Men,
In Good? They Will answer me I know not when.
CHAPTER X. Of the great and wonderful Wisdom in WOMEN: to the high Glory of
GOD, and great Benefit of Man.
ANd if our wicked, wayward, and witless Vilependers of Woman's Sex, could yet
at last begin to consider, and look to the Right hand; casting off that
blind-board wherewith Satan, the fat her of Envy, has so long over-syled and
blind-folded the eyes of their Understanding; then might they happily, even to
their own credit and advantage, clearlie behold and confess the singular
Grace of GOD, in every degree, and in greater measure, proceeding more from
WOMEN, than from Men. And so being come to themselves, and acknowledging their
heinous transgression against this Angelical Sex of Women, they would not
fail to imitate the Poet Stesichoris, who vnadvysedlie STESICHORIS.
in his verses had rayled against fair Helene of Greece: but when he IELEN.
rightly understood himself, he recalled all what he had either said or
written before: and wrote excellently in her praise and commendation. Then why
may not me^ of such quality (with Stesichoris) turn both Notes and Coats,
since now-a-dayes so many even of other qualities also willingly adjoyne
their Forces with them?

Now, amongst all other gracious Ornaments, and ornamentall Heavenly Graces,
wherewith Women are accompanied, is WISDOM, and wherewith even from the Cradle
they are still decored and clothed, as is most manifest as well by the sacred
Scriptures, as all other true Histories, both Ecclesiastical and Civil.

And the railing of men against women, shows them to be the sons of cursed
cursing Shimei, who rayled on blessed blessing David. And as David's Blessing
returned to himself, even so did Shimei's Cursing return unto himself also.
And so be it unto all those cursed men, who implore not the Heavens, that All
Blessing be upon WOMAN, that MAN may get part.

Look to the wisdom of Rebecca, GENES 27.
who procured her Husband Isaac his blessing unto Iaakob her youngest son,
whereas Isaac himself was purposed (that same very day) to have bestowed it
on Esau his eldest son. For, silly man, as he was blind of body, so also in
mind, and knew not that it was the LORD'S doing, as Rebecca knew, that the
elder must serve the younger.

Now, the men may stay their boasting against Women, (even by this example of
Iaakob and Esau) in pleading MATTHEW 26
of Antiquity; well remembering that the elder must serve the younger. For
they sold their birthright, for thirty pieces of Silver, and so became
portioners with Barabbas, that laudable seditious Murderer.

Again, if Antiquity of men may bear any sway against women, I am assured
the Devil is more ancient than men, being before them. And, as much as man can
think himself better than woman, because he was first, I think the Devil
may as well think such like, because He was before man. I will say nothing
here of the Antiquity of the Pope, and Popish Religion, till these mistie
muggie unwholesome vapors of Idolatry which infect my brain, be somewhat
disabled by the reflex of Titan from his highest Sphere.

But let us go on to our Purpose, in showing this great Gift of Wisdom in
Women.

Wise Abigaill is highly to be commended, and her churlish husband Naball
greatly to be condemned, for his uncharitable dealing with David in his great
necessity. Whereby he had almost brought Destruction to himself, and all his
Family, yea, and a horrible sin 1. SAM. 25.
upon David, had not wise Abigaill prevented the same in time.

There was a wise woman in the besiedged City of Abell of Bethmaachah, says
the Scripture, who delivered 2. SAM. 20.
the distressed City, even by the confusion of one wicked man, who had almost
been the destruction of the whole City, named Sheba, the son of Bichri.

The Emperor Theodosius, called the Youngest, was so foolish, that he would
put his Seal and subscription vnadvysedlie to any Wrytinges that were brought
unto him, without either reading or hearing the same. Which his Sister
Plucheria wyselie considering what great evil might ensue thereby, she
bethought her, how she might happily prevent all occasion of offense which
might happen through her brother's simplicity, and to ingraff in him more deep
and solid understanding.

So this Plucheria caused a fair writer PLUCHERIA
to frame a goodly Commission to look unto, the contents whereof was, That
EVBOCE, (which was his own Emperesse, and whom he beloved most dealy) should
be disherited of all her Dowry, and stripped of all fair Clothing; and being
wrapped in sacking, should lie in a dark Dungeon seven years. And if she
lived that long, then was she ordained, to work naked amongst the chayned
slaves, all the rest of her days. This Decree the Emperor too rashly
subscribed, which was presently delivered unto his Sister, who came speedily
therewith vnhim, desiring him that her name might also be incert in that
Decree, for company; for she vowed to take a part of all things with the
Empress, as well evil as good, woe as weal, yea, and to live and die with
her.

The Emperor being amazed to hear his sister speak thus, said, My loving
Sister, what mean you? I mean, quoth she, to live and die with thy Wife, whom
thou have cruelly condemned, without knowing or asking the cause why. And, as
one in a great fury, throwing the writing at him, said moreover, Have there
thine own hand and Seal: it can not now be mended: but write down my name
also, and we will go to prison together: for nothing but Death shall be able
to part us.

And when he saw, and understood the matter consideratiuelie, he cried with a
loud voice, desiring GOD and Man to forgive him, sent for the Empress, and on
his knees, (she falling about his neck half dead) he besought her to forgive
him: which she willingly granted. And giving them both great thanks, he never
did so again.

The Duke of Castilia being imprisoned THE Duchess of CASTILIA.
for treason against his brother the king, his wife got leave to visit him in
Prison: where she changed Clothes with him, putting his upon her, and hers
upon him, and sent him out of the Prison, and tarried therein her self;
willing to suffer any Torments, yea, to die for him, if it had so fallen out.
But when the jaylour perceaved the matter, he told the king, how that because
his Majesty had given access to the Duchess of Castilia to come to her
husband in Prison, she had beguiled them, and sent him away in her clothes,
and remained in the Prison with his clothes upon her self, and was very
willing to suffer whatsoever could be laid to her husband's charge. Which when
the king understood, he sent privatelie for her, and caused his Queen give her
of her own rich Attire: and sending his great Seal for her husband, forgave
him freely, upon good conditions: and sent them home with great Honor.

Plutarch makes mention of Pythius PLUTARCH.
in Lydia, who would have nothing done but making of Gold, with all his
people; neglecting all manner of Husbandry, Huswyuerie, and all other
Occupations: So that the whole land was overgone with Rubbish, Briers, and
Thorns. Which his wise Wife well remarking and considering, on a day her
husband, with the whole people, being away to the making of Gold, and she at
home, with her maids making ready their Dinner, she prepared the similitude
of all manner of meat, roast and sodden, every thing in its own form and
color, and all of pure gold, and nothing else. Now her husband coming home
hungry from the Mines, with his great company, sat down to Meat, with
well-prepared stomachs. And drawing out their sharp Thittles, he to a dish,
and he to a dish: but could not cut, for all was Gold* Whereat they took great
delight for a short space: but their bellies persuaded their eyes to somewhat
else. Then Pythius THE wife of PYTHIUS.
desired his wife to take that mea^ away, and give them others. So she brought
other kinds of Bread and Meat, also of pure Gold, still so long that he was
almost mad for hunger and began to chafe most horribly Whereupon she replied,
that she could give him no other than his Country afforded, and such as he
brought unto her: For, said she, you have forsaken Husbandry, our land lies
waste, corns have we none, our beasts run wild upon the mountayns, and
traffic with other Nations have we none: wherewithal then would ye have me
to satisfy your hunger, or cloathe your nakedness? Gold only is the fruit
of your hands: eat it, and be filled; put it on, and be clothed therewith;
for I have naught else to give you. And while they gazed one upon another, she
ran, and brought some other meat, both gross, and not much of it, wherewith
they were feign to be contented for that time.

But afterward Pythius took ever his wives counsel about him, employed his
people in Husbandry, and all manner of Virtue, made Gold also, were
Traffiquers with other Nations, and so became a most flowrishing Country. And
all by the wisdom and foresight of his worthy WIFE.

Thus Gold, and All, good Women can subdue,
And prove at all times to their Husbands true.
CHAPTER XI. Of the constant steadfastnesse in Women, not only suffering
cruel Torments, but also horrid Death, for the Testimony of JESUS CHRIST.
THe Almighty, our GOD, who is the beginner of every good work does often
times make choice of weak Instruments, and such as unwise men count fools;
ever to manifest His great Power, and make His Glory known to all the world;
By abasing the worldly wise, and turning their wisdom into folly; By putting
down the mighty from their seat, and exalting the humble and meek; By
sending the rich empti^ away, and filling the hungry with good things, etc.
Which is more than manifest by an innumerable number of women: who although by
nature they be but weak vessels; yet through influence from Above, many of
them have proven more strong and steadfast in the worthiest and greatest
Matters, than any men that ever were: and especially in mayntayning and
defending of the true and Christian Faith: yea, and suffered for the same, not
only tyrannical torments, but also cruel Death it self, notwithstanding of
the womanly tenderness of their most comlie proportionable featurall
personages.

A Christian Maid in France, named Blandine, in the great Persecution of
BLANDINE.
CHRIST'S Members there, under the Emperor Severus, about the year of our
LORD 178, was taken, and bound to a Stake, with strong threatninges to burn
her, or else to renounce the Christian Faith. But she continued rejoycinglie
steadfast. Then brought they wild beasts, to feed upon her flesh, and began
to let them byte her tender corpse. Yet nevertheless she shrunk not a jot:
but the faster that the Serpents did byte her, the louder she cried, I am a
Christian, I am a Christian: looking up, and calling earnestly to the GOD of
Heaven, to give her strength and patience, that she might be worthy to
finish her life to the Glory of His Name. Now, her torments lasted so long,
and she endured so steadfast, that the very Executioner stood amazed, and cut
off her head. The spectators bewailed her with many tears: and many at that
same hour believed, and were casten inte deep Dungeons.

Another Virgin called Maxima, MAXIMA
being so horribly tormented by Sason prince of Vandals, and yet could not be
urged to forsake CHRIST, he let her go free. But many others which were in
Prison, he banished into the Isle of Capsur, under the king of Mores: where
they preached the Gospel: and afterward were eaten with wild people.

Maximine was a cruel Persecuter of the Christians: and took his chief
pleasure in devysing new tormenting Instruments, to perplexe them with a
languishing death. But he was not busier to invent their Sorrow, than they were
earnestly ready to suffer all that he could imagine. But especially the
Women: Amongst whom were Dorothea SO PHRONIA. DOROTHEA.
and Sophronia; who chose far rather to drink out the very dreggs of the
Cup of Death, than any ways to shrink a whit from the Confession of the true
Faith.

And the same GOD which strengthened these Women in all kind of Martyrdom,
(yea, and in the pangues of Death) for His Names sake, wroght also in the heart
of this Tyrant, that he was overcome with the constant steadfastnesse in the
Religion of these Women: In so much, that he caused publish an Edict, and
proclaimed through all his Empire, That none should molest them in any thing,
upon poene of Death.

Thus we clearlie behold the extraordinary great loving Mercies of our GOD
toward Woman Sex: who has still so mightily assisted them even with His
Divine Strength, to suffer all whatsoever could be laid upon them, without
shrinking, unto the last period of Breath: no, not in Death it self. And thus
we proceed.

The Church History makes mention of an ancient Virgin of Alexandria, whom
the persecutioner took, and drew out all her teeth, and then A VIRGIN MARTYR
her tongue also; and brought her to the fire, to be burnt quick. And when
they entreated her, yet to forsake CHRIST, she resolutelie leaped into the
fire, and was burnt to powder, about the year of our LORD 251.

About which time also was a religious Woman, called Cointh, unnaturally,
COINTH
and filthilie drawn, at a horse tail, through all the nookes of the City of
Alexandria. And yet continuing steadfast, they rent her in pieces, with ugly
disguysed persons, like Devils, and Death himself.

Socrates tells, that a Temple was SOCRATES LIB. 6. CAP. 33.
erected in the town of Edesse, in Mesopotamia, to the honor of GOD, and the
Apostle Saint Thomas; in the which the Christians used to assemble, and offer
their sacrifices, of prayer, praise, and thanksgiving, unto the GOD of Heaven.
Which when the Emperor Valens understood, who was an Archenemie to the
servants of the true God, and an accursed persuer of all such as professed the
Name of JESUS, he was wrathful toward Modestus the chief Captain; sent for
him, and reproved him very sharply, for suffering the Christians, contrary
his will, and commandment: And gave him charge, on pain of Death, and his
whole posterity, that the next time that the Christians coveaned in Saynct
Thomas Church, he should murder them all, both young, and old. Now this
Modestus, MODESTUS.
the chief Captain, was a good Man, and sent private advertisement to the
Christians, that upon their next awonted day of assembly in Saint Thomas
Church, none should be found there, who loved his life. Nevertheless, upon
their usual day, they came to the Church in great numbers, to say their
Prayers: and Modestus, making a show to satisfy the Emperors evil purpose,
was marching thitherwards, with a band of armed soldiers: and seeing a
Christian Woman, with a child in her arms, running toward the Church, he
called her, saying; Unhappy Woman that thou art, whither art thou going? She
answered, To the Temple of Saynct Thomas. Have thou not heard tell, quoth he,
that the Emperor has commanded me to slay all that are in the Temple to day?
Yes, she said, and therefore I haste me thitherwardes, with my child, that
we may die with the rest of our Brethren, and Sisters.

This chief Captain seeing the Woman so resolutelie bent, with her little
one, to suffer for the Name of CHRIST, returned with his soldiers, to the
Emperor, told him what the Woman had said, and desired, rather to suffer
Martyrdom himself with the Christians, than to work any thing against them.
Whereby the Emperor was put from his hellish purpose.

The Archbishop of Saleucia had a Sister, called Tharbua; who because she
THARBUA.
would not renounce the faith of JESUS, was bound to a post, and her Maid to
another, and were cut in twain, in the middle, with a Saw, and never shrunk
for the matter.

And under the Reygne of Emperor Adrian, there was an holy, and wise Matron,
called Sophia, who had three daughters, SOPHI^
which she saw cruelly executed, for the Name of JESUS; she standing by, and
giving them cowrage, to the last gasp. And being dead, she buried them, with
her own hands, without the City of Rome; giving great praise unto GOD,
glory, and thanks, who had made her so happy a Woman, that the fruit of her
Womb was so respected of the LORD, as to account them worthy, to be of the
number of those that suffered for the Name, and Glory of the LORD JESUS.

But, seeing it is not possible for me, nor none else to registrate all the
steadfast and constant Women, in Godliness, Virtue, Wisdom, Learning,
Knowledge, Cowrage, Chastity, and many other excellent perfections: (for,
indeed, such a task would fill the world full of Books, and yet never be
ended) Therefore, at this time, I think to conclude this my little Essay, (to
the Honor of GOD, and good Women,) with the ecclesiastical History of the
Maccabees.

We read, that two Women were brought in, and accused, for not observing the
manners of the Gentiles; because, according to the Law of GOD, they had
circumcised their little ones; which, hanging on their Mothers breasts, they
hurried them, shamefullie, round about the City; and then, both Women, and
Infants, were thrown headlongs down from the Wall.

Again, a Mother, with her seven Sons, were cruelly, and vnhumanelie,
tortured, and also put to Death, because they would not forsake the Law of GOD,
and their fathers. And this part of Scripture testifies, That the Woman was
marvelous above all, and worthy of honorable memory, for when she saw her
seven Sons slain, within one days space, she bare it with a good cowrage,
because of the hope which she had in the LORD.

But, to understand this History the better, I pray you read the seventh
Chapter of the second Book of Maccabees, where it is already most
excellently set down, even by the Spirit of GOD: unto whom I consecrate my
self for ever, and recommend all good Women; unto whom, next unto God, I
dedicate my mind, since my might is not able to perform what my Muse would
feign amount unto: And to excuse my brevitie, I must conclude with Master
Tailor, That

The shortest Writ, the greatest Wit affordes:
And greatest Wit, consists in fewest words.
A false ECHO, truly answered.
The first Summonds,
Come ECHO, I do thee summon,
Tell me truly, What is a Woman?
ECHO.
If worn, she is a Feather:
If wooed, she is frostie weather.
If won, the wind's not slighter:
If vexed, the Moone's not lighter:
If lain withal, she is Apish:
If lain with none, she is snappish.
The ECHO thus replied,
But yet me thought it lied.
The second Summonds.
Come ECHO, I thee Summon,
Tell me once more, What Is a Woman?
ECHO.
If fair, she is coy in courting:
If witty, loose in sporting:
If ready, she is loathing:
If naked, she is nothing:
If well beloved, she scorns thee:
If not beloved, she horns thee:
The Answer.
And, for all good Women's sake,
This Replye now do I make;
If worn, she is a jewel:
If wooed, she is not cruel:
If won; the Rock's not surer:
If weighed, the Golde's not purer:
If lain withal, Delicious:
If lain with none, not vicious.
False ECHO, go, you lie,
For this is a Woman truly.
And for your second Summon,
I answer for a Woman.
If fair, she is heavenly Treasure:
If witty, she is all Pleasure:
If ready, far from Vaynties:
If naked, she is Daynties:
If well beloved, she fears not:
If not beloved, she cares not:
False ECHO, go, you lie,
For this is a Woman truly.
The Conclusion.
Blessed be the Heavenly Powers, which brought to light
This precious jemme called WOMAN, Man's Delight:
This Freeborn Princess, Casket full of Treasure:
This solid Author of Man's wished Pleasure.
This harmless spotless Saynct, not knowing evil,
A Goddess, though proud man would prove a Devil.
Why? She Is a Work so purelie wrought, that Nature
Knew not whether 'twas more adorned with Feature,
Or with chaste Honesty. And this was She,
Fruit of whose womb fred Man from Misery.
For which She Is blessed, that Her Sex Faults shall fall.
From small, to less; from less, to none at all.
And therefore thus we may defyne a WOMAN;
She Is lovely, faithful, harmless, false to no man.
Although that Man, as an incarnate Devil,
Of Her whom GOD made good, would feign make evil.
And if sweet Women's love do not Men cherish,
Those that contemn their Sex, with shame shall perish.
Epilogue.
THus to avoyde the imputation of Ingratitude, which was holden for so heinous
an Offense even amongst the Heathen, that Periander of Corinth made a Law, that
whosoever was found unthankful, having received any Gift, should be put to
death: Therefore,

With lowly Heart, and eke with thankful Mind,
I send my Labors to Good Woman-kynde.
Indeed, what the loftiness of the Argument requires, I confess, I have not
attained unto: Yet have I bestowed such willing pains, as I was able to
undergo: but nowayes herein can I satisfy my self to do them Good.
Nevertheless, I shall hold my self recompensed to the full, if by any
willingness I may reserve the Memory of Honorable Women, in relating the
Truth in Honesty and Wisdom: Desiring no more, but to find a place, for a
time, amongst the petty Writers of great matters: thinking my pains ever well
bestowed, if once well accepted: no ways taking upon me to Instruct; but
only to Remember.

Surely, if the poor Persians water in a potsheard, was acceptable to the
Emperor; and, an apple, from a poor Pessant, was received by Artaxerxes; a
great ARTAXERXES. ALEXANDER.
Prince: if Alexander took water courteously from a common Soldiers Helmet;
and our Savior crowned the Widow, with everlasting praise, for two mytes
casten into the Treasury: Then am I assured, that your generous dispositions
will sparingly censure, and courteously receive these my poor Endeavors.
Which howsoever they be, they be yours, and so am I: Ever wishing, To buy the
ABATEMENT of mine own HONOR, with the rich price of WOMAN'S TRUE GLORY:
Concluding with Master GIBSON, That

It is no BOUNTY which does flow from STORE.
Who gives his Heart, what Gift can he Give moRe?
THE Duty of Husbands: Drawn out of MASTER CARTER his Book of Christian
Commonwealth.
EPHESIANS. 5. 33.

Let every one of you so love his Wife, even as himself.

PROVE. 31. 11. 12.

The Heart of Her Husband does safely trust in Her: For She will do him
good, and not evil, all the days of his life.

TO All Good Husbands.
Good Husbands all, receive in thankful part,
This Sacrifice, (which may my Will approve:)
Upon the Altar of a faithful Heart,
Consumed in the Flames of Zeal an^ Love.
Let Honorable Woman live for ever,
In all that Art, that Time, that Fame can give hER.
The Introduction.
PAtient JOB saying, that the whole life of Man was nothing else, but a time of
Temptations, spoke most fearfullie, and yet most truly: for we are tempted
in our old Age; and in our Cradle we are not free. If any evil be set
before us, we are easily provoked unto it. If we abound with Adam, in
Paradise, there may be Death in that: And, if we want, with our Savior, in
the Wilderness, there are Temptations in that also: So subtle is Satan, and
so envyous is our Enemy, to serve himself, even upon all occasions.

In the former age of the World, he wrought, and prevayled with Men, by
bringing in Errors of Mind, and Doctrines of Devils, to seduce the Church:
But now the clear light of the Gospel being come in, and Knowledge
abounding, he labors to bring in Error of life, and depravitie of
Conversation; for that, notwithstanding men know their Masters will, yet they
perform it not, that all means possible ought to be used, for the
Reformation of these so notorious and known Evils: yea, every man to put a
hand to this work: amongst the number of which, I have brought forth this my
poor Talent, to the fartherance thereof: that we married Men may strive yet
with our Arch-enemie; and, through the assistance of GOD'S Spirit, give him the
foil; even by showing our upright duty toward our Wives, and our wives
toward us, in the true love and fear of GOD.

As for these contentious objectours, and barkers against the Moon, I weygh
not. Shepheardes, Cow-heardes, and Clownes, have written good things, yea,
Divyne matters; Why, then, may not I show my good will? desiring no other
Reward, nor Thanks for my pains, but only good acceptance: And so I go
forwards to thE Work.

The Duty of Husbands.
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
THis Duty of Husbands, is said to be the first Degree which GOD gave unto
Man after his creation: for, when GOD had made Man the Ruler of the whole
Earth, and gave him dominion over all the creatures therein; yet, until He
gave unto him a Wife, he had no true contentment in all the rest. For every
creature had solace, in their kind except Man: but so was it not with Man,
till he had a Wife. But then finding her a fit Companion to associate himself
withal, with her he settled his Content.

And this did GOD for Man in the time of his innocence; giving us thereby this
instruction, That we also ought to live so vprightlie, holilie, lovely, and
purelie in the state of Wedlock, that we sin not against GOD, nor against
one another.

Now, here is one special thing to be noted; That GOD gave unto Man but one
Wife; and not two, or three, or many; although He could have given him more, if
he had known it meet so to be. But the Prophet Malachie MALAC. 2.
tells us why GOD gave him but one: Because, (says he) He sought a Godly
Seed.

See, then, GOD rejects the seed of Bastardie, begotten in filthy lustful
fornication, and abominable Adultery. He chooses none of these: it is the
seed of lawful Wedlock, whereof He makes His choice, to inherit His
Kingdom, and reygne in Glory, with His beloved Son.

And whence proceeded this breach, of GOD'S commandment at the first? Came it
not from that wicked blood of Caine? Was not Lamech, that murderer, like his
father, the first author thereof? Yea, he was so, For we see plainly, that
at the first GOD ordained it not so to be: and what He first ordained, He
still confirms. For when he drowned the whole GENESIS 4.
World, yet He preserved unto Noah but one Woman, and that his own wife:
thereby teaching unto Man, That he ought to keep himself unto his own wife
only. And when the LORD gave His Laws, unto His own chosen People, written
even with His own Hand, He then says; Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors
EXODUS 20.
Wife, speaking in the singular number: so that by Him we find no nomination
of a plural.

But if any will object, and say, That the Saynctes and Servantes of GOD, as
Abraham, Jaacob, David, Solomon, and others, have not observed this rule; but
have had dyverse wives; and being the beloved and chosen of GOD, therefore
they could not err in these things.

To this I answer; It pleased GOD to permit his Servants to do many things,
which He commanded not: He suffered Abraham to say, that Sarah, his wife, was
his sister, Joseph to GENESIS 11. GENESIS 44. ^. SAM. 11
swear by the life of Pharaoh, David to commit Adultery, and Murder, and
many other the like: and yet, we know, that all these things were directly
contrary to the will of God. And Solomon had many wives, indeed, 1. KINGS 11.
but they drew him to Idolatry.

We read, that Moses suffered the People of Israel, to give their Wives
DEVT. 24.
a bill of Divorcement, and so to put them away. But our blessed Savior
tells the Jews, That it was for the hardness of their hearts; And, to
prevent farther evils, that Moses permitted it to be so: and, That from the
beginning MATTHEW. 10.
it was not so.

But, to come to our matter again; let us see from whence this wife came,
which GOD has given unto Man; that so of him she may accordingly be
reguarded, as indeed she should.

We find it to be most true, That of Man's own self, GOD made him this
Companion and Wife: And that not from the hand of Man neither, lest she should
claim to rule, where her power consists not; nor of the foot, lest she
should be disdayned, and despised, of her Husband: but from the very body is
she taken. Nay, it is not anough for thee to spare of thine own flesh, for to
make thee a wife of; but thou must spare a bone also, if thou will have a fit
Companion for thee.

Then, O Man, be thankful for so rich a Jewel; rich, and dear, indeed,
being so near unto thee, and that from the only Hand of the Great and
Almighty GOD. Surely it must needs be exceeding good which He makes, and
of a great value which he vouchsafes to give. We have an old Proverb, That
it is a sweet Collop, that is cut out of the own flesh. Then, it must needs
be both sweet and dear, which is both of thine own flesh and bone.
Therefore, let us be wise in using this jewel as we ought; lest we be found
unworthy of her, by Him that gave her unto us, and then too late we lament
our incomparable loss.

Then, who so would keep a good Wife, let him keep her in the place from
whence she came; that is, from near thine heart, O Man: therefore lay her
there again: let her not stray from thence: yea, lock her in there, with the
Key of good Discretion: and so shall thou be sure, to find a comfortable
Treasure of Her in thy need.

But if any would say, Where is the Wife that deserves such a place? For
there are many such lewd and froward ECCLUS. 26.
wives, that their husbands are happiest when they are fardest from them. I
answer such (to their own shame) with these words of SOLOMON, That a
virtuous and good woman shall be given unto him that fears the LORD: and a
wicked woman is given as a reward unto a wicked man.

And therefore, he that would have a good wife, let him earnestly strive to
fear the LORD, that he may be a good husband; and so (of the free mercy of
GOD) obtain such a Blessing as is a good wise: whose commendations wise
Solomon himself could no ways sufficiently express: and far less silly
Raban: but let her own works give her her due praise.

THE SECOND CHAPTER.
NOw, since Man has received so precious a jewel, and dear Companion, as is
WOMAN, let us justly consider the Duties which he is bound unto, first to
wards GOD, for such an incomparable Blessing, and then toward Her.

And if in this case we search the whole Book of GOD through, we shall find
the effect and end thereof, to be wholly and only Love. Saynct Paul teaches,
That men ought to love their wives, as their own bodies. And he shows the
reason why: For, says he, no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but EPHESIANS. 5^
nowrisheth and cherishes it, even as Christ does His Church.

And thus did the Saynctes and Servantes of GOD love their wives in times past:
Abraham loved Sara entirely, GENESIS 23 and 26.
and so did Isaac love Rebecca.

This has that great Prophet and Servant of GOD, Moses, worthily expressed,
thereby to show unto men, That it is not anough for them to live peaceably and
quyetlie with their Wives; but they must live lovinglie with them also.

Thus did Jaakob love his wife, making service unto his uncle Laban, not only
seven years, but fourteen: to the GENESIS 28.
end he might enjoy her thereafter.

And Helkana loved Hanna his wife ^. SAM. 1. ^UD. 14. TOB. 6.
most dearly: and so did Samson, and both old and young Tobias, with many
others.

And, as we have said before, this Love must not be ordinary, but
extraordinary, toward our wives: and must imitate that Great Love which
CHRIST showed unto His Church, who gave Himself for it. Yet this is a great
mystery. For we are not commanded to follow CHRIST punctuallie and perfectly,
but in imitation, as far as it shall please Him to enable us thereunto: That
is, We must protect our Wives, and defend them in all perils and dangers: we
must govern them in wisdom, according to the Rule of GOD'S Word, both by
continual Instructions from thence, and by our own lovely, wise, and gentle
behavior toward them: and we must be laborious and careful in our Callings,
in the fear of GOD; so that we may provyde all things necessary for their
mayntaynance. For so does CHRIST for His Church: He is still defending and
provyding for her. For this cause (says He, blessed for ever) shall a man
leave father and mother, and clean unto his wife; and MATTHEW 19. 5.
they twain shall be one flesh.

Saynct Peter, being himself a married Man, gives many notable instructions
like these: who speaking by the Spirit of GOD, and in the knowledge he had of
Marriage, imposes this duty unto Men; Ye Husbands, (says he) dwell with
your Wives, as men of Knowledge; giving honor unto the woman, as unto the
weaker vessel; even as 1. PET. 3
they which are heirs together of the grace of life; that your Prayers be not
interrupted. And the wise man gives this counsel, Not to depart from a
discreet and good Woman, which is fallen unto thee for thy portion in the fear
of the LORD. Use thy self to live joyfullie with thy wife, all the days of
thy life; for that is thy Portion in this life of all thy labor ECCLES 7.
and travel that thou take under the Sun.

And, our blessed Savior CHRIST Himself, confirming on earth, what His Father
had done in Paradise, vouchsafed to grace a nuptial feast, with His blessed
presence. And to manifest His Love the more which He bore to the holy Union
then there knit betwixt the Man and his Wife, He expressed His Glory and
Power, in showing His first miracle at this marriage, and that of joy; by
turning water into wine, even to comfort and JOHN 2.
glad their hearts withal.

But now seeing we have proven, out of GOD'S word, that the principal duty
of Husbands toward their Wives, is Love, let us look into the glass of our
times, and see how the duty of Love is performed. But I fear, that amongst
an hundredth we shall scarcely find one that stryveth to perform this duty
of Love as he ought. For see we not daily rather the contrary by many? Men
consume the estates which they have gotten by their wives, through their own
vicious lives; some by sloathfull idleness, some by gayming, some by
drunkenness, some by whoring, and many other sorts of damnable living. And
thus are good Women brought to Beggerie, by lewd, shameless, and godless
Husbands, who have altogether forsaken the LORD, showing neither Love nor
Duty to their Wives, who are their own very flesh, blood, and bones.

Other Husbands again, to show their authority, forsooth, will hold their
wives in such subjection, and servitude, that no servand nor slave could abide
the like; being even a very Naball unto them, in churlishness of speech, and
crabbednesse of Conditions. Where is wisdom in such Husbands, who are
commanded to govern their Wives in love, and according to Knowledge?

Other fellow-impudents with these, will not labor, nor care for nothing; but
put the poor woman to shift for all. Or, if perhaps he get something abroad,
yet she is sure not to be the better thereof: it must be spent before he
come home, or else hidden from her presence. What shall we say of such (...)
veth GOD, and yet loves not his wife, I say he is a liar in grain.

But, when I have all done, and said what I can, yet I must leave men to the
consideration of what is written, and wish, and entreat them, to be wise, and
submit themselves unto the governament of the Word of GOD: that so they may
live quyetlie, and lovinglie with their Wives: and not only so, but joyfullie
also, (as the wise man says) for, surely, he has obtained a good portion,
who has a wife that he can live joyfullie with. For, what if a Man do abound
in wealth, so that he can give unto himself as much pleasure as Solomon
possessed, even what his heart can desire? yet, if he live not peaceably at
home, and in love with his wife, all is but an heavy and sorrowful burden
unto him. But the poor man, having little, and yet living friendly,
lovinglie, and joyfullie, with his wife, has ten thousand times more than the
rich co^tentious wretch; his heart being filled with contentment in the LORD,
and the other his heart full of wretchedness, and the sting of an evil
conscience.

We have an old Proverb, That in Love is no lack. For, where Love is united
with the fear of GOD, in the hearts of Man and Wife, they will, like
yoak-fellowes, draw together the right way, like the two milke-kyne, which
brought the Ark of GOD, in the new Cart, from the land of the Philistimes:
Yea, they will plow together, and sow together: and there is no doubt, but
through the blessing of Him who governs them, they shall receive a plentiful
harvest together.

Thus, we have found, that the principal duty of the Husband toward his
Wife, is Love: which duty is now-a-dayes neglected, contemned, and even
despised of many, who have turned aside, and forsaken the way of the LORD, as
appears by the evils and mischiefs which daily arise betwixt Man and Wife.
And, therefore, having descryed a main defect in Husbands, the which we may
not pass over, because it is the greatest breach of Love that may be, we
shall speak something thereof (...) the next Chapter, GOD permmitting us.

THE FOURTH CHAPTER.
THis duty of the Husband unto the Wife, being wholly included in the Bands
of Love, it streatcheth it self farther, into many branches. For we find
also by the Word of GOD, that the Husband must dwell with his Wife, according
to Knowledge. So we see here, that it is not lawful for the Husband to
forsake his Wife: but, howsoever, whether it be in weal or woe, in riches or
poverty, yet he must abide, and dwell with her still, except it be only for
the fact of Adultery; and for no other cause may a Man forsake his Wife, nor a
Wife her Husband.

Indeed the wise man says, Give me any plague, but the plague of the
tongue. And, it may be, some wives have this imperfection; but, consider
rightly, if thou thy self be not the urgent cause thereof. Howsoever, it is
not a cause sufficient to forsake her, as testifies our Savior, who utterly
MATTHEW. 19.
forbids to separate those whom GOD has joined together, Adultery only
being accepted.

But the very fyre-brandes of Hell, even the wicked, and abominable
Adulterers, of our time, neither respecting the Word of GOD, nor yielding any
obedience to His commandments, or fearing the justice of His vengeance, to
come for their stiff-neckednesse, will, notwithstanding, like the Swyne
possessed by the Devil, run, violently, to their Destruction. But Saynct
Paull tells playnlie, that neither Fornicators, Adulterers, Wantons, or such
1. COR. 6
like, shall inherit the Kingdom of GOD. Whither they shall go, then, let
every good Christian tremble to think of. For these men, not regarding any
thing, will have a Wife here, and another there; one in this Country, and
another elsewhere: or if they be no Travelers, will think no shame to keep
a whore under his wives nose: and she dare not find fault with it, but may
know, and dare not know. Yea, many not yet contented heerewith, but proceed
farther: for all these damnable abuses seem sweet to a whore-monger, says the
wise man: neither will he leave off, till he perish. But ECCLES. 23
hearken what he says farther; to wit, that such a man shall be put to shame,
because he would not understand the ways of the LORD.

What need we cite petty Authors for this Adulterous generation? Let the
mouth of GOD take chief place, and condemn them, where He expresslie says,
Thou shall not commit Adultery, EXODUS 20.
thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife, etc. And the LORD commanded
stricklie, That there should be no whore-keepers amongst His people DEUTERONOMY. 23.
Israel. But if all such should be swept out of Britane, the land would be
thinlie inhabited. It is counted amongst young men, A trick of youth; and
amongst other of middle age, A venial sin: yea, the very aged themselves*
with their Hoarie and Snow-lyke head and beard, their furrowed and wrinckled
brows, and their carrion face; like a dead corpse, though their ability of
body be spent, and consumed, in abominable and damnable filthiness; yet they
will speak now more filthilie, than before they lived lasciviouslie. Behold,
of all Monsters, Lust is the worst, and that especially in old age,
testifies that worthy Clerk Erasmus of Rotterdam, in his Book of Christian
ERASMUS.
Warrefare, Capitulo 32. Where he very pithilie exhorts all such men, to
turn back from such great wickedness: saying, That if it be possible for
them to get true repentance, it is also possible for them to be saved.

But who so here repents never,
A Reprobate shall die for ever.
So great abominations were not committed in Sodom and Gomorrah, lo! as now
reygne amongst us, (who were consumed with fire and brimston long ago) and can
we then think to escape? Alace, no, except we repent in time. And therefore
let us be warned by the holy PSALMIST, who says thus: Oh, consider this,
ye that forget GOD, lest that He tear you in PSALM. 50. 22.
pieces, and there be none to deliver.

Hear yet what Saynct Paul says; Whore-mongers, and Adulterers, says HEB.
13.
he, GOD will judge.

And it is said in the Revelation, that they shall have their part in the Lake
that burns with fire and brimstone: which is REVEL. 24.
the second death.

And thus says the LORD by His Prophet JEREMIAH: They assemble IEREM. 5.
themselves, by companies, in the harlots houses; and rise up in the morning,
like fed horses, every man neyghing after his neighbors wife. And now mark
what follows: And shall I not visit for these things, says the LORD? Shall
not My Soul be avenged on such a nation as this?

And thus shortly have we proceeded in opening the breach of Sacred Wedlock;
to the end, that every one may clearlie see, into what dangers those men do
daily run, who live not lovinglie and faythfullie, yea, and joyfullie with
their own Wives, even as the Word of GOD enjoyneth them to do. And such a man
the wise SOLOMON proves to be the most foolish of all the fools under the
Sun, saying; That such a man destroys his own soul: yea, he shall find
a wound, says PROVE. 22.
he, and dishonor: and his reproach shall never be put away. And into such a
pit shall that man fall, with whom the LORD is angry.

THE FIFTH CHAPTER.
BY our former Chapters we have shown how far many Husbands come too
short of those Duties, which by the Word of GOD they are enjoined to perform
unto their only own Wives: and the whole cause, and chief ground whereof,
we see to be, The want of Love; or rather, of True Love. For if in Husbands
were that True Love, which the fear of GOD works in the heart of true
Christians, it would surely lead them to that Knowledge, wherewith Saynct
Peter exhorts them to be 1. PET. 3
furnished: and the which point we must needs handle a little broader before
we end this Treatise.

Now, as we have shown before, it is not anough for Husbands to abide and
dwell with their Wives: but they must dwell with them as men of knowledge and
understanding, well experienced in the Word of GOD, yielding wholly to the
Rule thereof, and obeying His holy Will and Commandementes.

Hereby comes that Knowledge, which will bring Husbands to perform that
Duty which Saynct Paull teaches them toward their Wives; to wit, To love
them, even as CHRIST EPHESIANS. 5
loved His Congregation: that is, with an holy, hearty, vnfeygned, and
constant love: Which we can no other ways attain unto, but by the aforesaid
Godly Knowledge; which must be gathered from the Word of GOD, even as a Be
gathers her honey from the sweetest flowers, and that by continual exercise:
or else be ye sure, you shall never receive true Comfort in your Marriages.

When Samuel had anointed Saull 1. SAM. 10.
to be King of Israel, the LORD gave unto Saull another heart than he had
before; even a heart according to his Calling. So no doubt but those men, whom
the LORD calls unto that Honorable Estate of Marriage, He will (and does)
furnish them with Gifts according to their places. For indeed it is no small
matter, but very weyghtie, of a Novice, to become the Father of a Family, the
governor of a Wife, Children, and Servantes, etc. Such a man has need of
another heart than he had before: even an heart to pray unto the LORD with
Solomon, That He would vouchsafe to give him wisdom, to go in and out, and
govern that Charge with Godly Knowledge, which the GOD of all Wisdom and
Knowledge has committed unto him.

Yet, before we conclude, let us also consider the Duty of FORBEARANCE,
which Husbands owe unto their Wives, as being the weaker Vessels: and Saynct
PAVL teaches us the reason playnlie why: Because, says he, they (meaning
the Wives) are Heirs with you of the Grace of Life: Elected by the favor of
GOD, in CHRIST JESUS, to that fellowship of Saynctes, wherein your selves hope
to be numbered: And, as dearly beloved of GOD, as your selves, are bought out
of the power of Satan, by the precious Blood of His dear Son, as well as
you: and Heirs also of that Eternal Life which you your selves hope to
enjoye. And therefore, if you your selves think to live as Sayncts in Heaven
heere-after, you must first live together as Sayncts here on Earth.

Let these thnges, then, be as a Lodestone, to draw Husbands unto the
performance of all their Duties toward their Wives. For this same Apostle
yields yet a farther reason of the Duties of LOVE, AMITY, and FORBEARANCE
of Husbands: to wit, That your Prayers (says he) be not hindered. That is:
If you would have GOD to hear you, when you pray unto Him, and to grant you
the things you desire of Him together, why then, in the Name of GOD, let us
agree together, live together, love together, and pray together. That so our
praying together, may receive comfort together;

And, That THE GOD OF LOVE may bless our Loves togethER. AMEN.

