Brave Raleigh's outward figure here you find But the great worth and
sharpness of his mind No tablet can contain; no paynter's skill Express,
seek that from his own (...) quill.


SIR Walter Raleighs INSTRVCTIONS TO HIS SON And to POSTERITY.

LONDON: Printed for Benjamin Fisher, dwelling in Aldersgate Street at the
Talbot, 1632.

TO THE READER.
IT was not perhaps, intended by the renowned Author, that these Instructions
should be made public: they were directed to his Son, who does make just and
due use of them. But such is the luster of Wisdom, that it cannot be hidden.
Men may bequeath their Wealth to their Children in particular, but their
Wisdom was given them for more general Good- Virgil willed that his
deathlesse AEneis should not live; but Great Augustus chose herein rather to
violate his Will, then to bury such Treasure. We need not such an Authority
nor precedent for this Publication: it is sufficient that it is a communicable
Good. Could his noble Son be hereby any way impaired, He should still have
impropriated it. But now He shall gain thus much; The World shall see that the
most secret Counsels of his Father were Just and religious, and has good cause
to hope that a Son so instructed can be no otherwise.

Suppose ( Reader) that thy Father might or should have given thee such Advice;
so shall thou be more willing to follow it and receive the Benefits here
prescribed; Discretion and Honesty.

The Contents of the several Chapters contained in this BOOK.
Chap. 1. Wise, and virtuous persons to be made choice of for friends. Chap.
2. Great care to be had in the choosing of a Wise. Chap. 3. Wisest men have
been abused by flatterers. Chap. 4. Private quarrels to be avoided. Chap. 5.
Three Rules to be observed for the preservation of man's estate. Chap. 6. What
sort of Servants are fittest to be entertained. Chap. 7. Brave rags wear
soonest out of fashion. Chap. 8. Riches not to be sought by evil means.
Chap. 9. What inconveniences happen to such as delight in wine. Chap. 10. Let
God be thy protector and director in all thy Actions.
S. WALTER RALEIGH, TO His Son.
CHAP. 1.
THere is nothing more beco^ming a wise man then to make choice of Friends; for
by them thou shall be judged what thou art; let them therefore be wise and
virtuous, and none of those that follow thee for gain, but make election
rather of thy Betters then thy Inferiors, shunning always such as are poor
and needy, for if thou give twenty gifts, and refuse to do the like but
once, all that thou have done will be lost, and such men will become thy
mortal Enemies; take also especial care, that thou never trust any Friend, or
Soruane, with any matter that may endanger thine estate, for so shall thou make
thy self a bond-slaue to him that thou trustest, and leave thy self always
to his mercy, and be sure of this, thou shall never find a friend in these thy
young years, whose conditions, and qualities will please the after thou
come to more discretion; and then all thou give is lost, and all wherein
thou shall trust such an one, will be discovered; such therefore, as are thy
inferiors will follow thee, but to eat thee up, and when thou leauest to feed
them, they will hate thee; and such kind of men, if thou preserve thy estate;
will always be had; and if thy Friends be of better quality then thy self,
thou may been sure of two things, that they will be more careful to keep thy
counsel, because they have more to loose then thou. Secondly, they esteem
thee not, because thou do possess, but for thy self; but if thou be
subject to any great vanity, or ill, which I hope God will bless thee from,
then therein trust no man; for every man's folly ought to be his greatest
secret. And although I persuade thee to associate thy self with thy betters,
at least Peers; yet remember always, that thou venture not thy estate with any
of those great ones, that shall attempt unlawful things, for such men labor
for themselves, and not for thee; thou shall be sure to part with them in their
danger, but not in their honor; and to venture a true estate in present, in
hope of a better in future, is mere madness; and great men forget such as have
done them service, when they have obtained what they would; and will rather
hate thee for saying, thou have been a means of their preferment, then
acknowledge it. I could give a thousand examples, and my self knows it, who
have tasted it, in all the course of my life; So that I need not in a matter so
known, give instance in examples. Let thy love therefore be, to love God, thy
Country, thy Prince, and thine own estate before all others: for the Fancies
of men change, and he that loves to day, hates to morrow; but let Reason be
thy Schoolmistris which shall guide thee aright.

CHAP. II.
THe next, and greatest care in this life, ought to be in choice of thy Wife,
and the only danger therein is Beauty, by which all men in all Ages, wise,
and foolish, have been betrayed. And though I know it vain to use Reasons, or
Arguments to dismay thee, from being captiuated therewith, there being few that
ever resistted the Witcherie; yet I cannot omit to warn thee, as of other
things, which may be thy destruction for the present time. It is true, that
every man prefers his fantasy in that Appetite before other worldly
deserts, leaving the care of Honor, credit, and safety in respect thereof;
yet remember, though these afflictions do not last, yet the bonds of Marriage,
dureth to the end of the life. Nor give thy humor liberty, in accompaning
light Women; for though that humor may change in thee again, yet the blot it
leaves on thy honor will ever remain. Remember secondly, that if thou marry
for Beauty, thou bindest thy self for all thy life, for that which perchance
will neither last nor please thee one year; and when thou have it, it will be
unto thee of no price at all, for the desire dies when it is attained, and the
affection perishes, when it is satisfied. Remember when thou were a sucking
Child, thou did love thy Nurse, and that thou were fond of her, after a
Child thou did love thy dry Nurse, and did forget the other, after that
thou did also despise her, so will it be in thy liking in elder years; and
therefore, though thou can not forbear to love, yet forbear to link, and
after a while thou shall find an alteration in thy self, and see another far
more pleasing then the first, second, or third love: yet I wish thee above all
the rest, have care thou do not marry an uncomely Woman for any respect,
comeliness in Children is riches, if nothing else be left them, and if thou
have care for thy races of Horses, and other beasts, value the shape of thy
children before Aliants or riches; Have care therefore of both together, for if
thou have a fair Wife, and a poor one, if thine own estate be not great,
assure thy self that Love abides not with want; for she is the companion of
plenty, for I never knew yet a poor Woman excoeding fair, that was not made
dishonest by one or other in the end. This, BERSHEBA taught her Son SOLOMON;
Favor is deceitful, and Beauty is vanity, she adds that a wise woman
overseeth the ways of her Husband, and eats not the bread of idleness; have
therefore, ever more care, that thou be beloved of thy wife, then thy self
besotted don her, and thou shall judge of her love by these two abservations:
first if thou perceive she have care of thy estate, and exercise her self
therein; the other, if she please thee and study it, and be sweet unto thee in
conversation without thy instruction, for Love needs no teaching nor precept;
on the otherside, be not sour nor stern to thy wise, for cruelty ingendereth
no other thing then hatred, let her have equal part of thy estate whilst thou
live, if thou find her sparing, and honest, but what thou give after thy
death, remember that thou give it to an enemy, and most times to a stranger,
for he that shall marry thy Wife shall despise thee, thy memory, and thine,
shall possess the quiet of thy labor, the fruit which thou have planted,
enjoy thy love, and spend with joy and ease what thou have spared, and gotten
with case, and travel; yet always remember, that thou leave not thy Wise to
be a shame unto thee after thou are dead, but she may live according to thy
estate; especially, if thou have few Children, and them provided for; but how
soever it be, or whatsfoever thou find, leave thy Wife no more then of
necessity thou must, but only duting her widdowhood, for if she love again,
lether not enjoy her second love in the same Bed wherein she loved thee, nor
fly to future pleasures with those feathers which death has pulled from thy
wings, but leave thy estate to thy House and Children in which thou deceasedst
upon earth whilst it lasted. To conclude, Wives were ordained to continue the
generation of Man, to transfer them, and diminish them, either in
countenance, or ability; and therefore thy house and estate which lives in
thy Son, and not in thy Wife, is to be preferred; Let thy time of marriage
be in thy young, and strong years; for believe it, ever the young Wife
bewrays the old Husband, and she that had thee not in thy flower, will
despise thee in thy fall, and thou shall be unto her, but a captivity and
sorrow, thy best time (...), for as the younger times are unfit, either to
choose or to govern a Wife and family; so if thou stay long, thou shall hardly
see the education of thy Children, which being left to strangers, are in effect
lost, and better were it to be unhorne then ill bred, for thereby thy
posterity shall eyether perish or remain a shame to thy name, and family.
Furthermore, if it be late ere thou take a Wife, thou shall spend the prime of
thy life with Harlots, who destroy thy health, improverish thy estate, and
endanger thy self, thy life, and be sure of this, that how many lewd Women
thou haft acquiantance withal, so many enemies thou shall purchase to thy
self, for there never was any such affection which ended not in hatred and
disdain. Remember the saying of SOLOMON there is a way which seems right to a
man, but the issues thereof are the wages of death. If thou can not then
abstain from them in thy vain, and unbridled times, yet remember that thou
sowest on the sands, and purchase diseases, repentance, and hatred only:
therefore, bestow thy youth so, that thou may have comfort to remember it
has forsaken thee, and not to grieve at the account thereof, whilst thou art
young; thou will think it will never have an end, bebold that the longest day
has his Evening, and that thou shall enjoy it but once, that it never turns
again, use it therefore as the Spring time which soon departs, and wherein
thou ought to plant, and sow all provisions for along and happy life.

CHAP. III.
TAke care thou be not made a fool by flatterers, for even the wisest men are
abused by these, know therefore, the flat terers are the worst kind of
Traitors, for they will strengthen thy imperfections, encourage thee in all
evils, correct thee in nothing, but so shadow, and paint all thy vices, and
follies, as thou shall never by their will discern evil from good, or vice
from virtue, because all Men are apt to flatter themselves to entertain the
additions of other men's praises, it is most perilous, do not therefore praise
thy self, and be counted a vainglorious fool, neither take delight in thy
praise except thou deserve it, receive it from such as are worthy and honest,
and will withal warn thee of thy faults; for flatterers have never no other
virtue, they are ever base, creeping, cowardly persons, for thou shall not find
a valiant friend that will venture his life for thee a flatterer, but such
creeping knaves as is good for nothing else. A flatterer, is said to be a
beast that flattereth biting, that biteth smelling; it is said by ESAIAS, in this
manner; My people they that praise thee seduce thee, and disorder the paths of
thy feet, and DAVID desires GOD to cast out the tongue of a flatterer, but it
is hard to know them from friends, so are they obsequious, and full of
protestations; for as a Wolf, a dog, so a flatterer resembles a friend. A
flatterer is compared to an Ape, who because she cannot defend the house like
a dog, labor as an Ox, or bear burdens as a Horse does, therefore yet play
tricks, and provoke laughter; a Friend thou may be sure that he will in
private tell thee of thy faults, he adventures this mischief, to hazard thy
hatred, for there are few men can endure it, every Man for the most part
delights himself in praise, which is one of the universal follies which
bewitcheth mankind.

CHAP. IIII.
BE careful to avoid public disputations at Feasts, or Tables, amongst
quarrelsome persons, and eschew evermore to be acquainted with Ruffians, for
thou shall be in as much danger with a brawler in private quarrel, as in a
battle wherein thou may get honor to thy self, and safety to thy Prince,
and country; but if thou be once engaged, carry thy self bravely, that they
may fear thee afterward; to shun therefore private fights, be well advised in
thy word and behavior, for honor and shame is in the talk and tongue of a
Man, jest not openly at those that are simple but remember how much thou art
bound to God who has made thee wiser! Defame not any Woman publicly, though
thou know her to be evil, for those that are faulty cannot endure to be taxt,
and will look to be avenged of thee, and those that are not guilty cannot
endure unjust reproach, and as there is nothing more shameful and dishonest,
so truth it self cutteth his Throat that carries her publicly. Do therefore
right to all Men where it may profit them, and thou shall thereby get much
love, and forebeare to speak evil things of Men though it be true, if thou
be not constrained, and thereby thou shall avoyde malice, and revenge. Do not
accuse any of any crime, if it be not to save thy self, thy Prince, or
Country; for there is nothing more dishonorable. I would not have you for any
respect loose your reputation, or endure public disgrace; for better it were
not to live then to live a coward, if the offense proceed not from thy self,
if it be it shall be better to compound it upon good terms, then to hazard
thy self, for if thou overcome, thou art under the cruelty of the Law, if
thou be overcome thou art dead, or dishonored; If thou therefore contend, or
discourse in argument, let it be with Wise and sober Men, of which thou may
learn by reasoning, and not with ignorant persons, for thou shall thereby
instruct those: that will not thank thee, and utter what they have learned
from thee, but if thou know more then other Men, utter it when it may do thee
honor, and not in assemblies of ignorant, and common persons: Speaking much,
is also a kind of vanity; for he that is lavish in words, is a niggard in
deeds, and as SOLOMON says, the heart of a Fool is in his mouth, and the
mouth of a wise Man is in his heart, because what he knows or thinks he
utters, and by words, and discourse, Men will judge thee. For as SOCRATES
says, such as thy words are, such will thy affections be esteemed, and such
will thy deeds as thy affections, and such thy life as thy deeds, therefore be
advised what thou do discourse of, what thou maintaynest, whether touching
Religion, estate, or vanity, for if thou err in the first, thou shall be
counted profane, in the second dangerous, in the third undiscreete, and
foolish, he that cannot refrain from much speaking, is like a City without
walls, and less pains in the world a Man cannot take then to hold his tongue,
therefore if, thou observest this rule in all assemblies thou shall seldom
err, restrain thy choler, hearken much and speak little, for the tongue is
the instrument of the greatest good, and greatest evil according to SOLOMON;
life, and death are in the power of the tongue: and as EURIPIDES truly
affirms, every unbridled tongue in the end shall find it self unfortunate,
for in all that ever I observed in the course of earthly things, I ever found,
that Men's fortunes are oftener mard by their tongues then by their vices, and to
conclude, all quarrels, mischief, hatred, and destruction arises from
unadvised speech, and in much speech there are many errors, out of which thy
enemies shall sure take the most dangerous advantage, and as thou shall be
happy if thou thy self observe these things, so shall it be most profitable
for thee to avoid their Companies that err in that kind, and not to hearken to
tale-bearers, to inquisitive persons, and such as busy themselves with other
Men's estates, that creep into houses as spies to learn news which concern
them not, for assure thy self such persons are most base, and unworthy, and I
will thou take heed also, that thou art not found a liar, for a lying spirit is
hateful both to GOD and Man, a liar is commonly a Coward, for he dares not
avow the truth, a liar is trusted of no Man, he can have no credit neither in
public nor private; and if there were no more argument but this, know that our
Lord in Saint JOHN says, that it is a vice proper to SATAN, lying, being
opposite to GODS nature, which consists in truth, and the gain of lying is
nothing else but not to be trusted of any, nor to be believed when we say the
truth. It is said in the PROVERBS, that GOD hates false lips, and that he
that speaks lies shall perish; Thus thou see how odious, and contrary to
GOD a liar is, and for the world, believe it, that it never did any Man good,
except in the extremity of saving life, for a liar is of a base, unworthy, and
cowardly spirit.

CHAP. V.
AMongst all other things of the world, take care of thy estate, which thou
shall ever preserve if thou observe these things: First, that thou know what
thou have, and to see that thou art not wasted by thy Servants and Officers;
the second is, that thou never spend any thing before thou have it, for
borrowing is the canker, and death of every Man's estate: The third is, that
thou suffer not thy self to be wounded for other Men's faults, and scourged for
other Men's offenses, which is, to be suerty for another, for thereby millions
of Men have been beggered and destroyed, paying the reckoning of other Men's
riot, and the charge of other Men's folly, and prodigality; if thou smart for
thy own sin, the pain is endured with some ease, and above all things be not
made an Ass to carry the burden of other Men; If thy friend desire thee to be
his surety, give him a part of what thou have to spare, if he press thee
farther, he is not thy friend at all, for friendship rather chooses harm to
it self then offers it, if thou be bound for a stranger, thou art a fool,
if for a Merchant, thou put thy estate to learn to swim; If for a
Churchman, he has no inheritance; if for a Lawyer, he will find an evasion by
a syllable, or word to abuse thee; if for a poor Man thou must pay it thy
self, therefore from Suretiship as from a Manslayer, or enchanter for the best
profit, and return will be this, that if thou force him for whom thou art
bound to pay it himself, he will become thy enemy, if thou use to pay it thy
self, thou will be a beggar, and believe thy Father in this, and print it in
thy thoughts, that what virtue soever thou have, be it never so manifold, if
thou be poor withal, thou, and thy qualities shall be despised; besides,
Poverty is ofttimes sent as a curse of God it is a chain amongst Men, an
imprisonment of the mind, a vexation of every worthy spirit; thou shall
neither help thy self nor others, thou shall drown in thee all thy virtues,
having no means to show them, thou shall be a burden, and Eyesore of all
thy friends, every Man will scorn thy Company, thou shall be driven basely
to beg, and depend on others, to flatter unworthy Men, to make dishonest
shifts; and to conclude, poverty provokes a Man to do infamous and detested
deeds; Let no vanity therefore, or persuasion draw thee to that worst of
worldly miseries, if thou be rich, it will give thee pleasure in health,
comfort in sickness, keep thy mind and body free, save thee from many perils,
relieve thee in thy elder years, the poor, and thy honest Friends, and give
means to thy posterity to live, and defend themselves, and thine own fame
where it is said in the Proverbs, that he shall be sore vexed that is surety
for a stranger, it is further said, the poor is hated even of his own
neighbor, but ye rich have many Friends. Lend not to him that is mightier then
thy self, for if thou lendest him count it but lost, be not surety above thy
power, for it thou be surety think to pay it.

CHAP. VI.
LEt thy servants be such as thou may command, and entertayne none about the
but yeomen to whom thou give wages, for those that will serve thee without
thy hire will cost thee trouble as much, as they that know their fare; If thou
trust any Servant with thy purse, be sure thou take his account ere thou
sleep, for if thou put it off thou wile then afterward for tediousness
neglect it, I my self have lost thereby more then I am worth. And whatsoever
he gains thereby he will never thank thee, but laugh thy simplicity to
scorn; and besides, it is the way to make thy Servants thieves, which else
would be truest.

CHAP. VII.
EXceed not in the humor of rags, and bravery, for these will soon wear
out of fashion, but that Money in thy purse will ever be in fashion, and no Man
is esteemed for gay Garments, but by Fools and women.

CHAP. VIII.
ON the other side, take heed that thou seek not riches basely nor attain them
by evil means, destroy no Man for his wealth, nor take any thing from the
poor, for the cry and complaint thereof will pierce the Heavens, and is most
detestable before GOD, and most dishonorable before worthy Men: To wrest any
thing from the needy and laboring Soul, will never prosper thee in ought if
ought thou offend therein, but use thy poor neighbors, and tennants well, put
not them, and their Children to a needless superfluity, and expenses to thy
self. He that has pity on another Man's sorrows shall be free from it
himself, and he that delights in, and scorneth the misery of another, shall
one time or other fall into it himself. Remember, he that has mercy on the
poor lends unto the Lord, and the LORD will recompense him what he has
given. I do not understand such for poor as are vagabonds, and beggars, but
those that labor to live, such as are old, and cannot travel, such poor
vagabounds, and fatherless Children as are ordered to be relieved, and the
poor Tenants that travel to pay their Rents, and that fall into poverty by
mischance, and not by careless expense, on such have thou compassion, and GOD
will bless thee for ever; Make not thy hungry Soul sorrowful, defer not
the gift of the needy, for if he curse thee in the bitterness of his Soul,
his prayer shall be heard of him that made him.

CHAP. IX.
TAke especial care that thou delight not in Wine, for there never was any Man
that came to honor, or preferment that loved it, for it transformeth a Man
into a Beast, because heat poysoneth the breath decays natural heat,
brings a Man's stomach into an artificial heat, deformeth the face, rotteth
the teeth, and to conclude makes a Man contemptible, soon old, and despised
of all wise, and worthy Men: in thy servants, in thy self, and Companions, for
it is a bewitching, and infectious vice. And remember my words, that it were
better for a man to be subject to any vice then to it, for all other vanities
and sins are recovered, but a Drunkard will never shake off the delight of
beastliness, for the longer it possesses a man the more he will delight in
it, and the elder he grows the more he shall be subject to it; for it
dulleth the spirits and destroys the Body, as Ivy does the old Tree; or as
the worm that ingendreth in the cornell of the Nut Take heed therefore that
such a curelesse Cankar possess not thy youth, nor such a beastly infection
thy old age; for thou shall all thy life time live but the life of a beast, and
after death thou shall shortly prove a shameful infamy to thy posterity, who
shall study to forget that such a one was their Father. ANACHARSIS says, the
first draught serves for health, the second for pleasure; third for shame,
fourth for madness, but in youth there is not so much as one draught
permitted, for it puts fire to fire, and wastes the natural heat, and
therefore except thou hasten thine end, take this for a general rule, that
thou add not an artificial heat to thee by Wine or Spice until thou find
that time has decayed thy natural heat, and as soon as thou beginnest to
help nature, the sooner she will forsake thee, and trust not only upon Art:
who has misfortune faith SOLOMON, who have sorrow, and grief, who have
trouble without sighing, stripes without cause, and faintness of eyes, even
they that sit at Wine, and strain themselves to empty Cups; PLINY says,
Wine makes the hand quivering, the eyes waterie, the night unquiet, lewd
dreams, a stinking breath in the morn and all utter forgetfulness of things.
Whosoever loves Wine, shall not be trusted of any Man, for he cannot keep a
secret, Wine makes a man nor only, a beast but a madman, and if thou love it,
thy own Wife, thy Children, and thy Friends will despise thee, In drink men
care not what they say, what offense they give, they forget comeliness, commit
disorders, and to conclude, offend all virtuous and honest Company, and GOD
most of all; to whom we daily pray for health and a life free from pain, and
yet by drunkenness, and gluttony (which is the drunkenness of feeding) we
draw on.

HESIOD says, a swift hasty evil untimely, and an infamous old age. And
AUSTIN describes Drunkenness, in this manner: (...) est blandus Damon dulce
venenum, suave peccatum, quam, qui habet seipsum non habet, quam, qui facit
peccatum non facit; sed ipse est peccatum.

INNOCENTIVO says, Quid turpius ebrioso cui foetor in ore, tramor in corpore,
qui promit stulta, promit occalta, cui ^^es alebatar, facit transfermutur;
nultum serrutum ubi ^^guat ebrietas at quid nos aliud designas malum?

When DIOGENES saw a House to be sold, whereof the owner was given to drink,
I thought at the last quoth DIOGENES, he would spew out a whole house; Sciebam
inquit quod domum tandem evomeret.

CHAP. X.
NOW for the world, I know it too well to persuade you to dive into the
practices thereof, rather stand upon your own guard against all that tempt you
thereunto, or may practice upon you in your Conscience, your reputation, or
your Purse; resolve that no Man is wise or safe, but he that is honest. Serve
GOD, let him be the Author of all your Actions, commend all your endeavors to
him that must either wither, or prosper them, please him with prayer, least if
he frown, he confound all your fortunes and labors like drops of Rain on the
Sandy ground, let my experienced advice and fatherly instructions sink deep
into your heart; So GOD direct you in all his ways and fill your heart with
his grace.

FINIS.

