A REPLYE ANSWERING A DEFENSE OF the Sermon, preached at the Consecration of
the Bishop of Bathe and Wells, by George Downame, Doctor of Divinitye.

In defense of an Answer to the foresaid Sermon Imprinted anno 1609.

1. These. 5. 21. Try all things, and keep that which is good

Prove. 12. 15. The way of a fool is right in his own eyes: but he that
hears counsel, is wise.

Imprinted Anno 1613.

To the Christian Reader.
IT was well said of Lib. de ira. Vtrique parti acti^nes dares, dares tempus,
no^ semel audires: magis enim veritas elucet, quo saepius ad manu^ venit.
Seneca, that in matters of controversy, each party should have time to try
his actio^, and be heard more then once; and the reason thereof as well give^ by
him: because the oftener the truth comes to hand, (to be scanned) the more
the light thereof appears. Seeing therefore, it has pleased the (Chr. Rea.)
with some patience to hear M. D. in defense of his sermon, against the answer
to it; I hope thou will vouchsafe the Refut: the reading of this reply, for
the justifying of it. When I first read that pretended defeni^ of his, and saw
the strange and palpable vanity thereof, and how it was but like an overblowne
bladder, that would burst of it self, and vent the wind thereof without any
pricking; I thought it needles, to entreat on our part any further audience;
but afterward hearing the common fame was, that it was so learnedly and
absolutely done, that it gave all men satisfaction (refractaries only
excepted) and that no man would ever be able, to make any sound reply to it: I
thought it good to take a second view thereof, and when (as before) I found
little or nothing therein, but calumniations, sarcasmes, or bitter scoffs,
slanders, untruths, contradictions to himself, the question continually
begged; yea both assertions and questions (first propounded in his sermon)
changed; and his proofs large for what was never doubted of, and few or none
for the maine point in question, either from his text, or other scriptures, or
any ancient and sound writers: and yet all outfaced with strange professions,
protestatio^s, braggs and boasts of victory: I conceived with my self, that
common brute must needs arise from such (as failing in that rule of Seneca)
had read little thereof, and taking less pains in examining and comparing it,
either with his sermon and it self; or the Refuters answer; and therefore
deemed it necessary to call the reader back, to a better consideration of the
business, out of persuasion, that upon a new surveigh thereof, his second
thoughts (which ought to be more wise) would give a righter sentence,
concerning both the D. weak and insufficient dealing therein; (to ^ay no worse
of it) and his own rash and unadvised verdict (if I may so call it) of the
cause in trial. Now, to give the reader some inckling, as well, concerning the
proceeding of the one in his defense; as of the other in this replye, be he
advertized, and let the marginall notes, direct him.

First concerning his bitte^ scoffs and raylings, that he shall the especially
meet with them, when being at a no^-plus, he letts the point in question alone;
so that we may truly suppose of him, (as Hiero^: ad Helvid: A^ bitror te
veritate superatu^, ad maledicta converti. ^Ad verse. Ruff: apol. 3. quid
refert, si causa cadis and criminesup^res?
one did of another) that overcome of the truth, ^e fell to evil speaking: but
the advised reader, will wisely consider and ^ay with the same^ father, it
nothing booteth a man, if he let his cause fall to the ground, though he
overcome in such dealing. Had M. D. met with an answerer of his own humor; he
might have been sure, (as one Salust: Si qua^ voluptatem ma^^dicendo cenisti,
ea^ ma^e a^diendo amittas.
said to Tully) to have lost the pleasure he took in speaking evil, by
hearing evil again: but his happ is better, he that now has him in hand,
has not so learned Christ, as to recompense evil for evil, and so to plunge
himself into the same condemnation, (as one Amb. lib. de offic. 1. c. 5. Si
referas contume liam, dicitur, ambo conviciati sunt, vterque condemnatur, nemo
absolvitur.
says) with his adversary; knowing that no man (wise at least;) will so much
as assay to oude is kako, kakon, ^ata^
heal one evil with another, and deeming it kakos a^ouein kreisson he leg^i^
kakos
much better to hear evil then to speak evil. And therefore as one Quam me
pudet ne quitiae tuae, cujus teipsum n^n pudet. says Tully to Anthony. Phil. 2.
ashamed of that, whereat perhapps, the D. blushed not; raking them under the
ashes rather then abroad, he overpasseth the^ save that now and then he
remembers him of his dealing, and wills him to take home, what he unjustly
cast abro^d.

Secondly concerning his untruths and slanders, (if I may speak in the words
of another man Aug. epis. 164. miro^ si habe^ in corpore sanguine^, qui ad haec
verba non erubescit.
) I mervayle that having any blood in his body he blushed not at them; and the
rather do I merveyll; because they are not only simple slanders and
untruths; but (to make the reader believe the contrary) colored over by him
with other slanders and untruths: and those so gross, that a man may feel
them with his Hieron: ad ^u^t. Vel manibus palpari possunt, et caecus sit
oportet, qui se me^tiri non cernat.
fingers, and cannot but be blinded (on that side) that ^eeth them not. The
Refuter (I doubt not) Amb. li. 1. cap 1. 15 Been ^bi conscius, non debet falsis
moveri; ne^ aestimare plus ponderis esse in alieno conviti^, quam in suo
testimonio.
privy to his own innocence, will not be moved with those falsehoods; but
esteem the testimony of his own conscience more worth then so; having
learned, that the A^g. ad ^etil l. 3. ^. 8. Nec mal^^ conscientiam sanat
praeconium laudan^is, nec bonam vulnerat, conviciantis opprobrium.
reproach of the slaunderer can no more wound the good conscience, then the
praise of the flatterer can heal the evil; and that false calumniations shall
no more fasten upon the innocent, then blows upon the absent; as one wittily
insinuated, speaking of one that rayled on him: Me paronta kai tupteto me.
let him beat me being absent: yea I persuade my self that he finds Cyprian
de bapt. nequaquam sub hoc onere (...) tudinem, sed quietem invenimus.
rest rather then wearines under the burden of them; and with holy Job Cap. 31.
36.
has taken them: upon his shoulder and bownd them as a crown unto him;
knowing that the D. Aug. co^t. Pe^^l. lib. 3. c. 7. volens detrahit fa^ae ^eae.
nolens addit mercedi.
detracting so willingly from his fame, has added against his will to his
reward. There was no need therefore in regard of himself to free him from the
D. slanders, the testimony Aug. ad frat. in Ere^^ (...) ^^. ^ihi quide^
sufficit conscientia mea, vobis aut necessaria est ^ama mea.
of his own conscience being enough to him, but for so much as his good name
is necessary for others; his slanders are not therefore alwaise passed by; but
sometimes met with and proved so to be, and that not the Refuter but the D. is
the slanderer yea such an one, as to color one has not blushed to make two.
Wherefore it shall be good for him to follow the counsel of an ancient ^asil,
ad ^unom: he apaleipson sou ta remata he me arnou ten asebeian.
father, in his next writing vz* to blot out his slanders, or to confess his
iniquity.

Thirdly as touching his shiftings and windings in and out, let it be observed,
how in his defense, he turns his whole sermon vpside down, not only
wandering from the question, but changing and subverting the state thereof; yea
changing his assertions and points of his sermon, making them neither eadem,
nor eodem numero. The which (not to mention how he alters, clippeth, and
perverteth, his Refut: both words and purpose) what are they, but Misera
kres^^geta seu tergiversantis effugia.
miserable starting holes, and scape-doores for him to ^lie out at, that
turns his back upon the cause, and dares not stand to it? To conceal (says
Aug. quaest. vet. test. 14. Qui verba supprimit quaestionis, au^ imperitus est,
aut tergiversatu^, qui calumniae magis studeat, qua^ doctrinae
one) or suppress the words of the question, argues either want of skill,
(which must not be imputed to the D. for we know what he professes of his
own skill in judging of an argument) or a wrangling spirit more studious to
cavil, then desirous to teach or learn.

Fourthly, hovvever the state of the question stands, as he has laid it
down in his sermon or defense, look we to his proofs, and it will
appear, that as in his sermon he scarcely assaied to prove the same, by any
word of his text: so with so little success has he travailed in his defense
to dravv it, or any other scriptures to the justifying thereof; that I dare
boldly say, he has no one place of scripture, under the shadovv whereof, he
can find any shelter, to shroud his episcopal fu^ctio^, as a divine ordinance.
Now who knows not that in all questions of this nature, no other testimony
or argument, ca^ strike the stroke to persuade the conscience, but the
authentical records of the Holy Ghost; or some inevitable consequence grounded
upon them. For as one well says: Chris^st. in Psalm. 95. ad finem. Si quid
dicatur absque scriptura, and itorum cogitatio claudicat: nunc ann^ens nu^^
haesitans, et interdum sermonem ut frivolu^ aversans, interdum ut probabilem
recipiens: verum vbi^^ divine scriptura vocis prodijt testimonium: et loquentis
sermonem, and audientis anima^. confirmat.
If any thing be spoken without scripture the mind of the hearers halteth, now
stooping to it, now sticking at it, sometimes turning from it as frivolous,
sometimes turning to it, as probable: but when the testimony of the speaker
comes from divine scripture; it confirms both the speech of the speaker,
and mind of the hearer.

The which had the D. regarded so carefully as he ought, much labor might
have been spared, both to himself, his Refuter, and Reader; for as all that he
has alleged from the scriptures (both in his sermon and defense) being
drawn together, would scarsely amount to so many lines as he has filled
leaves: so would it have been of more force (then all his counsels and
fathers) to enforce the conscience, had it made but half so much for his
advantage as he supposes. For who is not of their mind who thought
Panormit: in cap sig. extrv. de elect. Gers. part. 1. de ex^ doctr.
it meet, that one poor layman (rightly) alleging a text of the old or new
testament, ought to be preferred before the general councels. The which,
because the D. has not done, he has done nothing to the purpose; for hovvever
he and his Bps. be (as one Bishop Barlow. se^ in Act. 29. 28.
of them says) no Arcadians, to fetch their pedegre from beyond the moon:
yet before the D. can prove their calling to be a divine ordinance, he must
fetch it from the divine scriptures, far beyond his councels and Fathers
alleged.

Fifthly I grant indeed, he alleges scriptures asvvell as other testimonies;
but they are such as prove what was never doubted of, or such as prove those
points that directly conclude not his assertions, but referred by him to
questions besides the question, or else (to let pass how he takes one part
of the question to prove another) such as are mere begging of the question,
twice 20. times at the least. Wherefore though he had again and again
Etiam^^ millies repeteret, nihil quam Sisiphi saxum volveret, nec hilum
pro^i^eret.
a 1000. times after the same manner gone over them, what has he else done but
turned the stone of Sisiphus, and left it where he found it, vvth out profit
to his cause, or hurt to his adversary.

Sixthly, which is yet more, the reader may see how foul he falls (and
often) upon his own ancres; for he is almost as full of contradictions to
himself, as of beggings of the question; so that the saying of the Orator
Phil. 2. T^m eras excors, ut tota in ora tione tecu^ ipse pugnares, ut non
solum non cohae^entia inter se diceres; sed maxim disiuncta et contraria, ut
non tanta mecum, quanta tibi tecu^ esset contentio.
against Anthony, as fitly agrees to him, as if it had been first spoken to
him; he being indeed throughout his whole discourse at such odds with himself
that he has not only uttered things not hanging together; but so different
and contrary, that he is at greater variance with himself, the^ with his
adversary. The which what can it else argue, but that as he is a man
epilanthan^menos heactou.
forgetful of himself, and not likely to be agreed with, that disagreeth so
much with himself; so he is not a little pus^ed in in the cause; but vnabble to
mainteyne it. Now that we may know what to stand to, be he entreated,
against his next vvriting, to settle himself upon one and the same ground. If
we may judge of that which is to come, by that which is past, it is likely
he will streine the best of his wits for some distinctions, to reco^cile
those differences, and cure those botches; but let him deal more sincerely,
then formerly he has done, least his Cataplasmes prove such sophismes (too
many whereof the reader may meet with in his defense) as vvil make the soar
worse rather then better; and him to loose more peace at home, then gain
victory abroad.

Seventhly, all his former proceedings notvvithstanding, it is a vvonder to
see, with what strange boldness and boasts of victory, he marches on from
the beginning to the end? Verily such, as if all his proofs, were such
anantirretas, demonstrationes omni exceptione majores.
evident demo^strations, as are above all exception, admitting no
contradiction, such Achillean arguments and forcible ischuroi logoi, meden
diakrinomen^^.
reasons, as are not to be resisted or doubted of; and as he has great store
of them even (huper ek perissou) more then enough; so (if we may believe him)
there is no one of them, which is not of the nature of the Popes sentence
(penitus definitiva) absolutely definitive, not liable to exception or appeal.
Wherefore he is ready Tous anti ^gontas elegchein.
sharply to censure all gainsayers, how learned, judicious, and orthodoxal
divines soever) and to charge them that do (heterodidaskalein) teach
otherwise, with misinterpreting both of scriptures and fathers, yea and with
other crimes, little better then blasphemy. Wherein, though it were no great
presumption for him to take liberty so, to abuse his refuter considering the
base conceit, he has of him; yet seeing he has acknowledged others, whom
he has shutt up under the same sentences, to be both learned and orthodoxall
divines, and are such indeed, as both he and all men ought to reverence; he
ought certeynly to have dealt Cum bonis been aagier oportet, ^Tully. Phil. 3.
cur eos quos omnes venerari debemus, solus oppugnas?
better with them, the heathen ^being Judge.

But let not the Doctor think, so to carry the matter away: I hope the wise and
judicious reader studious of the truth, will be able to discern Aug. ad Petil l.
2. c. 10. non solum inani sonitu, sed in capite vestro cr^puerint.
that his blown sentences with so many vain ^racks, are broken upon his own
head; and that this lofty lifting up of his head (in a cause that lives so
much upon begging and by shifts), is both unworthy a man of his note, and such
as will Evagrius. deinon est^ mega p^ronein, mikr^ pratto^t^.
never bring grace to him. It would in all likelihood, have argued him to be
fuller of good proof; if he had in more humility hung down his head like an
^are of good corn, then to stand so bolt upright as he does.

Eighthly, concerning the course taken in this reply; be the Reader advertised.
1. that therein nothing is dealt with, but the Doctors text, and other places
of scripture produced, excepting such vvriters as are alleged for
interpretation of them, and the clearing of the Refuter from the slanders laid
upon him for misalleadging them. And the reason is, both because the scriptures
only can (and are alone sufficient) to decide the maine controversy concerning
the right of the episcopal function; and also for that the Doctor rejects
all nevve vvriters as parties and inco^petent, for the same cause for which,
the refuter might as well reject the old, were they (as they are not) such
Bishops and of his side, as he pretends. 2. The D. is not followed stepp by
stepp in his own order throughout his whole book, but that which lies
straggling here and there, is drawn together into one tracte, asvvell
concerning his text, as the rest of the scriptures alleged by him 3. neither
are the 5. points of his sermon handled in the same order; for, the first of
them concerning the Eldership, is put off to the last place, it being proved to
perteyn nothing to the maine question. 4. The whole is divided into three
parts; in the first whereof are 3. books, the first concerning the Refuters
preface, the 2. concerning the fitnes of the Doctors choice of his text, the
division and analysis thereof, together with the state of the question, etc.
the 3. concerning the true and genuine sense of his text, and whatsoever he
speaks of it. In the 2. part, first, all other scriptures alleged by him
for proof of the question are dealt with; and then the Refuter is cleared of
falsifying and misapplying many testimonies of humane writers, wherewith the
Doctor often charge him; by occasion whereof it is made manifest, that many
of the D. Fathers were neither such Bishops, nor yet of the D. opinion
concerning the point in question, as he affirms. In the third part is
handled that first point of his, concerning the Eldershippe.

Lastly, to end with a suite or two, 1. Let me entreat M. D, that ne pulchrum
sibi ducat esse Davum in hac fabula, imo unguem in vlcere ecclesiae; the which
if I may not obtain, but upon his third thoughts he remain the man that he
professes to be in his second, and that I have to do with the Tully. Phil. 2.
Non est mihi cum eo host certamen, cu^ quo aliqua pacis condicio esse possit.
Orators adversary, one that will receive no condition of peace, but upon
yielding him the cause against truth; I desire him, that, leaving all
by-matters and amending such faults as he is justly taxed with, in this reply,
he would follow the truth in love, without gall, and bitterness, as he tendreth
peace at home, and desires to bring this controversy to an happy and speedy
issue. 2. As for the reader, I pra^e him, that looking rather into the matter,
then enquiring after the author, he would not (like the scholars of
Pithagoras) build aforehand, on the opinion of the teacher (whether the D. or
Refuter) but Amb. de fide. lib. 1. c. 7. Imperiti legunt totum ut intelligant.
read all, seriously study, ponder and examine all, that both parties have
said in the whole carriage of this busynes: and then judge as God shall give
understanding; remembering what folly and shame it is for any (as Solomon says
Prove. ^8, 13.
) to answer (or give sentence of) ^ matter, before he hear it; wherein I
persuade my self too many have much failed, as well in praejudging the author of
the answer, as the matter or cause in question

THE FIRST PART THE FIRST BOOK concerning the Refut. Preface.
Chap. 1. Wherein the reason moving the Refuter to answer the D. sermon is made
good, and the Ref: freed from diverse untruths charged upon him by the D.
Sect. 1. p. 1.
THe way of some is perverted and strange; but of the pureman his work is
right, says Solomon Prove. 21. 8. Now which part of the proverb, belongs to
the Refuter in his preface, and which to the Doctor in his answer to it; let
the indifferent reader (secundum allegata et probata) judge, in the fear of
God, and spare not. And first as the Refuters eye was upon the scope of the
Doctors sermon; so is the D. eye upon the scope of the Ref. preface; the former
I suppose looking right forwards, the later quite awrie. For what can an eye
not evilly affected, see in that preface, that should charge the Refuter in the
scope thereof, like an Orator in his proeme to draw and withdraw his reader (as
he says from the D. to the Ref.) if he would be ledd by shows? when, without
any oratoricall shows at all, he plainly declares the reason, that moved him
to answer the sermon.

2. Where the refuters whole preface is but as a prologue; the D. divides it
into a prologue and an epilogue; as if one should divide a Lions head, into the
head of a Lion, and the tail of a Lion. But if it were not all a prologue, yet
to divide an entire speech, into a prologue and an epilogue, without any
protasis or epitasis coming between, is as if one should divide a man's body
into head and feet. As for his nice division and subdivision following, I mind
not to trouble the reader with them.

3. Where the refuter professes, that he deemed the D. sermon as needful to be
answered as any book written of that subject: The D. first premiseth a scoff,
which I here pass by; and then by way of analyzing, makes his refuter to tell
his reader, how there weee two motives that moved him to undertake it: Strong
opinion, and unquiet desire: which is in deed to torture and not to analize
words. His strong opinion was, that he deemed it as needful to be answered as
any book etc. which as the D. tells us, though the refuter confirms with
diverse reasons, yet they are such, as he that shall compare them, either with
the truth or his opinion, or one of them with another, he shall see a pleasant
representatio^ of the Matachin^, every one fighting with another; he shall see,
that is to say, if he has the D. spectacles on. But first, his logic fails
him; for a man that looks with his right eye, may easily discern, that the
ref: brought but one only reason for that his opinion; the other reason, or
reasons (as it pleases the D. to number them, for it seems he had on those
spectacles that makes a man to see gemmae obiecta, geminos soles) do but
prove the consequent of that reason. 2. as for the Matachine fight, I persuade
my self, it will (upon due examination of particulars) prove only but some
spectrum, arising out of that strong imagination, which many times makes any
thing seem to be, what the fantastic desires it should be. The Refuwordes,
in which the Doctor sees these marveils, are to this effect That when he saw
how his sermon tended directly to prove, that the calling of our Lord Bishops
(as they now exercise it in the Church of England) is not only lawful and
good, but to be holden jure divino; not as an humane ordinance, their ancient
and wonted tenure, but by divine right, as the very immediate ordinance of
Christ: he demed it as needful to be answered as any book of that subject etc.
For that (notwithstanding the D. commendation of it) it is evident, the
doctrine thereof is utterly false, very huriful and obnoxious, and therefore
necessary to be confuted. Would not any man think him driven to go nere the
wind, that rayseth up such tragedies, and logical clatterings upon these
words? or cannot he, trow we, see far into a millstone, that can see a
matachine fight in them? Well, let us see how the D. proves it.

The Refuters first reason (says he) is because he saw the Sect. 2, 0. 2. of
the D. and 3. of the ref.
sermon tended directly to prove that the calling of our Lord Bishops, as they
now exercise it etc. The first reason? Nay it is the only reason why he deemed
the book so needful to be answered; and what says the D. to it? In which
(says he) there were diverse untruthes. But whosoever with an indifferent ear
shall enterteyne the answer following: may (I doubt not) easily discern, that
this saying of the D. is an ^njust slander, and that he himself has delivered
diverse untruthes The D. first ^andereth his Ref: and then delivers diverse
untruths to color it.
to color it. Let the reader now hear what the one and the other has to say,
and give upright sentence.

First, says he, with what eye did he see that directly proclaimed in the
sermon, which directly and expresslly I did disclaim page 92. where I
prosissed, that although I held the calling of the Bishops etc. to be an
apostolicat and so a divine ordinance: yet that I do not mainteyn it to be
divine jur^^, as intehding thereby, that it is generally, perpetually and
immutably necessary, as though there could not be a true Church without it,
which himself also acknowledges page 92. of his book. With what eye did he see
it? even with the same eye that was upon the truth. Let the Doctor deal
plainly and answer to the point directly. Is it an untruth in the ref: to say,
that his sermon tends directly to prove that the calling of our Bishops is to
be holden jure divino, by divine right, and not as an humane ordinance? by God^
law.
Why then does he not directly contradict this assertion, and say, that his
sermon tends to prove, that their calling is to be holden, jure humano, by
humane right, and not as a divine ordinance? Or if they hold their calling by
another right, which is neither humanum nor divinum jus; why is he ashamed
plainly to profess, what it is? has he preached a whole sermon in defense of
their honorable function, and published four books in defense of his sermon,
and yet dares not directly proclaim quo jure they hold their superiority? But
let us touch a little some points of his sermon, and of his defense thereof. Was
not the callings of these 7. angels of which the text speaks, of divine
right? and does he not affirm (page 2) and profess plainly to prove, that the
reverent fathers of our Church, (for the substance of their calling) were such?

2. Are not the true proper Pastors of the Church, the lights and stars of
the Church, of divine right? and does he not (page 3. and 93) affirm our
Diocesan Bishops to be such? their calling therefore, (that honorable function
of theirs) must either be of divine right, or the Churches of God themselves
are not of divine right.

3. Does he not in diverse places of his se^rmon call it an apostolical
ordinance and affirm it, to be from heaven, from God, alleging diverse
scriptures for the proof thereof?

4. Yea, is not the doctrine which he rayseth from his text, (and in the
explication and application whereof, his whole sermon is spent) set down by
himself (page 94) in these very words, sc. that the episcopal function, is of
apostolical and divine institution? And does he not (def. lib. 1. cap. 3. pa.
60.) reduce this his doctrine to a question de jure? If then in teaching that
their function is of divine institution, his purpose be to show, that they hold
their pre^minence iure, by good and lawful right; can he mean any other then
divine right?

5. And does he not aim at the same right, when he says, it is the ordinance
of Christ by his Apostles (lib. 3. page 24, 35. 44. 48, 59.) and that many of
his allegations do justify the superiority of Bishops not only de facto, but
also de jure, and give testimony to their right? espetially when he says (page
26.) that his allegation of those fathers which adjudged Aerius an heretic,
does therefore prove the superiority of Bishops de jure, because there is no
heresy, which is not repugnant to Gods word.

6. Neither can he otherwise warrant their calling and function, to be an holy
calling, an high and sacred function (as he affirms it to be in his epistle
dedicatory to the King (page 3, 4.) unles the right and title they have unto it,
be divine and from God, who sanctifies whatsoever is holy.

7. Lastly, seeing he denies (in his second page of his answer to the preface)
their ancient tenure to be jure humano, and for proof thereof affirms that
their function was in the ptimitive CHVRCH acknowledged to be an ordinance
Apostolical: if there be any strength in his reasoning, it will follow that
he esteems their tenure to be jure divino; seeing he mainteyneth their
function to be a divine ordinance. For if an ordinance Apostolical, will
conclude their tenure to be jure apostolico and not jure humano only; then a
divine ordinance will prove their tenure to be jure divino, and not Apostolico
only. Wherefore as it is an evident truth in the Refut. to say, that the D.
sermon tends directly to prove that the calling of our Bishops is to be
holden, jure divino, by divine right, and not as an humane ordinance: so it is
a mallicious slander in the D. to tax him for an The D. slander.
untruth in so affirming. But let us look on, and see with what untruthes he
covers this slander. First he faith he did directly and expressly disclay^^ it
page 92 of his sermon. The which if true; will he thence infer that his Ref,
assertion is an untruth? nay rather, let him co^fess, that he has contradicted
himself, and in one page of his sermon expressly disclaymed, what he directly
proclaimed, and labored to prove in the principal scope of the whole. But is
it not a The D^^ first untruth to color his slander.
gross untruth in him to say, that in that 92 page he directly and expressly
disclaymeth the point in question? for does he not plenis buccis (as if he were
sounding of a trumpet) proclayme it? Let us view his words and refer them to
his purpose, vidz. to show what was Ieroms meaning when he says, that Bishops
are greater then Presbyters, rather by the custom of the Church, then by the
truth of divine disposition. If, says he, Ierom meant that Bishops were not
set over Presbyters by Apostolical ordinance, he should be contrary to all
antiquity and to himself. But if his meaning shall be that their superiority,
(though it be an Apostolical tradition, yet) is not direrectly of divine
institution; there is small difference betwixt these two; because what was
ordained of the Apostles, proceeded from God, what they did in the execution of
their Apostolical function, they did by direction of the holy Ghost. But yet
for more evidence he says, he will directly and breiffly prove, that the
episcopal function is of divine institution, or that Bishops were ordained of
God. And as he says so, so he assayeth to do so, from the instances of
Timothy and Archippus, especially from his text, from whence he says, it may
evidently be proved. 1. for that they are called angels, which not only
shows their excellency, but also proves that they were authorized and sent
of God. 2. for that they are commended under the name of stars, to signify
both their preeminence of dignity in this life, that they are the crown of the
Church. Revel. 12. 1. and their prerogative of glory, which they shall have in
the world to come, Dan. 12. 3. 3ly. for that they be the 7. stars which
Christ holds in his right hand, both for approbation of function and
protection of person. And so concludes that he has thus proved the doctrine
arising out of his text, that the episcopal function is of Apostolical and
divine institution. If these be his words; how does he directly and expressly
disclayme, that the calling of Bishops is to be holden by divine right? is he
not a man of strange conceit, that thinks with outfacing, to add credit to so
evide^t an untruth? Yet he blusheth not to mainteyne it by another The D. 2.
untruth to color his slander; which if it were true concludes not the point.
untruth, which (though it were as true as, it is false) concludes not what he
indeavoureth to make good. I did profess (says he) page 92. that although I
hold the calling of Bishops in respect of their first institution, to be an
apostolical, and so a diviue ordinance: yet that I do not mainteyn it to be
divini iuris, as intending thereby, that it is generally perpetually and
immutably necessary. From hence, if he will conclude, that therefore he did
directly and expressly disclaim, (in the same page) what his Refut: says he
labored in his sermon to prove, scz. that the calling of our Bishops is to be
holden by divine right and not as an humane ordinance; shall he not show
himself a weak disputer, and not well advised what he speaks? For which of the
D. friends, that advisedly compares the parts of his reasoning together sees
not, that a man in his right wits, will never take the professing of the
former, to be a direct and express disclayming of the later? yea, he that is
not over partial may see, (by that which is already showed) that the same pen
which now professes, that he does not mainteyne the episcopal function to be
divini juris, as intending thereby a perpetual and immutable necessity thereof;
does notwithstanding underhand (and by necessary consequence) proclaim that it
is to be holden jure divino, by divine right, and not as an humane ordinance. I
add for the present, that this will be concluded from that which here he
professes. For he that holds the calling of Bishops, to be an Apostolical
and so a divine ordinance, does in effect affirm it to be divini juris: as
meaning thereby that it is a divine and not an humane ordinance. But there is
less truth then he presumes, in that branch of his profession, which says,
that he did profess page 92, that he does not mainteyn the calling of Bishops to
be divini iuris, as intending thereby that it is generally and immutably
necessary. For he has no one word in all that page that can clear him of
professing an untruth in so speaking. In deed in the later part of his marginal
annotation, he tells us, that in respect of perpetuity, difference is made
by some, betwixt those things that be divini, and those which be apostolici
iuris, the former in their understanding, being generally perpetually and
immutably necessary, the later not so. But does he make himself one of those
some that make that difference, and is of that understanding? it seems no, by
the words, by some in their understanding; yea it appears no, by the words in
the body of the book, (even right against them where he says, there is small
difference as he understands divine institution; because what the Apostles
did in the execution of their apostolical function, they did it by the
direction of the holy Ghost; so that they might truly say of their
ordinances, It seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us Act. 15. 28. etc. For
though the D. should (now upon his later thoughts) put a difference between an
ordinance divine or apostolical, and jus divinum or apostolicum; yet the
direction of the Ho. Ghost, which accompanied the Apostles in the execution,
will as strongly conclude every jus apostolicu^ to be jus divinu^, as it will,
every ordinace apostolical, to be a divine ordinance. Wherefore it will be an
harder matter then the D. supposes, to work his marginall note so to accord
with thetext of his book, that he may deduce from thence such a co^clusio^ as
here he tendreth, when he says, that he professes page 92 not to (...) the
calling of Bishops to be divini juris, as intending thereby a general and
perpetual necessity thereof. Wherefore not being able to justify his
profession by any words of his own, he is gladd to crave relief of his Refut:
and to catch at some words of his, (page 90 of his answer) saying, that his
refut: acknowledges as much; for answer whereunto. 1. I demand of the Doctor
(in his own words) with what eye he beheld this acknowledgment in his refuter?
he says in deed, that the D. makes the calling of Bishops no further of
divine institution, the^ as being ordained of the Apostles it proceeded from
God, without implying thereby any necessary perpetu^^y thereof. In which words,
if the Refuter does acknowledge that ^he D. does not mainteyn the calling of
Bishops to be divini juris, as intending thereby the necssity and perpetuity
aforesaid; doubtless the same eye, which discerns this acknowledgment, does
also no less clearly perceive, that the Doctor mainteyneth their calling to
be divini juris so far (though not any further then) as he holds it to be a
divine institution, or an ordinance of God. And from hence we may safely
gather, that he plainly professes the episcopal function to be divini juris,
as intending thereby that the first iustitution thereof proceeded from God, and
not from men's divise, as other humane ordinances. And therefore once again, I
may conclude that the D. maliciously slandereth his Refut: in charging him with
an untruth saying, that he saw his sermon tended directly to prove that the
calling of Bishops is to be holden iure divino, by divine right and not as an
humane ordinance.

2. Moreover, since the Dr. is driven for his own advantage, both here and in
many other parts of his defense (Answer, to the preface page 7. libr. 3. page
57. libr 4. page 140. 145.) to shroud himself under this his Ref:
acknowledgment; with what conscience can he requite his kindenes so ill, as he
does, with this false imputation A third un truth of the D. often repeated.
(so often repeated lib. 3. page 22. 58. lib. 4. page 140. 145.) namely, that
his Ref. charge him with saying, that the episcopal function it divini juris
or to be holden jure divine, as being generally necessary and perpetually
imposed on all Churches, so as none other for me of government may l^ ^y case be
admitted. For albeit he sometimes puts the D. in mind of such speeches in
his sermon, as do urge the perpetuity or necessity of the episcopal function;
yet he no where affirms that his sermon tends directly to prove that the
calling of L. Bishops is held by such a divine right as here he disclaymeth. It
is enough to salve the Ref: assertion from an untruth, and to return back the
untruth into the Ds. bosom, if it appear (as it does sufficiently) that the
D. holds it any way to be divini juris, and not an humane ordinance only.

4. But if the D. meaning (in his profession before set down) be to show,
that he holds the episcopal function to be an apostolical and so a divine
ordinance, because the Apostles who ordained it, were therein directed by the
holy Ghost, and yet denies it to be divini juris, because it is not generally
perpetually and immutably necessary, as though there could be no true Church
without it: this construction of his words does rather increase, then diminish
his fault. For as it is false to say that he professes any such distinction in
that 92. page of his sermon; so it is both false and slanderous to say that his
Ref. acknowledges any such thing in that 90. page of his answer. And if he
do (in his judgment) allow of that distinction, which he says (in his
margin) some do putt between jus apostolicum and divinum, he bewrays therein
no small weakness of judgment. Moreover it is an error in divinity, either to
think that every ordinance which is juris divini, is so generally and
perpetually necessary, that no true Church can be without it: or to deny such
an ordinance to be juris divini, as is of so general and perpetual an use, as
he esteems and affirms the episcopal function to be in diverse pages of his
sermon. page 32. 35. 72. 74. 75. and 79. (put together by the Ref. page 158. of
his answer,) where he teaches clean contrary to his profession here. But for
the better clearing of the state of the question, and showing the vanity and
unsoundness of this distinction; I referr-the reader to the 3. 4. and 5.
Chapters of the second book; here, I doubt not, enough being said to free the
Ref. from the guilt of that untruth, Sect. 3. page 3 of the Ref. and page 2. of
the D.
which the D. here charge upon him.

The second untruth putt upon the Ref. by the D. he lays down thus; 2. where
I spoke (says he) of the substance of their calling, with (...) eye did he see
me defend their exercise of it? as if he would make the reader believe, I went
about to justify all the exercise of their function, which in all, even the
best governments whatsoever, is subject to personal abuses. With The 2.
untruth which the D. charge on his Ref: is the D. 2. slander.
what eye? I answer, even with the same, wherewith he sees, that either their
calling is not the same which they exercise; or else the D. defends the one
as well as the other. The Ref. meaning is to show, that the calling of Bishops
which the D. defends, is not their election or vocation to their function;
but rather the exercise of their function; yet not all the exercise thereof, as
the D. most falsely insinuates; but such an exercise of it as is performed by
virtue of their calling: as for particular and personal abuses in the
execution of a calling, as they cannot in proper speech, be termed the exercise
of that calling; so the D. has no reason to charge the Ref. with making the
reader bel^ev-that he went about to justify them. But this he would have
known, that the D. having undertaken to justify the calling of our Bishops,
does therein justify the exercis^ thereof; for the question is not of an
imaginary fantastical substance of I know not what calling in abstracto; but
of such a calling as all our Bishops do or may exercise, by means of their
office, according to the laws and canons of our Church. This therefore is far
from an untruth, unless this be true, that the D. in his sermon mainteineth
another manner of calling in our Bishops, then what they exercise; when all the
question is about that which they exercise, and either the Bishops calling is
the same which they exercise, or else they exercise not their calling.

As truly is that third untruth cast upon the refuter by the D. in The D 3.
slander.
his next words, where he says. 3. neither is it true that the ancient tenure
of Bishops is only iure humano. Whereto it may be replied, that neither is it
true that the Refuter says in general, that the ancient tenure of Bishops
was only iure humano: but that this was the ancient and wanted tenure of our
L: Bishops. What tenure other Bishops either in the darkness of popery, or
before, have made clay me to, is nothing to the affirmation or present purpose
of the Refuter. And as the D. with the same breath, wherewith he charge his
refuter, discharges him again in the next clause of his sentence: so however
the Protestant Lord Bishops are but as of yesterday in comparison: yet is it
plain, (as appears by the Bishops book fol. 48, 49) that (...) of late they
have been content to hold their callings jure humano, and that now upon the
sudden they have changed and turned from their old and ancient tenure. As for
the D. reason to prove the refuters speech to be an untruth, because
auncienter, then the Bishops he speaks of (namely they of the primitive
Church) did hold their callings by an other tenure, (viz. by apostolic all
tradition or ordinance) and that without all contradiction etc: as it is
insufficient for the purpose he produces it, and besides the point now in
question: so who knows not that it is altogether false, that it was so held
then without all contradiction? These 3. untruths therefore which the D. has
found in the Ref. reason, are nothing but mistes cast before his readers eyes,
the dispelling whereof makes me to remember what Ierom once said to Licinius
of them who while they endeavor alienos errores emendare, oftendunt suos: which
with a little change I may English thus; while the D. went about to correct his
Ref. for untruths, he has manifested his integrity, and discovered his own
corruption.

Chap. 2. Concerning the Matachine, charged upon the Ref: by the D.
Sect. 1. page 3. of the res. and page 2. of the D.
The D. proceeds, saying, that as the Refut. first Reason, fights with the
truth, so the second, both with his opinion and with it self: and so sets
down his reason why he deemed the sermon needful to be answered, to wit, that
howsoever the D. affirms the doctrine of his sermon to be true, profitable
and necessary; yet it is evident that it is utterly false, hurtful and
abnoxious, necessary to be confuted, at no hand to be believed; and then
tells us, that in these words of the Refuter there are 3. reasons propounded
that come to be examined. I looked when I read to have had a Matachine fight
showed in the former and these 3. pretended reasons, wherein all 4. of them
should fight one with another: but all is brought to this, that the first
reason fights with the truth, the second, not with any other reason, but with
the Ref: opinion and it self. How the first fights with the truth, we have
already seen, and The D. makes 3. reasons of the Ref. one.
we shall see by and by, that this second fights just after the same manner,
that is in deed nothing at all. I call it the second reason, because the D.
three, is but the refuters one. And if he had not lost his honesty in his
logic, he could never have made 3. reasons of those words cited by him; such
boys play ill beseems so reverend a man. But he tells us, they come now to
be examined, and for the readers sake, let us examine them according to his
own division. The first he makes to be this. It is evident that the doctrine
in the sermon is utterly false: therefore most needful to be confuted: what
answer makes he to it? and how does he prove it to fight against the Refuters
opinion and with it self? this is his charge, thus says he. It it be evidently
false it needs no confutation; Things manifestly false or true, are so judged
without disputation or discourse; neither does any thing need to be argued or
disputed, but that which is not evident. This reason therefore if it were true,
would with better reason conclude against his opinion. It is evident (says he)
that it is utterly false, therefore it needs not to be confuted. What an
answer is this? did the Refuter say, that it is evidently false to all men?
some color then had the D. for this answer. If not but that it is common to
many to be so blinded with partiallity and prejudice, that they see not that to
be false, which is evidently false; and not strange to others shamelesly to
bend their wits to mainteyne manifest and gross untruths, against as clear
a light as the Sun casts at noon days: must they not therefore be refuted,
because they are manifest? Is the D. ignorant that the godly and learned
Fathers of old confuted diverse vanities, some of which were so evidently
false, that they could say, recitasse est refutasse? Yea so grossly false and in
the face untrue; that the refuter of them, says They will fall of them selves
etc. Was it not a doctrine utterly and evidently false, that Christ was not
God? needed it not therefore to be confuted? the Fathers verily were but vain
men then. What? shall I need say any more to this? did the D. himself never
deem it needful to confute a point, which in his judgment and the judgment of
all (if we may believe him) that are not partial, is utterly false? does he
not affirm so of the presbyterian discipline (as he calls it) calling it a
fancy, a novelty that bewrays the falsity, a mere humane invention, a new
device etc. And does he not (all this notwithstanding) bestow first a long
sermon, and then a large defense, for confutation of what is said for it? me
thinks therefore the D. is quite of the hooks in his thus reasoninge. Things
manifestly true or false are so judged in deed without disputation or
discourse; but it is by them, sure, to whom they appear so, not to others; to
others they are so judged by disputation and discourse. It is true also, that
nether does any thing need to be argued or disputed, but that which is not
evident: but knows he not also, that nothing is to be confuted, but that
which is evident, whiles it is not evident, it must be argued and disputed: but
when the falsehood is evident, it must be confuted.

Thus we see how stoutly this reason fights with the Ref. opinion; the D.
should now show us how it fights with it self; but (whatsoever the matter is)
he has not a word to that end; the reader has leave to work that out by his
own imagination. Let us pass on to the second reason of the three (pretended
by the D.) called by him the second braneh, thus framed by him on the Refuters
behalf. It is very huriful and abnoxi^us, therefore necessary to be confuted.
How this reason fights either with the truth, or with the Ref: opinion, or
with it self, or with the other reasons, he shows us not; but in stead
thereof scofteth at the word obnoxious as if it would bear no other The D.
scoffeth at, a word, and lets the point alone.
sense, then scoffingly he gives of it, to wit, subject to be hurt with evil
tongues etc. Whereas the word is turned almost in all languages, French,
Italian, Spanish, as well as English, culpable, diserving blame, or punishment,
as the Refuter means it. But if it were not; yet hereby appears, how apt he
is to take his brother by the throat, not forgiving him the least syllabicall
slipp, but making him pay the utmost farthing. If his adversary should use him
after that manner, full often perhaps might he be twitched up for halting: But
let the D. make the word sound what he will, the reader may see, that the
Eagle is hungry when she catches at such flies; and the Refut: meaning and so
his words (indifferently construed) do sound, that it is a doctrine hurtful
and worthy of blame, and therefore to be confuted: what says he to the reason?
he only denies it to be hurtful; and why? For I not only said, says he, but
proved also both in the preface and conclusion of the sermon, that it was both
profitable and necessary. Which, what is it bur a silly begging even of the
mayn question? I call it filly, seeing The D. beggeth the maine quaestion.
the proof lies not in the body, but in the preface and conclusion; both which
are answered by the Refuter: to the former of which he has replied nothing,
nothing to purpose, it being as himself calls it (in the division of his
sermon. def. lib. 1. p. 28.) (not a proof but) an application of that which
before he pretends to have proved. And if the Refuter had not disproved his
proofs, both in preface and conclusion and wheresoever else, as he has (at
least deemed himself to have) done, yet is the matter under trial still. What
then has the Doct. here done, but as if a man making claim of some parcel of
land, and bringing forth to that end, certain deeds to prove his title;
whereunto when his adversary shall plead forgery or insufficiency, he should
think it sufficient for rejoinder to say, he has not only said his title is
good, but proved it by the deeds aforesaid. How the Refuter has disproved the
D. proofs, whether sufficiently or otherwise mattreth not in this point; sure
it is the matter remains still questionable; yea had he not at least made
some show of a sufficient disproof of them; what needed so wise a man as M. D.
to make so great a volume of defenses? he told us even now, (I cannot yet
forget it,) that nothing needs to be argued or disputed, but that which is
not evident.

Come we now to the Ref: words, which the D. makes his third reason. The
third, says he, It is necessary indeed to be confuted, as if he had said, it
is necessary indeed to be confuted, therefore it is most needful to be
answered. That clause of the Refuter is an epiphonematical repetition of the
maine conclusion and nothing else, as he that joyneth vit and honesty together
may easily see: but the Doctor makes it a different argument that he may make
a child of his adversary; and his reader to imagine, that he beggeth the
question and proves idem per idem: but let the judicious, judge of his
dealing herein, and honor him for it as he sees cause; to me it seems an
hungry cause, that is gladd to feed upon any thing. Thus much for the
Matachine fight charged upon the refuters reasons, how truly; I leave to the
readers sentence.

The Doctor goes on and tells us how his refuter proves the first of the
three former reasons by diverse arguments. The first Sect. 2. Refut. p. 3. Def.
p. 3.
whereof is as he says, this; The doctrine of his sermon is utterly false,
because it is repugnant to the truth, the word of truth, the scripture of
truth. now, what says he to it? 1. he calls them all ridiculous
amplifications 2. he says his Ref. had rather take it for granted, then be
putt to prove is to be repugnant to the word; and 3. that he for his part
shall make it clear in this defense, that there is not a syllable in the
scriptuere to prove the pretended discipline, and that the episcopal function
has good warrant in the word. To all which I have not much to reply. To the
first, not to stand upon the number of the amplifications, we see, the
sentences are there only, and mind one thing, the second being an exposition
of the first, the third, of the second, the one adding not an exegesis only,
but an emphasis also to the other. But say they are more then needed; is it not
much more then needs to call them ridiculous? Wisdom, I perceive, must dye
with the D^putt case there were such an amplification in the Service book, as
ridiculous as it is, the D. I doubt not, would find a hand to subscribe it, as
agreeable to the word of God, and no doubt but might do it with more peace of
conscience, then to many amplifications therein contained; and yet no
ridiculous thing in Gods service is agreeable to Gods word. To the second; may I
ask the Doct what need the refuter had to prove that in his praeface, which the
whole refutation tends to prove; and whither it was not enough for him in it
to admonish thereof? And me thinks he answers it in the third part by his
own practice, when he says, he shall make all clear in his book etc. the
which how well he has performed, will appear in the examination of the
particulars, in the mean time, it seems his sermon made not all clear.

So much for the first argument. A second the Doct frames of the Ref: words
thus. The doctrine is utterly false; because it is contrary to the judgment
and practice of the primitive Churches, next after Christ and his Apostles. To
let pass the wrong he offreth herein to his Refut. The D. again wrogeth his
Ref. in making more arg. of his Ref. words then he meant.
in making it by it self an argument contrary to his meaning, let us hear his
answer to it: I cannot tell (says he) whether to wonder at more, the blindness
or the impudency of the man. And why so? because (says he) I have made it
manifest, that the government of the Church by Bishops has the full consent of
antiquity, and not one testimony of the ancient writers, for their judgment,
or one example of the primitive Churches, for their practice to be alleged to
the contrary. etc. I am sorry I shall trouble the D. with so many questions:
where I pray, has he made this so manifest? in his sermon or in the defense of
it? has not the refuters as much (if not more) reason to wonder, at the D.
blindness and impudency? seeing, if he made it clear in his sermon, is he not
blind, in not seeing that he has made this his own defense needless? is it not
his own argument, that things manifest need not be disputed, nothing needs
to be argued or disputed, but that which is not evident? But his excessive The
D. practyce co^tradicteth his speech.
travel in mainteyning that sermon, and the strange fitts he falls into, in
his defense thereof do show, that in his sermon he made not the matter so
clear as he talks of. Where then? in his defense? so it seems, he means.
And be it so, yet was it not so before (no not in his own eyes) for then this
defense, by his own reason had been needless. What reason then, has he, to
argue his refuter either of wonderful blindness, for not seeing that which was
not then to be seen: or of impudency, for affirming the contrary, which if he
has not clearly proved, is yet in quaestion. May we not rather wonder, and
wonder in deed, at the Doct. that counts it woderful ignorace or impudency
for any to deny or disprove whatsoever he says, and seems to himself,
manifestly to prove; though in saying as he says here, he does but crave the
question? And yet out of the same passion, he proceeds and asks his ref.
The D. again beggeth the question, forgets him self and the part in
question.
how he durst mention the judgment and practice of the primitive Church for
the trial of the truth in question, seeing there is not one testimonye nor
example in all antiquity for the pretended discipline etc: and offreth, that if
his Ref. shall bring any one pregnant testimony or example, he will yield in
the whole cause. Not to tell him again, that he is still in begging the
question: I pray him to tell his Ref. what should fear him from mentioning
that, which he undertook to justify and prove? and whereto his large defense
serves, if his Ref. has not at least in show proved as much as he
mencioneth; or not brought so much as one testimony or example to the purpose?
the D. in his passion forgatt himself and the point in question surely; he
could not else but know, that diverse testimonies of the Fathers, are brought
to prove the function of the Bishops in question, to be jure humano, not
divino. As for his offer to yield in the whole cause, if but any one pregnant
testimony or example be produced: by pregnant he means certainly, such as are
subject to no wresting, or cavillation; but pregnant in his own judgment, not
in the judgment of all, or the most sound and orthodoxall divines in the world;
otherwise testimonies pregnant enough have bin already produced. But what so
pregnant, that Cavillers, (such especially as have the sword by their side)
cannot with some colors or others elude, and thereby delude the eyes of the
simple, which is all they care for.

In the next place, where the Ref: says that his doctrine is contrary Sect. 3.
page 4. of the ref. and 4 of the Doct.
to the judgment of all the reformed churches, since the reestablishment of
the gospel by the worthies in these latter times: the D. charge with an
untruth, saying. It is not a strange thing, that a man professing sincerity
should so overreache, seeing a far greater part of the reformed Churches, is
governed by Bishops and Superintendents, then by the Presbyterian discipline,
as I have showed in the later end of this book. How the Doct. has proved his
assertion here, shall be seen when we come to that later end of his book: but
if he there proves it no better, then he here proves his Refut. to have
overreached, I will turn the Doctors own words (one or two exchanged) upon
him, and say. Is it not a strange thing that a man of the Doctors title
should so overreach? Nay may I not apply it to him, before I proceed any
further? For how proves he that his refuter has so overreached in this place?
Forsooth beca^se a far greater part of the reformed Churches is governed by
Bishops and Superintendents, etc. The which for the time present, let us
suppose to be true: though by reformed Churches the Ref: meaning as he
elsewhere shows, soundly reformed Churches, it is not true. But grant it, yet
that which the D. says is false: viz. that The D. untruely char refuter to
overreach, and is himself too ready to overreach.
therefore his refuter overreacheth here. For may not reformed Churches be
governed by Bishops or Supreintendents, and yet the same Churches deny, that
the calling of our L. Bishops is jure divino? which is, (at least as the Ref.
understands it) the maine doctrine of the sermon; and that whereto all other
particulars do homage and service. When the D. has proved, that the Bishops
and Superintendents of all reformed Churches, are such (for the substance of
their calling) as ours, and do hold or exercise their functions, jure divino,
and not positivo; let him charge his Refut. with overreaching. In the mean
time he shows himself too ready to overreach; for if he look over his
Bishops and Superintendents mentioned in the later end of his book, he may
see (if he shutt not his eyes) that they held not their Bishoprics or
Supreinte^dencie, by the D. newfound claim and tenure; to whom (at this time
only) I will add one or two more not mentioned by him. Iodocus Naum upon Romans
12. distributeth the Church Officers ordained by GOD into Prophets and Deacons,
the Prophets into Pastors and Teachers, the Deacons into treasurers for the
poor, and those which are Presbyters or Elders, viz. Orderers or moderators of
discipline. Nicholaus Laurentius a late Superintendent in Denmark, in his
treatise of excommunication published Anno 1610. has these asserrions. That
the right of excommunication, is not in the power of any one man, either Bishop
or Pastor; but in the power of the Pastors, and that company which Paul calls
the Presbytery (p. 62.) That exco^municatio^, is either of the whole Church
(meaning the people) or of certain grave me^, which are in stead of the whole
Church; so that the Pastor do publicly in the name of the whole Church
pronounce the sentence (p. 64). That where there is no such Senate or
Presbytery (except the Magistrate shall otherwise decree and provide) the
Pastor choose two or three godly and discreet men of his parish: and the
Superintendent, and two of the Pastors in that Province, wherein he dwells,
and bring the matter before them all etc. (ibid). Many more might be brought for
this purpose, (if it were fitting for this place) but these are enough to
justify the refuters assertion, and to show the Doct. weakness in so
overreaching, as to charge that unjustly upon his refuter, which he himself is
justly guilty of.

Chap. 3. Wherein the Refuter is freed from the first of four other notorious
untruthes, charged upon him by the Doctor.
Sect. 1. page 4. of the ref. and page of the D. 4. 5.
In the D. next section, he charge his refuter to add to his former
overreaching, four notorious untruths concerning our own land, because he
said his doctrine was against, 1. the doctrine of our Martyrs, 2. contrary to
the profissed judgment of all our worthy writers, 3. contrariant to the laws
of our land, and 4. contrarying the doctrine of the Church of England. A foul
fault, if true; and no great credit for the D, if not his refut in his sayings,
but himself in so saying, has uttered 4. notorious untruths; let us therefore
examine them; and in this chapter the first of them. The refuters words out of
which the D. would extract the first of them are these: that the Do. sermon, is
against the doctrine of our immediate forefathers, (some of whom were worthy
Martyrs) who in their submission to King Henry the 8. at the abolishing the
Popes authority out of England, acknowledge with subscription, that the
disparity of Ministers, and Lordly primacie of Bishops was but a politic
devise of the fathers, not any ordinance of Christ: and that the government by
the Minister, and Seniors or Elders in every parish, was the ancient
discipline. These be his words, for his proof he refers us to three books,
the book of Martyrs, the book called the Bishops book, and the book called
Reformatio legum ecclesiasticarum. Consider we now how the D. convinces this
to be a notorious untruth; The witnesses says he, which the Ref. queteth, were
Archbishop Cranmer and other Bishops, allowing the episcopal function both in
judgment and practice; it is almost incredible that any testimonies, can from
them be soundly alleged against the same. Inc^edible in deed, if they had been
cast into the mould, in which our now Bishops have been formed: otherwise it
is credible enongh that they may, (as I still affirm that they do) testifye
something against such a calling of Bishops as the D. mainteyneth, and yet hold
the function and practice thereof lawful. Was it never heard of, that some of
our later Bishops (that worthy Jewel and others) allowed the episcopal
function both in judgment and practice, and yet denied the tenure thereof to
be jure divino? which is the point in quaestion, though the D. here would not
see it. And why may not they allow of the Lordly primacie of Bishops jure
bumano, and disclayme it jure divino, as well as allow them to exercise civil
authority, and yet disclaim it as being lawful iure divino? as may appear
they did in the places cited. But 2. the D. goes on, and (as if he had already
said enough to prove his refuter to be as unconscionable as may be) says, that
he wondreth greatly at his large conscience in this behalf, who throughout the
book takes wonderful liberty in citing authors, alleging as their
testimonies his own conceits, which he brought not from their writings, but to
them. A heavy charge, if true; but here it the comfort, that upon due
examination, it will be found to prove otherwise. It is no new thing that they
who are themselves the most egregious wresters of testimonies, should be the
readiest (as the D. here is) to lay the charge on others. Let us now try out
the whole in the particulars. First concerning the testimony taken from the
book of Martyrs, and the Bishops book, or book entitled, The institution of
a Christian man, the Doctor tells us, that he has perused it and finds
nothing at all concerning the superiority of of Bishops over other Ministers:
that which is said concerns the superiority of Bishops among themselves; all
whom with the ancient fathers I confess (says he) in respect of the power of
order to be equal, as were the Apostles whose successors they are. If it be but
so as the Doct. here confesses, they say enough to show (and he has
subscribed it) that the function of Archbishops is jure humano: But if he had
perused with purpose to find out what is there to be found, he might easily
The D. ca^^^ni^^eth.
have found full as much as the Refuter cites it for. For it speaks not of
Bishops severed from other Priests and Preachers; but promiscuously of all
Bishops Priests Priests and Preachers, as appears by diverse passages of that
part of the book there set down; to wit, the chap: of the Sacrament of
orders,) amongst which consider we, 1. that there should be continually in the
Church militant, ministers or officers to have special power under Christ, to
preach the word, administer the Sacraments, ioose and bind by
excommunication, and order and consecrate others in the same room and office
whereto they be called, that their power was limited, and office ordained of
God Ephesians. 4, committed and given by Christ and his Apostles to certain persons
only, viz. Priests and Bishops. That albeit the holy-Fathers of the Church
succeeding, did institute inferior orders and degrees etc. yet the truth is
that in the new Testament there is no mention made, of any degrees or
distinction in orders; but only of Deacons or Ministers. That the power and
authority belonging to Priests and Bishops is of 2. parts, potestas ordinis,
and potestas iurisdictionis, to the first whereof always good consent has
been, about the second, some disagrement, and therefore they think it meet that
the Bishops and preachers instruct the people, that the jurisdiction committed
to Priests and Bishops by authority of Gods law consists in three special
points. 1. in admonition, excommunication, and absolution. 2. in approving and
admitting, such as are nominated elected and presented to any Church. 3. to
make and ordeyn rules and canons for order and quietness, for diversities of
degrees among Ministers etc. And that those orders are to be made by the
ministers of the Church with the consent of the people, before Christian
Prince, and after Christian Princes, with the authority and consent both of
Prince and people. Again we think it convenient that all Bishops and Preachers
shall instrust the people committed to their spiritual charge, that whereas
certain men do imagine and affirm that Christ should give unto the Bishop of
Rome, power and authority over all Bishops and Priests in Christ's Church etc.
that it is utterly false and untrue. Again, it is out of all doubt, that there
is no mention made, neither in the scripture, nor in the wrytings of any
authentical Doctor or author in the Church, being within the times of the
Apostles, that Christ did ever make or institute, any distinction or difference
to be, in the pre-eminence of power, order, or jurisdiction; between the
Apostles themselves, or between the Bishops themselves, but they were equal in
power, order, authority and jurisdiction: And that there is now and since the
time of the Apostles, any such diversity or difference among the Bishops; it
was divised among the ancient Fathers of the primitive Church, for the
conservation of good order, and unity of the Catholic church, and that either
by the consent and authority, or else (...) least by the permissi^^ and
sufferance of the Princes and civil powers for the time rulinge. For the said
Fathers considering the great and infinite multitude of Christian men, so
largely increased through the world, and taking examples of the old testament;
thought it expedient to make an order of degrees among Bishops and spiritual
governors This it seemed the D. marked not.
of the Church and so ordained some to be Patriarchs, some to be Primates,
some to be Metropolitanes, some to be Archbishops, some Bishops. And to them
limited not only several Dioceses or Provinces, where they should exercise
their power, and not exceed the same: but also certain bounds and limitts of
their jurisdiction and power. In so much that whereas in the time of the
Apostles, it was lawful for all Bishops certain of them assembling together,
to constitute and consecrate other Bishops, the said Fathers restreyned the
said power, and reserved the same in such wise, that without the consent and
authority of the Metropolitan, or Archbishop, no Bishop could be consecrate in
any Province: and likewise in other cases, their powers were also restreyned,
for such causes as were then thought unto them conventent. Which differences,
the said holy Fathers thought necessary to enact and establish by their decrees
and constitutions, not for that any such differences were prescribed or
established in the Gospel, or mentioned in any canonical writings of the
Apostles, or testified by any ecclesiastical writer within the days of the
Apostles; but to the intent that thereby contention, variance, schisms and
divisions should be avoided, and the Church preserved in good order and
concord. Lo here their words: now ob^erve we among other things. 1. that they
join together Bishops and 1. That they make Priests or Bishops all one.
Priests not only in the duty of instructing, but also in the power of the
keys, and of bearing the spiritual charge of the people committed to them. 2.
And in setting down that headship of the Pope which they disclaim, they join
the Priests with the Bps. of Christ's Church; and affirm his power of claim
and authority from Christ over both, to be alike false and untrue. 3. they
say, that the Fathers devised an order of degrees among the Bishops and
spiritual governors of the Church, which last words spiritual governors, must
needs include all Preachers that have spiritual charge as is before noted. 4.
And as among those degrees ordained by them, they recko^ Bishops as well as
Archbishops etc. so they ascribe unto the devise of the Fathers, the limitatio^
of several Dioceses as well as of Provinces; yea the limitatio^ of the power of
Bishops as well as of Archbishops, which cannot be thought they would ever have
done, if they had held the^ jure divino. 5. And ail this was after that
Christians were increased to an infinite multitude throughout the world; and in
an imitation of the example of like degrees in the old testament; not for that
any such were established in the new etc. wherefore if the D. had well perused
their words, and with an indifferent eye looked to the scope and drift of their
pleading; he might have found, that whatsoever they speak of the equality or
superiority of Bps. among themselves (affirming the one, and denying the other
to be instituted by Christ) the same is to be understood (not of such Bishops
as had that name proper to them, after the Fathers had established sundry
differences of degrees, but) of all apostolic Bishops or spiritual governors,
priests or preachers, which had the spiritual charge of any people committed to
them by the Apostles. Which appears yet more clearly, as by that other book
called Reformatio legu^ ecclesiasticaru^, compiled by them, (wherein it shall
appear anon) they make the Bishops in quaestion to be of no other
institution, then the rest of that rank of Archbishops, Archdeaco^s, Deanes
etc. so also by that which Bishop Tonstall and Stokesley (two others of them,
and therefore fittest to interpret their own meaning) writ in their letters
to Cardinal Poole. S. Ierom, say they, as well in his Co^mentary on the Epistle
to Titus, as in his Epistle to Euagrius, shows that those primacyes long
after Christ's ascension were made by the device of men; where as before by the
common agreement and consent of the Clergy, every of the Churches were
governed; yea the Patriarchall Churches. The words of S. Ierom are these,
sciant ergo episcopi se magis ex consuetudine, quam dispensationis Dominicae
veritate, Praesbyteris esse majores. And in the margin, this note is set.
Difference betwixt Bishops and Priests how it came in. What ca^ be more plain
then this, to show that those Bishops did acknowledge (as the ref: says) the
disparity of Ministers and the primacie of Bishops, as well as of Archbishops
etc. was but a politik divise of the Fathers and not any ordinance of Christ
Jesus. This shall suffice for that testimony: before we come to the next, it
shall not be amiss to speak a word or two concerning the D. confession,
touching the parity of Bishops among themselves; but yet restreyning it to the
power of order, for fear of offending, and cutting off his Archbishops head.
But so it falls out, that when men are afraid to what is truth, for
offending one side, they often speak to the offense of the other, and that so
far, as we see the D. here cutteth off the whole argument of the Bishops
against the papal authority, whiles he denies, what they affirm, viz. that
Bishops jure divino are equal among themselves in respect of power and
jurisdiction as well as order. But though he deal honestly, that himself (and
not the Bishops of King Henry's days) restreyneth the equality of Bishops
among themselves to the power of order; yet he casts a great blemishe and
disgrace upon those our forefathers; in signifying that the ancient Fathers
consented not with them, but with him and against them in this point. As for
that clause he adds, as were also the Apostles, whose successors the Bishops
are, I know not to what purpose it serves; save to discover his contradictinge
either himself or the The D. co^tradicteth himself or the truth.
truth: himself, if he mean that the equality of Bishops among themselves, is
as large as that equality which was among the Apostles, for the^ he erreth in
restreyning the equality of Bishops, unto power of order only: the truth, if
he mean that the Apostles had no other equality among themselves then he
gives to Bishops; for they were equal also in authority and jurisdiction,
as well as in power of order; as is rightly acknowledged by our Bishops in their
books, and by the auncienter Bishops in their writings. Neither is it true (as
the Doct. would insinuate) tha^ Bishops only are the Apostles successors. The
D. untruly insinuates. that Bishops only are the Apostles successors.
For to speak properly, they have no successors; and in a general sense all
Pastors and Teachers, that hold and teach their doctrine, are their successors.
And herein we have against him (amongst many others) the consent of those
reverend Bishops, who having said that Christ gave none of his Apostles, nor
any of their successors, any such authority as the Pope claymeth over Princes,
or in civil matters, do make application thereof as well to Priests as to
Bishops. But the D. notwithstanding, upon this, (that the Bishops are the
Apostles successors) goes on and tells us, That we may not infer; because
the Apostles were equal among themselves, that therefore they were not superior
to the 72 disciples; or because Bishops are equal among themselves, therefore
they are not superior to other Ministers. Whereunto, I could say it is true; if
it were apparent, first, that Bishops and other Ministers do differ by any
special difference, as the 72. disciples did from the Apostles: but no such
thing appears, either in the scriptures, or in the Bishops book from whence
the Doct. reasons: but rather, as has been showed by the refuter, (and is
before mainteyned) the clean contrary. Secondly, that the Apostles had any
superiority over these disciples, the which the Doctor will not so easily prove
as take for granted; seeing 1. Christ living, the Apostles had no authority over
any, 2. their Apostolical authority was not as then (when the 72. were sent
forth) committed unto them. and 3. it appears not that the Ministry of the
72. was to be continued in the Church after Christ; but only to remain for
that present journey and afterward to be disposed of as Christ pleased.
Thirdly it is also true, that as the equality of the Apostles among
themselves, and the supposed superiority they had over the 72, took not away
their subjection and inferiority to Christ: so neither does the equallity of
Bishops among themselves, nor their superioty over other Ministers take away
their inferiority to the Pope, by any necessity of consequence. Wherefore I
must for this The Refus. rightly alleged the testimony.
testimony conclude, 1. that the refuter has rightly alleged it; and 2. that
the D. has wronged not only his refuter: but us and them, in laboring (and
that with slander,) to wrest their testimony out of our hands.

The next testimony is taken from the book called Reform: leg. eccles. Sect 2.
Ref. page 4. D. page 5.
cap. 10. 11. de divinis offic ijs, to prove, that those which made the book
deemed, that as the episcopal function is not jure divino: so the government
of the Church by the Minister and certain Seniors or Elders in every parish,
was the ancient discipline; and so consequently his doctrine in his sermon
contrary to their judgment. In answer whereunto, 1. he charge his Refuter to
play the part of an egregious falsifyer, and The D. columniateth.
the allegation to be forged; but by that time the matter be examined, I
persuade my self the reader will think it meet, the Doctor take home those
speeches to himself as his own proper; the rather, seeing the Ref: sets not
down the words of the book; but only his own collection out of them. 2. he
fathereth that upon him; which he neither said nor meant. With what eye, trow
we, looked he upon the Refuters words, that he would make his reader believe,
that the Refuter affirms (as he afterward intimates) that the The Doct.
slau^dereth.
compilers of the book, meant to bring in Lay Elders, or to establish the
pretended parish discipline, or to acknowledge that it was the ancient
discipline of the Church? Let us now debate the matter (as it deserves) at
large. And first, (it being remembered, that the book is cited to prove, that
the doctrine in his sermon is against the judgment of our immediate
forefathers) we are to see what his doctrine is, viz, that as the episcopal
function in qucstion is jure divino; so all ecclesiastical power of
jurisdiction is in the Bishops hands only, that the Pastors of particular
flocks, as they have their authority from the Bishop; so all the authority they
have is in fore conscientia, not in foro externo, either for direction or
correction, that belongs wholly to the Bishop, he is to reform abus^,
exercise Church Censures against offenders: It is not in the power of any
Pastor of a particular congregation, with any assistantes of Lay Elders, or
other associates to execute any censure etc, whereof we may see more at large
in the 4. point of his sermon page 45-52. And however in his defense he does in
part deny this to be his doctrine: yet is it sufficiently averred (lib. 2. Cap.
4. hereafter following) to be his doctrine. Now to prove that this his doctrine
is against the judgment of those fathers, is that book alleged; the Doct.
is now to make good his charge if he can: he says he will do it by
transcribing the 10. and 11. chap. cited, the bare recital whereof, being (as
he says) a sufficient consutation of his forged allegations. The words
transcribed by him are. Evening prayers being ended, (in city parish Churches)
whereunto after the sermon there shall be a concourse of all in their own
churches, the principal Minister whom they call parochum, the Parson or
Past^r, and the Deacon if they be present etc. and Seniors, are to consult with
the people how the money provided for godly uses may be best bestowed; and to
the same time let the discipline be reserved. For they who have committed any
public wickedness to the common offense of the Church are to be called to the
knowledge of their sin, and publicly to be punished, that the Church by
their wholesome correction may be kept in order. Moreover the Minister going
aside with some of the Seniors, shall take counsel how others whose ma^ners
are said to be naught, and whose life is found out to be wicked, first may be
talked withal in brotherly charity, according to Christ's precept in the
Gospel, by sober and honest men, by whose admonitions if they shall reform
themselves, thanks is duly to be given to God; but if they shall go on in
their wickedness, they are to receive such sharp punishment, as we see in the
Gospel provided against their contumacy.

In the 11. Chap. they set down (in case that they judge any for contumacy
worthy to be excommunicated) how to proceed in the exercise and denouncinge of
that sentence. 1. the Bishop is to be gone unto, and his sentence to be known:
who if he shall cons^^t, and putt to his authority, the sentence is to be
denounced before the whole congregation, that therein so much as may be, we may
bring in the ancient disciplyne. Here are their words; now what says M. D.
to prove, that (these words notwithstanding) the refuter is an egregious
falsifyer? and that the reader may be these words thus transcribed, discern
the allegations to be forged? of this last he has never a word, concerning the
first, he tells us, that though they mention Seniors, and ancient
discipli^e, yet they meant nothing l^sse, then to bring in l^y-Elders, or to
establish the pretended parish discipline, or to acknowledge that it was the
ancient discipline of the Church. And what of all this? what if they did mean
none of these? yet shall that which the refuter affirms of them remain true
still. What they meant and acknowledge, we shall see by and by; when we have
seen the D. proofs that they meant not so. He tells us, he will out of the
book it self make it manifest; and I will tell him he will not; but I will the
contrary rather. To make his word good, (if he could) he says. The whole
government and discipline of our Church, by Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons,
Rural Deanes, etc. is established in that book: and to make good mine, I say,
it mattereth not, they had no commission from the K. to remove it, and bring in
that ancient discipline, which (by their words they acknowledge) was not then
in use, but diverse from that established; their commission stretched no
further then to examine the laws and reform abuses, letting the offices to
remain still; yea and therein to proceed no further, then would stand with
those offices and the laws of the land. Will the D. say that they in all the
book have any one word to show that they held that government and discipline
of our Church by Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeaco^s, rural Deanes etc. to be
jure divino? Nay as diverse of them in their submission to King H. the 8.
profess the contrary; so throughout this book they have no one word tending to
prove the Bishops authority over other Ministers to be any more jure divino,
then Archbishops, Archdeacons, Rural Deanes, etc: but as they are birds of a
feather, so they stand and fall together by one and the same ecclesiastical
law, or humane ordinance.

But let us hear what the Doctor can make the book speak concerning the
Bishops authority, he sends us to the 12. chap. where he says it is
decreed, that the Bishop is at f^^ seasons to give holy orders, etc. to remove
unfit men etc. to correct by ecclesiastical censures, vices and corrupt
manners; to prescribe orders for amendment of life; to excommunicate those
which wilfully and obstinately refist, to receive into grace those that be
penitent etc. and finally to take care of all things, which ex Dei prescripto
by the ordinance of God belong to them, and which our ecclesiastical laws
have committed to their knowledge and judgments. Very well; and what does the
D. infer of all this? just nothing: I will help him by and by. But first, who
sees not that those fathers understood two parts of that episcopal function,
one divine, the care of those things, which are prescribed them by God, and
common to all Bishops or Ministers of the word; one principal member whereof,
to wit, the diligent and sincere preaching of the word, they mention as the
first duty in the first words of that Chapter, which the D. left ou^, perhaps
because diverse of our Bishops have left it of, as no part or the least part of
their duty; the other humane, viz, the exercise of that ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, which was committed to them by the K. in his ecclesiastical
laws. Now 2. to help the D. a little, he should have inferred upon the words
set down by him: That therefore the authority of doing all those things
mentioned, was (in the judgment of those Fathers) in the hands of the Bishops
alone; the which if he durst not do, he should have brought forth some other
chapter to show it: else certeynely he can say nothing to the purpose. And
that it may appear he cannot do it; I will now make it manifest out of the
book, that they were of a contrary judgment, and labored so far as their
commission would suffer them, to bring in that ancient discipline before
spoken of, concerning the ruling and guiding of the particular flocks by the
M^nister and Seniors of the same; and so far brought it in, by the order
prescribed in that book, that it cutteth the windpipe of the D. sermon
concerning his sole ruling Bishops so in sunder, as it will never breath from
their decrees; nor ever have affinity with the ancient discipline they speak
of. We have already seen (concerning discipline and excommunication) what they
decree, cap. 10. 11; that being remembered, add we to it, that in the 6. cap. de
excommunicat: thus they further order. 1. that if possibly it may be (it being
a thing much to be desired) the consent of the whole Church or Congregation
should be had, before excommunication be decreed or denounced against any. 2.
that no one man (Archbishop, Bishop or other) shall have the power of
excommunication in his hands. And therefore 3, that neither Archbishop,
Bishop, or any ecclesiastical Judge, sholl so much as decree excommunication
without the consent of one Justice of peace, of the Minister of the
Congregation, where the delinquent dwells, or (in his absence), of his deputy
Curate, or assistant, and of 2. or 3. other Ministers both learned and of good
life; in whose presenc^, the whole matter and busynes shall be heard, debated,
pondered, and decreed.

In like sort, for the receiving again of the excommunicate person into the
Church, upon his repentance, in the 14. chap: they likewise order: 1. that it
shall not be by any Judge, before his repentance be approved and certificate
thereof made to the Bishop, by the Minister and Syndicks, or some of the chief
of the parish. 2. when the Bishops or ecclesiastical Syndic^.
Judge, shall give license and authority, for the receiving of him into the
congregation by the Pastor, be shall not receive him into the Church; but in the
presence of the congregation: and 3. not before he has witnessed his
repentance to the Congregation, by confessing and bewayling his sin before
them, and craving ^^^don both of God and them, together with the^^ favor for
his reciving in. The which when the party has done, the Minister 4ly. shall
ask the congregation whether they will forgive him his fault, and commend his
cause by prayer unto God that he would show mercy to him, and co^firm that in
heaven which they do on earth. And the people answeringe thereto, we will, he
shall again ask them, whither they will receive him into their company and
count him as a brother, whereunto when they have answered, we will; then shall
the Minister absolve him, and receive him into the Church, saying after this
manner. I do here before this Church, the guiding whereof, is committed unto
me, absolve thee from the punishment of thine offenses, and from the bonds of
excommunication, by the authority of God, the power of Jesus Christ and the
Holy Ghost, with the consent of the members of this Church present, and also of
the ordinary; (Ordinario suffragante) And I do restore thee again to thy
former place and full right in the Church. Behold here the order prescribed by
the^ for administration of this part of discipline; and therein observe that
the Bishop or ecclesiastical Judge had but a voice in it, he was neither the
doer nor the sole-doer; but the Minister and the Seniors or chief men of the
Parish, and the congregation had their voices also; and that as they could not
do it with out the Bishop; so neither the Bishop without them. And thus far
they sought to bring in the ancient discipline; and do show their judgment
to be directly against his doctrine for the Bishops sole government, as
appears also by the former testimony cited out of the Bishops book. Consider
we now what the D. says to the Seniors they speak of; he tells us, that it
is apparent, that by Seniors they (...) not ecclesiastical officers, because
where they reckon up all ecclesiastical officers from the Clerks to the Church
wardens, Deacons, Ministers etc. they do not once mention Seniors or their
office. And thereupon concludes that by them they understand, some of the
principal householders, in some places called vestry-men, in some Masters of
the parish; in some ^^ncients of the parish. Which is nothing to the purpose,
seeing the ref: never said, that by the Seniors, with whom they require the
Minister to consult, they mean any of the ecclesiastical officers the^
established, whereof only they make mention in the Chapters noted in the
Doctors margin: yet when in the places alleged by the Refuter, they (all
those officers notwithstanding) prescribe the Ministers to take to them
Seniors, and without their counsel to do nothing in the the Church busynes,
and to proceed with wicked persons according to Math. 18, and adjudging them
worthy to be excommunicate, and having gotten to approve it, they must denounce
it publicly in the congregation: that therein so much as may be, they might
bring in the anncient discipline: will not any man that has wit and honesty
conclude, that they acknowledged that of old time there were Seniors (let the
D. call them what he will, they call them Seniors) who were joined with the
Pastors of particular co^gregations in Church government; and that they (so
far as their commission and the laws then established would permit them) out
of the love they bare to that discipline sought to bring it in. The D.
therefore wants wit or honesty in so charging his refut: the former we know
he has, the later, the reader may see he wants: else would he never at his
first meeting with this testimony, charge his refuter to be an egregious
falsifyer, to have produced forged allegations: and when he is to take his
leave of it, will the reader to judge with what conscience that book was
alleged, as if the Refuter against conscience had alleged it. But I will
join with him in that request, praying the reader in Gods fear so to do; as
also how well he has proved his Refuter in the allegation thereof, to be (as he
charge him) an egregious falsifyer, and to have produced forged allegations;
and so proceed to the rest of those notorious untruthes as he calls them.

Chap. 4. Wherein the Refuter is discharged of the other notorious untruthes,
charged upon him by the Doctor.
The second notorious untruth laid to the Refuters charge by Sect. 1. ref: page
4. D. p. 7.
the Doctor, is because he said, that his dactrine is contrary to the profifsed
profissed judgment of our worthy writers (Whitakers, Fulk etc.) who in their
answers to the Papists (who plead for their hierarchy with the same reasons,
that the D. does for his) do determine that the government our Bishops
exercise ever other Ministers, is jure humano, by the positive law of man
only; the which (if the D. say true) is false, and so the papists left
unanswered. fre hence arises this second notorious untruth; but how does M. D.
make it appear so? 1. Can he deny, the doctrine in his sermon to be clean
contrary to their judgment that hold the government our Bishops exercise over
other Ministers to be given them jure humano, by the positive law of man
only? No he dares not contradict his Refuter in this point. What then? 2.
Does he deny that the Papists do plead for their hierarchy with the same
reasons, that he does for ours? no, he only indeavoureth to persuade, that his
arguments are good, though theirs be naught. 3. But do not our worthy writers
(those the refuter named with others) in their answers to the Papists that
allege the same reasons, determine (as the refuter says, that the government
which our Bishops exercise over other Ministers, is jure humano, not by divine
right but) by the positive law of man only? This is so evident a truth, that
the D. neither does nor can refell it. Where then is that notorious untruth,
wherewith he charge his Refuter by reason of those words? is not he rather a
notorious slaunderer in delivering The D. is the slau^derer.
such an accusation as he cannot justify? Judge Christian reader when thou have
heard his answer. First, says he, the popish opinion is far different from
that, which I hold; for they hold the order and superiority of Bishops to be
jure divino, implying thereby a perpetual necessity thereof; in so much that
where Bishops are not to ordeyne, they think there can be no Ministers nor
Priests, and consequently no Church: I hold otherwise as the Ref: himself
acknowknowledgeth, p. 90 in fine. If therefore the Papists do bring the like
arguments to prove their opinion which is so unlike to mine; nothing hinders
but my arguments may be good, though theirs be naught. For those arguments
which demonstratively prove the episcopal function to be of Apostolical
institution, do not straitewayes prove it to be divini juris. Wherefore my
opinion being so far different from the popish conceit; who sees not that
the judgment of our divines, which is opposed to the doctrine of the Papists,
is not opposue to mine? for though they hold not the episcopal function to be
enjoined jure divino, as being perpetually necessary; yet what man of sound
learning does or dare deny that the first Bishops were ordained by the
Apostles? Thus we see how the D. has ledd us along. But notwithstanding the
confidence of his speech, observe we the extreme poverty of his cause; is he
not near driven, (think ye) when to prove his great difference between his
opinion and the Papists, he is feign to fly to the refuters acknowledgment of
it in that 90. page, where with the same breath, he challenges him to be
contrary to himself, seeminge at least to unsay that in one place, which he
had said in another? Does he not remember that he has often charged his
refuter to affirm throughout his answer that he holds the episcopal
function to be iure divino, and to imply a perpetual necessity thereof? how
then does the refuters acknowledgement prove that the popish opinion is far
different from his? Does it not rather prove that in this very point wherein he
lays the main difference, he he is fully knitt unto them? although
forgetting himself (as many Papists also do in their discourses) he
contradicts at one time, what he maynteyneth at an other. But to let the
world see, how he jumpeth with the Papists in this matter, I will relate his
opinion; (not in his ref: words, but in his own). The function and authority
(says he, sermon. p. 79) which Tim. and T it. had at Ephesus and in Crete
(consisting specially in the power of ordinatio^ and jurisdictio^) was not to
end with their persons, but to be continued in their successors, as being
ordinary and perpetually necessary, not only for the wel-being, but also for
the very being of the Churches. For if whiles the Apostles themselves lived, it
was necessary that they should substitute in the Churches already planted, such
as Timothy and Titus furnished with episcopal power: then much more after their
decease, have the Churches need of such governors. Lo here his own words:
now who sees not that they closely implye, that which he says, the Papists
do more impudently The D. closely implies, what the Papists impudently
affirm.
affirm? viz, that where Bishops are not to ordeyne, there can be no Ministers
or Priests, and consequently no Church. Yet there is a friend of the Do. who
pleadinge the same cause blusheth not (among other propositions, delivered to
disgace the Presbyterian discipline, and the mainteyners thereof) to affirm in
plain terms that, all Ministers created and made by the new Presbytery, are
mere laye-persons, and cannot lawfully, either preach Gods word, or administer
the sacraments; so says Tho: Bell in his regiment of the Church, page 136: and
then adds, this is already proved: and a little afer concludes with Ieroms
words (often objected by the Papists against the Protestants) ecclesia non est
quae non habet sacerdotem; where there it no Priest or Minister there can be no
Church. But to return to the D. seeing all the reason he here brings to
mainteyne his accusation is from the difference of opinion betwixt the Papists
and him, concerning the authority of Bishops: it being made evident that there
is no such difference as he pretends, it will necessarily follow that this
second untruth how notorious soever, here charged upon his refuter, must be
discharged upon himself. For it is a truth (so The 2. untruth which the D.
charge upon the Ref. returns to himself.
evident, as the D. cannot deny it), that the judgment of our divines is
wholly opposite to his, in that they hold the calling of L. Bishops to be,
neither divini nor apostolici juris, neither as the Papists, nor as the D.
holds them, if he did (as he says) so far differ from them. And putt case,
the difference betwixt the Papists and him were such as he says; yet what is
that to the point in question? (I mean to prove the refuters assertion to be a
notorious untruth?) nothing at all. The D. in deed his opinion being so
different (as he faith) from the popish conceit, asks who it is that sees
not that the judgment of our divines opposed to the doctrine of the Papists is
not opposite to his: and I may ask him, what meant he to ask that question?
May not the D, (yea does he not) agree with the Papists in affirminge the
episcopal function to be divini juris; thereby intending that it is a divine
and not an humane ordinance; though he should differ from them in the point of
the perpetual and immutable necessity of the function? And may not our worthy
writers of whom the Refuter speaks, (yea can the Doctor show that they do
not) contradict the papists as well in the former point, as in the later? Will
he say, (and can he prove) that they determine such Bishops only as have such
a calling as the papists mainteyne to be jure humano, by the positive law of
man only? do they not generally conclude and determine the matter, of all
Bishops whatsoever, that are superior to other Ministers? or can they hold
(which the Ref. says they do, and the D. does not deny) that the government
our Bishops exercise over other Ministers is jure humano only, and yet hold it
an apostolical ordinance also? or can they hold, that so far forth as there
is a perpetual necessity thereof, it is only jure humano: and that so far
forth as it is not perpetual, but so as the Church may be a church without it;
it is an apostolical and a divine ordinance? Or do our writers therefore
determine against the papists, that the government aforesaid is only jure
humano, because they defend it to be perpetually necessary? Or do they
determine only against those reasons of the papists by which they prove this
government to be perpetually necessary? Will the D. affirm this? Is not the
contrary to all this most evident to them that read their writings? Do they
not plainly and directly without any relation to this or that conceit,
conclude against all those reasons which papists bring, that the government of
Bishops over other Ministers, is not an ordinance divine or apostolical, but
humane only, directly contrary to the D. conclusion, let his reasons be what
they be may? And it were worth the knowinge what reasons those are that
demonstratively prove (as he says) the episcopal function to be of
apostolical institution, and yet prove it not to be divini juris, and of
perpetual necessity: as also what worthy writers of our side against the
papists there are, that mainteyninge the episcopal function to be of
apostolical institution, do yet deny it to be divini juris and perpetually
necessary? not that great Bell of whom we heard even now, I am sure of. For
as for the D. silly distinction between apostolical instuutio^ and divine
right, whereby he puts this difference betwixt his opinion and the papists,
as he tells not from whence it comes; so I see not whither it goes; except
to give Romish license to alter and change divine ordinances, at humane
pleasures. But hereof more hereafter in a sitter place, here enough is said for
the Ref. defense against the D. second slander; wherein he has bewraied want
both of judgment and honesty: the one in devysing such silly shifts, and
thinking The D. bewraieth want of judgment and honesty.
to escape from the whole host of our worthy writers by putting on so poor a
visard, or piece of a garment that would scarce cover any part of him: the
other in laboring against the truth and his own conscience, to persuade that
none of our worthy Champions against the papists are in their judgment opposite
to him in this question. And this his fault is the greater, because he lays
down their judgment imperfectly; and closely steals all reputation The D.
wrongeth all our best divines
of sound learning, both from them, and all other that accord in judgment
with them. The former appears in that he restreineth their denial of the
episcopal function to be divini juris, unto his own sense, as if thereby they
meant nothing else; then that their function is not perpetually necessary;
whereas it is plain, they make it an humane and not a divine ordinance. The
later discovers it self, in that he asks what man of sound learning; does
or can deny, but that the first Bishops were ordained by the Apostles? For he
cannot be ignorant, that (as our immediate forefathers before spoken of, so
also) the greatest number of orthodoxall divines at this day do flatly deny,
that the superiority of Bishops over other Ministers was ordained by the
Apostles.

The second notorious untruth being removed, we are now to Sect. 2. Ref. page
5. D. page 8. 9.
meet with the third, which the D. casts upon his Ref. because he said that
his doctrine was contrariant to the laws of our Land, which make it one part
of the Kings jurisdiction, to grant to our Bishops that ecclesiastical power,
they now exercise over us, and to take it from them as his pleasure: the which
his highness takes to himself, and gives to all Kings, where he professes
that God h^h left it to the liberty and free will of Princes, to alter the
Church Government at their pleasure. These are the refuters words in deed, and
he shows from whence he collected them, to wit, from Sr Edw. Cook, De jure
regis ecclesiastico: and the Kings Majesty's own speech, in his Preface before
his premonition. But how proves the D. that the Refuter has in these words
uttered a notorious untruth? for that is the charge; if many words will prove
it, he has proved it in deed, for he has spent a page and half about it,
wherein is as much profoundnes, as truth; let us give him the hearing at large.
Before he comes to the restimonies quoted by the refuter, he gives us two
distinctions; one concerning the episcopal power, the other concerning the
exercise thereof; first therefore of the first. Touching their power, he
tells us, that it is either spiritual respecting the soul, as to bind and
loose the souls of men: or corporal respecting the outward man, as to bind
and loose the bodies; the former of which is derived to them from the Apostles;
the later committed to them by the King; to whose crown all commanding and
compulsive power is annexed. It is well he grants the civil power of Bishops
to be jure humano, his Majesty is much beholden to him. But will he ever be
able to prove (trow we) that the spiritual power of opening and shutting,
binding and loosing, which he says was derived to the Bishops from the
Apostles, is by divine ordinance proper to them, and not common to all
Ministers of the gospel with them, but that they by the word of God are
excluded from it? this he means in and by those words, or The Doct. beggeth
the question.
else he speaks idlye; and in so meaning, who sees not that he beggeth the
main question, and labors for that, which by all the sweat of his brows,
he will never compass?

Touching the exercise of their power, (to let pass his terms of babituall or
potentiall right as fitter to choke then to nourish) his distinction, that
though their power be derived to them from the Apostles as a divine ordinance:
yet where a Christian Prince is assisting and directinge them by his laws,
they may not actually exercise their power, but according to his l^^es
ecclesiastical; seems to me somewhat harsh. 1. that God should give to
Archbishops, Bishops etc. such a peerless power, so The Doct. speaks
harshly and with contradiction to himself.
absolute and large over millions of souls, (as he speaks) without certain
rules and directions for the exercising and managinge thereof; but has left it
as a dead trunk or body, to depend upon the ecclesiastical laws of Christian
Princes, which as a soul, must give life and breath and motion thereunto.
Verily that power is not a peerless, but a powerless power in deed. 2. That
that power which has rule and direction enough from God for the exercise of
it, where no Christian ayding and directing Princes, are, should become
powerless and livelesse, by the aidance and advise of Christian Princes. 3.
That the Doctor dare be so bold as (besides these two) to imply (for so he
does) that Arch Bishops and Bishops with their adherence may actually exercise
their power, supposed to be derived to them from the Apostles, contrary to the
ecclesiastical laws, in case they be not such as do assiste and direct them.
But pass we on, all this wind shakes no corn, nor makes ought to prove the
untruth in question: leave we therefore his distinctions, and come we to his
answer to the ref: first proof of his assertion. He affirms that the
authority, which the reverend Judge speaks of in the place quoted, is the
authority of the high Commission, which the Bishops exercise not as they are
Bishops (for that others who are no Bishops have the same) but as they are the
Kings commissioners ecclesiastical; then which, The D. speaks untruly or
deceiptfully.
what can be more untruly or deceytfully spoken? Will he say that that reverend
Judge speaks of the authority of the high Commission only? knows he not
that that whole book tends to prove, that both the function of Archbishops
and L. Bishops and the jurisdiction they exercised in England, long before the
high Commission was dreamt of, was by and from the Kings of England? Does he
not (pa. 13.) affirm (from the Statute of the Parliament held at Carliel 25.
Edw. 1.) that the holy Church of England was founded in the stare of Prelacie
by the King and his progenitors? And that in the time of Edw. the third, it was
often resolved (17. cap. 23.) that the K. might exempt any person from the
jurisdiction of the Ordinary, and grant him episcopal jurisdiction? and (fol.
9: edit. 1606) that (in 1. Hen. 4.) the Archbishops and Bishops of this Realm
are called the K. spiritual Indges? And to conclude, does he not afterward
conclude that though the proceedings and progress of the ecclesiastical Courts
run in the Bishops name; yet both their courts and laws whereby they proceed,
are the Kings? Verily, if by our laws, their function and jurisdiction were
holden to be of divine ordinance, he neither could nor would have said so. But
hear we the Doctor speak again, he tells us, that the authority which the
Bishops exercise in the high Commission, is not exercised by them as they are
Bishops; but as they are high commisioners, and his reason for it, is, for
that others that are no Bishops have the same. Wherein he deals as decitfully
The. D. deals deceiptfully.
as before. For 1. he will not (I suppose) avouch that the ecclesiastical
jurisdiction which the Bishops there exercise of suspending exco^municating
depriving, etc. is exercised as Commissioners and not as Bishops and
Archbishops? or that others their Assistants in that Commission, that are
neither Archbishops, Bishops, nor Ministers of the word, can without them
exercise those Censures? In deed, in that the high Commisioners convent men
from all parts and out of all Dioceses in the Land, and proceed against them by
imprisonments impositions of fines etc. it is done by power of the high
commission: but for all ecclesiastical Censures, what do they, which every
Archbishop within his Province, and Bishop within his Diocese may not do, (yea
sometimes and too often does not) without that Commission? Thus we see how he
has infringed the Refuters first proof, taken from Sr Edw. Cooks testimony or
report. The refuter might have sent him for further proof of that point to
that Book called an Assertion for Church polocie; wherein are proofs
plentiful and pregnant, whereof the D. in likelihood cannot be ignorant. And I
might here commend unto him other testimonies also; but I have on to other more
needful matters.

Let us therefore hear him what he can say to his refuters second proof, to
wit, the K. Majesty's judgment, whose words are before set down. 1. says
he, It seems that whiles the Refut: talks of The D. slandereth his Ref.
with one brearh; and yet against his will clears him with another.
liberty to alter at their pleasure, he thinks it left to his liberty, to
alter the K. words at his pleasure. Might not a man this once tell him, that he
cares not what he says, so it may (as others before him) De Imperatorio
nomine invidiam conflare? the refuter is so far off from changing the K.
words, that he did not so much as once offer to set the^ down, but only
shows what he conceives to be the K. judgment, by his words in the place in
question; the Doctor therefore here falls up to the ears into the pit he
dug for his refuter: and his fault is the greater, for that he clears his
refuter of the crime objected, and confirms him in his so judging, by the
Kings words, which himself lays down with the next breath saying. The King
in deed does say, tha^ it is granted to every Christian King Prince and common
wealth to prescribe to their subjects, that outward form of ecclesiastical
regiment, which may seem best to agree with the form of their civil
government; so as they swarve not at all from the grounds of faith and true
religion. Let the reader judge whether the Refuter did not rightly collect,
what he collected from the Kings words yea or no? and I wish him also to
observe how the Doct. slippeth from these words of the King, without so much
as an offer to show wherein they are contrary to the Refuters collection; or
fall short of proving his assertion, both which he should have done, if he
would have made good his charge upon the ref: But we may see, he durst not
abide the light of the Sun, which here shines so bright, as if he had not
turned his back upon it, it would have marred his sight quite. We must
therefore here leave the Doct. or follow him flying from the point in question:
for not daring to speak one word to it, he appealeth to the Kings words
elsewhere, set down (Premonition p. 44) from whence (if we will believe him)
he will make it appear, that the K. differs not in judgment from the
doctrine of his sermon. The Kings words are these, That Bishops ought to be in
the Church, I ever mainteyned as an apostolik institution, and so the ordinance
of God etc: If the D. would by these the Kings words have proved the point in
question; he should have showed that the function of the Bishops of the Church
of England now exercised by them, is (for the substance of it) mainteyned by
these words of the King, to be an Apostolik institution and so the ordinance of
God: the which if he could have done, he might have made a contradiction
between the Kings preface and his Premonition; but never a whitt the more have
proved that the King agrees in judgment with the doctrine of his sermon,
which tends to prove another manner of episcopal function to be of divine
institution then the King in these words speaks of; as the Doct. (it seems)
saw well enough, when he forbore to set down his Majesty's very next words,
where he shows in what respect he ever held that episcopal function (which he
speaks of) to be an Apostolic institution: to wit, that he ever mainteyned
the state of Bishops, and the ecelesiasticall hierarchy, for order sake.
Again, that he allows of Bishops and Church hierarchy, and reverenceth the
institution of ranks and degrees among Bishops, Patriarchs, (which he knows
were in the time of the primitive Church) for order sake. Again, that if it
were now a question as once it was, which of the Patriarchs should have the
first place, he could with all his hare yield it to the Bishop of Rome, that he
should be primus episcopus inter omnes episcopos, and princeps episcoporum, so
it be no otherwise, but as Peter was princeps Apostolorum. And again
affirms, that the allowance he gives to the hierarchy of the church is for
distinction of orders, for so he understands it etc. What shall we say to the
Doctor? did he not read these speeches of the King? or did he skip them,
because they spell not well for his purpose? It appears plainly by them,
that the other his Majesty's words cited by the Doctor, are without color
drawn by him, to justify that jurisdiction of Bishops, for which he pleads.
Who sees not that these his highness words do evidently show, that he gives
no other jurisdiction to Bishops over Presbyters (by apostolical institution)
then unto Archbishops over Bishops, and to Patriarchs over Archbishops? And
the same is not any sole power of rule, but, for order sake, such a
principallity as three of the Apostles had over the rest, and Peter had above
the eleven: as is further to be observed out of page 48. where we may easily
discern, that it cannot be the Kings meaning to give unto Peter such
jurisdictio^ over the Apostles, as our Bishops have over Presbyters: nor yet to
clippe the wings of his own supremacy, which he must needs do, if that
superiority of order which he gives to Patriaches above Archbishops, shall
draw with it, that power of rule, which our Archbishops and Bishops have and
exercise in their Courts.

Thus much may suffice to free the Refuter, from the third untruth, falsely
fathered on him by the Doct. The rest of his speeches may well be passed over
as impertinent; for however he says, he herein comes to the point: yet as he
therein touches not the point in question; so he discovers his own unsaying
what he said before in his sermon, touching the perpetuity of the episcopal
function. The D. vnsaieth in his Def. what he said in his sermon.
And were it fit to follow him in his wandering from the point in hand, it
were no hard matter to show that himself and others of his side have their
hands chief in the trespass, which he closely charge his Refut: and the men
of his side with. For none in the Land have set their tongues and penns so
earnestly to abridge Kings and Princes of that liberty his Majesty speaks
of; then the favorers of the episcopal government now in question. To let
pass Archbishop Whitgifte (in his Defense against T. C. page 171. and 181. and
wishing the Reader only to compare it with T. C. second Reply part 1. page
227. and 614.) with diverse more: observe we what one M. D. Dove says in his
defense of Church Government. The Church must be ordered (says he, page 3.)
according to the precepts and examples of holy writ. Bishops (says he, p.
34.) ought to be Lords, and ecclesiastical persons ought to use civil
authority, quoniam ab initio fuit sic. from Adam to Moses, it was so; from
Moses to Christ and the Apostles it was so; with the^ it was so: and from the^
has so continued until this time, excepting only the times of persecution,
etc. (which he thus salveth a little after where he says,) Our question is not
what was then of fact; but what ought to have been of right. But as for this
Doctor, it may be the Doctor will say little more, then that he might have been
wiser. What defense, trow we, will he make for that his reverend father, that
gave him so good satisfaction concerning the episcopal function, who
discovers his judgment by the title of his book The perpetual government of
Christ's Church? And if we advisedly weigh what he affirms in the treatise it
self (page 3. lin. 9.-12 and compare together, p. 106. lin. 32. etc. page 2,
and 3. lin. 12. with page 245. lin. 4. and 9. and 247. lin. 32-35.) we may
easily discern, that he places a maine necessity in the reteyning of the
episcopal function. Yea and so does the D. also, (as his words already set
down do show). Neither can he with all his shifting, avoid the force of the
objection, which from those words his Refuter inforceth, as shall be showed more
at large in a place more fit for the purpose. For the present, I only wish the
reader to observe, that how ever he seems to assent unto the Kings speech,
which his refuter mentions and himself sets down; yet (for fear of
offending his good Lords the Bishops and Archbishops.) he dares not openly
profess the outward form of ecclesiastical regiment to be left to the
liberty of Princes and Common wealths as the King affirms. viz. that they
may prescribe to their subjects, what seems unto them fittest to to agree
with the civil government. And yet in a matter of far less moment (to wit,
the maintenance of our Clergy by tithes and other temporalities) he fears
not to tax the King, and the Laws of our land (underhand and by consequence)
of sacrilege in alienating and deteyning from the Clergy, the tithes or any
thing else once dedicated to holy uses. See his sermon of the dignity and
duty of the Ministers, page 82. But whither am I run in this digression?

I come now to the fourth notorious untruth, wherewith the Sect. 3. and Ref.
page 5. D. page 9. 10.
Refuter is charged by the Doct. because he says, that the doctrine of his
sermon, is contrary to the doctrine of the Church of England professed even by
the Bishops themselves till of late days, when as men weary to hold any longer
in capite of the K. they began to change their tenure into soccage, and disired
to be free even from Knights service. For proof of some part whereof he
refers the reader in his margin, to Bishop Jewels defense of the Apology,
and Archbishop Whitgift against Mr Cartw. See we now how the D. proves a
notorious untruth in them. First The D. to color his 4. slander, adds to the
Refu^: words, besides his meaning.
he adds these words of his own to them. Therefore utterly false, and and so
makes an Enthimeme of them: as if the Ref: should hold all for true, that the
Church of Engl: holds concerning the government of the Church, and the
contrary thereunto, for false. Whereas the Refuter neither so says nor
means. Might the D. be this once asked, what he meant by adding that his last
sentence, and making an enthymeme of this last speech of the Refuter and not of
any the rest? Was he at a nonplus, that he must needs make himself work quite
besides the point in question, yea besides the refuters words and meaning?
Wherefore to let pass the work he has upon that his Enthimeme made to
himself; in his next page, beginning at his Lastly: I will touch upon the point,
which the D. here calls the Antecedent. viz. that the doctrine of his sermon
is contrary to the doctrine of the Church of England professed by the Bishops.
He tells us, he gives no credit to it though Bishop Jewel and Archbishop
Whit. be cited at random. But will his not giving creditt to it prove it to be
a notorious untruth? I trow not, by that time we have heard the^ speak. Are
they cited at rando^? their books are named, and diverse of their testimonies
not unknown to the D, if he had but read his ref: answer page 34. and 124.
let us hear them speak again. And first of Archb. Whitg. concerning the
Elders in question, I know (says he, answ: to the admon: p. 161, 162.) that
in the primitive Ch:, they had in every Church certain Seniors to whom the
government of the congregation was committed, but that was before there was any
Chr. Pr. or Magistrate Both the names and offices of Seniors were extinguished
before Ambrose his time, as himself testifyeth writing upon 1. Tim. 5. And
knows not the Doct, that the Archbishop (in his defense of that his answer
page 161.) upon his second thoughts, three times confesses as much, and almost
in the same words? I confess, says he, that there was Seniors, and I
alleged Ambrose partly for that purpose, and partly to show that both their
names and offices were exstinguished before his time. And knows not the
Doctor also, that he spends two pages at the least (656. 658) to show the
inconveniences that would (as he conceives) follow upon the reteyning of that
government under Christian Princes, especially in the Church of England?
Secondly concerning the whole discipline or government of the Church, does he
not (in his answer to the Admonition, page 162) affirm that the diversity of
time and state of the Church, requires diversity of government in the same?
that it cannot be governed in time of prosperity as it is in the time of
persecution? etc. Does he not in his defense (page 658. and 660.) spend a whole
Chapter, tending (as the title shows) to prove that there is no one certain
kind of government in the Church, which must of necessity be perpetually
observed? After which discourse knitteth he not up the matter with these 3.
knotts? 1. that it is well known how the manner and form of government used
in the Apostles times, and expressed in the scriptures, neither is now, nor
can, nor ought to be observed, either touching the persons or the functions? 2.
that it is plain, that any one certain form or kind of government
perpetually to be observed is no where in scripture prescribed to the Church;
but the charge thereof left to the Christian Magistrate etc. 3. that we must
admit another form now of governing the Church, then was in the Apostles
times, or else we must seclude the Christian Magistrate, from all authority in
ecclesiastical matters.

Lastly concerning the tenure of their episcopal authority, does he not
acknowledge (page 680.) all jurisdiction that any Court in England has or does
exercise (be it civil or ecclesiastical) to be then executed in the Queens
Majesty's name, and right, and to come from her as supreme Governor? And
speaking (page 747) of the College of Presbyters, which Ierom calls Senatum
ecclesiae, and together with the Bishop had the deciding of all controversies
in doctrine or ceremonies, says he not, that that kind of government which
those Churches (Cathedral he means) had, it transferred to the civil
Magistrate to whom it is due, and to such as by him are appointed^ If the Doct.
has read him, he knows all this to be true, Thus much briefly for the
testimony and judgment of that Archbishop, the which how far it differs
from the Doctors sermon, whatsoever he says now (by exchange) in his defense,
and whether it casts not the government by Archbishops and Bishops out of the
Apostles times, let the reader (comparatis comparandis) judge.

Come we now to Bishop Jewels judgment, (set down at large in his defense of
the Apology, out of which the Doctor says, that Confession of the English
Church was collected) whose testimony I might well commend (in regard the book
out of which it is taken, is commanded to be in all our Churches) but that the
Doctor will again as before cry a mountain banck: but I will barely lay it
down and let it commend it self. First, concerning the power of the keys, he
has (in his apolog. chap. 7. divis. 5.) these words. Seeing one manner of word
is given to all, and one only ke^e belongs to all, we say (speaking in the
name of the Church of England) there is but one only power of all Ministers,
as concerning openninge and shutting. And in his defense of that Apology
speaking of the authority of the Priest (or Minister of the congregation for so
he means) he says (part 2. page 140.) that as a Judge together with the
Elders of the congregation, he has authority both to condemn and to absolve.
And (page 152.) that in the primitive Church, either the whole people or the
Elders of the Congregation, had authority herein, and that the direction and
judgment rested evermore in the Priest. And affirming that though those orders
for the greatest part were now outof use, yet he showing out of Beatus Rhenanus
how they were used in old time, says: That the excommunicated person, when he
began first to repent came first to the Bishop and Priests as unto the mouths
of the Church, and opened to them the whole burden of his heart, by whom he was
brought into the congregation, to make open confession and satisfaction, which
done duly and humbly, he was restored again openly into the Church, by laying
on of the hands of the priests and Elders.

Again, concerning the authority of Bishops over other Ministers (cap. 3.
divis 5. page 109.) he mainteyneth the testimony, which in his Apology he had
alleged out of Ierom ad Evagriu, making all Bishops to be of like
pre-eminence and preisthood, against the cavills of Harding, as the refuter
will (I doubt not) against the shifts of the D. And thus he says. What S.
Ierom meant hereby, Erasmus a man of great learning and judgment expounds
th^^. Ierom seems to match all Bishops together, as if they were all equally
the Apostles successors. And he thmketh not any Bishop to be less then other,
for that he is poorer; or greater then other, for that he is richer. For he
makes the Bishop of Eugubium (a poor town) equal with the Bishop of Rome.
And further he thinks, that a Bishop is no better then any Priest, save that
he has authority to order Ministers. Again (page 111.) that whereas Primates
had authority over other Inferior Bishops, they had it by agreement and
custom: but neither by Christ nor by Peter nor Paul, nor by any right of Gods
word. And to show that it was not his judgment alone, he produces Ierom and
Austin. Ierom upon Titus. 1. saying: Let Bishops understand, that they are
above the Priests, rather of custom then of any truth or right of Christ's
institution. And that they ought to rule the Church altogether. And that a
Priest and a Bishop are all one etc. Austin (epist. 19.) saying, The office of
a Bishop is above the office of a Priest, not by the authority of the
scriptures (says Bishop Jewel in a perenthesis but) after the names of honor,
which by the custom of the Church have now obtained. Again (chap. 9. divis.
1. page 198.) What meant Mr. Harding (says he) here to come in with the
difference betwixt Priests and Bishops? thinks he that Priests and Bishops
hold only by tradition? or, is it so horrible an heresy as he makes it, to
say, that by the scriptures of God a Bishop and a Priest are all one? or
knows he, how far and unto whom, he reaches the name of an heretic? verily
Chrisostom says. in 1. Tim. Hom. 11. ad Evagrium. quaest. vet. et novi.
testa^. q. 101 de dignitat. sacerdotali.
Between a Bishop and a priest in a manner there is no difference. S. Ierom
says somewhat in rougher sort. I here say, there is one become so peevishe,
that he sets Deacons before Priests, that is to say, before Bishops;
whereas the Apostles plainly teaches us, that Priests and Bishops be all one.
St. Austin says, what is a Bishop but the first Priest, that is to say, the
highest Priest? So says Saint Ambrose, there is but one consecration of Priest
and Bishop, for both of them are Priests; but the Bishop is the first. All
these and other mo^ holy Fathers together with Saint Paul the Apostle, for thus
saying by Mr. Hardinges advise, musts be holden for Haeretikes. And in his
reply to him (article 4. page 309.) having showed what primacie or headship
Ierom gave to Peter. (viz: that to avoid confusion which lightly happens in
all companies where no order is; Christ appointed Peter for that he was the
eldest man to speak and deal for the rest as chief and head of all his
brethren) he adds these words: which order also, was afterward universally
taken throughout the world, that in every congregation of Priests, one should
have a special pre-eminence above others, and be called (Episcopus) Bishop.
This was thought a good politic way, to avoid conteution in the Church. By all
which it appears that this worthy JEWEL was persuaded. 1. That the
pre-eminence of Bishops above other Ministers, was first brought in by humane
policy, and not by any divine ordinance in the holy scriptures. 2. that the
pre-eminence of Bishops in the first original and establishment thereof, was
only a pre-eminence, such as Peter had above the rest of his fellow Apostles,
which was at the most of order only, and not of any superior commanding power
and jurisdictio^. And 3. that in the primitive Ch:, other Elders besides
Ministers of the word, had an hand in the government of the Church.

Thus we see the judgment of these two Bishops cited by Sect. 4. Ref. page 5.
D. page 9. 10.
the Refuter; now let the reader judge whether he has uttered a notorious
untruth, in saying the Doctors sermon is contrary to the doctrine of the Church
of England professed by the Bishops, or rather whether the Doctor has not
malliciously The D. slandereth malliciously.
slaundered him in so charging him. I say malicious, and if his conscience be
spurred the quaestion, from the abundance whereof his pen wrote, it will
subscribe to it. For knew he not all this to be true in the Bishops books
quoted by the Refuter in his Margin? Yea are not diverse parts of these
testimonies expressed in the Refuters answer, page 34. and 124? Did he not
read them there? And has he not slipped them over with such a slubber, that
(if he be not far spent) he cannot lay them and his answer to them
together, without the blushredd-colour. Well, but the Doctor is none of them
that will be madd without reason; he therefore gives us a reason why he does
not credit his Refuter. For says he, the doctrine of our Church, appears
best by the articles and confession of our Church. Which reason is without
reason, and argues the man not so well advised as he might be, when he
appealeth to the confession of our Church, collected out of the Apology
thereof written (as himself says) by Bishop Jewel from the Apology it self,
and Authors own exposition and defense of it. Is it likely (think ye) that
other men should understand him, better then himself does, either in the
Apology or defense of it? especially being authorized to write it by our
Church; and it allowed yea commanded to be in all our Churches? But let us
examine his allegations apart. The first is the book of Articles, and what
does that? The 36. article thereof approves (says he) the book of
consecrating Bishops Priests and Deacons. And what then? that book (says he)
in the Preface thereof says, that from the Apostles times there have been
those orders of Ministers Bishops Priests and Deacons in Christ's Church, and
that God by his spirit appointed them in his Church. Is not this a sweet proof?
mark it well, The articles approve the book, and the preface of that book
says, that those three orders have been in the Church from the Apostles times
etc. Therefore the book of articles (and consequently the doctrine of the
church of England) approves the function of Bishops and their superiority
above Priests to be of divine ordinance. As if 1. what soever is said in the
preface before the book (which in all likelihood was done by one or two only,
and not by so general a consent as the book it self) must needs be allowed
for the current doctrine of the Church of England in that age, because the 36.
article (in our book of articles) does for some purpose approve the book of
consecrating Bishops etc. as containing in it all things necessary to such
consecration. But 2. does that preface say that those 3. orders were in the
Apostles times? no, but from the Apostles times, exclusively; which words do^
not prove they were in the Apostles times, but the contrary, as the refuter
has showed (out of Chamier de Pontif. Oecum:) in his answer page 87. in the
like phrase of Ierom to Evagrius, saying, that from Mark the Evangelist unto
Heraclas etc. one of the Presbyters were chosen from amongst the rest and set
over the rest etc. But 3. it seems they meant otherwise, by the last clause,
which the D. cites, that God by his spirit appointed them in his Church. But
the reader must know that that sentence is none of theirs, nor to be found in
that preface, it has pleased the D. ex abundanti, to add that clause of his
own head, and clean contrary to their meaning that made that book at least:
for as we have heard (cap. 3, before going,) they held the superiority of
Bishops, The D. adds one sentence, to his testimony and detracteth another
from it.
to be a politic devise of man, and not the ordinance of God. Let us go
forwards with the Doct: he adds, that the Bishop is required to correct and
punish according to such authority as he has by Gods word. Here 1. I charge
the D, as before with the adding of one sentence, so here with the detracting
of another whiles he deceitfully co^cealeth part of the words. For the book
requires the Bishop to correct and punish etc. according to such authority, as
he has by Gods word and the ordinance of this realm: which later clause (of
the laws of this realm) they would never have added, had they thought that
the power which our Bishops exercise is wholly by Gods word. But 2. though
those words detracted by the Doctor had not been added by them; if he thinks
it will prove that the function now exercised by Bishops is warranted to them by
Gods word; he forgets his own distinction between potest as and modus
potestatis, together with the difference which he puts between function and
authority lib. 4. page 100, 102. and 147. Neither 3. is that authority which
the book requires Bishops to exercise, such a sole power of correction, as
the Doctor gives unto them; for the same book requires also of every
Minister (as well as of the Bishop) at his ordination, that he preach the word,
and administer the sacraments and The D. own testimony against him.
discipline; so giving every Minister a stroke in the outward policy and
government of the Church, (as well as the Bishop) which the Doct. takes quite
from him. But to conclude this point, the book of articles, does in deed,
show the judgment of our Church in some matters of policy and church
government devised by men, as well as in more weighty points of faith set down
in Gods word. Wherefore the doctrine of our Church concerning the later, is not
to be sought for, in the book of consecration, or the 36. article that
establishes it, (much less in the preface of that book) but rather in those
articles which concern faith and sacraments. For the whole body of our Church
being assembled in Parliament, evidently perceiving that there were some
clauses sentences and articles in that book and the preface thereof not
warrantable by the word; did therefore approve of it, no further, then it
concerned the doctrine of faith and sacraments; and provided also that no
Minister of the word, should be tied by his subscription further to approve it:
as well appears by the statute. 13. Elizab: cap. 12. And here I wish the
reader 1. to take notice, that in all that book, there is no word of
Archbishops, Archdeacons, Deanes, rural Deanes with the rest of that row; so
that they will not be found (be like) in the word; nor has God by his spirit
appointed them in his Church. 2. To observe, how the Doct. that so boldly and
confidently (that I say no more) rejects so many Synods, Churches, and
learned men alleged by the Refut: and acknowledged by himself to be
orthodoxal divines, is not so well seen in his allegation here, as he would
seem to be; surely he might very well conceive, that we might take exception
not only to his book of ordering Bishops, Priests and Deacons; but to the
article that establishes it, both being made by the Bishops themselves, Judges
in their own cause, and seeking their own pre-eminence; espetially when they
were both so far excepted against, by that whole assembly of Parliament, as
not to bind any by subscription to approve them, so much as consonant to the
word.

Thus much concerning the book of articles and the D. dealing with us therein.
Come we now to the Confession of the English Sect. ^^
church, collected as the D says out of the Apology: The words as he lays
them down are these. We believe that there be diverse degrees of Ministers in
the Church, whereof some be Deacons, some Priests, some Bishops etc. But he
should have read out to the end of the sentence, and not break off with an
etc. (so keeping many of his readers from the sight of them) if he durst, for
overthrowinge his own cause. For the very next words insinuate that these
diverse degrees If the D. had read his own testimony to the end, it would have
been against him
are of order, not of power and jurisdiction, whiles they make the office of
those diverse degrees to be one and the same saying, to who^ is committed the
office to instruct the people, and the whole charge and setting forth of
religion. It seems the D. was somewhat shortwinded when he read that
sentence: and I challenge him to bring one word out of all that confession that
gives more authority to Bishops, then to other Ministers, that are called
Priests. Does not the 7. article of that confession profess, that Christ has
given to his Ministers (one as well as another) power, to bind, to loose, to
open, to shutt? Does it not make the authority of binding and loosing to be in
tha^ censure of excommunication, and absolving from it, as well as in preaching
mercy or judgment? Does it not make the word of God the keye, whereby the
Ministers must open or shut the kingdom of he^ve^? And does it not affirm,
that the disciples of Christ (as well as the Apostles) received the authortie of
opening and shutting by it? And that the Priest is a Judge in this case, though
he has no manner of right to challenge an authority or power? that is, (as
the observation upon it understands it) civil, or to make laws to men's
consciences? To be short, does it not affirm, that seeing one manner of word
is given to all, and one only keye belongs to all, that therefore there is
but one only power of all Ministers as concerning opening and shutting? If I
belie not the Confession, but that these be the very words thereof, let him
that reads confider, whether the Confession produced by the Doctor as an
Advocate in his behalf, to prove the Refuters fourth untruth, has not as a
Judge given sentence against his own Client. Worthily therefore has he here
cited this confession, and of no less worth is his own observation upon it.
It is to be noted (says he) that our Church acknowledges nothing as a matter
of faith, which is not con^^yned in Gods word, or grounded thereon. And I will
note it with him, and do tell him that he notes well for us and against The
Doct. note is for us and against him self.
himself; For if the government of the Church by such Bishops as he speaks
of, be a matter of faith, why puts he a difference between matters of
discipline and the articles of faith; and refers the question of the
function and superiority of Bishops to the former, lib. 3. page 38? and how
is their government mutable and not perpetually necessary as in his defense he
often affirms? In deed he once said that the ^piscopall function and
authority which Timothy and Titus had (the same with ours) as being assigned
to certain Churches (consisting in the power of ordination and jurisdiction)
was not to end with their persons, but to be continued in their successors as
being ordinary and perpetually necessary, not only for the well being, but
also for the very being of the visible Churches. This was the Doctors faith,
when he preached and printed his sermon (page 79.) but it seems his Refuter
has occasioned his departure from it. But let we that pass, and keep we him
to his note here. Thus I reason,

It is to be noted that our Church acknowledges nothing for a matter of faith,
which is not contained in Gods word, or grounded thereon This proposition is
the Doctors.

2. It is to be noted, that our CHVRCH acknowledges that though there be
d^vers degrees of Ministers, as Bishops, Priests and Deacous in the Church; yet
that one only manner of word is given to all, and one only keye belongs to
all, and that there is but one only power of all Ministers as concerning
opening and shutting. This assumption is the Confession; now from hence I may
be bold to make one note more with this conclusion.

3. Therefore it is to be noted, that whereas our Churches practice is otherwise
in the government that our Bishops now exercise, it is net a matter of faith
contained in Gods word or grounded there^n; but only of poli^i^ and humane
tradition; for the power of the keys and discipline of the Church, is one
only, and given to all Ministers as well as to Bishops by the word of God. And
consequently the doctrine of the Doctors sermon is contrary to the doctrine of
The D. has slaundered his Refut. his own testimonies produced for advocates
being judges.
the Church of England; and consequently that the Doctor has here slandered
his refuter: his own testimonies produced for Advocates being Indges.

But we have not yet done, the D. (as a man that will have somewhat to say if
the worst come to the worst) asks, that if the Bishops being now better
informed concerning their functions, had now reformed their judgments
according to the holy scriptures and other writings of antiquity: whether it
would follow that their later thoughts, which are commonly the wiser, were false
and worthy to be confuted? I answer, that it may be asked, whether he was
more foolish or presumptuous in making that question? For who is so foolish as
to affirm, that any man's later thoughts are false and worthy to be confuted,
because they are reformed according to the holy scriptures and other writings
of antiquity. 2. Presumes he not, that if the Bishops be now of late grown to
another judgment concerning their hierarchy; then the Bishops their
predicessors have been in the days that are past, that these later are wiser
then the former and have reformed their judgments according to the holy
scriptures etc? Does he not thereby censure the former of error and ignorance
concerning the truth in this behalf; howsoever (as it seems by his former
note) they made it a matter of faith contained in Gods word or grounded
thereon? I will not here question the probabilities, whether the thoughts of
the now and late Bishops or their predicessors be the wiser; this (without
comparison) I dare say, that those Bishops that made not this title of
superiority and authority over their brethren and fellow Ministers, were men
both godly and learned, zealous lovers of sincerity, and wrote as against the
common adversary, so against the ceremonies of those times now pressed, and
against ignorant Ministers, nonresidents, pluralitans, and many things of like
sort, now not only tolerated, but defended also; let the Doctor advance the
Prelates of these days above them, if he will, I will make no comparison. Thus
much shall ^uffice, to acquit the refuter of the false and slanderous
im^utations of such notorious untruths, as the Doctor has laid upon him in
his answer to the first reason.

Chap. 5. Concerning the hurt like to come to the Church by the D. sermon, and
namely of advantaging the Papists.
We are now to handle the D. answer to the Refuters second reason (as he
calls it, though it be in deed but a member of the Sect. 1. Refut: page 5. 6.
D. page 11. 12.
former) in reply whereunto I will be more breife, touching but here and there
upon a word or two most material, the most part of the Doctors speech being
in deed nothing but sarchasticall and by-speaches. The Refuter thought his
sermon the more needful to be confuted, because though it was utterly failse,
yet he had carried the matter so handsomely, smoothly, and confidently, that it
carried appearance of truth; and therefore discerned, that much hurt was like to
come to the Church of God by it. Hereunto (to let pass the D devised divisio^
of the words) he answers by charging his refuter again to cross and
contradict himself saying, that however his refut: had said in the former
reason, that it is evidently false and so not dangerous; yet now he says, the
doctrine is so by me handsomely and likely handled, that it is so far from
being evidently false, that every word has an appearance and promise of truth.
But the fight is here betwixt the Doctor and his own shadow, not between the
Refuter and his speeches. Not the Refuter but the D. fights against himself.
Things evidently false are not dangerous in deed where and to whom the
evidence appears; yet dangerous enough to them that see not, or will not see
the falsehood of them. Things evidently false to one, may have an appearence
and promise of truth to another. The Apostle (2. Cor. 11, 3. etc.) feared
least the Corinth^^ were beguiled (as Eve was) by Satan, through the false
APOSTLES that transformed themselves into an ANGEL of light, and told their
tale so handsomely, smoothly and confidently, that it had an appearaunce and
promise of truth to the Corinthes (why else was he afraid they would be
beguiled by them) though they scarce uttred one word of truth, themselves being
the Ministers of Satan, and their doctrine utterly false even the do^^^ine of
Divills. And if the D. here reasons well, who sees not, that he confuteth
that reverend Bishop Jewel. whom his Ref. as he says in that speech
imitateth? Hardings doctrine was utterly and evidently false surely, and yet
dangerous too, or Bishop Jewel said not well; and yet he carried himself so
smoothly, likely, and confidently, that to many it had show and appearance of
truth, why else does that reverend Bishop, bestow so much labor in confuting
it? I could again say as much concerning the Ref. answer and the D. defense,
but we must pass on. The Doctor thinks that he told his tale so smoothly in
his sermon, that he had almost persuaded his refuter to be of his mind: we
cannot let him to think so, nor he me to think, that that imagination of his
heart (among others) was vain. It may be he is now feeding himself upon this
fancy, that as his sermon had almost persuaded him; so this his defense has
altogether persuaded him to be of his mind: but I suppose the refut: or his
friend will tell him, that he ha^h an ill stomach that feeds fatt with such
wind. As for the rest of his speeches, to the end of that section, let the
reader judge of them as they deserve.

The Refut: proves the hurtfulnes of the Doct. sermon. 1. from Sect. 2.
the advantaging of the Papists, and 2. from the scandalizing of others
thereby. Touching the first: The Papists (says he) would be much advantaged
thereby, seeing that Antichristian doctrine (even after the renewing and
reviving of their cer^monies amongst us) is so freely preached and published,
tending to uphold their hierarchy as well as ours, the Doctors reasons being in
deed the very same with theirs. The Doctor answers with many vile and
opprobrious speeches: and 1. tells us, that the advantage which arises to
the Papists both by his doctrine preached and the ceremoniees mainteyned still
amongst us, may through Gods blessing be this. That when they see us not so new
fangled as our opposites, nor so carried with hatred to their persons, as to
depart further from them, then they have departed from the primitive Church;
but are content to observe the ancient government, and lawful ceremonies used
in the primitive Church, they may be induced to join The D. abuses the name
of God.
with us etc. Then which what can be said more against reason and their own
profession; to the abusing of the name of God and his blessing? Knows he not
that to this day, they have been encouraged in their madness by our coming so
near them, and departing no further from them? Do they not both say, and
write, that our book of leiturgie is an Apish imitation of their Masse-book?
that our religion cannot stand without their ceremonies? that the contention
that is amongst us for them, and eating their broth, puts them in good hope
of our eating their rostemeat? Do not the Rhemists in their annotation upon
Ioh. 21. 17. affirm, that the Protestants otherwise denying the pre-eminence
of Peter; yet to uphold their Archbishops, do avouch it against the Puritans?
Yea even of late take they not occasion to fill their books with our canons
and constititutions, arguments and resolutions? to let pass others, what will
the Doct. say to that worthy Proctor of theirs, Iacobus Gretzerus, has he not
(panegyr. missae, cap. 11. 12. and demonst. dogm. cap. 7) alleged against the
reformed Churches) our service book for their popish holy days, D. Tooker and
our late book of Canons both for the sign of the Cross; for kneeling in the
act of receiving the sacrament; for the whole hierarchy from the Archbishop
downwards, and for diverse other their superstitions? Has not Cornelius
Scultingius in his hierarchica Anacrisis, alleged D. Whitgift and transcribed
whole leaves out of him for defense of their hierarchy? Does not Stapleton,
(relect. against Whitak. Cont. 2. q. 3. art 3.) take the Bishops arguments for
the upholding of their hierarchy; to uphold the Popes, affirming they are built
both on one foundation. etc? I suppose the Doct. will not deny this; yea they
that are acquainted with their writings know more then this, of the advantage
they take by such sermons, as that the Doctor printed. What likelihood is there
then of winning the Pipists by coming nearer them? no no experience has
taught us, that this policy in seeking to win the adversaries by dallying and
playing with them, and coming so near them, has bredd more papists in
England in few years, then were wont to be bredd in many; in so much as, we
have cause to fear, that under color of licking he Papists whole by this
means, the wound is become so great, that all the balm in Gilead will s^atce
salve it, the case is so desperate.

Sect. 3.
But 2. what shall we say to those opprobrious speeches which the D. casts
forth against all that mislike the ceremonies and episcopal government, in
saying, they are new fangled and so far carried with hatred to their persons
(papists he means) as to depart further from them, then they have departed
from the primitive Church? And what to his unjust The Doct. calumniateth both
his Ref: and and the reformed Churches.
censure of his Refut. and of all that accord in judgment with him, when
(because he called his doctrine Antichristian) he faith, it is merely spoken
out of faction, after the usual fashion of our opposites? His tongue is his
own, and he thinks that none of his Lords will controwle him: wherefore he
spares not to stuff a great part of his great volume, with such unsavory
reproaches. Perhaps he meant to justify (at least it well appears he has
justified) his ref. in charging him, to have given the papists much advantage:
for is it not a great advantage unto them, when they may (if they list) assume
the Doctors testimony, to disgrace those worthy divines, which in other
reformed Churches have abandoned the ceremonies and government controverted in
our Churches, with departing (and that in a new fangled and factious humor,
and of mere hatred to their persons) from that ancient government, and those
lawful ceremonies, which they received from the doctrine and example of the
primitive Church? But it seems he forgatt that of Tully, verecundius loquor
propter Pompeium; For however he vilifieth his refuter without blushing, taking
him to be no better then a dishclout: yet considering he had so many Pompeies
to deal with as his refuter mentions, he could not but harden his face as an
Adamant, that he blusheth not (notwithstanding their names with their
testimonies and arguments and their just praises given them by other learned
more then by the refuter) to count all new fanglisme and faction.

But 3. his freindes will say he had good cause to be offended with Sect. 4.
him, that charged his doctrine to be Antichristian: for who can with patience
bear so heavy an imputation? But the Doctor must bear it, and it will stick
close to his ribbs, till he can remove the reason that inforceth it upon him.
To wit, that his doctrine tends to the upholding of the popish hierarchy
as well as ours, and therefore is Antichristian. The consequence he impugneth
not; all his labor is to weaken the Antecedent. And first in the detestation
thereof, he cries out, God forbid; which brought to my mind the saying of
Hazael, 2. Reg. 8. 13. who, when Elisha told him of the evil he should do,
protesting against it with indignation, said, what? is thy servant a dog,
that I should do this great thing? and yet for all that he did it. And I have
heard some in my time cry, fie on the Divil, when they have done him great
service. Let us therefore see whether the D. prayer and doings agree. In the
popish clergy (says he) above Bishops and Archbishops, the Pope and his
consistory of Cardinals are set as governors of the universal Church; in in
whom the popish ^yerarchy, so far forth as it is properly Antichristian
consists. And again, Their government is justly called Antichristian, who
are his assistantes in this universal government. The Doctors drift is (as it
seems) to free him self from defending the popish hierarchy, because he
mainteyneth not, either that headship and government of the universal Church,
which makes the Pope to be properly Antichrist; or that subordination and
assistance unto him in his headship, which makes the Romish Hierarchy to be
properly Antichristian. A poor shifte The Doct. has a poor shift and a silly
defense.
and a silly defense. Could the Doctor be so simple as to imagine that his
refuter had any meaning to charge him or his doctrine with upholding the
popish Hierarchy in any of those maine differences, which here or afterward,
he mentions, to distinguish the^ from our Clergy? Or could he persuade
himself that none of his The D. disputes, a dicto secu^dum quid, ad
simplicitor.
Opposites would discern the weakness of his defense, when he disputes, a
dicto secundum quid, ad simpliciter, in this manner?

My doctrine tends not to uphold the popish hierarchy, quatenus it is
properly Antichristian. Therefore it tends not to give them any supportance
at all. The Refuters meaning is plain, that the tenor of the Doctors
disputing for our prelacie, tends by consequence to uphold those functions
and degrees in the popish Hyerarchy, which other reformed Churches have
rejected as unlawful, at least vnecessarie and superfluous. Which is a truth
so apparent, that the Doctor does in part closely acknowledge it, though with
The Doct. closely acknowledges what he fairly, but falsely excuses.
a fair (but false) pretense, he seeks to excuse it, when he says, we are
content to observe the ancient government of the primitive Church, though
retained by them: for what is that government wherein we agree with them? Is
it not the government by ARCH BISHOPS, LORD BISHOPS, ARCH DEACONS, CHANCELLORS,
COMMISSARIES, etc. assisted with Proctors and Apparators? Wherefore since the
functions of the popish hierarchy serving for CHVRCH-government, are none other
then such as we reteyne in our Churches (the Pope and his Cardinals excepted)
the D. cannot disclaim the defense, of the rest of their hierarchy, unless he
will leave our own naked and destitute of due protection. And if that be true,
which the refuter has in many parts of his answer obected, (viz that the
Papists do (and may with as good color of truth, allege the same reasons
for the Popes primacie, over Archbishops, that the D. urges for the superiorty
of Bishops or Archbishops) it is no wrong at all to affirm, that the D. sermon
tends to uphold the popish hierarchy, as well as ours, even from the Pope to
the Apparitor. But let us go on and trace the Doctor in the stepps of his
answer. 1. Who can excuse him in this, that professing (as he now does) the
Pope to be properly Antichrist, in regard of that universal government which
he assumeth; he should notwithstanding rear up a pillar (in his defense
following) to upholde what he would seem The Doct. vpholdeth what he seems
to pull down.
to pull down. For to justify the government of Metropolitans (who were at the
first as he says, lib. 2. p. 114, autochephaloi, heads by themselves of their
Provinces) he thus reasons, page following. It was convenient or rather
necessary that there should be consociation of Churches within the same
Province, and that that governors of the several Dioceses, should meet for
the common good, and that the wrongs offered to any by the Bishops within their
Dioceses might be remedied. By consequent, therefore it was necessary
(especially before there were Christian Magistrates) that one in every
Province, should be held as chief or primate, who should assemble the Synods,
moderate them being assembled, see the decrees executed, and have a general
superintendencie over the whole province. By the like conseq: (it is well
known that) the Popes proctors do plead for his universal primacie; and the
D. does very frankly offer them the antecedent. lib. 3. p. 4. The whole Church
(says he) is governed by the mutual consociation of their governors for the
common good, and the concurrence of them to an Occumenical Synod: For the
whole Church being but one body, there ought to be a Christian consociation of
the governors thereof, for the common good of the whole body. If there ought to
be such a consociation of all Bishops and governors of the whole Church; then
there is no less conveniencie, or rather necessity of this consociation of the
whole, then there is of the former in one Province. Wherefore the Doctor cannot
forbid any friend of the papacy (in an imitation of his former argument) to
infer this conclusion. By consequent, therefore, it is necessary (specially
now that there is not a Christian Magistrate, to whose civil regiment, all (or
the greatest part of) Christian Churches, are in subjection as formerly they
were to the Roman Empire) that among the ecclesiastical governors of the
whole Church, one should be held as chief to assemble and moderate general
councels, to see the decrees executed, and so to have a general
superintendencie over the whole Church. Thus in traveiling The D. traveyling
with an Archbish: brings forrh a Pope. And so does Sta pleton charge ou^
Bishops by their arg. for their hierarchy to do. Relect. adver. whit cont. 2.
q. 3. art. 3
with an Archbishop, the Doctor brings forth a Pope. But if he will infringe
this later consequence, and say (as he seems to imply lib. 3. page 4.) that
the necessity of a Christian consociatio^ among the Bishops of the whole
Church, cannot infer a necessity of one Pope, or chief Bishop; because
Christ our King and Monarch for the government of the whole Church, has no
Vicar general, but the holy Ghost, who appoints governors under him, to
govern the several parts in some respect Monarchically; and the whole (by
concurrence in one Ecumenical Synod) aristocratically; then for the like
reason (to wit, because Christ our King has no Vicar provincial, but the
holy Ghost, who appoints governors under him in every Church throughout the
Province) the necessity of a consociation of all the Churches in one Province,
and of provincial Synodes for the common good of those Churches, cannot
conclude a necessity of one Metropolitan primate to assemble and moderate
those Synods, and to have a general superintendencie over the whole province.
Wherefore it is evident that by the Doct. reasoning, the Popes Universal
headship, and the Archbishops provincial primacie, do stand or fall together.

2. Shall we say also that the same reason which proves the one, to be
Antichristian, will prove the other to be Antichristian? Is it not proper to
Christ to be the head of every particular Church, as well as of the whole? 1.
Cor. 12, 27. 2 Cor. 11. 2. Ephesians. 2. 22. cu^ 1. 22. 23. and 5. 23. Colos. 1.
18. And is not the title and office of Archipoimen proper also to him alone? 1.
Pet. 5. 4.

3. But I hasten to examine the grounds which he has laid to Sect. 5. ad D.
page 13.
clear himself from patronizing the popish prelacie. He affirms (as we
heard before) that their government is justly termed Antichristian, who are
assistantes to the Pope in his universal government. Lo here the proposition,
I will make so hold, as to add an assumption. But Archbishops, L. Bishops,
Archdeacons, Chancelors etc. in their several functions are assistants to the
Pope in his universal government. Whence any man may make the conclusion.
Therefore the government of Archbishops L. bishops Archdeacons Chancelors yet
in their several functions, is justly termed Antichristian. The D. foreseing
(as it seems) that such a conclusion as this might be inferred from his own
words; to prevent any further inconvenience (if his Refuter or any other should
from thence collect, that he mainteyneth the popish or antichristian prelacie
as well as our own, in as much as the government and function of our Prelates,
is in substance and essential works of office, the same with theirs) says,
that Archbishops and Bishops in the Church of Rome are not Antichristian, in
respect of the large extent of their jurisdiction, but in regard of their
subordination to the Pope, and dependence on him, as members of that body,
whereof they acknowledge him to be the head. Where the reader must again be
advertised, that the D. wandreth from the question at The Docwandreth from the
question at his pleasure.
his pleasure: for the point now controverted between him and his Ref. is not
what transgression does make the Romish Bishops and Archbishops antichristian
properly or improperly? but whether their callings and functions (which other
reformed Churches have refused as better beseeminge the degenerate Synagogues
of Antichrist, then the orthodoxall Churches of Christ) be not justified by the
Drs. discourse, as well as the offices and functions of our own Prelates? The
negative in this question he should have strongly fortified; but he rather
justifies his Ref. assertion, in profering them a full discharge from all
steine of Antichristianity, if they will renounce their subordination to the
Pope, and acknowledgement of him for their head. But, seeing he professes (lib.
3. page 154.) never to give over the maintenance of his cause; at his better
leisure I will expect from him a direct answer to this reply; I have already
proved from his own assertion, that their government is justly termed
Antichristian: But their jurisdiction extended over the Churches of an whole
Diocese or Province, is a principal and essential part of their government:
why then should not their jurisdiction so largely extended, be justly termed
Antichristian? Again, wherein soever they give best and greatest assistance
unto the Pope in his universal government; therein they are rightly reputed
antichristian: this I trust the D. will acknowledge without any further proof,
neither will he (I hope) putt us to the pains to prove what all the world
discerns to be true. viz. that in the large extent of their jurisdictions,
they give best and greatest assistance unto the Pope in his universal
government; wherefore I will once rest persuaded, that he will subscribe to
this conclusion, that in respect of the large extent of their jurisdiction,
they are justly reputed Antichristian. And so I will enter upon the best
defense he has to wipe away all note of Antichristianity from our own Bishops.

Having restreyned (as before we heard) that Antichristianity Section. 6.
which cleaves to Romish Prelacie, unto their subordination to the Pope etc.
he adds this consequence. Therefore they are no more Antichristian, then
their parish-Preists, and as well might the Refut. call the Pastors of Parishes
amongst us Antichristian, because the Popish Parish Priests are Antichristian,
as our Bishops Antichristian, because the Popish Bishops The Doct. trifleth in
fig^ting with his own shadow.
are such. When will the D. cease to play the trifler in fighting against his
own shadow? Where does the Refut. say, that our Bishops are Antichristian,
because the Popish are such? Or which of his Opposites did ever argue to such a
purpose? Nay has his Ref. in any part of his answer once termed our Bishops
Antichristian? Yet if he had said, that the Popish be, and ours are alike
Antichristian in regard of their functions, as being in substance one and the
same, however they differ in subordination to the Pope; he is wiset (I trow)
then to be so far misledd by the Doctor, as to say, that our parish pastors,
and their parish priests are alike antichristian. For their Preisthood (in
regard of the very essence and form of their office) is a sacrificing
preisthood as the Doct. acknowledges, and the proctors of popery do more
clearly teach: Rhe^. annot. in Acts 14. 23. Bellarm. lib. de sac. ord. cap. 9.
But the office of our parish pastors (though corruptly termed Priests) has
nothing to do with sacrificing, and therefore it is not the same office, but
of a diverse form, ordained (as the Doctor rightly affirms) to preach the
word and to administer the sacraments. Now there is no such essential
difference in the very function it self, which our Bishops and the popish do
hold and execute. Wherefore though it be an absolute inconsequence, to infer
that our parish pastors are Antichristian, because the popish parish priests
are such: (in as much as the functions are differing) yet when the functions of
our Bishops and theirs are called into question; if the later be granted
Antichristian; the same must be confessed also of the former; unless it can be
clearly showed, that the functions do differ essentially one from another.

2. And if his meaning be thus to plead in behalf of our Bishops, viz, that
they cannot be Antichristian, because the popish Bishops are not Antichristian
in respect of the large extent of their jurisdiction, but in regard of their
subordination to the Pope, etc. I have already showed the error of this
argument, in proving that their very jurisdictio^ and government is
Antichristian. Only here again let the reader remember, how the D. justifies
his Ref: in that speech, which he indevoureth to wipe away, viz. that he
vpholdeth the Popish Hierarchy as well as our own.

3. In that which follows, he assayeth to show, that the function of Bishops
was not first instituted by the Bishops of Rome, and therefore cannot be
Antichristian. The function of Bishops (says he) is not more (nor yet so much)
to be ascribed, to the institution of the Bishop of Rome, as that of parish
Ministers: For Bishops, as we shall show, were ordained by the Apostles, and
set over Dioceses; but the parishes were first distinguished in the Western
Churches, and Presbyters peculiarly assigned to them, by the ancient Bishops of
Rome, whose example other Churches did imitate, as diverse authors report. Is
not the Doctor strangely bewitched with the love of his reverend Fathers and
their functions, that (to The D. to free the episcopal function from being
reputed Antichristian exposes his own calling to that disgrace.
set them free from all fear of being any longer reputed Antichristian or of
the Popes institution) he will expose his own calling and function to the same
disgrace? But if that be true, which diverse authors report (as Platina in vita
Euarist: and Polidor Virgil: de invent rer: lib. 4. cap. 9. and others) that
Euaristus did only divide titles in the City of Rome unto Presbyters; and that
Dyonisius gave them Churches or Churchyardes, and distributed abroad as well
Dioceses to Bishops, as Parishes to Presbyters: upon this ground we may safely
affirm, that the function of Diocesa^ Bps. is truly ascribed to the
institution of that monkish Pope Dionisius, 266 years after Christ, or
therabouts. For however Bishops were ordained of the Apostles, and set over
particular Churches, (as parish Ministers are at this day) yet there could be
no Diocesan Bishops till D^oceses were distributed, and parishes multiplied in
each Diocese. Wherefore it is neither error nor blasphemy to affirm, that the
function of Diocesan Bishops is Antichristian; if that may be rightly termed
Antichristian, which had the first institution from the Bishops of Rome, in the
third centurie of years after Christ.

If the Doct. shall contradict this position it will easily be made good from
the grounds of his own manner of disputing. For in The Ref: justified, by the
D. own grounds.
affirming (page 12. of his praeface) that the function and discipline of our
Bishops, though truly Catholic and Apostolical, is of his opposites termed
Antichristian; he offreth us this disjunction. The functions and government of
Diocesan Bishops and Provincial Arch Bishops are either truly Catholic and
Apostolical, or else rightly termed antichristian. He cannot weaken this
disiunctive proposition, unless he will overthrowe his own reasoning, lib. 1.
page 60. and 61. and confess himself to be as ignorant in logic, as he would
make his refuter to be. If therefore it may appear, that the functions and
government of Diocesan Bishops, and Provincial Archbishops are not truly
Catholic and Aposticall, it will then inevitably follow, that their functions
and government are justly termed Antichrstia^ But the function and government of
Diocesan Bishops, being first instituted by the Pope Dynosius, cannot be truly
Catholic or Apostolical: much less can the function and government of
Provincial Archbishops, be truly catholic or apostolical, if that be true
which himself holds for a truth not to be denied, viz. that there were
Diocesan Bishops such as ours be, before there were any Metropolitans or
Provincial Primates; because they followed upon the combination of Dioceses
and subordination of diverse Churches together with their Bishops, in the same
province, unto the metropolitan as their Primate. lib. 3. p. 20 21. and lib.
4. p. 7. Wherefore the Doct. has no just cause to blame his ref: if he shall
hereafter hold the calling of Diocesa^ and provincial Bishops to be
Antichristian. 4. Especially seeing he has not at all touched the main grounds
which prevayle with those, who have affirmed the degrees and functions of
Diocesan Bishops, and Archb: to be Antichristian. viz. 1. that the bringing in
of these degrees by little and little made way for the man of sin to climb up
to the top of his greatness, and to seat himself in that chair of Luciferian
pride, wherein he sits at this day, as shall be seen in the answ: to his lib.
4. cap. 5. sect. 10. 2. And as he still leans on their shoulders, so his
kingdom cannot stand without them (for they are his assistants, and without
them they can have no priests, and so no Church as the D. acknowledges pa: 7.
and 12. of of his preface) whereas on the contrary, the true Churches of Christ
may (as the Doct. also holds as he said before, page 2. and 7. of his
preface) very well want them, as they did in the purest times (viz the first
200 years, as shall appear in answer to his lib. 4. cap. 1. sect. 4. and 5.)
and do in some places at this day flourish in more peace and sincerity (witness
the broiles of the Church after the first 200. years, and the peace of the
reformed Churches at this day) then those Churches which formerly did and now
do embrace them. 3. But specially this is to be noted that sole ruling Bishops
(such as are ours, diocesan and provincial Lords) (for which see the state of
the question lib. 2. chap. 3. and 4.) could never gain any general applause
or place in the Church till Antichriste (having first gotten possession of his
usurped universal headshipp, to proportionate their estate in some degree like
to his own) did procure, for some of them, principallities, and for all of
them, Baronnies, and allowed every one of them to domineire, as petty Monarchs
in the exercise of their spiritual jurisdiction, as shall be proved in the
proper place hereafter.

To go on therefore unto that which remains. The D. thinks Sect. 7. D.
page 13. 14.
it strange, that the doctrine of his sermon concerning Bishops alone, should
uphold the Popish Hierarchy from the highest to the lowest as well as our
own, and calls it, a shameless untruth; because the Papists reckon. 5.
orders under Deacons. But we, with the primitive Church, reckon but. 3. only.
Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons. But entreating him The Doctmust take his
shameless untruth to himself.
to take the shameless untruth to himself, as his own proper in this point
as well as in the rest; I wish him wit, that it is not strange to them, who see
and know, that many arguments now urged in our Church for the popish
ceremonies retained by us, (as cross etc,) do by a like co^seque^ce plead for
oil, salt etc. which we have abolished. And therefore we have more cause to
think it a strange thing, that the Doctor should be ignorant that many of his
arguments intended for the defense of his Bps alone; with the change of an
Assumptio^, may serve as fitly to justify, those inferior degrees which are
under the Deacons in the Romish Synagogues. And yet it is more strange, that he
should challenge conformity with the primitive Church, in reckoning 3. degrees
of Ministers and neither more nor less; seeing the same authors that he
alleges for that purpose (sermon: page 29. etc.) do reckon other degrees
which we have refused, and the Papists reteyne though in a more corrupt
course, as all other Church functions are; and some more ancient do recko^ two
only, as his refuter in answer thereunto showed.

Lastly, it is more then a wonder in the Dect. eyes, that the very same reasons
which are brought to justify the Apostolical government of our Church, should
also serve to prove their Antichristian Hierarchy, because their Bishops are
subordinate to the Pope, and receive jurisdiction from him; but ours not so.
But if his reasoning be of any worth, it may well be more then a wonder to his
readers; if the example of the ancient and Apostolical Presbyters, should
justify our parish Ministers at this day. For, the former were all one with the
Bishops, in the Apostles times; and received their jurisdiction, as well as
their function from Christ, or the holy Ghost, Act. 20. 28; but ours now are
subordinate to Bishops, and receive their jurisdiction from them.
Nowithstanding if the Doctor had advisedly considered, that the question is of
functions only, and not of accidental circumstances; he would have The D.
exciption both idle and frivelous.
spared this exception of his, as judging it both idle and frivolous. As for
his conclusion, that there is but one small agreement with the Roman Church
concerning the superiority of Bishops over praesbyters, out of which the Ref.
would build a total consent and conformity to their Antichristian
government; may it not be wondered at? 1. That he can find, but one agreement
between the Protestant and the Popish government. Are there not the same
degrees, Primates, Archbishops, Suffraganes, Archdeacons, Deanes etc. Are there
not the same seats of dignity? The same authority and government? The same
laws and procedings? The same inferior Officers? The same rites and
ceremonies? The same change of names? The same civil jurisdiction and titles?
The same pomp and glory in the world? setting aside the truth of doctrine and
subordination to the Pope, non ovum ovo similius. 2. That because the Refuter
said, the doctrine of his sermon tended to the upholding of the popish
Hierarchy from the Pope to the Apparator; he charge him to build a total
consent and conformity; as if it may not tend to the vpholdinge of the
Hierarchy, though with some differences?

Chap. 6. Concerning the hurt like to come by the D. sermon, to the
scandalizing of Protestants. Sect. 1. re^. page 6. 7 8, def: of the D. page 14.
15. 16.

The Refuter showing how many were like to be scandalized by the Doctors
sermon, viz. some being to far in love with their own ease, were likely to
embrace it without examination, others whose hearts were upright before God
would be made doubtful, disquieted etc. The D. answers for the most part by
calumniation and sarcasme, from which I briefly pass, wishing the reader, 1. to
consider whither many have not bin brought to stagger and doubt in religion, as
upon the sight of that strife and pleading for the Hierarchy and ceremonies
with such arguments as will serve for the whole dose and recipe of very many
(if not all the rabble of) Romish ceremonies: so upon the readinge of such sound
doctrine as the D. here lays down (against all sound writers) for the
justifying as from the words of God all degres of Ministry in the Church, the
Popes and Cardinals only excepted and foreprized. I will not answer his
sarcasme, with Bishop Jewels speech against Hardinge and the like popish
proctors, The peace which they would have, is only the rest of idle bellies:
But I wish the D. to know, that we hate division and schism, and are the
sons of peace, desyring peace with all men, as much as is possible, and will
stand with holiness. And I say to him and the rest of his fellows (as the
Apostle did of his Accusers) you are not able to prove those things, which for
profitt, advantage, or preferment, or of anger, and in heat of contention
(which works not the righteousness of God,) you speak and write and suggeste
against us. Facile est maledictum ex trivio arripere, et in optimum quemque
jacere: but si accusasse sufficient, nemo erit innocens, I doubt not the reader
will remember, that aliud est madedicere, aliud accusare etc. and that the D.
has used many calumnniations more fit to be spitt at, then spoken to. As for
his conclusion following after them, that his Ref. resolution in answering his
sermon, though gilded over with glorious words, was naught, else, but to
publishe and disperse a mallicious diffamatorie libell, and so, after the
manner of other malefactors, The Doct. calumniareth.
to hide his head. I must touch upon it alittle, and wish it be considered,
whether he shows not himself as full of spleen and spite as he is empty of
good reason. First he therefore calls it a libell because the Author putt not
his name to it. Wherein as he jumpeth with the Papists; so he is answered
already in the answers to them. I pass over Bristowes challenge mentioned by
Doctor Reynoldes in his preface to the University of Oxford upon his Theses of
the Holy scriptures, and Church, where Bristowe required the Author to putt his
name to it etc. Bellarmine excepting and objecting certain treatises and
resolutions of John Gerson translated, for that the translator putt not to his
name, says against him, that the saying of Christ is verified, John, 3. qui
male agit, odit lucem, and cries, that he was ashamed to make his name known,
as the Doctor does against his Refuter, charging him as a malefactor to hide
his head. But Pryar Paulus in his Apology, shall serve the Doctors turn
as well as Bellarmins, who answers (page 3.) I see no reason (says he) why of
necessity he was to putt to his name, unless it be taken from a rule that
every translator is to do the like: we rather blame them that think to win
themselves creditt, by making praeface or Table, etc. Diverse works extant of
the Greek Fathers translated into Latin, carry not the names of the translator
etc. Christ approved not the advice of his kinsfolks, transi hince et vade in
ludaeam: but answered as in many cases his servants may answer (and the
Refuter at this time) Tempus meum etc. my time is not yet. Surely (says he,
page, 4.) the glorious luster of the authors titles is net a matter of such
prejudice as should over throw the cause of him that proposes it with out
manifesting his name, according to the course holden, in the council of the
Areopagites. Hardinge also calls the Apology which Bishop Jewel wrote
(amongst other reproachful terms,) a famous libell and a slanderous writ,
because it was printed without privilege, and no man's name set to it, etc. To
whom Bishop Jewel gives an answer. (Defenc. part 1. cap. 4. divis. 2:) that
will sit as close to the Doctors back, as the coat that is made for it. Must
it need follow says he) that all books not subscribed with the authors names
are libells? To begin with the scriptures (says he,) who wrote the books of
Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Denteronomy, Joshua, Judges, Kings,
Chronicles, Job, etc. What name has the Epistle to the Hebrews puit to it,
etc. And so reckoning up diverse other parts of the scriptures, with the
Apostles Creed and other wrytings of men that subscribed not their names to
them, asks him whether he would make his brethren believe, that all these be
but libels, slanderous writts etc. and so concludes that it is neither
necessary nor commonly not to do it etc. as the reader may see at large.

Secondly, whereas the Doct. calls the Refuters answer a ma^^ious
di^^amatory libell. I apeale to the reader to determine. 1. whether it be not a
malicious slander of him so to call it, and what honesty there is in him,
seeing (as I suppose) there can no one sentence be produced thereout, deserving
that censure, much less the whole book? 2. Whether (in what measure soever
the refuter be guilty of that crime) the Doct. has any reason to argue him of
it, it being apparent to any that will compare the refut: answer, with the
Doctors defense, that he may ten times, yea ten times ten times say, Tirpe est
Doctori etc. with that of Ierom (regula Monach) per dit authoritatem docendi
cujus sermo opere destruitur. But thirdly, when he charge his Refuter after
the manner of other malefactors therefore to hide his head, because he put not
to his name; what else bewrays he, but that he is one of those Doegs, (I
might say dogs) that hunt dry foot thirsting after blood. I wish him well,
and would The Doct. thirsts for blood.
have him know, that, let the terms be equal and as they ought to be, his
refuter will show his head when and where he will. But the Doctor is wise
(though he here danceth in a nett) in that he is desirous to see his Refuters
head: he knows well, he shall shortly after see his body in the Clink or
Gatehowse, or some such sweet place for disputation. In the mean time, if he be
a malefactor, let the The Doct. calumnia^eth.
D. bear witness of the evil; but let him not bear false witness against him as
a malefactor, as every where almost he has done, throughout his defense. As in
the next words, where he charge his ref: with wilful falsifycations,
depravations, forged calu^niations, sophistical shifis and evasio^s to elude
the light of truth, co^victing his conscience: and whereas his ref: simply and
ex animo confesses his weakness and wants in the answer, he charge him to
speak it by an Ironie, so reproaching all that is said of what kind soever.

He disdeyneth, that his refuter should say, there is not a syllable of any
Sect. 2. Ref. p. 8. 9. and D. p. 16. 17.
sound proof in his sermon, and prays God to give him grace to repent, of
his blasphemy against the truth he delivered. I embrace his charity, but see
not the refuters blasphemy. However the note of blasphemy against the truth,
makes a loud cry, in the ear of the simple; yet does it never the more prove
the doctrine of his sermon to be true. The Doct. slandereth his Refut. with
blasphemy, proves it not.
I affirm with the Ref: still; that the foundation whereon he built his sermon
will not bear it, the building is ruinous: and weakly underpropped in telling
us, he takes God to witness that the proofs alleged in his sermon, are such
as satisfy his own conscience, and that he trusts he may without any great
boasting assume as good skill to himself, to judge of an argument as his
Refuter etc. I fear me, it will appear, by that time all be laid together,
that he has often fallen foul upon his ancres, and that neither his
conscience nor his skill however assumed, are fit Judges in this case; my sight
has failed me, and I am much mistaken if I have not seen some men of as much
note for conscience, and skill, as the Doctor here assumeth to him self, who
yet have foiled both, when they have once undertake^ a badd cause. But to
proceed, it is worth the noting, that he calls all to consider of the
blasphemy, saying. And what was it that he has thus censured? A sermon
uttered in the presence of God, in the room of Christ, before a most
honorable Auditorie, by a Minister of the Gospel; shall I say as sound and
faithful as himself? no I disdeyne the comparison, (for by his fruits in his
book, he has to my seeming, bewrayed an unsound judgment, an evil
conscience, and an unsanctified heart) I trust I may say, by a Minister of the
Gospel, as sound and orthodoxall as his betters, as conscionable in all his
sermons and writings, and as careful to deliver nothing but the truth of God.
Me thinks, he should rather have trembled to think of confutinge a sermon of
such an one etc. then have dared thus to confute it. Is this the reverend
estimation that you would work in the peoples minds of the word preached etc?
What shall I say to this DOCTOR? Oh quam elatus? profecto satis pro imperiolo
suo. What would he have said, and how would he have disdeyned, and disdeyned
again, if he had bin but a degree higher, but a DEANE, as well as a Doctor? But
to answer this great charge, what if I should instance, for an assumption to
his proposition, but a few sermons preached at Paul's Cross as famous a place
as Lambithe, by me^, that take themselves to be as good divines as he, that yet
have (in the D. conscience) delivered unsound points of doctrine? will he
mainteyne the consequence of his proposition, that we should rather treble to
think of the confuting of them; then once to dare to censure them? I appeal to
his conscience, whether Bishop Bilsons sermon concerning Christ's sufferings and
discension was in all points sound or no? and yet he takes himself to be as
sound a divine as the D. and it may be will disdeyne the comparison too. But to
speak ad idem, let the D. suppose, that if a discipliarian (as the D. calls
them) if any may be found comparable to him, with great plenty of Arguments
and Testimonies truly and faithfully alleged, did deliver, that there is no
such pre-eminence, and superiority of Bishops over other Ministers, and the D.
should have excepted against it, and refuting it have given the same censure on
it, that the Ref. has done on his sermon; and he replied as the D. here does.
And what has he thus censured? A sermon uttred in the presence of God, in the
room of Christ, before a most honorable Auditory etc. would the D. have demed
this speech reasonable? Knows he not, that it is possible enough for as
faithful Ministers and as sound and orthodoxall divines as himself ever was or
is like to be; notwithstanding their soundnes in other points of divinity, to
preach and print (as well as Mr. D.) that which has (if we may believe him)
scarce one word of truth, or syllable of sound proof in it? What says he to
Calvin, B^za, and other worthy divines, admirably sound and orthodoxall in all
substantial points of religion by his own confession? Have they not both
preached and printed the clean contrary doctrine to his sermon concerning the
government of the Church? How often does he in his sermon centure their sermons
and writings, and all that is said by them, to be but pretty and witty proofs,
mere colors, no sound arguments etc. the discipline to be pretended, their
own devises: yea, and upon his second thoughts in his defense, does he not
charge a fresh, all that is said by them or any other, to be false,
counterfeit, novelous? and affirms he not, that if their can but one proof
be brought for it, he will yield etc. Might not a man now turn the D. speech
upon him, and say, what is that which by his sermon he has so censured? even
sermons and writings uttred in the presence of God etc. me thinks he should
rather have trembled to think of preaching such a sermon as that was, that
confuted the sermons and writings, not of one, but of many Ministers of the
Gospel; shall I say as sound and faithful as himself? If I were as
disdeynfull as he, I might disdeyn the comparison: I trust I may say as sound
and orthodoxall as his betters: for his own commendation of them elsewhere
proves it. Is this the reverend estimation he would work in the peoples minds
of the word preached by th^^, and of their worthy labors spredd abroad through
out the world? Or must they think that none make conscience of preaching ^he
truth but the D. and the men of his side? What said I, the men of his side? nay
he cares not to controwle some of the^ also. Bishop Hooper a faithful
Minister sound and orthodoxall, preached to as honorable an Auditory, as that
at Lambith, even to and before King Edward the sixth, against the Surplice, and
kneeling to receive the communion etc. and yet the Doctor censureth him for it
in his preface, as deeply as the Refuter does the Doctors sermon.

But pass we (over his slanderous speeches in the Sect. 3. Ref page 8. ad D.
page 18.
next words) to page ^8. where he affirms, That the new divines cited by the
refuter are incompetent witnesses in a question of story concerning things done
or not done 1400. or 1500. years before their time, themselves also for the
most part being parties in the cause. Wherein how near he draws to that
Pithagoricall autos epha, who with one dash of his pen, crosses out so many
worthyes, upon pretense that they are parties, and but men of yesterday, and
therefore must not be heard speak, but himself only, let the reader judge.
But how ever he shows himself to be one of them, whom Ierom writes of, qui
tantam sibi sumit authoritatem, ut sive dextra doceat sive sinistra, discipulos
noluit ratione discutere, sed se precessorem sequi: yet we must follow the
same man's counsel in Ephesians. lib. 3. cap. 5. to read and meditate, vt probati
Trapezitae The D. mistaketh the matter, and without reason makes the new
divines incompetent witnesses.
sciamus, quis nummus probus, quis adulterinus. For even here, where the Doctor
makes the new divines cited by the Refuters incompetent witnesses for matter
of fact, he much mistaketh the matter, seeing the whole dispute is de jure and
not de facto; for who ever denied the superiority of Bishops over other
Ministers de facto to be ancient? But if it were the question, they are every
way as competent witnesses, as many of them produced by the Doctor (who give
testimony to matters of fact done or not done, 3. 4. 500. years before they
were borne); being as able to judge as they and more too, having read the
stories, conferred them, and observed how new inventions crept in, how matters
from time to time were carried, and by what stepps and stairs, the man of sin,
that Antichrist of Rome, ascended to the top of his Luciferia^ pride, as having
I say better done these things, then those he alleges.

2. Where he makes them incompetent, for that for the most part, The D. by his
own reason makes all his witnesses incompetent.
they are (as he says) parties to the cause, let him consider, that if this
proposition of his be good, viz. All they are incompetent witnesses, who are
for the most part parties to the cause; whether this assumption following. viz.
But all the Doctors witnesses for his superiority of Bishops over Ministers,
are for the most part parties in the cause (being Bishops for the most part as
himself witnesses): Therefore they are incompetent etc. Let the Doct. affirm
the proposition against the new divines; I will make good the assumption
against the old, by his own pen. Let therefore the conclusion be, if he will:
That we will hear neither speak, but the word of God only; ^b^ discutiamus
causam nostra^. But yet his rejecting of the new writers after this sort, as
incompetent The Doct. underhand taxes all our new divines for misinterpreting
the script. and Fathers.
witnesses and his reasons for it, may not be passed from, with silence. For 1.
whereas the quaestions are to be decided by the scriptures, (which, I hope, he
will not refuse as Judges, concerning the substance of discipline to be
observed and continued in the Church till Christ's coming,) and those new
writers mentioned by the Refuter (called sound and orthodoxall by himself)
have alleged and interpreted the scriptures against the doctrine of the
Doctors sermon: what does he in rejecting them as parties, but censure them to
have alleged interpreted, and applied the scriptures corruptly, (even to
mainteyne a faction) and not dealt therein syncerely as in the sight of God?
Yea whereas diverse of them also have cited Tertullian, Ciprian, Ambrose
Augustine, Ierom and other Fathers, and so expounded them, as the men of our
side do, as diverse of the learned Papists have ingenniously acknowledged:
what does the D. by this censure but charge the^ to have perverted their
meaning also, and so to have dealt both weakly and corruptly? What could
Stapleton, H^^ding, Bellarmine, Gretzer, Bosius, Staphilus, or any of the most
spiteful and calumnious Papists have said more to the disgrace of those sound
and orthodoxal Divines? Was the D. well advised think ye, to present so pleasant
a spectacle to the como adversary, whose delight is to see mire and dirt cast
upon our worthy writers, to the disgrace of them, and in them of the common
faith? And seeing he thus deals with so many, so learned, so judicious and
orthodoxal, so faithful and conscionable divines (as his conscience tells
him, and his pen has told us, they are,) no marveile though he deals as he
does with his refuter, yea what other can we look for at his hands, (who
carries (even of the / best) so base and vile estimation) though he makes as
if he were loath to do it, page 20?

Touching the Refuters directions (as the D. is pleased to term Sect. 4.
Refut: page 9. 10. D. page 18. 19.
them) to the reader; I pass by the first of them, only wishing it to be
observed how captious he is, 1. in assuming that of Pythagoras to himself,
which the Refuter spoke no more to him, then to his self, while he gives it as
a reason, why he wishes the reader to believe no further then evidence truly
produced leads him. 2. in excepting against the testimonies of Ierom and
Tertullian as vnfittly cited, by the refuter: because they dissuade from giving
creditt to fame and uncertain rumors: as if they did not fit those persons
(of whom we have too many) that are transported with the name and fame of the
Doctor, to believe all he says, without any examination of his proofs. In the
next place, where the refuter wishes the reader to think with himself, that
if he find no sufficiency in the Doctors reasons to enforce the acknowledgment
of his doctrine for true; that then it is not elsewhere to be had: because he
being known to be a scholar, and professing to have read the chief Treatises
on both sides, it is likely that there is in his sermon the pith and substance
of all, that all of them can say for themselves and against us. M. Doctor
answers, it is an unreasonable motion; and the reasons thereof contradict,
both what he said even now, and are contradicted by what he affirms
afterward. And to prove that the motion is unreasonable, he affirms it to
be unreasonable, the weight of the whole cause, should lie upon one short
sermon uttered by so mean a man as himself. The which, (to use his own
words) is an unreasonable reason, and such as contradicts what he said even
now, and is contradicted by that which he affirms afterward. Even now he
said that the proofs which he used in his sermon were such as satisfied his
own conscience, and that without boasting he might assume to himself as goad
skill to judge of an argument, as the refuter or others of his side; he calls
it blasphemy against the truth, that his sermon was censured to have no sound
proof in it, he says, he is a Minister of the Gospel, What? as sound and
faithful as the refuter? no, he disdeyneth the comparison: but as sound and
orthodoxall as his betters, and as conscionable in all his sermons and
writings, and as careful to deliver nothing but the truth of God. And that
his refuter cannot deny him to be a faithful Minister and orthodoxall Divine.
Again, that he is persuaded in his conscience, the Refuter has not convinced
him of any one untruth throughout the whole body of his sermon. All this he
boasted, even now, of himself, and somewhat else a little before; and yet now
with the turning of the page he is beco^e (if he mean as he says) a mean man,
and so mean as it is an vnreasoable motion to desire any to think, that if
there be no sufficiency in his reasons; it is not elsewhere to be had: either
he Either the D. speaks by an irony and not sincerely, or else he
contradicts himself.
speaks by an ironie and not syncerely; or else his former speeches
co^tradict this later. And how it is contradicted by that he speaks
afterward, appears throughout his whole book, wherein every where he
advances himself above measure: yea in this very section, he stands upon
the creditt of his evidence with a witness, making this offer that he is well
contented to be credited in nothing, if there be not better evidence in his
sermon and the defense of it, for the episcopal government; then is to be
found for the discipline in quesion, in all the writings of the
disciplinarians; so advancing himself above all those sound and orthodoxall
divines in the world, that are by all soundly learned, counted the lights of
the world. Thus can he play fast and loose, up and down, debase and advance
himself, as may make for advantage; before he was alofte as we have heard,
learned and skilful to judge of an argument, etc. a faithful Minister, an
orthodoxal divine etc. now he is a mean man, and so mean a man, as if he had
not a fellow on his side to match him. By and by he is up on high again, and
disdeyning comparion with his Refuter, advances himself above all that have
writ for the discipline, Luther, Calvin, Beza, etc. Yea pawneth his creditt
concerning all that ever he wrote of what subject soever, upon his truth and
sufficiency in this one point. But let us now see the double contradiction in
the refuters reasons, as the Doctor calls them; but it but one reason as the
refuter has laid it down, and the reader will not be so simple, as to make
the first clause or member of a sentence, (as the Doctor here divides it) a
reason: that because the Doctor is a Scholar, therefore he has in his sermon
said as much, as can be The D. dismembreth the Ref. words and reasons ex male
divisis.
said of that argument. He might well enough, for all that, have said nothing
to it: but the Doctor is very ready to divide, where his refuter conjoyneth, it
seems to allude to his own words page 146. His refuters reason was too
strong for him to deal with, whiles the Medius terminus, consisting of two
branches, was bound together, and therefore he dissolveth it, taking each
branch by it self, endeavoring like a gross headed Sophister, to persuade
the reader, that because he can bow each twigge severally, therefore he can
break the whole bundell or faggott. But what the Doctor here weakneth (or
rather scoffeth at) by dissolving, I will strengthen by uniting, thus.

He who is known to be a Scholar, of good skill to judge of an argument, a
sound and orthodoxall divine, and professes to have read the chief treatis^s
written on both sides in this controversy, and to have set down in a sermon,
uttered in the presence of God, and in the room of Christ, those arguments
which for the fulness and plentifulnes of their proof satisfied his own
conscience. Of him, it is likely we may receive the very pith and substance of
all, that all of them can say, either for themselves, or against us.

But the Doctor is known to be such a scholar, and to have done all this. For
he professes as much of himself, as we have already heard.

Therefore of him, it is likely, we may receive the very pith and substance of
all that all of them can say for themselves or against us. For we cannot
immagine, that such a scholar, so skillful to judge of an argument, such a
divine so orthodoxall, and so faithful a Minister, as he professes himself to
be (and we will not dispute the contrary with him, we envy it not) having read
the chief treatises as says, would receive satisfaction and be persuaded by
the weakest reasons; or make any other choice but of the chief, the first
borne and strength of all the arguments he read, to utter in the presence of
God, and in the room of Christ, especially before that honorable auditory as
he calls it. Who would offer him that wrong, as to think he did not, against
that day, gleane out the pith and substance of what he had read, and could be
said therein, but that for want of skill or will to make the best of that he
had read for his own advantage and his cause, left out the best proofs and
made choice of the worst? But what says he against this? or how makes he his
Refuters contradictions to appear? To let his scoff alone, when he tells
us he has been a scholar ever since he was five years old; 1. He would know
how it can be, that he should have the pith and substance of all that can be
said in that controversy, seeing his refuter charge him to speak without
proof? The answer thereunto is easy. For putt case, those chief treatises
which he read, and from whence he received satisfaction, be without sound
proof (as in deed they are) may he not have the pith and substance of them
all, and yet all he has be without ptoofe? 2. He tells us, that it is not
possible that all which he and all the rest can say, can be comprised in so
short a sermon. And I believe it; For by this his defense it appears that he
himself can say a great deal more, then can be comprised in so short a
sermon; for besides all that he has spoken pertinent to the purpose, though
nothing to prove the point in question, I dare be bold, to affirm, there are
a century of untruths, sarcasmes, slanders and many things of like sort. But
all this while, how proves he that double contradiction he spoke of? Nay where
does the Ref. say (as the D. insinuates) that all that he and the men of his
side can say, is comprised in his sermon? That which the Ref. says, is
possible enough, to wit, that the pith and substance of all (how much soevet
it be,) that he and all of his side can say in this controversy to any purpose,
may be comprised in as short a sermon as his, which fills up an 100. pages;
and was not only preached, before that most honorable auditorie as he faith;
but also upon second thoughts and mature deliberation enlarged, and published
to the world. Thus we see how well he has proved both the unreasonableness of
the Ref. motion; and the contradictions charged upon the reason thereof. As for
his good admonitions in his epilogue and elsewhere, (how ever delivered by him
not without mixture of gall and wormwood) we have so learned to make use and
profit of the words of our enemies, as we willingly embrace them.

Thus much in reply to that which the Doctor has answered Sect. 5. D. page 20.
21. 2^.
concerning the Refuters preface: he should now have defended his own
praeface against the answer to it, but that he utterly refuses; because, 1.
it is a mere libell consisting of notorious cavillations, mallicious
calumniations, and personal invectives. 2. there is no material thing in it
which is not fully answered in the defense of his sermon. 3. the defense of his
sermon it self being grown to so great a volume; he should greatly wrong both
himself and his reader in answering it. 4. his refuter being in the dark, and
he in the light, it is a very unequal combat etc. And therefore in stead of
answeringe, he falls to advisinge, as we shall see when I have given answer
to these several points. Let the reader, concerning the first, judge,
whether the D^s. own words may not be banded back again, and charged more
justly upon his preface, the^ upon the answer to it? But albeit both that his
preface and this whole defense are in the highest degree guilty of those 3.
notorious evils charged upon the Refu. answer: yet I will spare him therein,
and only demand whether it stands with any equity, for him at his pleasure
to smite as with his tongue, yea utter in printe, words more sharp then
swords; and not forus, once to oppose a shield of just defense to bear of
his blows; for him, as Tullie says, venenata tela jacere, but not for us
medicinam facere? As if Caius Fimbria were revived, who when Orar. pro R^scio
Amerino.
he had not; as he desited, slain Q. Scevola, accused him in judgment, quod
non totum telum corpore recepisset, that he had not suffered, the whole weapon
wherewith he was smitten to enter his body. To the second, I answer, that the
reason were good, if what he says were true, but the reader comparinge them
together, will find no one material thing either fully or once in part
answered in the defense of his sermon, how ever here and there he shall meet,
with revylinge and reproachful speeches cast upon the Ref. for it.

As for the third, I will not deny but his defense is grown to a great volume
in deed, and so great, that he should not only have wronged himself and his
reader by making it greater as he says; but that he has wronged them both and
his Ref: too, in making it so great as it is; considering it is grown to that
greatness, as by many notorious untruths, so also by those three imputations
falsely charged upon his Ref: And I wish he had regarded more seriously what he
had committed to the Press for the judgment of the present age and all
posterity; and that he had not so much yielded to his inordinate affection and
corruption, as to make his volume swell with such bitter speeches, so full of
choler, and unpleasant flowers of his rethorick, not respecting what became
him, that commends mildenes to others, and proposes for that purpose the
very example of our Lord and Mr. Christ. If he had defended truth, as truth
requires to be defended, he would never have presented that pleasant spectacle
(he speaks of) to the common adversary. If in any sort, bitterness has bin
used in our defense by any, who have bin strangely dealt with, through which
perhaps some have uttered some distempered speech; the D I doubt not, has paid
them all home their own again with large interest, and measure even full and
running over, as one that counted it (whatsoever he professes to the contrary)
a disparagement to be overcome in such a contention.

Lastly touching the fourth, where he casts them into the dark that do not
putt their names to their writings etc. What argues that speech of his,
(besides the wrong offered to the penmen of the sciptures, and other good men
many mo^; (as is before said) but extreme dealing of the Bishops, toward us,
why else should we not dare to be seen in a cause, so clearly taught in the
word of God, and so famously professed and practiced by so many, even the best
reformed Churches in the world? As for the refuter, he is as much in the light
as the Doctor, and as well known to be the Refuter as the D. is to be the
defender. Let his Lordbishops lay by their imprisonment, and other extreme
dealings, and cease to be Judges in their own cause, and that without bail or
mainprize or benefitt of appeal enforcing us to endure their sentences; and
the D. shall soon see his adversary in the face. Till then, the reader will
both judge his request unreasonable; seeing manifest experience witnesses that
the mildest men for books written without bitterness, have drunk deep of the
Bishops cupp, mixed with the spice of their imprisonments, degradations and such
like; and also deem him a man of no great valor, for counting that combat
unequal, when he figheth with an Adversary, that is not shutt up in prison,
and has not his weapons blunted or rather taken from him by that means. Thus
much briefly to his reasons pretended for not replying to the Refuters answer,
I say pretended, being persuaded, the reason that moved him indeed not to make
reply, was for that his conscience co^vinced him of many foul offenses therein,
had not grace freely to acknowledge them. But to draw to an end, his
conclusion is. That in stead of answering tha^ which is past, he will advyse
for the time to come, that they who will be esteemed men of syncerity, when they
publish any books, (especially such as they dare not set their names unto)
would have special care not to disgrace any man's person, least they make
themselves guilty of that most b^se and odious crime of libelling etc. Least
they subject themselves to the fearful Curse of God etc. The which as I
gladly embrace, so I wish himself had followed The D. in the end of his
se^te^ce, forgets what he ad viseth in the beginning.
his own counsel, (especially in this his conclusion, in the end whereof he
forgets, what he advises in the beginning) so might he have been esteemed
a man of some syncerity and been freed both from that evil of sin he cast upon
his Refuter, and the evil of punishment he has cast him under: under both
which by his own sentence, he has thrown himself; all men seeing, who by all
means he has sought not more the overthrowe of his adversaries cause, then
disgrace of his person; and therein waded so deeply, as he has left neither
body nor soul, neither learning nor honesty untouched; and when he has all
done, makes up his mouth with this profession, that (as if his Refuter were
the vilest man in the world) his sharpest answers are but too mild for him.

THE FIRST PART. THE SECOND BOOK
Chap. 1. Of the Refuters preamble and the Doctors exceptions to it, especially
concerning the choice of his text, handled by the D. lib. 1. cap. 1.
THe Refuter of the D. sermon, having thoroughly viewed the Sect. 1. ad cap. 1.
Def. page 23. 27.
frame of the whole, and strength of every part, held it a point of honest and
plain dealing, at his first entrance upon the answer, to inform his reader,
what he conceived of it; both concerning the work it self, and the author of
it. Of the work he says (page 1.) that it was a building ruinous and
tottering, ready to type and fall, and of the Author, that though he boasted of
much riches, yet he showed himself poor and little worth. For where he made a
glorious show, of building a strong and goodly mansion, or tower of defense,
for our reverend Bishops to rest their Lordships in; he had scarce one stick or
stone of his own to build with; nor (as it seemed) one foot of firm or fast
ground to set it on. Hereat the Doctor scorneth, and with much choler, wrath,
and rage breaks out, at the first dash, beyond all bounds of charity and
modesty; charging his Refuter with this resolution, that before he would
encounter the sermon it self, he thought good to spend some of his spleen,
upon the author of the sermon, the matter, and the text; so making himself
privy to an other man's thoughts. But how comes he to that intelligence?
Forsooth, because he beholds in him, a proud in sulting over the Author, a
scornful gibing at the matter, and a captious carping at the choice of the
text. For toward the author (whose creditt must needs be very dear to the
Doctor) he behaveth him self like another insulting Goliath, gibinge Tobiah, and
slandering Sanballat; and (though his Refuter be but a worthless and witless
fellow (page 24.) yet in arrogant vantinge, he plays the part of
Pirgopo^^nices himself etc. page 25. And touching the matter, because the
Refuter said it was borrowed out of D. Bilsons book of perpetual government
etc. he takes it for a gibe or scoff, and rejects it, as a base
calumniation, framed according to his own practice, and as an objection of a
childish, yet odious wrangler, and a slanderous libeller and such like. Behold
here some of the fairest flowers of the Ds. defense, concerning the Author and
matter of his sermon; unless the reader will give the preferment to these high
praises, set by himself as a garland upon his own head, viz. that he comes
to the combat in simple manner, like David with 5. smoath stones (for so he
calls the 5. points of his sermon, now reduced by himself to 4.) taken out
of the fountain of Gods word etc. that the most of his allegations are of his
own readinge, that he is not conscious to himself, either in that sermon, or
any other writing, to have taken any one line from any, without citinge the
Author; And that in 9. or. 10. days space, (to provide for his sermon) he has
so fortifyed the cause of the Bishops, that the greatest worthies of the
adversaryes part, assaylinge is with all their force, have not bin able in
twice so many months, to make the least breach therein etc. But, I doubt not
but, he that reads, will consider otherwise of the matter; and that as there
is no reason, he should carry away those lofty praises given to himself, and
bitter reproaches cast upon his Answerer, without controwlment: so whiles he
striveth to wipe away that impuration of making boast of much riches; he more
and more verefieth and takes it home to himself; and that in scornful gibing
and proud insulting etc. He has already in the first 2. leaves of his
defense, so far outrun his refuter, in his whole answer, that it is in vain
for him, (if he were a man of that streyne) once to move one foot forwards,
for victory in that kind of bookemaking. Notwithstanding it were both easy
(and in some respects profitable) to clear the Refuters creditt, from the
injurious calumniations, thrown on him by the D. and justly to return his
venomous darts into his own boasome. But I purpose not to follow his vein in
prosecuting, so eagerly any personal quarrels, which brings little
advantage to the cause; or comfort any way. And if the D. had bin as loath as he
pretends (in his answer to the preface page 20.) to trouble; yea (to use his
own words) to wrong both himself and his reader, with personal discourses,
which breed endless and fruitless contentions; or had bin as willing to
embrace, as he was ready to give his advice (page 21.) (in the publishing of
any book) not to seck the disgrace of any man's person etc. yea if he had well
considered, that he here (page 25) makes it the part of an odious wrangler,
to seck his adversaries disgrace by that which does no whitt advantage his
cause; doubtless he would never have spent so many words, (and that in the
forefront of his treatise) in answering what was objected concerning the
Author and matter of the sermon. He would rather (as fit was) have labored
more the^ he does, in justifyng the choice of his text (the last of the three
objected against him) as that which is material and of great consequence; the
standing or falling of the the whole building, depending upon the strength (be
it more or less) which it receives from the foundation laid to uphold it. But
however he has slightly passed it over (that it may appear how unjustly he
has censured his Refuter therein) he shall be called back to a more serious
debating thereof, after a word or two spoken to some things concerning the
other two.

Concerning the Author, (which is the D. himself) he affirms, Section 2.
that the Refuter gave him greater praise then either he desired or deserved,
etc. and yet he scoffeth at it in his answer to his preface page 19. Again,
he would prove his Refuter to be a worthless and a witless fellow, because he
passed by the learned treatises of the worthies of their side, and made choice
to contend with him, in the vanquishing of whom, there can come neither creditt
to himself or his cause, nor disadvantage to the adverse part. But the reader
can easily conceive the contrary; for in dealing All former writers of the D.
side are answered in the answer to the doctor.
with the Doctor, who has read those accurate Treatises; and in his sermon (as
we have reason to believe) laid down the extract or quintessence, of that
which all those worthies could say therein; he deals after a sort with them
all, and answers them all, in answering him. Creditt enough therefore will be
gained to the Refuter and his cause, with disadvantage to the adverse part; in
case the D. (being the man that he makes himself to be, prefat. page 16. 17.)
who had read what all could say, and had the best helps of all that had
written before him, of that argument, and was wise enough to make the best
of that he read, for his advantage; shall yet in this question shevve himself
(as his Refuter says) but poor in deed. And where to prove himself to be
neither weak nor worthless, he affirms that in his sermon provided in 9. or
10. days at the most, he has so fortified his cause, that the greatest
worthies of opposites, assayling it with their forces, have not been able in
twice so many months to make the least breach therein: I vvish it may be
considered whether it be not a boast of much riches, or no? 2. If we may
believe reports, the greater part of that sermon, was preached before at a
visitation, or assembly of Ministers with great applause. But 3. it mattereth
not whether it were provided in that time or no; seeing he was above 9. or 10
days after the preaching of it, in reveiwing and enlarging of it (for enlarged
it was as he says preface 4.) for the press, as the time of the coming of it
forth, shows: 4. He speaks without book and more then is true, both in
saying that the greatest worthies assailed it with all their force, and that
the answerer was in answering it twice so many months as he was in providing
it. Well may he know his own time and helpers; but the Refuter knows that
the best able or greatest worthies, were so far from assayling it with all
their force, that they touched it not with one of their fingers: and that he
(one of the least among many) was not so many weeks as the Doctor names
months about it. Does the Doctor with reason imagine or look, that they who
have neither books, nor liberty for study, nor press, nor purse for either,
at command, (as himself has,) can make so quick dispatch as he? Let him
procure indifferency herein; and then blame us for want of expedition. And
with as little reason argues he, when he tells us, that the greatest worthies
assayling it with all their forces, have not been able to make any breach
therein, in twice so many months as he was days in providing his sermon; as
if because they have not done it in that time, they therefore were not able to
do it. Well may he argue them of sloth and negligence, but not of
insufficiency and unableness.

Concerning the matter; whether the Refuter (finding little in the D. sermon
which is not in the Bishops book, (from whence Section. 3.
he professes to have received so good satisfaction) and much almost,
verbatim, word for word with it) might not (suppose and) say, it was but
borrowed: I leave it to the indifferent reader, not to the D. (who is a party)
to judge. 2. The often references made thereunto, were not so much (as the D.
says) to show that what he delivered was taken thence: as to let the reader
see, that both are ansvvered in one, hovvever he says the Bishops proofs are
such, as never were nor never will be answered. 3. To make good his charge of
falsehood and slanderous libelling, upon the Ref:, for saying his sermon was
borrowed of the Bishop: he professes he is not conscious to himself of taking
any one line from any, without citing the author etc. And yet confesses a
little before, that diverse of his allegations, were not of his own first
reading, but examined at the founteine, being as it were, sent thither for
the^, by them whom he read: the which as the Refuter denied not; so the
contrary to which, he affirmed not, neither had reason, seeing it was fit in
deed, he should examine them by the first Authors (where ever he met with them
at the second hand) whether they were true or no. Lastly as for his praise set
upon the oldnesse of the stuff, because that which is the oldest is the
truest: it is but an idle begging of that question, which will not be granted
him; it being The Doct. beggeth the question.
out of question, that it was (as the refuter says) built out of the Bishops
old stuff: not of the oldest stuff, or of his stuff, which is the Ancient of
days. And therefore as Solomon (Prove. 16. 31.) says of old age, so say I of
it: It is then honorable and worthy of commendation, when it is found in the
way of righteousness, without which figure, it is but as a cipher, whose value
in divinity, is nothing worth.

But, to let all pass, come we now to the 3. point, and examine Sect. 4. ad
Sect. 3. Def. lib. 1. Cap. 1. pa. 27.
we, whether the Refuter deserves to be censured, as a man that spent his
spleen upon the text, captiously carping at the choice of it, yea or no? The
Refuters words, whereon the Doctor takes occasion so to censure him, are (not
as the Doctor lays them down, (out of an abortive book as he calls it)
thereby showing how greedy he himself is of carping: but as the Refuter
himself in his answer, page 2. line 5. 6. has them, namely) these. The text
being allegorical, (as himself confesses) dig he deep and do what he can,
he shall hardly find fast ground, whereon to lay his foundation. Can any man
that judges his text unfit for his purpose, deliver his opinion in milder
terms? Is there any one word, that savoureth of captious carping? Yet if there
were, is it all one to to carp at the choice of the text, and to spend of his
spene upon the text it self? But, not to stay upon this any longer, the Doctor
tells us, that though the quarrel pleased the refuter so well, that he
repeateth it again, page 3. yet without cause; for that, seeing the exposition
of the allegory is not doubtful, but confessed on both sides, that as by 7.
stars are meant the 7. angels; so by the angels, the Bps. of the Churches:
who sees not, that this assertion, the calling of the Bishops is lawful and
good, is built on the foundation of the Apostle John, as it were upon a rock?
But 1. let him certify us, 1. touching the exposition of the allegory in his
text, and that if it be nothing doubtful, but confessed (or agreed on) on both
sides, why he does, in the 2. page of his sermon, prepose this, as a doubtful
point needful to be examined. viz. who and what manner of persons are meant by
the angels of the Churches? The D. co^t^adicteth himself.
2. Wherefore he tendered this for his first reason of examining the doubt;
because (to use his own words, def. page 29.) when the Holyghost expounds
the stars by Angels, this interpretation it selfs allegorical, and
therefore needs some exposition? And. 3. Wherefore, in the very next words of
his defense, he m^ncioneth. 3. different opinions, touching the persons or
functions meant by the Angels. viz. whether all Ministers in general, the
Presidentes of the presbyteries, or diocesan Bishops?

2. Moreover, can he without blushing say, that it is confessed on The Doct.
speaks untruly.
both sides, that by the 7. stars are meant the 7. Angels? Was it not fl^ttly
denied? (Not without reason or show of reason at least) does not he himself
afterward (cap. 2. sectio^ 3.) spend pains in opening the doubt, and proving,
that the angels were just 7. and no more?

3. Lastly, if this be all that he can rightly and strongly build, upon the
Apostle in the words of his text, viz. that the calling of the Bishops is
lawful and good; his refuter has good cause, even still to affirm, that this
text neither was nor is, any firm ground for him, on which to set up such a
mansion for his Diocesans as he assayed. Who therefore sees not, that it is,
(not the refuter with the text, but) the Doctor that quarrelleth with the
Refuter in this point without a cause? Especially seeing when he comes to
that 3. page, where he says the quarrel is repeated, he does wittingly both
co^ce^^ under an (...), and overpasse without any answer, that which is (...)
^a^mom^nt to justify his Refuter in this point. For the Doct. (...) ^no^l^dge a
truth to lie in one of these assertions of of the Refuter, to wit, that either
there is some other portion of scripture, wh^^n, that which he pretends to be
here laid down under a v^^le, is (...) vnf^^ed ^^d delivered: or that there is
no such place to be sound (...) the scripture? Now let him make the best choice
he can; and which of them soever he choose; the same shall make ^ood the
refuters quarrel (as the Doctor calls it) I mean the consequence of his
reasoning in that place. For 1. if he shall affirm that there i^ some other
text, that plainly unfolds the points here said down under the va^^e of an
allegory; then in reason should his censure be approved which says, it had
been fitter both in divinity and good discretion, for him to have chosen, some
other more clear portion of scripture, then this which is allegorical. 2. If
he shall grant, (as I think he will not) that there is no such place to be
found in all the scripture; it will also inevitably follow, that the Refuters
sentence was right when he said, this text cannot be deemed a fit Judge to
decide so great a controversy.

But it was one of his points of wisdom, to pass by this dilemma, Sect. 5.
ad cap. 2. pa. 30. defen.
or two forked argument; he thought, it enough to repeat (in that 30. page,)
his former answer, that the meaning of the allegory is on all sides agreed
on; and to add, this silly inference, that since we do confess the Angels to
be the Bishops of the Churches, therefore by our confession the text was as
fittly chosen, as if it had bin said, the 7. Stars are the Bishops of the 7.
Churches. See, see, how feign he would (if he could) The D. beggeth of us, what
he dares not give himself.
wringe from us an acknowledgement of that which himself, well advised (I
suppose) dares not affirm namely, that an allegorical text is as fittly
chosen, to prove any conclusion, as another which unfolds the same more
plainly. But it shall not be amiss, to let him see the strength of his
consequence by another of like force.

Our adversaries (the D. I mean, and the men of his side) do affirm and
teach that the Angels were diocesan Bishops superior in degree to other
Ministers; and that the 7. Churches which they governed were properly,
Dioceses. Therefore in their opinion, the text was as fittly chosen, as if it
had bin said, the 7. Stars are the diocesan Bishops, who having a superiority
in degree over other Ministers, did oversee the 7. dioceses, or diocesan
Churches in Asia. 2. As for the reply, which he ascribes to his Refuter (viz.
that though it be granted, that the Angels are Bishops, yet not such Bishops as
The D. untruly fathereth on the Refut: what he said not.
the D. speaks of) if it had bin as truly his, as it is untruly fathered on
him; yet he gives him no cause, to answer as he does. viz. then the vnfittnes
of the text (belike) is not because it is allegorical, but because in his
conceit, it is impertinent. He should rather have inferred thus, Then I see
the text is unfit in a double respect: in part, because it is allegorical;
and chiefly because, (though the meaning of the allegory be thus far agreed
on, that it is confessed the Angels were Bishops, yet) it is a great
controversy whether they were such Bishops as the Bishops of our Church are.
But the D. gives little hope, that he will of his own accord, confess so
much; this, belike, shall be answered with another, inferred upon a more sure
ground. It is certain the consent of Interpreters (being so far divided (as
he acknowledges, page 7. touching the nature of the function of these Angels)
can give his text no fitnes to conclude his purpose. Belike therefore the
fitnes that the Doctor imagines to be in it, is because in his own conceit it
is pertinent, induced thereunto perhaps by the judgment of some few that are
parties in the cause. But his conceit (though supported with the approbation of
some that favor the Hierarchy) is too light to be laid in the balance against
the judgment of all those Protestant writers, which vary from him in the
explication of his text.

3. Lastly, where 1. he would set the newer and elder disciplinarians (as he
terms them) at odds, about the interpretation of the text; that the one
should understand it of all Ministers in general, the other, of the Presidents
of the Presbyteries only. And 2. that against them both, he proves by the
text it self, and by other divine evidence; that the calling of diocesan
Bishops, is in this text commended unto us, under this title of the Angels of
the Churches: we are to know, that for the former, they agree well enough; for
however some understand it of the Presidents; yet they mean such persons, as
were also of the common sort of Ministers, though for the time of the assembly,
chosen The D. avoucheth that of both, which is true in neither.
Presidents. As for the latter, I marveile he durst so boldly avouch it of
both; seeing it is true in neither; as I doubt not but the reader will confess
with me. Thus much in defense of the refuters first reason for mistiking the
Doctors choice of his text. viz. because it is allegorical.

It remains that I remember the reader of an other reason, urged Sect. 6. ad
page 27. Def: in fine
by the Refuter (answ. page 2.) against the Doctors choice of his text to
justify our Bishops callings; viz. That whereas others deny that the angels of
the Churches were (as the Doct. affirms) Diocesan Bishops, he does not once
offer to prove the meaning of his text to be so by any other scripture, or
sound expositor of it. Now as it was needful for the backing of the
interpretation of his text, to have produced some: so questionless M. Doctor
had both wit and will enough to have done so; if they had been to be found.
Wherefore I again conclude, the text chosen by him was and is unfit for his
purpose. In deed he gives us a direct answer hereunto in that last sentence
of page 27. where he says, Though some object that by the angels are meant
either all Ministers in general, or the Presidents of the Presbyters; yet he
proves both by the text it self and other evidence, that the calling of
Diocesan Bishops, is in the text commended under the title, of the angels of the
Churches. But has he done the deed, indeed? Is this his answer as true, as it
is direct? Then is it to purpose in deed, and this quarrel will soon be at an
end. But soft a while, what are his proofs? The Doct. promises double proof;
but produces none at all
What is his evidence, where of he thus boasts? Where shall we find them?
Are they here laid down to his readers view, that they may see and judge of
them? Or does he point out any one page, chapter or book, where, elsewhere any
piece of proof is to be found? No verily, this is all he says, but of this
more in my answer to the 3. page: where (besides that which is already
examined, concerning the unfitness of his text) some pains ^s taken to prove
that in each church one only was entitled the Angel thereof, and that he had a
pre-eminence above the rest, which may l^ granted, and yet his Diocesan
Bishopric denied: But to prove that which he says, he proves; there is not
as yet found any one line, either in his sermon, or his large defense thereof.
In the first, he did not once offer to prove it. In this next, be though it
enough to say, I do prove it. In his third, (which is to come) perhapps he
will attempt it; but till we see it effected; the Refuters judgment must stand
sound, that the Doct. unfitly chose this text, which makes nothing for his
purpose.

Chap: 2. Concerning the division and frame of the Doctors sermon, and other
material points contained in the defense of his praeface, or first part of his
sermon, unto page 54.
The D. being set to pick as many quarrels as he could (and Sect. 1. ad cap.
2. Def. sect. 1. and 2. p. 28. 29. 30.
more by many, then he had any color for) so far misliketh the refuters
division of his sermon into 3. parts, viz. the preface, the body, and the
conclusion; that he will needs change the number, either by enlarging it into
4; or abridging it into two. To bring his whole The D. forgets in one place,
what he does in an other.
building into a just quadrangle, he divides that which his Refuter calls
the preface, into these two distinct members, to wit, a proeme and a
proposition; but he forgets (as it seems) that himself shuts up both
these in one, calling them, in the very title of his Chapter, the first part of
his sermon. And to reduce all into a perfect dichotomy, he sends us to his
transition, (sermon. page 94.) there to observe a distribution thereof into two
parts, viz. the explication continuing to that place; and the application from
thence to the end. Wherein he shows himself not very well advised; for his
transition has these words, The same d^ct^ine, which by way of explication of
my text, I have proved; I do now by w^y of application commend unto you. Now
who is so blind that sees not here 3. distinct parts? to wit, the explication
of his text, a doctrine proved by the said explication, and an application of
the doctrine so proved? Or rather, who is so sharp The D. is very inco^stant in
the division of his sermon
sighted as the Doctor, to discern the two former to be included under one
word explication? And who so skillful in logical analyzing and dividing, as
he who now reduces unto explication the 3. first sides of his quadrangle^ I
mean, his p^oeme, proposition, and confirmation of his 5. points, proposed to
be proved; and again, divides his explication into these two members, viz. an
explication of his text, and a doctrine collected out of it. But though I will
not forbidd him to cut his own coat, into as many, or as few pieces, as he
will; nor to al^e, the frame of his own building, into what forms, and as
oft^ he lists: yet if he shall remain still angry, with them that observe it,
and shall still revile them that like not his inconstancy; I know none that
will excuse him. And since he is not ashamed, wrongfully (and without any just
cause given) to charge his Refuter (Def. page 46, etc.) with double dealing,
sophistical shifting, disordering ^e frame of his sermon, cutting shorter, and
stretching longer the parts thereof, and that by a forced analysis, against
the light of his own conscience; though I have not so learned Christ, as to
require him, with the like terms of reproach, (albeit he justly deserves it)
yet must he be contented to hear the truth declared, and his own shifting too
and fro in changing his assertions at his pleasure, more plainly discovered.

Of those two assertions, which his explication (as he says) Sect. 2.
co^teyneth, the first he lays down in these words, That the Pastors or
governors of the primitive Churches (here meant by the Angels) were Diocesan
Bishops, and such, for the substance of their calling, as ours be; the second
in these words, that the function of Diocesan Bishops is lawful and good: And
he affirms, that these assertions, are for the handling of the text first
propounded to be discussed. But if the Doctor had perused the 2. page of his
sermon, (for it seems he cast not his eye upon it, when he wrote his defense)
he should have seen that these are not the same assertions, but changlings
(whosoever rocked the cradle) The Doct. changes his assertions.
putt in their stead. For there having the words of his text before his eyes,
The 7. stars are the Angels of the 7. Churches, and considering to what end he
had chose^ his text, (viz. to justify the honorable function of our English
Prelates); he undertakes in the first place, plainly to prove, that the Angels
of those Churches were Bishops (for the substance of their calling) such as our
Bishops are. And secondly out of the words to show, that the office and
function of Bishops, here meant by angels, is in this text both approved as
lawful, and commended as excellent. Will the D. say, that in sense and meaning
(for in words they are not) these are all one with the two first? Nay his
conscience will tell him, that in each proposition both terms (I mean the
subiectum and the predicatum) have received such a change, that the two former,
cannot be truly said to be the same with the two later. For in that first,
(which he says is an explication of the text) let him shame the Divill and
speak the truth, and tell us, what moved him to add, the word primitive to the
subject, and the word Diocesan to the Predicate of that assertion? Shall I help
to inform the reader, till his own answer may be heard? He was resolved (the
event declares it) to make the best defense he could, for the calling of this
Diocesan Bishops; yet not so much by the text, which he chose; or by any other
testimony of scripture; (for then fewer lines might have served his turn, then
are now the leaves of his sermon) as by the authority of fathers and
councels, whereof he had greater store, and such as (in his own apprehension)
made a fayrer show for his purpose. Hence is it, that in the winding up of all
that he had spoken for the proof of his first assertion, (to make the
conclusion more suitable to the premises) he brought his whole discourse to this
issue, (sermon. page 52.) Thus you have heard, that the Angels or Bishops of the
primitive Church, were, for the substance of their calling, such as our Bishops
are. Where note, he says not, the angels of the 7. churches in S. John's time,
were such Bps. (yet that was the point, he promised to prove) but the angels or
Bishops of the primitive church, were such. Understanding by the primitive
Church, the ages succeding, for 300 years after the Apostles days, (as
appears by sermon. page 56. and 57. and by Def. lib. 3. page 12 and 14.) which
when he has made the best of it, that he can; is but an idle digression from
his text, not a right explication thereof. Yet in this vein, The D. digresseth
from his text: does not rightly explicate it
he persisteth throughout his defense, giving us for the true and natural
explication of his text, the same general assertion: whereof see lib. 1. page
54. lib. 2. page 41. and lib. 3. page 22. Only in these places (like as
before) he adds the word Diocesan in the predicate, or later term of the
sentence, to conform this first assertion, with the second of the last
edition, (viz. the calling of Diocesan Bishops is lawful and good) that he
might with the better color commend the later unto us, as the Doctrine which
flows from the former. For which cause also, he seems here to limitt his
first assertion, within the compass of his text, unto those Pastors or
Bishops, which are here meant by angels: he seems (I say) here to do it; and
he does it in deed, in the last section of this chapter, and page 3. lib. 4.
where he seriously minds the collecting of his doctrine from the text; yet,
in enclosing those words, here meant by angels, within a parenthesis, he
seems withal to intimate to his reader, that those words may well be spared;
and the sentence nevertheless stand perfect without them; as it does in the
places before noted, even as often as he aims at the reducing of his 4. first
points (sermon. page 6. and 7.) unto one common conclusion. Thus he windeth out
and in at his The Doct. windeth in and out, at pleasure.
pleasure, and under terms that carry a double construction, has fitted his
first assertion to a double purpose. What shall I say to him? Would he thus
have done, if he had hated double dealing and sophistical shifting in
himself, as much as he seems to loath it in his Refuter; who gave him far
less cause, what say I? yea, to speak truth, no cause at all, so to accuse
him of any such offense? Let the reader Judge.

But let us go on, and compare together the 2. assertion (to use his own
phrase) of the new edition, with the 2. point proposed, Sect. 3.
sermon. page 2. In the one he roaveth at random, and affirms of Diocesan
Bishops at large, (at least of all such as ours be, for so he expounds
himself, lib. 4. page 3.) that their calling is lawful and good: In the other,
reteyning a special reference to his text and the angels there mentioned, he
says, that the function of Bishops, there meant by the angels, is in the text
it self, approved as lawful and commended as excellent. Howsoever the Doctor
be strongly persuaded, that the Angels, of whom his text speaks, were
Diocesan Bishops, for the substance of their calling, like to ours; yet is he
not surely, so far bereaved of his senses, but he can discern a difference,
not only between those ancient Bishops, in particular, and those to whom he
resembles them; or Diocesan Bishops in general: but also between the
lawfulnes of their callings distinctly considered. For as he is not ignorant
that his Refuter acknowledges, the function of those Bishops, which are in his
text called Angels to be lawful and good, because they were Pastors of those
7. several Churches; and yet holds the calling, of all such Diocesan Bps. as
ours are, to be unlawful: so be he here remembered, that we find his own
^llogi^mes (lib. 1. p. 58. and lib. 4. 3) to put this difference between the
calling, of the one, and of the other; that the calling of such, as is here
meant by Angels, is made the M d^^s termi^us, to conclude the lawfulnes of the
calling of Diocesan Bishops. Moreover, there is so much difference, between the
lawfulnes of the calling of Diocesan Bishops, considered at large; and the
approbatio^ of their function, in this or that particular text of scripture;
that the Doctor himself may (and does) embrace the one; and yet reject the
other. Else how dares he understand that text, Act. 20, 28. (as he does, sermon.
page 18. 37. 69.) of inferior Presbyters, which had no power, either of
ordination, or of external jurisdiction, contrary to the judgment of Bishop
Barloe, who i^ his sermon thereon (at Hampton Court) page 3. affirms, that
the Apostle in those words, speeketh fully for the prelacie, and describes
therein every part of the outward function of Bishops.

As for the D. reasons moving him, to examine what manner of persons were noted
by the Angels of the Churches; though it were no hard matter to mainteyne the
Refuters objections; yet su^ceasing to contend further therein, I will
overpasse his 2. section, page 29, and 30; it having nothing material or
worthy of reply, save what is already spoken to, in the (...). section of the
former chapter. And as touching the 3. and 4. sections concerning the number of
the angels and their pre-eminence, because we shall have fitter places for them
hereafter, lib. 3. cap. 3. I will therefore here pass by them, and so come to
his 5. section.

In his 5. section, two things may be commended to the readers Sect. 4. ad
sect. 5. Def. p. 35.
observation. First, the Refut: saying (page 4.) that it was in deed needful
to inquire what manner of Bishops those Angels were; because Bishop, Bilson,
and Bishop Barloe, had fancied to themselves another sort of Bishops then
either the Holy Ghost has mentioned in the new Testament; or any sound divine
offered to teach thereout. The Doct. from thence infers, that the
controversy which remains to be decided is this, viz. whether sort of
Bishops, such as those learned and himself defends; or such as his
adversary, and his adhaerents stand for; is that kind of Bishop, which has
been of late devised. Where it is easy to be seen, how cunningly he changes
The D. changes the question.
the question; he should have said, The controversy to be decided is this,
whether the Holy Ghost does understand by the Angels of the Churches, Rev. 1.
20. such Bishops, as our English Praelates are; or rather such as his Refuter,
and his adhaerents stand for? But wittily, and not unwittingly does he shun
this controversy; for, it seems, he knows that to be true which his
Refuter added, to wit, that if the use of the word Bishop, manifestly
warra^ted unto us by God in his word, and the joint interpretation of all
protestant divines, would have contented him and others of his side, we neither
had need, nor occasion of this examination. Wherefore though he offreth two
things to our consideration, for the deciding of the former question, viz. what
manner of Churches they were, whereof they were Angels; and what manner of
pre-eminence they had in those Churches: yet he closly slideth The D. closely
slideth from debating points propounded and then braggeth etc.
from the debating of them, and propounds his 5. points before noted,
(diverse from these) to be handled in their stead. So that his first assertion,
which he promised plainly to prove, has none other direct proof, then the
bare propounding of those two questions, which he offreth to our consideration.
Which the D. knows well enough; notwithstanding he braggeth of the contrary,
and adjureth his reader, in the name of God without partiallity, to see on
which side is better evidence and more pregnant proofs, and to assent thereunto.

Secondly, where the Doct. undertaking to prove out of his text, that the
office and function of his Diocesan Bishops is lawful and good; and the
Refuter told him, it was soon said, but not so soon done, there being
nothing in his text to prove it; because, to be lights, stars, angels, (which
was all the D. had said, or could show out of the words) is not proper to his
Diocesans, but common to all true Pastors of particular congregations, as
himself had taught in his sermon of the dignity and duty of the Ministers.
page 20, 61. The D. replyeth indeed, but as a man out of temper, charge his
Ref: to wrangle, and to have nothi g to say, but that which with an idle
coccisme, he often repeateth, and in this place is altogether impertinent, and
that he was resolved aforehand, to cavil, with whatsoever he should find in
his book. etc. Whereunto I will say nothing, but this, that concerning the
temper of the Doctor, and truth of his speech, I will not, the D. is a party,
he must not, let the reader indifferent therefore, judge.

The sight of the Doctors former proceedings, moved the Refuter Sect. 5. ad
sect. 6. p. 36. 37.
(page 4.) to tell him, that if he had walked with a right foot in the path he
was entered into; be should by his text, have taught us the meaning of these
two points; and not (quire contrary as he geeth about) by these two points, t^
teach us the meaning of his text. But the D. enraged a^ these words of truth
and sobernes, as Festus was at the words of Paul; was ready to take up his
answer, (much learning has made thee madd) save that he would not ascribe to
his Refut: any learning at all; and therefore chooses rather to say, that too
much wrath (which is furor brevis) made him so to forgett himself, that he
wrangleth without wit, and against sense. But I wish the reader consider,
whether the Doctor does not overrashly judge him sick of his own disease? For
what can he say either to excuse himself, or justly to blame his Refuter? For
sooth, that no man that is in his wits, will say, it is not lawful for a
preacher to explain his text. True, but if the Refuter never said it, and if
the Doct. cannot extract any such thing from his words; may not the reader
worthily censure him, for a mallicious slanderer? 2. He asks, what The doct.
slaundereth.
it was which, in this section he had in hand; was it not, says he, to
endeavor the explanation of his text? And to show what manner of Bishops, are
here meant by the angels of the Churches? And I answer him, no; he had
already explained his text, and affirmed, that the Bishops meant by those
Angels were such Bishops (for the substance of their calling) as ours are: now
he was to make way for the performance of his promise, to prove The Doct. sees
not or would not see what he had in hand.
his former assertion. 3. He asks again, what could be more fitly propounded
for the explication of his text, then the consideration of those two things
before mentioned? And a little after, who sees not, (says he) that the
handling of these points, is the very explication of the text? I grant, that
these two points were fittly proposed, to clear his first assertion, wherein
he reposeth the explication of his text; and if he had handled them, so as he
ought (by giving direct answers to his questions, and adjoining the
confirmation of each point, by some clear evidence from the text it self, and
the circumstances thereof, or some other scripture (where the like words or
phrases are used): such a handeling in deed of these points, had bin a good
proof of his assertion, and consequently a sufficient explication of his text.
But since he has not once endeavored thus to handle his two points; (which
himself acknowledges, ought to have been discussed for the clearing of the
text) what should hinder the Refuter or his Reader still to affirm, that his
text (in regard of these two doubts) stands still vnexplained, and his first
assertion left vnproved? 4. To conclude, the D. thus reasons, If the text be
that which is to be explicated, who could be so senseless, as either to require
that these points should be explained by the text, or to find fault, that by
the handling of them, the text is explained? I answer first, to the last
accusation. If the fault which The Doct. slau^dreth.
the Refuter finds, be not such as the Doctor mentions, but rather the
contrary; viz. that he goes about to teach us the meaning of his text, without
any due handling of those points, by the bare commending of them to our
consideration: then, whether the Doctor be not again worthy to be censured,
either for a blind and inconsiderate, or for an uncharitable and mallicious
slanderour, let the christian reader judge. As touching the other, who The D.
seems sensles or forgettfull.
would have thought him to have bin so senseless, or at least forgettfull, as he
seems to be, either, in judging that his Refuter meant to limitt him in his
explication, unto the words of the text, to explain it by it self, without any
other help; the contrary whereof is plain to be seen (in his answer, page 3.
and 4.) or in deeming it absurd and impossible, for a text of scripture to be
explained by it self; seeing he himself explaineth and proves by the very words
of his text, (sermon. page 2. and 3.) his second assertion, concerning the
quality of their function. But the cause is reasonable, why the D. does the
one, and leaves the other undone. For his 2. assertion, viz. that the function
of the Bishops, meant by angels in his text, is of God approved as lawful,
does clearly in all men's understanding arise from the very name of stars and
angels: but it is not so easy, (nay it is impossible) to draw out of those
words, or any other circumstances of the text, such a pre-eminence above other
Ministers, as his first assertion attributes to these angels, when it
affirms them, to be such Bishops (for the substance of their calling) as ours
are. Wherefore, it was the Doctors wisdom (if it were worthy of that name) not
to deliver us any one proof (syllogistically concluded) throughout his large
defense: but to stopp his readers mouth every where with such words as these,
the text is rightly expounded of Diocesan Bishops, And, I doubt not by Gods
help to make it evident; that such Bishops are here meant by stars and
Angels. Yea it is proved, that Diocesan Bishops are here meant by angels. But
hereof more when I come to the 2. last sections.

As for the two next sections, there being nothing in them, but Sect. 6. ad
sect. 7. and 8. Def: page 37.-39.
gall and bitterness, vented in personal calumniations both false and
slanderous, I hold them unworthy any reply. It is sufficient, both for the
Authors, as well of that modest offer of disputation, as of the late Petition;
as also for the Refuter, that the Doct. bare accusation The Doct. has two
sections full of calumni ations.
of slanders not meet to be named, cannot make the guilt of them; for why
should they care to answer him in this case, wherein he speaks, he neither
cares nor knows what? And touching that loud-crying slander, which he
renueth, in charging them to deny the King to be a member of a true visible
Church; since it is already sufficiently refuted, I might well pass by all he
has said to weaken their defense: and seeing he does with great scorn, refuse
aforehand to admit of the answer, saying, it is no matter what they hold,
unless they were more learned and i^dicious; he deserves no other rejoinder
but this, it is no matter what he speaks, unless he had some better ground
then he has, to make good his accusation. But in so heinous a crime as this
is, (laesae Maiestatis) it may be a deed of charity to defend them; a word of
two of it therefore.

The Doctor being displeased with them, that argue our Bishops, to be therefore
no members, of any true visible Church, because they are not members of some
one only parish; did The D. added to his opposites reason a malicious speech;
and now sets a false gloss upon it.
falsely and maliciously add, that in these men's conceits, it must needs be the
Kings own case. In deed, if any of them had at any time professed, or given
the least suspicion of this conceit, that the King is not a member of any one
particular congregation, (such as we define a parish to be) there had been
reason for his inference: But the D. knows that they all hold the King and
his household to be an entire Church, or distinct congregation by it self.
Wherefore if malice and self-love, had not too much prevailed with him; he
would (upon his second thought) have revoked his slanderous inference, and not
have set a false gloss upon it, to make it seem the more probable; for thus
he reasons.

The King having a more general reference to all the Churches within his
dominions (as being the governor of them all in great Brittanie and Ireland)
is further from being a member of one only parish, then any Bishop in this
kingdom.

Therefore by what reason they deny the Bishops to be members of the true
Church; (because forsooth they be not of some particular parish) by the same,
they may as well deny the King to be a member of the true Church.

Whereunto I answer. 1. If he had any intent (by this argument) to justifye
his former slander; in stead of these words in his conclusion; they may as well
deny the King etc. he should have said, in their conceit they do and must deny
etc. which he cannot with any color conclude, unless he will add to his
Antecedent the like words, (in their conceit and opinion) and say, that in
their The D proves one slander by another, or reasons absurdly.
judgment and conceit the King is further from being a member of one only
parish, then of any Bishop in the kingdom. But this were to prove one slander
by another; for they whom he slaundereth do acknowledge, that notwithstanding
his general reference to all the Churches in great Brittanie and Ireland,
whereof he is supreme governor by his Kingly office, yet in as much as he
submits himself and his family, to the public Ministry of those whom he
has chosen to dispense the word and sacraments, to him and to them; he is a
member of a true visible Church, (or if you will) of one certain parish, that
is to say, (of one particular congregation of Christians, assembled together in
one place, for the solemn and public service of God. 2. If the Doctor be of
a contrary opinion, then he reasons absurdly from his own false imagination,
(that the King is further then any Bishop from being a member of one only
parish) to conclude that they which deny the Bishop to be a member of a true
Church, may as well (or rather must needs) be so conceited of the K. With much
more probability we may return this conclusion into The D. concludes against
himself, and brings his slander upon his own head.
his own bosom, that seeing he is persuaded, the K. cannot be a member of any
one parish, because he is the governor, of all the Churches within his
dominions; he must for the same cause deny him to be a member of any one
Diocesan or provincial, (I may add National) Church within his dominions.
And hence it will follow that in his conceit, the King is not a member of any
one certain visible Church: for by one visible Church, the D. means, the
christian people of one diocese or province, or at the most of one nation. For
the christian people lyving under diverse laws (as the people of England and
Scotland do) are diverse nations, and so diverse visible Churches, if we may
believe his own words lib. 3. p. 51. 52. Wherefore the impartial reader, may
easily see, that this odious crime, (of denying the King to be a member of a
true visible Church) falsely and spitefully ascribed to them, against whom he
deals; does truly and justly light upon himself. As for the question which
he moves, whither they hold the King and his household to be a true Church?
That so he may be thought to be a member of a true Church? though the Q. be
needless, and sufficiently answered already, yet know he again and again,
that they hold the King and his familye to be a true visible Church, not only
a member of a true Church; and the King in regard of his regal office, a most
noble member excelling all other, though the Doct. seems to be otherwise
persuaded, not only of the King as is before showed, but perhaps also of his
familey; because it is not as other parishes are, a subordinate member of any
one diocese, nor constantly subjected to the jurisdiction of the diocesan
Bishop.

His last reason, why we may not with the like reason acknowledge the Bishop
and his family to be an entire (Church he should say, but he says) family by
themselves? I will answer when I find him better disposed to receive it, then
he was, when to the end of his question, he added, It is no matter what they
hold, unless they were more learned and judicious. In the mean time, let
him bethink himself what to answer to these questions. 1. Whether every
Bishop, or any one of them, does alike subject himself as the King does to the
pastoral authority of any one or more, that do ordinarily distribute the word
and sacraments to his whole familye? 2. Whither any Bishop residinge, with his
familye in another diocese (as the Arch Bishops alwaise do, and some others
for the most part do) he and his familey be (as other parishes are) subject
to his jurisdiction, in whose diocese they are? 3. And if the Bishop be the
pastor of his familey and his chapleines assistants to him, for the pastoral
oversight thereof, whether we may not affirm their families to be so many
Presidents of parishes governed by a parish pres bytery?

In 3. sections following, the Doctor bestirreth himself to recover Sect. 7. ad
sect. 9. Def. page 40.
his credit with his Diocesan Bishops, who by a reason grounded on his own
words were proved (by the Refuter, page 6.) to be absolute Popelings. The
reason was laid down to him in this form.

They who have not only supreme, but also sole authority in causes
ecclesiastical, are absolute Popelings. All Diocesan Bishops have not only
supreme, but also sole authority in causes ecclesiastical. Therefore all
Diocesan Bishops are absolute Popelings. The Doct. scorning that this should be
called his reason, says, That there is nothing in it his, but the proposition,
which also is stretched, beyond not only his meaning, but his words. His
words are these (sermon. page 4.) least they might seem to set up an absolute
popeling in every parish, who should have not only supreme but also sole
authority in causes ecclesiastical, they adioyne unto him, (that is, to their
Pastor) a consistory of lay or governing elders. Out of these words (says the
Def: page 40.) I deny not, but this proposition may be framed. They who give to
a Bishop, not only supreme, but also sole authority in causes
ecclesiastical, do seem to set up an absolute popeling. And why not (or
better) that proposition, which his Refuter urges? In deed if he had said,
They seem to set up an absolute popelinge, in giving to their parish Bishop,
not only supreme, but also sole authority etc: his proposition had more
naturally flowed from his words, then now it does: but since he says an
absolute popeling, which should have both supreme and sole authority etc. he
very clearly describes in these last words, (of having such an authority as
he speaks of) what he meant by an absolute popeling, namely such a Pastor or
Bishop, as has not only supreme, but also sole authority in causes
ecclesiastical. Wherefore he may as well deny it to be daylight at high-noone,
as deny that the Refuter rightly drew his proposition from his words before
expressed.

2. Moreover put case, a man should contradict the proposition, which himself
acknowledges to agree with his words and meaning; must he not be enforced for
the proof thereof to assume, some such assertion as that is, which the Refuter
propounds. viz. that he is an absolute popeling who has (in any parish or
diocese) supreme and sole authority in causes ecclesiastical?

3. Yea does he not elsewhere in his sermon (page 17. and 51.) with out any
seeming, affirm in plain terms, that the parish Bishop, or Pastor of every
parish, must rule as a Pope unless he be assisted with a presbytery, or
subjected to the diocesan Bishops authority? Yea that it is to set up a Pope
in every parish, if the Pastors do rule alone, neither subject to the Bishop,
nor restreyned by Assistantes? In like manner, in this defense (lib. 1. cap. 8.
pa. 194.) says he not, that their parish Bishops whom they make the supreme
ecclesiastical officers, would be (he says not might seem to be, but would
be) absolute popelinges, if presbyteries were not adjoined unto them, because
they shall have not only supreme, but also sole authority? It is therefore a
mere cavil joined with an evident untruth; The D. j^ineth a cavil and an
untruth together.
to say as the D. does, that the proposition set down by the Refuter; is not
his, but stretched beyond not only his meaning but also his words.

4. But it was the D. cunninge to take advantage of the word seeminge (here
used, but elsewhere omitted,) so to persuade, if he could, that his Resuter had
no color from his words, to conclude, that he did set up (but only that he
did seem to set up) absolute poplinges, for which cause also, in meeting with
the places, where the Refuter renews this objection (which yet is no oftener
then his own words gave occasion, by his renewinge of his calumniation
against the favorites of the government by presbyters) he sends back his
reader to this place, saying, that th^se objections (though repeated in other
words answering to his own terms) are answered before, and that to their
shame (see lib. 1. pa. 194. and lib. 3. page 142.) But (will he, nill he) we
have gained the propositio; so that if his answer to the assumptio be not the
better, the shame will light upon his own pate.

To come therefore to the assumption. First, let it be remembered Sect. 8.
that the Refuter propounded it (not as his own assertion, which he meant to
prove by the constitution of our Churches, or the practice of our Bishops, but)
as a point which the D. undertakes to prove in his sermon. 2. He is likewise
to be so understood as often as he objecteth against our Bishops, that having
sole and supreme authority, they rule as Popes or Popelinge; wherefore the
assumption which the D. rejects, as false and foolish, or frivolous, is this
in effect. That all diocesan Bishops have (or ought to have in the D. opinion)
not only supreme but also s^le-authority in matters ecclesiastical within
their diocese. Or thus, The D. gives and allows to di^cesan Bishops, such
supreme and sole authority etc. Wherefore to make way for the proof of this
Assumption, the Refuter first laid down the state of the question, into which
the Doctor is now entered, (viz. whither the Churches should be governed by
Pastors and Elders, or by Diocesan Bishops) and then adds, that where they
say by Pastors and Elders, adjoining the Elders to the Pastors, and making them
both subuct to the congregation (so far off are they from giving sole and
supreme authority to the Pastors alone etc.) Mr Doct. takes all from them
all, and puts the re^^^ into the bands of his Diocesans alone, etc. From
which words to conclude the former assumption, and (in the contriving of the
argument) to keep, as near as may be, to the tenor of the syllogism,
proposed by the Doctor to himself to confute; thus I argue. Whosoever gives to
the Diocesan Bishop alone, that power which is taken from the several Pastors
with their Elders and parishes; he gives to the Diocesan Bishop, supreme and
sole authority in causes ecclesiastical. But the Doctor gives to the
Diocesan Bishop alone, that power which is taken from their several Pastors
with their Elders and Parishes. Therefore the Doctor gives to the Diocesan
Bishop both supreme and sole authority in causes ecclesiastical
I take the proposition which the Doct. himself sets down (sect. 11. page
43.) and adjoyne such an assumption as best fitteth with it. And I nothing
doubt, but the Refuter will easily be discharged from all the untruthes, the
Doctor charge upon him, and it be made to appear that the Doct. himself is
the man that climbeth that ladder of untruths, to put his The D. not the Ref.
climbeth the ladder of untruths.
Bishops out of that seat of papacy, wherein (by his own rules) they were
quietly seated. And first, I will confirm the parts of this argument; and
then blow away the smoke of those untruthes which rose from out of the Doctor
as sparks fly upward. The proposition I thus prove, Whosoever gives unto one
Diocesan Bishop alone for his Diocese, such a power of government as would be
found both supreme and sole, if it were invested wholly in the person of any
one pastor for the government of one parish, he gives to the Diocesan Bishop
alone for his Diocese both supreme and sole authority in causes
ecclesiastical. But that power of government which the D. takes, from the
several Pastors with their Elders and Parishes is such a power as would be
found to be both supreme and sole authority in causes ecel^sticall; if it were
wholly invested into the person of any one Pastor, for the government of one
Parish. Therefore whosoever gives unto one diocesan Bishop alone for his
Diocese, that power of government, which the D. takes from the several
Pastors with their Elders and parishes; he gives unto the diocesan Bishop:
alone for his diocese, both supreme and sole authority in causes
ecclesiastical.


Of this prosyllogisme the proposition is clear enough of it self, and the
assumption is drawn from the D. words both in his sermon and this defense of
it, when he says, again and again, that the authority which he denies unto
parishes, with their Pastors and Elders, (in this controversy) is an immediate
and independent or supreme authority sufficient for ecclesiastical government.
And that the Pastors should have Pope-like authority (viz. supreme and sole
authority in causes ecclesiastical) if there were not a consistory of Elders
adjoined to him. Wherefore, if it can be proved that the D. gives to diocesa
Bishops that power of ecclesiastical government, which he denies unto Pastors
with their parishes and Elders; it will inevitably follow, that he allows unto
every diocesa^ Bishop, supreme and sole authority in causes ecclesiastical. To
proceed therefore to the proof of this point (which is the assumption of the
first prosyllogisme) thus I argue, In debating this question (whither the
Churches are to be governed severally by Pastors and Elders in every parish,
or by Bishops set over the Pastors and people in a whole diocese) whosoever
impugneth the former and mainteineth the later, he gives unto every Bishop in
his diocese, that power of government which he den^eth to the several Pastors
with their Elders and parishes. But in debating the question before mentioned,
the D. impugneth the former branch of the question, and maintains the later.
Therefore, he gives to every Bishop, in his diocese, that power of government
which he denied unto the several pastors with their Elders and parishes.


Here the Assumption is in it self evident, if the question debated, be such as
is before noted; which none of his friends need to doubt of, since the D.
himself excepteth not against it, but entreats the reader to take notice of
the state of the question for future use (page 41.) and when he repeateth it
(cap. 3. page 61.) he acknowledges it to be rightly set down, in respect of
the parts of the disfunction. Whence it follows also that the proposition of
the prosyllogisme stands firm. For in this question (to use his own words
cap. 3. page 60. 61.) he must confess, (unless he will confess himself to be
ignorant in logic) that this disjunction is employed. The Churches of Christ
are to be governed either by a presbytery in every parish, or by one Bishop,
set over an whole diocese. And this disjunction, as it is ex hypothesi
necessary, it being agreed upon on both sides, that either the one or the
other form of government is to be embraced, and that one and but one of these
assertions is true or false; so it does necessarily import, both that they
which affirm the former, do give unto every parish Church and her presbytery
(for the government of it self) the same power, which they take from diocesan
Churches and their Bishops: And that they which plead for the government of
Bishops, do allow unto every Bishop in his diocese, the same power and
authority, which they deny to the several parishes and their presbyteries.
For as it were a foolish question, if both parts of the disjunction were true;
so it were no less foolish, if both parts were untrue or false; as it must
be, if that power of government, be not lawful for the one, which is denied
unto the other.

Now (to come to the untruths which the D. charge upon his Sect. 9. ad Sect.
10. page 41. 42.
Refuter:) he finds in his assumption these two. 1. that all authority is by
the Drs. taken from the Pastors, Elders and people in every parish. 2. That
all is given to the Bishop alone. To prove the first an untruth, he first
grants one part of it true, saying the Elders in deed, I reject as a new
devise. 2. As for the parishioners, (though for our credit sake, as he says,
he leaves out that dotage of their chief authority, as if we held it, and so
makes us beholding to him, for leaving that out, which we never put in; for
where did he ever read that we give them the chief authority in government?)
in them he acknowledges some authority, in choosing or consinting to the
choice of some Church officers. And 3. as touching the Pastors of the Parishes,
he leaves them that Pastoral power, which ever was granted to them, since the
first distinguishing of Parishes, to wit, their power of order as they are all
Ministers, and a power of spiritual or inward jurisdiction, to rule their flock
after a private manner, and as it were in the Court of conscience. The Elders
indeed, have little cause to thank him; but see how much the people and their
Pastors are beholding to him: he is content the people shall have some
authority, he had once said to choose, but that was too much, and therefore
recallinge it he says to consent to the choice of some Church officers; but
they must stand to his curtesy, hereafter to understand at his pleasure, who
are those some Churchofficers, to whose choice they have authority to consent;
and who are those other some, to whose choice, they have no authority so much
as to as^ent: whether by the former, he mean their Pastors, and perhaps the
Churchwardens and Parish clerks; and by the later, the Bishops, Deanes,
Prebends, Archdeacons etc. yea or no.

In like manner he allows, to the Pastors of parishes, a pastoral power,
both of order and jurisdiction; but their Pastoral authority, is not in foro
externo, but in fore cons^ientiae, and whatsoever it be, it is delegated and
committed to them by the Bishops, (sermon. page 45.) to whom the care of the
whole Church belongs so that the authority is not theirs, they are but as
servants to the Bps, and so rule under the^, as they are rued by the^, as at
large he assayeth to prove, sermon. p. 45. 46. 47. 51. Yea and in this defense,
p. 42. he leaves to them that pastoral power only, which ever was granted
unto them, since the first distinguishing of parishes, and allotting of
several Presbyters to them, as if their power and function were not of divine
or apostolical; but rather of humane and papal institution. Thus we see how
deeply indebted the Pastors and people are to the Doctor for his allowance
toward them.

2. But how will these parts of power or authority thus allowed them by the D.
prove an untruth in the Refuter when he said, that the question being (as he
said) whether the Church should be governed by Pastors and Elders with the
people, or by Diocesan Bishops, the Doctor takes all from them all, etc. Must
not that all which is said to be taken away, be limited to the question before
proposed? q. d. all that power of government (which is controverted whether it
belongs to the Pastors with the elders and people of every parish, or to the
Bishop in his whole Diocese, all this I say,) the Doctor takes from the
Pastors Elders and people, and puts the same (not all simply) into the hands
of his Diocesan Bishop alone. And in this sense (which is the true sense,
though the Doct. shifteth out of it) the refuters words are true, as before is
showed. The Doct. shifteth the sense.
Neither can the Doctor without shame, deny it; seeing that external power of
government which stands chiefly in ordeyning, censuring and absolving etc. is
the thing controverted in the quaestion before expressed, which the Doctor
holds to be the Diocesan Bishops right, and unlawfully given to the
parish-Bishop and his Elders. Wherefore the first untruth falls back upon the
Doctors own head, when he falsely says, that his Refuter affirms of him,
that he takes all manner of authority from the Pastors Elders and people. And
so also does that second untruth, inasmuch as himself well understands, and
elsewhere rightly interprets the refuters The D. charge the refuter with 2.
untruths, but they both fall back upon his own head.
meaning (in the proposition set down page 41.) to be of giving to the Bishop,
that power, which is taken from the several Pastors etc. and not all power
simply. As for that he objecteth to prove, that he gives not all authority to
the Bishop alone, because others are in the ecclesiastical government joined
with him, some under him, as Deanes, Archdeacons etc. some above him, as
Archbishops, and provincial Synodes etc. It shall be answered, cap. 4. sect. 8.
where it is nothing to the purpose but an other shift, from the question, which
is not defact^ and of the time present, (viz, what order of government now
stands in our Churches by our present laws and constitutions) but de ^^re,
what form of Church Government ought to be, or at least, lawfully The D.
shifteth the question.
may be, as being of divine or Apostolical institution? Or if d^ facto, yet it
is for the time past, for the first 200. years after Christ, as the Positions
which himself proposed to oppugn (sermon. page 4.) do declare. Wherefore, if
the Doctor will discharge himself from giving all the power of government in
question, to one Bishop alone in his Diocese (and so be guiltless of the
untruth, he charge on the Refuter) he must both affirm and prove, that the
Archdeacons and Deanes (rural and cathedral) together with the Chauncelors
and officialls, which now rule under the Bishop, and the Archbishop with his
courts, which are above him; be of divine institution, or at least were in use,
in the time of the Apostles, and so derived to succeeding ages. And yet, if he
could and should performo this hereafter; it shall nothing weaken the Refuters
assertion, who examining the tenor of his sermon (and finding therein no
intimation, either of any assistants to restreyne his Diocesan Bishop, or any
superior court to rule over him) did therefore truly Sect. 10. ad Section 11.
page. 43. Two other untruths charged on the Ref. by the D. return back into
his own bosom.
affirm, that the Doctor put the reins of the government co^troverted, into
the hands of his Diocesan alone.

As for those two untruths, which he sought and professes to find in the
proposition, they do (even as the former two) return home into his own
bosom. For since he cannot deny, but that the power which he takes from the
several Pastors with their Elders and parishes, is in his opinion a supreme
authority in causes ecclesiastical, and such as will be both supreme and sole
in the Pastor (yea more then Popelike) if they had not a consistory of elders
joined to him; it is no untruth to affirm (but an untruth to deny) that he
gives both sole and supreme authority to the Diocesan Bishop (whosoever he
be) that gives to him alone that power of government which the Doctor takes
from every several Pastor, with the Elders and people of every parish. For
whereas he objecteth, that because he acknowledges a superior authority, both
in the Archbishop: and his courts; and in the provincial Synods, etc. it is
apparent, that although he did take all authority from parish Bishops and their
Elders; yet it would not follow, that he gives the whole authority
ecclesiastical, to the Diocesan alone; it is but an idle repetition of what he
before objected, and is before answered; and here altogether impertinent;
because to w^^ken the refuters proposition, he must show that he gives not
supreme and sole authority to the Bishop in his Diocese; although he give to
him alone, all the power that he takes from the several Pastors, with their
Elders and parishes.

But whereas he falls back to the assumption again, and adds touching his
refuters speech in saying that he ascribes supreme authority in causes
ecclesiastical to the Diocesan Bishops, that it is the supreme and lowdest
lie, and makes the Assumption of his cheef^syllogisme evidently false; it is a
supreme and loud lie in the Doctor, (if The D. makes a loud lie.
I may return him his own words) 1. to reckon this for one untruth implied in
the proposition, when himself acknowledges it to be the assumptio^ of his
chief syllogism. 2. to deny it; for what could be spoken with a supremer and
louder cry, by him, then that the Diocesan Bishop has supreme authority in
causes ecclesiastical, and that not in this defense only, but in the 4. point
of those 5. in his sermon, where he offreth to prove it by diverse testimonies.
To what end else cites he (page 30.) Ignatius ad Smyrn. and page 31. 34. 36.
46. Ignatius ad Trallens. showing that all must be subject to the Bishop, who
holds and menageth the whole power and authority over all; yea such a power
as admits no partner, much less a superior? Yea what else means his
conclusion, page 52. where he says, thus you have heard that the Angels or
Bishops of the primitive Church, were for the substance of their calling such
as ours are, having a peerless power both of ordination and jurisdiction? If
this be not to give supreme authority to the Diocesan Bishop, let the reader
(especially when he has read the 7. section of the next chapter) judge. As yet
therefore neither the lowest nor the lowdest lies, which the Doctor charge
upon his Refuter do belong to him; they must go home and rest with their own
Father, for ought is yet done.

As for all that which follows (page 44. and 45.) either to Sect. 11. ad page
44. and 45. and sect. 12. 46. 47. Def.
free himself from giving popelike authority to Bishops, or to prove his
accusation against the Presbyterians, that they make the Pastor of every parish
a petty pope: Well may it argue his wps: good affection to the one, and evil
will, (which never said well) to the other; but it can neither clear him, nor
condemn them, in his conscience, who indifferently examineth the cause on both
sides. For neither is the Doctors cause releived, by that subjection which he
affirms (and the Refuter acknowledges) of our Diocesan Bishops, to their
Archbishops etc: Neither is their cause made the worse by the height or
impudency of that ecclesiastical authority, which they give to the Pastor or
people of every parish. For the question is not (as the Doctor shifteth The
Doct. shifteth the question
it). Whether by our Church constitutions, Dioccsan Bishops do lie subject to
any higher authority, or whether men may appeal from them, etc. but) whether
the Doctor does not endeavor in his sermon, to convey unto every Bishop in his
Diocese, as his right by divine institution, an authority and power of
government, in causes ecclesiastical no less sole and supreme, then the power
which every Pastor should have in his parish (by the doctrine of the later
disciplinarians as he calls them) if he had no consistory of Elders to
assist and restreine him? And towching the parishbishop, the question is this;
whether he should be (or at least seem to be) an absolute Popeling, (as having
sole and supreme authority in causes ecclesiastical) if he had not a
consistory of Elders adjoined unto him? If therefore the Doctor will leave his
shifting and slaundering, and syllogistically conclude either from his own
sermon, the Negative in the former question; or from their writings whom he
impugneth, the assirmative in the later; he shall, I doubt not, have good and
honest audience. In the mean time, seeing he has not as yet affirmed, (much
less proved) that Diocesan Bishops are by divine or apostolical institution,
subject to the jurisdiction either of the Archbishop, or of the provincial
synod; it may suffice to close up the former question with his own words (p.
43.) What has he gained by all his own triumphing outcries, but the
manifestation of his own manifest untruths? And for the later question, since
it is evident, (by their protestatio touching the K. supremacy) that they do
subject their Pastor, as well as the meanest of the people, together with the
whole congregatio, to the Kings authority, and to all his Majesty's civil
officers and ecclesiastical laws: and seeing also it appears, not only by
the same Tract, art. 26. but also by those 16. positions: and by the Refuters
words (whereof he took notice page 38. and 41.) that they subject their
Pastor, and every of their ecclesiastical officers, to the body of the
congregation and their censure, if there be just cause: he does wittingly add
unto his former untruths, these 2. false and shameless positions. viz. That
their Pastor is a pettye Pope The D. adds to his former untruths, 2. false
and shameless positions.
in regard of that supremacy, which they ascribe unto him: and that, were it
not that he had a consistory of Elders joined to him, as the Pope has of
Cardinals, he would be more then a Pope. True it is, they say, that the Pastor
of a particular congregation, is the highest ordinary ecclesiastical officer,
in every true constituted visible Church of Christ: But they speak only of
such Churches and Church Officers, as were specially instituted in the
New Testament. And if the D. judgment be demanded, which is the highest
ordinary Church Officer in such a Church, let him think with himself whether
he must not be enforced to affirm as much of his diocesan Bishop, or at least of
his Archbishop? For if all the visible Churches planted by the Apostles, and
endowed with power of ecclesiastical government, were dioceses properly (as he
confidently says) and if he dare not resolutely affirm and for a certain
truth (as he dares not but thinks only lib. 2. cap. 6. page 114.) that
Metropolitans were (I say not instituted, but) intended by the Apostles; why
may it not be concluded that in his opinion, the diocesan Bishop, is he highest
ordinary officer ecclesiastical, in every true visible Church instituted in
the new testamet? Wherefore since it is apparent by the tenor of his sermon
(specially by page 44. 45. and 90.); that he gives to the Bishop a peerless
power of rule, as well over the presbyters as the people of his diocese; that
may be truly affirmed of his diocesan Bishop, (which he falsely says of the
parish Bishop) that he is a petty Pope in regard of that supremacy, which he
ascribes unto him. If he had rather bestow this honor, upon his Metropolitan
Bishop; because (to prove that no Church in the world is more agreeable, to the
form and government of the most ancient and Apostolical Churches, then this
of England) he says (in that 114. page lib. 2.) that at the first
Metropolitans were, autokephaloi, heads by themselves of their provinces, and
not subordinate to any other superior Bishops; as it must needs be granted
him, that the title does beseem him much better, because the supremacy of his
jurisdiction is far larger: so it The D. falls into another un truth.
in denying any of our Bishops, to be the supreme ecclesiastical officer in
his Church. To say as he does (page 45.) that our Bishops are guidded by laws,
which by their superiors are imposed on them, makes no more for them; then the
like subjection in the parish Bishop. But why say I the like? Since it is far
greater, he being subject not only to the King, his ecclesiastical laws, and
the meanest of his civil officers; but also to the censures of his
fellow-elders, and the congregation whereof he is a member.

But that which is further added touching the Pastors with their elders and
people, (viz. that they have (as the Pope says he has) a supreme immediate
and independent authority sufficient for the government of their Churches in
all causes ecclesiastical, and therefore for m^king of laws ecclesiastical
etc. and that as the Pope does not acknowledge the superiority, of a synod to
impose laws on him, no more do they) I yet see not, with what windelace he
can draw from thence, that which he intends, viz. that the title of absolute
popelings agrees better to their parish Bishops, then to his Diocesan Bishops.
For is not that power of government which the Doctor gives to every Diocesan
Church, by divine and Apostolical institution, as immediate independent and
sufficient for it self; as that which they give to every parish? Else why does
he, for the confuting and supressing of their parishonal government set down
this assertion, namely, that the visible churches (such as he speaks of)
endowed with power of ecclesiastical government, were Dioceses properly, and
not parishes? The comparison therefore stands much better between the Pope
and the Diocesan Bishop, in this manner. As Papists say, their Pope has an
independent, and immediate authority, from Christ, over all the Pastors and
people within his charge, (which is the Catholic Church or universal society
of Christians throughout the world) and a power sufficient, for the
ecclesiastical government of all Churches every where: so siath the Doctor and
his associates, that every Diocesan Bishop has an immediate and independent
authority from Christ, over all the people of his Diocese (which is his charge)
and sufficient for the ecclesiastical government of all Churches within his
jurisdiction: see page 14. of his answer to the preface, and sermon. page 52. As
for Synodes, if they be lawfully called, well ordered, and their constitutions,
by royal authority ratified; the Doctor can give neither more honor, nor
obedience to them, then they do; (as their protestation shows. Art. 8, 12.
13. 14.) If they want regal authority to assemble or to ratify them; they
think, that by divine or apostolical ordinance, their decrees or canons ought
not to be imposed on any Churches, without their particular and free consents.
See H. I. in his reasons for reform: page 31. And if this also be a papal
priveledge; how will he exempt his Diocesan Bishop, from being like herein to
the Pope, when he had nether Archbishop, not provincial Synod, to impose any
laws on him? Or the Archbishop and primate of all England, who at this day,
acknowledges no superiority of any synod to impose laws upon him? Thus much
shall suffice to be spoken in defense of those later disciplinarians, from whom
(although in some things I confess I dissent) yet I cannot consent to the D.
taking away of their innocence. Wherein we see how the more he striveth, to
remove the title of popelings from the diocesan or provincial Bishop; the more
he inwrappeth either the one or the other, under a just and due title
thereunto. And since it is, and shall be proved, that he gives both The D.
gets nothing by striving, and let him take home his plain lie.
sole and supreme authority to Bishops in their Churches; he must (will he nill
he) take home to himself, that same plaine-lye, which he gives his Refuter (in
the next section. page 47.) because he says, that his words do there imply
(and afterward plainly affirm) a sovereigntie and supremacy in Bishops over
other Ministers; for in the Refuters understanding, sovereigntie, is nothing
but sole and supreme authority. What more there is, the Refuter is content to
say, (as the D. in the section following,) wills him to say in another case,
ou manthano, ad sect. 12. page 47.
I understand not. And as for that other untruth, which M. Doctor is pleased to
call an error, where he says, they were called angels in respect of their
general calling of the Ministry; it shall rest sub judice, undecided for a
while, till a fitter occasion calls for the examination of it.

In the 5. next sections (viz. 13-17.) there are many words Sect. 12. ad sect.
13. 14. 15. 16. Def. from page 47. to 52. D.
spent to little purpose, the Doctors chief drift is to clear himself of some
untruths, which the Refuter charge upon him in his affirmation, that the
wise and learned disciplinarians do grant, 1. that the Bishops which in his
text are called Angels, were Bishops of whole cities and the countreies
adjoining, that is to say, Dioceses. 2. That the Presbyters which were no
Ministers were lay and annual. 3. That these angels were nothing else but
Presidents of the Presbyteries. 4. That their presidentship, was only for a
week or a month, and that by course, as being common to them in their turns.
Now the Doctor, to manifest the truth to be of his side, in all these points,
appealeth to the writings of Calvin and Beza. And touching the first, the
shows from their words, that in the primitive Church, Bishops had the
oversight of Dioceses; and therefore in some places (where their circuit was
very large) they had under them, such as were called Chorepiscopi,
countrey-Bishops (he might have added Lectores, Acoluthes etc.) and that they
had also above them Metropolitanes, as we may see in the places whereunto he
sends us. Calv. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 4. section 2. and 4. Beza de Minist
grad: cap. 24. page 167. etc.

But how does this prove (that which he was to prove), that the The D. freeth
not himself fro the untruthes charged upon him.
Bishops which in his text are called angels, were Bishops of Dioceses, or set
over whole cities and the countries adjoining? Does it not prove as strongly,
that these angels had both country-Bishops, and diverse other inferior degrees
of clergymen under them; and Metropolitans above them? Which if the Doct.
should affirm, his best friends would see very evidently, that he abuses
these grave and The Doct. changes the quest:, and concealeth that which would
covince him of 2. evils.
learned divines most grossly, to make them the authors of those untruths,
which himself broached, and will not recall. His hope was (it seems) to
blind his readers eyes, by a crafty changing of the question (as almost every
where he does) and concealing that which serves to convince him, both of
mainteyning an untruth, and abusing their testimonies to mainteyne it. For it
is manifest, that they both do speak neither of these Angels, nor of the
Apostles times; but of that form of government, which by humane ordinance
took place after their days; wherein the ordinances of Christ and his
Apostles, which should have bin kept inviolable (according to 1. Tim. 6. 14.)
began to be violated; and so on to the time of the Papacy. Let the D. read
again the title of that 4. cap. with the 1. and 2. sections thereof, together
with that 24. chap. of M. Beza, page 165. 166. etc. and though he be a party,
yet I will (at this time) make him judge, how substancially he has proved the
first point.

Nether are the Testimonies alleged for the 2. point, so direct or The D.
testimonies prove not the point.
fit for his purpose, as he would persuade: for where he should prove that they
teach, that those ancient governinge Elders which (they hold) were par^s of the
presbytery, in the Apostolic Churches, are lay and annual; he shows out
of Beza, (in his former book page 60. cap. 11.) that at Geneva, there are
yearly, either new chosen, or the old confirmed. And out of Calvin. (Instit.
lib. 4. cap. 3. sect. 8.) and Beza again (cap. 11. pa. 64. and de presb. and
excom. page 105.) that they are or must be chosen out of the laiety. The
reasons why they are there annual, do clearly show (Beza dicto libro. page
68.) that it is a matter of conveniencie, in regard of persons, place, time,
and sundry other circumstances (so esteemed) and not a thing necessary. And
though they account them not of the Ministry, because they are not chosen and
ordained to the Ministry of the word and sacraments; yet is their office
merely ecclesiastical not civil, because of the choice and ordination by the
public prayers of the Church. And therefore if the word laiety or
laie-persons, be opposed to such as are persons ecclesiastical; they cannot
properly be said to remain lay, during their office. Neither does Calvin any
where say, that being chosen out of the lai^y, they still remain lay. Nay his
very phrase, chosen from among the laity, shows, that after the choice
during the time of their office they are not of the laiety. But the D. says,
that being chosen they do not become to be of the Clergy, therefore Mr Calvin
must needs mean, they still continue to be of the laiety. But when by the
Clergy, Mr Calvin means (as he says, vsitato nomine, all such as exercised
any publik Ministry in the Church; (all being so called from the Doctor to the
dore-keeper) what can he else mean, but that they (by that election being
called to bear public office of government with the pastors) became thereby
to be of the clergy, that is (as the general definition of the word clergy
shows) ecclesiastical persons. In deed, he calls them ^ie, because they be
not of the Clergy in the stricter sense, (viz Ministers of the Sacra functio
jurisdictionis.
word and sacraments) but yet he calls their function, an ecclesiastical
order and sacred function.

As idly and evilly alleged is Mr Bezaes testimoney, for as little Bezaes
testimony is both idly and evilly alleged by the D.
does it speak to the purpose; he may do^ well to look upon his book again, and
see whether it be Beza that calls them annual in the title of that chapter;
it may be the title itself will prove none of Bezaes, but Saraviaes his
adversaries, who by that term in the title seeks to disgrace that function;
which I the rather believe, because, where they are said in that title to be
such as are ad docendum in^pti, Beza disclaymeth it, and says, they must in
some sort and measure be ad docendum apti; and that it is a fault, if others be
chosen, and charge Saravia to do little better then calumniate in so terming
them. And that however new may be chosen at the years end, yet that tem^re nec
ipsi s^se deponunt, nec deponuntur; yea rather summo studio retinentur qui
fidem sua^, et diligentiam in suo praesbyteratu probarunt. And that whereas by
the order of the consistory, a time is prescribed whether annum vel longius: it
is done in discretion, for diverse causes (set down by him) not for that either
they did not, or by the nature of their office might not, continue longer. And
the Doctor might as well say, that these two worthies do^ make the office of the
Pastor (which is perpetual) a^nual: for the case may so fall out, that it may
and does last but a year with some, such is their demeanor therein. And to
conclude, the very laws of Geneva, which conteyne the order of that Church
whereunto the D. appealeth saying, (page 9.) That in the end of the year the
Elders shall be presented to the Seniory, to know if they be worthy to continue
in their office, or to be discharged, because it is not expedient, that they be
changed without a cause, shall be Judge. However it be, it rests still an
untruth upon the Doctors own head (neither shall he ever be able to remove it)
in that he faith, They hold the Presbyters of those Churches (mentioned in his
text) which were not Ministers, to be annual or lay-Presbyters.

As Much may be said concerning the third point, viz. that they The Doct.
stands out in an untruth.
make those angels nothing else but Presidents of the Presbyteries, then which
the Doctor says, nothing is more plain; and I say, nothing is less plain or
true, then that it is plain they say so. For 1. neither Calvin, nor Beza, nor
T. C. nor the Author of the ecclesiastical discipline, do confound those
ancient Bishops (the D. speaks of) with these Angels, as he does. He
produces them all 4. (as if he would strike it dead) and they all agree in
one, yet never The Doct. 4. authors agree in one, but never a one with him,
some of them against him.
a one with him. Three of them speak, neither of these angels, nor of the
times wherein they lived; but of other persons and times; very sweetly
therefore does the D. from them conclude, for these Angels and their times.
Beza in deed (Annot in Apoc. 2. 1.) speaks of these Angels, but it is clear
he makes them such (Proesto^es) praesidents of the assemblies, to moderate the
meetinges of the rest of the Ministers; as that also, they were Ministers of
particular Churches or congregations, with whom the rest of the Ministers were
equal in authority after the end of that assembly, over which they were for
order sake chosen and set: yea he directly disclaymeth, both in that
Annotation, and in his answer to Saravia, those presidents or Bishops, which
were nothing else but presidentes of such Assemblies having no particular
Churches, upon which they did reside, and over which they watched not, together
with the rest of the Ministers, of equal authority with them.

2. It is also evident by the writings both of Calvin and Beza (for as for the
other noted in his Margin, I know not to what end he should send the reader
to them, unless for his discredit in quoting them idly) Instit. lib. 4. ca.
4. sec. 3. and De gradib: Minist. ca. 22. pa. 133.) that even those ancient
Bishops, (which lived after the time of these Angels, for of them only they
speak) which moderated the assemblies of the rest of the Pastors and
presbyters in any Town or City, were themselves by their office, Pastors (et
suae pareciae preerant) and governed their own parish, yea they labored no
less (much more rather) then other presbyters, in the dispensation of the Word
and Sacraments; ill favouredly therefore, does the D. conclude from them, for
the Apostles times. But to help at a dead lift; and to color the falsehood
(which he could The D. to color his untruth foysteth in a sentence which yet
does him no good.
not but see,) of that his assertion; he now, in this defense, foysteth in
these words in respect of their superiority, and tells us, that they make the
Angels of the Churches (in respect of their superiority) only presidents of
the presbyteries. And so reasons very profoundly in this manner. They make
the Angels of the Churches, in respect of their superiority above other
presbyters, only praesidents of the presbyters; Ergo, they make those Angels
nothing else but presidentes or moderaters of the assemblies. As if a man
might (by rules of logic) conclude Mr. Downam to be nothing else but a Doctor
in divinity, because by degres in schools he is a D. in divinity, though he
be also Pastor of great Which is his best style, if he were so well advised, as
to take his degree of honor, from the word of God etc.

As for the fourth, since the Ref. acknowledges (answer page 7.) Sect. 13. ad
sect. 17. p. 52. 53.
that those wise and learned divines, do judge that their presidencie in
classical or Synodall meetings, was but of a short continuance, as occasion
required; the D. might have spared his labor in proving this point. If he
would directly have contradicted him; he should have proved from their
writings, that they are of opinion, that the president might not by the nature
of his office, continue longer then for a we^ke or a month; this was it, which
the Refuter denied: but herein he justifies him rather. For in the very places
quoted by him, page 141. 153. though Beza says, that the presidentes of the
presbyters were at first by course, and of short continuance; yet he affirms
that that order was not essential or immutable, but accidental and variable,
and that it was afterward thought fit to settle it constantly upon one. But
whereas the D. (lib. 2. pa. 141.) tells us, that as there cannot be one
instance given, but that alwaise the president of the presbytery in the
primitive Church, was perpetual: so it was in Calvin's time, and Beza misliketh
it not, but sometimes wishes it were restored; what else does he but justify
his Refuter in that The D. justifies his Refuter in that where in he would
co^demn him; and must take home his 4. untruthes.
wherein he would condemn him? Wherefore let the D. be entreated to take these
4. untruths to himself again their own home; where (for ought I know) they
were bredd and borne, and there let them rest, till he can bring (which will be
ad graecas calendas) a better discharge from their writings, to justify those
particulars.

Now touching those calumniations, of unmannerly ignorance, cu^^ing rudenes,
wrangling etc. which he objected against his Refuter, I overpasse them as
unworthy any answer; it was the best he could do, to outface and salve his
credit; but ill will it do it, with them that are wise and judicious. But
whereas he twice affirms (page 47 53.) that the Refuter craftily concealeth,
or cunningly seeks to conceal, the division which is among our selves; it is
a slander, not of ignorance, The D. wittingly slandereth.
but against his own knowledge; for he could not but see that he said (page 5.
of his answer) that all men are not resolved of the truth of every of them:
yet the division is not so great as he would persuade the world, nether are the
points so new or so generally contradicted of those reverend and learned
divines (Calvin Beza etc.) as he confidently (but falsely) avoucheth. Wherefore
take he also to him these two untruths, and add he a third likewise to the
former, where he says (in his margin. pa. 47.) that the Refuter mistaketh his
reason; unless, he had rather acknowledge, that his reason is impertinent and
frivolous. For the question being. What manner of pre-eminence, those Bishops
had, which are in his text, termed the Angels of the 7. churches; that which he
adds of the wiser and more learned disciplinarians, (their granting that they
were Bishops of whole cities etc. that their presbyteries consisted partly of
annual or lay. Elders, and that the Angels were nothing else, but presidents
of those presbyteries) cannot in reason rightly be reduced to the question;
unless it be understood of those Bishops and Churches which are mentioned in
the text, which is to be explicated. And if he be (as it must be) so
understood, he falsely charge his Refuter with an ignorant mistakinge of his
reason; and let him learn the lesson he elsewhere taught his Refuter say, ou
manthano, I understand not my own reason; or else against his understanding,
he did both trifle in the one, and slander in the other.

Chap: 3. Concerning the residue of the Doctors defense of his preface, or
first part of his sermon. from page 54 to the end.
Proceed we on now to the next section (page 54.) where he tells us, that
hitherto his two assertions contained in the explication, have bin Sect. 1. ad
sect. 18. page 54.
propounded, to be discussed; and that now there is way made for the proof of
either, by enumerating distinctly the several points, which he proposed to
handle etc. And I wish the reader to remember how he says before (sect. 1.
page 28) that the points to be handled are first deduced out of the text (from
page 2. to page 6. of his sermon: lin. 16.) and secondly, that they are
enumerated The Doct. changes the points of his sermon.
and distinctly marshalled, page: 6: and 7. Now can any man that hears him
thus speak, judge otherwise then that himself holds the points distinctly
enumerated, to be the self same, and neither more nor fewer then those, which
are before deduced out of the text? Yet he that well examineth the matter, shall
find that neither is the number of the points the same, neither are the points
(eadem numero) the same in number. We have already heard what are the two
principal assertions, which he proposes; (sermon. page 2.) For the deciding of
the former, he lays down two questions, which are enlarged into three. viz.
1. whether the Churches whereof they were angels, were parishes or Dioceses. 2.
And cons^qu^ntly whether those angels were parishional or Diocesan Bishops? 3.
What was the pre-eminence in regard whereof they were called angels, whether
only a priority in order above other Ministers, and that for a time and by
course; or a superi^itie in degree, and maiority of rule for term of life? In
the direct answering of these three questions, together with the later
assertion (which must be take as is before expressed) the sum of his preface
lies, as himself confesses. (Defen. page 29.) Wherefore the points deduced
out of the text, cannot exceed the number of four; so that in the Doctors
enumerating of 5. conclusions to be more at large prosecuted; the number of
these later excedeth the number of the former by one, as every child knows
that can tell his 5. fingers. And the reader may easily discern, that this One
(which is now marshalled into the field, and was not before appointed to serve
in the battle) is the first of the 5. which says, there were not l^y
governing Elders in the primitive Church; for this cannot carry the face of an
answer to any of the three questions before mentioned. Now to compare the rest
and to try whether they be one and the same. 1. His direct answer to the
first question touching the churches, must be this. The Churches whereof they
were Angels, were di^ceses properly and not parishes. But the second of the
five (for the first is showed to be an intruder) affirms, that in the first
200. years the visible churches endowed with power of ecclesiastical
government, were dioceses properly, and not parishes, and the presbyteries which
were in those times, were not asigned to parishes, but to di^^eses. Wherefore
2. That which follows as a consequent of this, (viz. that the Angels of the
Churches and presidents of the presbyteries, were not parishonall but diocesan
Bishops.) must be referred to the Bishops, that lived in the first 200 years
after Christ; whereas the answer of the second question has peculier
reference to the Angels of the 7. churches, that they were not parishonall but
diocesan Bishops. 3. In like manner, the answer to the 3. question,
determines the pre-eminence of those Bishops which are called the Angels of
the Churches, to be (not a prioritie in order, for a time and by course, but) a
superiority in degree above other Ministers, and a majority of rule during
life. But the fourth point among the five, with a larger reference to the
Bishops of the primitive Church for many ages, affirms, that every Bishop
being advanced to an higher degree of Ministry, was s^t above the other
presbyters not only in priority of order, but also in majority of rule for
term of life. 4. And the last of the five, having an eye unto the function of
Bishops described in the forenamed positions (whose Churches are Dioceses, and
their Presbyteries assigned for the whole Dioceses, whose pre-eminence also is
a superiority in degree, and majoritie of rule) promises to show and by
evidence of truth to demonstrate, that the calli^g of such Bishops is of divine
and apostolical institution. But the last assertion proposed (page 2.)
promises this only and no more, out of the words of the text to show, that
the office and function of Bishops, there meant by Angels, is in this text
approved as l^wf^ll, and commended as excellent. Wherefore since there is so
apparent a difference between the one and the other, me thinks the D. should
sooner be drawn to confess, that the points first deduced out of the text to
be handled, do differ both in number and nature from these, which are secondly
enumerated; then to undertake the mainteyninge of the contrary; and the
reducing of the first of his 5. conclusions, to one of those 3. questions,
which he propounded for the trial of his first assertion.

As for that fair florishe which he makes, for the bringing of the first
four to the proof of the first assertion; and the last of the five, to the
fortifyinge of the second; how vainly he striveth therein, the very change of
both the assertions before named and here continued, does sufficiently declare:
yet his defect herein, shall more fully be laid open hereafter, upon just
occasion offered.

In the mean time, I will first examine the scope of his reasoning, Sect. 2.
ad sect. 18. and 19. p. 54. 57.
whether it were so far disordered by his Refuter as he would persuade his
reader; or rather be not perverted and put out of frame by himself? It is a
truth, by himself confessed in the last section of this chapter (page 57. lin.
33. and 35.) that the body or frame of his sermon concludes one and the same
question; but he is very angry with his Refuter for reducing both the
assertions, which he proposed to be distinctly handled, into one syllogism.
For though he grants that some such syllogism, as his Refuter framed, ^aie
be gathered out of diverse places of his sermon; yet he denies that it
answers to his intent. The syllogism is this. The function of the Bishops of
the 7. Churches is lawful and good. The function of the Bishops of the Church
of England, is the function of the Bishops of the 7. Churches Therefore the
function of the Bishops of the Church of England, is lawful and good.


Both the premises are clearly gathered from the 2. page of his sermon; for
the proposition is implied in the 2. assertion, which says. That the office
and function of Bishops here meant by Angels, is in this text approved as
lawful and commended as excellent. And the assumption is thus propounded in
the first assertion (ibid.) The Angels of the 7. Churches (or the Pastors or
Bishops of those Churches understood by the angels) were Bishops for the
substance of their calling, such as the reverend fathers of our Church are. But
let us hear the Doctors censure of the refuters syllogism. Against the
assumption, he excepteth nothing, wherefore I must take it for granted, that
it is, as his refuter affirms, all one with his first assertion. In like
manner, he grants the conclusion, to be the same with that which he calls
the doctrine collected out of the text (viz. that the colli^ge of diocesan
Bishops is lawful and good:) which he sets also for the conclusion of both
the syllogismes which himself frames. (page 58.) neither denies he the
proposition to be in effect all one, with that which himself takes for the
proposition of his first syllogism, viz. that the calling of such as are here
meant by Angels is lawful and good. Let us view his syllogism and compare it
with the Refuter) and this it is. The calling of such as are here meant by
Angels is lawful and good. Diocesan Bishops are such as are here meant by
Angels. Therefore the calling of diocesan Bishops is lawful and good.


What difference in the proposition, between function and calling, Bishops of
the 7. Churches, and such as are here meant by Angels? What difference in the
assumption, between the Bishops of the Church of England, and diocesan Bishops?
Are they not in the D^^ense, all one? if so; what difference in the
conclusions? And wherein then has the Refuter offended; if his syllogism be
(for the sense and meaning of each part, though the words and phrases do a
little vary) one and the same with the first of the D. own framing? Forsooth
(the Doct. will tell you) because he would against sense make the Reader
believe, that the proposition of his syllogism is that last assertion, which
was prop^unded page 2. concerning the quality of their function. But goes not
the Doctor rather against all sense (yea against his own conscience) in
laboring to make the reader believe, that the conclusion of the Refuters
syllogisine, is that assertion (or doctrine as he calls it) which page 2.
shows the quality of their function? For, does the Doctor speak of the
Bishops of the Church of England, and not rather of the Bishops of the 7.
Churches in Asia; when he promises out of the words of the text to show that
the office and function of Bishops there meant by angels, is in the same text,
approved as lawful and commended as excellent? And are the Bishops there meant
by angels, the Bishops of the Church of England, and not the Bishops of those
7. Churches? Behold, how a greedy desire to quarrel with his Refuter without
cause, carries The D. co^. mitteth 3. foul faults to color a falsehood.
him at unawares into these fowl faults, not only of co^tradicting common
sense, and his own knowledge; but also of giving the lie to the holy ghost the
author of the text. And all this is done to color that falsehood, which before
he had forged, sciz. that his 2. assertion propounded (page 2.) was this, viz.
the calling of Diccesan Bishops is l^wfull and good. A falsehood sufficiently
before discovered, and by himself (inconsiderately no doubt, yet) plainly
acknowledged, when he says of the conclusion of the first Syllogism, (p. 58.)
which is verbatim the same, that before he called his doctrine; that he did not
express it, being employed in the collection of the doctrine out of his text.
So this one sentence (the calling of the diocesan Bishops is lawful and good)
is propounded as a doctrine collected out of the text (page 2.) and yet is not
expressed, neither is it the doctrine, but employed only in the collection of
the doctrine. How slippery is his memory, that The Doct. in one page grossly
co^tradicteth himself.
in less then one page contradicts himself so grossly? But pardon we him
this slip; for it is his common (though a false) Tenent, that the later of his
two assertions (propounded page 2. of his sermon) is the doctrine which he
collecteth from the text, the former serving to prove the later, which he says
(lib. 4. page 2.) does much commend the method of his sermon. But the reader
by that saying may see, how ready he is (notwithstanding his disclayming of it
with indignation, lib. 1. cap. 1.) to apprehend a slight occasion, to blase his
own commendations; and how needful it was he should discarde that second
assertion, which was first laid down, (sermon. page 2.) and in stead thereof,
tender us that, which every where in his defense, he terms his doctrine. For
if his 2. assertions (taken in the very words which first expressed them) be so
knit together, that the former shall prove the later; the Enthemem which they
will frame, is this and no other, The Pastors or Bishops meant by the angels
(Apocal. 1. 20.) were Bishops, for the substance of their calling, such as the
reverend fathers of our Church are; Therefore the office and function of
Bishops, here meant by angels, is in this text, both approved as lawful and
commended as excellent.


Now to make good the consequence of this collectio^, this must be added for
the proposition. The function of such Bishops, (for the substance of their
calling) as are the reverend fathers of our Church, is in this text approved as
lawful and commended as excellent. Does not this kind of reasoning (think you)
very highly commend the Doctors method, in disposing his two assertions, to
his best advantage? For however he beg the maine question, in the proposition,
or The D. beggeth the main question.
consequence of his Enthimeme for granted; yet he may rest securely in this,
that the conclusion of his argument will never be impugned. But if his Refuter
had thus disorderly turned the frame of his sermon vpside down; or given the
least intimation, that he endeavored to prove a Diocesan Bishopric to be
lawful in the angels of these 7. Churches; because it is lawful in the Lord
Bishops of England; there had been some cause for him (whereas now there is
no color of a cause) to complain as he does (page 56 and 57) that by a forced
Analysis (not answerable to his Genesis) the frame of his sermon (to let his
racking and taintering speeches alone) is put quite out of frame. Wherefore
since the Doctor charge his Refuter, with the fault whereof The D. is guilty
of the fault which he charge his refuter with.
himself is guilty; it shall be no great wrong done, to return him some other
of his own words p. 56. nimia est miseria, doctu^ esse hominum nimis, behold to
how great trouble, too much learning will put a man. For if his skill had not
been extraordinary, (I say not in analyzing his own treatise but) in changing
his two first assertions, and bringing in other two in their stead, all this
stir had bin needless.

But the stir (or strife) is not yet at an end, the Doctors greatest Sect. 3.
ad sect. 19 p. 56.
quarrel against his refuter is yet behind, namely, the censure which he
passes upon those 5. points which he prosecuted in the body of his sermon,
where he says (answ. page 9.) that the first and the last are to little
purpose, and that the other three do not directly prove the point in question.
I will not here trouble the reader with the Doctors terms, wherein he shows
in what rage he was hereat; let us rather examine how just or unjust this the
Refuters censure is; the which that it may appear, let it be remembered that
the Doctor acknowledges (in the former section page 54) that the first 4.
points must be referred to the proof of his first assertion; and the last of
the fyve, to the second. Now this being so, whosoever takes his second
assertion, in the words wherein he delivered it (sermon. page 2.) shall easily
discern, that it is labor bestowed in vain, to spend time in the proving of
that, which is clear enough of it self. For who ever doubted, but that the
office and function of those Bishops, which are in his text meant by angels, is
there approved as lawful and commended as excellent? Wherefore, if his 5.
point, serve for none other use, then for the proof of this The D. 5. point is
idle.
assertion; the D. has no cause to blame his Ref: for affirming he might well
have spared that labor. But albeit he could not endure so mild a reproof;
his patience must now be tried with a sharper. Be it therefore known to him,
that he reasons absurdly, if he The D. reasons absurdly.
referr his 5. point to the fortifying of his 2. assertion, (page 2.) for thus
then his enthymeme stands. The calling of Bishops, such as ours are, or at
least such as the Bishops of the ancient Churches are affirmed to be (sermon.
page 7.) is of apostolical and divine institution. Ergo the function of Bishops
meant by angels. (Apoc. 1, 20.) is in the same text approved as lawful and
commended as excellent. As for that difference which is between the later
term or praedicatum of the antecedent, and of the consequent in this argument,
I will take no exception against it; for though every apostolical or divine
institution finds not approbation in this text Apocal. 1. 20; yet the honor
of such an institution cannot be denied unto any function, which in this text
receives approbation. Wherefore, he shall with good leave (if he will)
exchange the later term of his conclusion thus, Ergo the function of Bishops
meant by Angels (Apoc. 1. 20.) is of apostolical and divine institution. But
how will the D. cover the shame, of his disorderly reasoning; when in stead of
justifying our Bishops, by the calling of those Angels; he does contrariwise,
infer their calling to be of divine institution, because our bishops have
deryved their function, from divine or apostolical ordination? Is not this to
set the Cart before the Horse, and to lay that for the foundation, which The
D. lays that for the groundsell, that should serve for the ridgepole.
should serve for the roof or highest part of his buylding? It will not serve
his turn to tell us, that we mistake his. 2. Assertion; for it is already
showed, that himself puts a changling in place thereof, when he delivers
under that name this conclusion; that calling of diocesan Bishops is lawful
and good. Notwithstanding since he will needs have this, (which the falsely
calls his 2. Assertion) to be the doctrine whlch he intended to prove (not
only by the explication of his text, comprised in his first assertion, but
also) by that 5. point, wherein he bestowed his greatest labor: if he have
sufficiently fortified the former 4. points, which serve to uphold that
explication which concludes his doctrine; what offense was it for his Refuter
then, or now again for his reader, to say, that his labor in the last point
was needless, and might well have bin spared? May he not well think, that one
argument soundly concluded from the canonical text, will more prevail with
the wise, then many conjectural reasons, drawn from mere humane testimonies?
But may a man prove his patience yet a little further, and that with an harder
sentence. viz. That he contradicts himself, in urging The D. co^tradicteth
himself.
that 5. point as a distinct proof to conclude the doctrine? I speak herein
nothing but the truth, and that I received from his own mouth. For this 5.
point, to wit, that the function of Bishops is of epost^licall and divine
institution, which he now (page 54. and 58.) makes a proof of the doctrine
arising out of the text, is expressly affirmed (sermon. page 93.) to be the
doctrine it self, which arises out of the text, and by way of explication of
the text, is proved. And who so well observes, what lawfulnes and goodness or
excellency, he ascribes, either to the function of those Bishops, which are
meant by angels in his text (assert. 2. page 2. or to the calling of all other
Bishops answerable to his description; (page 51. with 54. and 54.) he may
plainly perceive, that it is no other then such as has institution from God,
and approbation from the text it self under the names of stars and angels;
wherefore if he himself had been as careful to observe the transitions, which
he uses in his sermon; as he is ready without cause, to blame his refuter for
not observing the^; he might have discerned his doctrine handled in his sermon;
to be the very last of his 5. points, and not so diverse from it, as now he
would persuade.

As for the first 4. points, how pertinent or impertinent they are, shall be
best perceived if we examine, how he himself reduces them Sect. 4. ad page 57.
58.
to his purpose. But let the reader be first advertised of the D. inconstancy
in laying down his own project, whereat he aimed in in his sermon. For 1.
when he promises (sermon. page. 2.) in the handling of the words of his text,
to prove, both what manner of persons are there meant by the Angels, and what is
the quality of their function; The D. is very inco^stant in laying down of
his project.
who can with reason judge otherwise, then that these 2. assertions there set
down to answer those two questions, do apperteine to the explication of his
text? Yet now in his defense he every where restreineth the explication of his
text, unto the former assertion. 2. And having first altered the later (as he
does the former also as is before showed) he constantly commends it to us, as
the doctrine of his sermon; whereas his own words (page 93. of the s^rm. it
self) do deliver his doctrine in terms so far differing, that he now makes
his old doctrine an argument to confirm the new. 3. Again, though he will at
no hand consent to his Refuter platform, in casting both his assertions into
one syllogism, as the premises, from which the lawfullnes of the function, of
our English prela^es must be concluded: yet it appears (by his words page 2.
and 93. compared) that at first he intended both his assertions should concur
to prove his doctrine: for they both serve to the explication of his text, (as
is before noted) and his doctrine cannot possibly be concluded from either of
them without the help of the other. Yea he himself is enforced (though he
pretend the contrary) to use them both for the premises, which in his first
syllogism (Defenc. page 58.) do conclude his new doctrine. The D. sermon and
the defense there of are at variance. yea within 20. lines he disagreeth with
himself.


4. Lastly to these particulars, wherein his sermon and the defense thereof are
at variance add that disagreement which may be see^e (in these 2. pages 57. and
58.) within less then 20. lines distance. For when he will have those 2.
distinct parts (which he says were before propounded by him) to be drawn,
into two dis^inct syllogisms concluding the same question: who would not
expect, that the conclusion of each syllogism, should be a point differing from
both his assertions before distinguished; and that as the former assertion is
the assumption of his first syllogism: so the later also should be the
assumption of the second? But it is far otherwise; for the later of his two
distinct parts or assertions mentioned in his defense, is the conclusion of
both his syllogismes; and the assumption of his second syllogism, is the last
of his 5. points, which by his first and truest reckoninge, was the
maine-doctrine of his sermon; and therefore ought to have bin the final
conclusion, unto which the body of his sermon is to be reduced. Wherefore it is
not to be doubted, but that (when the D. has advisedly considered of these
things) in his next defense he will be well content to give the later of his
two syllogismes a fair bill of discharge, rather then to maintain it any
longer in that service, whereunto he has now assigned it.

As for his former syllogism, though I altogether mislike it not, if the
assumption and conclusion be understood of all kind of diocesan Bishops; (for
else, though it contains the greater part of his sermon, yet does it not so
much as conclude the question, because the calling of some kind of diocesan
Bishops may be lawful and good, though not the calling of such a kind as
ours are whose defense the D. intends) and if these words lawful and good
be so taken as he understands them (sermon. page 2. 54. 55.) viz. for that
which has institution and approbation from God, or is in his word approved as
lawful and good: yet to avoid further quarrels about words, I wish that his
conclusion carry the very words of his doctrine, or such as are apparently
equivalent unto the^. In which respect, (if I might be so bold as to lend the
D. advise in this matter) I suppose his syllogism might very well stand in this
form.

The function of Bishops meant by Angels Apoc. 1. 20. is of apostolical, or of
divine institution, or is approved in the holy Scripture as lawful and good.

But the function of Bishops (such as ours are for the substance of their
calling) is the very function of those Bishops which are meant by Angels,
Apoc. 1. 20. Therefore the function of Bishops (such as ours are for the
substance of their calling,) is of apostolical or divine institution: or is
approved in the holy Scriptures as lawful and good.

Of this syllogism, as the conclusion suteth well with the last of his 5.
points, which he calls (sermon. page 7. 55. 93.) his doctrine: so the
premises do agree with those two assertions, which contain the explication
of his text (page 2.) to wit, the proposition with the second, and the
assumption with the first.

But let us now examine his first syllogism, which he here delivers thus. The
c^lling of such as are meant by Angels is lawful and good. Diocesan Bishops are
such as are here meant by Angels. Therefore the calli^g of diocesan Bishops is
lawful and good.


Concerning this syllogism, hear we what he says, The proposition (says he)
I took for granted, and therefore did not express it; The ^ssump^ion is the
same with the former assertion, and is proved by the 4. first p^i^tes. The
conclusion I expressed not being employed in the collection of the doct^^ne out
of the text. What shall I say unto him? Loath I am, and yet I must say, behold
here as many untruths, as there are parts of the syllogism. 1. The proposition
(which he says he did not express) is in effect all one with the later of his
2. assertions (sermon. The D. tells 3. untruths in one syllogism.
page 2.) for there is no other difference betwixt them, then this, that here
their calling is more at large affirmed to be lawful and good; whereas there,
he speaks within a narrower compass, that their function is in this text
(then handled) approved as lawful and commended as excellent. Which difference
with him, is none at all, and therefore (though now he has forgotten it) he
acknowledges (in this chap. (sect. 5. page 35.) his second assertion to be
this, viz. that the calling of Bishops, who are here meant by Angels, is lawful
and good. 2. As for his assumption (which he says is the same with the first
assertion) it herein differreth from it; that it sets di cesan Bishops instead of these words, such Bishops as ours are for the substance of their
calling. And whosoever observes that for the deciding of his first question
(which affirms the Angels of the 7. churches to be such Bishops as ours are)
he undertakes to try (page 3.) whether those Angels were parishional or
diocesan Bishops; he shall find that his first assertion, does crave the help
of his assumption, to stand in the place of one of the pillars that must
support it.

And touching his conclusion, since he told us, (even in the former page) that
it is the very conclusion which he proposed to be proved, (sermon. page 55.) why
says he now, he did not express it? And if it be the main doctrine of his
sermon (as every where throughout his defense he affirms) why says he it is
only implied in the collection of his doctrine out of the text? But no more of
these whies, let us come to the maine question, (from which the reader has bin
held too long) I mean the trial of the truth of the assumption, and how true
it is, that it is (as he says) proved by the 4. first points of his five.

Well were it with the D. and the cause he pleads for, if he could Sect. 5.
as easily prove his assumption, as he can say, it is proved. But, as in truth
he has no ground from his text, chosen of purpose to raise it upon: so he
goes not about the proof of it, by any word or circumstance The D. does not
once offer to prove the point in question by any word of his text.
therein. For every man certainly sees that it is every way as doubtful (for
ought appears to the contrary by his text) whether the Angels therein spoken
of, were diocesan Bishops; as whether the calling of diocesan Bishops be
lawful and good. And it seems that himself discerned some defect in his
proof; seeing he forbeareth to deliver it in syllogisticall form of
reasoninge, (wherein otherwise he is not sparinge) for he has no other
syllogism that bends this way, then such as arise from each of his 4.
points Nether one alone nor all the D. 4. points together do directly
conclude his assertion. Yea the D. refers them to another question.
considered severally and a part; and yet not any one of them, (nor all of
them, in one together) directly concludes that assertion, which he says is
proved by them: viz. that diocesan Bishops are here meant by Angels. They all
sail another way, and trade for the bringinge in, of another commodity or
conclusion viz. That the primitive Church was governed by diocesan Bishops. and
that the Angels or pastors or governors of the primitive Church were diocesan
Bishops, and such for the substance of their function, as ours are. Which point
how well he has proved, we shall see hereafter, here, for the present, (till
he show us how he can directly and soundly conclude the former from the later)
I still must and will affirm, that the assumption of his first syllogism
remains as yet, vnproved, specially since he himself refers his 4. points
(which are all his proof of it) to another question. For the first assertion
(propounded sermon page 2.) with which he accords his assumption, determines
no other question then this, viz. who and what manner of persons are meant by
the Churches? But the assertion which his 4. points do conclude, is (as his
own words teach in the next chapter page 60.) the answer of another
question, to wit, whether the premitive Churches were governed by such
diocesan Bishops as ours are, or by such presbyteries as we speak of? This
later is a question de facto, examininge what form of government was embraced
of the ancient Churches; the former is de genuino scripturae sensu) touching
the true sense of the text he handles. Wherefore though Though the 4. points
were granted, yet the D. is still prooflesse etc. ^ Bishop Barlow sermon. at
Hamp. Court, upon Acts. 20. 28. fol. 3.)
it should be granted, that he has sufficiently confirmed the later; yet it
follows not that the former is directly proved, or necessarily concluded. For
he is not ignorant, that one of his reverend Fathers (to whose judgment in the
interpretation of a text, he owes more reverence, then himself can challenge
from his Refuter how basely soever he esteem of him) does behold every part
of the outward function of D: Bishops fully described in Act. 20. 28. as 1. The
preheminent superiority above other Ministers in the word Episcopos. 2. Both
their Cathedral seat or positive residencie in one City, and a regencie
settled in their persons during life; in the word posuit. And their diocesan
jurisdiction, in the words, in quo viniverso. And if the D. make any question
of any one of these points, he may find the first much more sufficiently
confirmed, the^ is his interpretation of the word Angels in his text; for
besides the proofs produced (in the sermon it self) to show that the Bishops
of the primitive Church were set in a preeminent superiority above other
Ministers; he backeth his understanding of the word Episcopos with some color
of reason from other Scripture, that as there are scopountes Seers Phil. 3. 17.
(which expresses the duty of each pastor over his flock), so there are 1.
Pet. 5. 2. episcopountes (quasi hoi opito^s scopountas) such as must visit and
over look, both the flock and the Seers: which last place of Peter, the D.
himself understands of Bishops (lib. 3. page 43.), whereas to prove that
diocesan Bishops, are meant by Angels he alleges no show of any authority
divine or humane, that may persuade the name to be given unto Bishops, to
express their pre-eminence above other ministers. And as for the rest of the
prerogatives of Bishops, which Bishop Barlow did but point at, and not
prosecute; who sees not how easy a matter it is to justify them by a like
consequence of reasoninge to that which the D. uses? For if we must believe
that a diocesan extent of jurisdiction and a prehminent superiority both in
degree of ministry and power of ordeyninge etc. is implied in this title the
Angels of the Churches; because the Bishops of the primitive Churches did
govern whole dioceses and had therein such superiority above all other
Ministers: why should not the D. also believe, that a diocesan jurisdiction and
Cathedral seat, together with a positive residencie in one City, and a
settled regencie during life, is rightly gathered from these words, in quo vni
verse posuit; seeing he knows that the Bishops of the primitive Churches, had
every of them, the like jurisdiction, seat, residenoie, and regencie peculiar
to their functions? Notwithstanding the D. will at no hand consent that the
presbyters, (of whom Paul speaks Acts 20. 28.) should be diocesan Bishops,
such as ours are; for he takes them for inferior Ministers, such as he will
have to be called Preistes. Now if he reply that the Churches practice in
succeding ages, allowinge unto Bishops those privileges before mentioned,
helps nothing to prove, that those words of the text, do conveye the same
parts or notes of episcopal pre-eminence, unto the Presbyters or Bishops
there spoken of; why may not the Refuter return him the same answer, viz. That
all his proofs produced to confirm his opinion touching the diocesan
jurisdiction and preheminent superiority of the Bishops, which governed the
ancient Churches, do neither directly nor necessarily conclude that such
diocesan Bishops, are to be understood by the Angels of the Churches Apoc. 1.
20? For is not the holy Scripture sufficient to interpret it self? Or are the
rules which divines do generally embrace for the interpretation of any text,
as by waying all circumstances of the text it self; and comparinge other
Scriptures with it, where the like words or phrases are used; are these rules
I say too weak or too short, to make good that large and powerful
pre-eminence, which he assigns to these Angels? If so; may we not justly
suspecte his explication to be forced and unfitting? If otherwise; why does he
not endeavor to show, that his constructio^ of the text he handles, is
consonant to the circumstances, and to other scriptures? There be many words in
the scripture, which may be drawn (as the Canon-lawe says did. 37. relatum)
to that sense which every one for the nonce, will frame to himself: But it
should not be so: for we must not from without them, seek a foreigne and
strange sense; that so we may, as we can, confirm it, with the authority of
the text; but the meaning of the truth must be received, from the scriptures
themselves. It was the fault of the Manichees (as Augustine notes against
Fa^stus a Manichee (Tom. 6. lib. 32. cap. 19) that every ones mind was his
author, what to allow or dissalovv in every text: and so he was not for his
faith subject to the scripture; but made the script: subject to himself; and
that vvch he held, did not therefore please him, because he found it vvritte^ in
so high authority but therefore he thought it vvritte^, because it pleased him.
But the reader (says Hillary de Trinit: lib. 1.) is he who rather expects
the understanding of things, from the things themselves; then from himself
imposing it upon them; who takes the exposition from thence, rather then
brings it thither; and inforceth not upon the words that sense, which before
his reading he presumed. Which course, if the D. had observed, he would never
have given us this exposition of his text, that the angels of the Churches
there mentioned were Diocesan Bishops, such as ours are: or if he had; he would
have endeavored to justify it, from the text it self and some other scriptures
compared; and not have boasted (so confidently as he does) that the explication
of his text, is sufficiently proved; because he has showed (undeniably as he
supposes) the like Diocesan jurisdiction and superiority to have been, in the
Bishops of the primitive Churches, that lived in the succeeding ages.

But that we may yet see how impertinent and superfluous, not Sect. 6. ad page
58. 59.
only the first and last of his 5. points; but the first and last of his 4.
(brought for proof of his assumption) are; it shall not be amiss to take a
general view of them together; before we come to handle them in particular,
even for this purpose, to see their impertinencie and thus they lie,

If there were no other presbyters in the Church, but Ministers; 2 If the
Churches whereof the Bishops were called Angels, were Dioceses properly and not
parishes. 3. If the Angels or Bishops then were not parishionall but Diocesan
Bishops 4. And ^f the Bishops then, were superior to other Ministers in degree
etc. Then Diocesan Bishops are such as are here meant by angels.

But all these 4. points in the Antecedent are true. Ergo the consequent is
true also.

First, I pray the Doctor to tell us, whether the first and last of these 4.
points do add any force or weight at all to the consequent; for if there
were in the primitive Church no Presbyters but Ministers; and the Bishops then
were superior to other Ministers in degree; yet will it never a whit the more
thence follow, that these angels were Diocesan Bishops; might they not be
parish Bps. only, and have other Ministers or Presbyters under them, inferior
in degree unto them, which might make a Presbytery in a Parish? Do they which
make the Pastor a degree above the Doctor, thereby make the Pastor a Diocesan
Bishop? Secondly, as for the third point is it not a consequent of the second?
Does not the D. himself confess it? (page 3. of his sermon.) might it not
therefore well have bin spared? Thirdly, if the second or third of his four be
granted him, does not the grant thereof, putt the fourth out of question? It
appears therefore that the Refuter may still affirm, and Two of the D. 5.
points are idle, and the first 4. conclude another question, and whatever they
conclude, two of them at least, might be spared.
that with advantage, that the first and last of the D. five points are
superfluous, and idley produced.

But which is more, seeing (as has bin showed) all the four do conclude
another question, and not that assumption of his own syllogism, which he says
is proved by them; does he not offer his Refuter the greater wrong, in
charging him so often as he does, with aforced analysis, yea and that divised
^g^inst the light of his conscience, to put the parts of his sermon out of the
frame? For as for the reasons which he urges to justify his accusation, they
are too light and vain to prevayle with any stayed mind. 1. He asks the
Refuter how he could persuade himself, that his anal^ysis was answerable to his
genesis, when he saw too parts of the 5. could not be brought to his frame,
and the other three, not suitable to it. 2. he says, that his ow^e distribution
of his sermon, and the transitions which he uses do wholly dis^gree with his
analysis 3. he adds, that the analysis here propounded by himself, and his
defense of the several parts, do manifestly prove, that neither the first
was impertinent, nor the ^^st superflous, nor the other 3. concluding besides
the purpose. To begin with the last first, I say that it is already showed,
how his own analysis here propounded, does in many points disagree from the
project of his sermon; in as much as, he has changed, both the assertions,
which he first set down to be proved, and the doctrine which he labored to
confirm, whence it f^lloweth also, that his second Syllogism (framed to show
that his 5. point was not superfluous) is it self superfluous and idle. In like
manner has been manifested, and that from his own words, that his 4. points
do conclude another question, and not that assertion, which he says is proved
by them, and that whatsoever they conclude, two of them at least, might have
been spared; so that his last too which I The Doct. heapeth up untruth to
color his slander.
first answer, is but an heap of untruthes compiled to color his slander.
And the untruth of his second, is no less evident; for as the distribution of
his sermon, and the transitions used therein, do wholly dissagree, from his
whole analysis here propounded; (as is before observed) so they do justify his
refuter against himself, not only in the premises of his first syllogism;
(which agree with his two assertions, (sermon. page 9.) but also insecluding the
first and the last of his 5. points, from all interest in the proving of the
assumption of his first syllogism. For as the Refuter rightly observed
(answer. page 8.) from the D. own words (sermon. page 61.) that the proof of
his first assertion, is to be searched for, not in the last of the five, but in
the 4. former: so it is plain by the transitions, which he uses (sermon. page
17. 22. 52.) that the direct proof of the like function unto our Bishops,
either in those Angels or any other Angels or pastors of the primitive
Churches, hangs upon the three middle points, and not upon the first, which
concerns only the persons of whom the ancient presbyteries consisted. And
though now he make a fair show, of reducing the first of his 5. points, to
prove his first assertion anaskevasticos, by disproving the presbyteries which
we desire; yet even this very defe^se he makes for himself, clearly
justifies his Refuter that said, he could not see how it did directly prove
that assertion the proof whereof he searched after. For if in his first point,
concerning lay Elders, he indeavoureth (as himself acknowledges (both in the
54. page of thi^ and 61. page of the next chapter) first and principally to
disprove the presbyterian discipline, that so (by consequence), the disproof
thereof might be a proof for our Bishops: with what face, can he affirm, that
this first point, is a direct proof of the assumption of his first syllogism,
which says, that diocesan Bishops were in his text meant by Angels? 3.
Wherefore, for an answer to his question, (which he tendered for his first
reason) it may suffice to demand the like of him, that is, how he could
persuade himself, that his analysis here delivered, was answerable to the
genesis or first composition of his sermon; when he saw (or at least wise
might have seen) that 4. parts of his five, do not conclude his first
assertion, and that the fifth could not be brought to his frame, without a
change of the doctrine first propounded in his sermon? But (it seems) the D.
is so well conceited of his own Genesis, that he is persuaded, that if his
Refuter could have discerned it, he would have acknowledged every poin^e to be
v^ry pertinent and direct, and the whole so perfect, that nothing is
superfluous or wantinge. A strange fancy, when his own Analysis, makes one of
his four points, to be a superfluous excr^scens, and more then needs; which
before seemed to be of necessary use. For, in reducinge his 4. points to this
conclusion. That the Angels or Pastors of the primitive Churches were diocesan
Bishops, his third point, which himself (as we have heard) makes but a
conseque^t of the second, can yield him no better argum^, then this: Those
ancient Pastors or Bishops were Diocesan Bishops. Therefore, they were Diocesan
Bishops. Wherefore when he has advisedly, (upon his second thoughts) compared
his own Analysis with his Genesis, I nothing doubt, but (wink he never so
hard) he will The D. him felt makes a forced analysis against conscience.
see, though I fear, he will be loath to confess: that it is his own self,
that deserves, much more then his Refuter to bear this imputation, of a
forced analysis, devised against the light of his own conscicence.

Notwithstanding, I deny not, but that his 5. points are all of them some way
pertinent to the purpose, though none of Sect. 7.
them directly conclude his first assertion, which he says is proved by 4. of
them. For his own words do show, that when he first set down those five
points, (in the proof whereof the body of his sermon stands) he minded not
so much the explication of his text, as the confutation of the Elder and later
sort of disciplinarians (as he calls them) whose odious opinions, he had
interlaced (sermon. page 6. and. 45.) in the proposing of those questions, which
served to clear his first assertion. I will prove (says be page 6.) 1.
Against both sorts, that there were no lay-governi^g Elders in the primitive
Church. 2. And then more particularly against the former, that in the first
200. years, the visible Churches were dioceses etc. 3. And cons^quently that
the A^gels of the Churches were not p^^ishonall, but diocesan Bishops. 4. And
against the later, That the Bishops being advanced to an higher degree of
Ministry, were set above other presbyters, not only in priority of order,
but also in major^^y of rule. To the same purpose, he speaks here in his
defense (page 54.) affirming as before, that he indeavoureth the proof ^f those
points against the new and ^lder disc pl^arians. And though he pretend to
draw all these particulars ^o one conclusion, which he says, is the
expl^cation ^f his text: yet this appea e^h to be a m^ere The Doct. prete^deth
without truth, and shakes hands with his text.
pretense void of truth; seeing the explication of his text, lies (not in this
conclusion here set down, scz. that the Angels or Pastors of the primitive
Church were di^cesan Bishops etc. but) in this ass^rtion propounded (sermon. page
2.) scz. that by the Angels mentioned in his text we are to understand such
Bishops, for the substance of their call^ge, as our reverend Fathers are It is
apparent therefore, that in the handling of these 4. points, he shakes hands
with his text, and lays by, both it, and the explication thereof: and (as if
he were now, not in the pulpit to explicate a text of scripture, but in the
schools to dispute, or rather declaime pro forma) he wholly minds the
justifying of our hierarchy; and the confuting of their opinions, which favor
the presbytery. Neither can any man otherwise judge, that observes his words
before set down, and compares together, both his three first points with
those. 3. opinions which he texeth page 4. and the fourth, with that which he
reprehendeth pa. 6. In which respect also, it shall be no great error to think,
that his 5. point is, (in his principal intendment) rather opposed against
their opinion, which hold that episcopal superiority: which he pleads, to
be unlawful, and (as he says page 5.) Antichristian; then proposed for the
proof of his 2. assertion, as he now pretends page 54. and 58. Add hereunto
his own words in the next chapter, (page 60. and 61.) where he affirms, the
question discussed in his sermon, to be two fold. The 1, De facto whether the
primitive churches were governed by D: Bishops, as they say, or by presbytertes
of such Elders as we speak of. The second, de i^^re, whether the Church may
lawfully be governed by Bishops as they hold; or must be governed by
Presbyteries, as we affirm. The first question, he says his handled in the
former part of his sermon; to which he reduces his 4. first points. And the
second in the later, which is the last of his five. And thus in deed, I grant,
that every of his 5. points may be pertinent to his purpose: yet still I
affirm, that if they be referred to the proof of his two assertions, which he
ought by his promise (sermon. page 2.) to prove; the first and last might well
have been spared; and the other three (not to repeat again, how one of them at
the least, is needless) do neither directly, nor necessarily conclude that
first assertion, which he says is proved by them. Wherefore, had he meant to
frame his analysis, to such a distribution, as best agrees with his Genesis;
we should never have heard: from him, (that which so often he repeateth in this
defense, to wit) that his five points enumerated page 6. 7. are the direct
proofs of his 2. assertions, proposed page 2: he would rather have divided
that part of his preface, which himself (sect. 1. of this chapter) calls the
proposition, into these two members. 1. a proposition of certain questions to
be debated for the explication of his text, (page 2. 3. and 5.) which he
promises to clear, but does not. 2. a digression from his text, wherein he
proposeh, 1. the opinions of the disciplinarians, whom he intends to confute
(page 4. 5. 6.) and 2. those 5. points which he opposes to their opinions
(page 6. and 7.) and pomiseth in his sermon to prove against them. This had
been both true and plain dealing, but he was not willing, the world should
see, that his text affoardeth him so little help as it does, to conclude the
doctrine, which he pretends to arise from the explication thereof. And
therefore, how often so ever his refuter calls upon him to make good his
promise, by proving, that we are by the angels in his text, to understand such
Bishops for the substance of their calling, as ours are: yet by no means will
he once hear on that side, and be recalled to this question; but sh^fteth it
off by this calumniation, that his Refuter by a forced analysis (for I let
pass his odious terms) withdraws him from the principal queston. Wherefore
to cut off all such quarrels, and to damme up some other lurking holes,
whereinto he flies, as occasion serves; before we proceed to the examination
of any of the large discourses, made by him, in defece of his 5. conclusions:
It shall be good to take a better view of the state of the question debated in
his s^rmon; that the reader may thoroughly see what it is both that the Refuter
denies; and the Doctor is to prove, first by the explication of his text; and
after that by such arguments as he takes most pregnant for his purpose.

Chap: 4. Concerning the state of the question, handled by the Doctor in his
third chapt. sect. 1. which is altogether changed by him.
The question discussed in the sermon, (as the Doctor tells us Sect. 1. ad
Cap. 1. sect 1. page 60. 61.
Cap. 3. sect. 1. page 60.) is twofold, The first de facto whether the
primitive Churches were governed by Diocesan Bishops, as we s^y, (says he) or
by the Presbyteries of such elders as they speak of. The second de ^ure,
whether the Church may lawfully be governed by Diocesan Bps, as we hold, or
must needs be governed by their presbyteries as they affirm? The first is
handled in the former part of the sermon; (to which he refers the first 4.
points) the second ^n the later, whereto the 5. or last appert yneth. Here the
reader must remember (as is already observed in the former chap.) that the
principal question in the entrance of his sermon, page 2. propounded to be
discussed is wholly overpasse^, the question I mean, de vero and genuino
textus sensu, whether by the angels there mentioned we are to understand such
Bishops for the substance of ^^eir c^lling, as ours are. And so let us see how
well he has reduced the whole controversy (his text set aside) to these two
questions, because he deals against two sorts of Disciplinarians, who as he
pretends differ greatly in their opinions the one from the other. His first
question he thus explaineth. Whither the prim^tive Churches were governed by
Diocesan Bishops, such (for the substance of their calling) as ours are; or by
such Presbyteries as they stand for, viz. either parishionall, consisting of
the Parish-Bishop, and a compani^ of lay or only governing elders: or
Presbyters in cities, consisting of the President, and other Presbyters,
Whereof some are Ministers, but the greater some, lay or only governing
elders. The question being thus laid down, because the exposition stands
generally between Presbyters and Diocesan Bishops; a man would think that all
which stand for the one, do generally and alike reject the other. Whereas
notwithstanding, the D. and other of his mind, do acknowledge that
presbyteries had place and use in the government of the ancient Churches: and he
would persuade his readers, that the more learned sort of disciplinarians do
acknowledge the primitive Bishops to be diocesan. But if the opposition be (not
simply between presbyteries and Bishops, but) only between such and such; yet
a man would judge that both sides hold, both diocesan Bishops, and
presbyteries, though they disagree in the nature of their functions; whereas it
is apparent, that he affirms, diocesan Bishops to be absolutely disclamed of
the later sort of presbyterians.

Again, in the difference which he puts between the elder and the younger
sort of Disciplinarians; who would not conceit that the elder sort, deny unto
country parishes as well any governing Elders, as a parish Bishop; and have no
entire presbyteries but in Cities only: Whereas it is well known, that all
their presbyteries are not limited to Cities, and that Elders are allowed to
country-parishes, even by them that contrive, the Churches of City and Country
into one Eldershipp; yet so as the Elders in the Country have not full power of
jurisdiction. Moreover, in the 2. question as he has proposed it, who would
not think, both that all which plead for presbyteries (whether several in
every parish, or one in diverse) do hold the government which they embrace,
to be a like necessary; and that such as stand with the D. for diocesan
Bishops, do with one consent, strive only for the lawfullnes of their places,
and not for the necessity or perpetuity of their functions? Yet he indeavoureth
to persuade his reader (lib. 4. page 161.) that the reteyning of diocesan
Bishops (such as he stands for) is no^ condemned, by any moderate or
judicious divine, but only by the late Presbyterians: whereas it is too
evident, (for his denial to evince the contrary) that many at this day, do
stand forth eagerly for the necessity and perpetuity of the episcopal
function now in question. Unto these erroneous conceits, there had been no door
opened, had the Doctor been pleased to have framed his questions, in such
terms as most fitly answer, either to the first project of his sermon, or to
the 2. assertions before delivered in his Defense. Agreeable to his first
project, are these questions. 1. Touching the explication of his text, whether
the Bishops meant there by angels, were such Bishops for the substance of their
calling as ours are? 2. and touching the doctrine raised out of his text,
whether the calling of such Bishops as ours are, be of divine institution. If
he had rather stick close to the words of his two Questions before mentioned,
the first De facto is whether the angels etc. and the second, De iure, whether
the calling etc. as we heard even now.

Wherefore the reader may see, that as before he changed his assertions; Sect.
2.
so now he changes his questio^^; neither is it hard to discern, what might
move him thereunto. For in the first, his own The Doct. changes his questions
as well as his assertions.
words discover his intent or purpose, when he entreats his Ref: (p. 60.) to
take notice, what is the question betwixt them, that so he may discern his
discourse concerning ^lders to be pertinent to the matter in quaestion.
Wherefore having set down the first question in those two members before
expressed, (whether the primitive Churches were governed by Diocesan Bishops as
we sat, or by Presbyteries of such elders as they speake^f?) he takes it for
granted, (p. 61.) and on both sides agreed on, that the Churches were governed
either by the one or the other, and so infers that the disproofe of their
Presbyteries is a direct proof of his Bishops. A direct proof? so he says, but
what Logician of any judgment will herein subscribe to his affirmation? The
question has two members, the Doctor holds the affirmative in the former,
and the negative in the later; to prove the one, and disprove the other, is The
D. disputes not directly.
a double labor. Wherefore since the Doctor susteyning the person of the
opponent, in this disputation, begins with the first member of the question,
and undertakes to prove this conclusion, viz. The the primitive Churches were
governed by diocesan Bishops, such as ours are; who would not now in an orderly
and direct course of disputation) expect at his hands some such Medius
terminus, as shows positively, etherwhat agrees to the function of a
diocesan Bishop; or what manner of government was anciently practiced, or such
like? And if he forbear to argue to this purpose, will not men of judgment be
ready to think, that either he has little to alledg this way, or to so little
purpose, that he distrusteth the issue of his trial?

But if he shall fly from the first member of his question, which he made
special choice of, and that with resolution to confirm it by unanswerable
evidence, as his words every where (and namely p. 29. 35.) put his reader in
hope: and if in stead of confirming this point, he shall bend the force of his
disputation against the 2. member of his question, to confute the reasons
produced by the adverse part for the Presbytery; who can excuse his
inco^stancie? yea, who (that loves him well) can judge otherwise, then that it
had been much better for his credit, to have openly professed that he would
first deal with the later member, and then come to the former? or rather that
he would first sustain the person of a respondent, and throw the burden of
proving upon his opposites, as afterward he does, and plainly professes it
in the next sect. page 62.

But since he undertaketh the person of an opponent at the first entrance into
this conflict, let us see how artificially he reasons from the one member of
his question to the other: his disiunctive argumentation (page 62.) stands
thus,

Either the primitive Church was governed by Diocesan Bishops, or by such
Presbyteries as they stand for: But not by such Presbyteies as they stand for:
Therefore by Diocesan Bishops.

The proposition (says he) is employed in the very question between us: And the
disjunction is therein by both parties presupposed as necessary. The
assumption is that first point of the five, which new we have in hand. But
first I deny that his assumption is the first of his 5. points; for when he
says, The primitive Church was not governed by such Presbyteries as they stand
for; does he not therein oppose himself equally against both sorts of
disciplinarians^ as well those that require a Presbytery, to assist their
Parish-Bishop, in every several congregation; as those which establish a
presbytery in every City, for the government of many parishes under one
president, having pre-eminence of order above the rest of the presbyters? For
so he explaneth the later member, of his disjunctive question page 60. It is
therefore clear, that his assumption here, is no otherwise the first, then it
is, the second, third, or fourth point of his five. For how proves he, that
his assumption is the first? Forsooth, he proves it by the first (as he
shows page. 62.) Ergo it is the first, and thus he proves it. They are not
able to prove, that ever there were any presbyters, which were not Ministers:
Therefore the primitive Churches were not governed by such presbyteries as they
stand for. And why may he not reason from the 2. 3. or 4. point to the like
purpose; They are not able to prove, that any of the visi^le Churches using
government were parishes; or that any parishes had their Bishop, to govern them
with the assistance of his presbytery; or that the presbyters were in power of
order and jurisdiction equal to their president, and inferior to him only in
order etc. Therefore the primitive Churches were not governed by such
presbyteries, as they stand for. But this were to overthrow his dichotomies
before set down page 54. and repeated lib. 2. pa. 41. specially that first
distribution of his proofs, which refers the first point to a disproving of
their presbyteries anaskevasticos, and the rest to the approving of our Bishops
kataskevasticos, wherefore, I will forbear, to contend any longer against his
assumption, and weigh rather what he says in defense of his proposition.

The disjunction implied in the proposition, he affirms to be necessary Sect.
3.
though not absolutely, yet ex hypothesi, and so presupposed on both sides. The
D craveth the question, and reasons from one member of it to another.
But I must give him to wit, that if it were as necessary, as he supposes;
yet this kind of reasoninge is on both sides esteemed no better, then a pretty
craving of the question, neither can it be otherwise when he reasons from one
member of the question to the other. Else, why may he not disprove their
presbyteries, by undertaking the proof of our Bishops government, with the
change of the assumption and conclusion on this manner?

If the primitive Churches were governed by diocesan Bishops, then not by such
presbyteries, as they stand for. But they were governed by diocesan Bishops.
Ergo, not by such presbyteries as they stand for.

The proposition of this argument is absolutely necessary; for such presbyters,
and such diocesan Bishops as ours are; cannot stand together. And if the
Assumption be denied, he is already provided of a disiunctive argumentation
sufficient to confirm it. So that he may dance (as in deed he does lib. 4.
cap. 1. page 35.) the round The Doct. daunceth the round.
between these two, and need not seek any new prosyllo^isme to conclude that
which is to be proved. But 2. what means the D. to take that for granted
which his refuter flatly denies? Does he not plainly tell him, (answer. page
10.) that though at were so (as he supposes) that there were no other Elders
in the primitive Church, b^t Ministers of the word; yet that it would not
foll^w, that the Bishops were Di^osan, because a Presbytery of Ministers (such
as the D. himself co^fsseth The D. takes for granted, that which is flatly
denied.
were then in use) might be joined with the Bishop in the government of the
Church, and that the whole congregation might have as great an hand in the
government as he (for so some of our opposites do grant it had some times) and
therefore the sole government of Diocesan Bishops, may well f^ll, though there
were no sole governing elders to over turn them. It is therefore plain, that
the Refuter disclaymeth this d^siunctive proposition, as not necessarily true;
and that the Doctor wittingly (how wittily soever) concealeth from his reader
both that division, which is among the favorites of the Hyerarchie (some
acknowledging the state of the Church in the Apostles times, for the outward
form and government thereof to be popular (as Archbishop Whitgift in defense
of his answer. page 180-182.) which the Doctor esteems (page 41.) a
Brownist^call and Anabaptisticall dotage) and The D. co^trad^cteth his own
doctrine.
that contradiction which is found in his own writing, since he now puts the
reins of Church Government into the hands of the Bishop; to rule as ours do,
without the advice of the presbyters; wherea^ he formerly acknowledged (s^rm.
page 1^. that in the primitive Church the Bishop used the advice of certain
^ra^e Ministers, and in Church caus^s did nothing almost without them. A thing
now grown altogether out of use; and in the opinion of ^ome, (whose judgeme^t
ought to sway much with the Doctor) that k^n^e of government, which the
aunci^nt Presbyteries and their Bishops exer^ised, is now transferred to the
M^gistrate, to whom it is due, and to such as by him are appointed: s^e D.
Whitgifts defense, page 747). Howsoever therefore it may be granted, that in
the question delivered by the Doctor, the disiunct on which his proposit: on
expresses, is impli^d; yet it follows not, (^ay it is an apparent untruth to
affirm) h^t the dis^unction is on both sides presupposed necessary; which the
Doctor must confes^e unless (to use his own words) he will confess himself
to be ignorant in logic: seeing his disjunction (and question) does not
sufficiently enumerate their opinions which have debated this question in
general: viz. what the form of government was, which was first practiced in
the most ancient and Apostolik Churches. So that if I would tread in the D.
stepps. I might justly repay him with some such marginall notes as (page 47. and
53.) without cause, he has set down to disgrace his Refuter: to wit, that
the D. and his Consorts at this Day, do plead against the discipline, which
Archbishop Whitgift and other learned Protestants (yea the most ancient
friends of the Hierarchy) acknowledged to be practiced in the apostolic
Churches; and that the Doctor mistaking the question, and craftily concealing
the division, that is among them of his own side; is bold to affirm that to
be granted, which he knows to be denied.

3. I know that (for his defense) he says, that his Refuter acknowledges the
question to be such as he proposes; but he does, both the Refuter and the
reader, the more wrong in so saying. In deed when the Refuter intended to
show, that our diocesan Bishops may be proved absolute popelings, by the same
reason that the D. urges to cast that name on the parish Bishops, for which,
they whom the D. calls a new sect, do (as he says) stryve; he then
affirmed that the question betwixt the Doctor and them, (not between the D. and
us, for those words the D. has evilly put in, to make his own cause good) was
this, whether the Churches should be governed by Pastors, The Doct. changes
the Refut^ words.
and Elders, or by diocesan Bishops? But how does it follow that he
acknowledges the first of his two questions before mentioned, to be rightly
and fully delivered, in respect of the parts of the disjunction? He that has
but half an eye, may see the inconsequence of his reasoning, specially seeing
the question expressed by the refuter; has more reference to the second
quaestion de iure, then to the first de facto. Moreover has the Doctor
forgotten, that at his first meeting with this question, he enterteyned it so
well, that (page 41.) The D. co^tradicteth himself.
he entreated the reader to store it up for future use? Shall I therefore now
infer, that he contradicts himself, in saying that his assertion is
falsified in the later part of the question?

4. But what need so many words to thewe the weakness of the Doctors disiunctive
argumentation, or to prove that there is not any presupposed truth in his
disiunctive proposition? I hope he will grant (for he is a Doctor, and cannot
(lightly) so far forget his logic rules, but he must know) that the
question, which he debateth in the first part of his sermon, must hold
proportion with that assertion, which is to be concluded from the 4. first
points of his five; seeing the first part of his sermon is comprehended in them.
Now the assertion, which is to be proved by these 4. points, is either this
which his disiunctive argument concludes, viz. that the primitive Churches
were governed by Diocesan Bishops; or rather, that which before he set down
(page 58.) for the assumption of his first syllogism, viz. that Diocesan
Bishops are such as are here meant by angels.

But which soever of these two, he chooses, certain it is, his question Sect.
4.
will not yield him any such disiunctive proposition, as he now draws from
this which he tendreth. For his quaestion must be a single one, and not
compounded of two members, viz either this, whether the primitive Church was
governed by Diocesan Bishops or no? or rather this, whether Diocesan Bishops,
be understood by the angels or no? And this last comes somewhat near the
mark, though it miss of the right tenor of words which it ought to have
kept. viz. whether Bishops meant by angels in his text, were such Bishops for
the substance of their calling, as are our Bishops at this day?

And thus we may see what moved the Doctor to change his first question, and
how little he gains thereby; seeing he cannot compass his desire of dravving
the first point of his five, to conclude that assertion, to which he referred
the first part of his sermon. Wherefore, seeing his disiunctive argumentation
will not serve his turn; and he will yet once again, (for it seems he is
vnwea^iable) attempt the effecting of his purpose; let me advise him to peruse
his own advise given to his Refuter, (lib. 2. 44.) namely, to set down his
Enthymem, and to supply thereto, that proposition, which is implied in the
consequence, so to make up a perfect syllogism His Enthymem is this; In the
primitive Church, there were no other presbyters but Ministers: Therefore the
primitive Church was governed by di^cesan Bishops, such as ours are. Here now
the Doctor is wise enough to perceive, that the proposition implied in the
consequence of his Enthimem, (and therefore needful to be supplied) is this,
viz. whatsoever church has in it none other Presbyters but Ministers; the same
is governed by such Diocesan Bishops as ours are: but his wisdom foresaw, that
if he brought this proposition into the sun, to be looked on, his Refuter
(yea I may say the simplest of his readers) would easily have discerned that it
needs no less proof, then the conclusion it self, or the assumption; which
he would so feign reduce to his purpose. Yea as the falseshood of it was
discovered, aforehand by the Refuter and that upon good and sufficient reason,
which the Doctor baulked, as he passed by: so it may evidently be convinced
from his own words as well in his sermon, (page 69. 70. as in this defense
(lib. 4. page 36.) where he confesses, that (...) the apostles days, all the
Churches, which they planted, (that at Jerusalem only excepted) wanted
Bishops, and yet had each of them a company of Presbyters, which as Pastors,
fedd them in common, and labored the conversion of others. Only when they
were to leave the Churches altogether by death or final departure into other
places etc. then they ordained them Bishops, and not before; and this, says
he, is that which Ierom (cap. 1. ad Tiium) affirms, that the Churches at the
first, before Bishops were appointed over them; were governed by the common
counsel of Presbyters. Wherefore the enjoying of a Presbytery consisting of
Ministers only, does not necessarily argue, that the Church, which has such a
Presbytery, is governed by a Diocesan Bishop, as the Doctor without truth or
reason takes it for granted, even at their hands, who (with good reason)
flatly denied it. Wherefore I hope, he will at length, acknowledge his passage,
concerning governing elders, to be altogether impertinent; for (to pay him with
his own coin page 60.) common sense requires, that what he sees
impertinent, he should acknowledge so to be; and charity would (though
self-love would not) that if he discerned not the untruth, and inconsequence
of his reasoning; he should rather have suspected his own analysis to be
forced, then have blamed his Refuter, for his own want of judgment.

Wherefore, not following him any longer in his outwandrings; it is high time
that we come to examine his other question de iure, Section. 5.
which stands on two feet (as the former) on this manner: whether the Church
may lawfully be governed by Bishops, as he holds; or must be governed by
their Presbyteries, as they affirm. The deceites couched in this question (as
it is proposed) are in part touched before (sect. 1.) and shall more fully be
deciphered hereafter: we are now to see how well it suteth with the later part
of his sermon, and the defense thereof) where he says (page 60.) it is
handled. By the later part of his sermon he means the last of his 5. points,
which affirms the function of Bishops (he means such as ours are) to be of
apostolical and divine institution. In the handling whereof, there is nothing,
to be found against the presbyteria^ government, save one only naked
syllogism (sermon, page 60.) which concludes the government of the Churches by
a paritie of ministers and assistance of lay Elders in every parish, not to be
of apostolical institution; because it was no where in use, in the first 300.
years after the Apostles. And now in his defense (lib. 4. cap. 1. page 35.) he
gives no other proof to justify the assumption which the Refuter denied, but
this; that it is proved in the former syllog^sme, set to justify the government
by Diocesan Bishops. For if, says he, the government by Di^cesan Bishops, was
generally and perpetually received in those 300 years; it is manifest, that
this government, which they speak of, was not in use. Here therefore he (like
as he did before) takes one part of The D. again takes one part of the
question to prove the other.
the question to prove the other. Shall I again answer him in his own
words? This does not so much bewray his ignorance in the laws of disputation,
as the badnes of his cause. Verily he had little reason to tell us, that he has
handled this question in the later part of his sermon, (viz. whether the Church
must be governed by these Presbyteries) unless he had more orderly disputed
against the assertion of his Opposite. Yea if he had as largely reasoned
against their Presbyteries, as he has for Diocesan Bps, yet the question is
not directly fitted to the points which he concludes; since he insisteth
wholly upon the trial of this issue, whether of those two governments, which
he or his opposites do commend, be of apostolical and divine institution. And
though he join together apostolical and divine, both in the first
propounding, and also in the winding up of this point: (sermon. page 7. and 54.)
yet when he addresseth him self to the confirmation thereof (page 55.) he
chiefly aims at this, to prove the function of Bishops to be of divine
institution; and takes apostol call i^stitution for his Medius terminus, to
conclude by consequence, that it is a divine ordinance. Wherefore it is
evident, that the maine argument of his whole sermon, is the proof of this
assertition, that the function of Bishops, (such as ours are for the substance
of the^^ calling) is a divine ordinance; for this he pretends to draw from
his text, in as much as, the name of Stars and Angels, is there given to such
Bishops. And to this, he reduces all the arguments laid down by him in the
handlinge of his fifth position, which he calls the later part of his sermon;
and from this he infers those three uses which he would have us all to make
conscience of, viz. To acknowledge their function to be the ordinance of God,
and in that regard, both to reverence their persons; and to obey their
authority, as we are exhorted. Phil. 2. 29. Heb. 13. 17. Notwithstanding for
the clearinge of the state of the question, two things are to be considered, to
wit, first what he includes in, or excludes from, the substance of their
calling. Secondly, in what sense, their function is to be esteemed, a divine
ordinance.

The substance of their calling the Doctor explaineth (sermon. Sect. 6.
page. 52. 53.) where (ha^ing said, that the angels or Bishops of the primitive
Church, were for the substance of their calling, such as ours are) he adds,
that is to say, Dioc^san and Provincial Bishops, being superior in degree to
other Ministers, and having a singularity of prehemmence for term of life,
and a peerless power both of ordination and jurisdiction. Nevertheless the
reader must not imagine, that he speaks of Provincial or Metropolitan
Bishops, when he affirms the episcopal function to be of divine institution;
^or in his defense, he usually inserteth the word Diocesan (as lib. 1. page 58.
and lib. 4. page 139.) to teach us that the Bishops, whose function he
mainteyneth to be of apostolical institution, are no other then Diocesan
Bishops. As for Metropolitans, though he think (lib. 2. cap. 6. page 114.)
that their superiority was intended by the Apostles, when they appointed
Bishops, over mother Cities: yet (as well as he loves them) he dares not
affirm that any were ordained by the Apostles, to the office or pr^h minence
of Metropolitan Bishops. For every Metropolitan, in his opinion, (lib. 3. cap.
1. page 20. 21.) was The function of Archbps. is less beholding to the D. the^
the function of Diocesan Bishops.
originally the Bishop of his peculiar Diocese; and not actually a
Metropolitan, until diverse Churches in the same Province, being constituted,
there was a consociation among themselves, and a subordination of them to him,
as their primate. So that the function of Metropolitans or Archbishops, is
less beholdinge to Master Doctor, then the calling of Diocesan Bishops. Of
the former he speaks doubtfully (lib. 4. cap. 5. p. 130.) Their superiority
arose, as Beza supposes, from the very light of nature, directinge, and force
of necessity urging men to that course: but, as I rather think, from the
institution of the Apostles. Of the other he affirms very peremptorily (lib.
4. page 139. 143.) that the calling of diocesan Bishops is of divine
institution. The substance then of that episcopal function, which he holds
to be a divine ordinance, the D. has placed in these particulars. 1. That they
be diocesan Bishops, or overseers of a diocese. 2. That they be superior in
degree to other Ministers. 3. That they have a singularity of pre-eminence,
duringe life, and 4. a peerless power both of ordination and of jurisdiction
in their places. Lo here his enumeration; and withal, how he omitteth
therein, (and that of purpose as it seems) four other more substantial, The
D. omitteth 4. substantial and less questionable points of the Bps. function,
but ye^ wisely.
and less questionable points of their function, who first had the name of
Bishops appropriated to the^ in the ance^t Churches to wit, that they were 1.
Pastors of their Churches bound by their office, to dispense the word and
Sacraments to their people; and therefore 2. tied to make their positive
residencie, in that one City or Church, whereof they had the Charge, 3.
assisted also every of them with his presbytery or Senate of Elders, without
whose advyce and consent in Church Matters, nothing of weight was done, and 4.
not subordinated to the jurisdictio^ or censure of any one Bishop superior
unto him. But of these points more he reafter, (lib. 3. and 4.) I now purpose
not to insist on this defect, in his laying down of the substanciall parts of
the episcopal function; neither will I contend about the continuance of their
Presidencie, or singular pre-eminence, whether it be essential or accidental
to enjoy it constantly for term of life? nor yet magnify the D. wisdom in his
cunning concealing of them, as knowing how it wipeth his Diocesans over the
shinnes. In this rather I disire to give or receive satissaction, whether that
singularity of pre-eminence and peereless^ power, which he ascribes unto
Bishop; be not a sole superiority, or sole power of rule, as the Refuter
affirms? And this I the rather desire, because the Doctor is so highly
offended with the word, sole, that as often as he finds it used by his Refuter
in this question, he rewards him, with these or the like counterbuffs at
every turn. Whence comes this sole I pray you, that has so often been foysted
in? I fear greatly from The Doct. standereth shamelessly.
an evil conscience resolved to op^ugn and d face the truth (lib. 3. page 118.)
And in the next page, God amend that soul, that so often foysteth in that
sole, besides my meaning and my words And again, page 126, O defiled
conscience, which cease not to ascribe such odious and absurd asser^ions to
me. Thus and thus is M. Doctor pleased to declaime.

Why? but how should the word sole, or the name of sovereignty, or Sect. 7.
sole. rule ^e so odious and offensive to the Doctors ears; when
(notwithstanding all this face, the thing is so pleasing to him, that he
pleads for it tooth and nail? To ask as he does (lib. 3. page 20. and 68,
and 69.) where do I say in all the sermon, that Bishops had, or must have sole
power or jurisdiction? and whether Bishops cannot be superior to Presbyters in
the power of ordination or iuri^aiction, unless they have all the sole p^w^r?
Thus to ask I say, helps little, either to fr^e him from giving way to those
assertions, which he seems to abhor; or to make his Refuter guilty of so
evil and defiled a conscience, as he accuses him of; nay, if he discharge a
good conscience, he must confess, either that his words do not faithfully
express his meaning; or that he meant to give unto Bishops, that sol power of
rule, which his Refuter gathers from his words. For, what difference is
there, betwixt that singularity of pre-eminence (which he makes the first
branch of the Bishops superiority. (sermon. page 32.) and that sole superiority,
or sole power of rule, which the Refuter speaks of? Does he not teach us out
of Cyprian and Herom (pa. 33. 34) that the government, and the whole care of
the Church, apperteineth to the Bishop, which is one only? And that his
singular pre-eminence is a peerless power, and eminent above all; yea such as
admits no partner, page 36. and 46? And does he not afterward (page 45. 46.
47.) undertake to demonstrate, that the Bishop governs in foro externo, not
only the people; but the pr^sbyters also of an whole diocese, as having
authority to guide and direct them, as their ruler; and to censure and correct
them as their Judge? Does he not, (sermon. page 30. as is already showed, in the
former chapter, sect. 10.) out of Ignatius, make 3. degrees of Ministers,
Deacons, Priests and Bishops under Christ; the De^cons subject to the
Presbyters, the Presbyters to the Bishops, and the Bishops to Christ? And
asks he not (page 46.) what a Bishop else is, but such a one as holds and
menageth the whole power and authority above all? yea, and does he not (page
30. 31.) out of the council of Sardis and out of Optatus and H^er^m, make those
3. degrees answerable, to the high Priests and Levites, placing the Deacons and
Presbyters, in the room of the Priests and Levites, and the Bishops in the
room of Aaron the High-Preist, the very chief and Prince of all? With what
face then can he deny unto the Bishop in his diocese a sole superiority, or
solepower of rule? or say, that the word sole is foisted in besides his
meaning? Let him weigh the force of this argument, and give us a direct answer
to it, the next time he writes.

Whosoever ascribes to every Bishop in his Diocese, a singular pre-eminence
(not of order only but) of power and rule, eminent above all, and admitting no
partner, to govern in fore externo, the Presbyters as well as the people, as
their Ruler and Judge, holding and menaging the whole power and authority
above all, all subject to him, and he subject to Christ, he gives to every B:
in his Diocese, a sole superiority or sovereignty and sole power of rule.

But the Dostor prescribes ^o every Bishop in his Diocese a singular
pre-eminence (not of order only but) of power and rule, eminent above all etc.

Therefore he gives to every Bishop in his Diocese, a sole superiority or
sovereigntie, and so power of rule.

The assumption is gathered from his own words as is before showed. If he
deny the proposition, shall he not bewray in himself that evil conscience,
(which he charge his Refuter with) which is resolved to oppugn and deface
the truth? Can he be ignorant, that a singular pre-eminence of power and rule,
eminent above all, and admitting no partner put into the hands of any one to
govern all the rest, as their ruler and Judge, and he subject to to none but to
Christ, is, not only a sole superiority, but a very sovereignty, or sole and
supreme power and rule? Wherefore, how soever every superiority in power, or
majority of rule; be not a sole or s^preme power or superiority etc: Yet the
Refuter has rightly affirmed, and the Doctor has with check of conscience (I
fear) denied the power of rule which he ascribes to Bishops, to be a sole
power.

And touching our own Bishops, though he be loath to acknowledge Sect. 8.
in plain terms, that they are sole ruling Bishops; yet he affirms that
which will easily evince it to be a truth. For, to let pass what he says
(sermon. page 40.) concerning ordination, that the power thereof is ascribed and
appropriated to the Bishop alone; and that however by the council of Carthage,
the Pre^byters were to impose hands with the Bishop, yet it was then (as now
with us) not for necessity, but for greater solemnly etc. To let this pass I
say) he confesses (lib. 1. cap. 8. page 192.) that the advice and ^ssistance
of presbyters, which the ancient Bishops used, grew long since out of use;
because it seemed needless, both to the presbyters, desyring their ease, and
to the Bishops, desyring to rule alone. And to take a way all show of
difference between those ancients and our Bishops, who have not the like
assistance of their presbyters that they had in former ages, he tells us
(lib. 3. cap. 5. page 111.) That when Bishops used the advice of their
presbyters, the sway of their authority was nothing less, then when they us^d
it not; for the assistance of the presbyters was to help and adv^se, but never
to overruled the Bishop; like as the authority of a Prince, who uses the
advice of his Council, is nothing the less for it; but the more advised. The
truth of this later speech, is not here to be examined; nor yet how well the
former does accord with the later: there will come a fitter time for it
hereafter, for the present purpose it shall suffice to observe. 1. That if a
desire in Bishops to rule alone, was one cause why the Assistance, which
formerly they had of their Presbyters grew out of use; it may well be thought
that ours do now rule alone, seeing they have no such assistance as they had.
2. Neither can it be otherwise if that assistance, which once they had, was not
to restreyne them of their wills, but only to yield them that help, that
great Princes and free Monarchs have of their grave Counselors, by whom they
are advised in their affairs of state. Here therefore I crave his answer to
this argument;

Whosoever in their government, and proceeding to give sentence in any cause,
that is to be judged by them, have no assistance of any to restreyne them, from
sw^^ing the matter as pleases them: they have a sole power of rule, or do rule
by their sole authority

But our English Pre^^tes i^ their Episcop^ll government, and in proceeding to
give sentence in any cause, that is to be judged by them; have no assistance of
any to restreyne them from swaying the matter as ple^seth them. Let not the D.
be ashamed to speak plainly, what he closely insinuat^th.


Therefore, they have a sole power of rule, or do rule by their sole
authority. The proposition I suppose to be so clear, that the Doct. will not
deny it. The Assumption is already acknowledged for true by himself; I hope
therefore in his next defense, he will embrace the conclusion, and esteem it no
longer an odious and absurd asserti on. For why should he be ashamed to speak
that plainly, which he does closely insinuate? the rather for that one of his
fellow Doct. (D. Dove I mean in his defense of Church Government page 19.)
coming to speak of a Diocesan D. Bishop; ruling by his sole power, says that
this is the chief matter now in question, and further (page 20.) that he may
speak something for the justification of the Bishops ruling by their sole
authority, affirms that Timothy and Titus were such Bishops. Now no doubt
the Doctor will expect an answer to that which was overpassed in the former
chapter as impertinent to the point then in hand, viz. That all power is not
given to the Bishop alone; because that in the government of the Church, others
are joined with him, some under him, and some above him etc. lib. 1. cap. 2.
page 42. and he shall here according to promise have it. And that he may see
the force of his reasoning, I wish him to remember that Christ says of
himself, (Math. 28. 18.) all power is given to mean heaven and earth, and to
bethink himself, what answer he would give to one that should thus argue,

In the government of the world, there are others joined with Christ, the
Father is above him, 1. Cor. 15. 27, 28. and under him are both his Apostles
and their successors Mat. 28, 19, 20. and also all Christian Princes.

Ergo, all power is not given to Christ alone; neither is his government a
Monarchy, or s^le power of rule.

If this conclusion does not necessarily follow upon the Antecedent; then the
Doctor (if he shut not his right eye) may see the loosenes of his own
argument. Shall I need to ask him, whether King James does not therefore
govern the Realms as a Monarch by his sole authority, because in the
government thereof, he has many subordinate helps under him? Or whether the
Duke of Saxony and such like free Princes, do not govern, by a sole power of
rule, their several Provinces, because they acknowledge the Emperor their
superior? Has not every Master in the government of his how shoud a sole
superiority, though some have, both under them a School Mr. for their
children, and a Steward for the oversight of their servants, and above them
sundry Magistrates, who in the Province or Country wherein they live, carry a
far more eminent and pecrelesse superiority?

It is apparent therefore, that the sole power of rule in our Bishops, is not
impaired by any that are superior or inferior to the^ unless they were in
the same Co^m^ssio^ joined with the^ as such assistants, as (if the case
require) may restreine them. Neither is their Monarchical authority abridged
by the power of Synods assembled (as he says page 43.) for the making of
ecclesiastical co^stitutions; since the Kings highness cease not to be a
Monarch, though he cannot make new laws, nor do some things, without the
consent of his Nobles, and Commons, assembled in the high court of Parliament.
Neither would the Doctor fear to profess that our Bishops do govern
Monarchically, or by their sole authority, save that he foreseeth (as it
seems lib. 3. page 22) that if he should plainly ascribe unto them a sole
power of ordination and jurisdiction; it might be thence inferred that he
allows no jurisdiction to Presbyters, and holds those Churches to have no
lawful Ministers, which have not such Bishops as ours are to ordeyne them. And
surely (though he falsely charge his Refuter for disgracing his sermon with
those inferences, yet) if he have none other way to avoid them, but by denying
that he gives unto Bishops, a sole power of ordination and jurisdiction; he
must be content hereafter to bear this imputation, that he gives way to those
absurdities he would seem to disclayme.

For first, touching jurisdiction, since he places it in that singular and
peerless power of rule (before spoken of sect. 7.) which Sect. 9.
admits no partner, and subjecteth all, both presbyters and people in foro
externo, to his direction as their ruler, and to his correction as their judge:
that which is already pressed to prove a sole superiority, or sole power of
rule in Bishops, does directly serve to conclude a sole power of jurisdiction
in them. For to speak (as he does) of external and public jurisdiction, in
foro externo, which stands (as he says sermon. page 51.) in receyving
accusations, in conventing parties accused, and censuring such as are found
guilty, according to the quality of the offense, by reproof, putting to
silence, suspension, deprivation, or excommunication; in which respect, seeing
all the presbyters within the diocese are subject to the Bishop (yea even those
that should assiste him, as well as others that are severed from him, and
affixed to their several cures) it is apparrant, that that majority of rule,
which the D. gives him over all, cannot be less then a sole power of
jurisdiction. For who can deny a sole power of jurisdiction to him, that is, in
the power and exercise thereof, so lifted up above all others, in an whole
diocese, that they are all in subjection unto him, and he has no assistantes
to restreyne him? Must the parish Bishop needs be a sole-governor, if he have
not the assistance of a presbytery joined in co^missio^ with him? And is it
plain that the Judges in the Kings Bench and common pleas, who are Assistants
to the L. chief Justices, are joined to either of them, as to help the^ in
giving right judgment, so to restreine the^ that they judge not alone,
according to their own pleasure? (S^^ his Def. lib. 3. page 141. 143.) And
shall not also a diocesan L. Bishop hold and exercise a sole power of
ecclesiastical jurisdiction; when he is so superior unto all in his diocese,
that he has no assistance of any, to restreine or overrule him? Moreover, if
Bishops only (and not presbyters) be authorized, jure apostolico, to exercise
their public and external jurisdiction, in all ecclesiastical censures, over
the people and clergy of their dioceses, (as the D. affirms lib. 3. page
116.) if also the power of reconciling paenitents, by imposition of hands,
does belong to Bishops only, and that by the power of their order; (page
105.) then surely their function is dishonored and their authority imparred, by
such as deny unto them, a sole power of jurisdiction.

Secondly, concerning ordination, the reader is to be advertised that he says
(sermon. page 37.) it has bin a receyved opinion in the Church of God, even from
the Apostles times until our age, that the right of ordinatio^ of presbyters
is such a peculiar prerogative of Bishops, as that ordinarily and regularly,
there could be no lawful ordination, but by a Bishop. And adds (page 40.)
that the perpetual consent of the Church of God, appropriateth the ordinary
right of ordination to the Bishop alone. And (page 42.) that Bishops only, in
the judgment of the Fathers have right of orde^ninge Ministers, regularly. And
therefore, though extraordinarily and in case of necessity, he seem to allow
of their Ministry, which in the want of a Bishop, are ordained by other
Ministers; yet this is no other allowance, then he gives to the baptism of
women or laie-persons, in the want of a Minister. For he says in plain terms
(page 44.) The truth is, where Ministers may be had, none but Ministers ought
to baptize; and where Bishops may be had, none but Bishops ought to ordeyne.
In which words, who sees not, that the ref: has sufficient ground to affirm,
that the D. gives to Bishops a sole power of ordination? If he will say (as he
seems to persuade lib. 3. page 69.) that this argues only a superiority in
the power of ordeyning and not a sole power; then let him also profess
plainly, that Ministers have not any sole power of baptising, but only a
superiority in that power, above women or other laie-persons.

But he cannot thus evade, though he would, seeing (lib. 3. page 105.) he
expressly affimeth, that the power of imposing hands to conveigh grace, either
to parties baptized for their confirmation; or to panitents for their
reconciliation, or to parties designed to the Ministry, for their ordination,
is peculiar unto Bishops, and to the power of their order, whereby they differ
from Presbyters and Deacons yea, this power of ordeyning is (in his conceit
page 106.) so appropriated to the power of order in Bishops, that they cannot
communicate it to any others. Wherefore though he should never so impudently
stand forth to maintain that he does not ascribe a sole power of ordinatio^ to
them; yet will it be inevitably concluded from his own words. For, whosoever
have the right or power of ordination appropriated to the^ alone, as a
prerogative peculiar to their function, and that by the power of their order,
yea so peculiar to their order, that they cannot communicate it to men of
another function; they must needs have the sole power of ordination. If
therefore Bishops have the power of ordination, so appropriated to them alone
and to the power of their order; (as is before showed from the D. own words)
it follows of necess^^y, that they have a sole power of ordination given unto
them. This is also implied in those speeches so often repeated (lib. 3. page
72. 86. 93. 97.) that the power of ordeyninge was in the Bishops, and not in
the presbyters; And that Bishops had the power or right of ordeyning, which
presbyters had not. And of ordination and jurisdiction jointly, as he
constantly mainteineth them, to be the principal and most essential parts of
the episcopal authority: (lib. 3. page 68. and lib. 4. page 78.) so he flatly
denied the charge of these affairs, to belong unto presbyters The Doct. must
^ay by his slander and grant that he gives sole power etc. to Bishops, or
else, he cotradict^^h himself often.
(lib. 4. page 79). And speaking of those precepts which Paul gave to Timothe
for ordination and Church government, 1. Tim. 5. 19. 21. he says, (page 77.)
they were not common to other Christians, or other Ministers, therefore
peculiar to Bishops. So that we may safely conclude, (neither can the Doct.
impugn it, without apparent contradiction to himself) that our Bishops are
sole-ruling. Bishops, and that the singularity of pre-eminence (or preheminent
power) which he ascribes unto Bishops, as an essential part of their
function, is in deed, a sole power of rule, or monarchical superiority.

The 5. Chapter. Concerning the s^ate of the Question, and namely of the D.
distinction, of ius apostolicum, and divinum.
Thus have we done with the first, come we now to the second point before
proposed to be examined. viz. in what sense the sole Sect. 1.
ruling Bishops, (such as ours are) is to be esteemed a divine ordinance. The
Doctor often acknowledges it to be a divine ordinance in respect of the first
institution, as having God the author thereof. But he can by no means endure
his Refuter to say, that he holds their function to be divini juris (or^de
jure di^i^o) and perpetually or generally necessary for all Churches; yea his
choller^i, so kindled thereat, that he charge him with untruth, cal^m^^tion,
wilful depraving of his assertion, as we may see both in his answer to his
Refuters preface page 2. and in this defense, lib. 3. page 22. and lib. 4. page
138. But it is already showed in the defense of that preface, that the Doctor
abuses the refuter, and depraveth his words and meaning, in as much as he had
an eye only to the first institution of the episcopal function, when he said
that the Doctors sermon tended to prove that the said function is to be holden
jure divino, (by Gods law) and not as an humane ordinance. And sithence, was
reserved to this place, the more full handling of those nice conceits in the
Doctor, which were then overpassed (touching the difference betwixt things that
are divini juris, and others that were apostolici; and that absolute necessity
which he places in those things that are divini juris; we are now to enter
upon the consideration of these particulars.

First therefore, because he now seems in this defense (lib. 3. page 26. and
116. and lib. 4. page 137. and 139.) to allow in his own judgment, that
distinction betwixt those things, that are divini and those that are apostolici
juris: which in his sermon pa. 92. he proposed in the name of some other
divines (viz. that the former are generally The Doct. neither does nor can make
good his distinction.
perpetually and immutably necessary, the later not so) he might have done well,
to have warra^ted this distinction either from the scripture or from the
testimony of some orthodoxal writers. From the Scripture he cannot 1. because
he has already laid that ground out of Acts. 15. 28. which will refute it, as
is already showed in defense of the said preface. 2. Moreover, it is well
observed of sundry Divines, as Aquinas 2^. 2^. q. 55. art. 2. that jus divinum
dicitur, quod divinitus promulgatur. And Lubbertus de Pont. Romano. lib. 5.
cap. 2. page 338, that jus dicitur a jussum per apocope^. Where fore as he
says jus divinum est quod Deus jubet; so we may say that jus apostolicum est,
quod apostolus jubet, vel ab apostolis jubetur. The true difference therefore,
(if there be any) between jus divinu^ and apostolicum stands only in this,
that the former has the express and immediate commandment of God, to
warrantize that which he prescribes; whereas the later proceeds from the
Apostles, as the Interpreters of Gods will, and his Ministers, which by
direction from him, give rules unto his Church to observe. In which sense the
Apostle Paul, distinguishes his commandment from the Lords, 1. Cor. 7. 10,
12. unto the married I command (ouk ^go alla ho kurios) not I, but the Lord.
etc. But to the remnant (ego lego, ouk hokurios l spe^ke, not the Lord etc.
Will the Docter now say of the former precept, because it is jus divinum, that
it is general perpetually and immutably necessary; and of the later that it
is not so, as being only jus apostolicum? I hope rather, he will spare the
Refuter (or his friend), the labor to prove, that the later is no less
generally perpetually and immutably necessary, then the former. Significat
Apostolus preceptum illud (verse. 10.) niti expresso verbi divini testimonio;
non autem ex revelatione singulari spiritus sancti profectum. Piscat. in 1. Cor
7. 10. Suum autem id esse dicit (verse. 12.) de quo nihil deserte expresserit
Dominus; non quod ipse ex se temere, aut suo arbitrio esset co^mentatus, Id
enim se fecisse negat, infra verse. 25. and 40. Beza in 1. Cor. 7. 12. And
therefore after many other precepts delivered by the Apostles, in sundry cases
not before determined by any direct and express verdict of Gods word, as will
appear to him, that wayeth what he teaches 1. Cor. 8. 9. 13. and 10. 25.-29.
and 11. 4.-14. 23.-25.) he binds them all up under one general charge, 1.
Cor. 14. 37. If any man think himself to be a Prophet or spiritual, let him
acknowledge that the things which I write unto you, are tou k^riou ent^lai, the
commandments of God. Dei precepta vocat, hoc est divinitus inspirata, et ob id
authentica. Aret: in 1. Cor. 14. 37. 3. It is well known that the doctrine of
the Apostles, and their practice recorded in their writings, yield us the most
direct and express warrant, which Christian people and their Teachers have (I
say not for the sanctifying of the Lords day, which is our Sabbath, because
some great Favorites of the Prelacy, hold it (though unjustly) to be a
varyable ordinance, and alterable at men's pelasure, but) for the estableshing
of a settled Ministry in every Church, to feed the ^lock which depends on
them, 1. Pet. 5. 3. 4. Act. 14. 23. and 20. Tit. 1. 5. Which (I suppose) all
will grant to be generally and perpetually necessary; Bishop Bilson not
excepted. Perpet Govern: page 106. 107. and 208.) And it is no lesle evident,
that there is no general necessity or perpetuity in some precepts, which
Christ himself gave to his Disciples, as Mat. 10. 5. 14. and 12. 16. and 15.
20. and 19. 21. and John. 13 14. 15: wherefore the perpetuity or immutability
of precepts given in the scriptures, depends not upon the authority of the
person, from whom D. distinction falls to the gro^d
they proceed immediately; but upon the generallity or perpetnity of the
grounds, or causes which give strength there unto. So that the things which are
Apostolici juris (and none otherwise divine ordinances then as they proceedd
from the spirit of God, that directed the Apostles) are generally perpetually
and immutable necessary, in the presence and concurrence of those causes and
grounds, whichmade them at the first necessary. And there is no other or
greater perpetuity or necessity, in any of those things, which are immediately
divini juris. Wherefore as the D. acknowledges the things which were ordained
of the Apostle, to be (for the authority of their iustitution) not only
apostolical, but also divine ordinances: so he must confess that whatsoever
they established, not for a short time, but for succeeding ages, the same
deserves to be esteemed, as a thing authorized divnio jure, not apostGlico
only.

And herein we have the consent of sundry Orthodoxal writers, Cert^ (says D.
Whitakers de Pont. Romans page 107.) quod apostoli ut necessarium sanxerunt,
atque introduxerunt, juris divini vim The D. distinction is against the
judgment or his own freindes as well as others.
obtinet. And in this very question of the superioritle of Bishops above
Presbyters, as it is their common Tenent, that they are equal or rather all
one jure divins, (by Gods law) so they hold the doctrine and practice of the
Apostles to be susficient warrant to conclude their assertion, as we may see in
Sadeel ad repet: Turrian: sophism. loc. 12. page 403. and 412. partis secundae.
And in Chemnitius exam: Conc. Trident. De sacram ord^n: part 22. sol. 249.)
yea Sadeel (page 117.) puts no difference between jus div^num and an
Apostolical ordinance: for upon these premises, Presbyteri certe apostolicis
institutis, habent jus ordinandi; Illi vero qui ha^ ae^ate ecclesiam primi
reformarunt, erant presbyteri, he concludes: quare primi illi doctores
potuerunt in ecclesia reformata, ministros ac pastores ordinare, idque jure
divino. In like manner Bishop Barlowe (in his sermon on Acts. 20. 28.) as one
not acquainted with any difference in perpetuity between ^us apostolicu^ and
divinum, gives both indifferently to the episcopal function: gathering out of
one word (posuit) in his text, that it was both praxis apostolic, an ordinance
apostolical, and thesis pneumalike a canon or constitution of the whole
Trinity, enacted for succeeding prosterity. Mr. Bell, in his regiment of the
Church page 117. says, a thing may be called de jure divino two ways. 1.
because it is of God immediately. 2. because it is of them, who are so directed
by Gods holy Spirit, that they cannot err. And in this sense the superiority
of Bishops, over other inferior Ministers, may be called de jure divino, or an
ordinance divine. Doctor Sutcliff: (de presb: cap. 15.) presses among other
arguments apostolorum usum et morem, to prove that the superiority of Bishops
above other Ministers does niti jure divino. The same may be said of sundry
others which at this day, hold the function of our diocesan Bishops, to be an
apostolical and so a divine ordinance; or give them a superiority of
jurisdiction, jure apostolico. (as the D. himself does lib. 3. page 116.) and
are not so scrupulous (as the D. is) to allow that the superiority of their
function is warranted to them jure divino. Neither fear they to conclude the
epis^opall government to be perpetual, because it is an ordinance apostolical.

Wherefore, I would be glad to learn of the Doctor in his next defense, (seeing
he was not in his sermon or the margin of it pleased A request to the D. to tell
us where he so lately learned that distinction.
to tell us) who those Some are, which in respect of perpetuity do put such a
difference (as he notes) between the things that are Divini, and those that
are apostolici juris. For as he receyved it not from any of the forenamed
Favorites of the prelacy: so neither did he suck it from Doct. Bilsons breast
the man that gave him in this question so good satisfaction. For, as the title
of his book shows that he holde^h the government of Bishops, to be the
perpetual government of Christ's Church: so the body of the book it self,
does plainly demonstrate; that he concludes the perpetuity thereof, from no
other arguments, then such as the D. urges to prove it to be an apostolical
and divine ordinance. Yea it seems, that when the D. preached his former
sermon of the dignity and duty of the Ministers; either he had not yet learned,
or at least, he little regarded this distinction. For (page 73.) he takes an
ordinance delivered by the Apostle 1. Cor. 9. 14. for a sufficient arguement,
to conclude that a sufficient maintenance, is due unto the Ministers of the
Gospel, jure divino, by the law of God.

But let us come (as near as we can) to his author of this distinction:
Bellarmin in deed, distinguishes between jus divinum and Apostolicum,
atfirming (lib. de clericis cap. 18.) that the marriage of priests, is
prohibired, only jure apostolico, not divino. Quod enim, says he, Apostolus
praecipit, non divinum, sed apostolicum praeceptum est. But with him, jus
apostolicum, is no other then jus humanum, or positivum. Ibid. and cap. seq:.
Moreover, he urges the same distinction (as the D. acknowledges (lib. 3. page
101.) to show, what he took to be Hieroms meaning, when he says that a
Bishop differs from a Presbyter, in nothing, save in the power of ordination,
that is, says he, (lib. de Clericis cap. 15.) in this only he is superior to
other Ministers jure divino; but in the power or jurisdiction, jure apostolico.
Which distinction, though in this place the Doctor admits not; yet elsewhere
(lib. 3. page 26.) he allows it to reconcile those speeches of Ierom (ad
Euagr: and in Tit. cap. 1. where he denies the superiority of Bishops, to be
of divine disposition; and yet affirms it to be an apostolical tradition. He
may be understood (says the D.) as holding their superioutie to be, not
divini, but apostolici juris. But how soever he accord with Bellarmin in
approving the distinction: yet since he holds the episcopal superiority, to
be so far forth a divine ordinance as it proceeded from God, in as much as the
Apostles were directed by the holy Ghost in ordeyning it: he cannot (without
apparent contradiction to himself) embrace Bellarmins The D. co^tradicteth
himself which way soever he turns him.
construction of Apostolici juris, who takes it for jus humanum or positivum.
Neither can he easily wind out of the briars of an evident contradiction; when
he denies it to be divini iuris, and yet grants it to be be a divine
ordinance: yea such an holy ordinance of God, as ought at this day (not only
so to be acknowledged but also) to be obeyed and that of conscience: sermon. page
94. and 98. For if this be so how should it want what perpetuity, which
agrees unto other things, that are in deed divini juris, by the law of God?

For out of what fountain drew the D. this deep learning; which Sect. 3. ad
page 2. of the D. answer to the ref: preface and ad lib. 4. page 138. 140.
now he sets abroach (answ: to the ref: preface page 2. and lib. 4. page
138. 140.) viz. that the things which are divini juris (by the law of God) are
so generally i^mutably and perpetually necess^rie, that no true Church can be
without them. What will he say to the pure preaching of the word, the right
administration of the Sacraments, and of the Church Censures, and the orderly
sending forth of Ministers, lawfully chosen and ordained to their several
charges? Are not these things divini juris, by the law of God, and divine (or
at least) apostol The D. distinction erroneous.
call ordinances, generally perpetually and immutablie necessary? for who can
take liberty in any of these, to depart from the rule of Gods word, and not be
guilty of sin against God? yea in that one Sacrament of the Lords Supper, are
not all the actions recorded in the first institution (viz. in the Minister, to
take bless break and deliver the bread, and to take bless and diliver the
cup; and in the Communicants, to take and eat the one, and to take and drink
the other, (are not all and every of these actions I say) generally
perpetually and immutably necessary to be observed, and therefore to be esteemed
to be divini juris? else have our divines little reason to hold them for
essential parts of the Lords supper, and to urge for proof thereof Christ's
Commandment, do this in remembrance of me: see D. Bilson ag: the Rhem
Apology (part quarta page 675. in quarto) Bucanus Insti^ loc. 48. page 677.
678 Notwithstanding, I hope the D. will not deny the name of a true Church,
unto every assembly of Christians, which wants in any part the purity of the
doctrine, or that sincere form of administration, which the word of God pre
cribeth for his Sacraments or Church Censures? For he is not ignorant that
among divine ordinances and things necessary, some (yea the greatest some) do
concern rather the welbeing, then the very being of the Church; and a^e only
needful or behooful for the wel-ordering of the Ch: (lib. 4. p. 103. 104) but
not so g^nerally and immutably necessary, as though no true Church could be
without them. Wherefore to draw this controversly to a direct issue; though
without any violoence offered unto he phrase, we might affirm every
commandment of God, (whether general or special, and temporal or
perpetual;) to be jus divinum; because the word jus is derived of jussum, (as
is before observed) yet because the word is restrained by the * Canonistes, and
by Ius divinum est quod in lege co^tine^tur, et evangelio, atque immutabile.
semper permanet. lib. 1. Iuris canon. Tit. 2.
common use appropriated to such ordinances, as are laid down in the holy
scripture for the perpetual use of the Church; I will here acknowledge a
general and perpetual necessity in those things that are to be holden jure
divino: yet place I not so absolute a necessity as the D. dreameth of; in those
things that are divini juris, as though no true Church could be without any of
them; It is sufficient if they be so immutably necessary, that the Church has
no liberty (as it has in things indifferent) to alter or abolish them; but
where they may be had, they may not without sin, be neglected, much l^sse
wittingly be refused or changed. If the D. shall herein profess an agreement
with us, and say that he therefore denies the episcopal function to be divini
juris, because (though it be lawful to be retained as being ordained of God by
his Apostles for the Churches, which they planted; yet) it is not by any
commandment, or warrant from Gods word, perpetually imposed on all Churches
(for so he seems to affirm lib. 4. page 145. lin. 6. and 26: I pray leave,
to demand, why (in the 2. page of his answ. to the Refuters preface) he
contenteth not himself to disclaim at large that general and immu^able
necessity, which is ascribed to things that are divini juris. (page 94. of his
sermon) but rather adds this clause, so as no true Church can be without it. If
it be not to explain that necessity, which he spoke of in his sermon; to what
purpose serves it? For he found no such clause, nether in the words of the
Refuters preface, which he taxes of untruth; nor yet in page 90. of his
answer, where he says a true acknowledgment is to be found, in what sense,
he denies the calling of the Bishops to be Divini juris.

But let us see whether the Doctor (both in his s^rmon, and in Sect. 4.
some places of this defense thereof) mainteineth not the epilcopal function,
to be generally and perpetually necessary, and that in as ample manner, as some
other ordinances are, that without all contradictio^ are esteemed to be divini
juris. 1. He appropriateth or at least attributes kat hexochen unto Bishops,
yea even to our diocesa^ Bishops, as well as unto the Bishops or Ministers of
the 7. Churches in Asia, and that in respect of their function, the name of
Angels sent of God, and stars held in the right hand of Christ. sermon. page
55. and 95. Yea he says (page 55.) They are as chief Stewards over Gods
family, and principal spiritual governors over Christ's body. And to them he
restreineth (pap. 70) the name of hegoumenoi, rulers or Leaders, which the
Apostle (Heb. 13. 17.) charge to be obeyed. Moreover, he esteems them to be
the proper pastors of the Church (lib. 4. page 141. lin. 18.) and gives unto
other presbyters (se^m. page 45.) no other pastoral authority, then what is
delegated unto them, by their Bishops. Wherefore like as he reasons to show
the lawfullnes and excellency of the episcopal function (page 54) so may we,
to prove by necessary consequence, from his own words that it is generally or
immutably necessary; or perpetually imposed by Christ and his Apostles on all
Churches. For if the office of presbyters, which in his opinion are but
assitantes unto the Bishops, admitted in partem sollicitudinis, to seed that
part of the Church, which he should commit unto them; be not only lawful but
necessary also to be retained and that jure divino; then the same may be said
much more, of the function of Bishops, that are (as he supposes) the cheef,
and principal pastors, even by Gods ordinance. But if their function be not
divini juris, nor generally and perpetually necessary for all Churches; then
let the Doctor also profess plainly, that he mainteineth not the office of
Presbyters, or any other Ministers to be The Doct. says as much for the
perpetuity of Di ocesan Bishops, as of any ministers of the word, yea and more.
divini juris, and generally or perpetually necessary, for the feeding or
governing of the visible Churches of Christ. Yea let him without staggering
affirm, that it is a thing indifferent (not de jure divino necessary, but)
left to every Churches liberty, to accept or refuse, as they shall see
expedie^^, those that are authorized of God, as Stars, Angels, Pastors and
guides, to convey unto them, the light of his truth, and the word or bread of
life, and to convert them in the way of salvation

But 2. does not his reasoning import the contrary, when he says (page 55.)
that if every Minister be to be honored in regard of his calling, with double
honor: viz. of reverence and maintenance, which he says (sermon. of the
dignity and duty of the ministers, p. 65. and 73.) is due to them by the word
of God, yea jure divino: the^ much more is the office of Bishops, who are the
chief and principal Ministers to be had in honor? Yea, does he not from the
doctrine of his sermon in question, infer these uses, and impose them on the
consciences of his hearers (page 94, and 96) viz. 1. to acknowledge their
function to be a divine ordinance; 2. to have the^ in honor, as spiritual
Fathers, (as the Apostle exhorts the Philippians cap. 2. 29.) and to receyve
them, as the Angels of God, as they are called in his text. 3. to obey their
authority, as being the holy ordinance of God, according to the Apostles
exhortation Heb. 13. 17. For, can the consideration of Gods ordinance,
appointing their function, and commanding honor and obedience to be given unto
them, in the days of the Apostles, bind the conscience at this day, if their
function were not of necessity to be continued? Or can the exhortation of the
Apostle, Phil. 2. 29. and Heb. 13. 17. touch the consciences of the people of
England, so strictly, as he pretends; and not reach at all to the conscience
of those professors, and teachers of the faith of Christ, that live in other
reformed Churches? It is true, I confess, that such Leaders and Laborers in
the Lords work, must first be had, before they can be honored and obeyed; but
do not these exhortations, and many other apostolic canons, which prescribe
what is required, either of Ministers for the good of their flocks; or of
people for encouragement of their Teachers, (as Act. 20. 28. 1. Tim. 3. 2. 4.
and 5. 17. 1. Pet. 5. 2. 3. 1. Cor. 9, 14. Gal. 6, 6. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. 13. Heb.
13, 17.) by an equal bond, bind all Churches, as well to labor for the
establishing of such Elders, Bishops and Leaders; as to see that when they are
settled, they may both give all diligence to perform their duties; and receive
all reverence and honor due unto them?

And 3, how often does he tell us in this defense, (lib. 3. page 24. 26. 44. 48
55. 59. 63. et alibi passim) that many of his allegations do testify for the
superiorit^e of Bishops, not only de f^cto, but also de iure, as giving test
money to the right, and showing what form of government ought to be, as being in
the judgment of the Fathers (which he approves) perpetual? And though he
return the lie upon his Refuter: (lib. 3, page 57.) for saying that he plainly
avoucheth a necessity of reteyning the government of Diocesan Bishops (when he
affirms, that as it was ordained for the pres^rvation of the Church in
unity, and for the avoiding of schi^me: so it is for the same cause to be
rete^ned) yet he confessed (page 64.) that Ieroms judgment, in the place
alleged, was, that Bishops are necessarily to be retained for the same cause
(to wit, the avoiding of schism) for which they were first instituted. And
from the same words of Ierom he collecteth (page 111.) that of necessity a
p^erelesse power, is to be attributed unto Bishops. Wherefore if the Which way
soever the Doct. turns him, he offends.
D. be not guilty of a plaine-lie, and notorious falsification of Ieroms
meaning in carrying his words to a necessity in reteyning Bishops; surely, he
has much wronged his refuter, to charge him with the like guiltynes for the
like collection. And if he consent not in judgment with Ierom, he does too much
abuse his reader, in fortifying his assertion with his testimony; unless he
had given some intimation, wherein he swarveth in opinion from him.

But 4. he discovers his own judgment touching the necessity of diocesan
and provincial Bishops, something more clearly, when he says (lib. 3. page
3.) that of provinci^ll or national Churches, the metropolitans and Bishops of
dioceses a^e and oug^t to be the governors. For if he had intended only a
lawfullnes, and not a necessity of reteyninge The Doct. wrongfully charge his
Refuter.
their functions, he would have said they are and may be, rather then (as he
does) they are and ought to be the governors: yea in his sermon (page 32.) does
he not imply a necessity? I say not an absolute necessity (as he wrongfully
charge his Refuter lib. 3. p. 57.) but a general and perpetual necessity,
for succeding ages, as well as for the Apostles times; when he says, that upon
this threefolde superiority of Bishops (scz. singularity of pre-eminence,
during life, power of ordination, and power of jurisdiction) there depends a
threefold benefit, to every church; to wit, the unity, perpetuit e, and
eutaxie or good order thereof. For who can deny, that those things are
generally and perpetually necessary to be retained in every Church, whereon
the unity, perpetuity, and eutaxie of every Church depends?

If the Doctor shall think to escape by saying, that the perpetuity Sect. 5.
ad lib. 4 page 102, and 147.
and eutaxie of every Church depends in deed upon the power of ordination and
jurisdiction; but not upon the investing of the power in Bishops; because his
second thoughts have drawn him to distinguish, between potestas and modus
potestatis (lib. 4. page 102. and 1 17.) we have reason to think (as shall
appear anon) that he The Doct. streyneth his wits in vain to avoid con^
dreamed not of this distinction, till he had set his wits awork to remove the
contradiction which his Refuter objected against him. Notwithstanding he cannot
(with all his cunning) avoyde that necessity, which flows from the first
branch of episcopal superiority. For if the unity of every Church, depends
on the singularity of pre-eminence in one duringe life, and that in such sort,
as afterward he explayneth his meaning, to wit, that whereas there were many
presbyters in one City; yet there neither were no^ might be, in succeedinge
ages downward, from the Apostles times any more then one Angel in a church,
or one Bishop in an whole diocese: how can it be denied, that there is a
general and perpetual necessity of episcopal superiority for the
preservation of the Church in unity? 2. Neither will the learning of that
distinction, which he now puts between p^t^stas and modus potestatis, free
him from placing the like necessity in the function of Bishops; for the
exercise of that lawful power (of ordination and jurisdiction) whereon the
Churches perpetuity and eutaxie or good order depends. For (to let pass
that which he says sermon. page 32.) how the superiority of Bishops not only
did, but also does consist in that two fold power, no less then in a
singularity of pre-eminence during life: he avoucheth in plain terms, that
the power which Timothy and Titus had for ordination and jurisdiction was not
to die with them, but to be transmitted to them that should succeed them in the
government of the Church. That the authority, yea the function and authority,
which they had (consisting specially in the power of ordination and
jurisdiction) was not to dye with their persons but to be continued in their
sucessors (sermon. page 75. 79. Defense lib. 3. page 72. and lib. 4. page 84.
98. and 100). That the commandments and injunctions given them, to be kept
inviolable until the appearing of Christ; were directed to them alone and their
successors (sermon. page 49. 74.) And that the duties prescribed for the
execution of their office and authority, were to be performed by them and
their successors till the coming of Christ (lib. 4. page 77.) And which is yet
more he adds, that their successors were Bishops only, yea Diocesan Bishops:
(sermon. page 75. lib. 4. page 85.) and that, not de facto only, but also de
iure. (Ibid.) And that Presbyters neither were nor could be their successors.
(lib. 3. page 73.) and that neither are those instructions given in general to
presbyters; neither does the charge of those affairs belong unto them. (lib.
4. page 79.) Wherefore also he affirms, or rather from the premises
concludes, that the epistles written to Timothy and Titus, were the very
patterns and presidents of the episcopal function, and purposely written to
inform not Timothy and Titus alone, but them and their successors (viz. all
Bishops) to the worlds end, how to exercise their function. (sermon. page 72. 73.
Defense lib. 4. page 75. 83.) Yea and further says, that those precepts, 1.
Tim. 5. 19. 22. are perpetual directions, which are not common either to other
Christians, or to other Ministers; therefore peculiar to Bishops (lib. 4. page
77. Thus It is sufficiently proved that the D. holds a perpetual necessity
of the episcopal function.
have we seen at large the Doctors judgment, now (to ^ay all these things
together): If the power and authority and (not so only but also) the
function, which Timothy and Titus had, was not to die with their persons, but
to be transmitted unto, and continued in Bishops, because Bishops and not
Presbyters were their successors, even de iure and not de facto only; And if
for the same cause (as also because the charge of those affairs, viz. of
ordination and jurisdictio^ belongs not to the Presbyters, nor is common to
other Christians or Ministers) the Commandments and injunctions given to
Timothy and Titus, to be inviolably kept till Christ's coming were directed
unto Bishops only; I would gladly hear, with what new distinction, the Doctor
(who directly and expressly affirms the premises) ca^ discharge himself from
implying (or teaching The Doct. himself cutteth the throat of his own
distinction, and has not one hole to hide himin.
by necessary consequence) that the episcopal function, was appointed for the
perpetual use of the Church, and is necessary to be retained in all Churches
till the coming of Christ.

His conjoyning together Timothies function and authority to be continued in
their successors, cutteth the throat of his distinction, betwixt potestas and
m^dus potestatis; neither can he fly to that starting hole, wherein he hides
his head (his heels at least hanging out lib. 3. page 57. lin. ult.) when he
expounds his words, is to be retained, by, meet or fit, exped^ent, or
conven^ent, profitable, or needful, to be retained. For he acknowledges the
power or authority it In seeking succor the Doct. does nothing but contradict
in one pla^ what he ^aith in a another.
self to be perpetually necessary, as an essential or immutable ordinance of
God. (lib. 4. page 102. 147.) Neither will it releeve him to say, as he does,
page 146. that Paul's directions (in his epistles to Tim. and Tit.) were given
though primarily and directly to Bishops; yet secondarily and by consequence,
to those who (though they were no Bishops) should have the like authority. For
he flatly secludeth, both the Presbyters and all other Christians or Ministers
from all right and title, either to the power it self or the execution thereof
(lib. 3. page 71. 72. and lib. 4. page 79.) And says (sermon. page 79.) that it
is much more necessary for the Churches of all ages succeeding the Apostles;
then for the first Churches in their life time, to have such governors as
Timothy, and Titus: that is, men furnished with episcopal authority in a
preheminent degree above other Ministers.

2. If he shall retire at last to his first and safest evasion (specially
fitted to the question of ordination without a Bishop (sermon pa. 43.) viz. that
though such ordination be not regular (or lawful ordinarily as he says page
37.) according to the rules of ordinatie church government yet in case of
necessity, that is, in the want of a Bishop, it is to be allowed as effectual
and as justifiable: What is this, but in effect to grant, that there is the
like perpetuity and necessity of the function of Bishops, as there is, of
sundry other ordinances of God, which all esteem to be divini juris? For the
comparison which himself makes (page 44.) between baptism administered by one
that is no Minister; and ordination performed by Ministers that are no Bishops,
does evidently show it. The truth is (says he) where Ministers may be had,
none but Ministers ought to baptize: and where Bishops may be had, none but
Bishops ought to ord^yn: But though neither ought to be done, yet being done:
the former by other Christians in want of a Minister; the later by other
Ministers in defect of a Bishop; as the one, so the other also is of force; the
Church receiving the party baptized into the communion of the faithful; and
the party ord^yned as a lawful Minister. Now if this be a truth, say I, then
there must be a truth acknowledged also, in these conclusions The D. again
says as much for the per petuitie of the episcopal function, as of the
function af other Ministers.
that follow. viz. That according to the rules of ordinary Church Government,
as the right of administering baptism, is a peculiar prerogative of the
ministerial function jure divino, by the law of God; so eodem jure, even by
the same law, the right of ordination is peculiar to the Bishops. And as all
Churches under heaven, till the coming of Christ to judgment, are bound to
strive for the establishing and reteyning of that Ministry, which God has
authorized to administer baptism: so are all Churches by a like band tied to
contend for the episcopal function, which has right to ordeyne. And
consequently the calling of Bishops for ordeyning is as generally, perpetually,
and immutablie necessary, as the office of other Ministers is, for the work of
baptism. I add, that, in the D. opinion, there is as perpetual and immutable
a necessity of the episcopal function for the ordering of every Church; as
there is (in the opinion of many very judicious divines) of wine, for the holy
and pure administration of the Lords supper. For whereas he allows not of any
other form of Church-governement, then by Bishops, unless in case of
necessity, where orthodoxall Bishops cannot be had, and that, because any
government whatsoever is better then none at all: (sermon. page 97:) In the like
necessity, where wine cannot be had, they judge it better to take in stead of
wine, water, or any other kind of drink usual in such places; then wholly to
neglect the Lords sacrament, or to maime it by an half administration, in one
only element. (see Polani Syntag. Col. 3213.) Wherefore as their allowa^ce of a
change in the outward eleme^t of the Lords supper, being limited to such an
extraordinary case, does rather support, then contradict their assertion, that
the Church has not liberty, to refuse wine, or to prefer any other element
before it:) the D. his excusing other reformed Churches for enterteyning a
Presbyteriall aristocracie, in stead of an episcopal Monarchy, only in such
a case of necessity, as he pretends; might give his Refuter just occasion to
think (though he affirmed no such mattet) that he held the episcopal
government to be divini juris, thereby intending that all Churches are bound to
prefer it as well in their endeavors, as in their judgment, before Sect. 6.
ad sermon. p. 79. and Defens. lib. 4. page 100. 146. 148. and 167.
any other form of government whatsoever.

But there is an higher pitch of the necessity of this function, as may appear
by some words that slipped from the D. in the penning of his sermon, page 79.
to wit, that the function and authority which Timothy and Titus had, as being
assigned to certain churches, is ordinary, and perpetually necessary, not
only for the welbeing, but also for the very The D. did hold the episcopal
function perpetually necessary for the very being of the visible Churches.
being of the visible Churches. For from hence, it follows by good
consequence, (as his Refuter rightly gathers answer. page 145 and 138.) that
seeing (in his judgment), the function and authority which they had, was
episcopal and diocesan, such as ours is now; therefore also in his judgment,
the episcopal power, or government of Diocesan Bishops, is perpetually
necessary for the very being of the visible Churches. Now herewith the Doctor
is highly offended, and charge him with malice, want of judgment, and with
ignorant mistaking, or wilful depraving of his sayings, and that against sense
(lib. 4. page 146. 148. and 167.) A great charge in deed; but how does he
avoid the consequence objected? for sooth, to explain his meaning, he
dismembreth his own speech, and cutteth asunder the knot which with his own
tongue and pen, he had knit: for whereas before he spoke jointly, (as of one
thing expressed by two words) of their function and authority that it was
ordinary and The Doct. plaieth fast and loose, tieth and vntieth: but every
one may see the slight, to his ^^ame.
perpetually necessary, now (to show his skill in playing fast and loose at
his pleasure) he says (page 100. and 147.) he meant, that their function was
ordinary, and their authority was perpetually necessary.

But as slippery as he is, his Refuter will not suffer him thus to slip his
neck out of the collar; all his wit and learning can neither unloose nor cut a
sunder, that chain which binds him to a gross absurdity. His words (sermon.
page 79) are these. The function and authority which Timothy and Titus had, as
being assigned to certain Churches, viz. of Ephesus and Creete, (consisting
specially in the power of ordination and jurisdiction) was not to end with
their persons, but to be continued in their successors: as being ordinary and
perpetually necessary; not only for the wellbeinge, but also for the very
being of the visible Churches. If the Doctor had meant so to divide the later
part of his speech (as he would now persuade) what meant he, not to discover
his meaning plainly? It had bin easy for him, to have disioyned their function
from their authority, in his whole speech on this manner. q. d. But neither was
the function which Tim. and Tit. had at Ephesus and in Crete, to end with
their persons, as being ordinary: neither was their authority to dye with them,
as being perpetually necessary etc. Therefore had he so meant in deed and truth,
as he now professes, since there wanted not skill; there must needs be in him
a want of will, to speak plainly unto the capacity of his reader; The Doct.
is guilty of that imputation, which he professes to abhor.
so that he stands here guilty of that ^oul imputation which elsewhere he
professes to abhor (lib. 2. page 52.) viz. a desire and intent of dazeling
the eyes of the simple, I might say, the eyes of all even the most judicious,
as all may see that read with a single eye, and weigh with an upright hand
what he has written.

But (to speak what I think) he rather belieth his own heart in The D. in all
likelihood belieth his own heart.
saying now, that he then meant that, which he never dreamt of, till he had set
his wits a work, to find out some fly evasion, to avoyde (if it were
possible) that perpetual necessity, which his words do equally throw upon
the function of Timothy and Titus, as well as on their authority. For 1. If he
had cast but one cie upon the proposition of that brave syllogism, whereunto
the former sentence is fitted as the assumption, he might have observed that
the word authority is superfluous, and idly inserted in the later; seeing it is
wholly omitted in the former. The proposition of his argument is this. The
supposed evangelisticall function (he says not evangelisticall function and
authority; but evangel: function) of Timothy and Titus, was to and with their
persons, and admitted no succession, being both extraordinary and temporary.
Wherefore, to make the assumption suitable to this proposition, he should have
said (not as he then did, and still does, the function and authority, but) the
function which they had as being assigned to certain Churches, was not to end
with their persons, but to be continued in their successors. And the^ the
words following must of necessity be carried also to their function only. q.
d. their function was not to end with their persons, because it was both
ordinary and perpetually necessary etc. And unless he will yield to this
construction of his assumption (I mean, either to blot out the word authority,
or at least to acknowledge that he user^^ those two words (function and
authority) as synonima, to express one only thing, to wit, their office or
function) he will be enforced If the D. seeks to avoid one, he falls into
another evil.
to lie down under this foul imputation also, viz. that he does sophisticate,
and by four terms in stead of three, utterly marreth the frame of his
supposed blameless syllogism.

2. Moreover, if he will vouchsafe to peruse his Defense (lib. 4. page 97 98.)
he may perceive, that as his purpose was by a new supply of arguments (as he
says) to prove that Timothy and Titus were Bishops: so his maine argument
there set down concludes, the very function of Timothy and Titus to be
ordinary and episcopal, because it was not extraordinary and Evangelicall.
For although (to conform his first argument to his prosyllogis^^es that
follow) he coupleth function and authority together: yet the frame of his
words do show, that by both terms he understandoth one thing only, to wit,
their proper function or office, which was, as he confesses, the only thing
now in question. Otherwise, having said in the proposition, that their function
and authority was either extraordinary and evangelisticall, or ordinary and
episcopal, he would never have set down the assumption and conclusion, so as
he does. But it was not extraordinary and eva^gelicall; therefore ordinary and
episcopal. For neither grammar no^ logic Neither grammar nor logic will
endure the D. disjunction.
will permit him under this one word (it) to comprehend two things so distinct;
as he now takes function and authority to be; when he affirms the one, and
denies the other to be perpetuallye necessary.

3. But if he will needs begin with that disjunction, with which he ends; he
shall fall into a twofolde absurdity, which he cannot avoid, viz. an untoward
laying down of the question, in the beginning; and a shameless begging of the
question, in the end. For neither do they hold the function only of Timothy
and Titus to be ordinary, or their authority only to be episcopal: neither
do the Disciplinarians teach their function only to be extraordinary, and
their authority only to be evangelicall: but rather affirm, their function
to be both extraordinary and evangelicall; as in the proposition of his first
syllogism he confesses. And as for their authority understanding thereby (as
the Doctor does) nothing else but a power to ordeyne and to exercise a publik
spiritual jurisdiction: they do no where affirm it to be either
extraordinary or proper to an Evangelist. Yea the Doctor acknowledges (page
84. and 100.) that his Refuter grants, that others were to succced Timothy
and Titus in the authority which they had; but not in their office; and that
their authority (though not their function) was perpetually necessary.
Wherefore if he take not authority and function, for one and the same thing, or
at least restreyne authotitie to that peculiar power, which distinguishes
their function from all other ministerial callings; he has apparently
falsified the state of the question. And (w^^ is worse) in the winding up of
his The D. falsineth the state of the question. The Doct. bewrays the
beggerie or his cause.
dispute, bewrays the extreme beggerie of his cause; when he proves their
function to be ordinary, because it was ordinary. For the conclusion of his
first syllogism (p. 98.) affirms the function of Timothy and Titus to be
ordinary: his medius terminus to prove it, is this. It was not extraordinary;
which to confirm, he says, that their function was not to end with their
persons but to be continued in their successors; and therefore was not
extraordinary. And to prove the Antecede^t, he argues thus, Their function was
ordinary; and therefore was not to end with their persons. So that his whole
reasoning-commeth to this issue, Their function was ordinary, and therefore it
was ordinary. To amend all these defaultes, since it is apparent that in his
maine conclusion, he affirms their function to be both ordinary and
episcopal, as before I showed the word authority to be superflous, so it
follows from things before delivered, that the word, ordinary, in that
prosyllogisme, which he lays down page 99. and 100. (so as he received it
from his Refuter,) is also superfluous and fit to be expunged; that the
syllogism may run current in this manner;

That function which is perpetu^lly necessary, not only for the wel-being but
also for the very being of the visible Churches; was not to end with the
persons of Timothy and Titus, but to be continued in their successors. But the
function which they had, when they were assigned to certain churches, is
perpetually necessary, not only for the well-beinge; but also for the very
being of the visible Churches. Therefore, the function which they had, being so
assigned, was not to end with their persons, but to be continued in their
successors.
Wherefore the Refuter has not wronged the Doc. in charging The refut.
wrongeth not the D. bur the D. wrongeth himself, when to avoid one absurdity,
he throws himself into many.
him to asfirme that the episcopal power or function is perpetually necessary,
not only for the well being, but for the very being of the visible Churches.
The D. rather has wronged himself, in that, whiles he labors to avoid the
rock of this one absurdity, he throws himself into the gulf of many others.
And to him, more fitly agrees, that which without cause he says of his
Refuter (pa. 99.) he roves and raves as men use to do; who being at a
nonplus, would feign seem to answer somewhat.

To conclude then this point, seeing the direction of the Holy Ghost (who
guided the Apostles in the execution of their function) does as strongly
conclude every jus apostolicum to be jus divinum Sect. 7.
as it does every ordinance apostolical, to be a divine ordinance: and the
perpetuity of divine ordinances or precepts, depends not on the authority
of the person, from whom they proceed immediately (whether from God, or holy
men authorized from God) but upon the perpetuity of the causes or grounds that
give strength thereunto: saying the Doctor acknowledges the superiority and
function of Bishops to be (not only a divine ordinance in regard of the first
institution, but also) such an ordinance, as is necessary to be retained for
the same cause (viz. the avoydinge of schisms) for which it was first
instituted: yea such an ordinance, as on which the unity perpetuity and eutaxy
of every Church depends: seeing also he affirms that the perpetual
directions and commandementes given to Timothy and Titus for ordination and
jurisdiction, are not common to other Ministers or Presbyters, but peculiar to
Bishops, as being their successors, not only de facto but also de jure, and
that the Churches of succeeding ages, have much more need of men furnished with
episcopal authority to govern them, then those Churches that were first
planted by the Apostles: And seeing he does so far grace our own Bishops,
that he says they are authorized to the exercise of their jurisdictio^ jure
Apostolico; and urges the conscience of his hearers both to acknowledge their
function, and to obey their authority, as an holy ordinance of God: Lastly,
seeing he did in his sermon. avouch (though now he disclaimeth it in the d^f^se
thereof) the episcopal function to be perpetually necessary, even for the very
being (and not for the well-ordering only) of the visible Ch; and he still
mainteineth their function to be no less necessary, for the ordeyning of
Ministers, the^ the office of Ministers is, for the baptizing of other
Christian disciples: (seeing I say, these things are so evident and apparent
truth, that none of them can be denied) it is no less apparent that the D.
stryveth in vain, to quench the light that shines to his conscience, when he
indeavoureth to persuade that he mainteineth not the episcopal function to be
such a divine ordinance as is juris divini, or of general and perpetual use
for the churches of Christ. For the reader may easily perceyve, that it were
easy for us by sundry syllogismes (that would carry good consequence and clear
evidence of truth with them) to confirm even from his own words, that which I
now affirm to be the state of the question; but I will content my self to use
one or two at this time only; and thus I reason;

The episcopal function (such as ours is at this day) in their opinion which
hold it to be of divine institution, must needs be reputed, ^yther such an
extraordinary and temporary office, as that of the Apostles Prophets and
Evangelistes, specially appointed for the first planting and establishing of
the Churches; or such an ordinary and perpetual function as that of Teaching
Elders or Ministers of the Word and Sacraments, fitted for the general use of
all Churches to the words end; or at least, such an office as was ^f necessary
use only for the times of persecution, and in want of a Christian M^gistra^e,
as some have esteemed the governinge Elders to be.

But in the Doctors opinion, who holds the episcopal function (such as ours
(...) at this ^^y) to be of divine institution; it was neither so
extraordinary or temporary, a^ that of the Apostles, Prophets, and
Evangelists specially appointed for the first planting and establishing of the
Churches; neither of necessary use only for the time of persecution and in
want of a Christian Magistrate, (...) some have esteemed the governing Elders
to be.

Therefore the episcopal function (such as ours is at this day) in the D.
opinion, who holds it to be of divine institution; is such an ordinary and
perpetual function as is the function of teaching Elders or Ministers of the
word and sacraments, fi^ted for the general use of all Churches to the worlds
end. Or thus.

Whatsoever function was once of divine institution, and still remeineth
lawful and good; the same is either arbytrary and at the pleasure of Church
and Magistrate to receive or refuse: or else is generally perpetually and
immutably necessary:

But the episcopal function, in the D. opinion, was once of divine
institution, and still remains lawful and good, and no^ arbitrary and at the
pleasure of Church and Magistrate, to receive or refuse.

Therefore (in the Doctors opinion) it is generally perpetually and immutably
necessary.

And consequently, the maine doctrine of the Doct. sermon, which he raises
from his text, and set down in these words. The episcopal function is of
apostolical and divine institution; or thus, The function of Bps. is lawful
and good, as having divine both institution and approbatio^, must thus be
understood. q. d. the function of Bishops, such as ours are, at this day, (viz.
Diocesa^ and sole ruling Bb.) is such an apostolical or divine ordinance, as
may be called divinum jus (Gods law) as being of general and perpetual use
for the Churches of Christ.

Notwithstanding because we differ in judgment from the D. Sect.
not only touching the perpetuity of this office; but also touching the first
original thereof; esteeming it to be of humane and not of divine institution:
yea, seeing we deny the function, not only of sole-ruling Bishops, but also of
D^ocesan and Provincial Bishops, lifted up in degree of office and ministry
above other Ministers, to be of divine or Apostolical institution: I will
therefore join issue with the Doctor in his own terms, and (as respondent in
this question) stand to maintain the contrary assertions, scz. that the
function of Bishops such as ours are, (viz. as himself explaineth his own
meaning sermon. page 52.) Diocesan and provincial Bishops, superior in degree
to other Ministers, having a singularity of pre-eminence for term of life; and
a p^^relesse power both of ordination and jurisdiction) is neither of
apostolical, nor of divine institution.

And first, because he boasts, that he has proved his assertion from the
text, which he handled: I will take liberty to follow him, in his rovings at
random, and to draw together into one continued tract, whatsoever he has in
any part of his sermon or defense thereof, that carries any color of
argument, to justify the doctrine, which he pretends, to have drawn from the
true and natural explication of his text; that his Refuters censure may
appear to be true, when he says (answ. page 4.) that his text yeildeth
nothing to prove his kind of Bishops; nor to show any such quality of their
function as he imagines. The which being done, I will in the second part, 1.
Examine all other testimonies, or arguments, which he draws from the
Scriptures, to justify his assertion, that all men may see, it cannot be a
divine ordinance, since it has no foundation in the word of God. 2. Though
that first point of his 5. concerning the Elders, be (as has bin proved to
this question impertinent, yet will I take the like course with him therein. 3
and lastly though he casts of all the testimonies of the new divines either
as incompetent being parties (as he ^aith) or as misalledged by him; I will
prove them both truly and rightly alleged, and as competent as any he
brings.

THE FIRST PART. THE THIRD BOOK.
Chap. 1. Containing an answer to the third Chap. of the Doctors 2. book,
wherein he labors (but in vain) to mainteyne the first argument in his
sermon, viz. That the seven Churches of Asia (whereof his text speaks) were
Dioceses.
We are now at the length come to see, how artificially and soundly he
collecteth from his text, Sect. ^.
the Doctrine which he principally insisteth on, viz. That the function or
calling of diocesan Bishops (such a^ ours are) is of Divine institution. He
says (page 94. of his sermon.) it is proved by the explication of his text,
which stands in this assertion; that the Bishops here meant by angels, were
such Bishops (for the substance of their calling) as ours are. His argument
therefore in an Enthymem runs thus; The Bishops meant by angels, Ap^^. ^.
20. were such Bishops as ours are: Therefore the function of Bishops, such as
ours are, is of divine institution. And in a plain syllogism (according to
the course of his own reasoning, Def: lib 4. p. 2. and 3. thus: The function
of such as are meant by the angels, Apoc. ^. 20. is of divine institution.
Bishops, such as ours be, are meant by the angels, Apoc. ^. 20. Therefore the
function of such Bishops as ours be, is of divine institution.


Here I willingly subscribe to the proposition, because the name of angels and
Stars holden in Christ's right hand, does argue his sending and approbation:
but I flatly deny the Assumption, or Antecede^t of his Enthimem, as having no
foundation in his text, nor any one sound reason, either in his sermon, or in
the defense thereof, to make it good. For though he will at no hand endure to
hear, of any solo power of rule, either for ordination or jurisdiction in
Bishops: yet since I have proved that our Bps. are sole-ruling Bishops, and
that he does underhand give such a power unto them (and that, iure apostolico)
if he will strongly conclude, the Bishops meant by Angels. Apoc. 1. 20. to be
such Bishops as ours are; he must clearly prove (which he can never do, nor as
yet ever attempted to do) that the Bishops meant by Angels, Apoc. 1. 20. were
sole-ruling Bishops. But that his own conscience may be the better convinced,
of the weakness of his reasoninge, and of his abusing the text which he
handles, he is to be put in mind, that himself (sermon. page 52. 53.) does thus
unfold the substantial parts of the calling of ou^ Bishops, to wit, that
they are Di cesan and provincial Bishops, superior in degree to other
Ministers, having a singularity of pre-eminence, for term of life, and a
peer^lesse power both of ordination and jurisdiction. For hence it follows,
that if he have not proved the Bishops meant by Angels in his text, to be 1.
some of them provincial and and other some diocesan Bishops. 2. and all of
them to be superior in degree to other Ministers. 3. as having a singularity of
pre-eminence duringe life, and 4. a peerless power of ordination, 5. and of
jurisdiction: (if I say these particulars be not sufficiently fortified), then
it follows that he has left naked, the main point which he should have
confirmed; namely, that the Bishops here meant by Angels, were such Bps. for
the substance of their calling as ours are. Now it is apparent to all that
peruse his sermon and the defense thereof, that he never indeavoureth to prove
any one of those Angels mentioned in his text to be a provincial Bishop, or in
the power of ordination to have a peerless pre-eminence above others. For
though he tell us (sermon. page 18.) that some of the 7. Churches were mother
cities and (de^. lib. 2. page 63.) that some of the succeeding Bishops were
Metropolitanes: yet all his strength is spent in proovinge every of those
Churches to be a diocese, and consequently their Bishops to be diocesan
Bishops. And though he speak some what for a preheminent power of jurisdiction
in these Angels (sermon. page 49. and def. lib. 3. page 135.) yet in all his
dispute of ordination, he is silent of them altogether. It remains then that
we examine how well he has proved the Bishops which are called the Angels of
the 7. Churches to be like unto our Bishops in those particulars. sc. that they
were 1. Diocesan Bishops, 2. Superior in degree to other Ministers. 3. as
having a singularity of pre-eminence duringe life: and 4. a peerless power of
jurisdiction or (as he expounds himself, Def. lib. 3. page 135.) a
corrective power over other Ministers.

To prove the first, s^. that those Angels were diocesan Bishops, Sect. ^.
that is to say, in the large extent of their authority over an whole diocese,
like to our diocesans; the only argument that he has either in his sermon or
defense, is drawn from the form or constitution of those Churches whereof
they were Angels, which he peremptorily affirms (but very weakly proves) to
be dioceses properly The Doct. only argument to prove, the Angels to be
Diocesa^ Bishops, is unsound, in both propositions.
and not parishes; he should say, that those Churches were dioceses, such as
ours are over which our Bishops are placed; wherefore to conclude his purpose,
he must reason (in an Enthymem) thus.

The 7. Churches whereof those Angels were Bishops were Dioceses such as ours
are. Therefore those Angels (or the Bishops there meant by Angels) were Diocesan
Bishops like to our Diocesans.

The Antecedent is an erroneous fancy forged by the Doctor and has nether
testimony nor reason to support it, as shall appear by and by. In the mean
while, be it known to him, that his c^sequence also is to be rejected as weak
and unsound. And may it please him to reduce his Enthymeme to a perfect
syllogism, he shall soon discern it; for to make a supply of the
proposition, which is presupposed in the consequence of his reasoninge, he must
argue thus, The Angels or Bishops of such Churches as are Dioceses properly,
and n^^ parishes, are Diocesan and not parishonall Bishops. But the 7. Churches
in Asia, were Dioceses properly, and not parishes. Therefore the Angels or
Bishops of those 7. Churches, were diocesan properly, and not parishionall
Bishops.
In which proposition so supplied, if there be a necessary truth, then must the
Doctor confess, (though against the hair, and contrary to his former
persuasion) that the Bishops of whom mention is made Acts. 20. 28. and phil.
1. ^. were diocesan Bishops; because the Churches of Ephesus and Philippi, in
his opinion were properly dioceses. And if one of our Bishops may in his
visitation apply to al^ the Ministers of his diocese those words of the Apostle
Acts. 20. 28. that they should attend the whole flock etc. (as he says lib.
2. page 105.) then he must acknowledge all those Ministers, to be properly
Diocesan and not parishonall Pastors, because the whole flock or Church (in
such a speech) is properly a Diocese and not a parish. Moreover by the like
consequence, he must acknowledge, that the Prophets and Teachers mentioned 1.
Cor. 12. 28. were for the extent of their authority equal with the Apostles;
that is, all universal Ministers and none affixed to any particular Church or
Diocese: because the Church, wherein God is said to ordeyne them, is the
universal Church militant, as he affirms lib. 1. page 227. and lib 2. page 4.
Also that Titus was properly a national Bishop, and not Diocesan or
provincial, because the Church of Crete whereof he was Bishop, was properly a
National Church, and not a province or diocese; And that the Bishops of our
own Church (whose function he will have to be of divine institution) are
properly, national also, and not diocesan or provincial: because the Church
of England whereof they are Bishops, is neither diocese nor province, but
properly a nation or national Church. Wherefore if the Doctor does not
wilfully shut his eyes against the light; he may se, that though he could
prove those. 7. Churches to be properly dioceses; yet it will not follow (as
he supposes) that the Angels of those Churches were properly diocesan Bishops.
So that if he fail also of his hope to prove (or ^ather boast in vain of that
proof, which he professes (lib. 2. pa 3.) to have drawn from his text to
show) that the 7. Churches of Asia were properly dioceses; then may he sit
down in silence with the loss of his cause; till he has found out a new text
(in case any other can be found) to justify the function of our Diocesan
Bishops.

His argument which (as he says sect. 2. cap. 3.) is grounded Section. 3. Ref.
pa. 53. D. lib. 2. cap. 3. page 43. sect. 3.
upon the text, was (in his sermon. page 17. and 18.) proposed to prove a more
large Concl^sion (viz. that in the Apostles times and in the age followinge,
the Churches whereof the Bishops were called Angels, to wit, all visibles
Churches endowed with power of ecclesiastical government, were Dioceses
properly and not parishes:) wherefore before we try, how well he has proved
those 7. churches to be Dioceses; let us first see how absurdly he deals in
strayning his text to a larger extent, I mean to justify that general
conclusion before mentioned. The words which ^ay down his argument are these,
For whereas our Savior Christ, writing to the Churches of Asia numbreth but
seven, and naming the principal, and (some of them) mother-cities) of Asia,
says: The^ stars were the angels of those 7. churches; it cannot be denied
but that the Ch^ whereof they were Bishops, were great and ample cities, and
not cities alone, but also the Countries adjoining. From the last words of
which-sentence, the refuter frames this connexive Syllogism. If the Churches
of Asia, to which our Savior Christ writ^, were great and ample cities, and
not the cities alone, but also the Countries adjoining, then they were Dioceses
properly and not parishes. But the Churches of Asia were such: therefore they
were Dioceses etc.
And adds, that the Assumption lies, page 18. and the conclusion page 17.
whereby it appears, that the last words of the proposition which is
supplied, (viz. then they were Dioceses properly and not parishes) must not be
restreyned to the 7* Churches of Asia only; but rather understood of all the
visible Churches which were in the world at that time, and in the age
following: as the words of his conclusion before delivered do show.

Notwithstanding because the re^uter rejects the consequence of the
proposition, and says, it is naught, the Doctor finding himself unable to
make it good, disgorgeth his stomach against his The D. unable to make good his
own reason, seeks to make his Ref. logic naught.
Refuter: and thinking to make his logic naught, asks (page 43. sect. 3.) if
he cannot frame a Syllogism with hope to answer it, unless the proposition
have a consequence which he may deny, and (as if he were a Puny that had not
learned the grounds of logic) entreats him that the Proposition may be
simple, and afterward charging him not to know what the hypothesis or thing
supposed in a connexive syllogism is, takes upon him Magistraliter to teach
him how to know it, and wills him to dispose his connexive proposition into
an Enthymem, and gives him to wit, that what part is wanting to make up a
syllogism, the same is presupposed as the hypothesis whereon the consequence is
grounded: and so goes on along in instructing his Refuter in logical points:
where I leave him. And on the Refuters behalf I answer, 1. that though he is
not perhapps so great a logician as Master Doctor; yet he is not ignorant how
to reduce an Enthymem into a simple Syllogism, he has often done it before
the Doctor drew him into his school, as the reader may see in his answer
page 9. 29. 70. 73. 109. 139. 145. 154. 155. and 156; and so has proved The D.
a false witness.
him to be a false witness, in saying as he does, (page 44. and 45.) that he
knows not what is the hypothesis, or thing presupposed in a connexive
proposed in a connexive proposition; and that he must unlearn that art (if he
will not be counted a Trifler) of flinging all arguments into a connexive
syllogism, that he may have a consequence to cavil with. ^. but does not the
D. himself frame many co^nexive Syllogismes in this Defense? See lib. 1. page
67. 84. 92. 101. 134. 165. and 180. in the rest of his books many others may
be found; besides sundry Enthymemes which he leaves void of that supply, that
should reduce to a perfect syllogism. Wherefore if his Refuter be worthy so often
to be reproved (as he is by the Doctor lib. 1. page 109. and 146. and here, et
alibi passim) for his connexive Syllogismes, however another might do it; yet
I may here tell the D. it becomes not him to do it: Turpe est Doctori cum
culpa redarguit ipsum. But had the Doctor made none yet the use of such
Syllogismes is common, both with Divine^ and Logicians of good account Does not
Aristotle often use them? See Prior. lib. 1. cap. 40. and lib. 2. cap. 2. Are
they not by good Logicians commended as most firm and apt. both for
confirmation of truth, and co^futatio^ of error? To pass by Polanus. Log. l.
1. p. 92; Let the D. read that worthy Sadeel (Tit. de verbo Dei scripto etc.
cap. 2. and 3. Uses he not in his reasoning there both kataskevasticos and
anaskevasticos ten connexives for one simple? And does he not justify that his
course of reasoning to be very proper and fit for Theological disputations,
and that by the practice both of ancient writers and schoolmen? I take him to
be a man not much inferior to the Doct, in the Art of reasoning; but if he
disdeyne the comparison, I hope the Apostle Paul was no ways inferior to him:
let him see whether he confirms not this course. 1. Cor. 15. 12. Gal. 3. 18.
etc. Yea let the Reader remember how our blessed Savior Christ, the Prince of
Logicians often vieth them. Ioh. 5. 46. and 8. 39. 40. 55. and 15. 19. 22. 24?
Let the D. therefore say what he will, it is no disgrace to the Refuter, with
them that are wise and unpartiall to have used them. 3. Moreover since the
Doctor will needs read to his Refuter a logic lecture, to ^each him how to
reduce every Enthymem into a simple syllogism, how happens it that he gives
him no direction, how to know unto which of the premises, every thing
presupposed in the consequence, must be referred? espetially when more
assertions then one, must be supplied, as it is in the argument which himself
has framed, sect. 2. page 42. 4. But (to stand no longer in answering him
according to his foolishnes herein) know he; his Refuter whom he undertakes to
teach, has learning enough to discern (as in many other parts of his
defense, so even) in his mainteyning this argument that he scarce knows, how
to reduce some of his own Enthymems or hypotheticall arguments into simple
syllogismes. For if he will draw the words wherein his Argument lies, to
conclude the question which here he proposes to be debated; his Enthymeme must
be this. The 7. Churches whose Bishops are called angels, Apoc. 1. 20. were
great and ample cities; and not cities only but also the countries ad^^yning.
Therefore in the age followinge the visible Churches endowed with power of
ecclesiastical government, were Dioceses properly and not parishes. Now who
sees not the consequence of this Enthymem to be naught, and that for the
reasons which the Refuter yields? 1. Because it presupposes (that which is
not true, to wit) that all Churches in the world at that time, were such as
those 7. that is great and ample cities, etc. 2. because it does not appear
(neither is it true) that every of those Churches was divided into diverse
several ordinary assemblies etc. Of the later we shall speak anon. Let us
now see how he wipeth away the former.

The proposition (or consequence) says he (page 45.) is so far from Sect. 4.
Ref. page D. page 45. lib. 2.
presupposing all the Churches in the world to be great and ample cities, that
it does not so much as presuppose those 7. in Asia, to be such. That is
presupposed in the proposition; but is assumed, or affirmed in the Assumption.
Here first let it be observed, that the Doctor assumeth or affirms A flat
contradiction in the D.
in the assumption of his argument, that those 7. churches in Asia, were great
and ample cities; the falsehood whereof is so apparent to his own conscience,
that within a few lines after, (scz. 16. or 17.) he denies it again, and
says it was spoken only concerning 5. of those Churches. But 2. to dispute
the point in hand, what will the Doctor answer to his refuter (whom he makes
so ignorant in the grounds of logic) if he should argue with him in this
manner? In every Enthymem what soever is not affirmed in the Antecedent, and
yet is necessarily understood to make good the conclusion: the same is
presupposed (or taken for granted) in the consequence of the argument. But in
the Doctors Enthymem before s^t down to make good the Conclusion, this
assertion that all churches in the world were at that time such as those. 7. to
wit, great and ample Cities is necessarily understood, but not affirmed in
the An ^^cedent. therefore the same Assertion is presupposed (or taken for
granted) in the consequence of the argument. And if in the consequence of the
argument, then, in the consequence of the proposition, which comprehends both
the Antecedent, and conclusion of the Enthymem. Till his answer be heard here
unto, it shall not be amiss to peruse, what he has already answered to the
objection, which himself frames, viz. That what he says of the 7. Churches,
he would have understood of all other Churches, and therefore presupposes,
what his Refuter objecteth. First, he grants it is presupposed in his
argumentation; but not in his proposition. Then he adds, that as in other
places he is not to be blamed for concluding from other Churches to these 7: so
neither here for concluding A silly sh^^^ and an idle q^arel of the D.
from these 7. to all others, etc. The former is a silly shift, and the later
an idle quarrel. 1. True it is, the Doct. has added to the assumption in his
argumentation (as he has framed it page 42.) that which his refuter referred,
to the consequence of the proposition of his connexive Syllogism: but how will
he justify his new presupposition? viz. that his Refuter erred in referring to
the consequence of his proposition, that which the Doct. has now added to the
assumption of his new forged Syllogism? And 2. to what purpose does he tell
us, he is not to be blamed for concluding from these 7. churches to all others?
since that which his Refuter blames in him, is not his so concluding: but his
presupposing an untruth (for the inferring of his conclusion) viz. that all the
Churches in the world were (at that time when John wrote his revelation) great
and ample cities. etc. Neither 3. can he salve The D. can not salve his credit.
his creditt, by denying that he is herein blameworthy; for 1. that he
presupposes thus much, he cannot deny, seeing in his sermon, he did affirm
those 7. Churches to be great and ample cities; and now he blusheth not to
avouch, that what is verified of these 7. the same may be truly affirmed of
the rest. And since in the words immediately following (lin. 24. page 45.) he
says, that all Churches had not within their circuit great and ample cities,
he must acknowledge his former presupposall, to be a gross untruth. 4. What
relief then can he gain, by appealing (as he does) to the testimony of his
Refuter to prove, that the form and constitution of all the primitive Churches
is one and the same? for I yet hope that prejudice has not so far blinded
him, but he can see the falla ^y of his former reasoning (ab accidente) when he
presupposes all other Churches to be great and ample cities like as he said,
those 7. in The Doct. reason is ^ fallacy of the accident.
Asia were; because the form and constitution of all Churches is one and the
same? Wherefore he rages without reason, in rejecting (page 47.) that reason
which his Refuter yielded for the denial of his consequence, viz. that though
it were granted, that those 7. were great and ample Cities and the Countries
adjoyninge, yet their might be diverse other (as that of Cenchrea Romans 16.)
which were small and bounded within the walle^ of some small Town. See you
not, says the D. how he secketh about for starting holes? what if there were
other small Churches? what is that to this consequence? If th^se Ch: contained
each of them, not only the City but the Country adjoining, then they were not
parishes properly, but Dioceses. his answer if it be well weighed, is an
exception against the conclusion etc. I answer. ^. if he grant there were
other small Churches, he then justifyeth his Ref: ce^sure; both in denying that
to agree to all other Churches, which he affirms of those 7. viz. that they
were great and ample cities etc. and in rejecting the consequence of his first
Enthymem, which in concluding all Churches to be Dioceses, because those 7.
were great and ample cities, did presuppose (as himself acknowledges) that
what he affirmed of those 7. is verified of all the rest. 2. And therefore he
slaundereth his refuter in charging him, to seek about for starting holes, and
his answer to be an exception The Doct. slaundreth his Refuter
against the conclusion. For his answer is a strong engine to b^tter the
consequence of his argumentation, and ferriteth him out of that starting hole
which himself crept into for safe harbor, when he says, that what is verified
of those 7. Churches, the same may be truly affirmed of all others. 3.
Moreover, he much forgets himself, in affirming (both here and page 44.)
that his argument concludes nothing else then this, that the 7. Churches were
Dioceses. For as the conclusion which he proposes in his sermon (page 17.) to
be proved, was more general: (of all Churches in the Apostles times and the
age following) so he does expressly affirm (page 45. of this defense) that in
this argument now controverted, he concludes A flat contradiction in the D.
from those 7. churches to all others. As for his conclusion, (or closing up of
this point) wherein he calls his Refuter a froward adversary, because here he
finds fault that he concludes what these Churches were; and yet in other
places accused him, for not concluding, what they or the angels of them were;
it argues the D. himself to be a froward adversary and a false witness. His
falsehood appears in this, that as he cannot allege one word to prove The
Doct. not the Refuter is a froward ad versary and a false witness.
his accusation; so he himself acquiteth him thereof when he says, (page 45.)
that he is here blamed for concluding from these 7. Churches to all others. And
since he knows the fault which his Refuter finds, to be a naughty
consequence, which falsely presupposes all Churches to be such, as he says
those 7. were, (to wit great and ample ^ities etc.) what is it else but
frowardnes in him, that will rather justify a lie, then acknowledge a truth,
which he knows?

But since he will now restreyne his argument, to the 7. Churches, Sect. 5.
to conclude them Dioceses. I will change the conclusion of his Enthymem
(before set down sect. 3. in fine) and set it thus as follows. The 7.
Churches whose Bishops are called Angels, Apoc. 1. 20. were great and ample
cities, and not the cities alone, but also the countries adjoining. Therefore
those 7. Churches were Dioceses properly and not Parishes; yea Dioceses such as
ours are. For unless their Churches were such as our Diocesan Churches are, he
cannot strongly conclude their Bishops to be in the large extent of their
authority, like to our Diocesans. Now if I might presume to give the Doctor
any direction for the reducing of his Enthymem into a simple syllogism, I would
advise him to remember* that the Medius terminus (which never enters into the
conclusion) must needs be here, the predicatum in the antecedent, to wit,
great and ample cities etc. and to make up the proposition which is wanting,
there must be joined to it, the predicatum of the consequent, to wit, Dioceses
etc. because it has no place in the antecedent. Wherefore the proposition to
be supplied must be this. Great and ample cities together with their countries
adjoining are Dioceses properly and not parishes; yea Dioceses like to ours.
Then follow the parts of his Enthymem in order as they lie. But the 7.
Churches who^e Bishops are called Angels, Apoc. 1. 20. were great and ample
cities together with their countries adjoining. Therefore those 7. Churches
were Dioceses properly etc. In the assumption of A double untruth in the D.
assumption.
this Syllogism, or antecedent of the former Enthymem, there is a double
untruth, which the Doctor in his second thoughts discerned; for himself page
45. restreyneth the name of great and ample cities to 5. only of those 7. and
that which he grants of Ephesus (page 62.) must be acknowledged also, of all
the rest, viz. that the whole city was not the Church, until it was wholly
co^verted to the profe^sion of Christianity. Wherefore to free his argument
from both these untruths: first he quite shu^teth out this cl^use great and
ample cities; and secondly, whereas before he had said; that the 7. Churches
whose Bishops are in his text called angels, were not only the cities, but
also the countries adjoining, now he says, his meaning was, that those
Churches contained in their circuit not only the Cities, but the Cuntries
adjoyninge. Wherefore he contriveth his argument in this form, page 42. and 44.

Churches, whose circuit contained both Cities and countries adjoining were
Dioceses. The circuit of the 7. Churches contained the Cities and Countries
adjoyninge. Therefore the 7. Churches were dioceses. The assumption, he has
made good (as he supposes) with necessary proof. And the proposition, which
he took for granted, will stand (as he says page 43.) immovable, when the
foundation of our discipline will be razed. But the issue will show (I doubt
not) that the foundation of our discipline will abide firm, when his
proposition is shaken into shivers: and that his assumption has not so much as
one probable argument to support it. To make his meaning a little more plain,
in both the premises, as himself does explain his assumption thus, that the
Circuit of every one of those Churches contained both the City, and the
Country adjoyninge: so (to hold proportion therewith) his proposition must
carry this sense, that every Church, whose circuit contains a City, and the
Country adjoyninge, is a Diocese. And because he must conclude (as we have
before observed) that every one of those. 7. Churches was properly a diocese,
such as are the dioceses subjected to our Bishops; his proposition must
affirm, every Church conteyninge one City and the Country adjoining, to be
such a diocese, as these are, which we behold at this day in the Church of
England. But admit a truth in his proposition (to let pass the Church of
London, which in Q. Mary's time comprehended all the true Christians as well in
the Country adjoyninge as in the City, and yet was not a diocese but rather a
parish assembly) 1. I object his own words (Cap. 2. p. 39.) Viz. That as
with us Bathe and Wells, Lichfeild and Coventry, London and Colchester; so in
the primitive Church more Cities the^ one, with the countries adjoining made
but one diocese. And for instance in this case, he says that the Bishop of
Hera^lea had both it and Panion; the Bishop of B^^e had also Arcadiopolis etc.
he adds (page 40.) that the whole nation of the Scythians having many Cities
Towns and Castles, had all of them by ancient custom, one only Bishop, and
therefore was but one diocese, From hence then, thus I reason. Here with us,
the Christian people of these 4. Cities, Coventry, Litchfield, Colch^ster, and
London with their Countries or Shires adjoining, do not make each of them a
^everall Diocese: the same may be said of the ancient Christians, in the
cities of Heraclea, Panion, Bize, and Arcadiapolis; and in the several cities
of the nations of the Scythians. Every Church therefore whose circuit
conteyneth an whole City with the Country adjoining, is not a Diocese. And
consequently he wrangleth against the truth known to his own conscience, when
he asks (page 47.) how is it poss^^e that those Churches should not be
Dioceses, which conteyne ample cities with the countries, (such as we call
Shires) belonging to them?

And to manifest the more fully, the falsehood of his proposition, Sect. 6.
I here renew that reason, which his Refuter objected (answer. page 54.)
against the consequence of the proposition by him framed: sc. Because it does
not appear (neither is it true) that every one of those Churches was divided
into diverse several ordinary assemblies, all of them depending upon some one,
as the chief; without power of ecclesiastical government, a part in
themselves. For since every of our Diocesan Churches is so divided: till this
appear, how can he conclude, every of those Churches to be properly such a
Diocese, as are the Dioceses subjected to our Bishops, which is the point that
he must prove, as is before showed. Notwithstanding the D. in his reply (p. 47.
and 48.) insulteth over his Ref: in this manner. Is this the denial of any
thing but the conclusion, is not the denial of the co^clusio^ an evidence that
the answerer is confounded? and is not co^fusio^ a manifest sign, that he
writes against his conscience, resolved not to be persuaded, though his
conscience be conv^ct^d? Whereunto I answer. 1. If the Refuters words be
nothing but the denial of the conclusion; Either the D. rayleth and
slaundereth, or else contradicts himself and his maine assertion.
then in the D. opinion a Diocese, and a Church divided into diverse several
ordinary assemblies etc. are one and the same thing: so that none other Church,
then that which is so divided, can properly or truly be called a Diocese; and
consequently, when he says (page 30.) that though those Churches had not been
divided into several congregations, yet had they (each of them) been Dioceses;
his meaning must be this. q. d. though none of those Churches had been a
Diocese, yet each of them had been a Diocese. In like manner when he affirms
(page 69.) that in the Apostles times the Churches were not divided into
several parishes, his meaning must be this and no other. q. d. In the Apostles
times, the Churches were no Dioceses. Which is to contradict and condemn of
falsehood, the very maine assertion, which in the second part of his sermon, he
undertook to prove. And when he argues there in this manner (The Churches in
the Apostles times were not divided into several parishes; and therefore the
presbyteries in their days were appointed not to parishes but to Dioceses) his
purpose is to reason very profoundly to this effect. q. d. in the Apostles
times, there were no Dioceses: and therefore in their times the Presbyteries
were appointed unto Dioceses. Behold we, what the Doctor has gained in
avouching his Refuters reason, to be nothing else but a denial of the
conclusion. Are not the consequences of this assertion clear evidences that it
is himself that is confounded; and that writes against his conscience, as one
resolved not to be persuaded, though his conscience be convicted?

2. For (to return to the point in hand) as the D. knows well enough, that
his Refuters words are bent against the consequence of his argument: for his
meaning is clearly nothing else then this, q. d. though it could be proved
that every of these 7. Churches was a great and ample city etc. yet it
follows not that they were Dioceses (such as ours are) because it does not
appear that every of those Churches was divided into diverse several ordinary
assemblies etc. and upon the same ground; the proposition of his argument
considered in the sense before explayned, is still to be rejected: to wit,
because to make any Churches dioceses (such as ours are) it is not enough to
show, that their circuit comprehends a City and the Country adjoining; he
must also demonstrate those. 3. branches, which he observes in the Refut:
words viz. 1. that the Church is divided into diverse ordinary assemblies. 2.
that all of them depend upon some one as the Chief. 3. and that they have not
any of them, the power of ecclesiastical government a part in themselves.

But the Doctor not willingly directly to contradict his Refuter: Sect. 7.
(in these particulars) perverteth the drifte of his words, as if he had
intended to prove, that those 7. Churches were not dioceses, because they were
not so divided etc. And therefore forgetting what part himself and his Refuter
do bear in this controversye; he urges him (as if he were the opponent) to
prove his assertions, holding i^ sufficient, for him to deny them, till proof
be made of the^. Yet knowing, forsooth, that none of his Opposites are able to
prove any of them; and desyring from his soul to satisfye them in this cause as
brethren, he will briefly disprove them. Who would have thought that he would
have bin so kind, to an adversary so froward, yea convicted and resolved (as
he says) not to be persuaded? Perhaps he takes this pains for some others
sake, of whom he has better hope. Well, let us listen to his discourse; and
(having first observed what he undertakes to disprove) we will way the force
of his arguments with as indifferent an hand as we can. The first point wherein
he contradicts his Refuter is, that he says, It does not appear (neither is
it true) that every one of those. 7. Churches, was divided into diverse
several ordinary assemblies. The which if he will disprove, he must make it
appear to be a truth, that every of those Churches was divided into diverse
ordinary assemblies; now let us hear what he has to say in this case. As
touching the first (says he) I have often wondered, what our brethren mean to
argue from the example of those Churches, which were not divided into parishes,
to those that be. But why does he wonder, where there is no cause of wonder?
Let him surcease his wondering The wonder is at the Doct. not at the Refuter.
till he show; both where his brethren have so argued; and why such an
argument will not hold? And 2. why gives he all his friends just cause, to
wonder at his proceeding, that wandreth from his purpose; or rather justifyeth
his Refut: in that which he undertook to disprove? For he does afterward
clearly acknowledge, that which now is closely implied; sc: that the ancient
Churches remeyned for a time undivided.

3. Moreover to answer him in his own words; we may wonder, what he means
to argue from the example of those Churches which were not divided into
parishes, to those that be; and on the contrary from those that in later ages
were divided, to those which at the first were not. The former may be seen p.
5. where to prove, that the Christian people of an whole province or diocese,
though consisting of many particular congregations is rightly termed a Church;
he alleges the pattern of those Apostolic Churches at Jerusalem and
Antioche etc. which in the Apostles times were not distinguished into parishes
as himself acknowledges, page 69. The later appears by this, that his best
reason, to prove that each Church had from the beginning, the circuit of the
city and country adjoined; is the practice of succeeding ages (p. 49. and 55.)
which after division of parishes, combined them in one body under one Bishop.
As for his questions following, though I see not how they will serve his
purpose; yet will I breefly touch upon them, and give him leave to make his
best advantage of the answer. 1. would they have, says he, the Church of a
City and country belonging to it, to be all but one congregation assemblinge
ordinarily in one place? I answer; so long as the number of Christians in any
City and Country adjoyninge, do not exceed the proportion of a popular
congregation, I hold it best they continue undivided, as the first Apostolic
Churches did: but when the people of any City and Country are so increased;
that their number will suffice for diverse several assemblies, it were absurd
to bind them perpetually unto an ordinary assembling in one place. 2. Then
tell me (says he) whether we that do and of necessity must, consist of
diverse congregations, are to follow the example of any ancient Church, as it
was before it was divided, or as it was after it was divided? I affirm, that
wheresoever necessity requires Church Assemblies to be multiplied, the
practice of the Apostles, and the ancient Apostolic Churches, is to be
imitated of us, in giving to those new erected assemblies, both the name and
form or constitution of Churches, and the like power for government, which
those apostolic Churches so multiplied did enjoye. If in this answer the
Doctor can find that which he desires, I shall gladly see what he will hence
infer for the disproving of his Refuters assertion, in any one branch
thereof. 3. He adds, They will say perhaps, that each congregation after the
division was as that one before, nothing less; let them prove that, and I will
yield in the whole cause. We say it in deed, and will not shrink from
affirminge, that in the Apostles times, wheresoever the Christians of any City
or Country, which at first made one Church, were distributed into diverse,
there each congregation was in form or constitution like to that one before,
and if it be not so, why does he not disprove it? Why does he again put
himself into the place of a respondent; giving his reader just occasion to
think, that he has nothing of any moment to oppose against us in this point?
As for the ages following in Constantines time or there aboutes, when Bishops
gained the over sight and government of all the Churches that were multiplied
in the City and Country adjoyninge to it, their example cannot be held so
fit as the former to determine the question of divine institution; either for
the constitution of Church Assemblies; or for the jurisdiction of Bishops and
Presbyters, wherefore the Doctor is much deceyved, if he think that his
testimonies from the decrees of councels etc. (before cited as he says) can
convince or persuade the conscience of his opposites, to hold their practyse
for a divine or apostolic ordinance. But to what purpose does he trif^le time
in these By-questio^s, which make him forget what he promised to prove, viz.
that every of those 7. Churches, was divided into several ordinary assemblies?
Yet in one point more, we must follow him, sc. when he indeavoreth to show,
that the Apostolic Churches were Dioceses before they were divided; for this
had bin very direct to the main question in hand; if he had added this clause,
that they were Dioceses such as ours are; but he foresawe, that this addition,
would have quite marred his market; notwithstanding attendance shall be given, to
that he has delivered in defense of the point, which he mainteyneth.

It will be said (says he) that the Churches before they were divided were not
Dioceses. Whereto I answer, that the circuit of the Church, in Sect. 8.
the intention of the Apostle or first founder of it, was the same as well
before the division of parishes as after. Here for the better apprehending of
his meaning, if I should ask why or how the circuit was the same? I suppose,
he would send us to those words, which he has within a few line, after, viz.
that the circuit of every Church, even from the beginning (aswelas after the
multiplying of perishes) included not only the city but the country thereto
belonging. And if this be his meaning (as it must unless he will show
himself unconstant) then behold how he is The D. must^ gg still.
enforced, principium petere, when from hence he infers the conclusion which
himself sets down in the page following (50.) sc. that though the 7.
Churches had not b^ne divided into several congregations; yet had they each of
them been Dioceses. And because he cannot endure a connexive proposition in his
Ref: I will assay, to draw his reasoning into a simple syllogism, and if he
can be^ter the argument, let him take his own away. Every Church, whose
circuit, in the intention of the Apostle, or first founder ^f it, was the same
(as including not only the city, but the country thereto belongi^g) as well
before the division ^f Parishes as after, (every such Church I saw) was a
Diocese from the beginning, though not divided then into several C^ngregations.
But such was the circuit of the 7. Churches, in the intention of the Apostles,
or their first founders. herefore they were Dioceses from the beginning, though
not yet divided into many several congregations.


Now let the Doctor and his dearest friends compare this syllogism, with the
maine argument which himself contrived (and is before set down sect. 5.) and
if they can find any such material difference in the medius terminus and the
premis^es, as may give the D. a discharge from begging the question, let them
show it. Mean while I doubt not, but, every unpartiall reader will perceive
his poverty in this dispute, especially seeing he supporteth the Assumption of
his principal argument with the same answer page ^4. For who, that denies
any of the Apostolic Churches, to comprehend the whole city and country
adjoining (as Dioceses in succeeding ages did) will believe, that the circuit
of those Churches, was the same, when there were but few, that it was when
many, yea all were Christians? and who, that denies (as the Refuter does) the
circuit of a city and country adjoining, to be sufficient to make a Church a
Diocese; unless it be divided into many congregations, will not take him for a
very trifler, which, to make good the contrary, shall yield him none other
argument then this; that a Church not yet divided into several assemblies is
notwithstanding a Diocese; If the founder thereof, did intend, that her
circuit should include city and country, as a divided Diocese does. Wherefore
to give the Doctor a direct and Both premises of the Doctor argument are
unsound.
downeright answer to his argument last contrived, I at once reject both the
promises, as erroneous and unsound.

First touching the proposition; since the Doctor places the very essence (and
life if I may so speak) of a Diocesan Church, in her circuit, including both
city and country adjoining; so long as the truth thereof remeineth
questionable; (as it does with the Refuter, who accounts such a circuit the
material cause only, and estemeth the very form that gives being unto a
Diocesan Church to be her distribution into many assemblies, as members of one
body:) a mean logician may see, that in a direct and orderly course of
proceeding, he should have yielded us some one or other Medius terminus, which
might have served to prove, that such a circuit makes a Diocesan body,
although it have no parish assemblies to be members thereof. But now in
arguing (as he does) that the ancient Churches, though yet undivided, were
Dioceses because their founders intended, that their circuit should extend
over city and country, as the later Diocesan Churches did: the error of his
reasoning is no less gross and absurd, then if he had said, Those Churches
were Dioceses intentionally; Therefore they were Dioceses properly or The D.
reasoning is gross and absurd.
actually. For all men know that whatsoever Church is properly a Diocese (as
he says all the first Apostolical Churches were) the same is actually and in
very deed a Diocese; and therefore has actually and in deed the circuit of a
Diocese: but if it have the circuit of a Dioc^se, only in the intention of the
founder; and not actually; it is impossible, it should be a dioce^e actually or
properly, but intentionally only; especially in their opinion, who place (as
the D. does) the very form and being, of a diocesan Church, in the circuit of
her jurisdiction, conteyninge both City and Country adjoining. Let the D. here
call to mind what he said page 18. of his sermon, and mainteineth in the next
chapter of his defense p. 65. viz. that when the Apostles first preached to the
chief Cities of any nation, they intended the conversion of the whole nation;
and that when having by Gods blessing converted some, they placed presbyters in
any of those chief Cities; their intent and hope was by their ministry to
converte, as well in the Countries adjoining as in the City, so many as did
belong unto God. He adds (in his defense) that they whose ministry was
intended for the conversion of the City and Country (he should have-sayd of the
whole nation) to their care or charge the people of that City and Country or
nation belonged, both for the first convertinge of them, and for the government
of them being converted. Whence it is also that he says (lib. 4. page 131.)
that it was from the beginning intended, that the Bishop: of the mother City
should be the chief in the Province, notwithstanding he constantly holds
(lib. 2. page 114. lib. 3. page 21. and lib. 4. page 7. and 31.) that the
Bishops appointed by the Apostles over Mother Cities, were at the first
actually but Bishops of their own Dioceses, not actually Metropolitanes,
until diverse Churches being constituted, and Bishops ordained in the several
Dioceses of the province, there was a consociation and subordination of them,
unto one chief primate. Now if the intention of the Apostles in the
constituting of Churches and presbyters or Bishops in Mother Cities thereby
intendinge the conversion of the whole nation, and the multiplying of Churches
and Bishops, as the light of the Gospel should spread it self into the
several Dioceses: if this intention I say, cannot persuade the Doctor to take
the first Churches and Bishops in Mother-Cities to be actually Mother
Churches, or Metropolitan Bishops: Surely then he might think us very Id^otes,
if we should take his bare word (when he disagreeth with himself) for a fit
proof to persuade us, that the like intention (of erecting a Church in any
city or Diocese, under an hope of subjecting the people thereof to the
obedience of the gospel) can make that Church actually or properly a Diocese,
till there be distribution of particular assemblies, subordinate to the
jurisdiction of the Church and ministry, first erected in the city.

Secondly, to come to the Assumption, if there be any truth in it, his Refuter
may make more advantage by it, to conclude those Sect. 9.
Churches not to be Dioceses properly or actually. For,

No Church, whose circuit includes the city (wherein it is seated,) and the
Country adjoining, only in the intention of the first founder, but not
actually or in execution, is a Diocese actually and properly: if therefore the
7. Churches, were Churches whose circuit included the cities (wherein they were
seated) and tho countries adjoining, only in the intention of the first
founders* but not actually, or in execution. (Then it follows that) The 7.
Churches were not Dioceses actually or properly.

The Proposition is grounded upon that difference which the Doctor himself
puts betwixt the actual being of Metropolitan Bishops, or Churches, and
the intention of those that first fo^nded Churches in Mother-cities. And the
Assumption is in effect the Doctors own assertion, as he explaineth himself
page 69. 73. and 128; for in the last place quoted he says expressly, that the
Coun^ries subject to the civil jurisdiction of any city, were actually under
the Bishops charge after their conversion, and intentionally before; wherefore
without contradiction to himself, he cannot rejecte the conclusion. So that if
his Defense of Diocesan Churches, shall hold proportion with the grounds of
his disputation; he must The Doct. in his next, must change and add and
detract as here he does, or else etc.
(in his next) first, change his maine ten^^t or conclusion, and plainly
profess that howsoever he undertook to prove, that the Apostolic Churches
were Dioceses properl^, yet that was not his meaning, but rather this, that
they were Dioces^s intentionally, that is, that it was their founders intention
that in time to come, (after all the people of city and country were converted)
they should become Dioceses actually and properly. And s^condly as he has
already (to color the falsehood of his anteceden^) with an Index expurgatorius,
wiped away this clause great and ampl^ cities; and by a Metonimie or some other
trope (as we shall hear an one) turned his laying, they were the cities and
countries, to this meaning, the circuit of the Churches contained both cities
and countries adjoining: so now, he must once again limit the word, contained,
to an intentionall containing, as if he had said, it was the intention of their
^^unders, that in time they should conteyne such a circuit. But (to pass
forward^s) this position is in truth more absurd and incredible then the
former. The Doct. proposition more absurd then before.
For in affirming before, that the circuit of every of those Churches
contained both the city and country, with a favorable construction being
understood, to speak (after that usual Me^onymie which he notes page 52.) of
the Christian people in city and country, his assertion might the more easily
gain his Refuters assent and allowance, to pass vncontrolde: so long at
least, as he should remain constant in his judgment touching the multiplying,
or distinguishing of parishes in such a circuit, which in his sermon (page 18.
and 22.) he denies to be done in the Apostles times, and when the Apostle John
wrote the Revelation. But now in avouching the circuit of each Church, to be
the same from the beginning, that it was after the division of parishes
thoughout the whole Diocese: his reasons must be very pregnant and
demonstrative, before he can draw any judicious reader that opposes to him in
this controversy, to subscribe to his assertion. But let the Doctor speak I
pray, Even as (says he page 49.) the subject of the leaven is in the whole
Bache in the intention of him that puts it into the lump^; though the loaves
be not yet divided; yea though but a little of the Dough be yet (after it is
newly put in) seasoned: So it is with the Church and the circuit thereof. If
the Doctor himself had made the application of his comparison) we should more
easily have discerned, how fit or unfit, it is for his purpose. The point
which he would (at least should) illustrate by this similitude is this, that
the circuit of the Church in the intention of the Apostle or first founder of
it, was the same as well before the division of parishes as after. Me thinks
therefore, to make the prota^is of his comparison answerable to the apodosis he
should have rather said, Even as the subject of the leven in the intention of
him that put it into the lump, is the same while the leaves are undivided, that
it is after. But if he had so proposed it, then it had rather darkened then
lightened that which he indeavoureth to persuade. Because it is better known
what the subject of the leven is, before the lump be divided, then after:
whereas in his assertion before expressed, the state or constitution of the
Church, after parishes were multiplied in city and country, and subordinated to
the jurisdiction of one consistory, is brought (as better known) to show
how fat the circuit of the Church and spiritual jurisdiction stretched,
when as yet but an handful of people (in comparison of the rest) was seasoned
by the Ministry of the gospel. Perhaps his meaning is that as he which
puts a little leven into an whole bache of bread, intends that the leven
should in time, spread her virtue over all, and so the whole mass of meal
made one body of a well levened lump: so also the Apostles and first founders
of Churches, when they first planted a Church, and placed Presbyters in any
city or Diocese, did intend, that the leven of their doctrine, being conveyed
into the hearts of the whole multitude, all might be made one body of a
Diocesan Church. If this be so; seeing in this comparison the Church is as the
leven, or that part of meal which is first leavened, we may by his own
comparison discover the absurdity of his former assertion. For as the circuit
of the leven (or meal leavened) is at the first putting in, (and for a while
after) far less, then when all is leavened: so also the circuit of the
Church, at the first erecting of it in any city (and for some ages after) was
far less then when the whole people of the Diocese embraced the faith.
Again, as it is contrary to the intent of him that puts in the leven, that
the loaves being once divided, should any longer rem^ine parts of one lump;
or that among the loaves more regard should be had to that little portion of
meal that was first sowred, to make of it a Mother-loafe, unto w^^ the rest of
the loaves should owe any homage: so it may seem (by this comparison) to be
contrary to the intent of the Apostles and first founders of Christian
Churches, that when an whole Diocese became seasoned, and distributed into many
congregations; there should be any such combination, or subor^ination of those
Churches, that all should be subject to the jurisd^ction, of one Ca^hed^all
Church seated in the city. But to leave his comparison to his his second
thoughts, if he can make any more advantage of it hereafter; I now demand how
he knows that the intention of the Apostles was such as he immagineth, viz.
that all the people of City and Country after the conversion of the whole
should continue parts of the Church, which at the first consisted but of a few.

Master D. supposing (as it seems) it were but reason to answer Sect. 10. ad
sect. 6. p. 49
thereunto, does aforehand prevente it, and will have us to understand that he
knows it. And therefore goes on and says. If you ask me how I know this?
I answer. First, because the whole Church of God ever since the Apostles days
unto our age, has so understood the intention of the Apostles, and of their
first founders; the circuit of every Church, having from the beginning,
included not only the City but the Country thereto belonging. I must here
demand again; how came it that the Church of God, did understand the Apostles
intention to be such? And how comes the D. to know that they had any such
understanding? 1. Did the Church of God receive their understanding in this
point from the mouths or pens of the Apostles? If they discovered their
intention by writing; be the Doctor entreated, we pray him, to show us where
we may read it for our learning? If not by writing, but by tradition? It is
strange a matter of such consequence, for the well-orderinge of all Churches to
the worlds end, should be committed to such an happ-hazzard. 2. And how has
the Church informed the Doctor of their understanding? has he received it
also by tradition, or from the writings of the The D. first reason confuted by
himself.
Lords worthies in all ages? Why does he not either quote us their books
wherein they affirm it; or give us the catalogue of such as have from hand to
hand conveied it to him? Till he has given satisfaction in these particulars,
let him not think but his reader will deem his first reason to be a speech
void of reason, yea a monstrous untruth confuted by himself, as shall well
appear in the examination of his reasons followinge.

His second reason he lays down thus; saying. Secondly because that division
of Churches which was 300. or 400. years after Christ, with their limits and
circuites, was ordinarily the same which had been from the beginning, as before
has been testified by diverse ancient Councels. Ordinarily and from the
beginning? So he says in deed. But 1. does any Council that he has
alleged, (page 22. and 37. or elsewhere) testify the circuites of the
Churches, to have been from the beginning of their planting by the Apostles,
the same, that they were in their own times? Is not all the question (in those
Counsels) of Country parishes, or such parts of any Country as neither
desired to have a Bishop, or were challenged of diverse Bishops? The beginning
therefore (whereof they speak) must be taken for the time of erecting Churches
in Country villages, and subordinating them to the Bishop of the City
adjoyninge. Neither yet do they ascribe this to any ordinance, or intention of
the Apostles, or first founders of the Church, in the City; but to ancient
custom, (as the words of the Ephesin Council show, which he has set down.
Can. 2. page 37.) ratified by ecclesiastical laws, and Canons (falsely called
Canons) of the Apostles. 2. But why says he, the circuites were ordinarily the
same? Means he, it was no common use to alter them? Or that it was against
order and unlawful? It cannot be the later, since he confesses (page 23.)
that if there were cause, (sc. for the greatness of the Charge and number of
people etc.) the circuites of Dioceses were lessened, and new Bishoprics
erected. Behold then, how worthily the D. reasons. The division of Churches
with their circuites, remained till 400. years after Christ, the same which
it had been from the beginning of erecting Churches in the remote parts of any
Diocese, and subordinatinge them to the Bishops of the Cities adjoyninge,
unless the greatness of the charge required the circuit to be lessened and a
new Bishopric to be established. Ergo, it was the intention of the Apostles,
that the Churches which they planted, should have the same Circuit before the
division of parishes, that they had after. May not the contrary, with much more
probability, be thus argued? When the charge of an whole diocese after the
distribution of parishes grew over great for one Bishop, and the number of
people in some parts, desired to have a new Bishop: the Circuites of Churches
or Dioceses were altered. Ergo it was never intended by the Apostles (or at
least the Fathers of those times were ignorant of any such intention) that the
Circuit of every Church should always continue the same, as well when all in
City and Country were converted, as when there were but a few. But let us
hear his third reason. Thirdly says he, because it is confessed by Beza and
testified by D. Reynoldes and others that the distribution of the Church, did
usu^ll^ fellow the division of the Common wealth: in so much that those
Countries that were subjected to the Civil jurisdiction, ^xercised in any
City, were also subject ordinarily to the ec^lesiasticall etc. Is not the
Doctors plenty (think ye) turned into mere penury; when (the testimony of
ancient Fathers and Counsels faylinge him) he is gladd to seek releife at
their hands, whose judgment otherwise (ordinarily and usually) he rejects?
And yet (alas for pity) they (whom he means) cannot yield him any comfort.
For what say they? Forsooth, that in the distribution of dioceses, provinces
and patriarchall preheminences, the state ecclesiastical followed the civil.
And when did the Church take up this Course? Do they say that the Apostles
began it, or intended any such matter? No, it was thought a convenient course
by the Bishops after the Apostles days, for the better managing of
Churchcauses in their Synods, and Meetings, that as for civil justice; so also
for ecclesiastical affairs, recourse should be had to the Cities and
Shire-townes. Neither was this order universal or perpetual, as the Doctor
himself acknowledges in Pergamus and Thyatira. page 63. yea he affirms that
by ancient custom, the whole nation of Scythians, having many Cities, towns,
and Castles, made but one Diocese: and that the Churches throughout a large
Province, were but part of one Paraecia or diocese, as may be seen page 10. and
40. of this his defense. Wherefore this reason of his, does also co^fure (and
not confirm) his fantastical conceit of the Apostles intention. And it
argues he spoke directly against the light of his conscience, when he said;
that the whole Church of God, ever since the Apostles days unto our age, has
so understood (as he does) the intention of the Apostles, and the first
founders of the apostolic Churches. Wherefore since he has no better ground
for his bold affirmation, (that the circuit of each Church in the intention
of the Apostles or first founders was the same before the division of parishes
that it was after) we may well take his conclusion which he infers
thereupon, to be laid in the sand of his own vain immagination, viz. that
though those Churches had not bin divided into several congregations, yet had
they each of them been dioceses.

But now (to return to the point, from which he has long wandered Sect. 11.
ad sect. 6. page 50.
at his pleasure, to little purpose) he adds, that at the time of writing the
Revelation, it is more then probable, that they contained diverse
congregations. If it be more then probable, then, I hope, his arguments
whereon he builds are more then probabilities, even firm and invincible
demonstrations. But if there be not so much as a shadow of probability, in
any thing he has alleged; no man can justly blame his Refuter, if he say;
It is more then probable the Doctor is deceived; and seeks to deceive, with
his vain braggs of proving, what he avoucheth. Let us therefore examine his
best probabilities. The first is, That* when Paul had continued but two years
at Ephesus, the holy Ghost testifies (Act. 19. 10.) that all which inhabited
Asia (so properly called) did hear the word of the Lord. And having both
placed many Presbyters amongst them; and continued with the^ for the space of
three yearees; afterward sends T^mothy to be their Bishop, who ordinarily
continued among them, until his death. And that we should not think, there
was but that Church at Ephesus in Paul's time, he makes mention of the Churches
of Asia. 1. Cor. 16. 19.

In all this if there be any probability, it lies in his last words, wherein
he seems thus to argue. S. Paul makes mention of the Churches of Asia. Ergo,
you may not think there was but that Church at Ephesus in his time. The
consequent of this Enthymem is subtly set down. If his meaning be to persuade
his reader, that there was more The D. lays down his consequence subtly.
then one Church at Ephesus in Paul's time, because he mentions Churches in
Asia, his consequence is worse then naught: nothing hinders his Refuter to
think, that there was one only Church at Ephesus, although there were more
Churches in Asia. That epistle to the Corinthians wherein he mentioneh the
Churches of Asia. was written before his departure from Ephesus (recorded Acts.
20. 1.) as we may gather, 1. Cor. 16. 5. 8. 10. compared with Acts. 19. 21.
22. yet, when after this, he had speech with the Elders of Ephesus (those many
Elders which he now tells us, Paul had there placed) they had no several
titles or cures, but in common attended the whole flock or Church, as himself
avoucheth (sermon. page 18.) from the very words of Paul, Acts. 20. 28. where he
does apparently contradict himself, if he now labor to persuade, that there
were at that time more Churches (or distinct congregations) A contradiction in
the D. if he etc.
then one that Ephesus. But if, (in arguinge as he does) he intend no more then
this; to show that in Paul's time, besides that Church at Ephesus, there were
in Asia some other Churches; what is this to the purpose? I mean to prove,
that in Saint John's time, each of the 7. Asian Churches contained diverse
congregations.

As for that he adds of Timothy sent unto Ephesus to be their Bishop, and his
ordinary continuance there until his death; it is sooner said then proved, as
shall be showed hereafter; and were it true, it gives him no help, to justify
his former assertion, of diverse congregations in every of these Churches. But
2. he proceeds to show that Peter likewise by his preaching converted many in
Asia. And 3. after the death of Peter and Paul, S. John went into those parts,
preached the Gospel for many years, ordained Bishops and Presbyters where need
was. 4. Wishes us to add to the Ministry of the Apostles, the preachings of
the Bishops and Presbyters ordained by them, and Disciples whom they had
instructed, by whose Ministry some Churches were brought to the faith, as that
of Colossae (in the Co^fines of Phrigia) in Paul's time. From all which
particulars in stead of co^cluding, (that which he pretended to make more then
propable, viz.) that the 7. Churches of Asia contained (each of them) diverse
congregations: he appealeth to the conscience of every indifferent reader;
whether it be not unlikely that not in any one of these famous Churches, no not
in that of Ephesus, there were in the whole city and country belonging to it,
any more then one ordinary congregation, after the preaching of such and so
many for the space of 45. years. Whereunto for answer, 1. I also appeal to
the conscience of every indifferent reader, whether the D. has not proved
himself a notable tri^^er, The Doct. a notable trifler.
when he thus disputes? It is very unlikely that* there should not be in any
one of those famous Churches (no not in that of Ephesus, that is, in the whole
city and country belonging to it) any more then one ordinary congregation.
Therefore it is more then propable, that they all contained diverse
congregations. But 2. how often will the D. contradict himself? does he not
confidently affirm, (sermon. page 18.) that in the Apostles times parishes were
10. The D. co^radicteth himself.
not distinguished, not any Presbyters assigned to their several Cures? And
does he not still maintain the same position? (def. page 69.) only he
excepteth the Church of Alexandria, which was far^ from any of these 7. And. 3.
had not the Churches of Jerusalem and Rome as great helps to enlarge them, by
the Ministry of many excellent Teachers, and for as many years? yet himself
denies any ordinary congregations to be multiplied in them. See we what he
says plainly for the one, page 92. and 124. and more closely touching the
other, page 88. And 4. since he acknowledges, that th^se Churches were much
annoyed with heretics as Paul foretold; since that which he foretold, (Act.
20. 29. 30.) did principally concern the Church of Ephesus, and himself
complayneth of their general forsaking him in Asia. 2. Tim. 1. 15. moreover
since it appears, even by the testimony of John (or rather of Christ
himself) that Ephesus, had left her first love; and that partly by
persecutions and partly by false Teachers; the prosperity and growth of those
Churches was much hindered. Revelat. 2. 4. 9. 13. 15. 20. and 3. 2. 16. the
indifferent reader will easily se^, how little likelihood there is, that there
should be either in Ephesus, or in any the rest of those cities of Asia, any
more then one populous congregation of Christians. 5. Lastly, if any man think,
that after the preaching of such and so many, (as he says) for the space of
45. years, it is probable there were more then 7. ordinary congregations, let
him judge indifferently betwixt the Doctor and his Refuter whether it be not
more likely his Refuters assertion is true, that there were no more then 7.
distinct Churches, (such as Colossae, Magnesia, and Trallis, whereof he
speaks) then that each of the 7. (as the Doctor affirms) was divided into
several Congregations.

And this may suffice (I doubt not) to show, that the Doctor Sect. 12. ad.
page ^1.
has said nothing to disprove that first branch of his Refuters reason (for
the denial of the consequence of his Proposition) when he said, that it does
not appear, neither is it true, that every one of these Churches was divided
into diverse several ordinary assemblies. The other two branches the Doctor
tells us, he will join together. And in deed, they must concur, not only
one with the other; but also both of them with the former. For if he could have
proved, by much more pregnant arguments, then he can, that those 7. Churches
had been (ea^ of them) divided into diverse congregations; yet it will not
follow, they were Dioceses; unless it appear also, that all of them did
depend upon one Cathedral Church as chief; and had not the power of
ecclesiastical government apart in themselves. Wherefore all his labor is
lost if he produce not better probabilities, to disprove these two later points.

If, says he, there were but one Bishop for the Church, both of the city and
Country (as there were but 7. in all those seven Churches) 2. If the Churches
both of city and country were subject to the B. of the city. 3. If the
parishes both of city and country had neither Bishop nor Presbytery* but
Presbyters severally assigned to them. 4. If the presbyters of the Country were
ordained by the Bishop of the City; and not only they, but also the rural
Bishops were subject to his authority, (all which I have by most evident
arguments* and testimonies proved already) then did the several congregatio^s
and parishes (which I have also proved were all but members of one body) depend
upon the chief Church in the City as their head; neither had they the power of
ecclesiastical jurisdiction whereof they speak, as I have also proved before.
All this wind shakes no corn, a short answer will serve to all these
particulars. 1. The matter hangs yet in question, whether every of those
Churches did include, (at least intentionally) the whole City and the Country
which afterward was subjected to the mother Church of the City? Also whither
parishes were multiplied and presbyters assigned to them in such sort as he
supposes; yea the contrary of this, for the Apostles times is mainteyned by
the D; as is before observed, 2. As for those Arguments and testimonies whereby
he says he has already proved the par^iculars, which he hear^ assumeth for
undoubted truths; they are (every Mothers son of them) of under age, and
neither of growth nor strength to bear out the matter, and swaye the
conscience of any that considers what is the question. The reader will
remember that the point here denied, is, that there were in every of these
Churches, many congregations which depended upon one as chief, without power
of ecclesiastical jurisdiction in themselves. All his testimonies are (as
appears cap. 2. of this defense) far beyond the compass of the first 200
years, the counterfeyt epistles of Cl^mens and Anicetus excepted, which he
cites, (cap. 2. sect. 3.) yet need I not except them, seeing the first author
of them, was a very novice in respect of true antiquity, as the Doctor well
knows. Wherefore the reader may see the valor of the Doctors best proofs in
this Enthymem; drawn out of the best of them, thus;

It appears by Councels and Fathers after Constantines time or a li^le
before, that parishes in cities and countries adjoining, were subjected to the
jurisdiction of the Bishop of the city, and members of one Diocesan body: Ergo
at the time of writing the Revelation, there were in every of the 7. Churches,
diverse congregations, which depended on one chief, without prower of
government in themselves.

At length the Doctor comes to the defense of his assumption, Sect. 23. ad
sect. 7. def. page ^2. 54.
which affirms (as the Refuter truly gathered, from his own express words
(sermon. page 18.) that the 7. Churches of Asia, were great and ample Cities, and
not the Cities alone but also the Countries adjoyning^, And because his Refuter
told him (page 54.) it was faulty both in words and matter, the Doctor charge
him to cavil egregiously; but is not Not the Refut: but the D. is the
caviller, or at least slaunderer.
the D. rather an egregious caviller, at least a notable slanderer, if his
Refuters censure be true? First for the words, I demand again (as his Refuter
did before) who ever said that the Church of Ephesus was a great City? Who
knows not, that the City, is one thing, and the Church an other? The D.
cannot deny the later, but he labors to excuse the former. If (says he) he
discerned the speech which I used to be unproper, had he not so much, neither
ar^ (I mean rethorick or logic) nor grace, (I mean charity) as either to
conceyve me to have spoken by a trope, or to explane my speech, by such an
enunciation, as the nature of the argument does require? Why; how could the D.
expect so much, either art or grace at their hands, whom he esteemed to be very
weaklings for learning or judgment; and in affection wholly alienated from our
Church-governors; and such as being full of odious censures etc. will not
without prejudice or partiallity read what is truly said for the defense of
our Church? for so he speaks of the^ page 1. 3. 9. 10. of his preface before
his sermon. If therefore himself discerned his own speech to be improper, had
he not so much (I say not rethorick or logic to explane his meaning but)
grace, that is prudence or charity, to prevent both all mistakinge in the
simple reader; and all cavilling in his odious-censuring opposites, by a plain
and naked deliverie of his true meaning? Had he remembered that he was to
prove, the Churches to be properly dioceses, he might have conceived that his
readers of all sorts, would expect proper, and not improper speeches, to
conclude his purpose. For how hangs this reasoning together, in the Doctors
logic? The Churches were improperly the cities and countries adjoining;
therefore The Doct. reasons stoutly.
they were properly Dioceses. Mutato genere predicationis, non valet
consequentia. It is a poor defense therefore for him to demand as he does, who
ever heard that stars were angels? or that the cup is blood? because it is
said in his text, the 7. stars are the angels; and Christ elsewhere says,
this cup is my blood. If he can show any text either of scripture or any
author, old or new, that has said as he does, we will cease to wonder at the
strangenes of his speech. But when he further demands, whither when he said,
the churches were the cities and the Country, his Refuter could not understand
him as speaking (after that most usual metonymie) of the Christian people in
the city and country, nor yet explain his words as the nature of the
argument contained in his speech did lead him? I answer, in the Refuters
behalf, he did well perceive by the Doctors words following, (where he speaks
of an intent and hope, the Apostles had, to convert the whole people of city
and country, by the Ministry of the Presbyters, which they ordained in every
city, etc. that if he had limited his speech only to those few, that were
already converted to the faith; the Doctor might have had a just quarrel
against him, for perverting his meaning. Wherefore though he find fault with
his words: (as he had good cause) yet he stays not there, but contradicts
also the matter or meaning; notwithstanding he does explain his words so, as
the nature of the argument did lead him, viz. that those 7. Churches contained
the people of those 7 Cities, whether already converted, or to be converted
hereafter, by the Bishop and presbyters of each City; for so he seems to
interpret himself (sermon. page 19.) But he durst not in plain terms so
affirm, for then the simplest of his readers might have replied, that those
Churches (for the present) contained no more of the people, in City or Country,
then such as were already brought to the ^aith, which were (as his Refuter
truly avoucheth, neither can the Doctor deney it) but a few, like to the
number of Christians which was in London and the towns about it in Q. Mary's
days; or which now is in Paris, or some Cities in France. Wherefore to say as
he did, that the Churches were great Cities etc.) might better serve his turn
(as the Refuter: judged) to dazell the eyes of the simple, that they might
think the people of those Churches to be (well near if not altogether) as
many The Doct. uses cunning in his purgation but yet in rain
as the cities contained. Now the D. to purge himself from so foul an
imputation thanketh God that he ^s free both from desire and intent of dazaling
the eyes of the simple: but, (this notwithstanding) let the reader observe the
cunning which he uses in this purgation. The intent of dazeling he
disclaymeth; but he contradicts not that which his re^: objecteth, vz. that
he would have his reader to think, that those Churches contained as many people
as the cities did; only he quarrelleth with him, page 54. for strayning his
words to The D. quarrel is fond and causlesse.
this meaning, as if he had said, that all the people in the city and country
had been a^ that time Christians; which is in deed a causles quarrel and a
fond cavil, seeing in the D: logic and divinity, here is a great difference
between these two speeches. All the people of the city and country were
Christians, and, the Church contained within her circuit all the people of
city and country: for though he reject the former as absurd, yet he
maintayneth the latter for a sound position. Else why does he not interpret
himself to have spoken (according to an usual metonymy) of the christian
people only? q. d. The 7. Churches were the christians, which then inhabited
the cities and countries adjoining. Why does he rather choose (page 53.) to
explain his meaning thus. The Churches were, (that is contained) not only the
cities, but the country, and to illustrate his interpretation by such an
instance as this. A man is not only body but soul also: that is, man
consists of body and soul; or, whole man contains these two parts: for if
every of the 7. Churches does so contain city and country, or consist of
those two parts, as a man contains, (or consists of) soul and body: then
both the whole city and the whole country adjoining, must necessarily
concur to the very essence or being of the Church; and consequently (in his
estimation and understanding) none of those Churches did consist of (or
contain,) only a few of the people (as a part) of city and country, but
rather all in general. Wherefore if he will clear himself of that foul
imputation, which he seems so far to abhor; let him deal plainly and
disclaim his construction, he now inforceth (of containing both city and
country) and stick to the usual metonymie, of the christian people in city
and country. So his arguments will stand in this form.

Whatsoever Church in S. John's time was, or cont^yned, the christian people of
an whole city and country adjoining: the same was properly a dio^ese, yea
such a diocese as ours are.

But every of the 7. Churches of Asia was or contained in S. John's time the
christian people of an whole city and country adjoining. Therefore, every of
those 7. Churches, was properly a diocese; yea such a diocese as ours is.

If it please the D. (in his next) to give allowance unto this form, his
assumptio^ will (perhaps) be allowed to pass, with some connivence till there
be some good cause of calling it into question: but he will find it a labor
surpassing all his skill and strength, to make good the proposition. Wherefore
I have little hope that he will make this exchange; seeing he indeavoureth his
best, to justify as well the words as the matter of his first assumptio^ against
his refu^: exceptions.

Concerning the words, first; is it (says the D.) so strange a thing with our
learned Refuter that the name of the city should be given to the Sect. 14. ad
sect. 8, page 53.
Church? Let him look back to Apoc. 1. 11. and he shall find that the 7.
Churches were Ephesus Smyrna etc. I answer, the Ref: (how unlearned soever in
the eyes of the D.) has no need to learn at his hands, that the name of a
city may be (and with ecclesiastical writers is) put, metonymice, for the
Church which was in that city: yet will it not be very easy for the D. to show
us, that the Apostles used this phrase of speech in their writings. For when
they speak (not of the place or city it self but) of the Church seated in any
city, they usually explain themselves by some such words as these. The Church
which is in Jerusalem or Antioch etc. Act. 8. 1. and 11. 22. and 13. 1. 1. Cor.
1. 2. Apo. 2. 12. 18. and 3. 1. 7. The Church of the Thessalonians, Smyrnians
etc. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 1. Apoc. 2. 8. and 3. 14. The Saints at Jerusalem Lidda etc.
Act. 8. 13, 22. Ephesians. 1. 1. Phil. 1. 1. 2. As for the words of Apoc. 1. 11;
(whereunto he sends his Refuter to learn that the 7. Churches were Eph^sus
Smyrna etc.) let him know, that he has learning enough, to see that the D.
gloss has no warrant from the text. The words are, k^ipempson tais e^clesiais
tais en Asia, eis Eph^son, The D. gloss is without warrant of the text.
kieis Smurnan, etc. And send to the 7. Churches which are in Asia, at Ephesus
and at Smyrna etc for it is no strange thing to find, ^is put for en: and our
latin translators (as the vulgar, Vatablus, Beza etc.) do with one consent
turn eis Epheson etc. Ephesi (vel Epheso) Smyrna etc. I wish the D. to see
whether the Holy Ghost himself (the best interpreter of himself) does not
turn eis Epheson, eis Smyrnan etc. Apoc. 1. 11. by en Epheso, en Smyrna, etc.
Apoc. 2. 1. 8. 12. 18. and 3. 1. 7. 14. And, as little skill as the Refuter
has in the tongues, yet has he observed thus much, that when the Apostles in
their writings, do note the persons to whom any letter or mes^age is sent,
they do, either use the dative case, (as here tais ^c^l^siais, so elsewhere
humin apestale to you is the word of salvation sent Act. 13. 26. hon epempsa
humin I have sent Timothe to you 1 Cor. 4. 17. see the like Phil. 2. 19. Math
20. 16. Apoc. 11. 10.) or else they take the preposition pros, as when Paul
sent Tychicus to the Ephesians, Colossians, he says hon epempsa pros humas.
Ephe. 6. 22. Colos. 4. 8. see the like Luke 7. 19. Ioh. 16. 3. Acts. 19. 31.
and 23. 30. Tit. 3. 12. As for the proposition eis in embassages etc. it does
always note the place and not the persons, as may be seen in these and the
like Math. 2. 8. and 20. 2. Luc. 15. 15. and 16. 27. Act. 10. 5. and 17. 10.
and 19. 22. and 20. 17. 2 Timothy 4. 12. But this difference is most clearly to be
discerned, where the persons and places are mentioned together. Luc. 1. 26. 27.
the Angel Gabriel was sent from God (eis polin) unto a city of Galile, called
Nazareth (pros parthenon) to a virgin etc. and 4. 26. unto none of them (s^.
the wydowes of Israel) was Elias sent, but only eis Sarepta etc. (pros gunaika
cheran.) to Sarapta etc. to a widow there. See Act. 9. 2. and 15. 2. in which
last place as some translators take eis for en (as the Syrian interpreter,
Vat^blus and the vulgar) so our english interpreters (elder and later) use a
transposition of words, thus, to Jerusalem, unto the Apostles and Elders; which
transposition though they use not, neither Apoc. 1. 11. nor Tit. 3. 12. (where
Paul says, make have to come to me pros me, eis Nicopolin) to me, unto
Nicopolis, yet the meaning of the spirit of God in these later places, is the
same with the former; namely after the mention, of the persons to whom, to add
the places also, unto which repair was to be made. And as the D. discretion
did see this, in Paul's speech unto Titus (lib. 4. page 107.) to wit, that those
words (^is nicopolin) were necessarily added, because else Titus should have been uncertain; both where Paul was to be found; and whether he was to go: so
doutlesse (if prejudice had not blinded his eyes) his discretion would have led
him to see also, that those words (^is Epheson etc. Apoc. 1. 11.) were no less
necessary, to give unto John sure direction, unto what parts of Asia he was to
send, and in what cities those Churches had their assemblies, unto which he
was charged to send, the things which were revealed to him. Wherefore, if his
learning serve him, to adjudge it a most absurd collection, and a sensles
perverting of the meaning of Gods spirit, for any man to say that the scripture
testifies Paul to be Nicopolis, Tit. 3. 12. and the Apostles and Elders to be
Jerusalem. Act. 15. 2. then may the indifferent reader very well wonder at the
D. The reader may wonder at the D. oversighte.
oversight, in affirming (so confidently as he does) that the 7. Churches were
Ephesus, Smyrna etc. and that this is to be found Apo^. 1. 11. But 3; to give
the D. the utmost advantage he can desire, from those words eis Epheson kai
Smyrnan etc. Apoc. 1. 11; (viz. that they are thus to be interpreted, q. d. to
the Church at Ephesus etc. and consequently that the name of the city is put
by a metonymy for the Church in the city) how will this warrant him to say,
that the 7. Churches were Ephesus Smyrna etc. or rather (as at the first he
said) that the 7. Churches were great and ample cities etc. It is well known
that Achaia was a large country and contained sundry provinces (see Aret: in
Act. 18. 27. and Hiper: 1 Cor. 1. 1.) and when the Apostle says (2. Cor. 9.
2.) that Achaia war prepared a year ago, for their benevolence to the Saints;
it must be confessed that by Achaia, he means (as he interprets himself
cap. 1. 1.) all the saints that were in all Achaia: yet were it a strange
speech (and such as I suppose as the D. learned ears are unacquainted with) to
say, that they whose hearts the Apostle had prepared, were a large country and
contained many provinces.

But to proceed, the D. for a new supply, tells us, it is so usual with
good Authors, speaking of Bishops, to say, they were Bishops of such or such a
city, that he might fill a volum with quotatio^s to this purpose. In deed, The
D. has filled his great volume, with quotations, to prove what no man doubted
of, and leaves the maine question without relief.
he has filled a great part of a great volume with quotations and testimonies,
that are to as little purpose as these which prove that no man doubts of, and
left the mayn matter in question, destitute of all releife: for whereas he
should have showed, that it is usual with good authors, speaking of the Ch: in
the Apostles times to say (as he does,) that they were great and ample cities,
and not cities alone, but also the countries adjoining: he wholly silenceth
this point, and tells us, that many good authors do entitle the Bishops of
succeeding ages Bishops of this or that city, but he had reason to do so; for
the former is indeed so vncooth, that he has not any one good author to clear
him from singularity in an absurd phrase of speaking: but the later he found
himself well able to confirm* and therefore (to send him home his own words
page 54.) full soberly he goes about it, telling us, that he could fill a
volume with quotations, but a few testimony shall suffice, and very learnedly
out of his reading he shows, that Eusebius says Evodius was the first, and
Ignatius the second Bishop of Antioch, and th (...) Ignatius writing to
Policarpus, styles himself Bishop of Antioch. As if the Church of Antioch
must needs be a great city, because Antioch was so, whereas the D. himself
acknowledges, that for 200. years and more, it could scarcely be verefied of
any city or country, that they were all Christians. All the rest of his
testimonies are not only after division of parishes, (as himself says) but
also after Constantines time, when whole cities with their countries adjoining
were subjected to the faith, and therefore if they proved (as they do not)
that they had said, the Churches were then great cities; yet would it not have
justified him, in so affirming of the 7. Churches in S. John's time.

To come at length from the words to the matter of his assumption, whereas the
Refuter told him, that the 7. Churches, Sect. 15. ad sect 8. page 54. and 55.
and sect 12. page 62.
could not contain the people of those cities, because some few only were
true christians; the generality of them remeyning pagans: the D. not daring to
contradict him herein, yet quarrelleth with his proofs, and feign would
maintain (if he could) that the Church contained both city and country
though the christians were never so few. First therefore because he showed out
of Eusebius (lib. 4. cap. 15) that Policarpus Bishop or pastor of the Church at
Smyrna, was martyred by the rage of the The D. scoffeth at at his Ref. and yet
justifies his assertion and condemns his own.
multitude, and that in the sight of his own people: the D. (having scoffed at
his learning and reading) adds that which does not only justify his Refuter
assertion; but also confute his own. Every body knows (says he) that in all
cities and countries for the space of almost 300. years, the Christians were
persecuted by the Gent^les. Every body therefore knows, say I, that the
Churches in S. John's time must needs consiste of a very few, in comparison of
the rest; and therefore neither were the cities the Churches, neither did the
Churches contein the people thereof. 2. Again, whereas the Refuter added, that
the Church of Smyrna writing of the said martyrd^m of Policarpus, intitleth
herself, the Church of God which is at Smyrna, and therefore asked, whether a
whole diocese? or country of Christians di^^^habite Smyrna? the D. says, it is
an obi^ctim scarce worth the answering, but yet vouchsafes it a frivolous
answer, vz. that the whole di^cese was se^ted chiefly in the city, as the
soul which is in all the body, is said to be in the head; and that though by
the Church at Smyrna, we should understand only, that part which did inhabit
the city; yet the ^aming it the Church which is (...) Sm^rna, excludes not
the Churches in the country from being of the same body or diocese with it.
Whereunto for reply, first to the last; what means he to beg that which he
should prove rather, (if he could) to wit, that there were The D. beggeth
CHVRCHES in the Country, which were parts of the same body with the Church in
the city? for if this cannot be proved; the former part of his answer is
absurd, where he compares the Church in the city to the head of the body. For
it is a monstrous body, that has either no body at all, or an head bigger
then all the rest of the body. Moreover, to bury in silence his unseemly (may
I not say blasphemous) comparison, in comparing a Diocesan Ch: seated in the
city to Gods sitting in heaven; how absurd is he in The D. comparison is more
then unseemly and absurd.
comparing the Diocese to the soul, which is in the head and in all the body
besides? For what shall the body be (trow ye) if the whole Diocese be the
soul? The city (he says) is the head; the country parishes (belike) are the
rest of the members; the city and country joined together, do make the
Diocese: yet the Diocese is not the body; but the soul of the body.

Hereunto I may add, that which is objected (page 55. of the Refuters answ.)
from the text of holy scripture. The epistles were directed to the Angel of the
Church in Ephesus, in Smyrna, etc. and not of Eph^sus the Church, of Smyrna the
Church etc. as if the whole cities were the Churches. The Doctors answer (page
62) is, that although the whole city of Ephesus, meaning Civitas, was not the
Church until it was wholly converted to Christianity; yet the whole city
(meaning ^^bs) was contained within the circuit of the Church, intended by the
Apostles etc. neither is it material that the Church is said to have been in
Ephesus, seeing, in urbe, the Church was cheefely seated, as was said before. I
suppose the Refuter is not ignorant of that difference, which the learned
hystorians put between urbs and civitas. Vrbs (ut M. Varro lib. 1. linguae
latinae tradit) ab orb and urno, quae pars est aratri deducitur: circum
dividebantur enim aratro, loca extruendo oppido designata, and (ut ait Servius)
sulco muri designabantur. Civitas autem tame^si pro urbe oppidove frequenter
usurpatur, proprie tamen ipsa est civium koinonia et societas; moribus
legibusque institutis gubernata; nam et hi qui passim tractu aliquo habitant,
ijsdem legibus et institutis usi, Civitas dicuntur Caesari. (sic habet Ioach:
Vadianus in Epitome trium terrae partium page 34. and 35. Impress. Tiguri, Anno
1534.) But what use does the Doctor make of this difference? The whole city
meaning Civitas (says he) was not the Church till it was wholly converted to
Christianity. Well, then it seems, when he says, the Churches were cities,
he took not the word city for civitas, which chiefly notes the people that
live in a communion together. He then acknowledges, he took the word city
for that which is called urbs; the walls and how^es within which, the citizens,
for the greater part, were enclosed. If so; he shows himself too absurd, to
be confuted with any other argument, then such as is framed in Bocardo. If not,
we may then (with good leave I hope) conclude, that seeing the Church of Ephesus
was neythe^ urbs nor civitas, therefore it cannot at all be truly said to be
the city, much less both city and country. And to what use then serves (if
I may be so bold to ask once again) that difference he yields between urbs
and civitas? Forsooth the whole city m^aning urbs was contained within the
circuit of the Church intended by the Apostles. Well, and may not the same be
said of the whole city meaning civitas? Else why does he tell us, that when
the Apostles planted presbyters in every city, they intended the conversion of
the whole city and country by their Ministry? Thus wisely has the Doctor
distinguished between urbs and Civitas, that what he affirms or A
distinction without any difference.
denies of the one; the same in his understanding, must be affirmed or denied
of the other. As for that he add^th, to show his understanding of the text,
sc. that the Church was seated (not wholly but) chiefly in urbe; either beggeth
the maine question, (as before was noted) if he think there were some other
Churches in the Country, The Doct. beggeth, or else co^senteh to his refut:
that were parts of the same Diocesan body; or he dissenteth not from his
Refuter, if he think the Christians inhabiting some towns and hamletts in the
country, did ordinarily assemble with those of the city, for the public works
of Gods worship.

Thus have we heard all that the Doctor can say in defense of his Sect. 16. ad
sect. 8. (...). 54.
assumption, as he first delivered it, when he said, those Churches were great
and ample cities etc. As for the change which he has now made choice of, viz.
that they contained both the cities and countries adjoining, he has nothing
else in defense thereof, then a naked repetition (in a manner) of that which
was before delivered, to help the consequence of his reasoning: yet I will
vouchsafe to mention it, least he should think better of it then it deserves.
If any man ask (says he) how it may be said, that the Church contained City
and Country, when but a few Christians in comparison of the heathen, were in
either of both. I answer (as before) that the circuit of the Church or
Diocese was the same, when there were fiwe, and when there were many, yea when
all were Christians. His former answer (whereto he now refers us)
affirms the circuit of the Churches to be the same, as well before the
division of parishes as after, (not actually but only) in the intention of the
Apostles or first founder. Which limitation he reme^breth again in that
answer, which was last examined in the former section. And if he do here also
understand it, why does he conceal it? Is it, because in those places he had
not directly to deal^ with his assumption, as now he has; and he would not so
plainly discover to his reader, how far^* he goes (in this defense) from the
words of his assumption as he first laid it down in his sermon? For, for this
cause it seems, he chose rather to reject that clause, of great and ample
Cities, whiles he was yet in examining the consequence of his argument. And it
had been too much to lay before the eyes of his reader at once, all three
changes or alterations; that one of The D. has 3. alteratio^s, but cannot
defend one of them.
turning were into contained, when in stead of this they were cities, he says,
they contained the cities etc. is more then he can well defend. But before I
come to try the strength of his defense; I must a little better ^ifte the
chaungling he gives us in steed of the former assumption viz. that the
circuit of every one of these 7. Churches contained both the city and
country adjoining. First therefore I demand what he means by city and
country? whether those parts of the ancient diocese, which he calls
paroikian kai choran (sermon. page 25. and def. page 13. and 36.) that is the
city with the suburbs and the whole country subject to the city? If so, then
this whole circuit, (in his understanding) was the circuit of every of those
7. Churches. But then, I demand again, did those Churches contain in their
circuit, only the walls, dwelling houses and feildes, and not also the people
inhabiting within that circuit? if he should either exclude all the people or
include all, (the state of those times being such; that the general multitude
in all cities and country were Pagans, as he confesses page 54.) he should
contradict both himself and the truth which he delivers, p. 3. and 5. where
he says, that ecclesia in all places of the new Testament (excepting Act. 19.)
is appropriated to the company of the faithful, and signifies a company of
men called out of the world unto salvation by Christ, that is to say, a
company of Christians. Wherefore, as I will not do him that wrong, to think
he means by city and country, the houses and feildes only: so if question
be made, what people he incloseth, within the circuit of those Churches (or of
the cities and countries, which, he says, they contained) unless he will
depart from the truth, and that with contradiction to himself, he must
acknowledge that he means none other, then the Christian people of those
cities and the countries adjoining. And yet, if he limit every Church to so
narrow a compass, for the people which it contained; who will believe him, (or
how will he persuade and prove) that the whole city meaning Vrbs (to use his
own words) and the whole country belonging to the city, was contained
within the circuit of the Church? for since the Church of any city or place,
is nothing else, but the company of Christians there. If it be absurd to say,
that a small company of Christians (not an handful to a great heap in
comparison of the heathen, that filled city and country) did contain in
their circuit, an whole city, with the whole country adjoining: then is it
no less absurd to affirm the same, of any Church, which is entitled the
Church of this or that city, yea, take all the people of any city or
country; who is so simple, but he knows that the city and country
contains them, and not they the city? Wherefore, though, all the people had
been converted to Christianity: yet had it been a gross error both in logic
and philosiphie to say, that the Church did contain the city and the
country. To leave then, the natural and proper signification of city and
country: and to carry the words by an usual metonymie unto the people (q. d.
they contained city and country, that is, the people of city and country) I
desire to be informed from his own mouth, whether he mean those people only,
that had already receyved the faith, or those also, that were in time to be
converted? The former does best agree with that foundation, laid by him in
this defense (chap. 2. sect. 2. and 3.) where he restreyneth (as before is
observed) both the name and nature of a Church unto a company of Christian
people, but so small a company as at that time embraced Christianity, will
fall far short of his purpose; not only of concluding the Churches to be
properly dioceses; but also, of enclosing, within that whole flock or Church,
over which the Presbyters were made Bishops, (Act. 20. 28.) the whole number of
such as belonged to God, in city and country; even those that should
afterward embrace the faith, as well as those that made present profession
thereof, for so he understands that scripture (sermon. page 18. def. page 66.)
and therefore infers (sermon. page 19.) that the Presbyteries in the Apostles
times were appointed to whole cities and countries annexed, that they might
both convert them, and feed them being converted: (as a little after he says,
were provided, not only for the cities themselves, but also for the Countries
adjoyninge, which were converted or to be converted. Which words do clearly
show, that by the Cities and Countries (which at first, he said, were the
Churches; now he says were contained in the circuit of the Churches) he
means all the 11. A contradiction in the Doct. understanding of the word
Church, and a childish error.
people in general, and not those few only that were already converted. But
in this construction of his words (besides an apparent contradiction with
himself, in a maine principle of Christian doctrine, which restrains the name
of a Church to a company of Christian people:) he falls into a childish
error (far unbeseeming a Doctor in divinity) in breaking down that
partition wall, which all sound divines have set, between the visible Churches
of Christ; and the invisible company of the elect, not yet brought home unto
the faith. For howsoever such as God appointed unto life, and intends in time
to call, are in his account members of his The D. assumption sensles and
absurd: and his defense of it much more.
invisible Church; yet it is against common sense, as well as the grounds of
true divinity; to reckon them for parts of the visible Church, which as yet
have had no manner of entrance into Christianity. In this sense therefore
(which his sermon and the defense thereof aymeth at) I reject his assumption as
an absurd and sensles positio^.

And the defense which he tendreth, is much more absurd, when Sect. 17.
he says, that the circuit of the Church was the same, when there were few
and when there were many, yea when all were Christians. For until country
towns were converted, and subjected to the over sight of the Bishop of the
City adjoyninge; how could they and their people, be reputed parts of the
Citie-Church, or enclosed within her circuit? Wherefore since it is confessed
(sermon. page 24.) that Country towns remeined heathenish for a time, after the
conversion of the City; it must be confessed also, that the Churches circuit
at the first, did not enclose the Country villagies, as it did afterward.
Notwithstanding, to justify his former assertion; he alleges, that there
were no more Bishops set over the City and Country, when all were Christians,
then when there were but a few; the same Bishop of the City having
jurisdiction, over all the Christians both in the City and the Country, as well
when all were Christians, as when but a few. He would have said, that the
Bishops which succeeded some ages after in the same City, had the same
jurisdiction over all the people of City and Country, when they were all
converted to the faith; which the first apostolic Bishops, had over those few
in the City and Country adjoining, that first yielded obedience to the Gospel.
For he acknowledges (Def. page 54.) that it could scarce be verified, in any
place till Constantines time (which was above 200. years after the Apostle
John's days) that all the people of City and Country were Christians. But with
what bands can the D. tie together these parts of his reasoning? with what
hands can the Doct. tie together the parts of his reasoning?
The Bishops in Constantines time and after, had the like jurisdiction, over
all the people of City and Country, that the first Apostolic Bishops, had over
those few that first embraced Christianity. Therefore, the circuit of the
Church was at the first, when they were but few, the same that it was after,
when all became Christians. Is there not much more probability in this
consequence? The Bishops in Constantines days and after, had the like
jurisdiction over all the people of City and Country, that the first apostolic
Bishops had over those few, which at first embraced Christianity. Ergo, the
circuit of the Church and Bishops charge, was far less, whiles there were
but a few; then it was when all the people of City and Country were converted
unto the Christian faith. Which of these two has more probability I leave to
the indifferent reader to judge. Wherefore till the D. can make good the
consequence of his reasoninge; all the proofs which he braggeth of for the
demonstration of his antecedent (the ancientest of them being after the first
300. years, as appears (Def. page 36. etc.) do give just occasion of
returning into his own boosome that definitive sentence, which he delivers
against his opposites, viz. that the general consent and perpetual practice
of all Christendom since the Apostles times, ought without comparison to
prevayle with all men (in persuading the^ to acknowledge, that every Churches
circuit, was much enlarged, by the general conversion of all, in Cities and
Country towns:) above the authority of a few, self-conceited persons (such
as the D. and his associates) not so singular for learning, as they are
singular in opinion: when they would make the world believe if they could, that
every Churches circuit, was the same at first, when but a few embraced the
faith, that it was after, when all the people of City and Country, were made
members of one diocesan Church. If the D. shall fly (as to a Sanctuary) ^o his
former evasion, viz. that the Ch^c^^^uite cont^ined at the first both City and
c^u^t^y, in the inte^tio^ of the Apost or first founders, I have enough already
said, to drive him out of this starting hole, unless he ca^ provide some better
forfication, to releeve himself in this behalf. But he supposes, that he
has sufficiently fortified his assumptio^; by repairing the breaches, which
his Refuter had made, in the reason, which his sermon tendered in defense
thereof.

His words are these, whereas our Savior Christ writing to the Churches of
Asia, numbreth but 7. and naming the principal, and (some of them)
mother-cities of Asia, says, the 7. stars were the Angles of the 7. Sect.
18. ad sect. 9. page ^5 56.
Churches; it cannot be denied that the Churches whereof they were Bishops.
were great and ample cities, and not the cities alone, but the countries
adjoining. From hence his Refuter drew this connexive syllogism; (answer p.
55. if our Saivour writing to the Churches of Asia, numbreth ^ut 9. and some of
them mother cities; then they were great and ample cities, and not the cities
alone but the countries adjoining. But our Saiviour etc. Ergo, Now the D.
misliking the frame of this argument, refers him to his former manner of
arguing (sect. 2. page 42. 43.) where he shew^th how this lyllogisme is to be
framed; and there we find a double proof laid down in defense of his
assumption, as he has now shaped it, vz. that the 7. Churches contained within
their circuit the cities and countries adjoining* the which he affirms to be
proved, first jointly thus, if the 7. Churches within their circuit comprised
all the Churches in Asia; then all both in cities and countries. But the first
is true: for our Savior Christ writing to the Churches ^n Asia, comprizeth all
under these 7. as being the principal, and containing within their circuit
all the rest. Concerning the Doct. jointly, let us severally observe: first
that he concealeth his conclusion; secondly, that he departs from the words
laid down in his sermon: and thirdly that he follows not his own directions
given for the reducing of an Enthymeme, or connexive argument, into a simple
syllogism, 3. Faults at once in the Doctor worth the noting.
1. we need not mervile why he concealeth his conclusion, the reason is
apparent: he concludes not his assumption, which is in question. For his
proposition being such as it is, (vz. that if the 7. Churches comprised within
their circuit all the Churches in Asia; then all both in cities and
countries) his conclusion must be this and none other; that the 7. Churches did
comprize within their circuit all the Churches that were both in the cities
and countries of Asia: a point far differing, from that which himself
proposed to prove; to wit, that the 7. Churches within their circuit contained
both the cities and countries adjoining; that is, (as himself explaineth his
own meaning page 52.) the circuit of every one of those 7. Churches contained
both the city and country adjoining for the consequence of his proposition (as
he has proposed it) runs more current then it would; if he had said, as he
should, thus. If the 7. Churches comprised within their circuit all the
Churches in Asia; then every of those 7. Churches contained in her circuit,
the whole city with the country adjoining. For here a man might very well deny,
the co^sequent; although he saw better proof, then the D. has brought, for
the justifying of the Antecedent. 2. But when departs he from the words of
his sermon, both in the antecedent, and in the prosyllogisme or confirmation
thereof? when he said, that our Savior writing to the Churches in Asia,
comprizeth all under these 7. as being the principal etc. For taking it for
granted that there were more Churches in Asia. then those. 7; and that our
Saivour in writing by name to these, did intend under their names to write to
all the rest: could the D. imagine that any man, which deny those other Asian
Churches to be written unto, would upon his bare word, embrace that which now he
affirms? s^z. that our Savior in writing to all the Ches of Asia, comprizeth
all under these seven as being the principal, and containing within their
circuit all the rest? This later (I grant) is more direct for his purpose, I
mean, to prove that those 7. churches (at least some of them if not all) were
Dioceses; in as much as other Churches were contained (as he supposes) within
their circuit: but he (as often before) shows himself a notable trifler, in
begging the question, when he takes this for granted, which, he The Doct.
beggeth.
could not but know, without good proof would never be yielded: yet he dealt
wisely in not attempting, what he could not effect; for if those Churches of
Colossa, Hierapolis, and Troas, mentioned in the scripture, were not within
Asia (as he mainteyneth page 61.) and if those of Magnesia and Trallis,
recorded in other writers, cannot be 12. A contradiction i^ the D.
proved (as he says p. 62) to have been Churches in S. John's time: all the
world may wonder what records he will bring to prove, that there were any other
Churches in Asia* then these 7. which his text names? And yet unless he prove
also that those other Churches (how many or fevve soever) were contained
within the circuit of those 7. or some of the^; he must be much beholding to
his reader, if he will take his naked affirmation, for sufficient warrantise in
this behalf. 3. And since he rejects that connexive form of reasoning, which
his Refuter gathered naturally from his own words; he might have done well to
have practiced here the lesson which he gave his Refuter (page 44.) for finding
out of the right hypothesis, or thing presupposed, in a connexive proposition.
But it was some what an hard task, and therefore he would not put one finger
to it: notwithstanding, that he may s^e how willing his Refuter is to learn,
and how ready to give him contentment, in framing his arguments to his best
advantage: the connexive proposition shall first be disposed in an Enthymem
thus. Our Savior writing to the Churches of Asia, numbreth but 7. and names
the principal, Ergo, those 7. Churches (were great and ample cities etc. or
since he will needs have it) contained each of them in her circuit the city
and country adjoining. To bring this Enthymem into a Syllogism, some little
change of words must be made, either in the Antecedent, or in the consequent,
thus. Whatsoever Churches are specially nu^bred or named as principal, by our
^av. Christ, when he writes to all the Churches in Asia; those Churches did
contain each o^ them in her circuit the city and country adjoining. But the
7. Churches (mentioned Apoc. 1. 11. 20.) are specially nombred and named as
principal by our Savior Christ, when he writes to all the Churches in Asia.
Therefore the 7. Churches (mentioned Apoc. 1. 11. 20.) contained each of them
in her circuit the city and country adjoyninge. Or thus, whosoever writing
to the Churches of Asia, numbreth but 7. and names them as the principal; he
thereby signifies that those 7. Churches contained in their circuit, each of
them, the city and country adjoyninge: But our Savior Christ writing to the
Churches in Asia, nombreth but 7. and names them as the principal. Ergo, he
hereby signifies, that these 7. Churches, contained in their circuit, each of
them, the city and country adjoining. Now to give the D. his choice of these
arguments, (not forbidding him to make a better if he can) since there is no
certain or manifest truth in the The D. disputes by begging (...).
proposition, which contains the Hypothesis of his Enthymeme, we may from his
own rule conclude, that he disputes sophistically, and takes that for
granted, which he cannot make good, while he has a day to live.

Thus have we seen how well he argues to prove his assumption Sect. 19. ad.
page 43.
jointly; let us now atte^d a little, how he confirms it severally. 1. The
Church of Ephesus (says he) contained a great and ample city (in deed,
metropolis, or mother city) and the country subject to it. 2. the Church of
Smyrna a mother-citie and the country belonging to it etc. and so proceeds
from one of them to another, to Thyatira, and Philadelphia, with their
territories. But where are his several proofs, for these several assertions?
It seems he is fallen in love with the trade of begging, and The D. beggeth,
and is in love with the trade of begging else he would not beg. 7. times to
g^ther.
is grown past shame in it, (so as we may be past hope of dryving him from it)
else he would never produce. 7. false positions, to confirm his assumption
before atteinted of falsehood: For since every of those cities, remeined, for
the greater part, heathenish, in the Apostle John's time; it cannot be, that any
of them did contain the whole city, much less city and country. The truth
is, each of these Churches was contained within those cities, as a small heap
of corn is contained in a great and large barn. 2. And why does he here also
depart from the words of his sermon; which were that some of those 7. Churches;
were mother-cities? doubtless he saw, it was a very slight and feeble
consequence to reason (as he should have done) in this manner. Some of those 7.
Ch: were mother-cities; Ergo they The D. departs from the words of his sermon.
were every of them great and ample cities etc. And had his Refuter thus
analyzed his words; it is likely the D. would have bin more offended, then he
is with that form which he used, in putting all his speech into one connexive
argument. 3. But to take his argument as he has set it down, what means ^e
by the countries, which (he says) belonged to every one of those
mother-cities? Is it his meaning that the Ch: of Ephesus Smyrna etc. did
contain together with their cities, the whole provinces subject to those
mothercities? or does he limit the country to that part only, which made a
particular diocese? The later best fitteth his first purpose, sc. to prove that
every of the 7. Ch: was (properly a diocese: but the former agrees best, both
with his own interpretation of his words, p. 63. when he says, that some of
those Churches were Metropol^is, that is, not only mother-cities, but also
metropolitan Churches: and with his former speech, which affirms, all the
Churches in the cities, and countries of all Asia, to be contained in the
circuit of those 7. Churches. Notwithstanding if this be his meaning, he
plays the Sophister, in his induction. For by city and country in his
conclusion (which is the assumpon of his principal syllogism) he means
paroikian et ^horan, which are the parts of a Diocese; and his meaning must be
the same in the two last Churches, Philadelphia and Thyatira. Wherefore well
hunge together
his argument hangs together in this fashion. Of the 7. Churches; 5.
contained Mother cities and the Provinces subject to them: the other two
contained Diocesan cities and the countries to them belonging. Ergo every of
those Churches were of a like circuit and constitution, in containing a
Diocesan country together with the city. But if that be true which he says,
of Philadelphia and Thyatira, that the one was subject to Sardis, the other to
Pergamus: then were the Churches of Philadelphia and Thyatira contained within
the circuit of Sardis and Pergamus, as parts of the Country and Province
subject to those cities. And hence it will follow that these 7. Churches, were
not of one form and constitution; but of differing condition; some being only
Diocesan, the rest metropolitan or provincial Churches. So that, like as his
first speech generally delivered of all 7. (that they were great and ample
Cities) is now limited to those 5. mother Cities: (page 45.) so in his next
defense, he may do well to restreine unto the same 5. Metropolitaine Churches,
that which now he affirms of all 7. viz. that they comprised within their
circuit, all the Churches that were in Asia, whether in the Cities or in the
Countries thereunto belonginge. But since the spirit of God, gives equal
honor to every of those Churches, and no prerogative to any one above another,
his proofs had need to be very pregnant and demonstrative, that shall persuade
the contrary. And this may suffice, to show how little cause he has, to bragg
(as he does p. 52.) that he has made good his assumption The D. braggeth
without cause.
by necessary proof: for in both his proofs (first jointly and then
severally) his antecedent is false, and his consequence sophistical.

Let us now cast a look a little upon his dealing with that frame of argument;
to which his Refuter reduced the proof of his assumption. Sect. 20. ad. sect.
9. page 56.
And first, because he denied both proposition and assumption, he complains,
(and very justly) that his hap was so hard, that scarce any one proposition or
assumption in his reasoning might be acknowledged to be true. But he comfort
himself in vain (as the issue has already, and I doubt not will hereafter
show) when he says, his refuters happ is so hard, that he is not able to prove
any one either proposition or assumption of his, to be untrue. To infringe the
proposition, it is answered, that though it were granted that our Savior
wrote those epistles, to all the Churches of Asia; yet it will not follow that
all the rest depended as children upon the mother. For put the ^ase, the
Emperor finding some abuse commonly reigning in Asia, should have written to
those principal and mother-cities, for the reforming of those abuses, with
intent that all other cities and towns, should be warned by his reproof of
them; might a man conclude thereupon, that all other cities and towns of Asia,
were subject to the government of those 7? The D. reply is, that this put case
is worthy to be put in a cap case; and therefore that all his readers may see
he deserves to have the ^loak-bagge: he puts a new case in this manner. But
say I (quoth he) put the case the Emperor should so do, with that intent,
that what he writes to them, might by and from them be notified, to those
towns and villages, which were within the circuit of their jurisdiction: would
it not strongly prove that all those other towns and villages were subject to
the^? As if he had said, grant me but thus much, that all the rest of the
towns and villages in Asia Will the D. never cease craving.?
were within the circuit of the jurisdictio^, of those 7. Churches or cities:
and then I can strongly prove, that they, were subject to them. He adds some
experiment from our selves; when the King or his Council would have any thing
intimated to all his subjects in certain countries; their warrants are
directed to the Leiftenants of each country and from them the high to
constables, etc. And when the Archbishop would have any thing imparted to every
parish, he directs his letters to the Bishops, the Bishops to the
Archdeacons, and they to their officers in every Deanery etc. (which shows a
subordination of officers in greater and lesser circuit of jurisdiction) even
(so says he) by Christ his writing to the 7. Churches what he would have
imparted to all the Churches; it may be gathered that the rest of the
particular Churches were subject to them. And it may well be, that when our
Savior; writing to every one of the Angels severally, and concluding each
epistle with this Epiphonema. Let him that has an ear, hear what the spirit
says to the Churches, would have it understood, that what he writes to the
Angel, he writes to the Churches, which were under his charge. To all which I
answer, 1. to make his similitude clear and suitable in the later part to the
former, he should have said, that Christ intending to admonish or reprove all
the Churches in Asia, directs his letters to the provincial or metropolitan
Churches; they to the diocesan, the diocesa^ to the particular congregations
under them. Or else, that what he wrote, to the Angels of the metropolitan
Churches, they imparted to the diocesan Bishops, and the Diocesan Bishops to
Parishe-Presbyters. But then he should have assumed that which he cannot prove,
neither by Scripture, nor tradition; wherefore it is plain that his similitude
halteth down right. 2. The D. similitude halteth.
And since the 7. Churches are equally written to; and the Angels of each
Church are equally honored with a several epistle directed to them; we may
very well persuade our selves, that none of those Churches or Angels, was
subordinate, or subject to the other. And therefore it was never intended by
our Savior Christ, or his Apostles; that the ecclesiastical state should
follow the civil, or that the Churches planted in Mother-Cities or Shire
towns, should contain within the circuit of their jurisdiction, the towns
and villages, or Country, subjected to the government of the City. 3. I also
^dd, that though he could prove, that the Angels and Churches specially written
unto by Christ, did impart the letters, unto other Churches and their
Ministers; yet would it not strongly but strangely conclude the rest of the
Churches and their Ministers, to be subordinate or subject to those 7. Churches
and their angels. For come we (for trial hereof) unto our selves and our own
stories. The Archbishop of Ca^terburie in the days of that worthy yongue King
Edward the 6. writes his letters missive and mandate to Edmund Bonner, then
Bishop of London, for the abolishing of candles, ashes, palms, and Images, out
of the Churches, with a direct charge that he should impart the contents of
those letters unto all other Bishops within the Province of Canterbury; and
Bishop Bonner did accordingly write, (see his letters, Act. and Monuments, page,
1183. last edit.) May I ask the Doctor now, whether this do strongly prove,
that the rest of the Bishops in the Province of Canterbury, were subject unto
the Bishop of London, and contained within his Churches jurisdiction at that
time? If he know the contrary, then I hope he will confess, that Christ his
writing to the 7. Churches, what he would have imparted to all the rest, does
not necessarily argue the rest to be subject unto these. 4. Yet to make the
weakness of his collection the more apparent, let him weigh the worth of these
consequences followinge. It was Christ's intent, in speaking as he does to
Peter, Math. 16. 17. 18. 19. Luc. 22. 31. 32. John. 13. 8. 10. and 21. 15, that
the rest of his fellow-Apostles, should take notice of all that he spoke to
him, for the i^ instruction and consolation. Ergo the rest were in subjectio^
to Peter. Again, the Angel informs Marie Magdale and the other Marie of
Christ's resurrection, and gave them charge to tell his disciples that he was
risen, Math. 28. 1. 5. 7. Ergo the Apostles were subject to the jurisdiction of
those weomen. Paul in writing to the Church of God at Corinth, writes also to
all the Saints that were in all Achaia, yea to all that every where did call on
the name of the Lord 1 Cor. 1. 2. and 2 Cor. 1. 1. And what he writes to the
Church at Colosse, he wills them to cause it to be read in the Church of the
Laodiceans. Col. 4. 16. Ergo, the Church of Laodicea was in subjection to the
Church of Colosse. And to the Church of Corinth, was not only all Achaia, but
all other Churches in the world subject, to her jurisdiction. But, who sees
not what absurd conclusions may be multiplied, if a man should proceed in this
vein of reasoning? 5. As for that Epiphonema, which concludes each epistle
directed severally to the Angel of each Church. (Let him that has an ear,
hear what the Spirit says to the Churches) if he had not first conceived that
it would be some advantage to his cause, to persuade his reader that those 7.
Churches did (every one of them) contain many several congregations within
their circuit; he would never have dreamed of any such construction of those
words, as he now commends to us, viz. that what Christ writes to the Angel,
he writes to the Churches that were under his charge. For as he has no ground
for it; either from the coherence of his text, or from any interpreter old, or
new; so it seems to have unadvisedly slipped from him; seeing as it is
confuted by himself; so it overthrows one maine part of his building.
Confuted it is by that himself sets down, in the end of his table (page
5.) of the signification of the word ecclesia; where he takes the word
Churches, in the conclusion of each epistle, indefinitely for any company of
Christians, not defining either the place or society; whether of a nation, or
city etc. whereas now he takes it difinitely for the congregations, which
were parts or members of that citie-Church, which is mentioned in the 14. a
Double contradiction? in the D.
beginning of each epistle. And if there be a truth in his construction of
those words, (viz. that what Christ writes to every Angel, he writes also to
the Churches that be under his charge;) then those Churches were interessed
with the Angel, in all that which is commended or reproved in him. And hence
it will follow, that if a correcting power over Ministers may be rightly
gathered (as he conceives sermon. page 49. Def. lib. 3. page 135.) from the
commendation or reproof, given Apoc. 2. verse. 2. and 20* then the
Daughter-churches distinguished, either in City or Country adjoining, were
partners with the Mother Church and the Angel or Bishop thereof, in that
corrective power over Ministers; which he labors (in the places before
alleged) to establishe in the hands of one Bishop or Angel only.

Thus we see how he fares in the defense of his proposition. In Sect. 21. ad
sect. 10. D. page 57. 62.
the assumption the Refuter observed two untruths, in as much as it cannot be
proved, either that all other Churches in Asia, were written unto, as within
the circuit and jurisdiction of those 7; or that any of the 7. was a
Mother-City. To make the untruths of the former apparent, he reasons
disiunctiuely from the diverse acceptions of Asia, distinguished by historians
into Asia Major* Asia minor, and Asia more properly so called. Concerning the
first; because it is unlikely, (or rather impossible) that our Savior writing
to that third part of the World (which was not much less then both the other)
should subscribe and send his epistles only to those 7. that are in one little
corner of it; the Refuter professes, he will not once let it come into his
thought to imagine that Mr. Doct. would have us believe, that all the Churches
in Asia Major (which contained the great Kingdom of China, with the
East Indies, Persia, Tartaria and a great part of Turkey) should be parishes,
belonginge to some one or more of these 7. Churches. Secondly to restreine it
to Asia minor; because the Scripture records many Churches to be in it, (as
Derbe, Lystra, Iconium, Antioch in Pisidia, Perga in Pamphilia, and diverse
Churches in Galatia;) he supposes that none is so much bewitched with the love
of Diocesan Churches, as to imagine, that all those famous Churches were but
dependantes on these 7. Thirdly therefore, to come as low as may be, and to
understand by Asia, that which is properly so called, and otherwise Sarrum;
even there also or near, we find diverse other Churches, as those of Colosse,
Hierapolis and Troas mentioned in the Scriptures, (to let pass Magnesia and
Trallis recorded in other writers) which did not belong to any of these 7. and
therefore he takes it to be clear, that our Savior intended not to write to
all the Churches of Asia; but only to those 7. that are named. Lo here the
sum, and almost the words, of the Ref. answer touching the first part of the
D. assumptio^: now let us see the parts of his reply. First, he charge him,
either to be a man of no learning, or else to ^^vill against the light of his
conscience: seeing he could not be ignorant, but that by Asia mentioned in the
Apocalypse, is meant only Asia properly so called. Secondly he says, he makes
a great flourish, partly to show some small skill in Geography, but chiefly to
dazell the e^es of the simple, in showing how unlikely it is, that the great
kingdoms of Asia major, and the many famous Churches of Asia minor, were but
dependants on those. 7. Thirdly to teach him (if he do not know) that none of
those countries were contained in that Asia whereof the Ho. Ghost speaks; he
says that by comparing. Act. 2. 9. 10. and 6. 9. and 16. 6. 7. and 1 Pet. 1.
1; he may find that many parts of Asia minor, are reckoned as diverse
countries, from that Asia, which is mentioned in the scripture. Fourthly he
adds, that if the Ref. would needs have shown his skill in Geography, he
should have done well, to have set down the bounds and limitts of this Asia,
whereof we spoke. And because the Ref. should not prevent him, that he might
have all the praise for skill herein, he undertakes to do it. Fifthly, he
comes at length to refute, that which his Ref. objected concerning those Ch:
which he mentioned to be either in Asia, properly so called, or nere there
abouts. Now come we to our answer: and first concerning the crimes, wherewith
he charge his Ref. I appeal to the indifferent reader, whether the D.
himself be not guilty of them? I mean, of laboring to dazell the eyes of the
simple, The D. is guilty of what he imputes to the (...)
and of cavilling against the light of his conscience: seeing it is clear, the
Ref. mentions the two first acceptions of the word Asia (not as though he
were ignorant how it is to be taken; nor yet to persuade his reader, that the
D. does so largely streach it; for he professes the contrary, as before
appears) but only to fortify his argument, whiles he shows that which way
soever the word be taken; it cannot be, that all the Churches of Asia, should
be reputed as parts of those 7. or subjected unto the^. Next, touching the
bounds of Asia properly so called, because it is a point of skill and cannot
easily be determined, the D. to show his variety of reading, indeavoureth to
reconcile the scripture and those that write of Geography, who vary from him
(as he confesses) in this point. According to the scriptures, in his account,
Asia includes Ionia, Mysia, Pergamene, Lydia, or Maeonia, and perhaps Caria.
The ancient Geographers include within the limits thereof all Phrygia, both the
greater and the lesser, wherein Troy stood; and all Mysia, even the greater
called Olympina, and the less called Pergamene: which excludes from that
Asia, whereof John speaks: because Phrygia, and Mysia, Olympina, are reckoned
apart from Asia Act. 16. 6. 7. For we are not to merveil (he says page 60.)
that a less circuit is assigned to it in the scripture, seeing within a less
compass then that which the scripture assigns thereunto, it is circumscribed
by others; which seclude from Asia, both Lydia and Caria as he shows out of
the subscriptio^s in the Nicen council, and from the speech of Eunapius, in
Maximo. But what if Saint John and Saint Luke follow different accounts for
the bounds of Asia whereof they speak? A worthy writer (Ioa^himus Vadianus) who
traveiled much in searching after the true and right situation of those towns
and countries, which are mentioned in the new Testament (in his Epitome triu^
terrae partiu^) entreating of Asia minor properly so called, affirms that
Peter (1, Pet. 1. 1.) and John (in those 7. Ch: of Asia) do follow the most
usual partitio^ in that age received; the same which Ptolomy and P^iny set
down; and that Luke, (Act. 16. 6. 7.) being lead by another division, which
some also the^ enterteyned, restreineth Asia within narrower limits. His words
are these (in that epitome page 467.) Ptolomeus, lib. 5. Asiam proprie dictam
includit a S^ptentrione, Bithynia, a meridie, Pamphylia et Lycia, ab ortu,
Galatia, ac occasu, Aegeo mari. Quam partitionem vt receptam haud dubie et eo
seculo vulgatam, secutus videtur Petrus Apostolus. 1. epist. 1. 1. vbi
Bithyniam et Galatia^, ab Asia sejungit, nimi^um hanc ipsam intelligens, quam
Ptolomaeus. Vaeterum enim more, harum tantum regionum, quae cis Taurum in
Aegeum and Euxinum patent, meminit, viz: Cappadocie, Ponti, Galatie, Bithyniae,
Asiae; ut intelligatur Asiae proprie. minoris esse, quicquid reliquum cis
Taurum est, a predictis regionibus divisum. Enimvero et Plinius, quinti libri
fine, initium Asiae de qua jam loquimur, a Lycie fine quondam sumptum esse,
testis est. Idem et Johannes secutus videtur, Apocalypsim suam septem ecclesijs
Asiae inscribens (viz. Ephesinae, Smyrnaeae, Pergamenae, Thyatirenae,
Sardyanae, Philadelphenae et Laodicenae) quae vniversae, Bithynia, Galatia,
Pamphilia et Lycia, includuntur. At vero Lucas terras quae minoris Asiae sunt,
paulo arctius definivit, et terminis contraxit angustioribus, haud d^bie et
ipse conceptam aliquam et usitatam loquendi consuetudinem suae aetatis secutus.
And then setting down the words of Luke, Act. 16. 6. 7. he adds. Ex quibus
verbis manifestum fit, aliter Asiam accipere Lucam, quam Petrus aut Johannes
acceperit. Palam enim et Phrygiam et Misiam Asiae demit, cum per cas se
profectum testatur, qui tamen Asiam ingredi ve^itus fuerit. Intelligimus ergo
Lucam eam peninsulae partem, proprie Asiae tribuisse, quae ad occasum proxima
mari, in Mediterraneis Aeoliam et Lydiam supra Ephesum et Smyrnam co^plectitur.
quam certe et Hieronymus specialiter Asiae nomine vocari tradit. Hujus parts
erunt Ionia, Aeolis et Lydia, fortissimae et cultissi^ae omnium Asiae regionum,
quae intra Maria, Euxinum et Cilicum prominent. To this testimony, I refer
the Doct. because I hope, he will reverence his gray-haires and great reading,
though he lightly esteem the Refuter for his small skill in Geography. And
withal I pray the reader to take notice of this, that the Doctor presumes all
men will take his word for the limitts which he gives to that Asia, whereof S.
John speaks; for he disagreeth with both those accounts, which himself
mentions, in giving to Asia a less circuit, then the former, which include
both Phrygia and Mysia major in it; and a larger then the later, which seclude
both Caria, and Lydia from it. And though he seem to ground his opinion on
the testimony of S. Luke in his story of the Acts of the Apostles; yet in
truth, he departs also from him, and so stands singular in his conceit,
without any to support or second him therein. For as he has rightly, observed,
Phrygia and Mysia to be distinguished from Asia by S. Luke, Acts 16. 6. 7. so
he might by a better search have found, that Caria also is (in his account)
divided from Asia. For it is recorded by Luke, (Act. 20. 15. 16.) that Paul
having determined not to spend any time in Asia, sailed by Ephesus, and
therefore from Trogillium, he came to Miletum, and from thence sent for the
Elders of Ephesus to come to him; which shows that Miletu^ was not within
Asia by his estimation; and therefore not in Ionia (wheri^ Ephesus stood)
although many do there place it; but in Car^a as ^omy affirms; to whose
opinion also, Ioach: Vadianus (ut supra.) in this point cleaves. Now if Saint
Luke does exclude both Caria and Phrygia from his Asia; it will follow that
Saint John's Asia is of a larger circuit; in as much as it includes Laodicea,
which with Ptolomy is a city of Caria; but more generally is reckoned within
Phrygia.

To come now at length, to his refutatio^, of that which is objected Sect. 22.
ad page 61. of the D.
by his Refuter why our Savior writing to the 7. Churches, should not under
them comprize all the Churches in Asia: the objection stands thus, even there
or near, we find diverse other Churches, as thos^ of Colossa, Hierapolis and
Troas mentioned in the scripture (to let pass Magnesia and Trallis recorded in
other writers:) which did not belong to any of these 7. The D. answers, first
touching the 3. former, that none of them was in Asia properly so called,
whereof John speaks; because Troas (forsooth) was the same with Phrygia
minor, and Hierapolis and Colossa were cities of Phrygia Major? Why is it
possible that the D. who has perused so many Authors both Geographers and
others, should be ignorant, that Troas is not always the name of a country
(or taken for Phrygia minor) but sometimes the name of a city in Asia, called
Antigonie, or Alexandria? or is he so unacquainted with his Refuters opinion
concerning the form and nature of visible Chur. that he should conceive he
would entitle an whole country (such as Phyrgia minor is) with the name of the
Church of Troas; and Does not the D. cavil against his own conscience?
join it with the Church of Colossae and Hierapolis, which he holds to be
but particular congregations* shall I say, that here also, he cavilleth against
the light of his conscience? for can he think that Troas (which is mentioned
Act. 16. 8. 11. and 20. 5. 6. and 2. Tim. 4. 13.) was the country of Phrygia
and not rather, some citi^ Troas urbs marit. in littore Asiae Aret. in Act. 16.
8.
in the sea costs, either of the same country or some otherwhere adjoining?
The truth is, (as the learned in Geography who have examined the towns and
countries in S. Lukes history do^ conceive) that the Troas which is pointed at
in the forenamed places, was a city in that country called Troas, as
appears by Pliny lib. 5. cap. 30. 16. who places Alexandria in Troas; that
is, the city Vide dictinar: Histor Car. Step. in Alexandria^
or town of Troas in the country of Phrygia minor. Ioach: Vadianus (in his
forenamed Epitome p. 487) entreating of those parts of Asia, which are called
Aeolis and Troas, and having placed Assos (whereof Luke speaks Act. 20. 13.)
in Aeolis, he says. Hand procul Asso, promontorium Lect^m attollitur, Aeoliam
et Troada disterminans, Plinio. Inde Troas oppidum, Colonia Romana, et Apostoli
etiam aetate Alexandria dictum, proximum Hellesponto, and Tenedo Insulae, in
ipsis Hellesponti faucibus jacenti; atque hinc Lecto, illinc Sigaeo promontorio
septa. Ejus Lucas meminit Act. 16. 8. 11. c. 20. 5. 6. meminit ejus urbis, et
ipse Paulus. 2. Tim. 4. 13. But as the D. says) of Colosse and Hierapolis, which
were cities of Phrygia major: for so he will affirm of Troas, a city of
Phrygia minor; that neither the one nor the other were within Saint John's Asia:
because Saint Luke severeth Phrygia and Troas (that is in his understanding,
Phrygia major and Phrygia minor) from Asia, Act. 16. 6. 8. But the answer is
already made, that the D. is deceived in taking John and Luke to embrace one
and the same partition of Asia; for the limits thereof. The Apostles Peter and
John do follow the most usual understanding of those that gave unto it a
larger circuit (as appears in reckoning Laodicea, a city of Phrygia or
Caria within Asia: and therefore the Churches mentioned by the Refuter (viz.
Troas, Hierapolis and Colosse) being all within Phrygia, are enclosed in Saint
John's Asia. But the D. has some other evasions, which cannot yield him the
releife he expects. It is recorded (says he page 61.) by Eusebius (in Chron)
that in the year of Christ 66. and 10. of Nero, these 3. cities Laodicea,
Hierapolis and Colosse were overthrown with earth quakes; and although
Laodicea flourished again in S. John's time; and Hierapolis not long after; yet
of Colosse as Calvine observes, that shortly after the epistle written to
them, that Church with the rest perished; so that it stood in S. John's time he
reads The D. shifteth
not etc. A poor shift; for, to make the best of all the allegation for his
purpose; it is no more then this; he neither reads nor remembre^h any
mention, of any Church at Colosse, i^ S. John's time: nor of any Church
flourishing at Hierapolis, when he wrote his Revelation, and therefore he
thinks that his Refuter might have spared the mention of these. And what if
his Refuter should gratify him herein? yet has he no reason to deny a
flourishing Church at Tro^s, and another at Miletum (a city in the borders of
Caria, which himself estemeth to be within S. John's Asia) since the Apostles
made choice of that place, to call thither the Elders of Ephesus, Act. 20. 27.
and there left Trophimus behind him sick, 2 Timothy 4. 20. not to speak of Assos;
where the writers of the centuries (Cent. 1. Lib. 2. Cap. 2. 16.) do think
there was a Church, because Paul was conducted thither from Troas (Act. 20. 13.
14.) there to meet his companions 2. Yet if that be true, which the Doctor
says, that Papias was made Bishop of Hierapolis by S. John; let the reader
judge, how unlikely it is (which he would persuade) that at the writing of the
Revelation there was no Church at all there; seeing S. John lived not above 4.
years after: for he wrote Anno 97. and died (as the Doctor will have it) Anno
101. but in the account of some others Anno 100. 3. Again what necessity is
there in this consequence, which the Doctor takes for undeniable? Those 3.
city* were overthrown with the earthquake, Ergo the Churches which there
flourished before, did then perish with the cities. 4. And why does he answer
nothing touching the state of those Churches, whiles they stood in that
prosperity, which the scripture ascribes to them? Col. 4. 13. 16. and Act. 20
6. 7. If none of them then, did owe subjection to Ephesus, or any other of
these 7. churches; how should they (or so many as remained in S. John's time)
become subordinate unto them? When all is done, he must seek to his first
answer, and see if he can make it good; viz. that they were with* in S. John's
Asia. Wherefore he may in his next defense bu^ie this in silence as an idle
flourish, to dazell the eyes of the simple, or to show some small skill in
histories. He adds one slender propp borrowed from Theodoret* to prove that
Colossae was no part of Asia. Theodoret (says he) being of opinion that Paul
had been at Collossae, proves it, because it is said, that he went through
Phrygia. Neither let any man object that Paul was forbidden of God, Act. 18,
for Luke speaks of As^^ and Bithyni^, not of Phrygia. I grant that Phrygia
was not within S. Lukes Asia: and I have proved that it was within S. John's
Crambo bis imo sepius po^^ta.
Asia; and therefore the Doctors often bringing in of his lame consequence,
cannot make him any better, but the more loathsome rather. And to confute
Theodoret (if he were more direct for him then he is) I could send him to
Hierome, who (in his prologue to the epistle to the Colossians) says
Collossenses et hi, si^^ Laodicenses, sunt Asiani. Some other authorities also
might be added, to sway the balance with the Refuter; which accounts those
Churches (of Collosse, Hierapolis and Troas) within the limitts of Asia,
properly (and in Saint John's understanding) so

As touching Magnesia and Trallis, his answer is, it appears not that they
were as yet converted to the faith, and when they were converted Sect. 23. ad
p. 61. and 62.
they were inferior to those 7. which Saint John names as the principal and
both of them subject to Ephesus. If the Doctor had remembered now upon his
second thoughts, what he spoke upon his first, (or at least wrote in his
sermon, page 62.) he would never have used this poor shift: to make it a
quaestion whether A poor shift in the Doctor.
Magnesia and Trallis were converted to the faith, when John wrote his
Revelation: for there to prove that Onesimus was that Angel of Ephesus, to
whom John directed his first Epistle; he thus reasons. When Ignatius wrote
his Epistle, he testifies, that at that time Onesimus was Bishop of Ephesus.
Now he wrote, whiles Clemens was Bishop of Rome, as appears by his first
epistle ad Marium Cassob. that is to say, between the 90. year of our Lord
and 99.; in the midst of which time, the Revelation was given. Therefore it
may well be supposed, that the Angel of the Church at Ephesus* to whom the
first epistle was directed, was Onesimus. Yea he builds so confidently on
this supposall, that without any staggering, he says he is able to show that
Onesimus was at that time Bishop of Ephesus, as the very man whom the Holy
Ghost calls the angel of that Church (Defenc. lib. 1, page 34. and lib. 4.
page 40.) With a little change the Doctors premises will serve to justify the
Ref: against himself in this manner. When Ignatius wrote his Epistles, the
Churches of Trallis and Magnesia flourished and enjoyed their Bishops
Presbyters and Deacons; neither were any thing inferior in estimation and
honor unto other Churches; as appears by his Epistles written to them, and
placed before others. Now he wrote whiles Clemens was Bishop of Rome, that is,
betwixt the year of our Lord 90. and 99. And S. John wrote his Revelation in
the year 97. Therefore it may well be supposed (yea it is so evidently proved,
that the Doct* cannot contradict it) that the Churches of Magnesia and Trallis
were flourishing Churches, when S. John wrote his Revelation. 2. But we will
not make an advantage to our selves, by the D. error. For that which he now
affirms (sc. that Ignatius wrote his Epistle a little before his death) is
more agreeable to the truth, if we may believe Eusebius (to whom the D. in his
sermon refers us for the better confirmation of his assertion) seeing Eus^bi*
Lib. 3. cap. 35.
affirms, that the epistles of Ignatius to the Churches of Ephesus; Magnesia,
Trallis etc. were written in his journey toward Rome, as he passed through
Asia; when he was sent thither to be martyred there, which fell out (by the D.
own account page 72. of his sermon.) in the year of our Lord 107; but as others
think, was later, to wit, in the year 109. or 111. (See Bucholcer Ind: Chrono.
log. and Eusebius: in Chron.) yet Nicephorus (lib. 3. cap. 2. refers it to the
3. year of Trajane, which was at the utmost but 6. years after John's writing
the Revelation. Wherefore since it appears by Ignatius his epistles to the
Churches of Magnesia and Trallis, that they were at that time (not newly
converted, as the Doctor intimates, but) perfectly established and furnished,
as well with Bishops as with other officers, (as is before noted) Let the reader
judge whether it be not more likely, that those Churches had a beginning, at
least of their standing at that time: then that they were not converted to the
faith, as the D. would persuade; especially seeing they were within the Province
of Ephesus (as he affirms) which had so many helps to spread the faith of
Christ thoughout all the corners thereof, that he thinks it absurd (as we
saw before in answ. to his 6. section and page 61.) that any man should make
any scruple to yield, that many particular co^gregations were settled before
that time, within the Diocesan circuit, of that Ch: of Ephesus. For is it not
much more likely, that Churches should be erected, rather in some cities within
the Province, the^ in some villages within the Diocese? and if in any cities,
what are more likely then these whereof we speak? But what shall we say to the
last branch of his answer, viz. that if they were Churches at that time; yet
they were both of them subject to Ephesus? These are his words, hear we now
his proofs; and then give him his answer; it appears, says he, by the
subscriptions in the council of Cal^edon; and by the distribution of the
Churches made by Leo the Emperor. Why? does it there appear, that Magnesia and
Trallis at their first conversion, were subjected to the Church and Bishop of
Ephesus? No, but it appears there, that in time of the council held at
Chalcedon and in the days of the Emperor Leo (both which were at least 350.
years after John's death) the Bishops of Magnesia and Trallis, were subject to
the Bishop of Ephesus, as their Metropolitan. And he takes it for granted,
that what soever Churches were subject to any Metropolitan city, or the Bishop
thereof; in those times (of the Chalcedon council and of Leo the Emperor,
they were subject to the Church and Bishop of the same city, from the time of
their first embracing the faith. But what The Doct. beggeth of his Refuter in
one place, what he denies to himself in an other
he now takes for a known truth, in the next page (63) he shows to be an
apparent falsehood: for there he affirms that Thyatira was in S. John's time
subject to Pergam'; but in the time of the counsel of Chalcedo^ subject to
Synada, and in the Emperor L^os days, subject to Ephesus. And in the same
Emperors days, Pergamus which anciently had been a Mother-citie, was now
subjected also unto Ephesus. Wherefore he himself has said enough to infringe
the consequence of his own reasoning. viz. that the Churches of Magnesia and
Trallis were from the first erection, subject to the Church of Ephesus; because
they were so subjected 350. years after S. John's days. Perhaps he exp^cteth
(as it seems by his conclusion in this section, page 62.) that his Refuter
should prove the contrary; but he is forgetful and must be remembered, that in
all this controversy he is the opponent, and his Refuter the respondent: and
therefore without reason expects it; yet to let him see, that his Refuter was
ledd by reason, and not by idle conceits, I will tender him these
probabilities. 1. In the civil distribution of provinces, and administrations
for government, Philadelphia was subject to Sardis and Thyatira to Pergamus, as
he notes page 63. out of Pliny, lib. 6. cap. 29. and 30. but in
ecclesiastical government the Churches of Philadelphia, and Thyatira, were
nothing inferior to Sardis and Pergamus: for they were all honored with the
name of candlesticks, and Churches, in the midst whereof Christ walked. Apoc.
1. 11. 20; and their Angels equally dignifyed, with the name of stars held in
Christ's right hand, verse. 16. 20. and equally saluted by a several epistle
directed to them. Cap. 2. 1. 8. 12. 18. and 3. 1. 7. 14. none is reproved for
the defaults of the other, but his own; none admonished to oversee the other,
or to be subject to an other. Wherefore unless some other reason can be
alleged, then the D has yet found out) it may be esteemed for a truth not to
be doubted of, that the Churches of Magnesia and Trallis, were not subjected to
the jurisdiction of the Church or Bp. of Ephesus; although for civil
government, they were within that Province. 2. And if there had been any such
subjection, or subordination in these Churches, who shall better know it, and
who more ^^tt to have intimated it: then Ignatius who wrote to every of those
Churches? I mean to Trallis, Magnesia, and Ephesus. But there is not the least
shadow of any such thing to be gathered from his writings; nay the contrary
rather seems firmly to be collected from that preeminence, which he gives to
the Bp. of each Church, as the highest Church Officer under Christ; even in
those words which the D. urges for his superiority above other Ministers.
Epist. ad Trall. Quid episcopus, nisi principatu^ omnem supra omnes obtinens.
And ad Philadelp. as he injoyneth the whole clergy and laity (even the
Princes and C^sar) to obey the Bishop: so he subjecteth the Bishop to none
other, then to Christ. Episcopus Christo (obediat) sicut Christus patri: et ita
unitas per omnia servetur. Which words do prove most clearly, that in his
time no Bishop, yielded subjection to another, as his Metropolitan or head. And
therefore neither was Demas the^ Bishop of Magnesia, nor Polybius of Trallis,
any more subject to Onesimus the Pastor of Ephesus, then he was to either of
them. So that the Refut: confident conclusion, stands firm against all the
D. attempts to shake it; that our savior did not under the name of these 7.
Churches, write unto all the Churches of Asia; in as much as, those famous
Churches, of Troas, Colossae, Hierapolis, Miletus, Magnesia and Trallis, (which
then flourished in Asia) did no way depend on any of them.

Thus the former part of his assumption remains guilty of that Sect. 24. 2d
sect. 12. p2. 62. 63.
untruth, wherewith the Refuter charged it: And so will the later also, lie
still under the burden of that falsehood, which is ascribed to it. For if none
of them were cities; (as has been sufficiently mainteyned already, against the
Doctors allegations) how could any of them be Mother-cities? Yet he undertakes
briefly to declare, that some of them were Metropoleis, that is, not only
Mother-cities, but also Metropolitan Churches. Where first we are to mark the
Doctor his, not only, but also. as if it were a small matter to affirm and
prove, that some of those 7. Churches were Mother-cities, he can easily
mainteyne that; and for an overplus, he will prove, (which is a matter of more
difficulty, and not so easily enterteyned) that they were Metropolitan
Churches. Well, let his proofs be heard, they are absolutely denied to be
Mother cities; and though some of them may be granted to be Metropolitan
Churches, if thereby nothing else be meant, then that they were such Churches,
as were seated in a Metropolis or mother-citie; yet in the common-vnderstanding
of our age, which esteems them only for Metropolitan Churches, that have
diocesan Churches subjected to them, they may also be denied to be Metropolitan
Churches, and it may be held as false as the former. Those cities says he,
which were capita dioike^^^n, the heads of the civil jurisdiction, where the
presidents of the Roman Provinces held their assemblies and kept their courts,
were mother-cities to the rest which were under the said jurisdiction: But such
were. 5. of these etc. May I ask him, what he means by these? what; the
cities afternamed? Which way soever the D. turns, either he concludes not
the question, or is absurd.
viz. Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamus, Sardis and Laodicea or the Churches seated in
those cities? If cities; then he concludes not the question, for it never
entered into the Refuters thought, to deny the cities of Ephesus Smyrna etc, to
be mother-cities. If he mean, that the Churches in those cities were heads of
the civil jurisdiction, etc. he is absurd, who will believe him? and he
abuses Pliny, for he speaks of the cities and not of any Churches seated in
them. His argument therefore is none other then this. The cities of Ephesus
Smyrna etc. were heads of the civil jurisdiction, as Pliny testifies: But the
Churches of Ephesus and Smyrna were the cities of Ephesus and Smyrna etc. Ergo
the Churches of Ephesus and Smyrna etc. were the heads of the cities
jurisdiction: and consequently mother-cities. Thus he justifies one falseshood
with another, a less with a greater; and for The D. justifies one falsehood by
another, so well performs he his first promise; his second he forgot
want of better proof, he recoileth back to his first assumption before
confuted, to wit, that the Churches of Ephesus and Smyrna etc. were the very
cities. And thus we have heard all that he can say, to show that some of these
Churches were mother-cities: he promised also to prove that they were
metropolitan-Churches; but either he forgot it; or he thought it better (in
policy) to overpasse it, then to meddle with it. For, unless he could prove
that the Angel and Church of Thyatira, were subject to the Angel and CHVRCH of
Pergamus: and likeweise, that the Church of Philadelphia and her Angel, were
subject to the Angel and Church of Sardis: (which were to controwle and
contradict the text of scripture which equalleth them one with the other) it
were in vain to affirm, and indiscretion to undertake to prove, that any of
these 7. Churches were metropolitan Churches.

And this may suffice for refutation of all that he has said in defense of
that one and only argument, which he proposed, as grounded on his text, to
prove that the Churches were properly dioceses. That which follows in his
sermon. page 18. touching the course which the Apostles took for the converting
of any nation (viz. first to preach the gospel in the chief city thereof and
after the conversion of some few, to ordeine Presbyters, in hope by their
M^nisterie to conver^ the rest,) was carried by the Refuter to conclude (by a
new prosyllogisme) the maine point of the former argument, to wit, that the 7.
Churches were great and ample cities, with their countries adjoining? And he
had reason so to refer it, because he found both points thus knitt together,
it cannot be denied that the Churches whereof the Angels were Bishops were
great and ample cities etc. For it is evident that the Apostles when they
intended to convert any nation, first preached to the cheife-cities etc. But
because the D. changes the Analysis, and carries it from the particular
question of the 7. Churches, to the general Thesis, which his sermon proposes
(touching all the visible Churches, which flourished, as well in the age
following the Apostles; as in their own times) I will, for the present, pass
by it whiles we are to examine, what he alleges more directly to conclude,
his explication of the text, that he handles; to wit, that the Angels of the
7. Churches were diocesan Bishops, such as ours are which is the third point of
his 5. mentioned in his sermon, and handled in the 7. chap. of this book, and
whereunto pertains the handling of that 3. and 4. sect. lib. 1. cap. 2. which
there was referred to this place.

Cap. 2. Concerning the number of the angels mentioned in the text, and whether
they were Diocesan Bishops.
We are now come to examine how well the D. opened that doubt, which his
Refuter told him, (answ: page 3.) he either did not or would not see. The
doubt is, whether by the Angel of the 7. Churches, Sect. 1. ad sect. 3. and 4.
cap. 2. lib 1. of the. def. page 31 32. 33. 34.
be meant 7. singular persons only, which were 7. chief Pastors or Byshop^ in
those Churches; for in his sermon he had taken this for granted, as if there
were no question to be made thereof; now though he and Bishop Bilson also (as
his words show; perpet. govern. p. 235. 289) are therein very bold, yet least
the Refuter should seem to be void of reason in tendering this doubt, he
puts the D. in mind, that the Holy Ghost does not (in the unfolding of the
mystery of the 7. stars and. 7. candlesticks) so precisely limitt, the
number of the Angels, signified by the stars, as he does the Churches figured
by the candlesticks: and therefore urges the D. in this manner. If M. D, will
needs have these Angels to be diocesan Bishops, he must give us, at least, some
likely reason, why the Holy Ghost limiteth not the number of the Angels, as well
as of the Churches to 7. and no more: which ^e spoke to provoke him, (if he
meant to defend his sermon, and the argument which he draws there, for the
justifying of our diocesan Bishops in their function) to give us some probable
reason; why the Ho: Ghost has not so clearly limited the number of the angels
to 7; as he does the number of the Chur. But albeit the D. took notice of those
words of the Refuter, yet has he not yielded (in all his defense) any show of
reason, to give to his reader or Refuter any satisfaction in this point,
neither answers he directly to that which his Refuter objected; but in his
name sets down such a The D. deals deceitfully.
frame of reasoning, as might best serve his turn, both to divert his reader
from expecting any such matter at his hands, as was demanded; and to persuade,
that his Refuter reasoned over-weakly, to prove that the number of Angels was
not limited. In which later point, (not to insiste upon the former) whosoever
judiciously compares the Refuters own words with those which the D. ascribes
to him; he may soon discern how deceitfully this D. deals. For 1; whereas
the Refuter (in viewing the whole verse whereof his text is a part) observes
that the Holy Ghost does not so plainly and expressly limitt the number of
Angels unto 7. as he does the number of the Churches; the D. not daring
directly to contradict this assertion; (for if he should have affirmed, that
the number of the Angels, are in the words of his text, limited to the number
of, 7; as plainly as the number of Churches, are in the words following; every
child might have seen that he falsified The D. clippeth the Refuter words and
preventeth his purpose.
his text; therefore) he gives his Refuters a more general proposition to
prove; to wit, that the Holy Ghost has not (at all, any where, or any way)
limited the Angels to 7. And secondly, that he might the easilier draw his
partial readers to apprehend the weakness of his Refuters arguments, he
blusheth not both to clipp his words, and pervert his purpose. He clippeth his
words in making him to speak peremptorily, that the Holy Ghost would have said,
the 7. stars are the 7. Angels etc. whereas he speaks comparatively, The
Doct. clippeth the refut: words and perverteth his purpose
and by way of probability, that as it is said. The 7. candlestick^ are the 7.
Churches; in like manner the Holy Ghost (it seems) would have said, The 7.
stars are the 7. Angels of the 7. Churches, in case, he had intended to
signify no more but 7. Angels. He perverteth his purpose, in drawinge this
speech to prove the former, which (being taken as it was meant) needs no
proof. For the words of the text do show, that the number of 7. is not given
to the Angels, in such express terms, as it is to the Churches. This
therefore being in it self evident, the Refuters meaning was, from hence to
infer a probable reason, to prove that the Holy Ghost, in explaninge the
mystery of the 7. stars, had no intent to teach, that the Angels signified
by those stars, were. 7. persons only, and no more. His reasons may be thus
disposed.

If the Holy Ghost has not limited the number of the Angels to 7. by saying
the 7. stars are the 7. Angels of the Churches: then it seems, he intended
not to signify that they were but 7. and no more. But he has not by so
speaking limited their number to 7. Therefore it seems, he intended not to
signify, that they were but 7. and no more.
The consequence of the proposion (being the only point that can be doubted
of) is confirmed by this prosyllogisme.

If the Holy Ghosts meaning to limit the number of the Churches, be clearly
discovered, by twice mentioning the number of 7. Churches, (in saying that the
7. stars are the Angels of the 7. Churches, and that the 7. candlesticks are
the 7. Churches:) then it seems* he would have said the 7. stars are the 7.
Angels of the 7. Churches, in case he had intended to signify no more but 7.
angels. But the former is evident: Therefore the later cannot be denied.
To all this the Doct. gives no other answer, then (in page 32) that the Holy
Ghost has more plainly limited the number, then if he had said so. For if he
had said, they are the 7. Angels of the 7. Churches, a captious Sophister,
would have expounded, septe^. 7. by septeni, seven a piece; but when he says.
The 7. stars are the angels of the 7. Churches, he plainly signifies, that
there were just so many of them, as of the Churches. But has this Doctor
(think you) any fellows among men of his degree and learning, that will
subscribe to this answer, and say as he does, that the words of his text do
plainly signify, that there were just The Doct. has not many fellows in
shifting.
so many of the angels as of the Churches, and that they do more plainly
limit the number of 7: then if it had been said. The 7. stars are the 7.
angels of the 7. Churches? Or did it ever enter into the heart of any other,
who agrees with him in the interpretation of his text, to imagine, that the
Holy Ghost did therefore say, that the 7. stars were the angels (rather then
the 7. angels) of the 7. Churches; because he would give no occasion to any
captious Sophister, to expound ^eptem by septeni, so to conclude, there were
just 7. in every Church? When the Holy Ghost says (1. Regum. 20.) that the
King of Aram had in his army 32. Kings with horses and chariots, and went up
with them to beseege Samaria; if the Refuter should d^ny the number of the
horses and chariots, to be just 32. as were the Kings there mentioned: it
seems that such a captious Sophister as the Doctor is, would be ready to
contradict him, and to answer; that the number of horses, in that army is more
plainly limited to the just number of 32; then if it had been said, that
those 32. Kings had 32. horses; for if it had been so said, the later number
of 32. might have been expounded by 32. a piece. But why strive I to discover
the vanity of the Doctors false and captious shifts, which lie open to the
view of all that are not blinded with over gross partiality?

Since therefore it is apparent that his text limitteth not the number of
Angels unto 7, as it does the Churches; there is no reason he should so lightly
overpasse those things from thence inferred by his Refuter as he does saying,
(page 33.) It is not material what the Refuter in^erreth from the not
^mutation of them. Let the reader weigh the inferences with his answers to
them and then judge. The inferences are these, That the Hol^ Ghost in not
limitting them to any number, would have us to understand. 1. that there was
more angels or Bish^ps then 7 in these Churches (as that place. Acts 20. 17-28.
concerning Ephesians sus shows) and consequently they were not Di^^^s^^ Bishops. 2.
Where the ^^s^ription of every epis^le written to these Churches, is to the
ang^l in the singular number; it must not be taken literally for one only, but
figurativ^ly, and by a syne^hdoche, the si^gular for the plural^, for more th^n
one. But because there is a veil that hides the light from his eyes, though
he i^ scoff desires his Refuter to help him remove it; yet will I yield to
his request in good earnest, and afford him some help, by refuting his
arguments produced which hung in his light, and whereby he persuades himself
(as it seems) the Angels of those Churches were just 7. and no more, which
done: his Refuters inferences will stand good for any one word he has said to
the contrary. His first argument is thus framed by himself.

The stars which Christ held in his right hand, were just. 7, or limited Sect.
2.
to the number of 7. Apoc. 1. 16. and, 2. 1.

The Angels of the 7. Churches, were the stars which Christ held in his right
hand Apoc. 1. 20.

Therefore the Angels of the 7. Churches were just 7. or limited to the number
of 7.

A word or two to the assumption, and then three or four to the whole
argument. The assumption is false and not proved by the place quoted, which
says, that the 7. stars are the Angels of the 7. Churches, and not as the
assumption says, the Angels are the 7. stars. And I hope when the D. shall
consider it, he will find (not that they are all one, but that) there is a
great difference between them. For when it is said, the 7. stars are the
Angels, it is a metonymie of the adjunct, as if it had been said, the 7. stars
do signifye the Angels of the 7. Churches: but so it cannot be said, that the
Angels signify the stars: These 2. sentences therefore are not all one, there
is a sallacy in the aequivocation.

To the whole argument I shall need say little more; for if the D. will but
draw the curteine and look a little upon these arguments which are of the like
form and figure; he may without any further help or more a do, discern the
deceit of his own argumentation.

1. The ram which Daniel saw (cap. 8. 3.) was one only individuum or
singular thing.

The Kings of the Medes and Persians were that ram verse. 20. Therefore the
Kings of the Medes and Persians, were one only individuum or singular thing.

2. The horns which Zachary saw (cap. 1. 18.) were just 4. or limited to the
number of 4. so were the Carpenters which he saw, verse. 20.

But they that scattred Judah were those horns; and they that frighted them
away, were the Carpenters.

Therefore, they that scattred Judah were just 4 persons, or limited to the
number of 4. and so were they also that frighted them away.

3. Aholah and Aholibah were two weomen, the daughter's of one mother etc.
Ezech. 2. 3. 2 3. 4.

Samaria and Jerusalem were Aholah and Aholibah verse. 4,

Therefore Samaria and Jerusalem were two weomen the daughters of one mother,
etc.

4. The wise virgins which took oil in their lamps to meet the Bridegroom
were just 5. or limited to the number of 5. So were the foolish virgins which
lacked oil in their lamps, Math. 25. 1-4.

But the sincere professors of Christ and his truth are the wise virgins, and
the profane or hypocritical professors are the fo^lish virgins (as all agree
in their comments.)

Therefore the sincere professors of Christ and his truth are just 5. or
limited to the number of 5. And so are the profane or hypocritical, etc.

Thus I could go on, a tribus ad centum, but by this time, I hope, the D.
sees the aequivocation which lies in his own argument: for either he lacks
the word stars in a double sense, to wit, for the tipe in the proposition,
and for the antitipe or thing signified in the assumption; or else (and rather)
the aequivocation lies in the word were, which in the proposition is taken,
substantive, but in the assumption significatiue. For seeing himself does thus
interpret his text (sermon. page 2.) The 7. stars are (that is, do signify)
the Angels of the 7. Churches, his assumption is false, unless it be thus
understood, q. d. The Angels of the 7. Churches, were signified by the 7.
stars, which Christ held in his right hand. And if it be so understood; then
to avoid four terms, (which mar the fashion of his argument) the
proposition must be thus changed. The persons whose Ministry is represented
by the 7. stars, which Christ held in his right hand are just 7. But this is
so gross an untruth; that the D. cannot but see it, and unless there be an
other veil to shadow him will be ashamed to avouch it; much more to allege
the words of the Holy Ghost (Apoc. 1. 16. and 2. 1.) to mainteyne it; seeing he
acknowledges all the Ministers of the gospel to the worlds end, to be, by
their office, stars and shining lights (so his sermon of the dignity of the
Ministers, p. 61.) And in this sermon in quest. p. 55. he says of Dioc:
Bishops in general that they are stars which Christ holds in his right
hand; yea he affirms the same of our Bishops at this day (page 98.) Wherefore
there being no need of any longer discourse, to remove the veil of this first
argument, I might here proceed to the second. But before I come to it, (to
prove the contradictorie to his conclusion, I thus reason;

All the Ministers of the word that had charge to feed and oversee the
Christian people, in those 7. Churches, were signified by the stars which
Christ held in his right hand.

But all the Ministers of the word, that had charge to feed; and oversee the
Christian people, in those 7. Churches; were more then 7. singular persons
only. Therefore the persons signified by the stars, which Christ held in his
right hand, were more then 7. singular persons only.

The assumption needs no proof, (more then what is after gathered from Act.
20. 28.) since it is of all our adversaries acknowledged, and the denial of it
is the utter overthrowe of their whole building. For how should this text
justify the superiority of Bishops above other Ministers; if there were not
diverse Ministers in each of these Churches, subject to one Bishop? And if
there were but only 7. angels, (that is Bishops) in these 7. churches, there
was then but one only angel or Bishop in each several Church; but it is
clear by that place of the Acts, that there was more then one in that Church
of Ephesus, seeing it speaks of Bishops in the plural number ordained, and
set over that Church by the Holy Ghost; and it must needs be with the rest of
these 7. as it was with it, and others, Phil. 1. 1. Act. 13. 1. 2. and 14. 23.
Tit. 1. 5.

The Proposition is a truth not to be denied, seeing it is also confessed by the
Doctor (sermon: of the dignity of the Ministers, page 46. and 61.) and easy to
be proved, if any man else should gain^ say it. For 1. the true reason, why the
name of Stars is used to signify the Ministers of God, and to explane their
function is this, viz. that as the stars are set in the firmament to shine
upon the earth (Genesis 1. 17.) and to govern the night: (Psalm. 136. 9.) so it is
the office of the Ministers in general (and not of Diocesan Bishops in
particular) to shine as lights unto the Churches in all purity of doctrine and
holiness of conversation (Mat. 5. 14. 15. Ioh. 5. 35. Phil. 2. 15. cum cap. 1.
1.) that men which naturally are in darkness (2. Cor. 4. 6. Ephesians. 5. 8.) may have
their hearts enlightened and converted, Act. 26. 18. Dan. 12. 3.) and still
directed in the way of obedience. Psalm. 119. 105.) Wherefore since it is the
office and duty, of all Ministers in general, thus to s^ine and enlighten
others; it must needs be granted, that the name of stars does equally agree
to all. 2. And in this sense the word is used, when it is said, that the third
part of the stars was darkened (Rev. 8. 12.) and that the Dragons tail drew,
the third part of the stars of heaven, and cast them to the earth, (Rev. 12.
4.) For hereby we are to understand the corruption and apostacy (not of
Bishops and Archbishops only, but) of preachers and Teachers in general;
which in huge heaps and multitudes, were drawn to embrace and teach, haeresy,
superstition, and idolattie. 3. Moreover, although it be so with the Ministers
of the word, as it is with the stars, that (as one star differs from an
other in glory. 1. Cor. 15. 41. some here excelling others in gifts and
labors, (1. Cor. 12. 4. 11. and 2. Cor. 11. 23) shall also exceed them
hereafter in glory: (1. Cor. 3. 8.) yet it no where appears in holy
scripture, that the name of stars is given to any one degree, or order of
Ministers; much less appropriated to the episcopal function, to declare their
pre-eminence, dignity or advancement above other preachers. 4. Neither is that
gracious protection and safety which is assured to the Ministers of Christ (by
his holding the 7. stars in his right hand. (Rev. 1. 16. 20. and 2. 1.) any
privilege proper to Bishops, but a favor which he communicates to all, that
faithfully serve him, in their Ministerial function whatever it be, for the
promise both of Christ's presence and assistance (Exodus 3. 12. Mat. 28. 20.) to
protect or deliver from evil. Ier. 1. 18. 19. Ezekiel. 2. 6. and 3. 8. 9. Act.
18. 9. 10.) and to preserve from falling. 2. Tim. 4. 17. 18. Rev. 12. 4.) does
equally agree unto all, without any respect to their outward pre-eminence, or
lower standing. Wherefore to prove the proposition against all gaynsayers thus
I reason,

All that in those 7. Churches, were bound by office to enlighten others and to
guide them in the way of life by the light of their doctrine, and had the
promise of Christ's presence to assist protect and preserve them: (all such I
say) were signified by the stars which Christ held in his right hand.

But all the Ministers of the word, that had charge to f^ede, and oversee the
Christian people in those 7. Churches, were such persons, a^ in those Churches
stood bound by office, to enlighten others, and to guide them in the way of
life, by the light of their doctrine, and had the promise of Christ's presence,
to assist, protect, and preserve them.

Therefore all the Ministers of the word in those 7. Churches, were signified
by the stars, which Christ held in his right hand.

And from hence it follows, that all the Ministers of the word in those
Churches (which were many, or at least) more then one in each Church) are also
comprehended under the name, of the angels of the 7. Churches; For,

All the persons (which then living in those Churches) were signified by the
stars which Christ held in his right hand; were comprehended also under the
name of the angels of those 7. Churches.

But all the Ministers of the word which attended on the feeding of the flock
of Christ in those places, were signified by the stars which Christ held in
his right hand.

Therefore, all those Ministers (which were diverse in each Church a^ is before
showed) were comprehended under the name, of the angels of the 7. Chapter

But there will be a fitter occasion hereafter to fortify this conclusion: I will
therefore pass to the D. second syllogism, which stands thus;

Of ^. monades or vnityes, such as be 7. singular person, the number is just 7.
Sect. 3.
The angels were 7. monades or vnityes, as being 7. singular persons, Therefore,
of the angels, the number is just 7.
May I demand of him, what moved him to add this clause to his proposition,
such as be 7. singular persons? Did not his science and conscience tell him,
that there are in the scriptures sundry monades or vnityes of men and angels,
which are not to be taken for so many singular persons; but rather for so many
several rancks or societies? so that if this clause had been omitted, he
foresawe his proposition had been liable to just reproof. Again, when he
says that the number is just 7. does he not mean, that the number is just 7.
singular persons, or 7. individua? Who then has such a veil before his eyes,
The Doct. proves idem per idem.
as not to see, that this argument is a frivoulous trifling and a vain
stryving to prove idem per idem? for thus he reasons,

The angels were 7. monades, as being 7. singular persons;

Therefore they were just 7. individua, or 7. singular persons.

Wherefore, for a direct answer to the argument as it stands, it shall
suffice, to reject the assumption, as a palpable begging of the question. And
it is as palpable an untruth which he adjoyneth: for the proof thereof, when
he says. That it appears by the inscription of the 7. Epistles written to
them, that the Angels were 7. singular persons. For it The D. assumption
beggeth the question and he proves it by an untruth.
cannot appear by those inscriptions, till he has proved, 1. that the Angels
of the 7. Churches, signified by the 7. stars in his text, were none other
then those Angels, to whom the Epistles were directed; and that the Angels
written to in those inscriptions, were 7. singular persons. There are, I
confess, which grant the latter and yet deny the former. For though they
primarily understand to^ pro^stata, the president of the Presbytery by that one
Angel noted in the inscription: yet they restrain not the name of stars or
Angels in his text to those presidents only; but intend the^ also to all the
Ministers of the word, that attended one the feeding of these Churches.
Wherefore, he should have proved, and not assumed without proof, this point,
viz. that the Angels in his text are the same in number, neither more nor
less, then those Angels that are (according to their sense) primarily poynted
at in those inscriptions. Others there are, who though they acknowledge a
president in every society of Ministers, throughout those Ch; yet they limit
not that title in the inscriptio^ to the president only; but take it for the
whole society. Wherefore this is a second point, which the D. ought strongly to
have confirmed, if he would have reasoned soundly. For whereas he adds, that
whosoever is able to count 20. may easily The D. again proves idem per ide^,
or one untruth by another.
find just 7. if he mean (as he must, to conclude his purpose) just, 7.
singular persons, what else does he again but trifle, in justifying one
untruth by another, or rather in laboring again to prove idem per idem? And
may it please him in his next defense, to recite them plainly and as he ought,
in this manner. The Angel of the Church at Ephesus, was one singular person;
the Angel of the Church at Smyrna, was a second singular person, and so of the
rest. I will (if his Refuter cannot) keep tale for him and tell in the end,
that (notwithstanding his boast) he has 7. times together begged, The D.
beggeth 7 times together.
what he should and would have proved, but cannot. For he has already been put
in mind (and that with more show of reason then he can remove,) that in the
inscriptions of those epistles, the word Angel in the singular number, notes
the whole company of Angels or Bishops, which were in each Church, and not one
singular person only.

If his meaning be, (as it seems by his last words, (7. Angels neither more
nor less) to reason thus. The Angels to whom the 7. epistles were written,
were, 7. Angels, or 7. monades of Angels, neither more nor less. Therefore
they were, 7. singular persons; though the falsehood of the consequence
appears by that already said; yet to make it more apparent, I here tender to
his veiwe these few arguments.

1 The Angels by whom the Gospel is said to be published. Apoc. 14. 6. 8. 9.
were 3. Angels or 3. unities of Angels, neither more nor less, Therefore they
were 3. singular persons.

2 The Kings meant by the 7. heads of the beast. Apoc. 17. 9. 10. were 7.
neither more nor less: Ergo. 7. singular persons.

3 The Virgins mentioned Math. 25. 1. 2. were 10. neither more nor less, The
two fives there noted show the account to be just ten, as every one that can
tell 20. well knows.

4 The King of the South and King of the North Dan. 11. 5. 15. were two monades
or unities.

5 The parties refusing the marriage banquet were 3. monades or unities, so
reckoned one by one. Luke 14. 18. 19. 20.

6 So were the servants that had the tallents committed to them Math. 25. 15.
18.

7 The men sound in the field at the last day are only two unities, so are
the wo^men at the mill, Math. 24. 40. 41.

Shall we therefore conclude, that every of those were so many singular
persons, neither more nor less?

8 And must we also limitt the number of those 144000. mentioned Apoc. 7. 4. 8.
to so many persons, neither more nor less, because 12. times 12000. do^
precisely conclude that number? It is well known that in these scriptures, a
certain number is put for an uncertain and unlimited; and that in some of
these, (where a distribution is made of diverse unities) we are thereby to
understand, not so many singular persons precisely; but so many rancks or
orders of persons agreeing in one thing. as Apoc. 14. 6. 9. three rancks of
Ministers succeeding one another, and concurring in one course of doctrine. The
7. Kings and the two Kings above mentioned. Apoc. 17. and Dan. 11. were so many
orders or states of government. The parties refusing the marriage feast, were
so many companies agreing in one excuse etc. In like manner, if the Refuter
shall say, that those 7 monades of Angels reckoned up, Apoc. 2. and 3. were so
many societies of Ministers, conjoined in one charge of one Church; the D. may
see his interpretation is backed, by many like speeches in script. where one
monade or unity, is put for many linked togithe in one society.

Pass we now on to his 3. argument; from which we might well Sect. 4.
pass seeing it might have bin better spared then ill spent; it being nothing
but a new repetition of what he urged before, to prove the assumption of his
second; only he has here set in form of reasoning the strength of that which
was in substance of matter there delivered when he ^ayth. The inscriptions of
the 7. epistles written to the Angels, do show that they were 7. singular
persons. But least he should judge better of it, then there is cause, I will
not refuse to examine it, and this it is.

To whom the epistles were written; they were just 7. (for they were written
singul^ singul^s, the first to the first etc.)

To the Angels of the 7. Churches, the 7. epistles were written.

Therefore the Angels of the 7. Churches, were just 7.

Once again I must demand wha^ he means by just. 7? If 7. singular persons
only; the proposition is grossly false; and that also which he adds for the
proof thereof: for those epistles were not written singulae singulis personis,
each to one only person, but rather singulae singulis soc^ita^ibu^; each
epistle to that society of Angels or Bishops, which attended on the Church, in
that city mentioned in the inscription, and not to them alone, but also to the
whole Chapter (as is manifest by Apoc. 1. 11.) and consequently (in regard of that
communion which all Churches have one with another) to the rest of the
Churches, yea to every one that has an ear to hear; as the conclusion of
each epistle shows chap. 2. 7. 11. 17. 29. and chap 3. 6. 13. 22.

As for the testimony of Arethas and Ambrose, they nothing help to conclude his
purpose, scz. that the Angels in his text were only 7. persons. For, as we
need not deny, the Angels to who^ the epistles were written, to be (as Arethas
says) just of the same number with the Churches: so we may grant with
Ambrose, that these 7. Angels, were the 7. ^^lers of the 7. Chapter And yet it
follows not, that by the Angels mentioned in the D. text, are meant only 7.
overseing Angels, other Angels or Minist. excluded, as shall be showed hereafter
in answ. to his next sectio^. the testimony of fathers and new writers also,
they are mo^ that are with us, then with him in this point, namely that by the
Angel of the Church in each inscription, is to be understood more then one
Minister or Church-ruler. Mr. Fox in his meditations on the Revelation (page 7.
9. 17.) gathering and conferring together the opinion of all interpreters that
he could meet with, says they all consented in this, that under the person of
an Angel, the Pas^o^ and Ministers of the Churches, were understood; let the
reader see what he says there concerning Augustine; Primasius, Hay^o, Beda,
Richard, Thomas and others. I will also here show what some of them say.
Augustine (epist. 132.) says thus, Si^ enim in Apocalypsi legitur Angelus etc.
Q^od si deAngelo superiorem C^lorum, et non d^ pr^positis ecclesiae; vellet
intelligi, no^ consequenter diceret habeo adversu^ te etc. whereby he plainly
shows, that though he spoke afterward but as of one; yet he understood it of
more then one, as his, 2. homely upon the Apocalypse shows. Quod autem dicit
Angelo Thyatirae, habeo adversum te, dicit prepositis ecclesiarum. That he
says to the Angel of Thyatira, I have somewhat against the, he says it to the
rulers of the Churches. And though Bishop Bilson alleges him to prove the
contrary in the self same epistle, (the words following) Laudatur sub Angeli
nomine praepositus ecclesiae; the ruler of the Church is praised under the name
of an Angel; yet have we reas^ to think, he meant not to appropriate to one
only person, either the title of prepositus ecclesiae, or the praise there
spoken of; seeing in the self same epistle compared with his 2. homely before
named, he includes both the company of Presbyters and the whole Church, and it
is easy to show out of other his writings, that by prepositus ecclesie, ruler
of the Church, he understands all them that had authority to preach the
word, and to rebuke men of sin, etc see his Tract on John, 46. and de
civitate dei lib. 1. cap. 9. and Mr. Fox his meditations in Apoc ex August: in
Apoc. Hom. 2. Interdum Angelorum nomine, ecclesias catholicas voluit intelligi:
neque enim soli (opinor) ministri, sed et universitas totius ecclesiae vocatur
ad poenitentiam.

I could add to him Chrisostom. in cap. 2. ad Tim. Ambrose in 1. Cor. 11. 10.
Ierom on the same place, and Phil. 1. 1. Gregory in his moral: on Job. lib. 11.
cap. 3. Beda in Luke lib. 2. cap. 7. Rupertus Tincinens. lib. 1. in Apoc. c. 3.
Albin. lib. 1. in Ioh. 1. Aretius in, Apoc 3. 1. Marlorat in Apoc. 2. 1.
Angelos ecclesiasticaru^ in dextra sua habet Christus, hoc est, pastores omnes
et episcopos seu verbi Ministros potestate sua regit etc. And that it was not
his meaning, by the Apostles meaning of the word Angel in the singular number
in each inscription (as the D. would have it) to understand one only chief
Pastor or Bishop over the rest, but all the Ministers of each Church under that
name, may appea^e by that he says, that the 5. epistle was written unto the
Pastors of the Church which was at Sardis, in cap 3. 1. and again in cap. 2.
1. verisilmile est etc. It is very like, that not some one of the
ecclesiastical governors is noted here and in the places following, but the
whole succession of the Bishops etc.

To pass by our own writers, Mr. Fox, Mr. Perkins, Mr. Brightman and others,
I will only note what D. Ful^e says in answer to the Rhemists in Apoc. 1. 20.
S. John (says he) by the Angels of the Churches means not all that should
wear on their heads, myters, and hold crosier staves in their hands, like dead
Idols: But them that are the faithful messengers of Gods word, and utter and
declare the same. Again they are called the Angels of the Churches, because
they be Gods messengers unto the Churches. But to shut up with the D. own
testimony, (of more worth in this case then all the rest) in his sermon of the
dignity and duty of the Ministers page 46. and 61. he tells us and that
with proof from scripture; that neither the name of Angels nor the whole title
Angels of the Churches, do argue any pre-eminence in degree. Wherefore (to
end this point) since I have made it clear that the D. has neither proved
the number of Angels in his text, to be limited to 7. nor removed that which
his Refuter objected to show that their number is not limited; the Refuter (or
his friend) has done enough to pull that veil from his eyes, which was the
occasion (as it seems) of his wandering so far as he does, out of the right
way of truth in his sermon, and the defense thereof. For unless a man would
freely yield unto him (what he assured to prove, but neither did nor can;
namely) that the Angels in his text are 7. singular persons and no (...) he
has no color (though never so light) to infer (as he does) that they were
Diocesan Bishops.

But howsoever he cannot by strong arguments overthrowe Sect. (...)
his Refuter as he wishes; yet by opposing him with a few questions, and 2.
syllogismes pretended to be drawn from his words, he does his best to weaken
his cause. In answering the questions I will begin with the last first; and
because his 2. syllogismes are grounded upon the 3. last questions, I will take
them in by the way.

First therefore, whereas he asks whether in Ephesus there were more
particular congregations, seeing his Refuter says, that in Eph^sus there were
more angels? I answer (as his Refuter had told him before, and he could not
but hear) that the Church of Ephesus was then one only congregation. And that
many angels or Bishops in Ephesus, cannot prove that there were in Ephesus many
particular congregations. For since the holy Ghost calls the Christians at
Ephesus, one Church and one flock (Act. 20. 17. 28.) neither dare I nor the
Refuter, without better reason then the Doctor does yet bring any, forsake the
grammatical sense, and expound him, as speaking of more then one particular
congregation.

To the next question, whether the Refuter (answer. page 2.) taught not, that
the angels (mentioned Apoc. 1. 20.) were such Bishops or Ministers as were
Pastors only of particular congregations? I answer, that the last time I
talked with him, he told me, he took the word Angels, to belong in common to
all the Ministers of the word, whether they be such as are properly called
Pastors; or such as are more properly named Doctors or Teachers. And therefore,
when he says, that the Bishops signified by angels, are Ministers, Pastors
only of particular congregations; that last clause is added to exclude, not
any such as have the office of Teachers in one congregation: but the D.
Bishops, such as exercise a Prelacie over an whole Diocese; and in that regard
have appropriated to themselves, the name of Angels, or Bishops or Pastors. And
here to put in an answer to his second syllogism, the Doctor may be pleased
to know, that his skill in reasoning much fails him; as will soon be seen,
if his Refuter (who is as he says but a smatterer in logic) do but devide
his one argument (as it must be) into two. The first is this, Where are many
Pastors of particular congregations, there are more particular congregations
then one: But at Ephesus there were many Pastors. Therefore, at Ephesus there
were more particular congregations then one.


The Doct. syllogism has 4. terms.
Behold here 4. terms in stead of three: wherefore the conclusion may be, and
is false, though both the premises be true. If the Doctor will amend his fault,
he must change his assumption and say, thus, But at Ephesus there were many
Pastors of particular congregations. The which as it is evidently false; so it
is no less slanderous, to father such a saying on his Refuter whom he calls
his adversary. If The D. assumption false and slanderous.
he shall strive to make good the assumption thus changed, by that second
argument, which is closely infolded in his reasoning, he must argue in this
manner,

Where were many Angels, there were many Pastors of particular congregations:
At Ephesus were many angels,

Therefore there were at Ephesus many Pastors of particular congregations.

And then I must return him his proposition, as having no color, either of
allowance from the refuters words, or of confirmation in his own defense. In
deed if he had said, that many angels of particular congregations, are many
Pastors of several co^gregations, his proposition might have passed without
controlement: the word Pastors being taken in a large construction for all
Ministers which break the bread of life to their people. But then he should be
as far to seek for the proof of that which he must assume, viz. that at
Ephesus there were many angels of particular congregations; for it has been
already said, that the Refuter holds the Christians of Ephesus, to be but one
Church or Congregation, though it had many angels or Bishops, to oversee and
feed the same.

Now by this that has been spoken, the answer to his 3. question (or 2. as he
has set it down) and of his first syllogism, will ask no great study or
labor. For whereas he demands, whether in one particular congregation there
were more Pastors then one? I answer that the word Pastor (being in a large
sense put for every one, that by his office, is bound to oversee and feed the
flock over which he is set) may be given to many in one congregation, as well as
the name of a Bishop is, Acts 20. 28. Phil. 1. 1. (so teaches D. Bilson.
Perpet. Govern. page 284. and D. Whit: de Pont. Romans page 351.) And in this
sense the Refuter takes the word (as is before noted) when he says (answ.
page 2. and 4.) that to be ST ARRES of heaven, and ANGELS in this kingdom, is
not proper to di^cesan Bishops; but common to all true Pastors of particular
congregation; and that by Angels (in the Doct. text) are signified such
Pastors. For finding that the D. confounds these names (sermon. page 2.) of
Angels, Bishops and Pastors, he was well content to forbear all strife about
words, and thought it sufficient to seclude diocesan Bishops, by restrayning
the Angels mentioned in his text, to the feeding and oversight of particular
congregations: Wherefore the D. reasons deceitfully, and seeks advantage by
adouble construction of the word Pastor, when he thus disputes.

The Pastor or Bishop of a particular congregation is but one.

But each Angel of the Churches (says the Refuter) did signify a pastor The
D. reasons deceitfully and seeks advantage by the double construction of
the word pastor.
or Bishop of a particular congregation. Ergo each Angel did signify but one.
For the proposition is false in the Refuters construction of the word at large,
viz. for every one that has such an office, as the Apostle understands by
the word Bishop in his writings. And though the assumption be true, rightly
understood, yet is it false in the D. understanding; both words appropriated to
one that is principally interressed (above other Ministers of the word that are
his helps and assistants) in the feeding and oversight, of any particular
congregation. Wherefore however the Doct. indeavoureth to wring out of his
Refuters answer; 2. conclusions directly (as he says) contradictorie to some
other his assertions; yet as he has not effected his purpose; so has he
discovered falsehood and deceit in his own reasoning. Sect. 6.


And thus at length are we come to his first question, wherein he would know
of his Refuter, 1. what reason he has to forsake the grammatical sense, in
understanding by the Angel (in each inscription) more th^n one. And secondly
where the Holy Ghost speaks but as of one, how he dare without good reason,
expound him as speaking of more then one? There were of the Jews, who having
seen many great signs wrought by Christ, yet, (as if he had never yielded any
sign at all) said unto him, we would see a sign of thee Math. 12. 38. and
16. 1. and what sign show thou? John 6. 30 And the D. is not unlike them
herein. Could he be ignorant that his Refuter (answ. page 3.) yielded reasons,
why he interprets the word Angel in the inscription of each epistle, not
literally for one person, but by a syne^doche for the whole company of Angels
in each Church? Yea and though he twice takes notice of his reasoning this way
(page 31. and 33.) he has not once put one finger, toward the removing of
that which is objected in this behalf. Wherefore there is reason to demand of
him, 1. with what face he dares suggest, so false a conceit into the mind of
his readers, viz. that the Refuter has either no reason at all; or at least no
good reason, to understand by the Angel (in the inscription of each epistle)
more Angels then one? And 2. why he should so stiffly urge the literal sense,
when he has not answered that which is urged to infringe it? Notwithstanding,
to move him once again, to enter into the consideration of this point, I here
tender him one of the Refuters reasons, in form of argument, thus.

If there were more then 7. Angels in the 7. Churches; then the word Angel in
the inscription of each epistle, must not be taken literally, for one only
person, but synecdochically for more then one.

But the first is true; (as that place of the Act. 20. 17. 28. concerning the
Church of Ephesus) shows: for there it appears, how there were more Angels
or Bishops then one in the Church at Ephesus, and therefore more the 7. in then
7. Churches.

Therefore the word Angel in the inscription of each epistle, must not be taken
literally, for one only person, but synecdochically for more then one. And
seeing the D. here reasons with his Refuter, for the superiority of Bishops,
from the name Angel, as Heart does with D: Reinolds for the sovereigntie of the
Pope, or of one Priest, from the name Priest; it shall not be amiss, to fit
him with the same answer, that D. Reinolds gave Heart. Not so; (says D. R. p.
252.) The name of Priest in Deuteronomy. 18. 3.
this law signifies the Priests etc. The law giving sentence, against him that
disobeieth the Pieist, means the Priests, according to a kind of speech,
wherein the whole i^ noted by the part. And giving the reason why he so
interpreted the singular by the plural, he says: It is clear, by reason that
the punishment of the transgressor, has relation to the law; and the law
wills Deuteronomy. 17. 9.
men to go to the Priests. If D. R. for that cause had reason to forsake the
grammatical sense, why not the Ref. here? seeing the scripture sends us to
diverse Bishops in one Church, Act. 20. 17. 28.

But to proceed in the refutation of his assertion or answer before
expressed; since it is granted there were more Angels or Bishops then one in
each of those 7. Churches: the reader is to be advertized, that now the
controversy is come to this issue, whether the singularity of the word Angel,
be a reason of more weight to carry it to one only person, then the plurality
of Angels in each Church is, to interpret it by a synecdoche for the whole
company. The D. affirms the former, and (to countenance his cause) puts
this difference between the name of an Angel or Bishop in general, and the
Angel of this or that Church: that where there are many Ministers in one Ch.,
though every one be an Angel, yet one only that has prehemene^ce above the
rest, is to be honored with the name of the Angel of that Church. On the
contrary, I affirm the later, and therefore will undertake to prove, that where
there are many Ministers or Angels (such as he acknowledges to be in every of
the 7. Churches) they have, every of them, in regard of their function, equal
right to be called, the Angel of that Church; and thus (...) reason.

If all the Angels or Ministers in each Church had equal right to be called
the Angel of that Church, wherein they administered; then this title, the Angel
of the Church, ought to be understood synecdochically for the whole company,
and not literally for one only.

But the first is true. Therefore also the second.

The assumption is thus proved.

All Gods messengers sent to oversee and ^^ed his flock, have equal right to
be called the Angels of that Church, wherein they minister. All the Angels or
Bishops in each of the 7. Churches, were Gods messengers, sent to oversee and
feed his flock.

Therefore all the Angels or Bishops in each of the 7. Churches, had equal
right to be called the Angel of that Church wherein they minister.

The proposition is the D. own assertion. (sermon. of the digni. of the
Ministers page 61.)

The assumption is his own also, (in the next section page 34.)

The conclusion therefore I hope will pass for current.

Moreover it is no less absurd to say, that this or that Minister is an Angel
or Bishop, but not the Angel of the Church which he overseeth; then to say, he
is an Elder or Minister, but not an Elder or Minister of the Church etc. 2.
yea, to yield the name of an Angel simply, or the Angel of the Lord, to agree
fittlie to every Minister of the word, and yet to restrain this title, the
Angel of the Church to one that has a pre-eminence above other Ministers, is
to deceive himself and others by a mistaking of the cause, why the Ministers
represented by the Stars, are called the Angels of their Churches, rather
then the L. Angels: for the only true cause is to distinguish them from the
heavenly Angels, who are more usually called, the Angels of the Lord. 3. And if
these 2. titles be compared; the name of the Lords Angel, is much better to
express a prehemine^ce in him, that is so entitled, the^ the Churches Angel;
seeing this later debaseth his Ministry, much more the^ the former. But as
these names, the L. Minister or servant, and the Churches Minister or servant
(Phil. 1. 1. 2. Cor. 6. 4. cum. 4. 5. and Colos. 1. 24. 25.) are indifferently
taken, for one and the same person or function; so can there no reason be
yielded, why also these titles, the Lords angel, and the Churches angel, should
be divided into several functions.

To conclude, if neither the singularity of the number, do argue a singular
person; nor the right reason of the whole title, implies a pre-eminence in one
above others, seeing it is granted, that there were many Angels; and proved
that the title here used, is (in regard of the signification of the phrase)
common to all; the D. has no reason to say, that his Refuter does without
reason (yea good reason) forsake the literal sense of the number.

But albeit enough has been said to show that this title: The angel Sect. 7.
of the Church, is to be taken for the whole society of Ministers in every
Church; rather then for one singular person* set in a singular pre-eminence
above the rest; yet to satisfy those which perhaps may demand, why the Son
of God should give in charge to John, to write unto the angel, as one; rather
then to the angels, as to many; it shall not be amiss to add this that
follows. 1. I grant that as the number of the Churches particularly named,
fully answers to the 7. golden candlesticks, which represented those
Churches: so it was very fit, the epistles directed to the Angels of those
Churches, should in their inscriptions, proportionate the number of the Angels,
to the number of the stars, by which those Angels were shadowed: which could
not have been, if there had been express mention of more Angels then one, in
each inscription. Notwithstanding as it were absurd, from the precise number of
7. Chapter to gather that there were not in all Asia more then 7, Churches; or that
they kat hexochen are called Church. 5, to note a prehemine^ce in jurisdiction
or government over the rest: so it were no less absurd to infer (from the
literal mention of one Angel in every Church) that there was but one only
person in that Church, to whom, the name of the Angel of that Church, did by
special right apperteine. 2. Their unity in the Ministerial function, and
joint commission to attend upon the feeding and governing of one Church, (which
ought to be accompanied with a common care, and joint labor, as it were with
one hand, and heart or affection, to further the Lords work in the peoples
salvation) is much more fitly declared, by the name of one Angel, then of many;
if we observe the phrase of speech, used elsewhere by the Holy Ghost, and in
other names or titles, to the like purpose. We often find the name of (one)
prophet, (Ier. 6. 13. and 18. 18. Esai. 3. 2. Hos. 9. 8.) or Priest, Ier. 6.
13. and 18. 18. Ezech. 7. 26. Hos. 4. 6. Malach. 2. 7.) and Angel or messenger,
(Isay. 42. 19. Malach 2. 7.) to be put for the general body of the Ministry
(or whole multitude of Prophets or Priests etc.) in the Church of Israel or
Judah; when the spirit of God intends to reprove, threaten or admonish them,
as occasion serves.

3 Neither need it seem strange to us, that a multitude or company of
Ministers, should be understood under the name of one Angel; seeing a multitude
of heavenly Angels (employed in one service for the good of Gods Saints) is
sometimes in the scripture shut up, under one Angel in the singular number, as
may be gathered from Genesis 24. 7. 2. King. 19. 35. and Psalm. 34. 7. compared
with Psalm. 91. 11. Genesis 32. 1. and 2. King. 6. 16. 17: seeing also a multitude
of Devils or evil Angels, (jointly laboring in any one work) is set forth
under the name of one evil or unclean spirit. 1. King. 22. 21. 22. Mar. 1.
23-27. and 5. 2-3. Luke 4. 33. 34. and called the Devil or Satan, Luc. 8. 27.
30. 1 Pet. 5. 8. Heb. 2. 14. Ephesians. 6. 11. 12.

4 Moreover, seeing it is a thing very common and usual, (throughout the whole
book of the Revelation) by the name of one Angel to understand a multitude or
some whole society of Ministers and Teachers; it was very meet that the
beginning of the book, should be suitable to the other parts; and that the
first vision should have none other construction, then such as might hold
proportion with, (or rather as a line lead us to the right understanding of)
the rest that follow.

Here John sees 7. stars in the right hand of the son of man, which are
interpreted, to be the Angels (or Bishops and Ministers) of the 7. Churches;
and he writteth 7. epistles to so many Angels. In another vision, he sees 7.
Angels, to whom were given 7. trumpets, (singulae singulis) to every Angel one
trumpet, and they blewe their trumpets successively one after another, and with
differing effects. Rev. 8. 2. 6. 7. etc. After this, he saw. 7. Angels and 7.
vialls given unto them (singulae singulis) in which vials were 7. plagues,
successively also powered out by every Angel in his time Rev. 15. 6. 7. etc. 16.
1. 2. etc. In these latter visio^s, (like as in the former) some of our best
Interpreters do understand by Angels, the Ministers and preachers of Gods word;
for in every age, they lift up their voices as trumpets, (Esa. 58. 1. Number. 10.
8. 2 Cor. 13. 12.) to show the people their sins, and to proclayme the will
of God unto men. And when they denounce his judgments against the contemners of
his truth and bind them up in their sins (Math. 18. 18. Ioh. 20. 23.) they
after a sort, pour out the vials of Gods wrath upon their heads, (Ier. 1. 10.
and 25. 15. 16. 2 Cor. 10. 6. Rev. 11. 5. 6*) Now there is none so foolish as
to think; that (in the time of every vials pouring out, or of every trumpets
blowing) that one Angel precisely mentioned, was one supreme Bishop, that had a
prehemenent pastoral authority over all the Ministers of that age: it is
acknowledged rather of many judicious divines, that every of those 7. Angels
stands for a multitude of faithful Ministers, which in their times
successively with one ^art, and as it were with one voice, published one and
the same truth to the world See amongst others, Marlo^at, in A^oc. 8. 2. 6. 7.
and 15. 1. 6. and Aretius in Chap. 8. 6. and 9 13. The same may be said, (yea
it is and must be acknowledged) of those 3. Angels, which followed one another
(Rev. 14. 6. 8. 9.) to recall men unto the true worship of God, after it was
corrupted by Antichrist. Marlorat on that place* Method Collat. page 322. and
Mr. Fox his meditations upon the Rev. page 286. 290. Wherefore if we compare
together the parts of Christ's Revelation; it is much more consonant to the true
use of the word Angel in other places, to affirm with the Refuter that one
Angel in each of the 7. Churches, signifies (not any one only chief Pastor,
but) all those Ministers or Teachers, which with a common care and joint
labor, attended on the service of the Church wherein they lived; so that it
may well be said in his defense, that he has both reason and good reason to
uphold his assertion. And (that the D. may have his own words returned home
again) since he has no weight of reason to limit (as he does) the number of
the Angels to 7. singular persons: it ma^tereth nothing what he infers from
falsely conceited limitation. Sect. 8.


Yet as if he had made all cock-sure on his side, in his next section, he
tryumpheth in this manner. Having (says he) thus manyfistly proved, that the
angels of the 7. Churches, were just, 7, and consequently that there was one,
and but one in every Church, whom the Holy Ghost calls the angel of that
Church; it will be easy both to free my text, from the c^vils, which more the^
once my adversary objecteth against it, and also out of the text to clear the
maine controversy in hand. But it is a meare cavil in the D. joined with
slander, to say that his adversary objecteth any cavil against The D. cav^lleth
and slandr^th.
his text. In deed his Refuter has said more then once, (and it is so clear
a truth, that he need not blush to avouch it an 100 times) that his ^ext
yields him no sure soundatio^, whereon to raise any sound argument, to
justify the calling of diocesan, Bishops; because he has no shadow of reason
from any word in his text, to conclude that the Angels of the 7. Churches were
7. singular persons, much less so many diocesa^ Prelates For though he boast
that he has manysistly proved the former, yet seeing his proofs are disproved,
it might be told him in imitation of his own rethorick (sect. 12. page 47.)
that his manifestly is a manifest-lie. But let him be foreborne therein, and
let us see how his proofs do hang together in order, to wi^t, 1. That the
angels of the 7. Churches were just 7. and consequently that there was one and
but one in every Church whom the Holy Ghost ^^lleth the angel of that Church.
It shall be granted him, that the latter will follow by good consequence from
the former. But in his reasoning (page 32.) he made the latter an argument (or
rather 2. arguments by an idle ^e^etition of one thing) to conclude the former.
Wherein also how weakly he reasons, is already showed at large, in as much
as he cannot prove, that there was one only person in each Church, saluted by
the name of the Angel of that Church. Neither will it follow (as is before
observed) that the angels of the 7. Churches (mentioned in his text (are 7.
singular persons only, (much less that they were so many diocesan Bishops)
though it should be granted that in the inscription of each epistle, one only
person bears the name of the Angel of that Church. It will therefore cost him
more labor and sweat, then he supposes, before he can out of his text, clear
the maine controversy which is in hand. For since the D. is here the Opponent,
and mainteineth the affirmative, (s^z. that the angels in his text were
diocesan Bishops) it is not enough for him, (as he well knows cap. 3. page
62. and chap. 5. page 101.) to remove what his Refuter objecteth; but he must
also prove by necessary and invincible force of argument, what himself
affirms. But as for the latter (to return back home his own sweet phrase
page 105.) he fair and mannerly slippeth his neck out of the collar, and
contenteth himself to attempt the former. And I may well say to attempt it;
for he leaves the strength of the objection untouched, The D. attemptet^ but
touches not etc.
as the reader may easily perceive; if he compare his answer with the objection
laid down page 4. of the Refuters answer, where he says. That he which
consideroth the text and the words thereof shall find naught to prove his
kind of Bishops, or ought to show any such quality of their function as he
i^magineth. For to be lights in the candlesticks, stars of heaven, angels in
this kingdom, the heaven of heavens, which is all the D. does or any other can
show out of the words; is not proper to diocesan Bishops; but common to all
true Pastors of particular congregations, as his own self confesses, (sermon:
of the d^g: and duty of the Ministers page 20. 61.)

But to prove the D. once again and to examine the force of the objection, I
will set it in order before his e^es thus.

Whatsoever text is such, that neither the D. does, nor any other can, fl^we
out of the words thereof, any thing, proper to diocesan Bishops; but rather
common to all true Pastors of particular congregations: the same ye^ldeth no
proof to uphold his kind of Bishops.

But this text (Apoc. 1. 20.) of the D. is such, as is before said.

Therefore, it yeldeth no proof to uphold his kind of Bishops.

The assumption which only needs to be cleared, may be thus manifested.

The name of stars or angels together with this title, the angels of the
Churches, is common to all true Pastors of particular congregations, and not
any one of them properly to diocesan Bishops.

But all that the D. does, or any other can show out of the words of the text
(Apoc. 1. 20.) is either the name of stars, or angels, or at least this
title, the angels of the Churches.

Therefore, all that the Doctor does, or any other can show, out of the words
of his text. (Apocal. 1. 20.) to justify his kind of Bishops, is common to all
true Pastors of particular congregations, and nothing in it proper to Diocesan
Bishops. Here the assumption is in it self evident; and the proposition is
enlightened by the D. interpretation of the words of his text (sermon. page 3.)
compared with the application thereof unto all Ministers in general (sermon. of
the dignity and duty of the Ministers, p. 20. 61.) ut supra. For in the
former place, he ascribes, to the Pastors or Bishops understood by those names
or titles* none other duty or dignity then this, namely, to be as lights set
on a candlestick, or shining in the Church, which is as heaven upon A
contradict: in the D two sermons
earth; and as angels in Gods kingdom, the heaven of heavens. And in the
later, he gives all this and much more to the office or function of Ministers
in general, yea he alleges this very text (page 46. and 63.) to prove that
they are both stars shining before others with the light of doctrine and good
example; and angels of the Lord, or rather angels of the Churches; and therefore
to be received as angels. For as herein they are like to angels (p. 56.) that
they are sent forth unto the Ministry, for their sakes that are heirs of
salvation, Heb. 1. 14.) so they seem to have some pre-eminence, in respect of
their Embassage, and spiritual authority; seeing the preaching of the gospel,
is committed to men and not to angels, as appears by the story of Cornelius,
Act. 10. 6. etc. Neither has God said to any of the angels at any time, that
which he speaks to his Ministers John 20. 23. whose sins you ^orgive they
shall be forgiven etc. Wherefore as the D. cannot (without check of conscience)
so neither can any other (without apparent gainsaying the truth) either deny
the names and titles mentioned in his text to be common, to all true Pastors of
particular congregations, or restreyn any one of them to Diocesan Bishops.

Having thus laid open the strength of the Ref: objectio^, I come Sect. 9.
now to examine the force of the Doct: answer. I answer (says he p. 34.)
that all Ministers who have charge of souls, are in a general sense, called
Angels, Pastors, Bishops, because they are messengers sent from God, to f^^de
and o^^rsee his flock: But yet where there are many Ministers (so called) if
there be one and but one, who k^t hexochen is called the Angel, the Pastor the
Bishop of that Church; he is plainly noted to have a singular pre-eminence
above the rest, whereof see more in my answer (sect. 12.) to page. 6. Here let
it be (...) against the (...) of (...) or (...) to insinuate (yet (...)
^^pressy (...) that it is an honor proper only to diocesan. Bishops (and
(...) common to other Ministers) to be called the Angels of their Churches. But
it is already showed, that the honor of this name or title, cannot be denied
unto any Minister, that has charge of souls: since it is a truth and so
acknowledged, that all such Ministers are messengers sent from God, to oversee
and ^eed that part of his flock, whereof they have the charge, 2. And whereas
he c^nningly slideth from the text, which he proposes to handle The D. slideth
from his text to the inscriptions.
to the inscriptions of the 7. epistles, (Rev. 2. and 3.) he is again to be
advertised, that though he could justify the pre-eminence of one Minister above
others from those inscriptions; yet it will not follow that diocesan Bishops,
are only meant by the Angels of the Churches, in the text he made choice of.
But 3. (not to stand upon this advantage) where he says, that where there is
one and but one, who kat hexochen is called, the Angel Pastor or Bishop of that
Church, he is plainly noted to have a singular pre-eminence above the rest; it
nothing justifies his cause, but discovers rather the weakness thereof; seeing
he no otherwise proceeds then he began; I mean in assuming The D. still
beggeth.
for granted, what he should have proved; and in pressing us with weak
consequences, to stand in stead of invincible arguments. Before he affirmed,
there was but one in every Church called the Angel of the Church: now (being
enforced to acknowledge that there were many other Angels or Bishops) he will
needs have that one to be called kat hexochen the Angel or Bishop of that
Church; and so from thence infer, that the same one Angel is plainly noted,
to have pre-eminence above the rest. The strength of which reasoning may
appear by these goodly consequences following.

1. There were others with Paul, whom he might rightly call his fellows and
helpers; wherefore he entitleth Titus kat hexochen his fellow and helper on the
behalf of the Corinthians 2. Cor. 8. 23. and so plainly notes in him a
pre-eminence above the rest.

2. In like manner, seeing there were others who in a general sense might be
called Apostles or messengers: they whom he calls (in the same place) the
Apostles or messengers of the Churches, were so called kat hexochen, to note in
them a pre-eminence above the rest.

3 The same may be said of Paul, when he entitleth himself a prisoner of
Christ Phil. 1. and Epaphroditus his fellow-ptisoner. Verse. 23. Timotheus a
brother Col. 1. 1. and a Minister of God 1. These. 3. 2. likewise of Peter
intitlinge himself a fellow-Elder, and a witness of Christ's sufferings 1 Pet.
5. 1.

4. And why then may not Bellarminargue from Math. 16. 19. and John 2. 15. 16.
that though others, in a general sense may be authorized to feed the sheep of
Christ, and to guide the keys: yet these things are spoken kat hexochen to
Peter, and do there plainly note in him, a pre-eminence above the rest.

5 Without all contradiction, the diocesan Byshopprick of Epaphroditus, will be
dashed in pieces with this argument following, if the D. former reasoninge have
any validity in it.

There were some others at Philippi; who were in a general sense yoke fellows
to the Apostles; wherefore, when he speaks precisely to one singular person,
I beseech the faithful y^ke fellow etc. Phil. 4. 3. this one is called kat
hexochen his faithful yoke fellow, and consequently this title notes in that
one, an episcopal pre-eminence above the rest.

But what if we should grant as much, as his words do ascribe unto that Angel
of each Church, (viz. that this title is given to one only, and plainly
notes in him a pre-eminence above the rest) will he from hence infer, that
because one angel in each Church, had some pre-eminence above others, therefore
that one was a diocesan Bishop? If so; (as he must to clear the maine
controversy now in hand) surely he fails grossly in that fault, whereof The.
D. fails in the fault imputed by him to his Refuter.
he accuses his Refuter (chap. 9. page 200.) how justly let the reader judge;
in reasoning from the genus, to a fained and Platonicall Idea, or Poetical
species, and that affirmative: for seeing there are diverse sorts of
pre-eminence (viz. of order or o^ dignity; and in gifts, or in degree of
Ministry, or in charge and power of jurisdiction) it is a silly and simple
argument to say* In each of the 7. Churches one Minister had some pre-eminence
above the rest. Therefore he had pre-eminence above them in degree of office or
Ministry. But when he infers. Therefore he had the prehemine^ce of a dio^.
Bishop; it is no less ridiculous, then if he should say, it is a byrd,
therefore it is a black swan.

But since he refers us to his answer to page 6. (which Sect. 10.
lies sect. 12. page 46. following) there to see more of this matter, I will
search and see, what he there has for his purpose, after that I have given the
reader to understand upon what occasion, he fell into the debating of this
point. The Refuter perceiving that the Doctor addressed himself to show, what
was the pre-eminence of these Bishops, in respect whereof, they are called the
angels of the Churches, thought it not fit, to suffer him with begging, to
carry that away, which he ought to have proved. to wit, that the BISHOPS which
are entitled, the Angels of the CHVRCHES, were so called in respect of that
pre-eminence, which he fancied to be in them above other Ministers; and
therefore tells him that they had the name of Angels, in regard of the
general calling of their Ministry, and not because of any sovereigntie or
supremacy, over other their fellow Ministers, as the Doctor implies here; and
plainly, (though untruly) affirms afterward. In these few words, the
DOCTOR finds (as he supposes, to say no worse of him) two untruths: the
former he says is an error the later, a plaine-lie: because, though he give
to Bishops superiority over other Ministers, yet neither sovereignty nor The
Refut. cleared of the Doct. slander.
supremacy. Concerning the lie which the Doctor slanderously charge on his
Refuter; I shall have fitter occasion to speak hereafter; here only will I
clear him of that error ascribed to him, for saying that the Bishops of
those Churches are named Angels in regard of the general calling of their
Ministry. Let us therefore hear how worthily the Doctor disputes, to
convince him of error. Though (says he) to be called Angel generally agrees
to all Ministers, yet for one, and but one among many Ministers, in one and
the same Church, to be kata hexochen, called the Angel of the Church; is not a
common title belonging to all Ministers, in regard of their general
calling; but a peculiar stale, belonging unto ^^e, who has singular
prehe^^nence above the rest, that is to say, a BISHOP. Behold here how he
disputes; now 1. Can any judicious reader (that compares this speech with
that which he delivered before page 34. find in this latter, any one material
point, more then in the former? When he referred us hither, to see more of this
matter, we had reason to expect some new argument, and that of more weight, to
prove the point, which was before but nakedly proposed. But (if my sight
deceives me not) nothing else is here to be seen, but the selfsame sentence,
varied in a few words, that carry the same sense. A thing which every novice
in grammar schools, that has but read his copia verborum, might have done in
the turning of a hand, as they say. This slight dealing becomes neither so
great a logician, nor so grave a divine, much less so censorious a Doctor: yet
behold The D. ^wisteth a 3. fould cord of vanyty.
a greater fault, or rather two other greater defaults, to make up a
threefoulde cord of vanity. For he has neither convinced his Refuter of
error, nor justified his own assertion by him reproved.

2 To convince his Refuter he reasons thus.

No common title belonging to all Ministers, in regard of the general calling
of the Ministry; is given kat hexochen, to one only among many Ministers in
one Church.

But the name of Angels (Apoc. 1. 20.) is given kat hexochen, to one only
Minister among many, in each of the 7. Churches.

Therefore, the name of angels (Apoc. 1. 20.) is not a common title belonging
to all Ministers, in regard of their general calling to the Ministry. Both
propositions are false; for it is already proved, that under the name of
Angels, (or the Angels of the 7. Churches Apoc. 1. 20.) all the Ministers of
the word, how many soever are comprised; wherefore the D. bare affirmation,
that one only in each Church is k^t hexochen so entitled, is no better then a
bare broaching of an untruth, (his own The D. contradicts himself,
delivers an untruth, and beggeth the question.
sermon of the dig. and duty of the Ministers page 60. 61. (which directly
contradicts this,) being judge) with the begging of the question. And to
evince the falsehood of the former proposition, it is easy to give instance of
sundry titles belonging in common to all Ministers, which yet are sometimes
k^t hex^chen given to one singular person, as when John is entitled The Elder
2. John. 1. and 3. Ioh. 1. Paul a Minister of the Church or a Minister of
Christ and of his gospel, Colos. 1. 24. 25. Romans 15, 16. Ephe. 3. 6. 7. Also
when he gives the name of a fellow-workman, felow-souldier or Minister of God,
unto some one among many 2 Cor. 8. 23. Phil. 2. 25. 1 These. 3. 2. Wherefore
unless there were more truth then is in his reasoning, he has small reason to
charge his Refuter with error, for affirming that the Bishops, of whom his
text speaks, are named Angels in regard of their general calling of the
Ministry. 3. See we now, whether he has any more strength of truth, to
maintain his own assertion, to wit, That they are called the angels of the
Churches, in respect of a prehemine^t superiority in power and jurisdiction
over other Ministers. His argument must be framed to this effect.

Whatsoever title is given kat hexochen, to one only among many Ministers in
one Church; the same is a particular style, belonging to one that has singular
pre-eminence above the rest; that is, to adioce san Bishop. But the name ^f
Angels (Apoc. 1. 20.) is given to one only, among many Ministers, in each of
the 7. Churches.

Therefore, the name of angels (Apoc. 1. 80.) is a peculiar style belonging to
one, that has singular pre-eminence above the rest of the Ministers in those
Churches; that is, to a diocesan Bishop. And consequently, the name of Angels
(Apoc. 1. 20.) is given to diocesan Bishops, in regard of their episcopal
superiority above other Ministers, in the same Churches, whereof they were
Angels. Here the assumption, (being the same with that in the former arg:, may
receive the same answ. vz.) is false and has no breath of life in it, except
to beg the question. As for the proposition, the falsehood of it, is more
gross, and palpable The D. beggeth in the assumption and delivers a flat
falseshood in the proposition.
then the former. For, besides that which is before delivered, to show that
some titles, belonging in common to all Ministers, are and may be given, kat
hexochen, to one only among many, (which argues that the giving of a title
kat hexochen to one, does not prove the same to be a peculiar style belonging
to one that has a singular pre-eminence above others: this may be added,
(which was also before observed) that if it should be granted, that such a
title is a peculiar style, belonging to one, that has a singular pre-eminence
above others; yet from hence to infer, that it is a style peculiar to a
diocesan Bishop (to use the Doct. words again) is as ridiculous, as if a man
should say, it is a bird, therefore a black swan: or thus, Mr. Dow. among many
Ministers is a Doctor, therefore he is a Duke, a Deane, a Bishop, or
Archbishop. Wherefore, since both the premises, as well in this, as in the
former argument are false, the reader may safely reject both his conclusions,
as erroneous. And to let him see (not his Refuters error which is none, but)
his own error, the better; I will this once thus argue, against him, and that
from his own pen.

If this text Apoc. 1. 20, (together with cap. 2. and 3. following) be rightly
applied in his sermon of the duty and dignity of the Ministers: then the name
of angels of the 7. golden candlesticks Apoc. 1. 20. is not a peculiar style,
belonging only to diocesan Bishops; but a common title apperteyning to all
Ministers in general.

But the first is true. Therefore also the second. Or thus, If the name of
angels of the 7. golden candlesticks (in Apoc. 1. 20. and the two chapters
following) be a style peculiar to dioc^san Bishops, and not common to all
Ministers in general: then those texts of holy scripture are wrongly applied
to all Ministers in general; in the D. sermon of the dignity and duty of the
Ministers.

But the first is true. Therefore also the second: And consequently, which way
soever, the D. turn his head, he cannot escape the blame, both of error in
misapplying his text, and of contradiction with The D. misapplieth his text,
and contradicts himself.
himself.

But 4. because in his latter argument the D. concludes not that assertion,
which his Refuter before contradicted: it shall not be amiss to see, if his
last conclusion, will necessarily infer it, by way of consequence. For though
he be a Doctor, and his Refuter but a smatterer in logic, as he says; yet
shall he do him that favor this once. And therefore if he will attempt it, he
must argue to this effect.

Whatsoever name or title is a peculiar style belonging to one that has
asingular pre-eminence above other Ministers in any Church or country; the
same is given to that one, in respect of that pre-eminence.

But the name of Angels (Apoc. 1. 20.) is a peculiar style, belonging to one,
that had the pre-eminence of a diocesan Bishop, in each of the 7. Churches.
Therefore, the name of Angels, is there given to one only di^cesan Bishop, in
each Church in respect of his diocese.

The falsehood of this assumption being already laid open; it shall suffice to
show the unsoundness of the proposition; for which purpose observe we these
few instances. First, The name of an Apostle given to Paul so often in the
epistles is a title peculiar to him, who was one, that had a singular
pre-eminence above all other Ministers in that Church or country where he
conversed, when he wrote those epistles. 2. So also is the name of a Minister
of the gospel Ephesians. 3. 6. 7. and 3. the name of a prisoner in the L, Ephesians.
4. 1. and 3. 1. 4. the like may be said for the title which Peter gives
himself 1 Pet. 5. 1. yet, were it absurd, to think that any one of these
titles were given to Paul or Peter, in respect of that pre-eminence, which each
of them had above other Ministers in the places where they conversed.

Thus we see, that whiles the D. striveth to convince his Refuter While the D.
seeks to co^vince his Refute^ of one error, he falls into 3. or 4.
of one error, he has inwrapped himself under the just blame of 3. or 4. And
this I might hope would be enough to stopp his mouth, from pleading for the
pre-eminence of diocesan Bishops, from the name of angels, or the title, the
angels of the Churches, in the text which he selected for the purpose; but that
I remember his vow (lib. 3. page 154.) that he will never give over his
Refuters, ill he has put him to silence.

As for the testimonies cited by him out of Mr. Beza and D. Reynolds, Sect. 1^.
ad lib. 1. sect. 4. page 34. and sect. 12. page 47.
werevnto he refers us (sect. 12. page 47.) they fall full short of his
purpose, to prove that the name Angel is given to note such a prehemine^ce in
one above the rest, or was a style peculiar to one alone. For it is but a
private fancy, peculiar to the D. and some few others, whereby they would
feign persuade the world, that these Angels were diocesan Bishops like to ours;
and as vain is it, as private. For the Refut: may grant all that Mr. Beza and
D. Reynolds say; and yet still deny, that the name of angel is gvien to the
president only, or exclusive, as if the rest of his fellow Ministers had no
right to that title with him.

As for his idle digression, in assaying (page 34.) to show against Beza, that
the president had a perpetuity in the presidencie; it is not worth worth the
answering; being as weakly mainteyned, as it is here unseasonably inserted. For
although we give unto Timothy (being an Evangelist) a standing presidencie
during his abode at Ephesus; yet the D. reasons absurdly, when he infers
that such as succeeded him in the presidencie, had the like perpetuity
therein; unless he could prove their ministerial function to be (as Timothyes
was) superior to other Presbyters.

No less absurd is his reasoning, when he undertakes to show from the
testimony of the most ancient authors in the Church, who were those singular
persons, whom the Holy Ghost calls the Angel of the Church at Ephesus, and
likewise at Smyrna etc. Onesimus was the Pastor of Ephesus, as Ignatius
testifyeth, and Policarpus the Bishop of Smyrna. If therefore Onesimus was but
one man, and likewise Policarpus; we may be bold to conclude that the angel of
the Church of Ephesus, was but one singular person, and likewise the angel of
Smyrna, and so of the rest. For answer whereunto I say, that if Ignatius or
any other, had justified that Onesimus was the only person at Ephesus whom
John saluted by the name of the Angel (though it may as well be read, an angel,
as the angel) of that Church, and so Policarpus and the rest: the Doct: might
have been bold (not to make his bold conclusion but) to say, that he had one
ancient author on his side in that point, though as one swallowe makes no
summer; so one ancient gives him no sufficient warrant, that he has the
consent of the most ancient authors in the Church. But to make the best he can
of Ignatius or any other, if they say no more for him, then as yet he has made
them (Ignatius here or others elsewhere) speak, they are too mute, to minister
relief to that his assertion; which in this 4. section he labors to
mayntayn as we shall have occasion further to affirm when we come to the last
Chap. of this book, wherein that he says here concerning Onesimus and
Polycarp, (being again repeated by him. lib. 4. page 40. with some addition)
shall be further debated. Let us now go forwards.

Chap. 3. Containing an answer to the D. argument handled lib. 2. chap. 7.
sect. 2. page 120. concerning the presidencie of the Angels of the 7. Churches.
The D. is willing (it seems) to play at small game, rather then to set out*
and to lay hold upon a slender advantage, rather Sect. 1 ad. D. lib. 2. cap.
7. sect 2. and Ref. page
then to leave his diocesan Lords, no footing in his text. If an eminent
superiority cannot be gathered from the name of an Angel; yet such a
presidency as is given to one above others, in every well-ordered society,
shall suffice to convey a diocesan Byshopprick to these Angels. And if b^tter
evidence fail, the confession of the Presbyterians shall serve to give them a
Presidencie: And though commonly he refuse the syllogismes, which his Refuter
reduces into form; yet finding one handsomely framed to his hand, (though
himself intended, as he says no such argument:) he is well pleased to make use
of it, and to stand forth in defense of every part of it. The syllogism
runs thus, The Presidents of the Presbyters were Diocesan Bishops. The
Angels of the 7. Churches, were presidents of the presbyteries. Therefore the
Angels of the 7. Churches were Diocesan Bishops.


Concerning the Assumption, it has been already showed, upon what reasons, we
hold it questionable, whether these Angels were 7. only persons, of chief
place in these Churches. But here, because the D. grounded himself upon the
confession of the Presbyterians; his refuter answered him, by a distinction of
a two fold Presbytery, mentioned in their writings; the one a Presbytery of
governing Elders assisting the Pastor of each congregation: the other a
Presbytery of Ministers set over diverse churches. Now because the former
could yield the Doctor no color of help, to co^vey a Diocesan Bishopric to
these angels; and he had expressly mentioned the later, in the last words of
the point before handled (sermon. page 21.) his Refuter signified his dissent
from him in the assumption; if his meaning were to give those angels, a
Presidencie over a college of Ministers, assigned to sundry particular
congregations. And this he added, that he knew none that did conf^sse the
angels of the 7. Churches to be some of those Presidents. Now the Doctor taking
those testimonies of Calvin and Beza (whom he has often v^lified in other
parts of his defense) for plentiful proof of his assumption; he refers us
to that he has alleged out of their writings, (lib. 1. cap. 2. sect.) whether
if we go, we shall find just nothing to the purpose. For Mr Calvin has not
one word touching those Angels. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 4. sect. 1. 2. And since
he there expressly, affirms, that the presidencie which one Minister in ca^h
city (called a Bishop) had over other Ministers his colleagues, was brought
in, by humane consent, and for the necessity of the times; there is no
likelihood, that he held those angels in S. John's time, to Humano consensit pro
tempo^^^ necessitate.
be Presidents of such a Presbytery. Yea his words do sh^w^ ((...) 1.) that
he speaks of that form of government, which took place under the. Bishops
that flourished after the Apostles; and before the papac^e was discovered. And
though Mr B^za do affirm, the Angel of the Church at Ephesus (and so the rest
each of them in his place) to be the President of the Presbytery there,
(Annotat. in Apoc. 2. 1.) yet has he nothing (neither there, nor de Minist.
grad. page 160.) that can be drawn to show, that he esteemed the Presbyteries
or College of each Angel to be (all of them) Ministers of the word, and Pastors
of several Churches. But what need words be multiplied in so plain a case?
Affirms he not himself (sermon. page 22.) that the parishes were not yet
distinguished, nor Ministers assigned to their several Cures? And must he not
then understand those Presbyrerians (with whom he pretends to have agreement)
to speak of such a Presbytery, as had the charge of one only Church, not yet
divided into several titles? Howsoever then he make a show of justifying his
assumption against the Refuters denial thereof; yet The D. subscribeth to his
Ref. and proves what was not gainesayd.
indeed he subscribeth unto it; and indeavoureth to prove it in a sense, which
now was not co^tradicted; for it is no disadvantage to us in the mayn question,
to give way to the assumption in such a sense as Mr. Beza avoucheth it: since
such a presidency as he allows to those Angels, can never conclude them to be
diocesan Bishops, such as ours.

To come therefore to the proposition; because the Refuter rejected it as
false, I will make good his censure both by removing Sect. 2.
the D defense thereof, and by proposing some other just exceptions against it.
And 1. he cannot prove every president of a Presbytery in the Apostles times to
be a Bishop; (much less a diocesa^ Bishop) in the usual construction of the
word, opposed to other Ministerial functions. For if some Presbyteries were a
company of Apostles and Apostolical men, who were more then Bishops (as he
acknowledges. (sermon. page 38. and def. lib. 3. page 81.) needs must their
president be more then a Bishop. And who doubts, but that, as James the
Apostle was president not only of the Synod Act. 15. but also of the standing
Presbytery, Act. 21. 18? And Timothe an Evangelist president among the
Presbyters at Ephesus for the time of his stay there, by S. Paul's appointment
1. Tim. 1. 3. so also every Apostle, and Evangelist in the absence of the
Apostles, was the president of any Church where they made their residence,
though but for a short continuance. Thus was Paul the president of that
Presbytery, which imposed hands on Timothe, (2. Tim. 1. 6. cum. 1. Tim. 4.
14.) and of the Ephesian Presbytery (during his aboade amongst them Act. 20.
17. 31.) And the like presidence even at Ephesus, S. John retained (doubtless)
when after his exile, returning thither, ibi denuo sedem ac don^icilium rerum
suarum collocavit, as Eusebius reports eccles. Hist. lib. 3. chap. 15. For it
were absurd, either to seclude him from all consultation with the clergy of
that Church; or to make him inferior unto any of them. And since the D.
acknowledges, that so long as there remained any Apostles, or Evangelists, or
Apostolical me^, they were the governors of the Churches (lib. 4. page 72.) we
have reason to think, that he cannot without contradiction, affirm in
general of all the presidents that moderated the first Presbyteri^s, that they
were properly Bishops; for he accounts none of the Apostles to be properly
Bishops, (lib. 4. page 57.) and he subscribeth (sermon. page 86.) to the saying of
Tertullian (de prescrip: adv: haere^.) that in the Apostolic Churches, their
first Bishop had for their founder and Antecessor, one of the Apostles or
Apostolik men. Now if all the presidents of Presbyteries were not properly
Bishops; how could they all be diocesan Bishops, yea such as our Diocesans are?
2. Certainly the very name of a president, that had a Presbytery adjoined to
him, for the managinge of Church* causes, does strongly argue the form of
Church Government then, to have nearer affinity with an Aristocracy, (such as
other reformed Churches have restored) then with a Monarchy, which our
diocesans hold. The D. argument therefore may be thus retorted against him.

The Presidents of the ancient Apostol^k Presbyteries were no diocesan Bishops
such as ours.

The Angels of the 7. Churches were the presidents of such Presbyteries.

Therefore they were no diocesan Bishops, such as ours.

Or thus, Diocesan Bishops, such as ours, are not presidents of such
presbyteries, as ^he ancient apostolic Churches enjoyed.

But the Angels of the 7. Churches were the presiae^ts of such Presbyteries*

Therefore, they were no diocesan Bishops.

The assumption of both is the same, that the D. makes use of for a contrary
conclusion. The proposition of the former, if it be denied will be thus
confirmed. Diocesan Bishops such as ours do govern monarchically (by their
sole authority) and without the advice and assistance of such a Presbytery,
as the ancient apos^olike Churches enjoyed.

But the presidents of those ancient Presbyteries, did not govern
monarchically (or by their sole authority) and without the advice and
assistance of their Presbytery.

Those presidents therefore were no diocesan Bps, such as ours.

Both parts of this argument are acknowledged by the D. for the assumption
appears by that which he affirms in particular of James his presidencie,
lib. 4. page 116. and generally of all Bishops in former ages (s^rm. page 15.
and d^f. lib. 1. page 191.) where he says, that in Churches causes nothing
almost was done without the advice of the Presbyters: and that their was great
necessity, that the Bishop should use their advice and counsel, because
otherwise his will would have seemed to stand up for a law etc. And touching
the proposition; as he intimates (sermon, page 97. and def. lib. 4. page 102.)
the government of our Bishops to be monarchical: so he confesses that Bishops
now have not that assistance of Presbyters, which the ancient Bishops had (lib.
1. page 190.) And this confirms also the truth of that other proposition of
the later argument: For if diocesan Bishops, such as ours, have not any such
Presbytery associated to them, for advice and assistance in government; then
they are not presidents of such Presbyteries, as the ancient apostolic
Churches enjoyed: But the former is an apparent truth and conf^ssed by him,
(sermon. page 16. 17. def. lib. 1. page 190.) where he says, that the assistance
of those Seniours that directed the ancient Bishops, is long since grown out
of use. Moreover if our Prebendaries of Cathedral Churches, be a resembla^ce
of the Presbyteries that were in Ambrose his time (as he affirms lib. 1. page
189.) since they have another president, then called Archi-presbyter, now
Deane; how can the Bishops of our da^es be their presidents, unless he will
make them a monstrous body that has two heads?

But let us see the D. own defense of his proposition before contradicted. If
says he, the Refuter will be pleased, to take notice of that Sect. 3.
which he has elsewhere proved; that there was but one Presbytery for an whole
diocese: the proposition will be manifest; vz. that the presidents of the
Presbyters (provided for whole dioceses) who^ the Fathers call Bishops, were
diocesan Bishops. The argument is thus digested by himself in a connexive
sylogisme page 122.

If the Presbyteries were alo^ted to whole dioces^s, and not to several
parishes: the^ the Bps. who were preside^ts of those Presbyteries, were not
par^^^onal but D.

But the first is true. Therefore also the second.

The assumption whose proof is laid down (viz. chap. 4.) I reserve to be
handled hereafter; now I refuse his conclusions for the weakness that I find in
the proposition; if he speak (as he ought) of diocesan Bishops such as ours:
for a Presbytery so allotted to a diocesa^, as he supposes, the Apostolic
Presbyteries were (viz. to work out their conversion) cannot make the whole
diocese to be a Church; and therefore cannot argue their president to be
properly a diocesan Bishop. Nay rather, if it may appear, that the flock
already converted, was but one only congregation of christians; howsoever the
Presbytery might be set to endeavor the conversio^ of the rest of the diocese;
yet (to speak properly (there was a parishonall Bishop, and not a diocesa^,
because the flock or congregation already converted, was more like to a parish,
then to a diocese. Yea, say he could prove, that the Presbyteries were
appointed for dioceses, that is, for many particular congregations in each
dioces^; why might not their president be a parishionall Bishop, in regard of
his particular Church, which he fed with the word and Sacraments; although
his presidency reached over all the Pastors of the rest of the parishes? For it
is clear that Mr. Beza (of whose consent with him in the question of dioceses
and diocesan Bishops he boasts, (lib. 1. page 51. and lib. 2. page 127.) does
hold it as necessary that the president of the pastors of a diocese, should
have (as the rest) his particular parish to attend upon; as it is esteemed
fit, that a provincial Bishop should be more specially interessed in the
oversight of one diocese. De Minist. grad. cap. 20. page 123. and cap. 4. page
168. And such were in deed the first diocesan Bishops, after parishes were
multiplied and Presbyters assigned to them; the pastoral charge of the
Mother Church the chief Presbyter or Bishop retained to himself, when his
compresbyters had other titles or daughter Churches allotted to the^. Neither
might he remove his seat from it, to any other Church, though within his own
Diocese. Council. Carthag. 5. can. 5.

3. If the D. shall here tell us (as he does) lib. 2. p. 117.) that the
cathedral Churches (which were the Bishops seas and Mother churches to the
whole Diocese) were never Parishes; nor the meetings there parishionall, but
panigyricall: it will be but a frivolous exception in this place: for there will
still remain a difference of that moment, betwixt the ancient Bishops or
Presidents of the Presbyteries and our diocesans; that will enable us to hold
fast our former assertion, that those presidents were not diocesan Bishops, of
that kind that ours are. For besides the forenoted disagrement (that ours are
not in deed presidents of any such Presbytery to advise and assiste them in
the Church government) it is well known that ours are not tied by virtue of
their calling, as they were (by the D. own confession, the truth thereunto
enforcing him, lib. 1. page 157. and 158.) to preach the word and to administer
the ^acraments, in the Cathedral Church of their Byshoprick. By this time
therefore, I hope, the reader may see, that although we should grant, the
Apostolic Presbyteries to be allotted unto whole dioceses: yet that will not
warrant him, to conclude their presidents to be diocesan Bishops, such as ours;
and consequently, though we should yield the angels of the 7. Churches to be
the presidents of such Presbyteries; he cannot necessarily infer, that they
were diocesan Bishops, like to ours at this day.

Chap. 4. Containing an answer to the D. last argument draven from his text,
lib. 4. cap. 6. sect. 3. page 142. handled by the Ref. page 155. 156. of his
answer.
We are now come to that argument; wherewith the D. closes Sect. 3.
all up, lib. 4. cap. 6. sect. 3. the which we might well overpasse; seeing he
has not one word in it, more then is already answered. Yet least he should
think better of it, then it deserves, I will give the reader a sight of it.

Those, says he, that are called by the Holy Ghost the Angels of the Churches,
and were signified by the 7. stars which were in Christ's right hand, had
divine both institution and approbation.

The diocesan Bishops of the 7. Churches are called by the holy Ghost, the
Angels of the 7. Churches, and were signified by the 7. stars which were in
Christ's right hand.

Therefore the Di: Bishops of the 7. churches had divine both institution and
approbation.

The proposition which needs no proof, he proves 1. by the name of angels.
2. by the name of stars. 3. by Christ's holding the stars in his right hand.
But the Assumptio^ which carries both these names to Diocesan Bishops, and
affirms that they also were the stars in Christ's right hand, as he took it
for granted in his sermon; The D. proves what needed* not proof, and passes
by what he should ha^ proved.
so in the defense thereof he overpasseth it; telling us, that now he went not
about to prove it; because it was proved at large in the former part of his
sermon. And because the Refuter did again put him in mind of his doctrine in
his former sermon (scz. that all Ministers are stars and Angels etc. he again
repeateth his answer before refuted, to wit, that these names kat hexochen are
attributed to Bishops to signify their pr^heminence. To the rest of the
Refuters words, he vouch safeth none other answer then this, that they are the
uttring of his splean, and emptying of his gall against Bishops. Wherefore I
will acquaint the reader with the substance of them, that he may judge, whether
they d^serve so to be censured. Is there not (says the Refuter page 155.)
pre-eminence of dignity to ministers as stars, unless some of them may be as
the sun, from whom all other have their light? all faithful Ministers shine
as stars in the eyes of the Churches, though they lift not up themselves, to
darken the brightness of their brethren, by their gl^ttring and glorious
bl^sing. As for the 12. stars, Rev. 12. 1. he says, they are either all
Ministers, or else the 12. Apostles only. For him therefore, to appropriate
this to diocesan Bishops, is rather to show his flattering humor; then soundly
to expound the text. And then wondreth if the Doct. blushed not and trembled
not, when he spoke of the prerogative of glory which his diocesan Bishops
shall have in the world to come: and when he made the prophet Daniel patron of
such Lordly idleness etc. and shows that it is so much the more to be wondered
at, and l^mented in him, because of that which he knows and professes in his
former sermon, that all Ministers are stars and angels etc. as the reader may
at large see, page 156. In which words of the refuter there are these 4.
Arguments closely couched, which do clearly discover, how the D. abuses the
text he ha^dleth. The Refut^ proves by 4. arguments that the D. abuses hi^
text.


1. To appropriate unto di^^^ Bishops, that which is either common to all
Ministers or proper to the Apostles, is rather to show his flattering humor,
then soundly to expound his text.

But the name of stars (Apoc. 1. 20.) is common to all Ministers; and all
Ministers are understood also by the 12. stars. (Apoc. 12. 1.) unless we
shall re^^rte it only to the Apostles.

Therefore to appropriate the name in both places, to D. Bishops, is rather to
show his flattering humor; then soundly to expound his text.

2. The name of stars cannot express their preeminence, who are as the su^^s
from whom others derive their light:

But such are Diocesan Bishops as both the D. sermon. page 47. lin. 13. and 54.
antepenult, and Bishop Bilson perpet. govern. 291. affirm.

Therefore etc.

3. To appropriate to Diocesan Bishops that prerogative of glory, which Daniel
notes in the stars he speaks of: cap. 12. 3. is to make the Prophet a
patron of Lordly ydlenes, or, at least, to give that prerogative, unto a work
of another nature, then that which the prophet mentions. For that which (by
Daniels doctrine) makes men shine like stars in heaven, is the turning of
many unto righteousness, by faithfulness and painfulnes in the Ministry of the
word.

But the works which lift up Bishops above other Ministers; are the ordeyning
of Ministers, the suspending of them etc. works of Lordly ydlenes; and not of
painfulnes or faithfulness in the Ministry of the word.

Wherefore the D. in appropriating to Diocesan Bishops, that prerogative of
glory. Dan. 12. 1. makes him a patron of Lordly idleness etc.

4. He who knows and professes, that all Ministers are stars and angels
(so entitled. Apoc. 1. 20.) and that the preaching of the word, is the chief
work of the Ministry, to which double honor is due: cannot without
contradiction to himself magnify their Ministerye by the same titles, who
either claim by privilege to be exempted from that great and necessary work
of their calling; or load themselves with so many cares and so much busynes not
belonging to their function, that they cannot have an hour to think upon that
service, for which they are chiefly counted Stars and Angels; or which is
worse, by their sole authority, thrust out painful laborers etc.

But the D. knows and professes as is abovesayd.

Therefore he falls into an apparent contradiction (which is to be wondered
The Doct. contradicts himself.
at and lamented) in magnifying by the same titles the function of Diocesan
Bishops, who either claim the former priveledge. etc.

Now because the Doctors only relief against these arguments of the Refuter
stands in referring us to the former; I only desire the indifferent reader
to consider the answers before and hereafter made to his best proofs, drawn
either from his text or any other scripture, for the justifying of the
interpretation of his text, or the doctrine of his sermon; and then to judge
whether the large proof he speaks of, be not mere begging of the question;
and a gross contradicting of himself.

Chap. 5. Concerning the argument drawn by the D. from Apoc. 2. 2. and 20. Lib.
3. cap. 5. sect. 20. page 135. 136.
Having already sifted all that the D. has urged from his text for the
singular pre-eminence and diocesan jurisdiction of his Sect. (...).
Bishops; we are now to proceed to that argument; which himself
syllogistically fram^th; to prove that they had a corrective power over other
Ministers; and thus he lays it down. Those who either are commended for
examining and not suffering, such in their Church as called themselves
Apostles, and were not, or were reproved for sufferinge false Teachers; had a
corrective power over other Ministers. The Angel of the Church of Ephesus, is
commended for the former; Apoc. 2. 2. The angel of the Church of Thyatira is
reproved for the l^tter Apo. 2. 20. Therefore, these Angels, (which before I
proved to be Bishops) had a corrective power over other Mini^ters.


The conclusion which the D. first aimed at (sermon. page 49.) when he laid down
the parts of this assumption, (as appears by page 46. and 48.) was this; that
Bishops had authority to censure and correct, even those Presbyters which
assisted them (as parts of their Presbytery) in the government of the
Diocese. Wherefore the Refuters answer (page 101.) knitt the parts of his
reasoning together in this connexive proposition.

If our Sav. Christ commended the Angel of the Church of Ephes^s for examining
and not suffering them that said they were Apostles and were not: And reproved
the Angel of the Church of Thyatyra, for suffering the Teachers of the
Nicholaitan h^ri^y: then Bishops ^ad majoritie of rule, for correction over
diocesan Presbyters.

And to show how loosely the consequent is tied to the Antecedent, he says
that neither were these Angels diocesan Bishops; nor those persons with whom
they dealt, Diocesan Presbyters. To this, the D. replyeth, The D. reply is
^rivolous, false, and sland^^^us.
that the answer is frivolous; because he has before proved the former, and
his Refuter devised the word diocesan Presbyters for a shi^^. Whereunto my
rejoinder is, that the first part of his reply is frivolous, or rather false;
and the second a ma^^^cious slander. 1. For to say he has proved, and not to
show where, is mere trifling. And if he have not either in his sermon, or any
part of his defense before-going, any one ^yllogisme or Enthymem to conclude
the point, which he faith he has before proved; what truth can there be in his
saying? 2. Touching the word Diocesan Presbyters; since the Doctor confesses
(page 124.) the word to be used in some Councels (granting the word may be
used in a sense) and urged by the Refuter in the arguments which he frames
before and after (as may be seen page 99. 100. 102. and 104. of his answer)
is it not a malli^ious slander, to say, he devised it, and that for a shift?
espetially, seeing in the rest of his answer to this argument, he makes no
advantage of the word Diocesan. But the Doct. says (page 124.) that he neither
used the word at all; neither (if he had) would he have used it in The D.
understa^deth not his own testimony.
that sense, scz. for those Presbyters that assisted the Bishop in his Diocesan
government; for in his understanding, the country. Ministers are called
Diocaesani (Conc^l. Agath. cap. 22. and Tolet. 3. cap. 20.) and the Presbyters
which in the city assisted the Bishop, were called Civitatenses. But to our
understanding; it seems that the Praesbyters called Diocesani (Council. Tolet.
3. cap. 20.) being opposed to another sort, there termed Locales, were not
country Ministers affixed to particular places; but rather members of that
College or Presbyter^e, which assisted the Bishop in the government of the
Diocese. The words of the Council are these. H^ vero clerici, tam locales quam
Diocefani, qui se ab episcopo gravati cognoverint, querelas suas, ad
Metropolitanum defer non differant. Neither does the Council of Agatha. cap.
22. distinguish them from the city Presbyters, as the Doctor would persuade
but, rather gives, both names to the same persons. Id statuinus quod omnes
jubent, ut Civitate^ses sive Diocesani, Presbyteri vel Clerici, salvo jure
ecclesie, rem ecclesiae, (sicut permiserunt episcopi) teneant, ^t vendere aut
donare penitus non presumant. But, to leave this quarrel about words, and to
come to the matter; seeing it is clear, that the Do: first intended by this
argument, to prove that Bishops had corrective power, over those Presbyters,
which assisted them in their Diocesan charge; is not the Refuters answer very
direct and pertinent (to show the loosenes of the D. reasoning) when he
tells him, That the Teachers against whom those angels, either did or should
have s^t themselves; were not such Presbyters? Wherefore if the Doct. has
neither yielded any such reason of his own, to prove that they were such
Presbyters; nor removed the presumptions which the Refut: alleged for his
denial; does not the blame of a weak consequence^ly still heavy upon his
shoulders? Let the indifferent reader weigh the answer of the one, and the
defense of the other, and then give upright sentence.

First, touching those whom the Angel of Ephesus examined, the Refuter asks
(page 102.) Is it not against sense that the Praesbyters, Sect. 2.
which were subject to the Bishop, should call themselves Apostles? And adds,
any man's reason will give him, that these false Apostles, were men, who coming
from some other place, would have thrist themselves into the Church, there, to
have taught with authority, and by right of Apostleship. And touching those
that taught the Nicholaitan haeresy in the Church at Thyatira, he says, that
they also might be such intruders; or it may be they were some that took upon
them to teach, having no calling thereto; but however; it no way appears,
that they were Ministers and members of the presbyt^^^e, assisting the Angel of
that Church. Now what says the Doct? Does he make the contrary appear, viz.
that they were Ministers and members of the Presbytery? No, for he will not
determine, whether they were Presbyters, or in a higher degree; whether of the
Bishops Presbytery, or not; and whether of the Diocese originally, or come
from other places. Only he says, it is plain they were Teachers; and that
being in their Diocese, the Bishop had authority either to suffer them to
preach, or to inhibit them, etc. Wherein observe we, 1. that he acknowledges a
truth in the maine point of the Refuters answer, scz. that it no way
appears, that they were members of the Presbytery of that Church wherein
they conversed. 2. And whereas he says It is plain they were Teachers; if his
meaning be that they were lawfully called to the function of teachers, it is
more then he can prove; his bare avouching that it is plain; does not plainly
co^vince it; yet will it nothing advantage him, nor disadvantage his Refut: to
grant it. 3. Moreover, in saying, that the Bishops or Angels had authority
either to suffer them to preach, or to inhibit them etc.; either it is
frivolous, if he speak of no other permission or prohibition then is common to
every Pastor or Minister, in his own charge (since the Refuter in that sense
grants they had good cause and sufficient right to forbidd such companions,
or else it is a begging of The D. answer is frivolous, or a begging of the
question.
of the question, if he speak of such a judicial licencing or silencing, as
Bishops in these days exercise over other Ministers in their diocese. But he
will both prove, that these false Teachers, were subject to the censure of the
Angels or Bishops, and remove that which his Refuter objecteth to the contrary.
The later he attempteth in this manner. If they were not Presbyters (he should
say parts of the Presbytery of that Church) because they called themselves
Apostles, belike; they were better men. Is it not then against sense, to deny
that Presbyters were subject to the censure of the Bishop; because he imagines
these, who were subject to their censure, were better men? Is this the Refuters
imagination, or is not rather the D. conclusion grounded upon his own The D.
cannot uphold his cause but by untruths
imagination? Why then may I not return him his own words p. 124* Is the D.
conscience no better, then still to father upon the Ref: untruths for his own
advantage? bewrays he not thereby, what a cause he mainteineth, that cannot
be vpheld but by forgeries? The Refuter; to make good his denial, of that
which the D. presupposed in the consequence of his reasoning, (vz. that the
false Apostles were Presbyters and parts of the Angels Presbytery) affirmed
that it was against sense to imagine, that any such would assume to themselves
the name and pre-eminence of Apostles; and that any man's reason would rather
give him, that they were persons that came from some other place. Add hereunto,
that if they had been of the Ephesian clergy, and so known to the whole
Church, to have embraced an ordinary calling and settled charge amongst them;
how should they with any color persuade the same people to receive them for
the Apostles of Christ? Doubtless the very consideration of the known
difference, betwixt the extraordinary Ministry of the Apostles, and the
ordinary function of Presbyters, might have been sufficient (without any
further search) to discover their lying forgerie, which being known to have
place among the latter, should usurp the name and authority of the former.
But the text says, Apoc. 2. 2. they were found to be liars by the wise and
diligent care of the angel who examined or tried them; it is therefore more
probable that they were rather of the number of those wandering Prophets, which
as grievous wolves from without, entered in to devour: then of those perverse
teachers, which springing up among them, did draw disciples after them. See
Aretius, Beza, and Marlorat, in Apoc. 2. 2.

And touching the false Prophetess ^e zabell, seeing she is expressly said to be
a woman; though good Interpreters do gather from hence, that women were
suffered to teach publikly in that Church (see Marlorat and Mr Perkins upon
Apoc. 2. 20.) yet were it too gross to imagine, that any women were admitted
to the office of Teachers, or to the charge of Presbyters. And though it should
be granted, that they were men (not women) which are deciphered by the name
of that woman Iezabell; yet the very name argues their greatness and their
prevayling by their subtle persuasions (no less then Iezabel did by her
commanding power) to draw many un to their wicked ways. And the title of a
Prophetess imports, y^ they boasted of an i^mediate calling, and of
extraordinary revelatio^s.

Neither does the Doctor contradict this: only he says, If they The D.
trifleth.
were not presbyters, belike they were better men. A frivolous speech, and an
unlikely consequence. For what likelihood is there, that they were better men?
seeing some of them were found to be liars in saying they were Apostles? Or how
does the denial of this, that they were parts of the standing Presbytery,
argue that they were no Presbyters at all? But say they were of an higher
calling (to wit Evangelists or fellowe-helpers sometimes to the Apostles) yet
now Apostates from the faith (as was Demas and some other) what will this
advantage the D. cause? For sooth, because himself imagines* that these (who
were better men,) were subject to the Bishops censure: therefore he deemeth it
against sense to deny, that Presbyters were subject to his censure.

To come then at length to that which he first proposed, (the reason I mean
which he urges to prove that the false Apostles and Iezabel the false
Prophetess, were subject to the Angels of the Churches, wherein they usurped
authority to teach) he says.

If they were not subject to them, why is the one commended for exercising
authority over them, and the other reproved for suffering them? For answer, it
shall suffice to ask; why he assumeth for an apparent truth, Yet the ^^beggeth.
that which is rather apparently false? viz. that the Angel of Ephesus is
commended for exercising authority over the false Apostles? And why he pre
supposes in the consequence of his reasoning, that which he cannot justify?
to wit, that the false prophetess of Thyatira, was subject to the Angels
censure; because he is reproved for suffering her. And thus wear lead (as it
were by the hand) to see, the falsehood of the proposition of the arg. before by
himself co^trived. For a corrective power over Ministers, cannot be firmly
concluded, either from the commendation of the one that examined them which
falsely called themselves Apostles; or from the reproof of the other, that
suffered false Teachers to seduce the people. For put the case, the D. were an
Archdea^on, (or which would please him better) a Diocesan Lord; and that in the
some parishes under his government, corrupt teachers should ^ind free access
to the pulpit, but in other places by the careful inquiry of the Ministers
and Churchwardens finding what they are, they should be restreyned: me thinks,
in this case he should highely commend the honest care of the one, and sharply
reprove, the carlesse negligence of the other: yet if a man should from his
commendation or reproof infer, that the persons so commended or reproved;
had the power of correcting and silencing Ministers: I suppose the D. would
rather deride the simplicity of such a disputer, then vouchsafe him a direct
answer. See the loosenes of the D. reasoning.
But to leave suppositions and to let him see the loosenes of his reasoning by
a more direct answer; it is clear that the Spirit of God does no less commend
the men of Berea for their diligent sifting the Apostle Paul's doctrine, (Act.
17. 11.) then he does the Angel of Ephesus, for examining them that falsely
assumed the name of Apostles? Will the D. therefore acknowledge that they had a
corrective power over that holy Apostle? And who knows not, that it is
required of every private Christian, to have their senses exercised in the
word, to discern between good and evil? (Heb. 5. 14.) to try the spirits of
their teachers, whether they be of God or not? (1. Ioh. 4. 1.) to bewarre of
false Prophets and seducers? (Math. 7. 15. and 24. 4.) to try all things and
to hold fast that only which is good? (1 These. 5. 21.) yea to judge of the
doctrine delivered to them? (1. Cor. 10. 15. and 11. 13.) to mark such as
teach contrary to the doctrine that they have received, and to avoid them,
Romans 16. 17. Moreover does not the general band of love, bind every one
freely to rebuke his neighbor, and not to suffer sin upon him? (Levi^. 19.
17.) and does not the Apostles sharply tax the Corinthians for suffering the
false Apostles to domineare over them (2. Cor. 11. 20.) Wherefore, if it be a
cursed confusion, and subversion of ecclesiastical power, to subject every
teacher to the jurisdiction or corrective power of every private hearer, and
to commit the managing of the keys or Church Censures, to every mean
Artisan; then the D. may see how gross an error it is to think; that the duty
of examining or trying, and not suffering false teachers, does necessarily
argue a power of inflicting the ecclesiastical censur^^ upon them. And the
indifferent reader may perceive, that while the D. labors to uphold the
preheminent suprioritie of Bishops, he has put a weapon into the hands of the
Anabaptists to overthrow all Ministerial authority, and to bring in a mere
Anarchy.

Perhaps the D. will reply, that besides this trial or judgment of Sect. 4.
discerning (which is common to all Christians, and needful for their
preservation from seducers) there is another and an higher kind, proper to the
guides of the Church; and necessary for the preserving of the whole ^lock,
from haereticall infection. This we acknowledge to be true; but withal we
say, it is none other, then a judgment of direction (as Doctor Field calls
it in his treatise of the Church. lib. 4. cap. 13. page 222.) which
endeavors to make others discern, what themselves have found out to be the
truth. And this is common to all the Ministers of the word, Elders of the
Church: as appears by that charge which Paul gives common to all the Elders
of Ephesus, viz. to attend on the feeding of the flock, and to watch against
the danger, both of wolves entering in, and of false teachers springing up
among them. Act. 20. 28.-31. For how should such danger be prevented by their
watchfulnes, if it were not their duty, to try out the lewd behavior and
false doctrine of seducing spirits; and not to suffer them to spread the
contagion and poison thereof, in the Church committed to their oversight? This
is yet more manifest by sundry canons, prescribed elsewhere by the same Apostle;
as when he requires of every Presbyter an ability, to convince the gainsayers
of wholesome doctrine. T^t. 1. 5. 9. and subjecteth the spirits of the prophets
to the judgment of the Prophets, 1. Cor. 14. 29. 32. Add hereunto the practice
of the Aposties, admitting the Presbyters of the Church of Jerusalem, to
consultation for the trying and determining of that question, (touching
circumcision etc.) which had troubled the minds of many believers at Antioche.
Act. 15. 6. 22. 23. It is apparent therefore, that in the trial and
examination, both of teachers and their doctrine, the scripture knows no
difference between Bishops, and Presbyters: so that if Bishops will challendge
to themselves a jurisdiction and power of correction over Presbyters, because
it belongs unto them, to try or examine, and not to suffer false teaching.
Presbyters; then for the same reason, it being the duty of every Pres byter to
try, the doctrine of Bishops and not to suffer them to spread any error
without resistance; Bishops also must subject themselves, to the corrective
power of every Presbyter.

But he will allege (as some others have done) that there is a third kind of
trial and judgment, proper to them that have chief authority in the Church,
(to wit, a judicial examination of persons suspected, in open co^sistory with
power to censure, such as are found faulty: which as it is now exercised of our
Bishops; so it was then practiced by the Angel of the Church at Ephesus.
Indeed, if this were true, he might with some color infer, that the angels
function, was in that respect like to the function of our Diocesan Bishops; but
who sees not that this plea is none other, then a mere begging of the
question? For, they that deny these angels to Still the D. beggeth.
be Bps., such as ours; do not acknowledge any such prehemine^ce, in one
Minister above another, for the trying and censuring of offenders. Moreover, by
this reply, the cause is as little relieved, as if a shipmaster, to stop one
leake in the one side of his shipp, should make two or three on the other side,
more dangerous then the former. For, to cover the falsehood of the proposition;
a double error or untruth is discovered in the Assumptio^. viz. 1. that by the
trial which the Angel of the Ephesian Church, took of the false The D. to
stopp one leake makes two.
Apostles, is meant a judicial co^venting of the^ in open Consistory; and
proceeding unto censure against them, being found liars. 2. that this power was
the peculiar prerogative, of that one which is here entitled, the angel of
that Church.

The falsehood of the former does appear in part, by some things already
spoken; it being before showed, that the trial and examination Sect. 5.
both of teachers and of their doctrine, appropriated unto Ministers in the
apostolical writings, is none other then that judgment of direction, whereby
themselves and their people are informed and guided, in this carriage, toward
those teachers. I add 1. that the Doctor cannot parallel the words or phrases
here used. ou dune bastasai k^k^us' kai epeiraso etc. Apo. 2. 2. and hoti eas
ten etc. ver. 20. with any other text of holy scripture; where the same words
do imply such a judicial trial, as he supposes to be infolded under them. 2.
And since the persons, which are said to be tried and not endured; professed to
be Apostles (and therefore such, as challendged an authority and calling,
superior to that Angel) what likelihoode is there that they would yield
themselves subject, to his judicial examination, and censure? 3. Again, the
text says only, that they were tried and found liars; now if they were in
open Consistory, judicially tried; why were they not upon the discovery of
their false dealing, enjoined to give open testimony of their repentance? And
(if they refused so to do) why did they not bear the sentence of suspension,
and excommunication, or degradation? Or (if any such proceeding was held
against them) why is it not recorded in the text; seeing it would have made
much more, for the angels commendation, then that which is expressly mentioned?
4. Nay, that is recorded, which sounds rather, to the confirmation of the
contrary; for that bearing which is commended in the same angel. verse. 3. is by
good Interpreters (and amongst other by Mr Perkins) construed, of his groaning
under the burden of those false Teachers, and their haereticall doctrine, of
which he labored what he could, to disburden the Church. But, however this be
taken, there is little reason for any man to think* that those false Apostles,
were in open consistory conv^nted and censured, as the Doctor imagines. And
yet were it as clear as he could wish; how will the second point be
manifested, which the Doctor presupposes rather then proves? viz. that the
power of conventing and correcting false Teachers, was the peculiar right of
one Bishop, here called the angel of the Church? To tell us that he has
before proved, that by the Angel of each Church; one only Bishop is meant,
will be no sufficient defense; seeing his proofs are already disproved, cap. 3.
sect. 1. 2. 3. etc. and reasons yielded for the contrary, viz. that under the
name of one Angel, the whole college of Ministers or Elders is understood.
Wherefore if a corrective power over Ministers, may be rightly gathered from
that course of proceeding against false Teachers mentioned, Apoc. 2. 2. and 20;
we may very well retort the Doctors argument against the preheminent power of
Bishops, and for the joint authority of Presbyters, in this manner;

They, who are either commended for examining and not suffering, or reproved for
suffering false Teachers in their Church; had a corrective power over other
Ministers.

But the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, was commended for the former. Apoc. 2.
2. and the Angel of the Church of Thyatira, was reproved for the later. ve^s.
20.

Ergo, those Angels, (which are before proved to be the whole College of
Ministers and Elders in each Church) had the corrective power over Ministers.

And since it appears by the commandment, which John had to write unto the
7. Churches. (Apoc. 1. 11.) that the praise o^ dispraise of every angel,
belongs in part unto the whole Church: (a truth acknowledged by the best
Interpreters, Calvin, Beza, Marlorat, Aretius Perkins etc.) though it should be
granted that one Minister (to wit, the chief Pastor or President of the
Presbytery) is principally aimed at, in the name of the angel of each Church;
yet will it not follow that the whole power of correction, was his p^culiar
right; nay rather, it will follow, that so far as his fellow angels; and (not
they only but) the whole Church, did partake with him, in the praise or
disprayse ascribed to him; so far also, they had their part in the power of
judicial proceeding. Wherefore, if the Doctors meaning be (in his assumption
to restreyne the praise or dispraise mentioned (Apoc. 2. 2 20.) unto The D.
wresteth the text; or must yield the cause.
one only person (whom he reputeth to be the Bishop) his Assumption is to be
rejected, as an erroneous wresting of the text, contrary to the true meaning
thereof: But if he assent unto this explanation of his assumption, (viz. that
in the praise or reproof of the angel, the rest of the Ministers or Elders,
and the whole Church did partake with him) then must he subscribe to this
conclusion; to wit; that the rest of the Elders and the whole Ch: did partake
with the Angel of each Church, in the power of administering the
Church Censures. And this may suffice for answer to all that he has alleged
from his text, or any part of the holy scripture, in defense of the explication
of his text, viz. that the Angels of the 7. Churches, were 7. Bishops, for the
substance of their calling such as ours are. We are in the next place to see,
what strength there is in that argument, whereby from the title of Angels in
his text, he labors to uphold the title of Lord given to the Bishops.

Chap. 6. Concerning the Title of Lord given to Bishops comparing the same,
with the Title of Angels in the Doctors text, handled by him, Lib. 3. page 150.
etc. against the Refuters answer. page 105. 106.
LEt us now see what force there is in that argument which the D. frames from
this title (The angels of the Churches) to justify Sect. (...).
the titles of honor, which in this age are given to Diocesan and and
Provincial Prelates; his argument is this,

The H. Ghost gives Bishops a more honorable title, in calling them the
angels of the Churches; then if he had called them Lords.

Therefore, we should not think much, that they are called Lords.

The consequence of this argument lies in this proposition, That unto
who^soever the holy ghost gives a more honorable title; to them we may
without scruple give any title that is inferior, which is not universally
true; as the D. (I suppose) will confess in many particulars. For the name or
ti^le of Mayor, Bayliffe, Alderman, Constable, etc. I might say King, Duk^,
Earl etc. must needs be (in his understanding) by many degrees inferior, to
the titles that he acknowledges to be given by the Holy Ghost in common to all
Ministers of the word, (sermon dignity and duty of the Ministers page 60.
61. 62.) such as are Co-workers, and Stewards of God, etc. But to give the
former unto Ministers, were to bring confusion into the Church, and to
overthrow that difference, which the laws of God and man have set between
civil and eccles. functions. And though a man should offer to salve this
mischeife, with the like distinction of civil and ecclesiastical Majors or
Kings etc. (by which the D. excuses the title of Lords given to Bishops) yet I
persuade my self, he would not easylie admit of this disorder, yea doubtless,
he would think it a great disparagement, to his reverend Fathers and spiritual
Lords, that every painful Minister of Christ, should be equalled with them
in those honorable titles, which do now lift them up above their brethren. And
yet (by his own confession (page 61. and 62. last mentioned,) they have (all)
right to those titles of Doctors, Fathers, Pastors, and Saviors of their
brethren, which are more glorious, then that name of Angels of the Churches,
which he now appropriateth unto Bishops. We may take it therefore, for an
evident truth; that there is no truth at all in the consequence of the D. The
D. consq. is not true.
argument; no not, though he should limit himself to titles of the same
nature, I mean such, as declare the same kind of honor, either civil, or
ministerial. For, I make no question, but the D. would judge it, as vnbeseming
his diocesan Bishops, to bear the name of Archdeacons, Officials, or Curates
etc. as for Kings and Emperors, to be called Dukes, and Captains, or high
Constables. And I judge it much more absurd, to argue (as he does) from titles
in holy scripture given to Ministers, to show the dignity of their function;
unto titles of civil honor, apperteyning unto great personages, that excel
in external pomp, and worldly glory.

And this is the exception which the Refuter took to the D. argument, when (to
show the inconsequence thereof) he said, that Sect. 2.
the titles which the D. compares together are of a different nature. For
Angels and stars are glorious creatures of heaven, and have some fit
resemblance of the Ministers office; but Lord, Lordship, and Grace, are terms
of civil honor, not so well be sitting the Ministers of Jesus Christ. Hereto
the D. replyeth, I confess they do not so well befit them, because they come
short of the honor and excellency, which in the name of angels, the Holy
Ghost ascribes to them: as if the honor of the episcopal function were much
abased (not increased (as the world judges) by those titles of civil honor,
given unto Bishops, for what else can he mean, in saying they do not so well
befitt them because they come short etc. And why then are ye so unwise (o ye
Princes and Nobles) as to give unto Bishops, for the honoring of their those
titles that do debase them? Be wise and instructed from henceforth, to deny
them these base terms, of Lordship and Grace and to give them those titles of
honor, which are peculiar to Christ and not common with them to any other
creature; viz. Pastors of souls, the light of the world, and savior of their
brethren (see the D. sermon. of the dignity of the Ministers, (page 62. 64.)

But why makes the D. a show of removing his Refuters answer, The D makes
show of removing his Ref. answ. but does not once touch it.
and yet leaves it altogether untouched? For he cannot give his argument a
discharge from the inconsequence objected against it, till he show, either that
the titles which he co^pareth, are not of an other nature; or that the terms
of civil honor co^troverted; do well beseem those, whose calling is adorned
with titles of greater honor, in another kind; to wit, in regard of a
spiritual and celestial dignity. To attempt the former, were to quench the
light of common reason: and to endeavor the latter, is to conveye the
controverted titles of civil honor (by an equal right) unto every Minister;
seeing the titles of greatest spiritual dignity, do equally belong to all the
Ministers of the word, as is before observed. The D. therefore, as one that
wittingly will not see, the weakness of his consequence, spends all his
strength in fortifying the Antecde^t; viz. that the names of Lords etc. given
to Bishops by earthly Princes, is a title of less honor, then that which the
Holy Ghost gives them in calling them the Angels of the Churches. I will not
now urge him a fresh to give us some better reason, then any he has yet
proposed, for the proof of that which he takes here for granted; sz. that
the Holy Ghost appropriateth unto Bishops, such as ours; the name of the Angels
of the Churches; I will only examine how well he has proved, that this is a
more honorable title: then the name of Lords.

They are called, says he, not only Angels, that is, messengers and
Ambassadors of God, as all Ministers are in respect of their Ministry: but
each Sect. 3.
of them also, is called the Angel of the Church whereof he is Bishop, in
respect of his government, and guardianship of the Church; as the holy angels
are said to be their angels, over whom they are appointed governors and
guardians: therefore the name Lord give^ to them in respect of their government
and authority, is a title of less honor; the^ that; which in the same respect
is give^ the^ by Christ. Here also I must pass by a double error (in his
words) before discovered, namely that Bishops only and not any other
Ministers, have right unto this title, the Angels of the Churches; and that
more (...) As if it were more honor to be the knight of a shire (in
Parliament) then to be the Kings ^eutenant?
honor is employed in this latter, then in the name of the Lords Angels or
Ambassadors, which he acknowledges to be common to all Ministers, (see for
that these points, the answ. to his 7. sect. lib. 1. cap. 2.) The weight and
worth of his reasoning is now to be examined, which stands in this Enthymem.

Every Bishop is called the Angels of the Church whereof he is Bishop, in
respect of his government and guardianship of the Church; like as the holy
angels are said to be their angels, over whom they are appointed.

Therefore, the name Lord given to them in respect of their government is a
title of less honor, then the other that is given in the same respect. Why?
if both titles be given to Bishops, in one and the same respect, does it not
rather follow (by good probability) that equal honor is employed in both?
should not then the D. have done better, to have fortified the consequence of
his argument, then to leave it naked as he does? And why (neither in this, nor
in the former Enthymem) supplieth he not the consequence or proposition, which
(according to his own rules lib. 2. page 44.) might make a perfect syllogism?
at least, why does he not fill up his comparison, and tell us, from whose
government the name of Lord (given unto Bishops) is borrowed? Perhaps, because
he says (in the next clause of his defense) that Bishops have that title of
Lords, common to them with the Lords temporal: he would have us to conceive,
that it is for that cause, a title of less honor, then that other, which
Bishops have common to them, with the holy Angels of God. If this be his
meaning (as ^^gesse it is, for I know not, what better color he can pretend,
for the justifying of the co^seque^ce of his reasoning) we are then to inquire,
whether he be not deceived, either in laying down the reason of the name Lord,
given unto Bishops, or in making that the cause of a less honor included in
the name? His own words are the occasion of drawing the former into question,
when he says: They are not therefore civil Lords, because they have the title
of Lords common to them with the Lords temporal, for who knows not the
distinction? between the Lords spiritual and temporal? We are not ignorant of
the distinction, so often mentioned in the acts of parliament, but the D.
seems not to know the right meaning and use thereof. For if the Bishops be
not civil Lords, nor their Lordship a civil honor, because they are
distinguished from the nobles of the laytie, by the name of Lords spiritual;
then it follows that their Lordship and honor annexed thereunto, is merely
spiritual. But it is so well known to all the world, that Bishops do partake
with temporal Lords in all the appurtenances of civil Lordship and civil
honor; that to deny it, were delirare cum insanis, to play the madd man. The
reason therefore, of the distinction retained in our laws, is rather to show
the different condition of the persons, then the diversity of their Lordship;
because the one are spiritual persons or clergymen; and the other temporal
men or lay-persons. Or ^f the D. will needs have their very Lorpships to be
distinguished by those terms. Spiritual and temporal; then the difference
must be this, that Bishops have, (besides their civil Lordships and temporal
Baronies, common to them with the Lords temporal) an ecclesiastical Lordship,
or Lordlike rule in spiritual causes; in respect whereof they are denominated
Lords spiritual. However it be, since he denies them to be civil Lords, and
acknowledges the name Lord to be given them, in regard of the same
government, which is implied under the name of, the angels of the Churches; he
should in reason, derive the Lordship of Bishops, rather from Christ's Lordship,
which is spiritual, then from the dignity of Lords temporal which is merely
civil. For if that be true which he conceives; Bishops have no more affinity
with noble personages in the name of Lords: then they have with all civil
Magistrates in the name of Pastors. Both may be called Pastors of the people
(as he says sermon. of the dig. of Min. page 53.) but the Magistrates are
Pastors of their bodies; the Ministers of their souls. In like manner, our
nobles and our Bishops do agree in the name of Lords; but the one are civil
Lords, the other not so, but spiritual. Wherefore, as he affirms (sermon. page
62.) Ministers to partake with Christ in the name of Pastors; because, as he is
the Pastor of our souls; so they are Pastors not of men's bodies, but of their
souls; so he makes (or at least, might from the like ground affirm) Bishops,
to have the name of Lords, common to them with Christ; seeing as he is a
spiritual Lord; so are they also Lords spiritual, and not civil. Wherefore,
if we may measure the greatness or smallnes of that honor, which any titles
convey unto Ministers, by the greater or less excellency of the persons, with
whom they, in those titles, are compared: then have we good warrant to
conclude, the honor included in the name of Lords, attributed unto Bishops;
to be by so much greater, then that which is implied, in the other title of the
Churches Angels; by how much our Lord Christ is greater then all angels. But no
stayed building stands upon so ^andy a foundation; for as men shall please to
vary the things, with which they may (by any title) compare the Ministers of
Christ; so their honor shall rise or fall at their pleasure, and that under
one and the same title. For compare the name of Pastors or shepherds given to
Ministers (Ephesians. 4. 11.) with Christ, the chief Pastor and great shepherd of
the sheep. (1. Pet. 5. 4. and Heb. 13. 20.) then is it a name of far greater
honor, then the name of Angels, or Angels of the Churches: but it is by many
degrees more base, if it be referred to the shepherds that watch and attend on
their flocks in the feilds, from whence (in truth) it was at the first derived.
Wherefore, it must be confessed, that there is a manifest falsehood infolded in
the consequence of the Doctors reasoning.

And this serves well to justify the later point before proposed, Sect. 4.
scz. that the Doctor is deceived in judging the name of Lord, being common to
Bishops, with Lords temporal, to be a title of less honor, then the name, of
the angels of the Churches, that has reference to the caelestiall Angels. We
may with much more probability affirm, that by how much it is a greater
honor, to have a Lord-like government in any Church; then to have a tutorship,
or Guardianship therein: by so much, the name of Lord given to Bishops, in
respect of their government; is a title of greater honor, the^ the other,
which expresses their Guardianship, which in some respect is allowed, to the
Churchwardens of every parish. For, why should we not measure the height of
that honor, which titles do imply, rather by the nature of that government
which 18. The Doct. contradicts himself.
the names import; then by the condition of the persons or things, with which
the titles do compare the persons so entitled? To end this dispute, let the
reader observe here a shrewd show of a plain contradiction in the Doctor; for
whereas now he grants the name Lord to be given unto Bishops in respect of
their government and authority: a little after (page 153.) he denieththe
title to be given them, with relation, but as a simple title with honor and
revere^ce. For how can it be a simple title of honor, used without any
relation or reference unto those that are governed by them; if it be given them
in respect of their government? And thus much for answer to the argument,
drawn from the name of Angels in his text, to justify those honorable
titles, of Lord and Lordship given to Bishops.

Chap. 7. Concerning two new arguments produced by the D. lib. 4. page 40. etc.
to prove the angels of the 7. Churches to be Bishops, like to ours.
There remains some what (alleged by the D. to show that ^^e 7. angels were
Bishops, for the substance of their calling, like to ours) as yet unanswered:
but it is from humane, and not divine evidence. He promises indeed (sermon. page
61. to prove both by scripture and other evidence, that the government by
Bishops, was used even in the Apostles times, and not contradicted by them. His
scripture proof is nothing but this, The 7. Angels were the Bishops of the 7.
Churches as all confess, and for the substance of their calling like to ours,
as I (says he) have proved. Which proofs, because his Refuter had removed,
before he came to that part of the sermon; he therefore told him; that he had
brought nothing to prove his assertion, but what was already answered: now the
D. tells us, that this is untrue. For (says he) I bring two new arguments to
prove that the 7. Angels were Bishops. That they were Bishops? why? that is to
prove what he knows to be of all confessed; he should therefore say, (and
make his saying good) that he has two new arguments to show that they were
Bishops like to ours; but so to affirm were to avouch, an untruth: wherefore
he wrongeth his Refuter to charge him with an untruth in saying he brought
nothing, but what was before answered. Which wrong is the greater, because he
could not but see, by his Refuters words following, (answ. page 128.) that in
so saying, he had an ^ie, to the D. proofs from scripture; which was the thing
promised b^t not performed: Wherefore he may very well again, be once told;
that ^ayling in his proofs from scripture (which only is sufficient to make
good his assertion) how much soeverhe say besides, he must be beholding to his
reader, if he be persuaded by him. Notwithstanding, let us not refuse to hear
what those his arguments be, wherein he rests so confidently. The former
(says he) though this great Analyser, either did not, or would not see, it is
this: That two of these Angels were Policarpus and Onesimus: Policarpus the
Bishop of Smyrna, and Onesimus the Bishop of Ephesus, Policarpus the Bishop of
Smyrna, and Onesimus the Bishop of Ephesus, and what is said of two, is to be
understood of the rest. Indeed, the Refuter saw not this last clause, for how
should he see it, before it came into the D. head to deliver it? and now he
might well have spared it: unless he had better explaned his meaning. For
would he have us to think, that as two of the angels were Policarpus and
Onesimus; so also the other five, were Policarpus and Onesimus? If this be not
his meaning, why does he tell us, that what is said of two, the same must be
understood of the rest? If his meaning be, that as he nominated two; so we must
believe he can nominate the rest, if he list; he must pardon us, in case we
intertayne not the thought; seeing he he is not likely to have concealed their
names, if he had ever met with any evidence that revealed them.

But why does this great disputer (who makes so many and great protestations
of his upright dealing) so falsely, and yet wittingly, charge his Refuter (whom
in scorn he terms the great Analyser) not to see, or not to mention this his
first The D. falsely yet willingly slandereth his Refuter.
argument? Does he not expressly point unto it, when he says (page 128.) that
the sum of all that the D. has, is comprised in 3. points, 1. that
Policarpus was the Bishop of Smyrna; and Onesimus, as it may well be supposed,
the Bishop of the Church of Ephesus? 2. that from the 7. angels etc. Had the
Refuter put the word Angel, in stead of the word Bishop which he used; the D.
had had no color of cause, as he had no cause, to quarrel with him: but the
old proverb is verifyed, wrangl^rs will play at small game rather then sit
out; and men set to pick quarrels, will take hold of small occasions, rather
then want some color of just cause to complain.

But to leave his evil and idle wanderings, and to examine his Sect. 2.
argument, the first stands thus in form.

Two of these angels were Policarpus and Onesimus.

But Policarpit^ and Onesimus were Bishops, (he should say) By-shops like to
ours.

Therefore, two of these angels were Bishops, like unto ^urs. And the second
thus.

From the 7. angels a succession of Bishops, was continued in those 7.
Churches, until thae council of Nice, and afterward.

Therefore, those 7, angels were Bishops, like to ours.

To both these jointly the Refuter answers thus: that the Bishops so called
in the Apostles times were not diocesan, as they were which followed in
succeeding ages. The D. Replyeth (page 43.) that if ever there had been within
the compass of a diocese more Bishops then one at once, since the Apostles
times; or if it could be truly alleged, that the circuit of the Bishops
charge, was enlarged from a parish to a diocese; then there were some color,
for this exception; but these conceits (says he) I have disproved before, and
therefore doubt not most confidently to conclude, that if the successors of
these 7. Bishops, were in the end of 300. years, diocesan Bishops; then were
their first pr^decessors such. For answer whereunto in a word, I say 1. That
it is besides the present question, now to enquire, whether there ever were
within one diocese, any more Bishops then one, at once etc. 2. since the D.
upon his bare word denies those things to be so; he has little reason to
think that we will blindly subscribe to his confident conclusion, inferred upon
his naked presumptions; to make no worse of them. For first, it is no hard
matter to make them false presumptions. What says he to Epiphanius, (cont
Haeres. lib. 2. haeres. 68. contra Milet) does not he affirm, that there were
diverse Bishops in one Church or city, though not in Alexandria; nunquam
Alexandria duos habuit episcopos, velut aliae urbes? Secondly as touching his
own testimonies which he produces to show that Policarpus was Bishop of
Smyrna, and Onesimus Bishop of Ephesians. in S. John's time: I desire him to take
notice how he still contradicts himself, as he may easily discern, if he
compare his words lib. 2. page The D. contradicts himself.
62. with sermon. page 62. and lib. 4. page 40. together. In the^BCH 4168-0138
the thing promised b^t not performed: Wherefore he may very w^l again, be once
told; that failing in his proofs from scripture (which only is sufficient to
make good his assertion) how much soeverhe say besides, he must be beholding to
his reader, if he be persuaded by him. Notwithstanding, let us not refuse to
hear what those his arguments be, wherein he rests so confidently. The
former (says he) though this great Analyser, either did not, or would not see,
it is this: That two of these Angels were Policarpus and Onesimus: Policarpus
the Bishop of Smyrna, and Onesimus the Bishop of Ephesus, and what is said of
two, is to be understood of the rest. Indeed, the Refuter saw not this last
clause, for how should he see it, before it came into the D. head to deliver
it? and now he might well have spared it: unless he had better explaned his
meaning. For would he have us to think, that as two of the angels were
Policarpus and Onesimus; so also the other five, were Policarpus and Onesimus?
If this be not his meaning, why does he tell us, that what is said of two, the
same must be understood of the rest? If his meaning be, that as he nominated
two; so we must believe he can nominate the rest, if he list; he must pardon
us, in case we intertayne not the thought; seeing he he is not likely to have
concealed their names, if he had ever met with any evidence that revealed
them.

But why does this great disputer (who makes so many and great protestations
of his upright dealing) so falsely, and yet wittingly, charge his Refuter (whom
in scorn he terms the great Analyser) not to see, or not to mention this his
first The D. fal^ly yet willingly slandereth his Refuter.
argument? Does he not expressly point unto it, when he says (page 128.) that
the sum of all that the D. has, is comprised in 3. points, 1. that
Policarpus was the Bishop of Smyrna; and Onesimus, as it may w^ll be supposed,
the Bishop of the Church of Ephesus? 2. that from the 7. angels etc. Had the
Refuter put the word Angel, in stead of the word Bishop which he used; the D.
had had no color of cause, as he had no cause, to quarrel with him: but the
old proverb is verifyed, wranglars will play at small game rather then sit
out; and men set to pick quarrels, will take hold of small occasions, rather
then want some color of just cause to complain.

But to leave his evil and idle wanderings, and to examine his Sect. 2.
argument, the first stands thus in form.

Two of these angels were Policarpus and Onesimus.

But Policarpus and Onesimus were Bishops, (he should say) Bishops like to
ours.)

Therefore, two of these angels were Bishops, like unto ^urs. And the second
thus.

From the 7. angels a succession of Bishops, was continued in those 7.
Churches, until thae council of Nice, and afterward.

Therefore, those 7, angels were Bishops, like to ours.

To both these jointly* the Refuter answers thus: that the Bishops so called
in the Apostles times were not diocesan, as they were which followed in
succeeding ages. The D. Replyeth (page 43.) that if ever there had been within
the compass of a diocese more Bishops then one at once, since the Apostles
times; or if it could be truly alleged, that the circuit of the Bishops
charge, was enlarged from a parish to a diocese; then there were some color,
for this exception; but these conceits (says he) I have disproved before, and
therefore doubt not most confidently to conclude, that if the successors of
these 7. Bishops, were in the end of 300. years, diocesan Bishops; then were
their first pred^cessors such. For answer whereunto in a word, I say 1. That
it is besides the present question, now to enquire, whether there ever were
within one diocese, any more Bishops then one, at once etc. 2. since the D.
upon his bare word denies those things to be so; he has little reason to
think that we will blindly subscribe to his confident conclusion, inferred upon
his naked presumptions; to make no worse of them. For first, it is no hard
matter to make them false presumptions. What says he to Epiphanius, (cont
Haeres. lib. 2. haeres. 68. contra Milet) does not he affirm, that there were
diverse Bishops in one Church or city, though not in Alexandria; nunquam
Alexandria duos habuit episcopos, velut aliae urbes? Secondly as touching his
own testimonies which he produces to show that Policarpus was Bishop of
Smyrna, and Onesimus Bishop of Ephesians. in S. John's time* I desire him to take
notice how he still contradicts himself, The D. contradicts himself.
as he may easily discern, if he compare his words lib. 2. page 62. with sermon.
page 62. and lib. 4. page 40. together. In the former he says that Ignatius
his ep^stles were written but a little before his death; and therefore he
denies the Churches of Magnesia and Trallis, to have been Churches extant what
time the Apostle John wrote the revelation. Now if this be true, (as true it
is) then is it false to say as he does (sermon. page 62.) that the epistles of
Ignatius were written between the 90. year of our Lord and 99. and that his
epistle ad Ephesians: is a pregnant proof that Onesimus was the Bishop of Ephesus
when the Revelation was written as he confidentlye avoucheth, (lib. 4. page 40).
For Ignatius his death fell out, Anno 111. (as Eusebius: notes in Chro^. and
Cent. 2. col. 169.) which was 14. years after the Revelation was written. But
if his epist. ad Ephesians. wherein he mentions Onesimus their Pastor, be a
sufficient proof, that Onesimus was the Bishop of Ephesus, what time the
Apostle John wrote the Revelation; because he wrote while Clemens lived; that
is, between the years 90. and 99. (as he says sermon. page 62.) then his
epistles written to the Churches of Magnesia and Trallis, will be as pregnant a
proof that those Churches flourished, when John wrote the Revelation. For it is
evident by Eusebius his testimony (Hist. lib. 3. cap. 30.) that these epistles,
and that to the Ephesians, were written at one and the same time.

2 Leaving him to his contradiction, I must, renew the Refuters answer that
those testimonies are not free from suspicion, whatever the D. then or now has
said to free them. The ep^stles of Igna^tus and Policarp, that now go under
their names, says D. Fulke (in answ. to the Rhem: on Act. 6. 7.) are not
authen^^k; but gathered out of the Apocryphal constitutions of that
counter^^yt Clemens. And concerning Ignatius, whom the Rhemists on 1 Pet. 2,
13. alleged to prove that the Bishop must be honored above the King: these
words (says he) show out of whose sh^pp that epis^le came; he (meaning
Ignatius) was a man of greater religion, then to correct the scripture in
Solomon Provb. 24. 21. and Peter etc.

3. Were those testimonies freer from exception then they are, yet they yield
him no relief; seeing they speak not one word either for their diocesan
jurisdiction; or for their preheminent superiority above other Presbyters in
their Churches. But of their Byshoppricks what they were, and whether such as
he supposes; we shall have fit occasion to speak hereafter; there is enough
already said to show, that his best evidence is to weak to persuade what he
undertakes to prove, viz. that the Angels of the 7. Churches were Bishops, for
the substance of their calling, like to ours. So that his explication of the
text he handles, having no foundation in any part of Gods truth, nor any
humane testimony worthy of credit to support it; I may well join with his
Refuter and say, he builds upon the sand of his own conceit, and not upon
the rock of Christ's truth, when he raises from thence, his high Turret, that
the calling of Bishops, (such for the substance of their calling as ours are)
is of divine institution.

And thus much for the first part. Have patience a while, Christian Reader, and
thou shall (God willing,) have the other two, that are behind.

The faults escaped in the printing are thus to be corrected.
Page 7. l. 16. the. p. 8. l. 14. deny. p. ^0. l. 8. put out, he. page 41. l.
12. Mounte-bancke. page 72. l. 23 put out, him: l. vlt. for who, read how. p:
30. l. 2. for and, read, what. p: 102. l. 18. put out, is. p. 110. l. 28.
praeerant. p. 118. in the title, for points read point. p. 175. l. penult:
put out, in a connexive proposed. p. 195. l. 33. for that, read, at. p. 197. l.
13. put out, no. p. 205. l. 11. put out, and p. 206. l. 27. dividebantur, p.
209. l. 7. put out, for p. 229. l. 36. Miletum. p. 227. l. 14. Mariam. page
237. l. 20. for lacks, read, takes. p. 245. l. 1. Tuiciensis. p. 274. l.
27. can. p. 281. l. 25. read, not bearing. p. 286. l. 5. put out, that.

THE SECOND PART OF A REPLY, Answering A DEFENSE OF A SERMON PREACHED AT THE
Consecration of the Bishop of Bathe and Wells, by George Downame, Doctor of
Divinity.

In defense of an Answer to the foresaid Sermon Imprinted Anno 1609.

1. These. 5. 21. Try all things, and keep that which is good.

Imprinted, Anno 1614.

To (...)
THose two motives which do most usually and not unjustly persuade the Reader
to believe his author, (the credit of the man, and the apparent evidence that
he brings) have by many been thought to have united their forces in Doctor
Downames defense. For the man himself, he has been generally accounted
judicious, learned, painful, religious, sincere, and ingenuous, the defense he
has made carries such an appearance of learning, antiquity, and truth with it,
that not only to himself (through too much love of his own) but to diverse
others also, it seems not subject unto any reply or refutation, so that,
this attempt of his adversaries in gainsaying, and that so confidently, fully,
and roundly, without any fear, fainting, or staggering, will doubtless be
censured, before it be pondered.

But if such thoughts can be brought to endure but the calling back a while, to
the reexamining of the grounds they are built on: the hollowness of them will
soon bewray it self. For be it granted, that sound learning and good
conscience is this man's praise and privilege above the most of his
fellow-champions (though this defense does so bear it self on the former,
that it gives small proof of the later) yet that does not free him from
dangerous deceit and error; especially in quaestions of this nature, which
have on the one side so much to sway with beside the cause, and on the other,
nothing but naked and despised truth. Neither can it be thought, that
impartial desire and search of truth, did so take up his mind in all this
enterprise, as that blinding praejudice had no place in it. Let the wise
consider and give sentence, whether he that was the son of a Bishop, the
servant or Chaplain of a Bishop, and that none of the best, the favorite also
of a third Bishop, whose consecration he desired to grace, one that sought
needily to raise himself in Bishops favor; whether such a man (I say) be
likely to preach and write in these causes even to the overflowing of passion,
with a mind so clear and free from prejudice!

It is the most charitable excuse that can probably be affoarded to diverse of
this guise, that such beams as those are do lie in their eyes, which hinder
their sight where the light is clear. Nay most of our climers do look so
strangely upon these questions, as if their eyes stood clean awry. Platerus
reports of a Germane soldjer, that being shot in the face, he had his eye so
turned, and his nose so peirsed, that always after his eye could see nothing
but thorough the passages of his nose. Just such a shot have these men received
from the world; all that they see is thorough their nose: and except they can
smell some profit or preferment by the way, their eyes will not serve them to
discern of any thing. I affirm not this of Doct. Downame, (though he among
other alehouse jests which he rudely breaks upon his adversary, does tell him
of seeing to his nose end) yet he has also plainly bewrayed, that he looked
through a false glass of his own imagination, when viewing the scriptures, he
spied such a Church and Bishop in them, as in his book he tells us of. The
Philosophers wright of certain colors, which they call intentionall, because
they are not such in deed as they seem to be: as when thorough a glass that
is red or green, the bodies adjoining do appear so also. Such a glass it was
without doubt that made this man to think that he saw an intentionall Church
and an intentionall Bishop, that were diocesan and provincial, such as the
Popish and English are, intentionally as he says, though not really and
truly. The Popish Doctors make too too much of intention in giving of orders
and other sacraments: yet that is an intention answerable to the words
pronounced. But now we are told of an intention that the state of all Churches
depends upon, which was not expressed by any words; but so far fecht and
hardly gathered, that it gives suspicion of such a trick as once was taught
Themistocles, by a man of Lacedemonia; that because he might not take the
tables away wherein a law was engraven, he would therefore turn them
upsidedowne, which was as good as to take them quite away? for when the
institution of a Church and Bishop which is found in the scriptures may not be
wholly removed, the next course is to give it a turn, by carrying the intention
to a contrary point. To such strange shifts they must needs be driven, which
will stretch the scriptures, as shomakers do^ leather, with their teeth, that
they may bring them to agree with humane inventions.

The vnlikelinesse of this devised intention, will easily appear to any, but
him which has been so accustomed to cathedral churches, that every thing
sounds in his head to the tune of the organs that he has heard there.

The papist, he tells us (just as the organs go at Rome) Boz. de jur. not.
and div. eccl. pot. l. 1. c. 18.
that the extent of a Bishops jurisdiction is not any ways limited, but by the
Popes appointment; his power of it self indifferently reaching over all the
world. Our prelatists, they would persuade us (to the tune of Canterbury) that
neither Church nor Bishop has his bounds determined by the Pope, nor yet by
Christ in the scriptures, but left to the pleasure of Princes, for to be cast
in one mowld with the civil state. Now the plain Christian finding nothing
but humane uncerteinties in either of these devises, he contenteth himself
with plain song, and knowing that Christ has appointed Christians to gather
themselves into such societies as may assemble together for the worship of God,
and that unto such he has given their peculiar Pastors, he (I say) in his
simplicity, calls these assemblies the churches of Christ, and these pastors
his Bishops, as for other intentions, extentions, and circumscriptions, which
come from men, he dares not receive them, for fear they should lead him from
that certainty he finds in Christ's institution, and leave him floating among
men's presumptions.

Besides, it must needs seem strange to a serious wellmeaning Christian, when
it shall be told him, as these Cathedral men will have it, that his pastor
whom he depends upon at home, has not the charge of his sowl committed unto
him from Christ, who appointed no Bishops nor Presbyters but Diocesan; that the
L. Bishop whom he never savv, is properly his pastor, the parish minister
being but the Bishops curate or vicegerent, and therefore standing no further
bound then as the Bishop appoints; so that by his permission he may be a
non-resident, or residing there he may only read divine service (so the cross
and surplus be not neglected) or howsoever he makes his agreement. Will not
this seem uncouth to simple men, who have always been told of a straighter
bond to tie their ministers unto duty? especially when they shall hear on the
other side, their own duty so strictly urged, of keeping to their minister
though he be but a reader, of paying al tithes to him even by Gods appointment,
though he never appointed him to whom they are paid? certainly if Apparitors
and Sumners brought not more terrible arguments from the carnal courts, then
D. Downame has from holy scripture to prove and persuade these paradoxes with,
there must a new generation arise, that knew not the L. nor what he has done
for Israel, before they would be embraced.

As for the scripture proofs which are gathered by him, the foundation or
principal cornerstone of them, which he deemed to lie in his text, that is
utterly dashed in the former part. Which being done, the rest that depends on
that, were ready to fall of themselves. Yet it has pleased his adversary, for
their more thorough scattering, in this second part to give every one his
several knock. A labor not necessary, were it not that the insolent
confidence wherevvith they are avouched, has I know not how amazed and scared
some vveak and fearful minds, but for the better bringing both of him and
them to themselves again, that course is taken, then which there is no shorter
or directer. For when the question is, what Church and Bishop is Apostolical,
the next way is, to search the scriptures, and hear what they say of
themselves, before we regard what fathers or councels do make them say. D.
Downham therefore has no reason to take it unkindely (which yet I know he
will) at his adversaries hand, that he has for evidence divided the house,
causing holy scriptures to go by themselves in this second part of his Reply,
remitting the voices of men to the last place, that they also may speak by
themselves. When divine and humane suffrages are shuffled together in one, the
simple hearer perceiving a sound which seems glorious to him, though they be
men that speak, yet he is presently ready to cry as the people did to Herod,
the voice of God and not of man. In confidence of this stratageme, the beggarly
ceremonies which we borrowed of Papists have been lately mainteyned as
Apostolical.

The method therefore which this writer has followed, is for the readers
good. His answers are such as will speak for themselves. Only this I may
forespeak, in their behalf, that if they seem (as in the former part I fear
they will) in the logical terms and forms of reasoning, to be over
troublesome for the common reader; the greatest part of that blame must rest
upon the defense, which they were bound to follow. For the defendant taking it
too much in scorn, that his logic (wherein of all other things he would be
thought to excel) was somewhat impeached by his Refuters analysis, be did so
vehemently strive to maintain that part of his credit, that his Refuter was
forced to give him that trial which such logicians trust to. The studious
reader will bear with this necessity, and seek out the truth, though it lie
among thorns.

THE SECOND PART. THE FIRST BOOK.
Chap. 1. Concerning the word, Church, handled by the Doct. in his Def. (lib.
2. cap. ^. sect. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.) of the 2. point of his fermon. viz. that the
Apostolical Churches were Dioceses properly and not Parishes.
IN the Doct. first section I find nothing but a vain Sect. 1. ad ^ect. 1. and
2. D.
floorish, and therefore will overpasse it without answer. In his second
section, he tells us, that at first, he intended only a light skirmish, and
therefore finding that his adversary brought a maine ba^tell into the field
against him, he thought good to bring in a new supply; before he put a new
life into his former arguments, to make them return upon his Refuter a fresh.
And for as much as he was to entreat of Churches, Parishes, and Dioceses, he
resolves first to begin with the names, that are diversely taken, and first
with the word Ecclesia, which he tells us, is in all places of the new
Testament (excep^^ng Act. 19.) appropriated to the companies of the faithful.
For whereas all mankind is to be divided into two companies; the one is the
world, which is the kingdom of darkness, containing many particular companies,
which are all the Synagogues of Satan: the other, the kingdom of God: this
later is called Ecclesia, signifiing a company of men as redeemed, so also
called out of the world, as the gr^ word imports. And so concludes with his
definition of a Church thus. Ecclesia therefore is a company of men, called out
of the world unto salvation by Christ; that is to say, more briefly, the
Church does signify a company of Christians. To all which, I (for my part) most
willingly subscribe, and from thence do infer, that (in the Doctors
understanding for the present) the 7. Churches of Asia (meant by the 7.
candlesticks, in his text) were none other, then so many companies of
Christians called out of the world, and divided from all the companies of
Infidels or Idolaters, which were Satan's Synagogues in any of the cities or
towns of Asia. And therefore he contradicts the truth, whereunto he now
bears The D. co^tradicteth the truth and himself.
witness; when he indeavoureth to persuade (page 36. 42. and 54.) that every of
those 7 Churches, contained in their circuit, the whole city and country
adjoining, although the Christians at that time, were but a very few in
comparison of heathen: And that the church or flock, which in those (and other)
cities, was committed to the care of the presbyters there ordained, was, not
only the number of Christians already converted, but the whole number also, of
such as were in time to be converted. Whereof we may see, sermon. page 66. 69.
and 88.

As for the Doctors table following in the next page, wherein he presents to
his Reader in one view, the diverse significations of the word Ecclesia,
reduced by him unto certain heads, his reader The D. table of ecclesia is
erroneous in some particulars.
has reason to think, that he is deceived in some particulars; and namely, 1.
in carrying Act. 2. 47. and Colos. 1. 24. unto the catholic company of Gods
elect, which is the invisible Church. For 1. all that were there and then (Act.
2.) called by the Ministry of the Apostles, were called to a visible
communion; and when their number was much increased, so many of them as dwelt
at Jerusalem remained members of that Church, as himself by and by
acknowledges, in referring unto it, Act. 5. 11. 2. And why should we not take
that Church whereof Paul was made a Minister (Col. 1. 24 25.) for the same,
unto which the rest of the Apostles were ordained, (1. Cor. 12. 28.) that is,
the catholic militant church, as himself understands the later place? 3.
And to let pass his referring Act. 8. 3. to the whole militant Church
dispersed, whereas it appears to be meant of that Church of Jerusalem, which
was not yet scatterd abroad, as verse. 1. 3. and. 4. compared do^ show; it is
4. more to be wondered at, that he should also carry to the catholic militant
church, that of 1. Tim. 3. 15. seeing he holds Timothy to be the Bishop of
Ephesus, affixed to it, to live and di^ there. And 5. (not to tell him how
those two agree not well together) how 2. contradictions in the Doct.
will he accord his understanding Mat. 16. 18. of the militant part of the
Church, with his own interpretation (p. 106. of this book) where he takes it,
for that universal congregation of Gods elect, which is spoken of Ephesians. 1.
22. and 5. 25. 6. As for those places which he says do definitely signify a
Church congregated into a Synod or Congregation; though by the line which is
drawn in his table, they seem to belong to the Church of a nation: yet I
guess, they should have been referred rather to the Church of a city or
country adjoining. And if so; then (although he leave it doubtful whether it
were a set or uncertain congregation; yet) he plainly acknowledges that by
these places (Act. 14. 27. 1. Cor. 11. 18. and 14. 23.) is meant the Church of
a city and country adjoining, gathered into one congregation; and then he
forgets himself in construing those words otherwise page 104. and 105.
following. Yea though a contradiction in the Doct.
he should now carry those places as the line draws them, to the Churches of
an whole nation; yet can he not escape the blame of an apparent contradiction,
in his understanding of Act. 14. 27; (both places of his book compared;)
besides a gross oversight, in making the Church spoken of Act. 11. 26. and 1.
Cor. 11. 18. etc. to be far more large then the church mentioned. 1. Cor. 1.
2. and Act. 13. 1. And 7. touching the places which he takes to signify
indefinitely any company of Christians etc. it is strange he should not see, as
definite a limitation of the place, and nation or province in Act. 9. 31. and
15. 41. and 1. These. 2. 14. as there is in the places forealleaged for the
Churches of a nation; Romans 16. 4. 2. Cor. 8. 1. Gal. 1. 2. 22. And no less
strange, that he which could discern a church definitely deciphered, Act. 14.
27. 1. Cor. 14. 19. 34. 2. Cor. 8. 23. 1. Tim. 5. 16. and 3. Ioh. 6. should not
discern as much in Act. 15. 3. 4. and. 18. 22. 1. Cor. 4. 17. 2. Cor. 8. 19. 1.
Tim. 3. 5. and 3. Ioh. 9. 10. And 8. lastly, since he refers the word
Churches Apoc. 2. 7. to the same signification, that he given unto it. ca. 1,
4, 11, 20. viz. definitely to the church of a city and country adjoining; how
is it that so soon after, he understands the same and the like (Apoc. 2. 7.
17. 23, 29.) etc. indefinitely of any company a contradiction in the Doct.
of Christians, not defining the place or society, whether of nation, or city
etc? And yet (as if he had a dispensation to define what the Holy Ghost has
not defined) hereafter he will tell us (page 57.) that by Churches in the
conclusion of each epistle (Apoc. 2. 7. 17.) etc. we may very well understand
the particular Churches, which were under the charge of every angel, to whom
the epistles are directed.

Thus much to his significations of the word Church, from which Sect. 2. to the
Doct. 3. sect. page 6. and 6.
(being so manifold as he says) he proceeds to show what is truly and
properly a Church upon earth. And first he says, that by warrant of the word,
every company of men professing the faith of Christ, is both truly a church,
and also a true church. But it is more then he can prove, as shall appear in
the examination of some particulars following. He adds, that as the whole
company of the faithful upon earth, is the true Church and spouse of Christ:
so also the company of Christians professing the true faith of Christ, in any
nation or part of the world, is to be termed by the name of a Church. The
former I may grant him; but touching the later, I must ask, what he means by
this phrase is to be termed? does it imply a necessity, or only a liberty and
convenience? If the first, what reason has he to debar us from reteyning the
phrase of speech, which himself confesses (in the former page) to be usual
in the new Testament, namely to call the Christians of an whole nation Churches
in the plural number? If the later; whence has he his warrant? since he has
not (in all his table) any one place which gives the name of a Church in the
singular number, to the faithful of an whole nation; save only that of Act.
7. 38. which is spoken of the Jewish people, whiles they were one congregation
(not yet divided into several Synagogues, or Church Assemblies) under the
guidance of Moses and Aaron in the wilderness. But he argues a p^ri in this
manner. The whole people of the Jews profissing the true religion were one
Church; though containing very many particular co^gregations or Synagogues:
(which were also so many Churches) Even so, the whole people of The D.
reasons inconseque^tly from the Church of the Jews to the Churches of the
gentiles.
England, professing (through Gods mercy) the true Catholic and Apostolic
faith, is to be called the Church of England. The consequence hereof might be
denied; for why should the form and constitution of the Jewish Church under
the law, be a more fit pattern for us to follow, then that form of
Church-constitution which was established under the Gospel, for the Christians
of all nations, both Jews and Grecians? Is there not more strength in this
consequence? The Christians of an whole nation are every where in the new
Testament, called Churches, and no where by the name of a Church in the
singular number: (as Churches of Asia, Macedonia, Galatia, Judea, Galile and
Samaria: 1. Cor. 16. 1. 19. 2. Cor. 8. 1. Gal. 1. 2. 22. 1. These. 2. 14. Act.
9. 31.) Ergo the Christians, which at this day, profess the faith of Christ in
England, are rather to be termed the Churches, then the Church of England;
especially seeing the number of Churches or congregations, is far greater (in
all likelihood) then the number of families was in any one nation in the
Apostles times. Notwithstanding, if the Doctor can (as he assaieth) parallel
the people of England, with the Jewish nation in that which properly made the^
as some think one church; he might take more liberty to include them al under
the name of the church of England. To effect this, unto that which some
allege (viz. that the Church of the Jews was one, because it was under one
high-Preist, who was a figure and therefore ceased) the Doctor frames a double
answer. 1. It is evident (says he) that it was one Church because it was one
people or common wealth, ruled by the same laws, professing the same religion;
both before there was one high-Preist, and after there were through corruption
more then one. 2. Neither was the high-Preist a type of Christ in respect of
his pre-eminence, and government over the Priests and people; but in respect of
his sacrifice and intercession for the whole people etc. To the first I reply
as follows. 1. It is evident, that the Christian Jews in Judea were one
people or commonwealth, ruled by the same laws and professing the same
religion: yet were they not one but many churches, as appears Gal. 1. 22. and
1. These. 2. 14. Act. 9. 31. Wherefore the Doctor takes that for an evident
truth, which is evidently The D. takes for truth that which is false.
false, in affirming that the Jewish Church was one because they were one
common wealth etc. 2. Neither do they affirm who hold the Church of the Jews
one, that their unity depended only upon the person of one high priest; but
upon Gods ordinance which combined them all (say they) in one body of a church;
in binding them to assemble at times appointed, unto one tabernacle or temple,
there to perform the parts of his worship in one uniform order, under the
oversight of one high priest, assisted by inferior Priests and Levites. But 3.
how will the Doctor prove, that they were (as he says) one commonwealth,
ruled by the same laws, before they had one high-preist? Is not the law of
their high preisthood, as ancient as any of the laws given by Moses, to settle
them in one form of a commonwealth? (Exodus 28. Levit. 8. cum seq.) And 4.
when through corruption there were two highpreists (Luc. 3. 2.) which executed
the office by their courses, one after another (as other priests did in their
order) was not the whole administration and exercise of the office in the hands
of that one, which was the high-preist for his year? (John 11. 49. with Act.
4. 6.) What great difference then of one high priest, between the time of this
corruption, and that which went before it?

To the the second, I answer, that it is an idle and feeble flourish, Sect. 3.
leaving the maine point of the objection untouched, and weakly performing what
he undertaketh. 1. It is observed before, that they who in this point concur
with the Doctor, viz. that the Jewish Church was but one, do hold their unity
to arise, from Gods ordinance, The D. makes an idle and feeble flourish.
who conjoined the whole nation in one society, not only under one
high-preist; but also in regard of one tabernacle at the first, and after that,
of one Temple, unto which they were all bound to resort 3. times in the year,
there to worship God in such sort, as he had prescribed. Which ordinances, viz.
of one high priest and of one tabernacle or temple for the whole nation) are
now ceased because they were figures and types, which had their end in Christ.
That their one high-preist was a figure of our one high-preist Jesus Christ, is
a truth so evident by the scriptures (especially Heb. 3 1. and 4. 14. and 5. 1.
5. and 8, 1, 2. and 9. 7. and 10. 1. 9. 20.) that the Doctor cannot but
subscribe to it. And it is no less evident, that the same Christ, was also
shadowed out by their tabernacle and temple. Heb. 8. 2. and 9. 8, 9, 11, 12,
24. Ioh. 2, 19, 21. In another respect, one tabernacle compact together of many
parts, and one temple composed of many stones, was a figure of that one
catholic church, which, as one temple or house, comprehends all the elect,
as living stones and parts of the building. 2. Cor. 6. 16. Ephesians. 2, 21. 22,
Heb. 3. 6. 1. Pet. 2, 5. And their assembling together in that one temple under
the Ministry of that one highpreist, was a lively type of the gathering
together of all the elect, unto the heavenly Jerusalem, to the general
assembly and Church of the first borne written in heaven, and unto Jesus the
Mediator of the new covenant (Heb. 12, 23, 24, 25) as sheep which come into
one fold under the oversight of one chief Shepherd, John 10. 16. Heb. 13.
20. 1. Pet. 2, 25. There is an apparent truth therefore in that which the
Doctor proposes as a frivolous allegation, viz. that these legal ordinances
were figures and therefore are ceased; especially seeing, it is held that there
is neither any one national Bishop answering in degree of office and
pre-eminence unto their one high priest; nor any one national temple unto
which the general body of the people do resort for the practice of Gods
evangelicall worship. And though the Doct. may perhaps, give allowance unto the
former; yet I suppose he will not easily acknowledge the later, to be fit for
the times of the gospel.

2. All that the Doctor says, is no more but this; he denies the high Priest
to be a type of Christ in respect of his pre-eminence and government over the
Priests and people. What means the Doct? neither in respect of pre-eminence?
no^ yet of government? belike then, he was a type of Christ; quatenus a Priest;
but not as a high Priest? yet as the scripture (Heb. 9. 7. 8. 11. 12. 24.) so
the D. acknowledges that the high Priest figured Christ; by his entrance alone
into the sanctuary, which none other Priest might do: how then can he deny
that he prefigured Christ in the respect of his pre-eminence which was peculiar
to his office? and why not also in respect of his government; over Priests and
people in things perteyning to God? what means else that name of great
high-Preist; and great Priest set over the house of God? Heb. 4. 14. and 10.
20. But 3. let us hear the D. reasons, why he thinks that the high-Preist
was no type of Christ in respect of pre-eminence or government. Forsooth then
had he as well as Melchisedeck, been a type of Christ's government and Kingly
office, as well as of the Preisthood: and consequently Christ might have been a
Priest of the order of Aaron as well as of Melchisedech. And a little after;
Christ's government apperteineth to his kingdom and not to his priest hood. As
if all pre-eminence and government were peculiar to princes, and inseparably
annexed to the kingly office? Surely if Christ have no pre-eminence nor
government in his Church, as he is our Prophet and Priest; but only as he is
King; then is he in these Offices considered a part, inferior to all other
Prophets and Priests that had their part in ecclesiastical government. But how
can he be a great Priest over the House of God (Heb. 10 21) and sit not only
as a King, but also as a Priest upon his throne; (Zach 6, 13) and yet have no
manner of government by his preistly function? Wherefore the government now
invested in Christ, might be (yea undoubtedly was) figured a part as well by the
ecclesiastical government of the high-preists succeeding Aaron; as by the
civil government of David and the Kings that sat on his throne. I conclude
then that the Leviticall high-preist was a type of Christ, in respect of his
ecclesiastical pre-eminence and government: although his principality and
regal government, joining in one with the preistly function, was rightly
figured (not in Aaron but) in Melchisedek. And, although the conjoyning of both
these preheminences together in Christ, was also praesigured, in Iehoshua The
D. pro poseth a weak consequence and a false antecedent to justify an untruth
an high priest of Aarons line, (Zach. 6, 11, 13.) yet it were gross ignorance
in the grounds of divinity from hence to infer, that therefore Christ might
have been a Priest after the order of Iehoshua (or Aaron) as well as of
Melchisedeck. It is apparent then, that the Doctor has proposed both a weak
consequence, and a false antecedent; to justify the untruth of his frivolous
exception.

Thus have we seen what success the Doctor has had, in his endeavor Sect. 4.
to prove, that the name of a Church in the singular number, is to be given
unto the people of an whole nation professing the faith, though divided into
many thousand particular Churches; He proceeds to tell us, that likewise the
Christian people of any City or country adjoining, whether that which we call
a province or diocese, though consisting of many particular congregatio^s; is
rightly termed a Church; as the Church of Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus, Smyrna,
Sardis, Philadelphis etc. I confess, that this latter, has a like right and
title, to the name of a Church, with the former: to wit, by the custom of
speech and humane ordinance; subjecting the particular Churches of an whole
country or nation, to one Diocesan or Provincial Bishop, or to one national
Synod: But I deny, that the scripture does give any more allowance unto the
one, then to the other: and I doubt not but his proofs for the later, will be
found as weak as the former. To draw his words before set down, into an
orderly form of reasoning; they must run in this fashion or the like. Such a
company of Christians as answers in Church-constitution to the Church of
Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus etc. mentioned in the Scriptures, is rightly termed
a Church: But the Christian people of any City and Country adjoining, though
consisting of many particular congregations, whether in a province or diocese
answers in Church-constitution to the Church of Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus
etc. mentioned in the scripture. Therefore, the Christian people of any City
and country adjoining, though consisting of many particular congregations,
whether in a province or diocese; is rightly termed a Church. Here the
assumption is a mere begging of the question, for he is The Doct. beggeth the
question
not ignorant, (as appears in the beginning of his 4. sect.) that they,
against whom he contendeth, do hold; that the visible Churches instituted in
the new testam^, were none other then parish asse^blies, co^teyning one
congregation: and yet he assumeth for granted (as if they were bound, to take
his word for sufficient warrant) that the Christians of an whole diocese or
province, distributed into many several congregations, or parish assembles,
do carry the same Church-constitution, with the first Apostolic Churches; as
of Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus etc. The contrary whereof may be gathered from
his own positions in his sermon and the defense thereof. For he affirms and
mainteyneth (sermon. page 18. and 22. and def. ^ib. 2. page 69. and 121.) that
parishes were not distinguished in the Apostles times. And as here (in the next
section, page 6) he acknowledges that at the first conversion of Cities, the
whole number of people converted, were able to make but a small congregation?
so he grants afterward (cap. 6. page 104.) that the most of the Churches,
during the time of S. Paul, did not, each of them, exceed the proportion of a
populous congregation. Yet in Paul's time they were perfectly constituted; seeing
(in his opinion) they had many of them, their Bishop and their Presbytery and
Deacons; which (as now he says page 7.) do make an accomplished or fully
constituted Church. Wherefore still there remains this difference, between
our diocesan and provincial Churches, and those Apostolic Churches mentioned
in the scriptures (as the Church at Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus and the like)
that congregations or parish assemblies, were not multiplied in them, as now
they are in ours; so that the name of a Church, given in the scripture to the
one, does not prove that it may be also rightly allotted to the other.

But proceed we on, the Doctor at length discendeth lower, and Sect. 5. ad
page 6.
says; That in like manner, the Christian people of any one town or village,
containing but one congregation (which we call a parish) is truly called a
Church, as perhaps that of Cenchreae. And further, that the company of
faithful in one family, does deserve the name of a Church, as has bin showed
(to wit in his table page 4. where he cites for that purpose Romans 16. 5. 1.
Cor. 16. 19. Colos. 4. 15. Philem. 2.) Adding, that to make any particular
Church of a whole nation, city and country, town, parish or family (family
I say, being alone, and not a part of a congregation: but an entire church or
parish by it self) to be a true visible Church, there is required (besides the
profession of the true faith, wherein the life and being of a Christian
consists) the Ministry of the word and sacraments, and eutaxie or some good
order of government: not that all governors are to be placed in every society
or church: but that the effect and benefit of the government is to redound to
every particular. What shall the reader say to all this? Does not the
considerate beholder hereof, evidently see an ho^ch potch, of some
self-conceited fancies, mingled with some The D. makes an hotch potch.
truths soundly grounded? Of the later sort, are these, viz. that the name of
a Church is given in the scripture both to the Christian people of one town or
village, containing but one congregation; and to the company of faithful in
one family. 2. that that which we call a parish, is such a company of Christian
people as make but one congregation. 3. and that the Church at Cenchrea was
such a parish. For though he speak here doubtfully (with a perhaps) yet
afterward he says certainly it was a parish. (page 104. following) 4. And
there is required (besides the profession of the true faith) the Ministry of
the word and sacraments and some good order of government, to make the
Christians of any city town or family a true visible Church. Of the former
sort are these supposals: ^cz. 1. that the people of an whole nation and city,
with country adjoining, may make one visible Church; as well as the company of
one town or family. 2. and that all Church government are not to be placed in
every visible Church. His meaning is (as afterward he shows) that a Bishop
and his presbytery may not be had in every parish: it suffices if they be
seated in the city, and that particular parishes in city and country, do
partake the effect and benefit of their government. Which he speaks (not
because he finds in the scripture, any such difference between Churches
seated in cities, and those that were in smaller villages; but) because he
would persuade the simple, (that will take his words for payment) that there
ought to be the like difference for Church-governme^t, which is for civil
policy between cities and other villages. Notwithstanding I deny not, but it
were as absurd to desire a Bishop and Presbytery in every parish (that is to
say, such a Lord Bishop as ours are, and such a Presbytery as are the Deane and
Prebends of our cathedral Churches) as to require for every village, a Major
and Aldermen, of that state, that they bear at this day in the city of
London. For we may well say with Musculus in Mat. 9. 35, Deus bone, quis
ferret sumptus tot equitum and reliquorum de comitatu episcoporum, si nostri
episcopi, quales eos habemus, episeopatus suos circuire cogerentur etc. Who
goes on and shows how base and unfitting a thing it is, for the great pomp
and state of Bishops at this day to visit poor villages; and how unable such
places are to bear the charge of their expenses in their visitations. No
merveile therefore if it be too great a but then for every parish to mainteyn
an whole college of cathedral Clercks, together with the retinew of the Lo.
Bishop. 3. But herein the Doct. deceives his reader, in conveying into his The
D. deceives his reader by a false conceit.
heart, this false conceit; that the state of the ancient Bishops, and their
presbytery, was no less unfitting (in regard of their pomp and charge) for a
country town; then their condition is, that pretend to be their successors at
this day.

Thus have we heard to what particulars he stretches the name Sect. 6. ad
^ect. 4. page 6. 7.
of a Church as it is used in the scriptures; attend we now to his conclusion.
All this (says he) I have the rather noted, because some having first strongly
co^ceited, that there is no true visible Church but a parish, have haled the
places of scripture, where ECCLESIA is mentioned to the confirmation of their
conceit etc, whereas in very truth, scarce any one testimony of such a
congregation of Christians, as we call a parish, can be alleged out of the
scriptures. I hope the indifferent reader will discern by the answer already
made, that the Doctor deserves to be censured in The D. deserves to be
censured in his own terms
his own terms; viz. that having first strongly conceited all the differing
forms of visible Churches which are now in use (scz. national, provincial,
diocesan, and parishionall) to be lawful; has haled the places of scripture,
where ecclesia is mentioned to the confirmation of his conceit: whereas in very
truth he cannot allege any one testimony out of the scripture, which gives
the name of a Church in the singular number; to such a multitude of Christians,
distributed into many particular assemblies, as we esteem a national or
provincial or diocesan Church. And as for parish assemblies which conteyne one
congregation, though he ca^ scarcely affoard us any one testimony, yet it is
already showed, that besides the Church of Cenchreae, (which he acknowledges
to be a parish) he grants that the most of the Churches in the greatest
cities during Paul's time, did not exceed a populous congregation. And in his
own table page 4. for a Church congregated into one congregation he gives us
all these scriptures, Act. 11, 26. The D. co^tradicteth himself.
and 14, 27. 1. Cor. 11. 18. 22. and 14. 5. 12. 19. 23. 28. 34. 35. 3. Ioh. 6.
which are so many testimonies to justify the congregations which we call
parishes. But we need not to go further then to his words ^mediately
following; for in granting that at the first conversion of cities, the whole
number of the people converted (being sometimes not much greater then the
number of presbyters placed amongst them) were able to make but a small
congregation: he does acknowledge every of the ancient Churches, to have been
at the first such, as we call parishes. That which he adds; viz. that those
Churches were in constituting and not fully constituted, till their number
being increased, they had their Bishop, or Pastor, their Presbytery and
Deacons; is but a renewing of his old suite, or begging of The D. renueth his
old suite o^ begging.
the question, if he understand by the Pastor or Bishop, such a diocesan
Prelate as he pleads for. And yet, if by constitution he mean, that form of
a Church, which makes it properly a Diocese, and not a Parish; he overturneth
the foundation, whereon he first builded his diocesan Churches in his sermon.
page 18. where he affirms, the apostolic Churches to be Dioceses properly,
because the Presbyters first ordained (when as yet they had no Bishop) were
trusted not only with the feeding of those few already converted; but also
with the care of indeavoring the conversion of the rest, both in city and
country; and therefore he applies to their Ministry, that comparision of a
little leaven, which by degrees seasoneth the whole lump, now used (in the
words following) to show what was the office of the Bishop and Presbytery.
Which point how true or false it is, and how fit or unfit for his purpose,
shall have fitter occasion to show in the answer to his 4. chapter, and to the
6. section of his third; where also I shall meet with that which follows,
touching the intent of the Apostles in planting Churches in cities; to wit,
that when parishes were multiplied (as was fit and necessary upon the increase
of Christians) in the cities and countries adjoining, they should all remain
under the government of one Bishop or superintendent seated in each city.
Mean while the reader may see, that the Doctor has little cause to boast of
his conquest, before he has put on his harness, for the conflict. Wherefore
he but blows the trumpet of insolent vanity, when he faith, avain blast of
the D.
that all the disciplinarians to the world shall never be able to show, that
there were, or ought to have been after the division of parishes, any more then
one Bishop and one Presbytery for an whole Diocese. He should remember that he
being the opponent in this controversy, the burden of proving lies on his
shoulders; and therefore it had been his part to have demonstrated from the
scripture, that which he affirms touching the intent of the Apostles in the
first constituting of churches: for one testimony from holy writ, to show,
that they intended and ordained; that the city Church should spread her wings
over the whole diocese, and cover under the shadow thereof all the people,
after their conversion and distribution into many parishes writings to justify
this assertion) will easily draw us to acknowledge, that diocesan Churches were
instituted by the Apostles. But til this be done, though he write ten volumes
more, and each of them ten times greater then this: yet he shall never be albe
to convince the conscience of his indifferent reader in the point which he
undertakes to prove; to wit, that the Apostolical Churches were properly (and
if not actually yet at least intentionally) dioceses and not parishes.

But though he cannot fortify his own assertion, yet will he assay Sect. 7. ad
sect. 5. page 7.
to throw down their hold that oppugn it, with this jolly Enthymem: The word
Eeclesia signifi^th (according to the usual phrase of the Holy Ghost:) any
company of Christians, whether great or small. Ergo the use of the word in the
scripture does not savor their conceit, which i^magine there is no true
Church, but a parish. Wherein he does neither rightly The D. in one Enthymem,
saniteth 2.
set down their assertion; nor assume a clear truth to refute it. The first
appears by H. I his table (page 6. of his book whereto the Doctor points) in
that, besides a particular congregation of Christians meeting for religious
exercises (which the Doct. calls a parish) he acknowledges the name of
Church to be given in the scriptures, unto some other societies, viz. the
Catholic milita^t Church on earth; the invisible society of Gods elect,
absolutely Catholic; the people of a particular congregation considered
without and besides their Ministers; and the company of a Christian family.
The truth is, he holds the only true visible Church, endowed by Christ with
the spiritual power of order and government in it self, to be none other then
a particular congregation. Neither is the truth hereof infringed, by that which
the Doctor assumeth: seeing the name of a Church given at large, to any company
of Christians in regard of their profession of the true faith, cannot prove the
power of Ecclesiastical government to belong unto every such company of
Christians, or to any other society, then one particular congregation. 2. But
he assumeth for a grounded truth, that The D. reasons ex non co^cessis.
which he shall never be able to justify: when he says that the word ecclesia
signifies (according to the usual phrase of the Holy Ghost) any company of
Christians, great or small. For he cannot show any one place of scripture,
where the word Church in the singular number is give^ to such a multitude of
Christians in an whole Nation Province or Diocese, as was distributed into many
particular congregations. Yea his own table (page 4.) shows that when the
scripture speaks of the Christians in an whole nation, it calls them
Churches plurally (and not by the name of a Church singularly) as Churches of
Galatia, Asia, Macedonia. 1. Cor. 16. 1. 19. 2. Cor. 8. t. Gal. 1. 2. And the
like phrase of Churches is used for the Christians of one province. Act. 9. 31.
the Churches had rest throughout all Judea, Galile and Samaria. Wherefore to
let the Doctor see how little the use of the word favors his conceit of
Diocesan Churches etc. I will this once tender him this argument. The word
ecclesia in the singular number, does no where note such a number of Christians
as is divided into many particular congregations in any diocese, nation or
province. Ergo, the use of the word in the scripture favors not their
concest which imagine, that the Christians of an whole Nation, Province or
Diocese, though distributed into many congregations may not with standing (by
the warrant of the word) be rightly termed one Church. Yea it serves, rather
to confute then to co^firm, the point now in question, viz. that the 7.
Churches (me^cioned in this text) were properly Dioceses and not Parishes.

As for his large discourse touching the diverse significations of these words,
Eeclesia, Paraecia, Diaecesis, commonly translated, Church, Parish, Diocese
(how they are taken in the ancient writers) I see not what advantage he can
make by it to conclude the question. The sum of all that he says, is this;
In ancient writers, Ecclesia, paroecia and Dioecesis, having refere^ce to a
Bishop, and his whole charge, do signify a Diocese and not a parish. Which how
true it is I cannot now enquire, unless I should digress into a new
controversy. For the present it shall suffice to observe, that though it were
granted to be true, yet it will not justify his assertion; that the 7. Churches
of Asia mentioned in his text, were properly dioceses, and not parishes; for in
the consequence of his reasoning (if he shall so argue) he beggeth the question
in two particulars, which he should The Doct. beggeth the question in 2.
particulars
(but cannot) make evident, by good demonstration: viz. that in his text, the
word Ecelesia, has reference to one Bishop and his charge; and that it
carries the same signification (for the singularity or plurality of particular
congregations comprised within it) which it does in those ancient writers whom
he cites. Leaving therefore this whole discourse, and overpassing also his 2.
Chapter as apperteyning to another question, (viz. how ancient that
distribution of Dioceses and Parishes is, which in later ages preveiled) and
passing by his whole 3. Chapter concerning the 7. Churches being handled in the
former part, lib. 3. I will now proceed to his 4. Chapter and the argument
there concluding, that the first Apostolic Churches were properly Dioceses;
because the presbyters ordained, by the Apostles were appointed but to whole
cities and countries, that is, to dioceses.

Chap. 2. containing an answer to the D. argument to prove that the first
Apostolical Churches were properly dioceses not parishes, because the
Presbyters ordained by the Apostles, were appointed not to parishes but to
dioceses. Sect. 1. ad sect. 1. cap. 4 of the D. page 64.

We have already heard in the former part, how feebly the D. argues to prove
the 7. Churches of Asia, to be great and ample city together with the
countries adjoining; when he says, it cannot be denied, but they were such
because our Savior, writing to the Churches of Asia numbreth but 7; and names
the principal, some whereof were Mother cities. He adds imediately after,
For it is evident that the Apostles when they intended to convert any nation,
they first preached to the cheise cities thereof. Wherein, when through Gods
blessing, they had converted some, their manner was to ordeyne Presbyters,
hoping by their Ministry to convert not only the rest of the city but also
the countries adjoining, so many as did belong to God. Which words the Refuter
(answ. page.) carried as the 2. reason to conclude the point before questioned:
because (finding the former argument to be so obscure and unfitting as it is
before showed to be) he judged it in effect all one to say, It cannot be denied
but the 7. Churches, were great and ample cities etc. for it is evide^t that
the Apostles in the chief cities of any nation, where they had converted some
to the faith, did usually ordeine Presbyters, by their Ministry to convert the
rest of the city and country adjoining: and to transpose the sentences in this
manner: It is evident that the Apostles in the chief cities of every nation,
where they had converted some to the faith, did usually ordeine presbyters etc.
Ergo, it cannot be denied but the 7. Churches were great and ample Cities etc.
But the D. says, his analysis mistake^, to say no worse, as if he could have
justly laid an heavier fault upon his Refuter; if he had not favored him. And
in deed, he loadeth him with a fouler imputation, when (after in the same page)
he says that (in digesting his words before expressed, into a connexive
syllogism) he framed a proposition for the nonce to cavil withal. A rash
censure, the less to be regarded, because the Refuter may safely appeal to
Gods own tribunal, who knows that he dealt syncerely; and was led by the
connection of both sentences to conceive the meaning to be such as is before
showed. But he should (says the Doctor) have looked to the end of that which
he made the 3. sect. where he should have found this to be the maine conclusion
of all that follows the first argument (concerning the 7. Churches) to that
place. viz. that the Presbyters in the Apostles times, were not appointed to
parishes but to dioceses. But he thought it needless to carry the word for so
far; when there was need of help to prove the point aforegoing.
Notwithstanding, let him walk in his own way, I doubt not, but to make it
appear, that the argument and the prosyllogismes thereof framed by himself,
do discover both his own mistaking of his Analysis (to say no worse) and the
weakness of his arguing, as well now in this defense, as before in the sermon
itself. The maine conclusion to which he sends us, has these words (sermon.
page 18. lin: ult. etc. The Presbyteries therefore in the Apostles times, were
appointed, not to feverall parishes, but to whole cities, and the countries
annexed, viz. to dioceses; that both they might convert them; and attend and
f^ed them being converted. The conclusion is long (as you see,) and unfoldeth
in it sundry propositions; which since the Doctor has not rightly
distinguished, I will presume (though I look to be required with shrewd words
for my labor) to propose to the view of the Reader in this manner. The
conclusion shows to what the Presbyteries in the Apostles times, were
appointed. 1. Negatively; They were not appointed to several parishes. 2.
Affirmatively; they were appointed to whole cities and the countries annexed.
Which is first explayned, viz. to dioceses. 2. amplified by a twofold end of
their appointment. 1. that they might convert them. 2. that they might attend
and feed them being converted.

So then it appears, that in the words of his sermon before Sect. 2.
going page 18. 19. we are to expect the proof of these. 5. points (for else he
stretches his co^clusio^ beyond the bounds of the premises, which should
infer it) viz. 1. the Presbyteries ordained by the Apostles, were not
appointed to several parishes. 2. they were appointed to whole cities and the
countires adjoining. 3. those cities and countries were Dioceses. 4. one end of
that their appointmet, was to co^vert etc. 5. the other end was to attend and
feed the co^overted. But of these 5. propositio^s, he co^cealeth wholly in this
defense the third and last. The former it seems he took for granted; and
therefore now coupling the two first together, he sets them down in this
manner. The Presbyteries ordained by the Apostles, were not appointed to
parishes but to dioceses; the other was wisely concealed, because there is not
one word in his sermon to make it good; though it be of the greatest moment for
his purpose: In deed, he had said before, that the Presbyters were in common to
attend the whole flock converted, feeding them with the word and sacraments;
and to labor the conversion of the residue etc. but how great a difference
there is between these two ends of the Ministry of the Presbyters, ordained
by the Apostles; and those that his conclusion mencioneth; it is easy for the
simplest of his Readers to discern, Whether the change were made unwittingly,
or of purpose to deceive, I will not determine, neither will I press him for
resolution of the doubt, unless he please. It is the analysis of his
conclusion and all that apperteyneth thereunto, which we now look after. His
co^^lusio^ (whatsoever it was at the first) is now co^prized in this copound
axlome before delivered. The Presbyteries ordained by the Apostles were not
appointed to parishes but to dioceses; which he makes the antecedent of a
Enthymem, to infer the principal question (touching diocesan Churches in
general) viz. Therefore the Churches endued with power of ecclesiastical
government, were not parishes but dioceses. The Antecedent (he says) is proved
by two arguments; the first whereof (not to speak now of the proposition which
he omitted) lies in this sentence. The Presbyteries ordained by the Apostles,
were appointed for whole cities and countries thereto belonging, to labor so
far as they were able, the conversion of all that belonged unto God. And to
the confirmation of this he refers all that which his Refuter carried an
other way. For it is evident that the Apostles, when they intended to convert
any nation, first preached to the chief cities thereof etc. to the words,
neither were the parishes. Which half persuades me, that he has borrowed his
first argument for the proof of the Antecedent, from the second and fourth
points (before noted to be couched) in that conclusion delivered in his sermon.
For other wise his analysis cutteth the^ off from the co^clusio^ as superfluous
branches; and makes his first argument to be Cryptically inwrapped under the
confirmation thereof. Now if it were borrowed thenee; then the words following
(sermon. page 18. Neither were the parishes distinguished etc) in all equity
should be, not a second argument, to confirm his first antecedent; but rather
a new prosyllogisme to justify the general proof thereof. To conclude,
whencesoever he derive it; there is so small a difference between the Medius
terminus of his first argument, with both the prosyllogismes set to uphold it:
and the words which in his second argument are of greatest force (as he says
page 70. of this defense) to prove that the persbyteries were appointed to
Dioceses: that they are little better (when he has made the best that he can
of them) then a beggarly repetition of one thing, or a proving of the same by
the same. So that we may well think, if his Refuter should The Doct. proves
idem per idem.
have contrived his arguments so as himself has done, he would have been as
ready as now he is to charge him with mistaking his Analysis. But let him make
the best advantage of his own Analysis; and let us try the valor of his
syllogismes, which he profereth to our Sect. 3.
view. And first of that Enthymeme, which concludes the principal question in
this manner;

The Presbyteries ordained by the Apostles, were appointed not to parishes but
to Dioceses. Therefore the churches endued with power of ecolesiasticall
government were not parishes but Dioceses. This consequence, says he, the
Refuter grants, ingranting the connexive proposition of the Syllogism, which
he fremeth, page 58. of the answer. If he did not, it might easily be
confirmed, by adding the assumption. viz. To visible Churches endued with power
of ecclesissticall government, the Presbyters ordained by the Apostles were
appointed. Lo here the D. reasoning; now what if the adding of this
assumption, utterly marreth the fashion of his argument? has he not then spent
his labor well to discover his own heedlesse oversight, to say no worse? for
had he well perused the parts, he might have found 5. terms in his syllogism.
viz. 1. The D. has 5. germes, in one syllogism.
Presbyteries ordained by the Apostles. 2. appointed to Dioceses not to
parishes. 3. appointed to visible Churches endued with power of ecclesiastical
government. 4. the Churches (themselves) endued with such power. 5. Dioceses
and not Parishes. To redress this gross fault; if so simple a Scholar as the
Refuter might presume to give any direction, to so great a Clerk as Mr. D. me
thinks he should have done well, to have exchanged the Antecedent of his
Enthymeme, with some Proposition in sense equivalent that might have yielded
the same predicatum, which his conclusion carries, as thus; The Churches, to
which the Presbyteries ordained by the Apostles were appointed, were properly
dioceses (such as ours) and not parishes. Or thus; Dioceses (such as ours) and
not parishes, were the whole and only charge of the Presbyteries ordained by
the Apostles. The assumption then to be added, must be one of these; viz. The
Churches which in the Apostles times were endued with the power of
ecclesiastical government were those unto which the Presbyteries ordained by
them, were appointed. Or thus; The Churches which the Apostles endued with
power of ecclesiastical government were the whole and only charge of those
presbyteries which they ordained. So the conclusion would naturally flow from
these premises, to wit; Therefore, the Churches which the Apostles endued (or
were endued in their times) with the power of ecclesiastical government, were
Dioceses properly (such as ours) and not parishes; which of these soever he
shall choose; the proposition is to be refused, as utterly false. Against the
Assu^ption (whether former or later) I have nothing to except. This only I
say, if the Doctor shall dislike the later, as too narrowly limited by those
words, whole and only charge. I must then tell him, his syllogism is also
herein deceitful and faulty; that his proposition speaks of an appointment,
differing from that which he intends in his Assumption; the feeding and
governing of the visible Churches being but a part (yea the least part) of the
charge of those Presbyteries; in as much as he supposes, they were appointed
also, to an other more principal work, viz. to labor the conversion of such
as were yet enemies to the faith and not members of the Churches. But if he
will acknowledge the visible Churches, to be the whole and only charge of the
Prebyteries ordained by the Apostles; then the premises of his syllogism do
make war, the one against the other. For the assumption so understood,
directly crosses the assumption and the fortifications thereof, which are
(page 65.) fitted to confirm the Proposition or Antecedene of his maine
argument; and consequently, through their sides, it pearceth the heart of the
proposition itself. For if the visible churches endued with power of
ecclesiastical government, were the whole and only charge of the presbyteries
ordained by the Apostles; then were they not appointed for the conversio^ of
the rest of the city and country: neither was that work the end or motive
that swayed the Apostles to ordeyn them. So that his proposition (which
affirms that those presbyteries were appointed for whole Dioceses) has
nothing to support it.

Moreover, if he shall dislike the limitation which I have added to his
proposition, restreyning it to such Dioceses as ours are, or at least to such
Dioceses, as were also Churches: he is to know that his consequence is naught,
and such as of which he has no grant from his refuter to boast of. For
unless it be presupposed, that the Dioceses, to which he says, the
Presbyteries were appointed, were Churches, and like to our diocesan Churches;
his argument will be deceitful also in a second respect; to wit, because his
antecedent and the conclusion speak, not of one kind of Dioceses; but of such
as differ toto genere, (if the one be churches and the other not so) or at
least in specie, if they be Diocesan Churches unlike to ours. For (as is
heretofore noted) Diocesan Bishops like to ours, do require the Churches where
of they are Bishops, to be dioceses, (or diocesan Churches) like to ours. This
memorandum therefore being premised (that by Dioceses in his proposition, we
are to understand Diocesan Churches like to ours) we are come to examine the
first of his two arguments, which himself frames to prove the proposition
before denied in manner and form following;

They who were appointed to whole cities and countries to labor so far at
Sect. 4.
they were able; the conversion of all that, belonged to God; were appointed to
Dioceses, and not to Parishes. But the Presbyteries ordained by the Apostles
were appointed for whole cities and countries thereto belonging, to labor so
far as they were able, the conversion of all that belonged to God.

Therefore the Presbyteries ordained by the Apostles, 3: 44 PM 5/7/2011 were
appointed not unto Parishes, but unto Dioceses, that is, to Diocesan Churches,
like to ours. This Proposition, says he, I omitted as taking it for granted.
Be it so; yet since he saw, that his Refuter esteemed the consequence weak of
that argum: he framed to a conclusion somewhat differing, he might well have
been jealous of his rejecting this proposition also. For since the Presbyters
of which he speaks were planted in the chief cities of such a nation, as the
Apostles desired to co^vers; what hinders but the countries annexed might be
Provinces, or rather whole Nations, and not Dioceses properly? Moreover, how
can they be said to be appointed to Diocesan Churches such as ours (for to
speak of other Dioceses, that are estranged from Christianity, is to rove far
wide from the question) who are appointed unto cities and countries, (not to
feed and govern them, as all Churches are by their Pastors; but) to labor
their conversion that yet remained Pagans and Infidels? To provoke him
therefore in his next defense, to undertake the proof of this proposition
which he now takes for granted, I first contradict it thus; They who were
appointed to whole cities and countries, for the working out of the conversion,
were not set over Diocesan Churches such as ours: Then I take his own
assumption, with the help thereof to conclude; the contradictorie of his former
proposition, in this manner. The Presbyteries ordained by the Apostles were
appointed to whole cities and countries, for the working out of their
conversion. Therefore, the Presbyteries ordained by the Apostles, were not set
over Diocesan Churches, such as ours. This our proposition opposed against his,
may be fortified by this Enthymeme. Those whole cities and countries whose
people are generally so ^stranged from the faith, that their conversion must be
labored, are not diocesan Churches like to ours. Therefore, neither they, who
were appointed over such cities and countries, set over diocesan Churches such
as ours. The Antecedent is a truth so apparent to all the world, that it were
madness to contradict it: And the consequence is such as (I verify think) no man
of common sense, will ever call it into question. As for the Refuters exceptions
against the proposition which he had framed for an other purpose; they are (as
the Doctor says) eavils not worth the refuting; and yet (to show his valor)
he will needs have a fling at them, though with shame to himself. For first,
for want of just matter of blame, he forgeth a false calumniation in in saying,
That, his Refuter absurdly eavilleth with him, as if he had said that, all in
the city and country were in S. John's time converted. For the fumme of the
first exception is nothing but this, that the Apostles ordained Preseyters for
such an end (as he supposes) yet it follows not that the Churches were great
cities and the countries adjoining. And he backeth it with this reason, that,
the seed of the word in many places was thick sown, but came thin up, and the
heat of perseeution at, that, time, burnt up the zoale and profession of many.
Which if it were too weak to justify the exception, why does he not take notice
of confute it? thinks he, his unpartiall readers will take it for a
sufficient refutation, to say, it is a cavil not worth the refuting? The
second exception is of more moment; because it serves also to weaken the
proposition of the Doctors own argument before set down. For the ordeyning of
Presbyters for whole cities and countries, to labor the conversion of all that
in those places belonged to God; can never prove that they were appointed to
the care and charge of diocesan Churches; unless there be a necessity that
all which in time were to be converted by their Ministry, should be and
remain members of the same Church with them. It shall not be amisle therefore
to stay a while upon the examination of that which the Refuter has said, to
justify his denial; and the Doct. to mainteyn the affirmation, of this
necessity. Sect. ^.


In defense of the negative, it was alleged (answ. page 57) that it is very
likely if not certain, that they of Cenchrea received the gospel from
Corinthe; (for Cenchtea was the port of Corinthe, and not far from it, as
Radcliffe or Lymehouse to London) yet was it a distinct Church from that of
Corinth; for it is called the Church of Cenchrea. Romans 16. 1. The Doctor in his
reply, first lays down his own opinion touching this matter, and then
indeavoreth to wrest that example of the Church of Cenchraea, out of his
refuters hands. His own opinion (or rather definitive sentence,) quast ex
cathed a and satis pro imperis) he delivers in this manner. I say, that they
whose Ministry was intended for the conversion of the city and country; to
their care and charge, both for the first conversion of them, and government of
them being converted, the city and country belonged. And the Doctor only
says it, and dares the Refuter or any of his unlearned associates, contradict
it? No verily; they will rather assent to him so far, as truth and reason
grounded on the truth of Gods word, will permit them, that is kat ^^ and in
parr, but not aploos and in general; for it is most true, that the Apostles
and Evangelists whose Ministry was intended, either to begin, or to bring
forwards the conversion of any city and country, had the care and charge of
the people in those parts, as well for the governing of them whom they did
convert, as for the laboring of their conversion at the first. But how long?
and how? was it for a perpetuity, or for a time only, till they might be
furnished with their proper Ministry? And when the faith spread it self from
any of those chief cities which first enterteyned it; into the towns
adjoining (and that with such increase that the number of believers in those
places, were sufficient to make two or more Churches or congregations) did they
all remain still parts of one Church; and was it esteemed by such as effected
their assemblies? Here lies the pith and marrow of the present controversy;
wherefore if the Doctor does resolutely hold the affirmative, he should have
plainly contradicted the refuter, and said, there was a necessity, that all
which were brought to the faith, in any city and country adjoining, by the
labors of any appointed for their conversion, should remayn (though never so
many or far dista^t) members of the citie-Church, which first enterteyned the
gospel. Perhaps he thought his readers would expect some better proof then
his bare word, I say it, to conclude this necessity. And it was not easy for
him to yield any sound reason, for the justifying of such an assertion; in
wisdom therefore he judged it better, to say and affirm that which (though it
beleffe pertinent, yet) might seem more reasonable (viz. that such as were
converted by their labors, that were appointed to endeavor their conversion,
should submit themselves to be governed by them) and in stead of yiedling any
pregnant demonstration to confute his Refuters exception, to make a show of
removing that which was alleged by him. To this purpose he adds; that
though Cenchrea be called a Church, yet was it not such a Church as we now
speak of, endued with power of ecclesiastical government, but subject to the
^ur^sliction of the Church of Corinthe. Thus he faith; but has he any other
reason, then such as before, (I say it) to show the subjection of Cenchrea to
the Church of Corinthe? No surely; for though he often reiterateth this
affirmation (page 46. 105. 129.) yet his best proof is, most certeynly so it
was. I doubt not therefore, but with the indifferent reader the phrase of the
holy Ghost, equalling the believers in Cenchrea, and those in Corinth with the
same name; (calling the one the Church in Cenchrxa, and the other the Church in
Corinthe. Romans 16. 1. 1. Cor. 1. 2.) will argue our assertion to be more
probable, (when we say, they were distinct Churches, and alike endued with
power of ecclesiastical government) then his denial that has no other
confirmation then I say it, or so it was; for what authority has he, either
to subordinate one to another, or to confine in one ecclesiastical body, those
societies which Gods word makes distinct Churches?

Thus much for his Proposition; his Assumption comes now to Sect. 6. 2d page
65.
be examined, which he says is confirmed by two arguments; the one, the end
intended by the Apostles in appointing Presbyters in cities, which was the
conversion of the nation, for which themselves first preached in the chief
cities; the other is the motive, their hope by the Ministry of the Presbyters
placed in the city to convert them which belonged to God, both in city and
country; grounded on the force of the Gospel, testified by our Savior, Math.
13. 13. Thus he says, but why contriveth he not his two arguments into. 2.
distinct syllogismes, that we might see the strength of each of them a part?
Nay, why does himself combine them in one connexive proposition in this
manner? page 66: If the Apostles intending the conversion of the nation, as they
began themselves to preach in the chief cities, so they placed Presbyters to
the same intent; hoping by them to convert, both city and country; then were
they appointed and it was their duty, to labor the conversion of all
belonging to God both in city and country. For if the assumption be added to
this proposition, is it not as large as that which his Refuter framed and
divided into 3. parts, (viz. 1. that the Apostles intending to co^vert any
nation, first preached the Gospel in the chief cities thereof. 2. and having
converted some there usually ordained Presbyters. 3. by their Ministry to
convert the rest of the city and country. Why then should he not take home to
himself those words of his, wha^ cannot he bring within the compass of his
syllogismes? 2. Moreover, since he says, that the last of the 3. parts
distinguished by his Refuter; is the assumption it self, and inferred on the
two former; as he sets them down; does he not confound the assumption, with
one (at least if not with both) of the arguments which should confirm it? for
if a man should say, that the D. preached his sermon, to enlarge his favor
with his good Lord, the Bishop of B. and W. and the rest of the Prelates; who
would not understand such a speech to carry this meaning, that the very end
whereat he aimed in his preaching, was the enlarging of his favor etc. And
that an hope to gain more grace with them moved him to undertake the work? If
then himself, or any friend of his should deny and contradict this speech;
would he not take him for a trifler, (or rather a slanderer) that should make
his boast, he could prove it with. 2. arguments, and yet had nothing else to
say, then in a change of phrase, to repeat the same thing in this manner: The
enlarging of his favor with his good Lord the Bishop etc was the very end
which he proposed to himself when he preached. And he hoped by this means to
gain more grace. Therefore (doubtless) he preached this sermon to enlarge his
favor etc. Yet such (and no better) are the Doct. arguments, when he proves
that the Presbyteries were planted by the Apostles in Cities, to labor the
conversio^ of the cities and countries adjoining; because their conversion was
both the end intended by the Apostles; and the thing they hoped by their labor
to effect.

3. But perhaps, there may be found (upon due examination) some greater light,
or help for the clearing of the assumption in question, then can at the first
blush be discerned in the arguments: as they are laid down. It shall not
therefore be amiss to compare them a part, with the point whereunto they are
referred, and to avoid blame (if it be posible) I will stick close to the words
of his own connexive proposition before delivered; and derive from thence, the
Antecedent of each Enthymeme. First then (from the end intended by the
Apostles) he argues thus. The Apostles intending the conversion of any nation,
as they began themselves to preach in the chief Cities; so they placed
Presbyters to the same intent. Ergo, those Presbyters (or Presbyteries) were
appointed to labor the conversion of all that belonged to God both in city
and country. The pith of the argument, lies in the later branch of the
antecedent. viz. the Apostles placed Presbyters in the chief Cities, for the
conversion of the whole nation. And it seems to be fortifyed in this manner.
The Apostles placed Presbyters to the same intent, for which themselves
preached in the chief cities. But they preached there with an intent to
convert the whole nation. Therefore they also placed Presbyters in the Chief
Cities for the conversion of the whole nation.

To begin with the conclusion which is the Antecedent of the D. first argument,
if there were an evident truth in it, it would serve (if need were) to
contradict, the antecedent of the maine argument (propounded sect. 4) in this
sort; The Presbyters (or Presbyteries) ordained by the Apostles, were placed in
chief cities for the conversion of the whole nation. Ergo they were appointed
for whole provinces or rather nations and not for dioceses properly. The same
will be concluded much more fully, from the proposition of the last syllogism,
and the instances that he gives (page 66) to prove the assumption thereof. (For
if) The Apostles placed Presbyters in chief Cities, to the same intent, for
which themselves began to preach there: (If also) Paul's intent in preaching and
staying at Corinth an whole year and 6 months, and 3. years at Ephesus, was
to convert, (not the diocese of Corinth or Ephesus only, but) the whole nation
of Asia, and Achaia (Then it will follow that) Paul in placing Presbyters at
Corinth and Ephesus (did not appoint the for the^ for the diocese of Corinth or
Ephesus, but for the whole country of Achaia and Asia; to labor as far as
they were able, the conversion of all that belonged to God in those parts.

To the like purpose, his 2. argument tends, when (from the Apostles hope) he
reasons thus. The Apostles hoped by those Presbyters which they placed in
chief Cities, to convert both city and country, (And this their hope was
grounded on the force of the gospel testified by our Savior, Math. 13. 53.)
Ergo, those Presbyters were appointed (and it was their duty) to labor the
conversion of all, that in city and country belonged to God. For unless
their hope, (the motive that guided their intention) should be absurdly
restreined into a far narrower compass, then the end which they intended: the
country whose conversion he incloseth within their hope, and so allotteth to
the charge of the Presbyters, as the lump that was to be leavened by their
Ministry, must be the whole nation and not so small a portion as one Diocese.
But as I purpose not to dwell upon this advantage; so I need not use many words
to remove the ground of both his arguments, since they have no other
foundation, then his own wavering fancy, which does not well accord with
itself. It is time I should compare the Refuters answer and his defense
together, to see whether his second thoughts have any more weight of reason in
them then the first.

It can never be showed (says the Refut: answ. page 57.) neither may it be
reasonably thought that it was any part, of those Presbyters proper Sect. 7. ad
p. 66
duty, to labor the conversion of the residue, either in city or country.
For howsoever we deny not, but that it belonged to them, both as Christians to
use all opportunity of winning to the faith; and as Ministers to preach to the
heae^ also, if they were present in their co^gregatio^s: yet it was their
office to attend on the flock, whereof the holy Ghost had made them overseers,
Act. 20. 28. And not like Apostles or Evangelists to employ themselves in the
conversion of them that were no Christians. By these few words (says the
Doctor) the deep wisdom of the parish disciplinarians, may easily be sounded.
1. they conceive that Churches in the first constitution of them, when there
were but a few converted, and before parishes were distinguished, were in the
same estate, that now they are being fully constituted etc. 2. that the flock
over which the Presbyters were set, was only that number of Christians already
converted etc. 3. that their proper office was to attend them only which were
already converted; and not to labor the conversion of the rest, etc. The last
of these I confess is plainly averred by the Refuter, and the second by
consequence employed. But the first has no shadow of any foundation in his
words; so that the Doctor his deep wisdom has drawn it (I suppose) out of
his own drowsy imagination. And yet if it be an erroneous conceit, why bends
he not the stroke of some one reason or other against it? Yea how will the D.
free himself from error; seeing the refuter has nothing in his whole answer,
that does more savor of that conceit, then these words of the Doct. (Def. page
54.) that the circuit of the Church was the same, when there were few, and
when there were many, yea when all were Christians) and those in his sermon page
25. that upon the division of parishes, there happened no alteration to the
state of the Bishop.

2. Moreover, if the second be an error, whose hand is deepest in it? whether
the Refuter who alleges Act. 20. 28. to show that the office of Presbyters
was to attend that flock, whereof the H. Ghost had made them overseers; or the
Doctor who cite^h the same scripture (sermon. page 18.) to justify this speech,
that the Presbyters were to attend the flock converted, feeding them with the
word and sacraments. Very likely then, he supposed it to be a truth, A
contradiction in the Doct.
that the flock over which they were set, was only that number of Christians;
which were already converted. And he had good reason so to judge, because that
flock only was the visible Church, which then professed the faith of Christ at
Ephesus. But now he sees it is an error so to conceive; because our Savior
calle^h the elect not converted, his sheep, Ioh. 10. 16. and the L. in Corinth
had much people, when but a few were as yet converted. As if men could give or
take, the charge of such a flock or people, as they neither know nor could be
taught to discern, by any notes that come within their understanding; because
the Lord (who knows all that he has chosen, and appointed in time to call;
and to whose cies, things to come are as manifest, as things present) does
entitle his elect, though yet unborn, or at least unconverted, by the name of
his sheep or his people.

3. As touching the third point, the Refuter has plainly discovered his
judgment, how far he grants it, and in what respect he denies it, to be
the duty of Presbyters, to labor the conversio^ of Infidels. For besides the
common duty of Christians, to use all opportunity for the winning of them to
the faith, they are (as he faith) to preach unto them, if they will come into
their assemblies; but to employ their labor in traveiling to and fro in any
country or diocese, to preach unto them, where they find any concourse of
people: this he denies to be any part of the Presbyteriall function; and
judges it rather to be the work of an Apostle, or Evangelist. Which plain
dealing of the Refuter requires in equity the like at the hands of the Doctor,
by showing how, and in what course holds it their duty, to labor the
conversion of infidels; whether by the like traveil and employment, that the
Apostles and Evangelists, undertook in places where the gospel had not yet
any entrance, or whether in any other fashion, that the Ref: apprehended not?
But he (I will not say craftily) concealeth from his Reader, the parts of his
Refuters distinction; and (as if he had simply denied them, any way to labor
the conversion, of any that were allenated from the faith) he rests on this
trifling reply, as though, says he, the Apostles intended by their Ministry
the conversion: and salvation of no more, but those few that were at first
converted. And then for the better manifestation of their wisdom (he should
have said of his own inhability to make good his assertion) he opposes them
with a few questions, which yet are more then needed; but let us hear them;
and they are these;

1. Whether the Presbyters ordained by the Apostles were not Ministers of the
word? 2. whether they were not many, in some places more, in some fiwer; yea
sometimes as many as those who were before converted? Act. 19. 6. 3. whether,
they being many, were only to attend that small number of converts? 4. whether
the Apostles in ordeyning many, intended not the conversion of more then those
few? 5. whether it was not their office, to labor their conversion? 6. If not,
how they were to be converted? 7. Nay, if they did not labor, how were they
converted? Of these 7. the. 3. 4. and 5. might have been spared, seeing they are
already answered. viz. that the conversion of city and country did not belong
to their office, as any proper work thereof (and therefore was not intended by
the Apostles in ordeyning them) otherwise then is before expressed. The rest
also might have been overpassed (since he knows his Refuters mind therein)
save that he would closely intimate unto his Reader (as it seems) two
arguments to justify his own assertion; for the answer which himself has
given to the 2. first may argue for his purpose in this manner, The Presbyters
ordained by the Apostles were all Ministers of the word, and were many in each
Church, yea in some places as many, as those that were besides converted:
wherefore it is probable that the Apostles intended by their Ministry, to
convert the rest, and that it was a duty proper to their office, to labor
their conversio. How true it is, which in the first place he avoucheth, I will
not here debate; it belongs to another treatise; the later part of his
Antecedent imports that the Apostles ordained many Ministers for each Church,
though the number of converts were so small, that in some places it scarce
exceeded the number of Presbyters. A matter so unlikely, that if the consequent
annexed, must hang in suspense, till he has made good proof of this
assertion; I sear it will weary the dearest of his friends, to wait for the
proof thereof. All that he has yet found worth the mencioning, is that the
Evangelist reports, Act. 19. 6. 7. viz. that Paul having found at Ephefus
certain Disciples (about 12. in number, that had been partakers of John's
Baptism) by imposing hands on them, gave them the gifts of the Holy Ghost, so
that they spoke with tongues and prophesied. From hence he gathers, 1. that
these persons were at that time, enabled by the gifts of the spirit, for the
work of the Ministry. 2. Yea ordained Presbyters and appointed to take the
charge of that Church. 3. That they did equal the number of all that were
besides converted. 4. And consequently that sometimes in Churches newly
constituted, the number of people converted was not much greater then the
number of Presbyters placed among them; for this he affirmed once before. Cap.
1. page 6. The first of these may be doubted of, we consider how generally the
gifts of the holy Ghost, were at other times beslowed, Act. 8. 12-17. and 10.
44. 46. But I will not contend about this point. The second is more unlikely
then the first, and the third more absurd then the second, and therefore the
last which flows from these, has nothing to relieve it; for as there is not
a syllable in the text, to uphold either the one or the other; so it suteth not
with the Apostles wisdom, so far to exceed here the proportio which he held
in other places, between the number of the Presbyters, and the state of the
Churches, to which they were assigned (as himself confesses in this 67. page
lin. 10.) 2. Moreover it was the usual course of the Apostles in all places
where they came, to plant the gospel, first to continue their own preaching,
for the gathering of a competent number to the faith, and then to give them
Presbyters, to feed those whom they had converted; (as the Doctor also
acknowledges in the first of his two arguments, page 65.) It were absurd
therefore to imagine, that he should now take a preposterous and contrary
order; at his first coming to Ephesus to ordeyne them 12. Ministers, and
himself to stay there 3. years after, to labor their conversion, by his own
preaching. 3. Again, we may truly say of preaching Presbyters, that which he
says of Bishops (sermon. page 65.) there was not that use of them, among a
people which was to be converted, before they needed to be fedd, and governed;
especially while the Apostles was present, and had the assistance of
Evangelists to labor their conversion with him. Act. 19. 22. 4. Were the
Refuter as full of questions as the Doctor, he might ask him, how 12.
Presbyters could have that honorable stipend, which in justice is due to the
for their work fake (as himself understands the Apostle. 1. Tim. 5. 17. see
lib. 1. p. 127.) if the number of converts that were bound to mainteyn the,
were but so many persons, or thereabouts? 5. And if he shall ask, to what use,
their gift of prophesy was employed, if they were not Presbyters affixed to
the care of that flock? he may take answer from these scriptures, Act. 2. 17.
and 11. 27. and 13. 1. and 15, 31. and 1. Cor. 14 29. 31. and 1. Tim, 4. 14.
which show that all prophesying was not enclosed within th breist of his
preaching presbyters. But I have said enough to show, that we deny not without
cause out assent to his idle fancy of a number of Presbyters given to some
Churches, by far too many for the number of persons already converted.
Wherefore till he has yielded better proofs for this supposall, it cannot
conclude his purpose. viz. that the Apostles intended the conversion of city
and country adjoining, by the Ministry of those Presbyters, which he
ordained in any city that had enterteyned the faith.

The 2. last questions before delivered, intimate this opinion selted in the
Doctor; that if the Presoyters ordained in cities by the Sect. 9.
Apostles, were not appointed to labor the conversion of the rest (yea if they
did not endeavor it) then there was no means to effect their coversion.
(Hereto if the Assumption be adds) But there was a means appointed for their
conversion; and it was in time effected. (Then this coclusion will follow)
Therefore they were appointed to labor their conversion; and (as their office
did bind them, so) they did endeavor it. But the proposition is false, and
discovers an high presumption in the Doctor, that dares limit the wisdom
and work of God, unto one only means and that such as he fancieth to
himself, without any warrant, (yea against the clear light) of the word. For
was not the conversion of Infidels unto the faith, the principal work of the
extraordinary function of Apostles, and of Evangelists, that accompanied and
assisted them in their traveiles? 2. And when the Apostles themselves left any
Churches to the care of Presbyters ordained by them; did they not use the
labor of their fellow helpers, to finish the work which they had begun? 3.
And why does Mr Doctor take no notice of the means mentioned by the Refuter,
to wit; the private labors both of the pres-byters, and of every well affected
Christian striving to win others unto the faith; and the public exhortations
and instructions, directed by the Ministers to those heathen, that had access
to the church assemblies seeing the scripture acknowledges that even by these
helps, the work of the Lord in the gathering together of his Saints has been
very much furthered? Romans 16. 3. 12. Phil. 2. 15. 16. and 4. 3. Iam. 5. 19. 20.
1. Cor. 14. 24. 25. 4. But though the Doctor make light account of these helps;
yet the Apostles were not ignorant, that his hand was not shortened, who had
given them good (as of his blessing upon such weak means, so also) of his
working out the calling and salvation of such as belonged to his kingdom, by
many other ways. Act. 8. 4. 5. 26. 40. and 9. 38. and 10. 3. 5. and 11. 19.
21. Isa. 2. 3. Zach. 8. 23. Ioh. 1. 41. 45. and 4. 29. 39. and 12. 20. 21.
Apoc. 3. 9. And therefore we have no cause to think, that any fear of wanting
fit means for the conversion of Gods elect, that yet were drowned in
paganism, should carry them, to commit this work, unto those Presbyters whom
they ordained for the feeding of the flock already converted.

So much to the 7. questions, there remains 3. more to make Sect. 10. ad page
67. 68.
up the complete number of 10; which (though they be nothing to the present
busynes, yet) may not be overpassed, least he crow over his Refuter without
cause. Were all these Presbyters (says he) Pastors property of that one flock;
or was there but one properly the Pastor or Bishop, the rest being his
Assistants? 2. when more were converted, then could well assemble in one
ordinary congregation were not the congregation divided? 3. upon this
division, was there a Bishop and Presbytery assigned to every congregation; or
only one Presbyter etc. Because these questions are fitted (as also the former
were) not so much to be informed what we hold, as to show what himself would
have to be embraced; let us first consider, to what issue he drives the
matter, which is discovered in the words following, page 68, where he says;
That the parish disciplinarisns do show themselves to be of shallow judgment,
and their parish discipline to consist of undisgested favcies, in that they
imagine the state of the Churches and charge of the Ministers, was so the same,
before the division of parishes and after; that now every congregation shall
have her Bishop and Presbytery, like as that one Church had, before Parishes
were divided in the Diocese; and that as now Ministers are appointed to atted
their several Charges; so also then it was the proper office of the Bishop and
his Presbytery to attend the flock already converted. No merveile if the
Doctors stomach, which afficteth nothing but that which favors the Diocesa
discipline cannot digest these points; yet will it be hard for him, from the
resolution of his questions, to gather any well digested argument, to prove
them undigested sancies. In the two former; he presumes (as it seems) upon
an agreement with his Refuter in these two points, viz. that of those many
presbyters, which the Apostles ordained in any one City; one only was
properly the Pastor or Bishop, and the rest his Assistants. And 2. that when
more were converted then could well assemble together in one ordinary
congregation, the congregations were divided. But in the f^^st of these, he
grossly forgets himself. For how could one of those presbyters be a
Bishop, if that be true, which he peremptorily holds, (sermon. page 69. def.
lib. 4. page 63.) viz. that the presbyters first ordained by the Apostles, to
labor the conversion of the people, had not any Bishop among them. Moreover in
denying the presbyters which assisted the Bishop, to be properly Pastors of
that flock which they fedd in common; does he not at unawares weaken one of his
best arguments, framed by him against Lay Elders? lib. 1. page III. for the
governing Elders in the church of Geneva, are Pastors improperly, (as Beza
shows de grad: Minist. cap. 9.) If therefore the Presbyters of Ephesus (and
consequently the presbyters mentioned. 1. Tim. 5. 17, being the same with those
of Ephesus, Act. 20. 28. as he professes, lib. 1. page 108; If I say these
Presbyters) were none otherwise Pastors then improperly; why might they not be
Lay Elders? or how could they be properly Ministers of the word (as he
mainteyneth) if they were not properly Pastors? In the answer, which himself
makes to the last of his questions; lies the weight of all that yeildeth him
any advantage. And since it inquireth altogether de sacto (what was done) and
not de jure, (what in right ought to be done) unless he had kept himself
within the times of the Apostles, and grounded his assumptio^ upon such
records, as may assure us of their approbation, he argues overweakely to
conclude as he does. 1. that our parish assemblies at this day, ought to have
one only Presbyter, (and not a Presbytery to assist their Pastor) because
such an order was taken, for those Churches which were multiplied, upon an
increase of converts in cities and villages adjoining. 2. that the first
Presbyters were not (as Ministers now are) set over the flock converted only,
but over the whole city and country to labor their co^version, because upon
the divisio^ of co^gregations in the diocese when each congregation had her
Presbyter to attend it; the Bishop of the city and his Presbytery had a
general superintendencie over all, not only to govern them, and their
Presbyters; but also to labor the conversion of the rest. And does not
himself weaken the consequence of his own reasoning? when he tells us (lib.
3. cap. 1. sect. 9.) that the Churches of former times (before Constantines
days) were not in all things established and settled according to their
desires; for in time of persecution their government was not always such as
they would, but such as they could attain unto. But how proves he, that which
he assumeth for a truth not to be contradicted? viz. 1. that upon the first
division of congregations, the ancient Mother Church only, had her presbytery
to assist the Bishop, the rest of the Churches having each of them one only
Presbyter: and 2. that the Bishops Presbytery in office and charge differed
from the rest of the Presbyters in this; that the presbyters were restreyned to
the feeding of their particular Churches; and the Presbytery assisted the
Bishop; in procuring the conversio^ of such as yet remained in infidelity.

It is a known truth confessed by the Doctor, that when churches Sect. 11.
were multiplied in Asia, after S. Paul had preached and placed Presbyters at
Ephesus (and that with an intent as he conceives to work out the conversion os
all Asia, by the labor of those Presbyters) each Church was made equal with
the Mother Church of Ephesus, in this, that as she, so they had, (not one only
presbyter, but) a presbytery together with a Bishop; or President to govern
them. For he teaches out of his text (Apoc. 1. 20.) that the 7 churches of
Asia, had each of them her Presbytery and a Bishop entitled by the name of an
Angel: moreover, he acknowledges (Def. chap. 7. page 23.) that Timothy and
Titus (who were as he faith Bishops, the one of all Asia, the other of all the
Churches in Creete) were to ordeyne Presbyters in the several cities; and that
by Paul's direction, as well by letter as example; and adds, that he no where
reads, that they assigned several Presbyters to their several Cures,
e^yther in city or country. So then it is clear by the Doctors own
confession, that how many Churches so ever were multiplied within the
episcopal charge of Timothy and Titus, they all had (and by Paul's direction
ought to have) a presbytery, and not a single presbyter in any place to attend
them. Wherefore for the better manifestation (I say not of the Doctors wi^dome,
but) of the truth or falsehood of his 2. assertions mentioned in the end of the
former sectio^; though I presume not to oppose him, yet I crave his resolution
in these sewe quaestions. Were not the Epistles to Timothy and Titus written to
inform all Bishops (even Diocesan Bishops if there were any such ordained by
the Apostles) and their successors unto the worlds end; how to exercise their
function, as well in respect of ordination, as of jurisdiction? see this
mainteyned, lib. 4. Def. page 75. 83. and 85: if then these epistles gave the^
no direction for the placing of a singular Presbyter, but rather for the
ordeyning of a (Presbytery, or) company of Presbyters, for those Churches,
that were (or should be) multiplied in their charge: does it not follow that
every diocesa^ Bishop, ought to have a Presbytery, (and not one Presbyter
only) to every Church that should grow up in his Diocese? If he shall say that
the Apostles charge of ordeyning many Presbyters for one Church, was limited to
cities, is it not in effect to deny, that the Apostle gave them, any direction
for diocesan Bishops; how to furnish the Churches of their diocese? But was the
Apostles care only for cities, and not for country-townes? Or did he appoint
the Bishop, and Presbyters of cities to labor the conversion of the towns and
villages, and yet give them no instrustio^ how to settle a Ministry among
them? must diocesan Bishops fetch their pattern, for the right way of
establishing particular Churches within their Diocese, from Damasus his
pontifical, and the practice of Euaristus and Dyonisius, that were Bishops of
Rome, and not from the writings of the Apostles? If it must needs be so; yet
how shall this one poor sentence (Presbyteris Romae, titulos divisit
Euaristus) give warranti^e unto these assertions? 1. That each title was a
distinct Church. 2. That each title had one only Presbyter and no more
assigned to it. 3. that those Presbyters were (as he says, sermon. page 46. and
^0.) Pastors severed from the Bishop, as no part of his presbytery that
assisted him in his Diocesan government. 4. That besides those presbyters so
distributed to their cures, there were others which remained with the Bishop,
as assistants unto him in the Mother Church. Till these particulars be
supported with better proofs, then yet the Doctor has produced; I doubt not
but the discreet reader will see, he was ledd by prejudice rather then by any
sound reason, who^ he pronounced it an undisgested sancie, to affirm, that as
every particular Church in the Apostles times had; so now it ought to have a
presbytery to govern it.

But, say he could prove by invincible arguments, that the Sect. 12.
parish-assemblies which are multiplied in every Diocese, ought to have one
only presbyter, and not a presbytery, as the first churches had, which were
planted in cities by the Apostles; how will he ever be able to make good, that
difference which he puts, between the presbyters of parish Churches, and
the presbytery of the Mother Church, when he gives to the later, and denies
to the former, the duty of laboring the conversion of all, that either in
city or country, remain estranged from the faith? It is before observed that
in his conceit, the presbyters of Ephesus were placed by S. Paul to endeavor
the conversion of all Asia, as far as they were able: and yet nevertheless,
he gives to the several presbyteries of other cities, as Smyrna, Pergamus,
Thyatira etc. the charge of converting all within their Diocese. Now if the
general charge of the whole nations conversion, first cast upon the
presbytery of one chief city, be no bar against the presbyters of other
cities, to deny them the like charge, for the rest of each city and country
adjoining, why should the Diocesan charge of any presbytery, in any one city,
debar the presbyters established in country towns, that embrace the gospel
before some others, from indeavoring the conversion of the rest in the same
town, and the hamlett adjoining? If he have any testimony (divine or humane,
ancient or modern) to justify this difference, why does he overpasse them in
silence? If he have none, is it not as indisgested a fancy, as ever was
broached by a man of learning? And to come to our own times, since there is in
many Dioceses, great scarcity of able Teachers, and the Doctor is persuaded
that without the word preached, men ordinarily cannot atteyne to salvation; no
nor yet to any degree thereof in this life (viz. neither to an effectual
vocation, nor to justification, or sanctification, as he teaches elsewhere.
(sermon. of the dignity and ductie of the Ministers, page 27.) I would feign
know who there are that stand charged, by office and duty to labor the
vocation of such, as have not any able preacher set over them? Whether the
Bishop and his presbytery; or the preachers that are licensed for the Diocese,
or the Idol-ministers only, that have charge of souls in those places
committed to them? For why should not the Bishop and Presbytery stand charged,
with the office and duty of laboring their vocation at this day; if it did
of old belong to their office, to work out the conversion of such as remained
in unbeleefe? and yet why should they bear the burden of this work, since
there are many other preachers, authorized for the Diocese; and the
Idol-ministers are by their institution to their benesices as deeply charged,
with the care of souls in their places, as any of the mostable preachers?
Again, if all licenced preachers ought in duty to lend their help for this
work; how shall this duty (of laboring to reduce unbelievers to the says)
distinguish the office of the ancient Presbyters, first ordained by the
Apostles, from the function and charge of Ministers, which now are allotted to
their several Cures? but if the cure of souls: which is committed to such
Idols, do discharge all others from the bond of this duty, how shall the
people under their charge be brought unto salvation? It comes to my
remembrance at length, that the Doctor says, our divines in the universities,
are ordained (as the first Presbyters were) to the national Church in common;
before they be assigned to their peculiar titles or cures (sermon. page 50. in
the Margin) shall the burden of this work rely on their shoulders? I hope
that in his next defense, he will clearly resolve us of these doubts; mean
while, he must give both Refuter and Reader (I think) leave to think, that the
office and charge of our Ministers now affixed to their cures, is altogether
the same, with the charge of those preaching Elders, which were planted in the
first Apostolical Churches, to feed the slock that depends on the^? (Acts 20.
28. 1. pet. 5. 2.) and that the conversion of Insidels then, was none otherwise
a work of the office of those Presbyters, then it is the duty of our Ministers
now, to labor the vocation of those, which in parishes adjoining to the^ do
want the ordinary means of their salvation. The proposition therefore, and
the assumption of his first argument (before propounded sect. 4.) being found
weak, and destitute of any stay, sufficient to uphold them, we are now to see;
if his second argument, be of any more worth to infer that conclusion which
he indeavoureth to justify. viz. that the Presbyteries ordained by the
Apostles, were appointed not to parishes, but to Dioceses.

Chap. 3. Removing the second argument proposed by the Doctor to prove, that
the Presbyteries ordained by the Apostles, were appointed Sect. 1. ^d Sect. 3.
cap. 4. page 68. and sermon. page 18.
unto Dioceses; and not to Parishes.
His second argument, Mr Doctor himself has thus framed, When the Churches
were not divided into several Parishes, nor Presbyters assigned to their
several Titles or Cures; but were in common to attend the whole slock, seeding
them that were already converted, and laboring the conversion of the rest, so
far as they are able both in city and country: the^ were not the
Presbyteries appointed to Parishes, but to Dioceses.

In the Apostles times the Churches were not divided into several Parishes
etc. Ergo in the Apostles times the Presbyteries were not appointed to Parishes
but to Dioceses. We see here, how he has himself framed it, now he tells us
how his Refuter, after his perpetual manner propounded the proposition
connexively thus, Is the parishes were not distinguished in the Apostles times,
nor the Presbyters assigned to their several titles or cures; but in common
were to attend the whole flock converted, or to labor the conversion of the
residue: then the Presbyters in the Apostles times were not appointed for
parishes but for dioceses. Was it a fault in the Refuter (trow ye) to propound
the proposition connexively with astrict eye to the words of his sermon? and is
it praiseworthy in the Doctor to exchange it for an other co^nexive
proposition, wherein he also made a change of one phrase, for his advantage;
for having The Doct. changes a phrase for advantage.
at the first said that in the Apostles times, Parishes were not distinguished,
now he says, the Churches in their times were not divided into several
parishes; which later may be true, and yet the former false, as we shall see
anon, when we come to his assumption. But (as a man full of charges) he
charge his Refuter with a worse fault, viz. the suppressing of the force of
the connection, as it infers they were appointed to Dioceses, in leaving out
(as he says) the words of the greatest force, viz. that they were appointed
to labor the conversion of those that belong to God, etc. A worse fault in
deed, were it true; but has he no other way to The Doct. to disgrace his Ref.
calu^niateth.
disgrace his Refut: then by so false a calumniation as this is? does he not
faithfully set down his own words, to wit, that the Presbyters were to
attend the whole flock converted, and to labor the conversion of the residue?
In deed for brevitie sake he omitted the words following (so sarre as they
should be able, both in the city and countries adjoining:) but does not
himself use the like abbreviation, page 66. The Doct. 2. argument is but a
beggarly repetition of the point urged in the former.
lin. ult. page 67. lin. ante penulr, and 68. lin. 14? But though I commend him
not for this; yet I cannot but praise him for speaking the truth, in saying,
that ^e force of his connection, as it infers they were appointed to
Dioceses, lies in this, that they were appointed to labor the conversion of
those that belonged to God, so far as they were able, both in the city and
in the countries adjoining. For this makes good, what before was touched (cap.
2. sect. 3.) scz. that his 2. argument is but a beggarly repetition of the same
point, which he urged in the former. And seeing in his reply, page 74. (to his
Refuters objecting it an error before refuted) he makes no other defense then
this; that ^e b^th prouid it to be an evident truth and discovered the
shallownes of their indgment that deny it; It were sufficient to send him back
for his answer, to that which has been already spoken, to show the weakness of
his defense. Yet to take from him all evasions; as I wish the reader to see
what is further observed touching the state of this argument. (sect. 14.) so I
refuse not to examine, what he has brought, either in maintenance of his own
argument, or in removing his Refuters answer.

His proposition (as he has set it) seems to be (as he says) of sect. 2. ad
page 69.
necessary and evident truth, and well may it seem so to him; but all things
are not so as they seem; yet if his reasons be of any worth, I will grant him
a seeming truth in it. First he asks how the Presbyters could be assigned to
several Parishes when there were no parishes distinguished? And 2. if they
were appointed to labor the conversion of all that belonged to God, in the
city and country, how were they not appointed to dioceses? Behold here, how
the Doctor is driven to disioynt his proposition, (like as he does also page
70. lin. 2. and 6.) and to prove the part thereof a part. Why then does he
count his Refuter (Def. lib. 1. page 148.) to be no better then a gross headed
Sophister for the like course? and why then did he not divide it at the first
into 2. members, the one concluding that the presbyters were not appointed to
parishes; and the other, that they were appointed unto dioceses? But (once
again to return him his own) what cannot he bring within the compass of one
of his syllogismes? Now to answer his questions; touching the first, be it
freely confessed, that when Parishes were not at all distinguished, Presbyters
could not be assigned to several Parishes. But if the Doctor had not departed
from the words of his proposition (whether craftily or carelessly, I leave it to
his own conscience) I would flatly have refused to assent to his connection:
for the Presbyters ordained by the Apostles might be assigned unto parishes;
(that is to say, the Churches unto which the Presbyters were assigned, might be
each of them one particular congregation) although the Churches planted by the
Apostles, were not as yet divided into several parishes, or distinct
congregations. And to the second connexio^ propounded after the same manner,
which he taxes in his Refuter with an if, in stead of when, which word his
proposition imbraceth; I answer as before to the proposition of his former
argument (sect. 4. cap. 2.) It does not follow, that the Presbyters were
appointed to Dioceses, (that is, to diocesa^ churches such as ours) although it
should be grants, that they were appointed to labor the conversion of all
that belonged to God both in city and country.

Neither do his questions that follow, give him the least releife, to justify
this consquencewhich I disclaim, It seems his meaning is to persuade his
Reader, that the denial of his consequence will enforce his Refuter to father
this fancy; that all the people which belonged to God in the city and
country and were afterward converred, belonged to one parish. And the
absurdity hereof (he hops) will appear by this; that after their
conversion, they were divided into many parishes both in city and country.
For answer, 1. I ask why it should be more absurd to say, that the people of
one parish may be (or were) divided into many parishes, then to say, that the
people of one Church or Diocese may be and were distributed into many Dioceses
or Churches? but he is much deceived if he think, that the denial of his
consequence, will drive us to acknowledge, that all the people which in an
whole city and country belonged to God as being ordained to life and in time
to be converted, were to be reckoned one parish. For it is flatly denied, that
they did before their conversion, belong unto any parish, or visible Church at
all. And it is a blind fancy in the Doctor to think, that because they
belonged to God in his election, therefore they belonged to the Citie-church;
for how should they be members of any visible Church or congregation; which yet
were drowned in atheism and insidelitie? yet, as if he had sufficiently
fortified the proposition or consequence of his own argument he leaves it;
and indeavoreth to take from his Refuter the ground where on he stands in
contradicting his conclusion: for he seems to grant that at the first all the
Christians in the City and Country being assembled together; could make but a
small congregation: but he demands how they could be of one parish, before
there was any parish at all? do you not see the Doctor is wise enough to make
his bargain well for his own advantage, when he has a fool in hand, that
will give him all that he asks? for in effect he says, grant me; The Doct.
beggeth.
but thus much that there was not any parish at all in the Apostles times; and
then I can justify my denial of your consequence, when you thus reason, that
all the Christians in one city and the country adjoining, at the first were
but as one parish, because they were but a small congregation, when they were
all gathered together. His last refuge is to tell us, he has before proved,
that the circuit of the Church, and of the Bishop or Presbyteries charge, was
the same in purpose and intention at the first, when they were but a few, which
it was afterward in execution, when all were converted; but this discovers
the nakedness of his cause, that inforceth him to lay hold on so bare a covering
as I have showed this to be in the answer to his third Chapter and 6. section.

We have seen how weak his stays are, whereon his proposition Sect. 3.
leans, but for his assuption he provideth much more weakly. It is that,
(says he) which the Refuter himself boldeth. But this defense (say I) is such
as the Doctor himself contradicts (page 74.) The Doct. co^tradicteth himself
and proves to be a soul untruth delivered not of ignorance, but against the
light of his own conscience. For there he acknowledges that in his
assumptio^, the Refuter finds one error repeated, which was before noted
(concerning the end of the Presbyters ordination) and charge also the maine
points in it to be altogether void of truth. But let us hear what it is, which
he says his Refuter holds; Forsooth, that there were not in any Church many
parishes in the Apostlestimes. Well but can he from hence conclude, that his
Refuter joyneth with him in his whole assumption? Nay rather we may see a
threefold trick A 3. fold trick of cunning in the D.
of cunning in the Doctor, namely, in changing the first branch of his
assumption, in justifying it by his Refuters allowance; and in concealing the
other parts of his assumption. 1. he changes the first branch, because he
could neither challenge any allowance of it from his Refuter, nor yet yield any
sufficient reason to justify it against him in that sense, that he takes
parishes in this controversy. For he knows that his Opposites define a parish
to be a particular ordinary or set congregation of Christians, assembling in
one place to the solemn service of God, (see page 4. of his sermon) And that
his Refuter holds the ancient Churches to be parishes, because (although
their multitude were great in some places, yet) each of them was one distinct
assembly guided in ecclesiastical matters, by their own Presbyters (see
answer. page 58. and this Defense, lib. 2. p. 74.) Wherefore, to say, that
there were no such parishes distinguished in the Apostles times, is all one as
to deny, that in their times there were any distinct congregations or
assemblies, which ordinarily (if they were not by sufficient causes hindered,
for this exception himself takes notice of (Def. page 83.) assembled together
in one place to the solemn service of God etc. he thought it wisdom therefore
to let go this point, and to tender another in stead thereof, which might
pass without controlment, viz. that in the Apostles times, the Churches were
not divided into several parishes. But this argues against, rather then for
the D; forseing Churches which are not divided into several parishes (or
titles and cures for these are one and the same in the Doctors phrase of
speaking) do make but one ordinary congregation of Christians; they must needs
be parishes, to the Refuters understanding; yea to the Doct. also, as he
delivers the state of the question (sermon. page 4.)

2. But why does he rely for the proof of his own assertion upon his
Refuters approbation? Is it not because in his own judgment, there is no
general truth in it? which may appear by his own exception; for in excepting
the church of Alexandria, he much weakeneth not only his assuptio^, but his
whole argument. For if his study for this defense has brought him to know
(what he knew not when he made the sermon, as he acknowledges, pa. 93. to wit)
that parishes were distinguished in Alexandria, long before Euaristus his
days, whom he supposed to have been the first author of that ordinance; why
may not his traveile for the next bring him to find out some better evidence,
then he has yet atteined to, for the like distribution, made in some other
Churches: yea, he has already told us (page 50.) that it is more then probable,
that the 7. Churches of Asia at the time of writing the Revelation contained
diverse congregations. (see for this point also sect. 14.) And among other
reasons to make good that probability, he observes, that (besides the Churches
and Presbyters that Paul and Pet^r had settled in Asia) S. John also preached
the gospel, in those parts for many years, and ordained Bishops and
Presbyters where need was. But if there be any truth in that which his argument
presupposes (to wit, that in the Apostles times, the Presbyteries were not
appoi^red to parishes, because there was not in any church many parishesin
their days: why then should there not be some probability (sufficient atleast
to weaken the consequence of his argument) in the contrary assertion (viz. that
some Presbyteries might be appointed unto Parishes; seeing some Churches, (as
that of Alexandria for certainty, and those 7 in Asia, in very great
probability) were even in the Apostles times distinguished into several
parishes.

3. As for the rest of the branches of his Assumption; when he should make
proof of them, he wholly silenceth them (not of ignorance or forgetfulness,
but) of purpose, because he found it easier to wrangle with his Refuter, about
some parts of his answer, then to propose any sound argument; for the
justifying of the points impugned; which is in deed the perpetual course of
this great disputer for the most part.

But let us see whether he has so just cause as he suppofeth, to Sect. 4.
insult over his Refuter, when he says (to let pass his scoffs more fit for a
vice in a play then a Doctor of divinity, in re tam seria as this is) that his
Refuter wrangleth and as a man confounded, yet resolved, to co^ntradict, though
against the light of his conscience, denies the conclusion, and co^tradicteth
himself. The contradiction objected, will come to be examined, in his defense
of the Assumption. All that is said to weaken the consequence or proposition,
he takes to be but a bare denial of the conclusion. And first he so
conceives of his quaestion (what if every one of the Churches then, were but
one parish etc.) because he cannot see, how it impugneth the consequence, in
any respect. But had he had so much charity toward his Refuter as he would
have yielded to himself, he might have supplied that which the state of the
question, and the scope of his answer requires, to be necessarily understood
q. d. what if (though that were granted which he supposes) every one of the
Churches then were but one parish, which by reason of the multitude of people
had many Teachers? so he might have seen, that he impugneth his consequence; so
far as it infers, that the Presbyteries were not appointed unto parishes:
and that therefore, he both wrongeth him to say, that in that respect he gives
it no answer at all; and sporteth himself in vain with the hope of a victory
that turns to his ruin. For his quaestion rightly conceived (as before is
showed) does in plain phrase of speaking import thus much. q. d. Be it granted
that parishes in the Apostles times, were not distinguished in any city and
the country nere adjoining, nor presbyters assigned to their several cures?
this nothing hinders, but that every one of the Churches, which by their
ordination enjoyed a presbytery (or company of teachers) might be one parish;
that is, one ordinary congregation of Christians assembling together, in one
place. And that which is added touching the French and Dutch Churches, serves
(not to prove the maine conclusion, as the Doctor supposes, therein mistaking
his Refuters Analysis; but) to justify the denial of the consequence, by a
parallel comparing those outlandish churches, here in England, with the ancient
Apostolic Churches in this manner;

It is well known that the French and Dutch Churches here in England have
first a presbytery or company of Teachers allotted to them, 2. no parishes
distinguished in any city for them. 3. nor presbyters so assigned to their
several cures, as our parish Ministers are. Be it also granted that the
Apostolic Churches in cities had the like: yet the French and Dutch Churches
are, (neither does the want of distinct parishes, and presbyters assigned to
their several cures, hinder their being) each of them, one parishionall (and
not a diocesan) assembly, that is, one ordinary congregation of Christians,
assembling together in one place. Why then might not those Apostolic Churches
be, yea how should the want of distinct parishes etc. hinder their like being?
If the Doctor will needs have the comparison brought into a syllogism, it may
be thus framed.

What, hinders not the French and Dutch Churches, which here in England, have
a presbytery (or company of Teachers) allotted to them; from being each of
them one parishonall assembly: that cannot binder the Apostolic Churches,
which in Cities enjoyed their presbytery (or company of Teachers) from being
each of them, one parishonall assembly. The want of distinct parishes, and
presbyters so assigned to their several Cures as our parish-Ministers are;
does not hinder the French or Dutch Churches which here in England have a
presbytery (or company of Teachers) allotted to them, from being each of them,
one parishonall assembly. Therefore, the like want, cannot hinder the
Apostolic Churches, which in cities, enjoyed, their presbytery (or company of
Teachers) from being each of them, one parishonall assembly.
As for his cavils agianst his own Argument, framed (I will not Sect. 5.
say, for the nonce to cavil withal, but) upon a mistake of his Refuters
meaning; though I might pass by them, as not directly touching any part of the
argument before contrived; yet because they contradict some pointers implied in
the comparison, I will remove them out of the way, least any one should stomble
at them.

First therefore, whereas he hunteth after some differences between the
Apostolic Churches, and the French or Dutch Churches here in England (thereby
to show that they are not of like condition, as the Refuters comparison
imports). I answer, 1. the Doctor cannot be ignorant, that comparisons are
not to be racked beyond the purpose of the Author that produces them; neither
is he so simple, but that he may see his Refuter principally intended herein to
compare the Apostolic Churches, with the French and Dutch Churches; that as
the later have; so also the former had, by reason of the multitude of people
many teachers to attend the^; and yet remained one Church assembly, not
distributed into several congregations, under several Ministers. Herein
therefore, (if the comparison hold, (as himself confefseth and argues for
his advantage, page 74. 75.) all the differences that he alleges (were they
as many more as they are) cannot contradict, or infringe the truth of the
Refuters speech, when he says, do you not see the like in the French and
Dutch churches here in England. 2. But what are the dissagreements which he
has found out? For the most part such as are now questioned concerning the
Apostolic Churches; for he says, Their Presbytery consists for the most
part of Laymen placed among us, not with purpose to convert either the Ci^^^
or count^^^ to them, but to attend them of their own Church: whereas contrary
wise, the Churches in the Apostles times, had a Bishop and a Presbytery of
learned men placed among them; (as leaven is put into the lump) with purpose to
convert the re^^ both in Ci^^^ and Country. As if he would argue, that they
agree not in the points assumed by the Refuter for his purpose; because they
answer not his expectation in the particulars, which his imagination ascribes
(though his arguments cannot conveigh them) to the Apostolic Churches. As for
that other difference (viz. that the French Church in London is but one, among
many prosessing the same religion, whereas the Apostolic Churches were not so,
before the division o^ parish^^, but planted among heathen peo-ple) though he
make it a chief one; yet is it srivolous and of no value, The Doct. pulls
down with the one hand, what he fetteth up with the other.
especially seeing himself (page 72.) compares the French Churches here with
those ancient Christians, who dwelt in Cities replenished with men of another
says, (as with Arrians), as ours be with men of another language.

3. And here by the way observe, how the Doctor at unawares, pulls down with
the one hand, what he sets up with the other. For against this comparison,
(between those churches that lived among the Arrians, and the French Churches
among us) alleged to prove that the later are (as he says the former were)
models of diocesan Churches: I may return his own exceptions, thus; The
French Churches cannot be Models of diocesan Churches, like as he supposes the
other were; because their Presbytery consists for the most part of laymen,
and wants a Bishop which they had; neither are they placed and re^eined, for
the the conversion of the city and country to them, as (in the Doctors
conceit) the ancient Churches among the Arrians were; for otherwise how should
they be converted? as he argues, page 67.

And this also (by the way) weakneth his arguing, to show that Sect. 6.
the French and Dutch Churches among us, are no parish assemblies. For if they
be neither diocesan nor models of diocesan Churches, what else can they be then
parishes; such at least, as the Refuter in this question, esteems to be
parishes, or parishonall Churches. 2. But in this point, he shows himself
what he is; when knowing (as is before noted sect. 3.) in what sense, the
Refuter holds those The Doct. knowing the Refut, to speak in one sense ^^ieth
to an other.
Churches and the ancient Apostolic Churches, to be parishes; he does
notwithstanding fly to another sort of parishes, viz. such as ours now are,
deprived of the power of ecclesiastical government, and subordinate to an
other Church, as members thereof; to his exceptions therefore, in this behalf
this reply may suffice. That which is one Church among many in one city; is
one parish or one congregation, such as (in this question) we define a parish
to be. But the French Church in London is one Church among many in one city,
(as the Doctor acknowledges, p. 7. 1) It is therefore one parish, as we
understand a parish in this question. Again, That which hinders not the
french and dutch Churches among us, fro being, each of them, one ordinary
congregation, assembling to one place for the worship of God: does not hind^^
them from being each of them, one parish: (as we take a parish in this
question). But the Doctors exceptions (viz. that the members of the French and
Dutch Churches do dwell in many distinct parishes, (according to the circuit
of our English division of parishes, in London and other places) and that their
Churches are endowed with power of ecclesiastical government, and not
subordinate to another Church as members thereof, these exceptions (I say) do
not hinder the French and Dutch Churches among us from being each of them, one
ordinary congregation, assembling to one place for the wor-ship of God.
Therefore neither do they hinder them, from being each of them, one parish, as
we take a parish in this question.

As for that one speech inserted, touching the French and Dutch Churches (when
he says, they have a Presbytery as the Church ^^ Geneva has, to supply the
want of a Bishop, which once they had and still might have, in an imitation of
the ancient Christinians) me thinks it scarce savoureth of truth, or at least
argues forgetfulness in himself. For if that he speaks, of having a Bishop
once in e^^e, and still in poss^; The Doct. speech either is untrue or else
contradicts himself
be referred to the French and Dutch Churches here in England; where does
Alasco say, that they once had a Bishop? and how knows he that our Bishops
would suffer them to have in each church a Bishop of their own? If to the
Church of Geneva; as he needs not Alascoes testimony, to prove that they
once had a Bishop; so in saying that they now might have a Bishop, what else
does he, but contradict here what he earnestly pleads for, lib. 4. page 166;
viz. that the Churches of France and Geneva, neither in the first reformation
could; neither now can obtain the government of Bishops, to be s^tled among
them, though they would; but it is no new thing to meet with the Doctors
slippings this way.

We come now to the Refuters regestion; when he strikes at the Doctor with his
own weapon in this manner; ^^ there were no parishes Sect. 7. ad P. 70. lin 8,
in the Apostles times, how could there be Dioceses; seeing every Diocese,
consists of diverse distinct parishes? The Doctor tells us, it is but a
floorish, and a kind of answer that best fi^teth him that is at a nonplus. But
it is well known that this kind of answer, is very usual with divines,
nothing inferior to him, either in school learning or divinity; and that, to
contradict any assertion belonging to the question, as well as the conclusion
principally contraverted, does not the D. know that it is the course held by Mr
Sadeel in all his Theological and scholasticall disputations? yea, it is in
deed, of special use, to put the adverse part to a nonplus; or at least to
let the indifferent Reader see the weakness of his argument and therefore no
merv^ile though the Doctors patience be not a little troubled with it. But see
we how he bestirreth himself to escape the stroke of it. Good Sir, says he,
what is this to my consequence? Again, to what end is this spoken; to deny my
consequence, or the maine conclusion? And a little after, Therefore, when he
would s^^me to deny the consequence of the propo-^^tion, he does not so much
as touch it; but by taking a supposed advantage, against the assumption, he
d^ni^th the principal conclusion. Good Mr. D. with your patience, is there no
difference betwixt the denial of the conclusion; and the retorting of an
argument against it? And is it nothing to you, if your maine conclusion fall to
the ground; so that the consequence of one of your arguments stand upright^?
but it is a fault in the Refuter; when he would seem to impugn your
consequence, to pass by it, and to set upon your conclusion, when you thought
it had been sufficiently guarded. Belike you looked not for such a stratageme at
his hands, whom you took to be amazed at the fight of your argument, (as you
say, page 71) and so shallow conceited (when he is in his best wits) that (if
we may believe you, pa. 80.) he can see no further then his nose end. Yet
perhaps if you had seen your consequence touched by the former part of his
answer, you would not have blamed him ^ for running out against your
conclusion; before he gave the onset to your assumption. But (to let your
scoffs alone) tell us in good earnest, do you think your consequence is
altogether out of the reach of this his regestion, as you call it? does it not
rather fall with the conclusion? for how could Presbyteries be appointed to
Dioce^es, when there were none? If therefore the want of distinct parishes in
the Apostles times, do argue that there were no dioceses; does it necessarily
argue also, that the Presbyteries ordained by the Apostles, were not appointed
to dioceses? But the Doctor we see is a man of that courage, that though he
fores^e he cannot long escape his adversaries The D. ^^^eth from one starting
hole to another till he be shut out of all.
hands; yet he will fly from one starting hole to another, till he be shut out
of all. For he tells us, his consequence is this, If there were no parishes,
then the presbyteries were not appointed to parishes; but he knows I need not
tell him, that that is not all; he should have added, but ^o dioceses. And for
us it suffices, if one part of his consequence be overthrown, for the other
will fall of it self afterward. Again, I must tell him, that howsoever his
consequence (as he has now with his detraction proposed it) may seem in
vincible; yet himself (such is his happ) has showed us a way how to crush it.
For if the want of distinct parishes in the Apostles times will argue (as is
before showed) that the presbyteries were not appointed to dioceses; then it
will also argue that they were appointed to parishes, for he must confess
(unless he will confess himself to be ignorant in logic, as he says lib. 1.
page 60.) that in this controversy this di^^unction is employed, viz. that the
presbyteries were appointed either to dioceses as he says, or else to such
parishes as we spoke of. The disproof therefore of his dioceses, is a direct
proof of our parishes. The which the Doctor (as it seems foreseeing, falls
upon the examination of the argument, which runs thus,

If there were no parishes distinguished in the Apostles times; then Sect. 1.
there were no dioceses, such as ours; (for every such diocese consists of
diverse distinct parishes)

But in the Apostles times there were no parishes distinguished. Therefore
neither were there any dioceses in their days, such as ours are.

How necessary this clause, dioceses such as ours, is, I have showed
heretofore, because Bishops such as ours cannot be had without dioceses such as
ours. And here it makes the consequence of the argument as clear as the Sun
in a clear summers day. Yet the Doct. denies it; because he imagines that
the diocese was the same, and the circuit of the spiritual jurisdiction
intended, the same, before parishes were divided, with that it was after they
were divided, that is, answerable to the civil: but that is coleworts more then
thrice sodden, the falsehood and vanity of which evasion is already sufficiently
discovered, in the answer to his 3. cap. sect. 6. and 8.

It shall here suffice in one word to remember him of this, that his own
words do convince, that the want of parishes distinguished, argues there
were no dioceses such as ours, which in execution (and not intention only)
comprize all the inhabitants of City and Country. I might put him in mind of
another difference, betwixt our and the ancient dioceses, which in circuit (as
he says) answered to the civil; seeing ours do not so; for some of them
conteyn many shires within their circuit: and sundry shires are dismembered by
the spiritual jurisdiction, which draws them to several dioceses. But let
us see how he removes the pillar, that vpholdeth the consequence of the
argument, viz. that every diocese (such as ours) consistech of distinct
parishes. It is true (says he) after the distinction of parishes, but not
before. But is not this answer miserune An absurb evasion.
kersphogeton) an absurd evasion, and no better then a very denial of the
conclusion? For (to borrow the Doctors comparisions before applied to the
question of dioceses and their circuit, page 53.) when he says, that every man
consists of soul and body; and the body consists of many members; if one
should answer him, It is true, that a man consists of those parts, after the
conjunction but not before; and the body has many members after the
distinction of the members, but not before; would he not censure him for an
absurd caviller, and his answer for a poor evasion of one that is at a
nonplus; yet such and none other is the Doctors answer. And. 2. that it may
appear to what purpose his answer serves, I will here frame the argument,
that fortifieth the consequence before denied, and leave it to the readers
judgment, to give sentence betwixt the Doctor and the Refuter in this cafe.

Whatsoever consists of distinct parishes, that cannot have his being or
subsistence, before parishes were distinguished.

But every Diocese (such as ours) consists of distinct Parishes.

No Diocese therefore (such as ours) can have any being or subsistence, before
there be a distinction of Parishes.

Now to answer as he does, that the assumption is true after parishes were
distinguished, but not before; is it not all one in effect as if he had said,
that there may be and were dioceses, before there there were any parishes? so
that under a pretense of contradicting the assumption, with a frivolous
distinction, he does in deed (as a man amazed or rather confounded) deny the
conclusion.

As for the comparisions, borrowed by him, to justify his answer, Sect. 9.
they fall far short of his purpose. First he says, a batch of bread
consists of many loaves after the distinction, which before it contained
undistinguished in the lump. But, he must remember, that a Diocese does so
consist of many parishes, as a Province does of many dioceses; and a
Patriatchship of many provinces. Wherefore as he confesses that Metropolitan
Bishops and Patriarcks (and consequently provincial and patriarchall Churches)
grew and followed, the one, upon the combination of Dioceses, and the other
upon the consociation of Provinces (lib. 4. page 7) so his Refuter holds that
these Diocesan Churches and Bishops, had their original, from the conjunction
of many particular congregations subjected to one Diocesan consistory. And it
is evident so to be, in as much as, the first Churches planted in cities by the
Apostles, were for a while (as the Doctor himself confesses page 6. and 103.)
but a small congregation; and when more were converted then could well assemble
together in one ordinary congregation, the congregations were divided; and
still as people in diverse places were converted, the Churches (as he also
acknowledges page 67.) were multiplied; so that the many parishes which grew
up in a diocese, were not all distinguished at once, as the loaves of one Bach
are, after the seasoning of the whole lump. And therefore neither were they all
contained within the bowels of the citie-church undistiguished, as the loaves
are in the lump before their division: but rather as the first constituted
Churches consisted of diverse families, but by the combyning of many christian
families in one ecclesiastical assembly: so also they became (in process of
time) diocesan and provincial Churches; not by reteyning all the Christians of
an whole diocese or province in one confused lump till all were leavened; but
by consociating many particular Churches (which were distinguished, some at one
time, and some at another, as the number daily increased,) under the the
oversight of one diocese or provincial Bishop.

His second comparision (of a man who consists of many distinct members after
they are distinguished, which at his first conception, were not distinct) if it
be well weighed makes more for his Refuter then for himself. For as it is
willingly granted, that a man in his first conception has no distinct members;
so it is as freely professed, that it is no man, to speak properly; much less
is it such a man as the Doctor is. Wherefore that which he presupposes in his
comparison, viz. that the Churches planted by the Apostles, before parishes
were multiplied in the cities and countries annexed, were Dioceses; even so, as
a woman's offspring is a man, before the parts of an humane body are formed and
distinguished: this I say argues with the Refuter and against the Doctor, that
The D. argues against himself and for the Refut.
it is no less absurd to say, that the first Apostolic Churches, which had no
parishes distinguished in their circuit, were notwithstanding properly
Dioceses, yea such as ours are at this day; then to affirm, that a child in
his first conception, before the parts of his body are framed, is yet properly
a man, yea such a man as all others. that are borne and converse among men.

We have heard how well he has bestowed his pains for recoverie Sect. 10. ad
sect. 6. page 73.
of his proposition out of his Refut: hands; it remains that we attend what
he says, for the rescuing of his assumption, which has these parts. 1. that
parishes were not distinguished in the Apostles times. 2. that Presbyters were
not assigned to their several cures. 3. that they were not only to attend the
whole flock converted, but also to labor the conversion of the residue. 4. and
that in both these duties they must labor in common. In what sense the first
is contradicted by the Refuter we have seen before (sect. 3.) where was also
noted how far it differs from that which he now gives in stead thereof.
viz. that the Churches planted in cities (as at Ephesus. Antioch etc.) were not
in the Apostles times divided into Parishes; from whence he may recieve a
direct answer (which here he expects) to his question, (whither the Churches
were tho^ divided into parishes or not?) viz. that although the Apostles did
distinguish parishes, by constituting particular congregations, in several
places, (that is, in each town or city that enterteyned the faith, one
Church-assembly; yet none of the Churches which they established in any town
or city, was in their times subdivided into several parish assemblies. But
what shall we say to that two horned argument, which thus disputes for his
advantage? If the Churches were divided into parishes in the Apostles times (as
at Alexandria it seems to have been) then was not every Church but one
parish: Is they were not; then the Presbyters were not assigned to their
several cures; and so the Assumption is true. The Doctor takes on imediately
after these words against his Refuter, for being transported with a spirit of
contradiction; whereof by and by; in the mean time, is not the Doctor The
Doct. contradicts him.
himself a strange kind of disputer, that will contradict one branch of his
own assumption, to justify his maine conclusion; and yet assume the same, to
confirm another part of his assumption, and then make his boast that his whole
assumption is true? But to answer him in kind, thus I reply; If the Churches
were divided into parishes in the Apostles times; then his assumption in the
first branch is false: if they were not, then each Church in their times, was
but one parish, (that is to say, one congregation) and so he erreth in his
maine conclusion. And that he may see, I use not this regestion; because his
argument has put his Refuter to a nonplus; for a more direct answer, I give
him to wit, that his first horn has a weak consequence; and his second is
sophysticall. The one is weak, beause that which makes an, Church, bearing the
name of this or that city, (as the Church of London or Sarum) to be more the^
one parish, is not the distribution of the people of each diocese, into many
parishes; but the combining of the parishes so divided, into one Diocesan body.
If therefore, he will prove the Church of Alexandria, or any other which he
supposes to have been divided into sundry parishes in the Apostles times, not
to be one parish, he must make demonstration of that which he often averreth,
but neyver proves by any testimony divine or humane, to wit, that the parishes
which issued out of the citie-church by such division, were subordinated to her
jurisdiction, as daughter churches to their Mother. The other is sophysticall,
because, in saying the Presbyters were not assigned to several parishes,
until the Churches were divided into parishes, he takes the Presbyters not
jointly for the Presbyteries whereof his conclusion speaks, but singly for
each Presbyter or Minister apart. For we may grant that the assignement of one
Presbyter to take the charge of one parish, followed (in course of time) the
multiplying of parishes in one Diocese; and yet mainteyne that Presbyteries
were appointed to several parishes, (that is to say, to particular
congregations) before any Church planted in cities by the Apostles, was divided
into several parishes. Wherefore, had the Doctor regarded in what sense the
Refut: takes these words; Presbyters and Parishes or several Cures; when he
denies the two first branches of his assumptio^; he would never have made so
srivolous a flourish, as he does, (both here and afterward, page 76) of a
false conceited contradiction for his persuasion that every of the Apostolic
churches was but one parish, made him to censure the assumption as void of
truth, in that it denies parishes to be distinguished in the Apostles times;
and the presbyters (or Presbyteries ordained by them) to be assigned unto their
distinct charges. Neither shall the Doctor ever be able to prove (though he
strive til his heart ache) that in this impugning of his assumption, he
contradicts his own persuasion formerly delivered.

But let us see how he freeth his assumption from the errors or Sectio^ 11. ad
page 74.
untruthes objected against it? First touching the third point before set
down, viz. that the Presbyters were not only to attend the converted, but
labor the conversion of the residue; he was told that it was but the
repetition of an error, before noted in the former argument: whereto he
answers nothing, but that he has proved it to be an evident truth. Wherefore
his proofs being disproved, the error remains unsalved. And the repetition
of it (seeing he confesses it to be of greatest force to prove that the
Presbyteries were appointed to Dioceses. pa. 70.) argues him to have ill
distinguished his arguments, seeing the two are in effect but one, yea one error
twice produced for two distinct arguments. Secondly the last point (of the
Presbyters attendance on their charge in The D. 2. arguments are in effect but
one, yea one error twice produced for two distinct arg.
common) which is rejected as unworthy to be ascribed to the Apostles
appointment or allowance; and that for this reason following, It is at no hand
to be endured that the Apostles should be suspected, to appoint or allow of any
disorderly confusion. But to ordeyne many Presbyters or Ministers in common to
attend, not only the feeding of the whole flock converted; but also to labor
the conversion of the residue in the city and country adjoining: is to
authorize and give allowance to a disordely confusion. Therefore it is at no
hand to be endured, that the Apostles should be suspected to have ordained many
Presbyters or Ministers for such attendance in common.

The proposition cannot be doubted of, neither takes the Doctor any exception
against it. The assumption he contradicts, but answers not the
probabilities urged to clear it. And first the disorder and confusion is
declared by a like example, of a school erected in some great town, by some
great scholar, who (having entered his Auditors in the principles of grammar,
and being drawn away by some occasions) appoints certain Vshers in common
to take care of all that were so entered, and to gain as many more as they
could, not of the same town only, but of all other towns round about. Now if
they thus left to their liberty, shall go now hither now thither, and teach
now these, now those, as it best likes himself and them; is it not likely
(think yet) that there would be good teaching and learning in such a school?
To this cafe, the Doctor makes no other answer but this; that he is worthy to
be put into a cloakbagg which proposed it; but is not himself more worthy of
the cloak bagg, that could find no better answer? Surely if his refuter had
made such an answer he would have said so; but I will not, for he shows
himself to have wit enough to scoff it out, when he is at a nonplus. For
seeing he shows not the dissagreement of the things compared together, who
sees not reason to think, the comparison is much fitter then he would have it.
2. Again the Refuter asks how such a common employment (of preaching here
and there at randon) could be orderly then, since it was afterward disorderly:
(for the Doctor acknowledges (sermon. page 20.) that this promiscuous
attendance, was taken away by Euaristus, for avoiding confusion). And 3. he
also intimates, that schisms must needs ensue, when the people being tied to
the hearing of no one preacher, might upon their fancy run some after one,
some after an other, and so peradventure leave some quite without auditors. To
all which the Doctor in his discretion gives his grave consu^re; That which he
(meaning the Refuter) bebleth concerning disorder and confusion, is wholly to
be ascribed to his own distemper and confusion.

Now that we may not think he wants reason thus to censure Sect. 12.
his Refuter he asks (as a man that did not or would not see) in which of the
(parts of his assumption) points (as he calls them) this orderly and
^nconfounded man, notes such disorder and confusion? or was not the co^fused
conceit he spoke of in his own brain? But is the Doctor in deed so shallowe
conceited as he would seem to be? can he not discern (by the plain
mencioning of the teachers and hearers going to and fro, from one company, and
from one town to another; the one to teach the other to hear, whom and where
themselves list) that the disorder and confusion objected, lies neither in the
first or second branch of the assumption (which concern the distinction of
parishes, and the assignement of Presbyters to their several cures) nor yet
altogether in that which he makes the third, (scz. that the presbyters were in
common to attend the whole flock) but in this rather, that they were in common
to endeavor as well the conversion of the residue in city and country, as the
feeding of the whole flock already converted? Wherefore that which he
alleges from the state of the French and Dutch Churches among us, to show
there is no disorder or confusion in the three points which himself proposes;
is in deed, but mere babbling, and a deceitful drawing of the reader from the
question, which is not whither one parish The D. cu^ningly withdraws the
reader from the question
may enjoy sundry teachers co^municon^ilis it mutuo auxili^ to attend the whole
flock, none of them being appointed to a several charge? but whether one
Presbytery (or company of Ministers) may be appointed in common to the charge
of an whole city and the country adjoining; so as each of them may at his
pleasure bestow his labor either in teaching any part of the people
converted, wheresoever they shall meet together in an uncerteyne assembly; or
in preaching to any of the rest that remayn infi^^elitie; and in traveiling for
that purpose from one part of the Diocese to an other, as his own mind shall
guide him? the former is that which the Refuter grants, and judges to be the
state of the Apostolic Churches, therein like to the French and Dutch here in
England: The D. case is but poor and weak.
the later he disclaymeth for the reasons before mentioned. Herein therefore
behoid, and pity the Doctors poor and weak estare, for whereas before as
appears, sect. 5.) he renounced the comparison which his Refuter made
between these outlandish Churches, and the ancient Apostolic Churches,
(though fitly agreeing in the points wherein they were to be compared, as is
showed sect. 4.) Now; (for want of better help, to wipe away that disorder and
confusio objected against that common employment, which his conceit ascribes
to the Presbyters ordained by the Apostles) he is feign to apprehend the same
comparison; and to conceal that disagreement, which (though then it were
impertinently urged, yet now) serves well to show, how weakly or rather
disceitfully he disputes. For although in one congregation assembling in one
place, many Ministers may without confusion, teach at several times one after
another (as it was in the Church of Corinth. 1. Cor. 14. 31. and now is in the
French churches) yet may it be, (yea it is already proved to be) disorderly for
many Ministers to attend promiscuously and at their pleasure, sometimes on the
feeding of a people converted and that either in whole or in part; and
sometimes on the instructing of such, as in an whole city and country
adjoining do yet remain in unbeleefe. Moreover, it is well known that there
is no such co^munitie in the charge which the French and Dutch Ministers have
of one congregation, as he attributes to the Presbyters first ordained by the
Apostles; for among these the Doctor gives no cheiftie or pre-eminence to any
one above the rest, neither perpetual not te^porarie, in any Pastoral duty of
feeding or governing the people depending on them; seeing in his conceit they
had neither Bishop nor President, to guide the, or to moderate their meetings,
in the absence of the Apostles; who (as he supposes) retained all episcopal
government in their own hands. Which confused paritie, or rather Anarchie, as
it was never embraced of any reformed Church in these last times: so it cannot
without wrong and disgrace to the Apostles, be ascribed unto their ordinance.

As for the Apostles words to the Presbyters of Ephesus, Acts. 20. 28. the
Doctor seems inconstant, and at odds with himself Sect. 13. ad sect. 7. p.
75.
in the application of them. For he first quoted that text (sermon. p. 18.) to
prove that the Presbyters were in common to attend the whole flock converted,
feeding them with the word and Sacraments; where note that he limiteth the word
flock and the duty of feeding to the company already converted; which argues
(as may well be supposed) that he did not then conceive, the residue of the
City and Country yet unconverted to be any part of that flock or The D. agrees
not with himself in the applicatio of Act. 20. 29.
Church there spoken of: but now he streatcheth both words to the whole number
of all, which in City and Country belonged to God, and were by their Ministry
to be converted; and rockoneth it (as we heard before sect. 7.) one of the
Refuters indigested fancies, to restreine the flock over which those presbyters
were set unto the number of Christians already converted. Hear we now the
reasons that persuaded him to change his opinion; for he uses not to do and
undo without reason. First, he urges the use of the word flock. John. 10. 16.
where the flock (he faith) is that, for which the good shepherd gave his life;
unto which apperteyned the sheep which his Father gave him (even the elect not
yet converted as he says page 66.) not only among the jews, but the Gentles
also; even that Church, which God (meaning Christ who is God) is said to have
redeemed with his blood, Acts. 20. 28, and that people of his, which he saves
from their sins. But how will he from his allegations infer, that the
flock, in which those Presbyters were set as overseers Act. 20. 28. was the
people belonging to God (as well unconverted as converted) in the City of
Ephesus and the Country adjoining? Does not himself weaken the consequence
when he faith. This is spoken of the Church in general? yea, but he proceeds
to say, so the company of them that belong to Christ, in any nation, province,
diocese, city, or parish, may be called the flock, the Church, the people of
God. Well then, if the company of faithful in one parish may be called the
flock and Church of God, as well as a larger society of such as belong unto
God, in a nation province or diocese; is not the Doctor yet, as far to seek
as at the first, for a found reason to persuade his conscience, that the people
yet vnverted, but belonging to Gods election, throughout the diocese or
province of Ephesus, were a part of the flock and Church, which those
presbyters were charged to attend to and feed; May not a man with half an eye
discern, that a greedy desire to contradict his Refuters assertion, has
instead of better reason preveyled with him; or rather (as he wrongfully
charge his Refuter page 73.) so transported him, that he cares not how
shamefully, he contradicts himself; so as he may gainesay his adversaries
present assertion. Yet there is a worse fault that accompanies this change of
opinion in him; for he absurdly consoundeth the visible Church of Christian
professors known unto men, with the invisible Church or flock of Gods elect,
known only to himself, yea we may thereunto The D. co^radicteth himself, co^
foundeth the visible and invisible Church, and makes the Apostle author of a
senseless charge.
add a third fault no less absurd then the former; when he makerh the Apostle
Paul, the author of a senseless charge imposed on the presbyters; viz. to
attend on a flock the number and parts whereof they neither knew nor could
know, and to feed with the word and Sacraments, such as were not yet begotten
unto the faith.

Attend we now a little, to the advantage which he makes to his ^ause from this
text; and to his removal of the disadvantage, which his Refuter draws from
thence: If, says he, they were to attend the whole flock in common, then were
they not assigned to several parishes, which were but parts of the flock; to
which purpose the place of the Acts was Sect. 14.
quoted. Before he borrowed (as is observed sect. 10.) the first branch of his
assumption to justify the second; and now the second is fortified by the third;
so that his own pen makes him guilty of the fault (which upon far less
cause) he imputes (page 55.) to Mark whethe D. be not co^fou^-ded in him self.
his Refuter, scz. to bring within the compass of one syllogism, two arguments
which tend to justify, the mayn point of the assumption. Consider this well,
and with all remember, that the 4. point is a bare repetition of that, which he
urged in the former argumet (as is showed sect. 1.) yea observe further that
the second parr of his assumption (which by this reckoning, is the only maine
point of his argument) is made a part of the consequence of his proposition (as
appears sect. 2.) By all which laid together, it is evident, that this
argument of his, (separatis separandis) is nothing else but a concluding of the
same by the same in this manner; In the Apostles times the Presbyters were not
assigned to several cures (whereby he means parishes.) Ergo, in their times
they were not appointed to parishes. But to come to his inference; deduced from
the place of the Acts. which he quoted; if that be true which his words
intimate; that several parishes were parts of the flock, which the Presbyters
were charged to attend; how can there be a truth in the first branch of the
Assumption, which denies parishes to be distinguished in the Apostles times?
must he not fall, an ase at least, lower then before, when he said (page 63.
sect. 6.) that his assertion touching Churches not divided into parishes, is to
be understood ^^ epi to plaiston as true of most Churches? I might ask him, how
it is possible, the Presbyters should hold the charge of the flock in common, if
it had several parishes for the parts thereof? and how the flock could be
undistinguished, or attended on in common; if the charge given to the
Presbyters were such, as upon like occasion might by a Bishop, in his
visitation be applied to all the Ministers of a Diocese? (as he afterward
affirms, page 105.) will it not be A contradiction in the Doct.
hard think you, for Doctor to wind out of the briars of a co^tradiction, if
his speeches be well compared?

Neither can he so easily, as he supposes, remove that disadvantage Sect. 15.
which his Refuter presses upon him, in this argument following;

If the word ecclesia, (there used to signify that Church and all one with the
word flock) do signify any other company of men, then a particular
congregation only; then is there no truth in the assumption, that denies
parishes to be distinguished, and the Presbyters assigned to their several
cures.

But the first is true; Therefore also the second.

Nay, says the Doctor; the contrary rather is to be inferred thus;

If the word Church did signify one congregation, and was in every city but
one; and if such was the flock, which the Presbyters were appointed to attend:
then it follows that the flock was not divided into particular parishes, nor
the Presbyters assigned to several cures.

Lo here again how the Doctor choppeth and changes at his The Doct. ^hoppeth
and chageth
pleasure, that first branch of his assumption. For whereas at the first it
simply denied parishes to be distinguished in the Apostles times; now he makes
it to deny no other distinction of parishes, then the division of one parish
into many. For as often before, so now and again must I ring it into his
ears; that when his Refuter holds in this question, the Apostolic Churches
to be parishes, his meaning is (as the Doctor knows very well) that each of
those Churches was but one particular congregation. If then it be granted that
the word ECCLESIA Church, does nor in the Apostolic writings signify any other
outward co^opany of men, the such as were gathered into one particular
assembly; it will follow that the visible Churches, to which that word is
referred in their writings, must be acknowledged to be parishes, and
consequently there can be no truth in that assumptio^, which denies parishes
to be distinguished, and presbyters assigned to several parishes. But rather
then the disgrace of any untruth shall lie upon the Doctors assumption, he will
reject the assumptio^ of his Refuters argument; which denies the word ecclesia
to signify any other outward company of men, then a particular congregation
only. For he tells us, he has already said more to confute that ignorant
conceit, then will be answered in have. But for ought he has alleged from
the scripture (which is the only guide of the conscience in questions of this
nature) more has been said to confute his slender objections, then upon his
third thoughts he will be able to produce for the fortifying of them. And as for
that he here adds touching the word poimonion or poimne, it discovers his
will to be more then his strength to confute any thing his refuter has
delivered. First, whereas he had said, that the word, (to wit, the English word
flock, (for the gr: word was not at all mentioned) is ordinarily used, of
beasts and fowls that heird and flock together in one company; the Doctor
falsely charge him to have said, that the word poimnion, or poimne is so used,
and then (in great modesty) professes it is beyond the compass of his
reading etc which is but to fight with his own shadow; for he should (if with
truth he could) have said, that he never read or heard the word flock applied
to fowls. Secondly, it is to no purpose to tell us, that the flock of Christ's
sheep mentioned, Luke 12. 32, and Ioh. 10. 16. is not one only particular
congregation; unless he could say and prove, that the word in those places
signifies an outward company of men making one visible Church, of larger
extent (to use his own words, page 75) then one only assembly. But himself
acknowledges (as the truth is) that in John, 10. 16. the universal Church of
Christ (which comprehends the elect yet unconverted and therefore is
invisible) is understood by that one flock, whereof he is the great shepherd.
And that little flock to whom he speaks, Luc. 12. 32. fear not little flock
etc. is none other then that company of his disciples, which then were his
hearers, and as a little flock or congregation, cleaved to him as their Pastor
and Teacher; as appears by the text it self, verse. 1. 22. 32. 41. and
(besides the judgment of many worthy divines writing thereon) the use of the
word to the same purpose elsewhere, as Math. 26. 31. Wherefore, the Doctor has
nothing worth the objecting against that assertion of his Refuter, which
affirms the flock and Church, whereto the Presbyters were assigned, Act. 20.
28. to be one only particular congregation; so that if he will stand (as he
seems to be willing) to the judgment of the judicious Reader, I make no
doubt but he will be found (as his Refuter first told him) to have dealt full
weakly in a point of so great importance.

Chap. 4. Wherein is maint^yned their objection, who affirm that the
Presbyteries ordained by the Apostles, were assigned to one only congregation
of Christians; and therefore not to Dioceses properly but to Parishes. Handled
by the Doctor, sermon. page 19. and Def. page 78. etc. and Refuter, page 60. etc.
IT pleased the Doctor to make answer to certain arguments objected Sect. 1. ad
page 78.
partly by himself, and partly by his Refuter to prove, that the visible
Churches in the Apostles times were not Dioceses properly but Parishes; they
are now to be examined. But first, the conclusion it self is to be cleared from
one quarrel made against it by the Doct. (page 78.) viz. that, there must be
added, and in the age following, because (as he says) themselves include in
their question 200 years. The Reader therefore is to be advertized, that
himself lays down their assertion, whom he contradicts in these 3.
members (sermon page 4) viz. 1. that properly there is no visible church but a
parish. 2. nor lawful Bishops, but parishonall, and 3. that for the space of
200 years after Christ, there were no other but parish-Bishops. And he which
peruseth Mr. Jacobs book (entitled reasons etc. proving a necessity of
reforming our churches) from whence the D. draws that extent of 200 years)
shall see, that as well concerning Churches as Bishops, he distinctly handles.
First what they are and ought to be by divine, or Apostolical ordinance; and
afterward what their state and condition was, for the first 200 years after
Christ. And although the Doctor in that conclusion which he tendreth to be
proved (sermon. page 17.) mencioneth the age following the Apostles times; yet he
tieth not himself to that term, neither in the arguments first proposed by
him, nor yet in this defense hitherto continued. Nay his arguments do bound
themselves within the Apostles days; and the later, which generally concern
the ancient visible churches are directly bent against that first assertion of
theirs, which says, The visible Churches instituted by the Apostles, were
properly Parishes, (that is particular congregations) and not Dioceses. But
however the D. may at his pleasure, wholly leave out the age following, or
wander for his proofs beyond that compass to Constantines days, and the ages
following his time: yet his Refuter must be bound, to the stake, precisely to
conclude, that the Churches were not only in the Apostles times, but also in
the age following, Parishes properly and not Dioces^s. Yea even then when he
discerns (page 100) that two rancks of Instances are produced, to prove the
conclusion which himself tendreth (the former taken out of the scriptures: and
the later out of the fathers:) he would feign enforce him to streatch his
scripture testimonies to the whole term of 200, years. A thing unreasonable
and such as argues his seeking rather by some evasion to elude; then, by
direct answer to infringe, that which is objected. But seeing the questions are
distinct and require confirmation by testimonies of a differing nature (for the
scriptures must determine what was the form or constitution of Churches
instituted by the Apostles; and we must search after humane testimonies to find
out the first orginall, of multiplying of parishes in cities, and of combyning
many congregations, in one diocesan body) I will therefore (with the Doct.
leave) first take a view of that which is objected and answered touching the
state of the Churches, which were of greatest note in the Apostles times.

To begin then with the objection, which himself propounds, Sect. 2. 2d page
79.
it seems by his own Enthymem (page 79.) his purpose was to contradict not
the maine question (though he so affirmed) but the conclusion of his 2. last
arguments (which he reduced to the maine conclusion page 64.) And because he
shall have no cause to think that his Refuter carried it to the principal
question, to make it more strong for his advantage; I will apply it to the
point whereat he aymeth; with a supply only of those words, which are by him
suppressed, yet necessary to be added;

The Presbyteries ordained by the Apostles (together with the preside^ts of the
Presbyteries) were assigned, each of them, but to one particular ordi^^try
congregation, assembling together in one place.

Therefore, they were assigned but to a parish and not to a diocese. To the
consequent, I add these words, but for a parish, to make the contradiction the
more full; because his conclusion affirms that the Presbyteries ordained by
the Apostles were appointed; not to parishes but to dioceses. And for the same
cause, I also add to the An^ecedent, these words ord^yned by the Apostles. The
consequence of this Enthymem relieth upon this inference,

One particular ordinary congregation assembling together in one place, is a
parish and not a diocese: Therefore, what is provided but for one such
congregation, the same is provided but for a Parish and not for a diocese. This
latter connection cannot be impugned. The consequent (or conclusion) is the
proposition, which was presupposed in the consequence of the former Enthymem;
The Antecedent is a truth agreed upon, on both parties in this controversy as
appears by the D. laying down of their assertion against whom he disputes
(sermon. page 4.) and in affirming here. (def. page 79.) that for brevities sake
he first omitted this argument, desyring in few words to bring our obiction to
the issue; he gives allowance to the consequence thereof. Only he disliketh
that confirmation delivered by the Refuter for clearing the consequence of his
proposition; when he says, that he had before showed that a diocese must
consist of distinct congregations. For (says he) i^ proposition have no better
hypotheses to support it, I may deny it; seeing I have proved before that there
were dioceses, in the first conception of the Churches, before distinction of
parishes. But I answer, that if he has no better argument to impugn the
proposition or consequence thereof; then so slender a proof as that is whereof
he boasts, I need not seek any new propp to uphold it, it shall suffice to
referr him to that which is already said in the former chapter (sect. 9.) where
he may, (if he shut not his eyes) see it proved by the escope of his own
reasoning; that the Apostolic Churches before the division of parishes in the
city and Country annexed, could not any otherwise be properly dioceses, then a
child in the womb can be perfict man, before his body have the distinct
members; so that (to return him his own phrase) the addition of this answer
has made his cause somewhat worse then it was before.

Now to proceed to the confirmation of the Antecedent before Sect. 3. ad 79.
mentioned; (viz. that the presbyteries (and their presidents) ordained by the
Apostles were assigned, each of them, but to one particular ordinary
congregation, assebling together in one place) the Doctor has no cause to
blame us, though we should refuse to mainteyne the argument, which he framed
for us; for I suppose, none of our side were so foolish, as to deliver for the
proof thereof, that assertion which he tendreth to us; to wit, that in the
first 200. years, all the Christians in any one great city, made but one such
congregation. Wherefore till he produce his Author, from whom he received this
argument; I will pray leave to think, he forged it, for his own advantage,
that his reader might judge he has gotten the conquest, though he only threw
down a rotten post of his own setting up. For to conclude the former
Antecedent it might suffice to assume thus much; to wit, that all the members
of those Churches, whereunto the Presbyteries were ordained by the Apostles
made but one particular ordinary congregation assembled together in one place.
Against which proposition (rightly understood of the time, when the Churches
received their Presbyteries and presidents by the Apostles ordination) I find
no just exception taken, either in his sermon: or this defense; seeing in both
he wandreth beyond the Apostles days, to the age following; whereof he had not
spoken one word in all that he has urged hitherto for the justifying of his
main conclusion. Seeing then the question is what the number of Christians was,
at the time of giving presbyteries to them; if we say, they exceeded not one
congregation; is it not a frivolous cavil to answer, that they far exceeded
the proportion of one congregation, in the next age following and the later
part thereof? It is apparent therefore, that these clauses in the first two
hundred years, and in the age following the Apostles, were inserted into this
question by the Doctor (both here and afterward pa. 100) only to give him
some color of a just exception, against his Refuters reasoning; and some
excuse for his sliding from the state of the Churches in the Apostles times, to
the ages following.

But let us see, how he impugneth the argument framed by him sect. 4. 2d 79.
and 80.
self in this Enthymem. In the first two hundred years all the Christians in
any one great city made but one particular ordinary congregation assembled in
one place. Therefore, both the presbytery and the president thereof, were
assigned but to one congregation. First he denies the consequence upon this
ground; that the Presbyters were provided not only for the cities themselves;
but also for the countries adjoining; and in both, as well to labor the
conversion of the rest, as to take charge of them, that were already converted.
Which being nothing but a repetition of that he before affirmed, nakedly and
without any proof; his refuter thought it enough to tell him, that in as much
as he has before showed his answer to be false, the consequence will remain
good notwithstanding. And since he now boasts that he has proved his
Refuters affertio^ opposed against his answer, (viz. that it was no part of
the presbyters proper duty, to labor the conversion of the unconverted,
throughout the city and country adjoining;) to be an indigested fancy of
shallow (if not gidd^^ beads tha^ see no further then their nose-end; if the
reader please to look back to that already laid down (cap. 2. of this reply;
sect. 7. 8. etc.) he ^lay perceive that the Doctor is very nose wise, and his
Phan tasia being bewitched with the sweet smell of the prelacie, has fathered
on the Apostles, such an intent (in the placing of Presbyters in cities) as
never was discovered, either to his care by any ancient tradition; or to his
eye in any monuments of antiquity. Wherefore his censure passed against his
Refuter more properly belongs to himself, viz. that he slubbereth over the
proof of his own arguments, as having a better faculty in denying
consequences, then in proving any of the premises, whereon his cause relieth;
yet as if his dreams were Oracles, he says (and indeed only says it, for
proof he can yield none) that the ancient Church of God in all places
understood the Apostles instent, as he expounds it. He adds, when all both
in city and country were converted to the profession of the faith (which
could scarcesly be verified of any city and country for 300 years, after the
Apostles began to place Presbyters in Cities, I mean till constantines days
as the Doctor observes page 54) they acknowledged the generally care and
inspection over them all to belong to that one Bishop of the city; and
themselves to be part of that Church; and therefore concludes that the
consequence of the former Enthymem, will never be made good. But the Reader may
see how the D. is deceived in imagining that the former consequence is beaten
down by the strength of this last; if he will take notice of that which he now
assumeth, contrived for his best advantage, to conclude, his purpose in form
of argument to this effect;

All that acknowledged themselves after their conversion, to be part of the
City. Church and so belong to the general care and inspection of the Bishop of
that city: (they all I say) were a part of that Church from the beginning,
orat least a part of the charge of the Bishop and Presbytery first assigned by
the Apostles to the Church of that city.

But all the Inhabitants of the City and Country after their co^versio^ to the
faith, acknowledged themselves to be part of the City Church, and to belong to
the general care and inspection of the Bishop of that City.

Ergo all the Inhabitants of city and country were a part of that Church from
the beginning, or at least a part of the charge of the bishop and Presbytery,
first assigned by the Apostles to the Church of that city. And consequently
though it should be granted, that in the first 200 years all the Christians of
any one great city, made but one particular ordinary congregation assembled in
one place; yet it follows not that the Presbytery and president thereof,
were assigned but to one congregation.

If he can make any better use of his assumption, for any other conclusion,
that may be more for his advantage, good leave have he to follow his own way,
mean while I deny the proposition wherein (as we take it) the strength of his
reasoning lies, and wish him to behold the weakness thereof in this argument
following.

All that acknowledged themselwes after their conversion, to be parts of any
city Church etc. were from the beginning parts of that Church etc.

But all the people which inhabited the several dioceses of any province, as
soon as they were converted to the faith (notwithstanding they enjoyed their
own Bishops to govern them, yet) they acknowledged themselves to be parts of
the metropolitan Church seated in that chief city; and the Bishop thereof to
be their primate, or head. All the people therefore, which inhabited the
several dioceses of any Province were from the beginning parts of the
Metropolitan Church, or at least, parts of the charge of the Bishop and
Presbytery seated in the mother city. And consequently the Churches and
Bishops of Mother cities, were (in their first foundation) properly
provincial, and not diocesan only. The assumption of this Syllogism is the
same with that which the D. avoucheth lib. 2. p. 113. lin 25. 29. But the
conclusion with the co^sequent annexed, crosses that which he affirms page
20. 1. 3. and 21. 1. 1; which contradiction if he will avoid, he must disclaim
the proposition, and so acknowledge that he trusted to a broken reed, when he
persuaded his own heart; that the subjection which the inhabitants of an whole
diocese yielded (in the 4. age after Christ) to the citie-Church and the Bishop
thereof; could argue invinciblie that the Presbyteries ordained by the Apostles
(300 years before) were provided as well for the vnco^verted as for those
already brought to the faith.

As for the Antecedent of the former Enthymem, which he rejects Sect. 5. ad
page 81.
with much disdeine; (but with little show of reason to him that weighs the
matter) because it belongs to another question (as is before noted) I refer
the handling of it to another place; for the present, it shall suffice to
discharge the Refuter from those calumniations, which the D. throws on him,
for exchanging it with this Assertion. All the Christians in any great city
and the towns about it, (unless there were distinct Churches in those towns)
made but one particular ordinary congregation assembled in one place. I mislike
not (says the Doctor) his addition of the towns about, so he will be pleased
not to forget to take them into the defense of his Antecedent. If he will be
pleased (say I) to take the Antecedent so, and in such sense, as it is tendered
to him; let him never think his Refuter will shrink from the defense thereof.
But the Doctor is timorous and fears to be circumvented with the enclosure of
that parenthesis (unless there were distinct Churches in those towns) and
therefore he would feign have it to be removed, or rather the word although to
be set in stead of unless; where we may see the old proverb verefied in him,
give him an inche and he will take an ell; was his Refuters liberality nothing
worth, when he was content to annexe unto the city, the towns adjoining that
had any distinct Church in them? Did the Doctor at first find himself able, to
confound the former Antecedent (which spoke only of the Christians that were
within the city) and to prove it not only false but also unreasonable and
incredible? And is he now too weak to consute that assertion, which (for his
advantage) is tendered to him in stead of the former? viz. that all the Churches
in any great city and such towns adjoining as had not any distinct Church in
them, made but one particular congregation? must he have all the towns annexed
to the city; and this also freely granted, that in some of those towns, there
were distinct Churches? blame him not though he affect this well; for he
finds himself man good enough, to encounter with such an assertion as this
(if his Refuter would mainteyne it against him,) viz. that all the christians
in a great city, and the towns adjoining (though there were distinct Churches
in some of those towns) made but one particular congregation. Mean while, to
case his heart of that foreconceited fear, which the sight of the parenthesis
(in his Refuters Antecede^t) cast him into; 1. he sporteth himself with some
unsavorie jests, which argues that the ridiculum caput (he speaks of)
cleaves close to his own shoulders; and at length full soberly he undertaketh
to show, that the enclosure before mentioned, bewrays both weakness in the
consequence, and falsehood in the Antecedent.

First touching the consequence, he judges it as weak as the Sect. 6.
former, because he sees not, to what purpose the towns are added because the
parishes be excepted. The former overmuch mirth of the Doctor, has (as it
seems) marred his memory, for he saw well enough before, to what purpose
the towns were added; namely to strengthen the consequence of the first
Enthymem framed by himself, against one branch of his answer, which affirmed
the Presbyters to be divided as well for the country as city. For the Refuter
(desirous to come as near to the Doctor as the truth will give leave)
acknowledges that the Christians which inhabited the towns or country round
about the city, made their repair unto the city, there to join with the
inhabitants thereof in the public worship of God, till their number so
increased, that they might conveniently enjoy a distinct Church, in some one,
or more of those towns. And as it was meet the Refuter should yield so far to
the Doctor: so is it absurd and against common sense; he should be denied to
except those towns, that had a distinct Church seated in them. But will you
see how strongly the Doctor impugneth the consequence, as it now stands, with
this inartificiall argument, q. d, I cannot see to what purpose that addition
serves. Therefore this later consequence is altogether as weak as the former.
Had the Refut: at any time argued so loosely, to infringe any of the Doctors
consequences; he had been worthy to bear this censure, that his faculty is
better in denying consequences; then in proving them. But the Doctor (not being
yet returned to his right temper) at this time is to be borne with not only
for this fault; but also for a worse in charging the Antecedent of falsehood,
when he has nothing to allege that directly impugneth it: yet let us give
him the hearing; By this inclusure (says he) the Antecedent it bewrayed of
falsehood; for The D. to charge his Refuter with falsehood delivers a double
untruth, and yet to no purpose.
if there were in the city and country more distinct Churches or Parishes (as
here is supposed) and these all subor dinate to one (as I have manifestly
proved) then all these will make a Dincese. Behold here a double untruth
propounded to conclude a falsehood in his Refuters Antecedent, and yet all will
not serve the turn, when he has done the most he can. For first, the
parenthesis in the Antecedent, does not necessarily suppose, that the towns
round about every city had distinct Churches in them; only it holds the
matter in suspense, touching some one or more towns in some countries, because
(as the Doctor remembers) Cenchreae near unto Corinth, was a distinct church;
and in such a case, it excepteth such towns, and annexeth to the city church
the rest. Neither is it true, that he has manifestly proved the subordination
of many Churches unto one, within the Apostles daynes; no nor yet within the
first 200. years after Christ. But say there were a truth in both his
untruthes; and grant him also that which he infers, to wit, that many
Churches subordinate to one, will make a Diocese? how does this convince the
refuters Antecedent of falsehood? Did not his passions blind his judgment,
when he imagined there is strength enough in this cosequence? for thus he
reasons. Many Churches in city and country subordinated all to one do make a
Diocise; Ergo, all the Christians in a city, and the towns adjoining, which
have no distinct Church in them, must needs make more then one particular
congregation.

But perhaps he corrects his own error, in the words following, when he
faith; I say therefore again, that though their Antecedent were true, yet the
consequence were to be denied. The which, what is it, but to run from one
error to another? For it is before observed, that the conclusion which the
Refuter slandeth here to mainteyn, is no other in effect then this; that the
Presbyters first ordained by the Apostles, were assigned (not to the overfight
of many Churches) but to one only congregation. Now if there be a truth in his
Antecedent (which affirms that at that time, the Christians in any city and
towns around it (such namely as had no distinct Churches in them) made but one
congregation:) the consequence of the argument; cannot be infringed otherwise;
then by showing that the presbyters received from the Apostles, not only the
charge of that one congregation; but also the government of some other churches
established, in some other, either more populous or more remote towns. Which
to demonstrate, it suffices not to assume this, that many churches subordinate
to one do make a Diocese; but good proof must be added also, that this
subordination of many Churches in country towns to the Church of the city,
took place in the time of the Apostles, and was ratified by their allowance.

Having thus freed the Refuters Enthymem from the Doctors Sect 7.
frivolous exceptions, I will once again produce it to his view; but in
another form, which shall not affright him, as the former parenthesis did, in
a plain syllogism therefore (which kind of argument he best affect^th) thus
I reason;

All the Christians which in the Apostles times dwelt in and about any great
city, and were called the Church of that city, made but one particular
ordinary congregation assembled together in one place: But all those Christians
were the whole or proper charge, unto which the Presbytery with their
President, seated in any city, was assigned by the Apostles. Ergo, the whole
or proper charge unto which the Presbytery with their President seated in the
city assigned by the Apostles, made but one particular ordinary congregation,
assembled in one place.

The conclusion is the same (in effect) with the consequent of the Enthymem
before delivered; and the proposition here is the former Antecedent rightly
understood, according to the explanation where of the D. takes notice. page 83.
Only that clause (of Apostles times) is inserted to prevent his wandering
beyond the principal question, unto the ages that followed the first
assignment of Presbyters to the charge of those Churches, which the Apostles
planted. And because it has very near agreement with that Assumption which
the D. afterward impugneth (cap. 6. page 102. etc.) the defense of that will be
sufficient confirmation of this. For if it may appear (as I doubt not but it
shall) that the Churches of Corinth, Ephesus, and Antioch, in the Apostles
times were each of them no more, then one particular ordinary congregation;
then will it follow that the rest of the Churches planted in cities by the
Apostles, made also but one congregation, the Doct. himself being Judge, who
grants this consequence page 101. At this time therefore passing by the
proposition, I will take in hand the Assumption, which comprizeth the
consequence of the former Enthymem; and unto all already said for removal of
the D. exceptions, I add this one argument following;

The whole or proper charge unto which the Presbytery with their president
seated in any city, was assigned by the Apostles, is co^prized in those
instructions, which in the Apostolical writings concern the office of Bishops
and Presbyters;

But this only charge is there comprised; to wit, the charge of all the
Christians which in those times, dwelling in or about the town or city that
enjoyed such a Presbytery, were called the Church of that place.

Ergo, this only charge, to wit, the charge of all the Christians which in
those times dwelling in or about the Town or City that enjoyed such a
Presbytery; was the whole charge, to which the Presbytery with their president
seated in any city, was assigned by the Apostles.

The proposition cannot be doubted of; seeing the Apostle testifies the
scripture to be sufficient, for the direction of every Minister of God, and
perfecting of him in the work of his calling. 2 Timothy 3. 16. 17. And
th'assumption is evident by these and the like places. (Act. 20. 28. 1. Tim. 3.
1. 5. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. Heb. 13. 7. 17) which show that the persons committed to
the charge of Bishops or Presbyters, were none other then those Christians,
which were members of the particular churches, wherein their labors were
employed. For none other but such christians can properly be understood, by the
shock or Church of God; which they (in the 3. former places) are charged to
feed, to care for; and by the persons, which are (in the two later) commanded to
know, love and obey such as labored among the^ etc. And if the Doctor can
yield us any text of holy writ, that stretches the charge of Bishops and
Presbyters over an whole diocese or country, to labor the conversio^ of all
that within such a circuit belonged to Gods election, I will most gladly
listen to it. In the interim, to end this point, I argue with him a concessis,
in this manner;

A visible Church endued with power of ecclesiastical government, was the
proper and whole charge of each Presbytery, ordained by the Apostles in any
city that embraced the Gospel. But the company of Christians which in the
Apostles times, dwelt in and about any city, and were called the Church of
that city was a visible church endued with power of ecclesiastical
government. Ergo such a company of Christians, was the proper and whole charge,
of each Presbytery ordained by the Apostles, in any city that embraced the
Gospel. The proposition is in effect, all one with that, which the supplieth
to his Enthymem. Cap. 4. sect 1. page 64; where he affirms, that the
Presbyters ordained by the Apostles, were appointed to visible Churches endued
with power of ecclesiastical government. And the Assumption receives
approbation from that description of a church in general, and of a visible
Church in special. cap. 1. page 3. 5. 6. I could make these points more
clears, if I thought it needful; but I hope he will rather subscribe to the
conclusion, then strive in vain against the stream. Wherefore I proceed to
the Refuters argument urged to prove, that the visible Churches endued by the
Apostles with the power of ecclesiastical government, were parishes.

Chap. 5. Proving that the visible Churches planted by the Apostles (as the
Church of Corinth Ephesus Antioch etc.) were each of them in the days of the
Apostles, one only particular Congregation, ordinarily assembled in one place.
Which is handled in the answer. pa. 66. and in the defense, lib. 2. cap. 6.
page 100. etc.
True it is, that the Refuter cleaving close to the words of the Sect. 1. ad
cap. 6. sect. 1. p. 100. and 101.
Doctors assertion (sermon. page 17.) sets down the question these words:
Whether in the Apostles times and in the age following the visible Churches
endued with power of eccelesiasticall government, were parishes or no? Hence Mr
Doctor takes occasion to advertise the Reader, that he is to conclude that the
Churches, were each of them for the whole term at the least, but a parish etc.
yet looking toward his proofs, he consesseth (as the truth is) that his
argumentation conteyneth two ranckes of Instances: the former taken out of the
scriptures, the Later out of the fathers: Wherefore, I hope the indifferent
will conceive, that his scripture instances are not to be carried beyond the
Apostles times; and that the fathers are to speak for the age following: and
consequently will judge it, but an absurd evasion in the Doct. to hold (as he
does) the former instances (and the argument which induces them) unto the
whole term of 200. years, specially seeing he acknowledges (page 102) that
his chief proofs are bounded within the Apostle Paul's time. The Refuters
Argument therefore shall come forth once again, in that plain form that was
first given unto it. Only I add the Church of Jerusalem to the other three,
that he mentions, because that which the Refuter urges touching it, is
bounded also within the Apostles times, as appears page 64. of his answer
(for which cause I refer the handling of his 4 6 7 8 sect. cap. 5. concerning
Jerusalem to this place. And so it lies thus;

If the Churches of Corinth, Ephesus, Antioch, and Ierusalim (being visible
churches endued with power of ecclesiastical government) were each of them but
one parish: then the other visible Churches endued with the like power; were
also each of them, but one parish. But the first is true. Ergo also the second.

To make good the consequence of the Proposition, he said, that it stands
upon the foundation which the Doctor himself laid in the first argument;
drawn from his text: neither was he therein deceived; for in this defense cap.
2. sect. 2. he confesses, that he presupposed all other Churches endued with
power of ecclesiastical government, to be like to those 7; because it is not
to be doubted, but the primitive Churches endued with that power, were of like
nature and constitution. But the Doctor burieth all this in silence; and (as if
the Refuter had entreated that the consequence might pass without
controulment) he seems unwilling to yield him so much favor unless it may
be lawful for him, to use another which he says is like, viz. that if the
Churches of Alexandria and Rome were not parishonall Churches in the first 200
years; (he means unto the full end of that term) then neither were the
Churches of other cities. And then tells us, But they were not parishonall
churches, as for Rome he had proved, and for Alexandria would prove; and
therefore concludes so of the rest. Well, let us reason a little with him; is
the consequence indeed the same? so he says; but does he speak as he is
persuaded? if not, why sets he such a face of truth upon a lie? If yea, why
inwrappeth he his own feet in the snare that he lays for another? for
whether he disclaim or allow the consequence, and the hypothesis, whereon it
is grounded; will he nil he, he must bear the blame of a foul contradiction.
To disclaim it, is to overthrow (as before is noted) the foundation of his
own argument, pa. 42. To allow it, is to make way for the utter ruin of A
foul cotradiction in the D.
that assumption, which he urges for a double advantage, (p. 69 and 122. lin.
1.) for if that may be verefied of all other Churches; which he avoucheth (here
and page 124) for certeinty, of Alexandria; and elsewhere (page 50 and 122)
denies probable in some others, then by the like consequence (alike grounded
on the same hypothesis) we may conclude that all other Churches, endued with
power of ecclesiastical government, were also divided into diverse parishes,
even in the Apostles times, deserves not the D. now to be beaten with his own
cudgel. page 73. Is it credible that any man should be so transported with the
spirit of contradiction, that he should not care, so he may gainsay his
adversaries present affertion; how shamefally he contradicts himself, yet
thus it fares with the Doctor.

Notwithstanding, I can easily free the Refuter from that disadvantage, which
the D. conclusion threatens. For we can and will hold our own consequence for
a truth on both parts already assented to; till we hear him directly
contradict the hypothesis, whereon it is grounded (as himself acknowledges)
viz. that all churches endued with power of ecclesiastical government, were at
the first of the same nature and constitution: but the later shall hang in
suspense, till he has proved, that it is grounded on the same hypothesis. For
in our apprehension, his consequence presupposes, that all Churches were alike
(not in that nature and constitution, wherein they stood at the first, but) in
this alteration, wherein Alexandria and Rome went before others; namely to be
distinguished into many parishes, whereas all, at their first planting, were
vndistinguished as himself confesses.

To pass therefore forwards to the Assumption; because the Sect. 2. ad sect.
2. page 102.
Refuter says, it appears plain by the proof of the particulars. Mr. D.
asks, whether his syll^gismes are so soon come to an end? and perceiving
that his chief proofs are, that in the Apostle Paul's time, each of them used
to assemble in one congregation: he further asks whether this was his
Assumption? whereto I answer, that for brevity sake the Refuter omitted the
contriving of his proofs into form of syllogisticall reasoning, presuming (as
the Doct. says elsewhere in his own defense page 79.) that any man might, from
that which the Doct. observes to be his chief drift conclude his assumption,
thus;

The Churches of Corinth, Ephesus, Antioch and Jerusalem, were each of them in
the Apostle Paul's time, no more then ordinarily assembled in one place.
Therefore, they were each of them, at that time but one parish.
But the Doctor having wronged his Refuter before, by stretching his assumption
beyond the age of the Apostles, to the full term of 200 years; holds on and
doubleth the wrong, by reteyning the same addition of 200. years; that he
might have the more color to cavil with the consequence of the argument; and
to charge his Refuter with playing the Sophister, in taking that for granted,
which he did not so much as dream of; viz. that each of those Churches
continued one congregation; and so one parish, for 200. years, because they
were but one congregation in the Apostles times. Wherefore, what he objecteth
to infringe this consequence, I overpasse as unworthy the answer, seeing he
forged it for the nonce to cavil with. True it is, that the consequence of the
Entoymem before set down presupposes a truth in this assertion; scz. that
those Churches are parishes whose people are no more, then such as ordinarily
assemble in one place. And the Refuter deemed it a vame of time and labor,
(yea mere folly to call into question that which was of the Doctor assented
unto, (sermon. p. 4) viz. that (when we affirm and he denies every visible
Church to be properly a parish) by a parish is meant a particular ordinary
congregation of Christians assembling in one place to the solemn service of
God. Wherefore in denying now the consequence of the argument before
delivered, what else does he, but play the wrangler? For he that means
truly, to bring the matter controverted to the right issue, will never offer
to gainsay, what is certain and confessed. And because he says, that the
reasons of his denial, are set down at large, cap. 3. sect. 5. and 6. I must
tell him that I find nothing there, that directly controuleth the hypothesis
of our consequence here; to wit, that every Church which makes but one
ordinary congregation is a parish. And whatsoever is there said touching the
point then in hand, it is sufficiently (to use his own words) overthrown
already. Wherefore, let us hear those 2. Reasons, which for a surplussage (as he
says) he now adds; The first is this.

If these Churches because they were each of them one congregation, were
parishes, Sect. 3. ad page 103.
before the division of parishes; then they were such Churches, as after the
division, parishes were. But they were not such Churches. (I will add the
conclusion) Ergo, neither were they parishes, before the division of Parishes;
because they were each of them one congregation.

First, I pray the Doctor to tell us, what moves him to tumble into the
conclusion, and consequent of the proposition this clause; before the division
of parishes? Where has his Refuter said, that those Churches of Corinth,
Ephesus etc. were parishes before the division of parishes? or why does he
father on him such a senseless assertion, as this is? For in his own
understanding, it is all one, as if a man should say, that those Churches were
parishes, before they were any parishes at all; as appears by his descanting
upon this point, page 69. and 70. But let us see how the Doctor fortifyeth each
part of his argumentation. First touching his assumption to prove that those
churches were not such, as were the parishes that followed the division, he
urges 3. differences betwixt the one and the other. 1. parishes after their
division, had not a Bishop and a Presbytery (as those Churches had) but only
one preshyter assigned to them. 2. the Pastor of the Parishes was not a
Superintendent, (as was the Bishop of those Churches) over other Pastors. 3.
neither was any of them intended (as each of those Churches was) to be a
Mother Church. These differences being nakedly affirmed, The Doct. argues like
a Sophister.
may with a bare denial be repelled; but the answer at this time shall be
rather this; that he plays the Sophister in arguing a dicto secundum quid, ad
simpliciter. For say that he could (as he cannot) mainteyne these differences;
those Churches might be (yea were) notwithstanding, such churches as the
parishes were after the division: that is, alike in the point, which himself
takes notice of (page 4. of his sermon) as the substanciall point of the
agreement intended; the former being as well as the later, each of them, one
ordinary congregation assembled in one place. But if his meaning be, that they
were not such in all points; we may well demurre upon the matter, till the
question be debated (which belongs to another tract) what manner of parishes
they were, which received their original, from the division of one city
Church into many parishassemblies. In the mean time, to come to the
consequence of his proposition, whereas he says, it may not be denied,
specially by them, that would have all parishes framed to the constitution of
the first Churches; I will be so bold as utterly to contradict this speech, and
say the contrary to it, that it may very well be denied even by such as would
have the parishes so framed. For in as much as they desire, not the abolishing
of parishes, but the reducing of them to the pattern of the first churches, it
is evident, that they in their judgment hold two kinds of parishes; the one
differing from, the other agreeing with the form and constitution of the first
Churches. And whosoever will in any sort undertake the defense of that
conclusion, which the Doctors argument throws upon his Refuter, he must needs
distinguish in some respect or other, betwixt the parishes that had their being
before, and those that began after that division of parishes, whereof he
speaks; and therefore must of necessity contradict the Doctors consequence,
and say, that the first Churches, which were parishes (in as much as they were
but one congregation) before that division of parishes, which followed (when
those Churches by reason of their multitude, hugely increased, were parted into
more particular congregations;) were not in all points such Churches as the
later parishes were.

Thus is the stroke of his first reason warded; let me come now Sect. ^
to encounter with the second. If says he, that assumption was false, which
denied Parishes to have been distinguished in the Apostles times; then these
Churches were not only many congregations, but many parishes also. But the
Refuter said before that that assumption had no truth in it. (here also must I
add the conclusion) Ergo, those Churches were, not only many congregations
but also many parishes. Understand this to be meant of each Church severally,
q. d. Ergo each of them was not one only congregation or parish, but many. And
mark what follows. These two just exceptions (says he) I have against his
consequence. So you may discern how just cause he gives me, to take up
against him, his own fashion of reply, page 72. Good Sir, what is this to the
Refuters consequence? Where does he say, that each of these Churches was but
one congregation, and not many? and where, that each was but one parish? Is not
the former his Antecedent or assumption, and the later the consequent or
conclusion? Therefore (to use his own words, page 73.) when you would seem to
deny the consequence, you do not so much as touch it; but by taking a supposed
advantage against some other assertion of his; you deny the principal
conclusion. I might proceed therefore to rowse him up, with the sweet sound of
his own b^lls, page 47. and ring this peale into his cares, Is not the denial
of the conclusion an evidence that the Doctor is confounded etc? but I spare
him the rest of his speech and return to the matter. His argument is no other
then such as he before objected (page 73. and 76.) and is already answered cap.
3. s^ct. 10. and 15.) to this purpose, viz. that the refuter in affirming
parishes to be distinguished in the Apostles times, cannot contradict his own
assertion, which mainteyneth the Apostolic Churches to be parishes; because in
his understanding, every particular congregation is a parish. And if it be not
so also in the Doctors persuasion, why does he so often use the words
indiff^rently (viz. several parishes or congregations) for one and the same
thing? Yea since he coupleth congregations and parishes togi^her in this very
argument of his; to contradict his conclusion, and so to justify our own, I
tender him for req^itall this that follows.

If that assumption be true which denies the Churches to have been divided
into several congregations or parishes in the Apostles t^me: then the Churches
o^ Corinth, Eph^sus etc. Were in that age each of them; but on^ only
congr^gation or parish. But that ^ssump^ion ^s by the D. maint^yned to be true,
page 69. and 73; let him therefore disclaim that Assumptio^, or give way to
this conclusion. Therefore, the Churches of Cori^th Ephesus etc were each of
them, in the Apostl^s ^im^s, but one only congregation or parish, and not
many. But let us hear, what it is that withholdeth his a^sent from the
Antecedent (or assumption) of the Refuters, b^for^ set down.

Though I deny not (says he) b^t that ^t the first, and namely in the Sect. 5.
ad sect. 3. pa. ^04.
time of the Apostle P^ul, the most of the Churches, so soon after their
conversion) did not each of them exceed, the proportion of a p^pulous
congregation: yet ^ cannot yield to all his proofs. Even so, but why does he
not answer directly to the point, by approving or contrarying, that which is
said of those three churches, Corinth Ephesus and Antioche? If it be false in
his p^rswasion, what makes him affrayd or ab^sht, to discover the falsehood
thereof? if true, why does he not plainly acknowledge it? He has courage
enough to do the one; but it seems he wants that grace that should do the
other. And touching the proofs, when he says, he cannot yield to all, would
not a man think he did allow of some? and yet snarleth at every one. But if a
man should ask him for his best proofs, that he can p^oduce, to justify that
which he acknowledges (scz. that the most of the Churches in Paul's time did
not exceed the proportion of a populous congregation) could he find (think ye)
in the Apostolical writings any more pregnant allegations, to countenance his
assertion, then such as the Refuter has produced? Well, let us give him the
hearing in his exceptions. First in the scriptures alleged he tak^th occasion
from the date of them, being before the year 55. or 60), to weaken his
argumentation; for it sounds in his ears as is he had said, If before the
year 55. or 60, they were but The D. is ^pilanthanomin^s cautou^.
one congregation, then they were no more unt^ll the year 200. See how soon
the Doctor forgets himself; for his own pen testifyeth (lin. 1. and 2. of
this very page 104) that both the maine argument and the proofs thereof do
speak of the Apostles time. And can any matter questioned concerning the state
of any Church or Churches in the Apostles time be proved from the scripture,
otherwise then by those testimonies that their writings affoard? He that can
argue at his pleasure from the condition of the 7. Churches in S. John's time
(see his defense for this. lib. 2. pa. 45. and 47. and lib. 3. page 21.) to
conclude all other Churches to be such, as they were for the first 200, years;
and from the stare of the Churches that flourished in the third or fourth age
after Christ; to prove that the Churches and Bishops established by the
Apostles, were of the same constitution: does he not show himself an egregious
wrangler, when he will not admit the testimony of S. Paul and S. Luke, to be
sufficient for the time of the Apostles, because S. John lived 40. years or
more after the date of their writings? especially when no alteration can be
proved, by any other evidence, as himself confesses, page 101. lin. 21.

But perhaps he has exceptions of more weight against the particulars. For
touching the church of Corinth he says, the thing that is testified for it (1.
Cor. 11. 18. 20. 33.) is such as might be written to the Church of England.
False and absurd, can it be affirmed of all the people professing the gospel
in England, that they come, (or for their number may come) together (en te
ecclesia and epitoauto) in one Church, or into one place; to eat the Lords
supper? but the words of the Apostle (verse. 18. 20. 33.) do by consequence
imply that the faithful which then were members of the Church in Corinth (to
whom he writes) came together in one church assembly and into one place (or at
least for their number might, and in duty ought, so to assemble together) to
eat the Lords supper. Compare the tenor of the Apostles words sunerchomenoon
humoon etc. v. 18. 20. with the like phrase of speech (1. Cor. 5. 4.)
sunachthentoon humoon etc. Math. 22. 34. 41. and 27. 17. Act. 20. 7. 8. and 25.
17. and 28. 17. sunegmenoon, vel sunelthontoon etc. and it will appear that a
concurse into one place, for one work, is imported by the very word
sunerchomai, though it had no other words annexed to enforce that
construction. Neither can any one instance be given, where it notes such a
distribution into many several societies, as must be implied in it, if it
should be applied to the Church of England, which cannot possibly be gathered
into one place, for the celebration of the Lords supper. But why does the
Doctor bury in silence, that other testimony, 1. Cor. 14. 23. etc. Ean oun
sun^lthe he ecclesia holee epi to auto? What, did he skip because he could not
spell? Doubtless his own conscience told him, the simplest of his readers
would have discerned, that he had spoken against common sense, if he should
have said, that the like might be affirmed of the Church of England. viz. that
the whole church comes together into one place. And yet he was loath to
acknowledge, that those words evidently approve the Ref: assertion touching the
Church of Corinthe, viz. that their number was no more then such, as ordinarily
assembled for the worship of God into one place.

Secondly, whereas he says, that what is testified for the church Sect. 6. ad
page 105.
of Ephesus, Act. 20. 28. might be applied by a Bishop in his visitation to all
the Ministers of a Dioc^se. What else is it but a direct contradiction of that
truth which himseffe has already approved, page 75. A flat contradiction in
the D.
viz. that those Presbyters attend^d one flock in common (that is co^muni
co^cilso, et mutu^ auxilio,) and were not assioned to several parishes, or
parts of the flock. For how can that speech, which imports a common charge
given to many Presbyters, over one flock or congregation (not yet distinguished
into several parts or members) fitly be applied (and without any change in the
meaning of the words) to a multitude of Ministers which have every one, their
particular flock or portion of people committed to his peculiar oversight? If
the Doct. shall (either here, or in the for his defense, that these speeches
may be fitly applied (though in a differing sense) to such purpose as he
affirms; it may be replied, that if he confess the sense to be differing, he
discovers his answer to be deceitful; but it is false and absurd, if the
construction of the words be one and the same. As for that which he adds
touching the word flock that it may be extended to a national, provincial or
diocesan Church, what means he still to presume, that his bare word will be
taken for current payment? I confess, it is sometimes put for the universal
Church (as John 10. 16.) but he can allege no place in all the Apostolical
writings, where it is given to any visible church, that comprised in her
circuit many distinct congregations. Wherefore he can with no show of reason
contradict his Refuter in affirming it to be a new conceit (and void of
reason) to imagine that the church of Ephesus was a Diocesan flock consisting
of many congregations. Moreover how can we in the interpretation of the
scripture, admit any word, whose signification is questioned to be extended
unto a thing, which at that time had none existe^ce in rerum natura? or how can
he affirm without contradiction to the truth (elsewhere acknowledged) that the
Church of Ephesus was a national or provincial Church? for provincial
Churches grew up by the combinatio^ of many Dioceses, under one Metropolitan
Bishop, (as himself affirms lib. 3. page 21) but as yet Ephesus had no
Bishop at all, if that be true which he mainteyneth touching Timothy their
Bishop, in his account; (sermon page 79. and 80. and Def. lib. 4. page 90.) viz.
that he was not ordained Bishop, till after Paul's deliverance from his
imprisonment at Rome. And if the rest of the churches which were then in Asia
(1. Cor. 16. 19.) stood in any subordination to Ephesus, as the Mother Church
of the whole nation; why should not Ephesus have some note of principality
given unto it, above the rest of the 7. Churches Apoc. 1. and 2? But himself
reckons them all alike principal; (lib. 2. page 43. lin. 2.) at the least
equalleth 4. other with Ephesus in the dignity of Mother-cities. p^. 63.
following;

Thirdly concerning the Church at Antioch, rather then the D. will acknowledge,
that the people thereof assembled together in one Sect. 7. 2d page 105.
place (which the Refuter gathers from Acts. 14. 27.) he indeavoureth to
elude the testimony by a frivolous evasion that has no appearance of truth. It
is apparent (says he) that not all the Church consisting of busbandes and
wives, their children and servants; but some of the cheese and principal,
perhaps not many (perhaps not any) besides those of the clergy, were called to
that meeting. Thus he says, but why does he not acquaint us with the reasons
that made this apparent to his senses? does he think still to win credit by his
bare word? when Paul and Barnabas were by imposition of hands commended to the
grace of God, for that work which they had now fulfilled, will he say that the
laity for the greater part (or at least wives children and servants) were
excluded from the Leiturgie, fasting and prayers, which were then performed.
Act. 13. 2. 3? does not himself acknowledge the Leiturgie to be the public
service of God in the congregation? sermon: of the dig: and duty of the Ministers
page 25. lin. penult. Is it not the judgment of the sound divines? leitourgein
significat (says Aretius upon that place) talieta ergazein, publica obire
muni^. Collectaerat, ecclia^ (says Zanchius de oper: redempt. page 714.) quta
Lucas ait lcitourgo^ntoon autoon. If the^ the whole body of that Church
(without exception of age, sex or outward estate) joined in prayer and fasting,
when they were separated to the work; shall we think, they disdeyned to
assemble the whole, or made special choice of few, when they gathered the
Church together, to relate unto them what God had wrought by their Ministry?
Is it not safest, and most consonant to the rules of sound interpreting the
text, to understand by the church here, the multitude, and not the cle^gie
only, or some few principal men; seeing in another case (and not long after)
it is expressly said, that they which were sent with Paul and Barnabas to
Antioche from the Synod at Ireusalcm sunagago ntes to p^thos) having gathered
together the multitude, delivered the ^pistle? y 2 the D. himself quoteth both
this text (Acts. 14. 27.) and those before handled, touching the Corinthian
Church (1. Cor. 11. 18. 23) as signifying the Church of a city and country
adjoining, co^gregated into a congregation. (page 4. of this book). Wherefore,
it is apparent, that in co^tradicting his Refuters proofs from the scriptures;
he does but labor to obscure the light, which himself discerns well enough;
but is loath that others should apprehend.

His other testimonies are out of Eusebius, Ignatius and some Sect. 8. 2d page
105. sect. 4.
of our own writers as the D. says, of all which, this is his grave censure
in general. That they are soarce worth the mencioning; and yet he does his
best to wrest them out of his Refuters hands; let us see how well he does it.
First out of Eusebius it is observed that he ealleth the Churches of Corinth,
Ephesus and Antioch, paroikias, that is, parishes. And because the D. had
inserted (sermon. page 4. and 26.) something to persuade that Eusebius and others
take the word in a larger sense, to wit, for the whole diocese, or at least for
city and suburbs, though containing many particular parishes: to make it
appear that Eusebius takes the word as we do, for one particular
congregation of Christians, he urges that phrase, which he asks concerning
Timothees Bishopric, which he says, was of the parish in Ephesus. Now it
were, (says the Refuter) a strange kind of sp^ach, ^r Eusebius to term the
Diocese (or the whole city and suburbs) of Ephesus, the parish of Ephesus; for
who would say, the parish in London, for the Diosese of the Bishop of London;
seeing the whole city is not the tenth part of the Diocise? And adds, that as
Eusebius calls the Church of Ephesus, one parish in Ephesus; so when he
speaks of the Christians in a Province, he calls their several companies
assembling together in one place Parishes or Churches, as of Creete, Pontus
etc. lib. 3. ca. 4. and lib. 4. cap. 22. To all which the Doctor makes a
slight answer, first referring us to that which he has before spoken touching
the ancient use of the word paroikia (cap. 1. page 11.) where there is not one
word, that either takes notice of the maine objection (touching the parith in
Ephesus) or gives any color of answer to it; therefore he adds that
Eusebius as he used the proposition en, so sometimes kata to the same purpose,
the which is false, and has nothing to cover the naked falsehood of it.

Unto Ignatius who witnesses, that the Church of Ephesus, in his time, came
together (ipi to auto) into one place, he gives the like answer, to that
which is refuted before (touching the words 1. Cor. 11. 18. 20.) viz. that the
faubsull in London may be in like manner exhorted (though they be divided into
many congregations) to come ofc together into one place. But he that should so
write, would be thought to speak very iproperly and obscurely; seeing it is
impossible they should all meet together in one place, for the public service
of God. As for word polupletheia, which Ignatiu uses (as the D. imagines) of
purpose to note, that the Church consisted of many multitudes or congregations;
it is but a weak conjecture, unworthy to come from the Doctor for popupletheia
is nothing else, but polu plethos a great multitude; and therefore argues not
many congregations, but rather one great assembly. But go we forwards;
whereas Ignatius calls the Church at Antioch sunagogen, a Synagogue, which
properly notes one congregation; as rich as he is, he has no other answer to
give us, but that it is used in the same signification with ecclesia, which
argues his poverty, in as much as he does therein again but beg the
question. Yea, but he has another shift wherein he much glories, viz. that
Ignatius entitleth himself the Bishop of Syria. epist. ad Magnes. and Romans and
as if he had struck it dead, wills his adversary to tell him, what manner of
parish Syrsa was; and desires that may hear also what he can object against
the two epistles; and so gives all the grace he can to them, closing all up
and saying, that he leaves that most pregnunt and authentic evidence of
Ignatius to his adversary to muse upon. See you not how brag he would seem
to be, as if he had gotten a great conquest? yet what is this to the present
question? will he thus argue? The Christians throughout Syria in the time of
Ignatius (who calls himself the Bishop of Sy-ria) made many Churches or
congregations. Ergo the Church of Antioch (where of he had more properly the
charge) was more then one congregation. Can there come a worse inconsequence
from one that is but a smatterer in school disputations?

Thus are we come to the testimonies of the new writers. viz. Tindall, Bale,
Fulk, Perkins; Our great Church-Bible, and D. Bilson. Sect. 9. ad page 106. and
107.
All which, the Doctor says (excepting two testimonies of Tindall) the Refuter
most childishly alleges. But what if his exceptions be more childish, then
his Refuters allegations? let us compare them; and leave the censure of both,
to the indifferent reader. It is objected that the ancient translators of the
new testament into the english tongue, do turoe the word, ecclesia,
congregation; when they speak of the Church of Ephesus, and the rest in the
Revelation: and to the same purpose are the rest (but Doct. Bilson) alleged).
And that translation is justified not only by Mr Tindall Thomas More, but by
John Bale sometimes a Bishop, in his exposition of the word Churches and
Candlesticks, by D. Fulk against the Rhemists aunot, in Ephel. 5. and by Mr
Perkins in his exposition of Apoc. 2. and 3. affirming that the 7. Churches
were particular congregations. And D. Bilson against the Seminaries affirms,
that the word is never taken in the new testament for the Priests alone; but
for the congregation of the faithful, and namely that it is so taken Act. 20,
28. From which allegations it is inferred, that therefore in their judgment,
the Church of Ephesus, and other like chutches in cities; were each of them but
one particular congregation, and did not consist of many. Now is not this
inference grounded on good probability? for can it be imagined that these
learned and worthy men would have so interpreted the word ecclesie, by
congregation, if they had not been persuaded, that most naturally it expressed
the meaning thereof? And if so; must not each particular Church, be, in their
judgment one particular congregation? If the Papists could prove any one of
the 7. Churches of Asia, to have consisted of many distinct congregations: were
it not a more just exception, then any they have alleged, to weaken their
interpretation; seeing a multitude distinguished into many congregations, cannot
properly be called one congregation? But let us hear the Doctors exceptions.
First he tells us, that the ancient english Bibles, do use the word
congregation, not only where mention is made of particular Churches, but of
the universal Church also, as Mat. 16 18. Ephesians. 1. 22. and 5. 25. even so;
and we know it well; and esteem the reason to be alike; for as particular
Churches are each of them one visible congregation, and not many: so is the
Church universal, one invisible congregation; the former gathered together
into one assembly; open to the eyes of men at one time and in one place; the
other gathered together into one mystical body, which (though hidden from men
in this world, yet) is ^no nituitu manifest unto God, and at the last day,
shall be actually congregated into one assembly in the view of men and angels.
Secondly the Doctor lays down the reasons moving the first translators of
the Bible into English, to avoid the name Church and in stead thereof to use
the word congregation. 1. Because CHURCH more properly signifies the place of
meeting, then the congregation it self, which is meant by ecclesia. 2. Because
the Papists had abused it, to signify, either generally the romish Church, or
particularly to import the romish Clergy. And I wish the reader to consider,
whether this first reason does not justify the refuters affirmation, viz. that
in the judgment of those Translators ECCLESIA does properly note such a
congregation as is gathered together in one place, and whither the second does
any way infringe it?

Thirdly concerning the testimony of D. Fulk; the Doctor says, Sect. 10. ad
page 107.
the allegation thereof, shows extreme want, either of indgement or
beneftie: but I persuade my self, the want either of the one or other, will
more justly fall upon the Accuser, then the Refut: when things are
indifferently weighed on both sides. For wherein has he failed? Is it not true
which he says, that D. Fulkinstifieth the translation of ecelesia by
congregation, as better expressing the Greek then the word Church? and does not
this argue plainly, that he heild the Church of Ephesus (and all other
Churches in cities) to consist but of one particular congregation? In deed, if
his defense of our Bibles, translating ecclesia by congregation, had been
limited only to that text Ephesians. 5. 23. (as Mr Doctor indeavoureth to
persuade) the Refuter had showed little discretion, in the choice of that
restimony, to argue that which he infers: but as the Rhemists (in their
annot. on that text) tax our first english Bibles with corruption (not for
mistranslating the word in that place only, but generally) for not using so
much at once in all the Bible, the name of Church, but in stead thereof,
congregation: so D. Fulks answer is sitted in general to justify the
Translators in so doing. They rather used (says he) the word Congregation then
Church to avoid ambiguity; because this word Church is commonly taken for the
house of the assembly of Christians; and that the people might know that the
Church is a gathering together, of all the members into one body, which in the
name of church does not appear. Is it not plain that in his understanding,
the word eccksia signifies properly, such an assembly of Christians as is
gathered together into one body, in one house or place, such as commonly we call
a Church? See I pray, how he interprets himself in his answer to Gregory
Martin Pref. sect. 51. page 92. and cap. 5. sect. 5. page 148. Wherefore, though
he speak never a word of the Church of Ephesus in special, yet his defense of
the translations in general, does not only justify them in calling the Church
in Ephesus, the Congregation in Ephesus; but also argue by consequence, that
the Church there consisted at that time, (not of many several congregations,
but) of one particular Church-assembly only. Wherefore, the Doctor might with
more judgment and honesty have set a less face upon it, then to charge his
Refut: with want of either, for alleging his testimony. Fourthly, as touching
the testimony of Mr. Perkins, the same inference also clearly arises from his
assertion, viz. that the 7. churches were particular congregations. For he
would never have so said unless he thought each of them to be one particular
congregation; seeing it were absurd to entitle any Church, a particular
congregation, which is known to consift of many particulars. And for the same
cause, who can with reason judge otherwise, then that D. Bilson also took the
Church of Ephesus to be one congregation, when he alleges Act. 20. 28. to
show, that the Church in the new Testament, is put for the congregation of the
faithful, and not for the Priests alone. Wherefore whereas the D. in the
conclusion renueth his challenge, that our new writers are childishly
alleged; what else does he, but show himself to be set to outface all? The
which the more appears by that his tax laid upon his Refuter for alleging
Mr Tindall which (as he says) was not a childish mistakeing, but a wilful
misalleadging of him in both places, there being in the former, no such thing;
and in the later a falsifying of the testimony; and to aggrevate the offense,
charge it upon him as committed again. lib. 4. cap. 7. sect. 9. But if any
fault be here committed (save the mistaking of page 135. for 133.) it is in the
Doctor, who might also have amended that mistaking; seeing he could not but see
it, when he patched up his own allegation out of both those pages; but it
seems he had rather make two faults then mend one. And that it may appear
how he falsely accuses his Retuter; let the reader consider, that as the words
set down by him are not Mr Tindals words at large; but a breife of them; so
they are a true breife of them. For proof whereof it is clear, 1. that he
makes Bishops, Priests and Elders all one, page 53. 54. 251. 345. 2. He says
that by their office, they were always abiding in one place to govern the
Congregation there. page 251. And 3. (however the Doctor says, he makes the
word CONGREGATION as large as the word ECCLEST A CHURCH, yet he makes the word
Church or Congregation, whereof a Bishop, Priest, or Elder had the charge, no
larger, then one particular company assembling in one place as appears both
by his exposition of Math. 18. 17. (page 345.) and by his words at large (which
the D. could not but (though he would not) see, when he overskipped them) page
133. where speaking of the 2. officers ordained by the Apostles for the
governing of the Church; he says. The Apostles disguished no man, but chose
men annoy^ted with the same spirit (viz. wherewith Christ anointed them) one
to preach the word, whom We call after the Greek tongue, a Bishop or Prust,
that is, in English, an overseer, or an Elder; how he was anointed thou
read 1. Tim. 3. etc. This Overseer becanse he was taken from his own
business and labor to preach Gods word to the parish, bath right by the
autboritie of his office, to challendge an honest living of the parish, etc.
Likewise in every congregation, chose they another after the same ensample, as
is to be seen Act. 6. whom after the grword we call Deason, that is in
English, servant or Minister, whose office was to help and assist the Priest,
to gather up his duty, and to gather for the poor etc. But of Mr Tindalls
judgment and words we shall hear more at large when we come to that place,
where he says his Refuter falsifyeth his testimony again; in the mean time,
let the reader judge with what face the Doctor so charged his Refuter.

Thus much shall suffice to show, how the Doctor sought but startingholes, in
all his exceptions against the refuters testimonies. For when he has done
wrangling with all his proofs, he returns to his denial of the consequence
(page 111.) viz. that though it were granted, that each of the Churches for a
time did not exceed for their number the proportion of one ordinary
congregation; yet it would not prove them to have been parishes. As if he could
deny them, to be each of them one parish (that is, one co^-gregation) and yet
grant the^ to be one only ordinary congregation.

Having done with those 3. Churches of Corinth Ephesus and Antioch; Sect. 11.
ad cap. 5. sect. 8. pa. 89.
we are to proceed to that which the D. answers concerning the Church of
Jerusalem; viz. to the assumption of that syllogisma which affirms (Cap. 5.
sect. 8. page 89.) the Christians of lerusalem to have continued one assembly
meeting together in one place (during S. Lukes story) Act. 2. 1. 2. 6. 44. and
6. 2. and 15. 22. 25. and 21. 22. This (says the D) is false, because the
Church of Jerusalem never was a parish so far was it from continuing so still
etc. and the D. dwells wholly in a manner upon this answer; but the Reader is
to be advertised, that he does but trifle and quarrel with words, rather then
impugn the maine point of the argument, for when the Refuter affirms that
the Christians at lerusalem continued one parishonall assembly, meeting
together in one place; the later clase is the explication, or rather
confirmation of the former. q. d. they continued one parish-assembly, in as much
as they met together in one place. Wherefore the principal question here for
Ietusalem, (like as before for the 3. above named Churches) is, whether the
Christians there might and did meet together, in one place? to this purpose
those places out of the Acts are quoted, and if the D. can make the contrary
appear, his labor is well spent, otherwise he does but beat the aier. It is
not probable (says he) that the Church of Ierusate afeer they came to the
number of 5000. did ordinarily meet all in one place. Belike he holds it
probable, that before they arose to that number they did ordinarily meet
together in one place; so that when he striveth to wrest from his Refuter the
places alleged out of Act. 2. he does here (as before is observed sect. 5.)
rather quarrel with his proofs, then contradict the thing thence collected.
But let us take the particulars of the thing as they lie in order. We read
(says he) of some Panegyricall meetings, as it were in Salomons porch and in
the temple, such as be the meetings at Paul's cross and at the Sp^tle; but
their ordinary and as it were parishonall meetings, were by companies in more
private places. It is true, we read of diverse meetings, some in more private
houses (as Act. 2. 1. 2. 46. and 4. 31. and 5. 42.) and some in more public
places (as the Temple Act. 2. 46. and 5. 12. 42.) but that one were
Panegyricall and the other Parishonall (whether simply, or as it were) I for my
part never read author, that has gone before the Doctor in this distinction;
neither does he yield us any shredd of probability to grace his apprehension.
The maine point now stood for (viz. that the Christians at Jerusalem were but
one ordinary assembly, gathered into one place) is apparent enough by the
scriptures before quoted; though in the Doctors eyes they seem to be either
ignorantly or absurdly alleged. For however the two first verses of Act. 2.
are by some learned Interpreters restreyned to the 12. Apostles, because they
think the promise of the holy Ghost belonged to them alone. cap. 1. 4. 5. yet
are there others also of good account, that hold it no absurdity to think,
that the rest of the disciples (which accompanied the Apostles, cap 1. 14. 15.)
were pareakers with them of the holy Ghost; because it suiteth well with Ioels
prophesye, urged by Peter, (cap. 2. 17. 18.) and with that riches of Gods
grace, manifested in many others afterward, cap. 8. 17. and 10. 45. 46. and 19
6. And D. Saravia, (whose judgment should not be lightly rejected of Mr Doctor
and his associates) holds it (lib. de minist. grad. cap. 5.) for so certain
a truth, that the whole number of 120 received the holy Ghost; that he
distributeth them into these ^. ranks, 12. Apostles, 72. Evangelists, and 36.
prophets; which put together make the just number of 120. But I will not
contend for this matter, only I wish that moderation which is in Piscator. (in
Acts 2. 4,) who, though he appropriateth the gifts of the holy Ghost then
given, to the 12. Apostles; yet denies not, but many others, were then
assembled with them in the same place. But hereat the D. ^^ombleth, and cannot
see, (though it should be granted that the 120. were all assembled together)
how it should be a parishenall assembly, wherein the 12. patriarshes of
Christendom were met together? why? was not Jacobs household, at the first, one
family, though the 12. Patriarchs of the Jewish nation, were there combined in
one society? Yea, was not Noah's company in the ark one family, though they were
the root of all nations, and people that filled all kingdoms and countries in
the world? Or did the coming of Paul and Barnabas (because they were Apostles
into the Synagogue at Antioche (Act. 13. 14.) alter the nature of the assembly,
and make it no longer a parishonall Synagogue?

As for the 6. and 44. verses of Act. 2. they were jointly cited to Sect. 12.
2d page 91.
show that those 3000. converts (mentioned verse. 41.) had recourse to one
place, both before and after their conversion, for they are included within the
mention of that multitude which came together verse. 6. and of those beleeveres
which are said to be all epi to auto in one place verse. 44. But the D. tells
us, that Calvin prefers another sense, viz. that they were in one, that is,
joined together in heart and affection, as is said. Cap. 4. 32. and the Doctor
knows that others prefer the sense the Refuter gives, yea and
acknowledges also that it may be true; and may signify, they coversed together
in one place, which is to grant as much as the Refuter asks. For if the words
may be so construed, then it must also be confessed, that as yet they made but
one assembly gathered in one place. Not so (says the Doct.) he speaks not of
their assemblies, for ver. 46. he speaks of their meetings in the temple.
Belike his meaning is, that their Church assembly is mentioned verse. 46, and
not verse. 44. if so, there is some kindness in him, that will give his adversary
another text, as sit for his purpose as the former; for if they all met
together for holy exercises in any one place (temple or any other) the Refuters
assertion stands firm. Yea, but the D. will not have his Refuter to be so
much beholding, to him, for he adds, that in the temple, they could not meet
alone, and that there, national r^ther then parishonall meetings used to be
assembled. As if the comuning in of strangers into one of our parish-Churches
at the time of Lectures and sermons, made the assembly to be no parishonall
assembly, but somewhat else? (perhaps we shall know of him hereafter what) but
how does this concourse of others weaken the Refuters purpose? will the D. say,
the Christians at Jerusalem were too many for one congregation; because when
they all met in the temple, some others were intermingled with them? does not
the contrary rather follow very strongly? viz. that they all were not more then
such as might and did assemble in one place; seeing they were all with one
accord in the temple, although they could not there meet alone.

Concerning the meetings of the 12. Apostles and multitude of Sect. 13.
the Disciples. Acts. 6. 2. and of the whole Church with the Apostles and
Elders Acts. 15. 22. 25. the D. answer is, they were not parishonall but rather
Synodicall (page 90.) The later indeed, is como^ly taken for a Synodicall
assembly, because the Synod, selebrated in succeeding ages, followed the
pattern there given by the Apostles; in determining the like questions; but if
we look to the persons there assembled, it carried no great resemblance of a
Synod; for none were called thither from any other Church or Churches in the
Countries adjoining, only some were sent from Antioch, to confer with the
Apostles and Elders, which then abode at Jerusalem; and they gathered the whole
Church of the City together, for the hearing and determining of the matter
then controverted; which course was imitated in the next age. (before Synods
grew into common use) when one Church by letters and messengers sent, and
craved the help and direction of some other Church and their Ministers, in any
question of weight, that began to breed disturbance. But for the Refuters
purpose it suffices that the whole Church was then assembled in one place as
verse. 22 25 show; and as the same is clearly collected also from Acts. 6. 2:
so there is less reason to make it a Synodicall and not a parishonall assembly.

There remains Act. 21. 22. where it is told Paul, that the whole ^ultitude
would come together, when they should bear that he was some; which words are,
(in all reason) to be refered to those many thousands of believing Jews,
mentioned verse. 20; for of them it is said, that they were informed of him,
that he taught to for sake Moses, and for their satisfaction, he was directed,
to go into the temple and to show himself an observer of the law, verse. 21.
24; and however the Doctor (after his manner wrangleth) with the allegatio^, in
saying the word multitude may be otherwise understood; (to wit, of the people
of lerusalem in general as well unbeleevers as believers) yet he denies not,
but it may be meant of the believers only, which is a plain confession, that
the believers in that Church, were at that time, no more then such as might
well asse^ole into one place. Neither does the mention of many ten thowsands
(in those words, posas muriadas etc. verse. 20. make the number such as by no
means could meet together in the public worship of God, seeing it is apparent
Luke 12. 1. that the people which assembled unto Christ, and did partake his
doctrine, were also many muriades. And albeit he began at the first to speak to
his disciples, verse. 2, yet afterward he spoke to all the people assembled,
verse. 13. 15. 54. Besides, it is to be observed, that a great number of these
believers, were strangers which were not inhabitants of Jerusalem, but came
thither to the feasts of the Passover and Pentecost: and some of them it may
be not actual members of any Church, but such as are spoken of, Ioh. 2. 23.
24. To conclude therefore, seeing it is evident by the words of S. Lokes
story, that all the believers which belonged to the Church at Jerusalem in
that time were assembled together in one place from time to time as occasion
served; it is sufficiently proved (all the Doctors cavils not with standing)
that they did not for their number exceed the proportion of one ordinary
congregation; and consequently (as the rest of the Churches before spoken of,
so) this was rather a parish assembly, then a diocesan church like to one of
ours.

As for the Doctors exceptions sect. 6. page 87. (viz. that the Sect. 14. ad
sect. 6. page 87.
Church of Jerusalem was never intended to be one parish among many, but a
mother Church to beget others, which were to be severed from it, and yet to
remain subject to it; and that it was intended that all the Christians both in
city and country should be under the Bishop of Jerusalem like as the people of
city and country were all under one high-preist) me thinks that reader is
stra^gely and strongly conceited of the Doctor, that will enterteyne these
points, upon his own mere conjecture and bare word. For however it is clear,
that many Churches drew their original from Jerusalem, and received the faith
by their Ministry, which had been for a time members of that Church (Act. 8.
1. 4. 5. 44. and 9. 19. 22.) yet is there not the least inkling of the least
subjection, that any of those daughter churches, yielded to Jerusalem, or the
presbytery there established. And therefore the intention which he dreameth of
(concerning the subjection of all Christians in City and Country to the Bishop
of Jerusalem, like as all the Jews were anciently under the high. priest) has
neither foundation in the holy scriptures; nor can he gather it from the
practice of succeding ages; seeing their advancing of the Church of Cesarea to
the honor of a Metropolitance Church, superior in jurisdiction to Jerusalem;
argues that they were altogether ignorant of it. For, among the many and great
thoughts of the Doctors heart, can this enter into it, that they would
wittingly depart from that order, which was instituted or intended by the
Apostles, to follow the which was instituted or intended the Apostles, to
follow the course of that pre-eminence, which the Roman Emperors (that were
enemies to Christ and his truth) should establish in their political
government? But what need many words in a plain matter? This is enough for
resuting so frivolous a fancy, as has no force of any sound reason to confirm
it. Thus have we seen how well the Doctor has proved that the Churches
founded by the Apostles were Dioceses properly, like to ours; and not parishes.
It now follows in the second book, that we examine his proofs for his
Diocesan Bishops.

THE SECOND PART. THE SECOND BOOK.
Chapter 1. Showing that in the 4. point of the Doctors sermon and third book
of the defense thereof, there is not one place of scripture that affoardeth him
any help of proof for the justifying of his episcopal function.
IN the fourth point of the Doct. sermon he handles Section. 1.
ex professo the superiority of Bishops over other Ministers, and in the 3.
book of his defense he indeavoureth the justifying of the same. And first he
entreats in general of their superiority in degree; but though he boast
(sermon. page 29.) that all antiquity favors his opinion; yet he passes by
the Apostolical writings, as too ancient for his purpose. Notwithstanding,
when he comes to declare the particulars, wherein the superiority of Bishops
consists; he refers us (sermon. page 32.) to the epistle of Paul to Titus
(cap. 1. 5.) there to behold that threefold superiority given by him to
Bishops; to wit, their singularity of pre-eminence during life, and their power
of ordination and of jurisdiction, not confined to a parish, but extended to
the whole Island of Creete, and to all the cities thereof. A text more fit to
justify the function of an Archbishop, or of a national Primate, rather then
the calling of a Diocesan Prelare; if he could make good the parts of his
reasoning. viz. that Titus not only had such a threefold superiority, but also
was by his calling a Bishop, as he supposes. But this later (wherein the
controversy chiefly stands) has no foundation in his text; only he tells
us (page 50. of this third book) that afterward he projeth it in the sermon,
by the common consent of the ancient and most approved writers of the Church.
The which what is it but a secret confession, that the text of holy scripture
will not serve his turn, to prove that Titus was a Bishop?

In like manner, when to justify the singularity of pre-eminence in one Bishop
over one whole Diocese, he says, (sermon. page 33.) that there was one Timothy
at Ephesus, one Titus in Creete, one Epaphroditus in Philippi, and one
Archippus at Coloss^: what else does he but presuppose, (not prove that every
of them was a Diocesan Bishop? As if the whole Island of Creet (with all the
cities thereof) made but one Diocese; and as if we were more bound to believe
Mr. Doctors word, then the Apostles testimoney, who says, that there were
other Bishops at Philippi besides Epaphroditus, (Phil. 1. 1.) and gives us to
understand that Epaphras was one of their Teachers at Colossa, and nothing
inferior to Archippus. (Colos. 1. 7. and 4. 12. Afterward, when the
Commission which Paul gave to Yimonthy at Ephesus, and to Titus in Creete, is
urged to prove the power of Bishops, first in ordination, and then in
jurisdiction, (to make us a mends for his often begging) he promises (sermon.
page 49. to prove afterward that they were (...); the which how he performs,
we have heard before from his own mouth; for his proofs touching Timothy and
Titus are of the same nature, as shall more fully appear hereafter. Now more
the^ this here noted, he has not in his whole discourse, (I mean either his
sermon or the defense thereof) touching the superiority of Bishops to prove
by the scriptures, that they have any such pre-eminence allowed then by God.
Wherefore, if the Doctor has found any clear text, to prove the episcopal
function and superiority in question, to be a divine ordinance; it is likely we
shall meet with it in the 5. point of his sermon and in the fourth book of his
defense; where this question is at large debated and his Assertion proved as he
says sermon. page 55. and def. lib. 4. page 4. first by consequence, and then
directly; whither I will now hasten, without any longer stay upon his 3. book.

Chapter 2. Answering to the 3. section of the first chapter of the Doctors 4.
book, and showing that his reasons prosecuted in his 4. book do fight one
against another.
In the entrance upon his 4. book, before I move one foot further Sect. 1. ad
lib. 4. ca. 1. sect. 3. of the Doct.
it is meet we know how he distinguishes his two kind of proofs which he
says are first by consequence and then directly. By consequence he proves the
Episcopal function, to be a divine ordinance, because it is of Apostolical
institution. For he takes it for an undoubted truth, (sermon. page 92.) that
what the Apostles did in the execution of their Apostolical function, they did
by the direction of the holy Ghost; and therefore he holds their ordinances
to be divine, as having God for their author. So then in affirming it to be
therefore divine, because it is Apostolical, we take his meaning to be this;
that this function was first instituted (not by Christ or God immediately, but)
by the Apostles, as the immediate authors; and therefore is not otherwise
divine, then mediately and by consequence, as all other Apostolical ordinances
and actions are. And this to be his meaning, his own words declare (sermon. page
92. in the margin) when he says, that in this sense and no other, he holds
the episcopal function to be a divine ordinance, to wit, because what was
ordained by the Apostles, the same proceeded from God. But then, what may we
think his meaning to be, in his second sort of proofs, which must conclude
directly (and not by consequence as before) that the episcopal function is of
divine institution? Bishop Barloe, from whom the Doctor (it seems) borrowed
this order of proving his assertion (first indirectly or by consequence, and
the^ directly) when he comes to the later, staggereth not to affirm (sermon. on
Act. 20. 28. fol. 12. 13. cum 17.) that the Prelacie of Bishops is directly the
Lords own institution. And to explane his meaning, he adds; that the holy
Ghost (not only by the Apostles who had received him in great measure, but)
even by Christ himself, who (Ioh. 3.) was indu^d with the spirit without
measure, ordained this superiority. And as he builds upon the Fathers in this
behalf; so the Doct. acknowledges this to be the judgment of many ancient
Fathers, that Christ instituted the episcopal function immediately by
himself. fee his defense lib. 4. page 48. 49. and lib. 3. page 32. Now if his
later sort of arguments briefly trussed together (sermon. page 92. and 93.) do
bend unto this conclusion; then are his forces like to the troops of the
Midianites, who (Judge. 7. 22.) set their swords every A contradiction in the D.
arguments.
one against his fellow throughtout the host, for this conclusion cutteth the
throat of the former; and the former pearceth through the heart of the later; it
being no more possible, for one and the same function, to have his first
institution from God, both immediately by his Apostles and immediately by
himself; then it is for one living creature to be both a man and a beast; or
for one and the same soul, to have her original both by mediate derivation and
by divine infusion. But if in both rancks he aim at one mark (viz. to prove
that the episcopal function is medi^tely divine) then is there no other
difference betwixt them but thi^; the one argues their function to be a divine
ordinance; because the Apostles by divine direction instituted it; and the
other, because God was their director in the institution thereof; or rather
whereas the former principally labors to prove, that the Apostles did
institute the function; taking it for granted, that in the institution thereof
they were led by divine direction; the later proposes to be proved, that which
before was taken for granted; so that his two kinds of proofs, do all come to
one general argument, the former to justify the Assumption; and the later, the
consequence or proposition, yet if the maine point be well weighed, which the
later rank of arguments does conclude; (viz. that Bishops were ordained of God)
it will appear that his direct proofs (so called) do fetch as large a
compass, as the former; and do in deed, (not directly but) by consequence
only prove, the episcopal function to be of divine institution. Wherefore, to
bleare the eyes of his reader, that he might not see how indirect his direct
proofs are; he promises (sermon. page 92.) directly to prove that the episcopal
function is of divine institution; or, that Bishops were ordained of God; as if
the later were all one with the former.

But we must take his arguments as they lie, and examine the Sect. 2.
scriptures which he produces (if he have any) to justify the doctrine, which
he presses as a necessary truth to be embraced. His general argument, which
by consequence argues the episcopal function to be a divine ordinance is thus
framed, (sermon. page 56.)

What function or government is of Apostolical institution; that is to be
acknowledged a divine ordinance.

The episcopal function or government by Bishops, is of Apostolical
institution. Therefore the episcopal function is a divine ordinance.

To the proposition of this argument, as the refuter yields free passage; so
do I, only with the addition of this caution, that it holds only in such
ordinances, as are mediately divine, for no i^mediate ordinance of God or
Christ, can be said to be of Apostolical institution. And therefore (were it
not that the D. is often found to forget himself) I should wonder, why he now
undertakes to prove, that the function or government of Bishops, was
instituted by the Apostles, seeing in his former book (page 32.) he says, that
diverse ancient and approved Fathers teach, that these two degrees of
Ministers (viz. Bishops and presbyters) were ordained by Christ; and therefore
infers, that it cannot be denied but that the calling and superiority of
Bishops is of Christ's own institution. If it cannot be A contradiction.
denied, why does the Doctor underhand impugn it? For if it were Christ's
own institution, as the Fathers (if we may believe the Doctor) do teach;
then it cannot be an Apostolical institution, as he now very confidently
averreth. And because he braggeth (lib. 3. page 24.) that he has with such
evidence demonstrated, that the Bishops (discribed in his first assertion) are
of Apostolical institution, that he is well assured, that his Refuter with all
his partak^rs, will never be able soundly and substancially to confute; before
I proceed to examine the strength of his evidence; I will give him a little
taste of his own weakness, in this argument following.

Whatsoever calling or superiority cannot be deni^d to be of Christ's own
institution; the same is erro^io^sly, and weakly mainteyned to be of
Apostolical institution.

But the calling or superiority of Bishops, cannot be denied to be of Christ's
own institution.

Therefore, the same is erroniously and weakly mainteyned to be of Apostolical
institution.

To impugn the proposition were to labor to quench the light of reason; and
if the Doctor contradict the Assumption; he must not only eat up his own
words before set down; but also oppose himself against the judgment of the
best approved Fathers, who (as himself testifies) have taught the contrary;
and then the stroke of his own tongue, (which he whett as a sharp rasor
against his Refuter,) will recoile into his own sides in this manner. Do the
Fathers restify with one consent, that these two degrees of Ministers (Bishops
and Presbyters) were instituted of Christ; and has the Doctor the forhead to
deny it? In a matter of fact (as this is, whether Bishops were first
instituted by Christ himself, or by his Apostles) for any man to deny creditt
to all antiquity; it is a plain evidence, that he is addicted to noveltie and
singularity, the Doct. himself being judge, for they are his own words lib.
3. page 23. Again, in a matter of fact, the authority and testimony of some
one Father, ought to overweigh the whole nation of disciplinaria^s (as the
Doctor says, but let it here be Episcopalians or Byshoplings) contradicting
the same. I could here give him a large handful of these kind of flowers
gathered out of his own garden, but I will spare both him and them; seeing I am
to attend upon those arguments, which he has produced to prove his episcopal
function and government, to be of Apostolical institution.

The first argues that function to be Apostolical, because it was generally
and perpetually used, in the first 300 years after Christ and his Apostles,
and was not ordained by general counsels; which argument since it altogether
balketh the whole book of God, and is fitted only, to make some use of his
extravagant learning, and great reading in the Counsels and Fathers, and of
his long digression in his former treatises, to another question: I shall do
him no wrong to pass by it, for the present, and referr the examination both
of it and the testimonies therein unto a fitter time: for the question is not,
how long Bishops have had the possession, of that superiority and government,
which now they retain; but by what authority and warrant (of God or man) they
were first seized of it: and there is good cause to suspect their title to be
naught; when their defendants (not being able to bring forth any authentical
evidence, signed and sealed by the hands of the Apostles from whom they pretend
to derive their tenure) do lay the weight of their cause, either upon
prescription of long continuance; or upon the testimony of Fathers, that lived
for the most part, 2. or 3. hundred years after the thing was or should be
done, which they stand forth to restify. Especially seeing the true records of
all ordinances, delivered by the Apostles unto the Churches of Christ, are
neither perished nor locked up in any private Cloisters or closets; but
communicated to the public view of all men, who lift to search what form of
government they prescribed.

Chapt. 3. Answering the 2. Chapt. of his 4. book, and the reason there tendered
to prove the episcopal function to be of Apostolical institution; because it
was (as he falsely suppo^eth) used in the Apostles times, and not contradicted
by them.
In the 2. Chapter of his 4. book, he stays himself within the Sect. 1. ad
lib. 4. cap. 2. sect. 1. page 17. of the Doct.
compass of the Apostles times, and indeavoureth to show that the Episcopal
function now in question was then in use; his argument for proof thereof
cartieth this form, (sermon. page

That government which even in the Apostles times, was used in the Apostolical
Churches, and not contradicted by them, was undoubtedly of Apostolical
institution.

The government by Bishops, was used even in the Apostles times, and not
contradicted by them.

It was therefore undoubtedly of Apostolical institution.

Concerning the proposition, how ever it be true in their opinion, which hold
that there was but one form of government in the Church and the same
instituted by the Apostles: yet the Doct. was told by the Ref^ter (answ. page
127.) that it cannot serve his turn, who by his distinction of gold and silver
(sermon page 95.) mainteyneth, that there may be an other government in the
Church, and that good, besides that which he affirms to be of Apostolical
institution. For the proposition cannot be true, but upon this ground, that the
Apostles were not to suffer any government, save that which was of their own
institution; and therefore in taking it for granted, he did but reckon without
his host. This answer the Doctor labors to remove, and then fortifieth his
proposition against all future assaults. But first he seems to repent the
delivering of that his distinction of diverse Church governments which he
compares for their goodness, as it is more or less to gold and silver; saying
he did it in favor of the D^sciplinarians, therein clawing a churl, according
to the homely proverb. The disciplinaria^s (which were that churl in whose
favor he spoke) were and are the reformed Churches abroad, where the
Presbyterian discipline is established, as himself acknowledges (lib. 3. page
108. and lib. 4. cap. vlt. page 145. But his own tongue discovers the
affection of his heart therein, to wit, how The D. bechurleth the reformed
Churches.
he spoke it as a clawback, in hope to have got thanks, at least at the hands
of all that favor the discipline. Which not obteyning of his refuter, in
revenge to him, he throws the name of a Churl on them. And to him he
returns this answer, that he said not simply, that other governments may be
admitted, besides that which the Apostles ordained; but only there, where that
cannot be had. But whiles the Apostles lived, that which they ordained might be
had.

To these premises I will add the conclusion, which the Doct. aymeth at,
though he does not express it. viz. That therefore The D. removed not the
co^tradiction charged upon him by his Refut.
whiles the Apostles lived none other government might be admitted save that
which they ordained. But for our better satisfaction, because he has not in
our understanding clearly removed the contradiction charged upon him by his
Refuter (answ. page 1^7. 158.) he and I both humbly pray in his next def^nce a
direct answer to the premises of these arguments following.

Whatsoever form of Church Government is lawful and good; the same might
lawfully be tolerated of the Apostles in some Churches. But some other form
of Church Government, besides that which they ordained is lawful and good,
Ergo, some other form of Church Government, besides that which the Apostles
ordained, might lawfully be tolerated by them insome Churches. Again
Whatsoever form of Church Government is lawful and good the same might
lawfully be tolerated by the Apostles. But none other form of
Church-governme^nt, save that which the Apostles ordained, might lawfully be
tolerated (or admitted) by them. Ergo none other form of Church Government
save that which the Apostles ordained, is lawful and good.
The proposition in both these Arguments is one and the same, and it is
justified by these Apostolical precepts. 1. These. 5. 21. Phil. 4. 8. and 3.
Ioh. 11. which allow the Churches of Christ to reteyn any good thing; and deny
them the use of nothing but what is evil.

The former assumption is grounded upon the Doctors allowance of the
Presbyterian discipline, when he affirms it (sermon. page 95. and 97. to be
good as silver, and next to the best, though he deny it to be of Apostolical
institution. And the later assumption is the conclusion, of his answer before
set down: wherefore he cannot with any equity withdraw his assent from any of
the co^clusions of these arguments, how soever the former conclusion is
contradictory to the assumption of the later; and the later conclusion directly
contradicts the assumption of the former argument.

Thus the reader may see that whiles the Doctor labors to A dubble
contradiction in the Doctor.
wind out of one contradiction, he sticks fast ensnared in two for failing.
Neither let him think here to evade (as before) by saying that he affirmed not
simple, the presbyterian discipline to be good, but only then, when the
episcopal government cannot be had: for Mr. Doctor were simple, if he could
persuade himself, that so slight an answer might free the reformed Churches
that want Bishops, from the obloquies of caviling papists; which he professes
to be his charitable intent, in pleading (so as he did) for them and their
discipline. And since silver is simply good, and at all times good, though
inferior in goodness, to gold, he dealt deceitfully and not simply or
syncerely, with his reader (in comparing these. 2 kinds of governments, for
their goodness unto silver and gold:) if he meant not to allow, the
presbyterian government any other or larger goodness, then for those times or
places, where the episcopal regiment cannot be had.

But to look back once again to the Doctors answer before set down; what if
I should contradict his assumption, and make use of his proposition, to cut in
sunder the windepipe of his conclusion in this manner'

Where that government which the Apostles ordained cannot be had, there some
other government might be admitted.

But whiles the Apostles lived, in some Churches that government which they
ordained could not be had.

Ergo, whiles they lived, in some Churches, an other form of government might
be admitted.

The proposition I am sure he will acknowledge for his own. Th'assumption is
fitted (indeed) to contradict his, in the sense that he imbraceth,
understanding, by the government ordained by the Apostles, the government by
Bishops; so that, whereas he says, it might be had whiles the Apostles lived,
I on the contratie affirm, that in some Churches at that time it could not be
had. And this (I suppose) will be made good by his own words elsewhere (sermon p.
69. The D. contradicts himself.
Def. lib. 4. page 62.) when he alleges the want of sit choice for one
reason; why all other Churches besides that of Jerusalem wanted Bishops, for
many years in the life time of the Apostles. For how could Bishops be had to
govern every Church, when there was not sit choice of persons fit for that
function? The same reason is more plainly delivered, by others that plead the
same cause. Bishop Barloe (sermon. on Acts. 20. 28. fol. 6.) says, that after
the conversion of many people, even in settled Churches, the Apostles hasted
not, to place a Bishop, because a presbyter fu to be made a Bishop is hardly
found. which the Doctor also acknowledges (sermon: page 54.) where he says. If
a worthy Minister be among men, as one of a 1000, (as Elihu spukith, Job. 33.
23) undoubtedly a worthy Bishop is as one of a millio^. very hardly therefore
will he escape the briars of another palpable contradiction. And it will be no
less hard to avoyde the stroke of the co^clusio^, which if he cannot turn
aside; then his proposition now in question, will lie in the dust, overthrown
(not by any of our weapons, but) by the turninge of those upon him, which he
put into our hands.

As for the Arguments which he adds, to put new life and strength into his
proposition; though just exception may be taken, against them (for there is
odds betwixt the use of government, not instituted by the Apostles in some
Churches; and the reteyning of it in all Churches, or the altering of that
government which they had once established:) yet will I not prosecure such
advantages, seeing we are no less persuaded then he, that there is a manifest
truth in it.

The assumption follows which has two parts, the one, that Sect. 3. ad sect.
2. etc. p 38-44.
the government by Bishops (such as ours are) was used even in the Apostles
times; the other, that it was not contradicted by them. both pa^ts he
indeavoreth to prove first by scripture, and then by other evidence.

His scripture proof for the former, is nothing else then a naked repetition of
the explication of his text, scz. that the 7. angels were the Bishops of the.
7. churches and for the substance of their calling like to ours, which, as he
says he has proved, for I may as confidently avouch we have disproved. But
for the proof of the later, (besides the. 7. angels approved by Saint John, or
rather by our Savior Christ) he alleges (section. 6.) Epaphroditus the
Apostle or Bishop of the Philippians, commended by Saint Paul, as his (funergos
kai sustratiotes) copartner both in his function and affliction, and the
Philippians commanded to have in honor such. Phil. 2. 25. 29. Also James the
just, Bishop of Jerusalem approved of all, Acts. 15. and. 21. Gal. 1. 19.
Archippus the Bishop of Colossa, in respect of his function approved of Paul,
Colos. 4. 17. And Antipas, who had been Bishop of Pergamus, commended by the
holy Ghost. Apoc. 2. 13. His argument stands thus,

In the Apostles times Epaphroditus was the Apostle or Bishop of the
Philippians; James the just, the Bishop of jerusalem; Archippus the Bishop of
Colossa; and Antipas the Bishop of Pergamus.

But Epaphroditus was commended of Saine Paulas his Copartner infunction and
affliction, James the just generally approved; Archippus in respect of his
function approved by Saint Paul, and Antipas commended by the Holy Ghost.

Ergo, the function and government of Bishops, was approved and not
contradicted by the Apostles. Here the Proposition, if understood of Diocesan
Bishops such as ours, is altogether false; and the D. does but beg the
question, in taking for granted, what he should have The Doct. beggeth
proved, if he could. But if it be understood of such Bishops, as the
scriptures testify to have bin in the Apostles times; seeing they were no Lordly
governors; but Pastors or Bishops in another function; either higher as was
James the Apostle, or inferior as Pastors of one congregation, I demand again
(as the Refuter did once before) what need there was, that the Doct. should
spend so many words to prove their approbation. For the approbation of such
Pastors can never conclude the approbation of Diocesan Prelates such as ours.
He must therefore bear the blame, of equivocating (in the word Bishop) or of
begging the question; until he prove The Doct. equivocateth or beggeth
that Epaphroditus, James the just, Archippus and Aniipas, were Diocesan
Bishops like to ours.

The best defense that the Doct. makes for himself is this. Til he can
disprove (says he sect. 6. page 43.) the former part of my sermon and of this
Treatise; he must give the Reader leave to think they were such as they have
been manifestly proved to be. If he have manifestly proved (in any part of his
sermon: or defense before delivered) that the four me^ he speaks of or any of
them, were Diocesan Bishops, like unto ours, good reason, his reader should
have leave to think they were such; but if hitherro he has not (as it is most
certain he has not) delivered any one word that carries the least show of
any such proof; then the reader I hope (whither he have leave or no) will
think that the D. is too forward to say he has proved that, which he never
till now proposed; viz. that these four men were Diocesan Bishops. The proof
of this Proposition both his Refuter and Reader will call for, till they see
it. And I still say, that the proof of the Assumption, (which in a generallity
affirms, that they were approved of the Apostles in respect of their
function) might well have been spared. And the Doctor assuredly does flatter
himself in vain, while he conceives that there is somewhat in this point
which his Refuter could wish had been spared; or at least whereabout he means
to spare his answer. For, what should he have answered, more then he has,
touching the scriptures which the Doctor allegeth to prove, that the persons
before mentioned were approved of the Apostles in respect of their function for
no man doubts, but their functions were approved; all the doubt is, whether
their functions were such, as our Dioccsans are; and this the D. wittingly
overpasseth. Notwithstanding, among the scriptures quoted for the approbatio^
of their Ministry; the Ref: (answ. p. 130.) gives one note touching Sect. 4.
ad sect. 6. page 44.
the word, sunergos, Phil. 25, which the Doctor interprets a copartener in
function; he says the Apostle meant not to signify thereby, that Ep^phroditus
was a Diocesan Bishop; for the Apostle himself was none; neither meant he to
equal him to himself in the Apostleship; for Epaphroditus was none: but
because he labored in the Ministry of the word, as the Apostle did;
therefore he calls him sunergos fellow-workman as he does Timothy and others,
1. Cor. 16. 10. 16. The Doct. answer runs thus, Though that word does not
prove it, (to wit that Epaphroditus was a Diocesan Bishop) neither was it
alleged to that end, but as one of the ^^^les of commendation given to him;
yet the word Apostle which he alleged, does prove it. Neither should the
Refuter have balk^d that, to lay hold upon another, unless it were to deceive
the simple. And then adds, that it was malipertly said by the Refuter that he
was not an Apostle. Behold here 1. a free acknowledgme^t that the word sunergos
proves not E paphroditus to be a diocesan Bishop; nor import a Copartenership
with S. Paul in that function; I ask then, in what function his copartenership
with the Apostle is commended by that title? if in the Apostleship, why does he
not as freely acknowledge it? if in any other, why does he not expressly declare
it? may he not be justly censured in his own words, he would never have balked
this point, to lay hold upon another, unless it were to deceive the simple.
But he cannot thus deceive a judicious reader, who observes that (in
contradicting his refuter for saying that Epaphroditus was not an Apostle) he
secretly insinuates, that he was copartener with S. Paul, in the function of
an Apostle, though he dares not plainly avouch it.

And 2. since the simplest that has perused the Refuters answer (page 130.)
may easily perceive, that (in denying Epaphroditus to be an Apostle) he meant,
that he had not that function of Apostleship, which under that name is given to
S. Paul; I nothing doubt, but every indifferent reader will judge that he is
over malipertly, and very injuriously censured by the Doctor, when he says, it
was malipertly said by the Refuter that he was not an Apostle. Nay it were a
malipert speech, for the Doctor to say simply and without addition; that he was
an Apostle seeing he cannot show any one text in the new Testament, that
gives that title simply unto any other, then unto Christ and his Apostles.

3. And whereas he says, that the word Apostle which he alleged does prove
that Epaphroditus was a diocesan Bishop; I dema^d, why he never alleged the
word for that purpose, and show his reader how to discern a diocesan Prelacie
in it? In deed in his next argument, (sermon. p. 71.) he bends his speech that
way: and his Refuters readiness to apprehend his purpose, and to join issue with
him therein, may and does (I doubt not) persuade the indifferent reader, that
if the Doctor had as plainly discovered any such proof here, he would never
have balked it; he plaieth therefore an egregious The Doct. calumniateth.
calumniators part, in saying that the Refuter balked the word (alleged to
prove the diocesan Bishopprick of Epaphroditus) of purpose, to deceive the
simple.

4. But I merveile what giddines has taken hold on the Doct. that he runs
in and out, this way and that way, at his pleasure; before we heard touching
the word, sunergos, that he placed that copartnership in the function which
Epaphroditus had with S. Paul in the Apostleship, and not in the office of a
diocesan Bishop; yet now he says, that the name of an Apostle given to
Epaphroditus proves him to be a Diocesan Prelate. I demand therefore, if
Epaphroditus had none other Apostleship then a diocesan Byshopprick how could
he be a copartner in function with Paul, by reason of his Apostleship unless
Saint Paul also, had bin a Diocesan Bishop by his Apostleship? And again, if
his Copartnershipp infunction with Paul, proves him not to be a Diocesan
Bishop; how should it prove him to be his copartner in the Apostleship, unless
his Apostleship were a function diverse from the calling of a diocesan Bishop?
The truth is, as the Apostle had no copartnership with Epaphroditus in the
function of a diocesan Bishop, so neither had Epaphroditus any copartnership
with the Apostle in the Apostleship. The word sunergos; signifies a companion
in labor, or a fellow workman; and not a copartner in office or function: for
it were absurd to imagine, that all were copartners with the Apostle in
function, whom he honors with the name of his sunergos, fellowworkmen, or
helpers in the work of the gosp ll; seeing it is given not only to Titus,
Timotheus, Marcus and others which were Evangelistes (2. Cor. 8. 23. Romans 16.
21. 1. These. 3. 2. Colof. 4. 10. Philem. 24.) but also to some of whom it may
be doubted, whither they had any public ministry (Romans 16. 9. Philem. 1.)
yea unto some, which (question-lesse) had none at all: as unto Aquila and his
wife Priscilla (Romans 16. 3.) In like manner he gives unto diverse women this
commendation, that they labored much in the Lord (Romans 16. 12.) and did
wrestle (or fight) together with him in the Gospel; sunethlesan moi Phil. 4.
3.) yet I hope the D. will not say, that those weomen were coparreners in
function with S. The Doct. misinterpreteth and con^oundeth
Paul. It is therefore clear, that the Doctor m^sinterpreteth the word
sunergos, and confounds things that differ, in putting no difference,
between a companion in labor; and a copartener in function.

And touching the diocesan Bishopric of Epaphroditus, as the Sect. 5.
Doctor rightly acknowledges it has no relief in the word sunergos: so he
falsely averreth, that the word Apostle, does prove it. The proof which here he
tendereth, is not worth the mentioning, save to let the reader still see, how
the Doct. holds on in his trade of begging. It is to be noted (says he) that
the twelve Patriarchs of The Doct. still beggeth.
Christ's Church, which were sent into the who^ world, were called the Apostles
of Christ; and not the Apostles of any Church in particular (excepting lames
who was the Apostle of the Jews) so those Apostolical men, who were set over
particular Churches, as the Bishops thereof, were for a time called the
Apostles of the Churches. So Paul calls Epaphroditus the Apostle of the
Philippians etc. If the Doctor could yield us, as pregnant testimonies from the
Apostolical writings, to show that Diocesan Bishops were called the Apostles
of the Churches; as there are to prove, that those 12, who^ Christ sent into
the whole world, were called the Apostles of Christ; we should as willingly
subscribe to the one, as to the other. But when (to justify his former
assertion, that the very word Aposto^^s given to Epaphroditus, proves him to
be a diocesan Bishop) he brings no other proof then this, that the Bishops
set over particular Churches were called the Apostles of those Churches. And to
mainteyne this; he has nothing to allege but that, So Epaphroditus is called
by S. Paul the Apostle of the Philippians; who can bear with his so shameless
begging? But more of this (he says) we shall hear hereafter, and I find (in
the next Chapter, sect. 12. 13. 14. whereto he sends us) some humane
testimonies to prove that Epaphroditus was the Pastor or Bishop of the
Philippians, and an answer to the reasons alleged by the refuter for the
justifying of an other interpretation of the word apostolos, viz. that he was
their messenger to S. Paul. But touching the question of his Ministerial
function (which the Refuter said could not be proved to be a Diocesan
Bishopric) when he should handle it, he flattly refuses to enter upon it: yea
(sect. 15. page 71.) he says, that there he is so far from inferring or
proving it, that he presupposes it, as sufficiently proved before; and yet in
his whole volume, concerning diocesan Churches or Bishops (Defense lib. 3.) he
has not a word that particularly touches Epaphroditus. Wherefore, it is
apparent, that the Diocesan Bishoprik ascribed to Epaphroditus is presupposed
only but not proved, to be infolded under the word Apostle. And consequently
the commendation which Paul gives him (Phil. 2. 25.) cannot conclude an
approbation of his supposed episcopal function. And here by the way, let the
reader observe, what a trick the Do: has to avoid the proof of this point,
though he were urged unto it. Now when he should have done it, A trick of the
Doct. to shift off a proof.
because Epaphroditus is a principal instance, brought to justify the later
branch of the Assumption (which affirms that the government of Bishops, such
as ours, having place in the Apostles times, was not contradicted by them) he
puts us off to the next chapter; and there he sends us back to another
treatise, where is just nothing for this purpose; and to ter^ify his Refuter
with his loud (I had almost said lewd) railing, he calls him a notorious
caviller (pa. 64.) and says he writes, as the most of his book, to bleare
the eyes of the simple (p. 70.) for none other fault but this; that he urges
him to prove, that the function of a Diocesan Bishop, is understood in the name
of an Apostle given to Epaphroditus; and that such Bishops were at the first
called Rulers or Apostles of the Churches. Yet least the Doctor should conceive
better of his discourse, then it deserves, I will take a nearer consideration
of all that he has said. And the rather, because his assertion will appear to
be the more absurd; if he have wrested those names, which he attributes unto
Bishops from the true meaning of the Apostle is the places alleged by him.

Chapter 4. Declaring that the function of d^ocesan Bishops, is not mentioned
in the Scriptures, under the titles of Rulers or Apostles; and that a diocesan
Bishopric is not given to Epaphroditus under the name of an Apostle Phil. 2.
25. as the Doctor would have it, Def. lib. 4. cap. 3. Sect. 11. page 65.
I Knew (says the Doctor) it was objected that Bishops are not mentioned Vide
sect. 1. ad sect. 11. cap. 3. lib. 4.
in the Scriptures, the name, Episeopus, Bishop, being given to Presbyters; and
therefore that it is not like, they were ordained by the Apostles, of Whom no
mention is in the Scriptures. For prevention of this objection, or assoyling of
this doubt; I declared first, that the Bishops in the wri^nges of the Apostles
are called, sometimes the Angels of the Churches, sometimes the^^ Rulers,
sometimes their Apostles. If I should ask the Doctor what it is that does
second his first, he would be ready to snatch at such an occasion, for the
renewing of his unjust quarrel with his Refuter, viz. that I snatch at words.
And if I should demand, from what words in his sermon, the Refuter might (and
ought to) have gathered, that those names (which he says, were attributed to
Bishops) were delivered for the prevention of that objection, which he now
discovers; I suppose the Reader should scarce gain any better answer then
this, that his own intent is best known to himself. Yet had his Refuter
reason to say; (as he did answer P. 34.) that this long discourse touching the
time of ordeyning Bishops, should help to prove that the Apostles themselves
ordained Bishops; for he promised (sermon. p. 65.) to explain and prove this
point; by showing the time when, the place Where, and the persons whom, the
Apostles ordained Bishops, and he says (Def. lib. 4. p. 49.) that it was not
explayned only; but also proved by showing the time etc. Wherefore he does his
refuter the greater wrong, to call him a notorious caviller, and to say, he
gave sufficient proof of a bad conscience (page 64. and 65.) because he
complained that in all this section, there was nothing to prove the point
before mentioned. For had he intended that his discourse, touching the time,
should serve, either for a bare explanation of his former assertion; or for the
affoiling of such a doubt, as he now proposes, he was able enough to have
expressed his meaning in plain terms; and therefore (not having so done) he
gives us cause to think, either that he had no such meaning; or that he
purposely concealed it; that he might here (as he does in sundry other parts
of his sermon) pick a quarrel with his Refuter for mistaking his Analysis. But
since the Doctor will needs (for the better recovering of his spirits) change
the tenor of his reasoning; and make answer rather to our objection, then go
on with the proof of his own position; I will first set down the objection in
form, and then weigh the validity of his answer.

Whatsoever function or government is not mentioned in the Apostolical
Writings; the same was not ordained by the Apostles, neither is it of divine
institution.

But the function or government of diocesan Bishops, (such as ours) is not
mentioned in the Apostalicall writings.

Ergo, the function and government of diocesan Bishops, was not ordained of the
Apostles, neither is it of divine institution.

His answer tends wholly to infringe the Assumption, by declaring Sect. ^^
(as himself speaks) that Bishops in the writings of the Apostles are called,
sometimes the Angels of the Churches, (Apoc. 1. 2. 3.) sometimes their Rulers,
(Heb. 13. 17.) sometimes their Apostles (as Phil. 2. 25.) Wherefore, if he
cannot make it appear, that Diocesan Bishops (such as ours) were pointed at,
under the names which he alleges; then his whole discourse spent this way, is
altogether idle and impertinent. And if the spirit of God has given these
names to such Bishops; is it not an oversight in the Do. to allow (as he does)
in his sermon of the dignity of the Ministers (page 60. 61.) all the same
names, (save only the name of Apostles) A contradiction.
to all Ministers? To clear himself from this contradiction, he says, his
former sermon is of Ministers in general, including Bishops; and diverse
things there spoken of Ministers in general do principally belong to
Bishops. He adds, all Pastors are Rulers or Rectors of their several
flocks; but the Byshopes are Rulers, both of them and their flocks. And all
Ministers are Angels, but the Bishop alone, is the Angel of each Church or
diocese. Behold here a plain confession, that in his former sermon he gives
to Ministers in general, the names and titles there mentioned, among which are
these, that they are called egoumenoi, Rulers and Angels of the Churches. How
then excuses he, his restreyning of these titles, here to diocesan Bishops
such as ours? Forsooth, Bishops are included; and diverse things spoken of
Ministers in general, do principally belong to Bishops. Be it so in his
understanding; but can he persuade himself that his bare affirmation will
persuade the conscience of an indifferent reader to interteine the opinion? no
no, we have learned from his own inditing (lib. 1. p. 200.) how to frame him
an answer. If diocesan Bishops, such as ours, were first proved by other
arguments to be of divine institution; the best argument that could be raised
out of these places, were from the Genus to the species affirmative; as if he
should say, The Scriptures speak of Church-Angels, and Rulers which were
Ministers of the word; Ergo of diocesan ruling Bishops, But seeing they never
were, nor ever will be proved by other arguments; the reason taken from those
places, is from the Genus to a fancied and platonicall Idea, or poetical
species, and that affirmatively. If we should say, it were a bird, therefore a
swan; it were but a simple argument. But if thus, it is a bird, therefore a
black swan, it were too ridiculous, yet such is the argument of this disputer.
For if he should say, The Holy Ghost in these. 3. scriptures, (Apoc. 1. 20.
Heb. 13. 17. and Phil. 2. 25.) speaks of ministers, which dispensed the word
and sacraments; therefore of Bishops which had prehemine^ce over other
ministers; it were a weak argument: but when he infers, therefore of
diocesan Bishops such as ours, which were more rare then black swann; it is
very ridiculous.

But to descend unto the particulars; it is already showed, how Sect. 3.
much he deceives himself and his reader, in fancying the function of Bishops
such as ours, to be described in his text, under the name of the angels of the
7. Churches. And all may see how guilty he is of a plain contradiction in
restrayning now unto Bishops alone, A plain contradiction in the Doct.
the same title which in his other sermon he extended to all Ministers, viz. to
be called not only Angels, but also angels of the churches. The same
contradiction he incurreth, if he will appropriate unto Bishops those words,
Heb. 13. 17. obey your rulers seeing he applied them in his former sermon, unto
all Ministers. To say, as now he does, (that all Pastors are Rulers of their
several flocks, but the Bishops are Rulers both of them and their flocks) does
rather weaken, the^ strengthen his present purpose. For what one word in all
the circumstances of that text, can lead any man to think, that the Apostle
does there bind the Pastors of several flocks to yield obedience unto a
Diocesan Bishop set over them? Does not the contrary rather appear very
clearly? But I will let him see his error, not in my own words; but in the
words of one of our learnedest Bishops, (from whom the Doctor received so good
satisfaction) the Bishop of Winchester (in his confutation of the Seminaries,
pa. 164. 165. in quarto, printed at Oxford. First, touching the translation of
the word egoumenois, he says, it signifies leaders, as well as rulers, and in
this place stands rather for Leaders, then Rulers: but S. Paul using the same
word, in this very chapter, ver. 7. remember the Leaders, adds, beholding the
end of their conversation, imitate their faith, that is, follow their stepps.
If we must mark and I^mitate them, the^ surely, must they be Leaders to direct
us, and not Rulers to Master us. Secondly he says, that by tois egoumenois
(whether it be leaders, or Rulers) are meant all christian and godly preachers:
and that this is S. Paul's own construction, Remember your Leaders, which have
spoken to you the word of God, we be not bound to their fancies or pleasure;
but only to the word of truth proceeding out of their mouths etc. But the D. to
justify his understanding of this text, says that in the ancient ^^nons of
the Apostles, (Can. 39. or rather 40.) and in the 2. epistle of Ignatius (ad
Trallian:) the text is appropriated unto Bishops; like as also is the name
Prepositi, in the Latin Fathers. First, to answer him in his own terms; in
stead of appropriated, he would (or at least should) have said, communicated
unto Bishops; for I know no man so foolish, as to appropriate either that text,
(Heb. 13. 17) or the name Prepositis to such Bishops as ours. Jerome was so
far from appropriating this text to Bishops, that he does rather appropriate
it to Presbyters, which at the first governed the Church (as he says (on Tit.
cap. 1.) communi consilio. Aequaliter inter plures ecclesie curam dividit, Heb.
13. 17. Parete, (inquiens, principibus egoumenois) vestris etc. Augustine (a
principal latin Father) often understands. under the name, Praepositi; all
the Ministers of the word. Tract. 46. in Johan: Habet ovile domini praepositos,
et filios, and mercenarios. Praepositi qui fili; sunt, pastores sunt. Et sunt
quidem ecclesiae praepositi, de quibus Paulus dicit. Sua quaerentes etc. And de
civitate deilib. 1. cap. 9. Ad hoc Speculatores, ho^est, populorum praepositi
etc. And epistola 166. ad finem. Quod usq^adeo celestis Magister cavendum
premonuit; ut etiam de praepositis malis plebem secura^ faceret, ne propter
illos doctrinae salutaris cathedra desereretur etc. neque enim sua sunt quae
dicunt sed Dei; etc. 2. But if the canons (fasly called the Apostles) have
rightly appropriated the text unto Bishops; it will follow, that (both by the
scripture, and by their judgment that first framed and afterward approved
them) the Pastors care of souls (and consequently the dispensation of the Word
and Sacraments) is proper to the function of Bishops. And if it be so, it will
then also follow, and that inevitably, that those presbyters, whose office is
diverse from the function of Bishops (in their judgment, as well as of the author
of that Epistle to the Hebrews) were no teaching Elders, or Ministers of the
word. Which to affirm, directly contradicts the Doctors assertion
(peremptorily mainteyned by him, lib. 1. cap. 3.) viz. that there were no other
Presbyters in the prim: Church, but Ministers, and that the word Presbyter,
noting an ecclesiastical person, does evermore in the scriptures, councels and
faibers signify a Minister.

3. If to avoyde this disadvantage, the D. shall choose rather to Sect. 4. ad
sect. 12. of the Doct. page 65.
grant, that the text is to be vndetstood of Ministers in general; as he once
understood it; (sermon of the dignity of the Ministers) the^ can his diocela^
Bishops find no sure footing in this text; as is already showed.

All his hope and help therefore, must lie in the last title, which he
supposes is given to Bishops, to wit, the Apostles of the Churches. And to
make this good, he tells us, that he rendered a reason why they are so called;
viz. because they succeaded the Apostles in the government of the particular
Churches; and that there of he gave an instance, Philip. 2. 25; where
Epapbroditus who was the Bishop, or Pastor of Philippi; is therefore called
their Apastle. He should rather have produced some reason, to demonstrate (to
ei esti) that Bishops such as ours are so called; then to show (to diati) why
they are so entitled: espetially; seeing he takes notice of his Refuters
quelition, viz. by what authority that title is appropriated unto Bishops? Not
with standing, if his meaning be, (as it seems it is) by the instance which
he mentions; to fortify the reason which he renders; I will desire no other
demonstration, then a clear proof of those premises, which must infer this
conclusion. viz. that Bishops such as ours, are in the Apostles writings,
called the Apostles of the Churches, because they succeeded the Apostles in the
government of the particular Churches. The which to conclude from the former
instance given by him, he must thus argue, Epaphroditus is called the
Philippians Apostle (Phil. 2. 25.) because be succeeded the Apostles in the
government of that particular Church.

But Epaphraditus was the Bishop or Pastor of Philippi in function like to one
of our Bishops. Ergo, Bishops, such as ours were called in the Apostles
writings, the Apostles of the Churches; because they succeeded the Apostles, in
the government of the particular Churches.

Both the parts of this argument are contradicted by the Refut: and yet the
Doct. harh nothing that can give sufficient confirmation to the one or other.
Some testimonies he has, that may serve to uphold (as far as their strength
will stretch) the one half of each proposition (viz. that Epaphroditus is called
the Apostle of Philippians, and that he was their Bishop or pastor) but he has
no shadow of any testimony or reason, to cover the nakedness, either of the
first (which says he was so called, because he succeeded the Apostles in the
government of that Church) or of the second (which affirms him to be a Bishop
in function like to one of ours). All his labor te^deth to make good against
his Refut: answer an other point, (something differing from the former) viz.
that he was therefore called the Apostle of the Philippians, because he was
their Bishop or Pastor. Which might be granted, and his purpose, there-by at
all nothing furthered. For it is a weak consequence and sophirticall, thus to
argue; The office of a Bishop or Pastor, is noted in Epaphroditus; when he is
called the Philippians Apostle: Ergo Diocesan Bishops, such as ours, are in the
scriptures called, the Apostles of the Churches. But let us see by what
authority he is swayed to embrace that co^structio^ which he gives to the
words of the Apostle (Phil. 2. 25.) humoon apostolon first, in translating
the^, their Apostle; and then in saying, he was therefore called their Apostle,
because he was their Bishop or Pastor.

First touching the translation; however the word Apostolos, be Sect. 5.
usually in the new testament, appropriated unto such as we call Apostles (men
immediately called of Christ, to an universal and unlimited Ministry;) yet
is it well known, both that Epaphroditus was none of them; and that the word
(in his most natural signification) is of as large use, as our English word,
Messenger. And in this large fense it is used by Christ, John 13, 16. oude
Apostolos etc. Neither is the messenger greater then he that sent him.
Wherefore as the name of a Deacon (though derived from the Greek word diaconos)
cannot sitly be given to all those that are in the scripture called diakonoi;
for I suppose the Doctor would not allow the word to be so translated in these
and such like places. Mat. 20. 26. and 23 11. He that will be (or is) greatest
among you, let him be (humoon diakonos) your Deacon. Romans 13. 4. for he is
(theou diaconos) Gods Deaco^ for thy good. Col. 1. 25. The Church whereof I am
made Diaconos a Deacon, and verse 7. Who is for you (pistos diaconos) a
faithful Deacon of Christ:) so neither can we sitly give the name of an
Apostle, to every one, which in the Greek language may be rightly called
apostolos. So that unless the Doctor can yield us very sufficient and
necessary reasons, to enforce his translating the text (Phil. 2. 25.) your
Apostle he must give us leave to retain the usual reading your Messenger; for
as this has been formerly embraced of all our English Translaters (the
Rhemists excepted): so it is still retained in the newest translation, which
with great diligence has been revised, and published by his Majesty's special
commandment. Wherefore, whereas he assumeth it as a granted truth, that
Epxphrodstus was called the Apostle of the Philippians, I may safely contradict
him thus, he is not called their Apostle but their Messenger. And surely had Mr
D. studied in this controversy (wherein the translation allowed in our Church
is called into question) with the same affection and resolution, with which (if
we may believe him in his preface to his sermon page 3.) he was carried in
studying the whole controversy of our Church policy. viz. as one that meant
to be the respondent or defendant, and therefore resolved not to depart from
the received translation; unless with clear evidence of truth, he might see
it convicted of error; doubtless he would herein have yielded to his Refuter,
and not have wounded through his sides, (as he does) our Church Governors, and
those worthy divines, which in their translation do justify his exposition of
this text. Wherefore he deserves to have the same measure which he meateth to
others, to be returned unto him again, to wit, that being (as it seems) out
of love with our Church-translation; and in affection wholly alienated from our
Church Governors, he has studied this question as an opponent and plaintiffc;
there-fore having sought a knott, as it were, in every bullrush, and strayned
at every gnatt, he has picked to many quarrels, against the
Church-translation, and his refuters just defense thereof; that by his
opposition (though the Church be not deprived of his Ministry, for he will
rather cry peccavi, then stand to the hazard; yet) he has opened the mouth of
papists and atheists, to disgrace our translations; rather then he will without
prejudice and parrialitie read, what is truly said in defense thereof, for he
taxes deeply the credit of their learning and judgment, that have given way
unto it; not only in the text principally questioned, but also in two others
(2. Cor. 8. 23. and Ioh. 13. 16. where the word apostolos is translated a
Messenger, or one that is sent. For this is his difinitive sentence (sect. 14.
in fine) that however the word apostolos may signify any Messenger, with
relation to any sender: yet in the scripture it is not used to signify
messengers sent from men; neither is it to be translated other wise then
Apostle.

But his correcting Magnificat in the translation might be the better born
with, if he altered not the sense and signification of the word, as he does, in
saying, that he is therefore called the Apostle of the Philippin^s, because be
was their Bishop or Pastor. And even this co^struction were the more tolerable;
because in a large acception of the name of a Bishop or every Teacher, none
will impugn it, that think his Ministerial function to be noted by the name
of their Apostle, if he did not thereby understand such a Bishop or Pastor,
whose superiority and function is now in question. Wherefore his refuter had
reason to demand as he did (answ. page 135.) Who they are th^^ concur w^^h
him in his interpretation of the words of the Apostle, espetially (seeing in his
view of the b^o^^s themselves) he could not find that any of his Authors do
fully justify his assertion. This puts the D. to new labor, and his slight
defense, enforces me to spend a little time in discovering the weakness
thereof. First therefore, he is to be put in mind of his own speech in the
like case, (lib. 1, page 200.) we are wont (says he) to hold that scripture is
to be expounded by scripture, as by conference of other parallel scriptures, or
by inference out of the context it self, deduced by some artificial argument.
But what would you have a man to do these helps sailing? The best gloss that
he can set upon his cause, and the fairest excuse for himself is, that some
old and new writers are partly of his mind. But now if it shall appear, that
he has abused the new writers, and wronged the Fathers whom he alleges,
assuredly if he be not altogether shameless, he will never dare to show his
face again in this quarrel.

1. His new writers are Calvin and Bullinger men well known to be opposite to
the Doctor in the maine question of the episcopal superiority, that it were
more then a wonder, if they should so far forget themselves, as to
acknowledge, that the words of S. Paul (Phil. 2. 25.) do give the same
episcopal superiority and function unto Epaphroditus. Mr. Bullinger says (in
Philip. 2.) that Epaphroditus was Philippensium Episcopus, and Mr Calvin (on
the same Chap.) esteems him to be their Pastor: but neither of them, affirm
him to be a Bishop or Pastor, set in a preh^minent degree above other
Ministers. Yea the Doctor himself takes notice of Mr. Calvin's judgment,
touching the word Apostolus, to be this, that the name of an Apostle here, as
in many other places is taken generally pro quolibet Eva^gelissa. Wherefore, it
is evident that (although he call him their Pastor, yet) he holds the true
reason of that name, your Apostle given unto him, to be, (not the particular
function of a diocesan Bishop, but) the calling rather of an Evangelist
(preacher of the Gospel) there exercised for a season.

2. His Fathers are, Ambrose, Theodoret, Hierom, and Chrysostom; the two later
say, that Epaphroditus was their Teacher, and so does Aquinas. But what is this
to justify that episcopal pre-eminence which the Doct. understands by the
word Apostle? here to help, at a dead lift, he faith, that in Ieroms time, by
the name of Doctor or Teacher, Bishop commonly was signified; and that they did
by the word Apostle understand, not every common Teacher or teaching Presbyter,
but specsale^ The Doct. shifteth, but poorly.
doctorem (as Anselme says) and instructorem precipuum as says Dionysius
Carthusianus. A poor shift in deed; For how will he persuade that there were
no other special Teachers, or chief instructors, but Bishops does not this
rather argue, that he was an Evangeliste? And why presumes he upon the kindness
both of his Refuter and Reader, freely to yield him, without any further
proof, both the antecedent and the consequence of his argument? In Ieroms
time, Bishops were commonly called Doctors. Ergo, when Ierom (in expounding
Phil. 2. 29. Have (...) in honor) faith, not him only qui vester est Doctor,
who is your Teacher, he does affirm, that Epaphroditus, is therefore called the
Apostle of the Philippians (verse 25.) because he was their Bishop or Pastor. In
like manner touching Ambrose, how loosely does he reason? Ambrose says, that
the Apostles (mentioned. 1. Cor. 12. 28. and Ephe. 4. 11.) were Bishops, Ergo
in saying that Epaphroditus was by the Apostle, made their Apostle, Phil. 2.
25. he means that he was affixed and limited to the Episcopal charge of that
Church, (in like sort as the later Bishops were) and for that cause, called
their Apostle. Nay rather, it follows from Ambrose his words, that the
function of Epaphroditus had some affinity with the Apostleship; I mean in
this, that he had only a temporary overfight of that Church, as the Apostle
himself had before, during the time of his aboade there. And this has
confirmation from the words that follow, which the Doctor was wise enough to
conceal, his whole speech is this. Erat enim little Apostolus, ab Apostclo
factus, dum illum in exhortationerie eorum mittebat ad eos, and quia vir bonus
erat, desiderabatur a plebe. Where note, he was desired of the people (not
because he was their Pastor, but) because he was a good man; and was now sent
unto them by the Apostle, (and so made their Apostle) for their present
instruction or exhortation, and not to take perpetual charge of them; for as
afterward he says (in verse. 27. necessarius erat ecclesiss) he was necessary
for many other Churches, as one that yielded (solisium er auxilium) both
comfort and help to the Apostle. By all which it appears, that (in Ambrose
his judgment) Epaphroditus by his ministerial function, was an Evangelist and
not affixed to the Church of Philippi as their Bishop. There remains
Theodoret, whose words make the fairest show for him; yet are they not so
full, as he prete^deth for that which he says (in Phil. 2. 25. he called him
an Apostle, because to him the charge of them was committed etc. might very
well be affirmed of an Evangelist; seeing they had a temporary charge, of some
one or more Churches committed to them. Therefore it does not necessarily argue
his function to be properly episcopal, and such as now is controverted. Yea
the Doctor himself, does so understand Theodoret, when he faith (in 1. Tim. 3.)
that those who now are called Bishops, were at the first called Apostles, and
that thus Epaphroditus was the Apostle of the philippians etc. For he gathers
from Theodorets testimony, conferred with some words of Ierom (Def. lib. 4.
page 72.) that the first Bishops (so reputed were Apostles, and Apostolic men,
that is Evangelists, and that so long as any Evangelists or Apostolical men
remained, none were chosen our of the Presbyters, to the office of a Bishop,
whence it follows that Epaphroditus (in Theodorets judgment) is called an
Apostle, (not because he was a Bishop, but) for that, he was an Apostolical
man, or Evangelist. Wherefore it is but a vayn brag of Mr. D. 1. to conclude,
as he does (page 67.) that all the Authors which he cited, give testimony with
his exposition. And 2. to ask with what face his Refut: could deny it. For
although he has face enough to affirm, whatever may seem to advantage his
cause, and to color the maintenance of what he has once affirmed; yet the
truth will discover it self to them, that with an upright eye, search after it
to their shame that seek to deface it.

Now whereas he adds that his authors before mentioned, Sect. 7. ad sect. 13.
p. 68.
do all go against the interpretation of the word Apostolos, which his
Refuter brings; he says no more, but what his Refuter had before
acknowledged. His Authors were produced, not to confute his Refurer before he
saw his answer, but to justify his own collectio^ from the words of the
Apostle, which since he cannot effect, he shall do best, not to trouble his
reader any further in examining their depositions; especially seeing in such a
case as this, (when Interpreters do vary about the meaning of any word or
sentence in any text of Holy Scripture) the judgment of the indifferent Reader
must be swayed, (neither by the number, years, or learning of the parties,
but) by that weight of reason which leads them to think as they do, and best
accords with the circumstances of the text it self, and with the use of the
word or phrase in other places. Wherefore, the Refuter (though he mention the
names of some which embrace his interpretation, yet) grounded himself rather
upon the probability of reason; then the creditt of their testimony.
Notwithstanding the Doctor much forgets himself, to reject so lightly as he
does, the judgment of Mr. Beza and Piscator; in saying they are as much parties
in this cause, as the refuter himself. For if it be true, he has wronged
Beza, in affirming, that in the question of Diocesan Churches and Bishops, he
goes with him, and against his Refuter, (Lib. 1. page 48. and Lib. 2. page
140. and Lib. 3. page 11.) and that he is so far from condemning, the A
contradiction.
government of Bishops retained in other reformed Churches, that he wished
withal his heart; that with the reformation of religion in the Church of
Geneva, the episcopal government had bin retained; (for so he says. Lib: 4.
page 161. and 166.) but it is no strange thing to the observant reader, to find
the Doctor very often in this contradicting fault amongst others.

Let us see what he answers to the reasons, that were delivered to prove the
Refuters construction the more likely. viz. that Epaphroditus is called, their
Apostle (or rather Messenger) because he was sent by the Philippians, in their
stead to minister unto the Apostle Paul. The first reason has two branches.
1. That the words following in the same verse and Chap. 4. 18. do show how he
ministered unto him. 2. and the same phrase is used to the like purpose, 2. Cor.
8. 23. where the breshren sent with Titus, to receive the Corinthes
benevolence, are called Apostles, (that is messengers) of the Churches. In his
answer 1. he acknowledges that Epaphroditus brought a gratuitie from the
Philippia^s to Paul, etc. and that the brethren likewise which accompanied
Titus, were to receive the benevolence of the Corinthians. 2. but he says, it
is unlikely, that either he or they, were called the Apostles of the Churches,
in that regard. And why unlikely? is not that interpretation mostly likely,
which best agrees both with the parts of the same scripture, and with the use
of the word, or phrase in other places? And does not that interpretation much
better agree with both them Mr Doct? Let them be compared together, and
sentence given with the truth. First, touching Epaphroditus, that he was their
Imbassadour or Messenger to the Apostle Paul, the evidence alleged by the
Refuter from the same verse, and cap. 1. 18. is so pregnant that the Doct.
cannot deny it, yea he does acknowledge it. The word apostolos therefore
signifying properly any Messenger (as he must also confess) it is more then
probable (even necesssarie) to construe those words humoon apostolon, your
Messenger, (or at least to take them in this sense, that he is called their
Apostle, because he was their Imbassadour sent by them to the Apostle, unless
some necessary reason can be produced to demonstrate the contrary. Now what
says the Doctor in this case? Has he any sentence, or syllable from the text
it self, or any other scripture to justify any one of his Assertions, viz. that
Epaphroditus was their Bishop, and that he is therefore called their Apostle?
no such matter. What then? Forsooth, it appears by diverse of Ignatius his
epistles, that when the Churches sent one upon a Christian Imbassage; the
Bishop was commonly entreated to take that Embassage upon him. In like manner
the Philippians, being to send, as it were upon Embassage to Paul, Epaphroditus
their Bishop undertook that voyage. He being therefore both their Bishop, and
their Imbassadour, it is more likely that he was called their Apostle, because
he was their Bishop, then for that he was their Imbassadour. I answer, 1. may
I not say that the Churches then sent forth their Bishops, as the Apostles sent
forth Peter. Act. 8. 14. and the Church, Barnabas, Act. 11. 22? 2. Touching
Ignatius Epistles; will the D. still presume upon the credulity of his reader
to take his bare word for proof, that the Churches in his time, sent their
Bishops in Embassage, only upon entreaty? There is small cause he should trust
upon it, when his reader shall understand, that he learned this evasion of
Bella^rmin The Doct. learnetn a shift of Bellarmine
(de Pont. Romans lib. 1. cap. 16.) who with this shift puts off that argument
which our Divines urge against Peter's primacie from Act. 8. 14. where he is
said to be sent with John, by the rest of the Apostles unto Samari^a. 3. And
touching Epaphroditus; seeing he presumes also that his word will be taken, in
stead of better proof, that he was in like manner entreated to take the
journey; he deserves to hear from me that which Bellarmin does from Doct.
Whitakers (de pont. Romans quest. 2. page 260.) Number adeum Philippenses supplices
venerunt, and cnm eo precibus egerunt, ut mitteree aliquem Romam, si minus
placeret, ipsi proficisci? nil eiusmodi habetur.) even this in effect, there is
no such matter Mr D. But be it that he went by their entreaty, as Timothy at
S. Paul's entreaty remained at Ephesus. 1. Tim. 1. 3. May the Church of Wells
or rather of Canterbury (for Philippi was Metropolis Macedonia, as afterward
he tells us, page 71.) send their Bishop abroad by the like entreaty, and
upon the like busynes; to wit, to convey their benevolence unto some Bishop, or
person of great note, that is a prisoner as Paul was, at that time? Who sees
not, that even this Embassage argues, he was not a Bishop of that degree and
dignity that one of our Bishops bear at this day? Moreover, (to pass by for the
present his begging the question in asfirming him to be their Bp.) if he were
both their The Doct. beggeth again.
Bishop and Ambassador; is it not more likely, that he was called their
Apostle, because he was their Imbassadour (seeing the word imports so much)
then for that: he was their Bp? but he has better probabilities in store to
prove, the contrary; let us givehim hearing.

It is unlikely (says he) that the name of that sacred function of the
Apostles of Christ (who also himself is the Apostle of our profession) should
be used in Sect. 8. ad page 66. and 67.
the Scriptures, to signify the Messengers of men. Is it unlikely? why? does he
not know, that the offices of pastors and deacons, are also sacred functions;
and that Christ himself is entitled our Shepherd, and Pastor of our Souls.
John. 10. 16. and 1. Pet. 5. 25. and the (diaconos) minister of the
circumcision, Romans 15. 8. ^ notwithstanding it is certain that both these
names (poimen, diaconos) are given in the Apostolical writings to
Feildshepheards, and servants of men. Luc. 8. 8. 15. 18. 20. John. 2. 5. 9. In
like manner, though the word aggelos be the name of that sacred function, of
the celestial spirits, and communicated even unto Christ himself, Act. 7. 35.
38. Revel. 10. 1. 5.) yet it is given also, in the Holy Scriptures, unto the
messengers of men, Iam. 2. 25. where Rahab is said to have received (tous
aggelous) the messengers and sent them out another way. It is apparent
therefore, that neither the holiness of the Apostolic function, nor the
worthiness of Christ's person or office, can yield any probable argument, to
justify the Doctors affirming it to be unlikely that the word apostolos should
be used in the scriptures to signify the messengers of men. But hear we him
again, he adds, that in both places (Phil. 2. 25. and 2. Cor. 8. 23.) the
Apostle intends by this title, highly to commend Epaphroditus and the others;
but this had been but a small commendation, that they were messengers of the
Churches. But a small? How small soever the commendation seems in the Doct.
eyes, who esteems basely of the church in comparison of their Bishop, yet is
it otherwise in their eyes (see Heming: and Hyper: in 2. Cor. 8.) who concur
with us in the translation of both texts; among whom are many (the translators
of our Church-bibles former and later) whom he dares not accuse (Iam sure) to
be parties with us in this controversy. But what speak I of their judgment,
seeing we have the Apostles own testimony; that having given to one this high
commendation, his praise is in the gospel throughout all the Churches, does yet
enlarge his praise in saying, and not that only, but he was also chosen of the
Churches to traveile with us, with this grace which is administered by us, etc.
(2. Cor. 8. 18. 19.) and therefore also he signifies (1. Cor. 16. 3.) that he
would not send those that were to carry the benevolence of the Corinths unto
Jerusalem without their letters of commendations. And by these testimonies of
the Apostle, we see the falsehood of that which he assumeth in his last reason,
specially fitted to prove that they (in 2. Cor. 8. 23.) were not called the
Apostles of the Churches, because they were their Messengers; viz. that they
were not sent by the Churches. But let us look upon the color he sets upon
this untruth; it is evident, says he, that Paul himself sent them, for as it
was required of him Gal. 2. 10. so had he undertaken to procure a supply for
rel^ife of the brethren in Judea. And ^o that end having de^lt before with the
Corinthians, sends Titus and two others^, to receive their contribution. All
which I grant, but hold it a very lame consequence, and such as the Doctor
with all his learning will never be able to cure; when he thus reasons, Those
two that accompanied Titus were sent by Paul, who had undertaken to procure
some releif for the poor brethren in Judea: Ergo they were not sent by the
Churches, whose contribution they carried. He falsely conceives, that Paul was
as highminded as some Bishops now are; who scorn to associate any others with
them, in the choice of such as they send abroad. For we learn from Paul's own
mouth, that he was of an other mind: he says expressly that one of those two,
whom he sent, was chosen by the Churches, to be his fellow-traveiler, to convey
their benevolence. 2. Cor. 8. 19. and his foredealing with the Corinthes
shows (1. Cor. 16. 3.) that he meant not to send any other, with their
contribution, then such as they should choose and approve by letters.

The Refuters first reason being thus recovered out of the Doct. hands and
mainteyned against all his exceptions; his interpretation Sect. 9 ad. sect. 14.
pa. 69.
will stand firm enough (as having both the circumstances of the text it self,
and the use of the like phrase also here, to justify it) although his 2.
reason should be found too weak. Notwithstanding, I doubt not, but to make it
good, if the Refuter may have that favor which reason allows to every one; I
mean to interpret his own meaning, so as the words may well bear, without
wresting, or contradiction to any part of his writing. The reason is this; Is
stands not so well with the property of the word apostolos, which signifies
a Messenger, to entitle any man (in regard of his ministerial function) their
Apostle to Whom, as his from whom he is sent. Against this, the Doctor
directly opposes not, for though he say, that in the Scripture the word is
used with reference, as well to the parties to whom; as to the party from whom
the Apostle is sent: yet the truth thereof argues not the Refuters assertion
to be false. For he shall bewray his own ignorance, or want of judgment, if he
press this for a good consequence. The word is used with reference as well to
the one as to the other; Therefore both phrases of speech do equally and alike
agree with the proper signification of the word. For if both phrases have a
like agreement with the proper signisicatio^ of the word; then in both the word
may be (with a like fitnes) translated Messenger; but that were absurd; for
though we may fitly lay of Paul, or any other called the Apostle of Christ.
(1. Cor. 1. 1. 1. Pet. 1. 1. Jude, verse 17.) that he was the Messenger or
Ambassador of Christ: yet were it a very improper and unfitting phrase of
speech, to say of Paul, that he was the Messenger or Ambassador of Gentiles,
when he intitleth himself (ethnoon apostolos) the Apostle of the Gentiles.
Romans 11. 13. To speak properly, he was not their Apostle, but Christ's; vocatus
a Christo principaliter vt esset Doctor gentium; as Piscator observes (upon
those words) and himself shows (1. Tim. 2. 2. 7 and 2. Tim. 1. 11. Where it
is said, that unto Paul was committed the gospel of the uncircumcision. Gal. 2.
7. May we (with as good regard to the proper sense of the word evaggelion
gospel) call his gospel; the uncircumcised Jews gospel; as we may call it,
Gods gospel, from those words. (Romans 1. 1.) where he says, he was separated to
preach the gospel of God? It is clear that in these places, Romans 11. 13. and
Gal. 2. 7. as also in the verse following, where Peter is said to have the
Apostleship of the circumcision) the genetive case must be interpreted, either
by the dative, as in the first, I am the Apostle of the Gentiles, that is, to
or for the Gentiles, as he says, 1. Cor, 9. 2. if I be not an Apostle (allois)
unto others; yet doubtless I am humin to you) or else by an equivalent phrase
as the Apostle interprets himself, Gal. 2, 8. 9. Q. d. to me was committed
the gospel of the uncircumcision; and to Peter the gospel or Apostleship of the
circumcision, that is to say, to me was committed the dispensation of the
gospel (cis ta ethne, unto or toward the Gentiles; and to Peter, the like
dispensation or Apostleship (eis ten peritomen) toward the circumcision. What
cause then, has the Doctor to insult over the Refuter, saying, that whiles he
goes about to discover his ignorance (as if he knew not the signification of
the word apostolos as well as he) he bewrays his own? For wherein bewrays
he is own ignorance? Perhaps in saying that among all the titles that Paul
takes to himself to magnify his office, he never calls himself their or
your Apostle; but an Apostle of Christ, or Apostle to them? Nothing less; if
his meaning be explained, as the coherence of his whole speech requires. viz.
that he never called himself their or your Apostle; but an Apostle of Christ,
or Apostle to them? Nothing less; if his meaning be explained, as the
coherence of his whole speech requires. viz. that he never called himself
their or your Apostle, taking the word in his proper signification, of a
Messenger or Imbassadour. For the Doct. himself confesses, that when the
Apostle calls himself the Apostle of the Gentiles, (Romans 11. 13.) he uses
the word with reference, unto the parties to whom he was sent; which argues
the Apostles meaning to be this, (not that he was their Messenger, but) that he
was Christ's Imbassadour sent to them. If he shall yet urge that those words may
warrant him to say, that Paul was their Apostle; I grant it; but withal he
must know, that in so saying, the word Apostle, does not now signify a
Messenger, but a Teacher (or Minister of the word) holding that peculiar
function, which the 12 Apostles enjoyed. If the Doctor know not this, it is
gross ignorance in him; if knowing it, he shall yet endeavor to justify his
ce^sure given forth against the Refut: it will be enough (in the judgment of the
indifferent reader I doubt not) to prove himself to be but a wrangler.

Having said enough in defense of the Refuter for both his reasons; Sect. 10.
ad page 70.
we are now to take notice, how that which the Doct. adds to vnderpropp his
own Assertion, is too feeble to stay it up from falling. Even as (says he)
Angels absolutely spoken, is a title of all Ministers sent of God, but used
with reference to the Churches, whereto they are sent (as the Angels of the. 7.
Churches) do signify the Bishops or Pastors of the same Churches: so
Apostoli, absolutely used, is a title of all Ambassadors sent from God with
authority Apostolical (Romans 16. 7.) though kat hexochen given to Paul and
Barnabas (Acts. 14. 14.) and the 12. Apostles, but used with reference to
particular Churches, does signify their Bishops. Here the Doctor deserves to
be answered with his own words, viz. that while he goes about to discover his
Refuters ignorance (as though he knew not the signification and use of the
words agg^los and Apostolos) he bewrays his own, and that in diverse The
Doct. discovers his own errors, while he offers to show his ref. ignorance.
particulars. For (to let pass now the repetition of any thing formerly spoken
for the use of this phrase the angels of the Churches) he had need to have a
very favorable interpreter that shall excuse him of error, in saying, the word
Angels absolutely spoken, as a title given to all Ministers sent of God; for,
(not to heap up places where it is put for the celestial Angels) I have before
showed that it is referred to messengers sent of men, la^. 2. 25. 2. And surely
that text of Ro^. 16. 7. (which says that Andronicus and Funia were men of
note among the Apostles) cannot prove what he affirms, viz. that besides Paul
and Barnabas, and the 12. Apostles, there were sundry other Ambassadors sent
from God with authority Apostolical. 3. Neither can he make good generally
his last asserti^on, that the word Apostle used with reference to particular
churches, signifies their Bishops. For (besides the places before questioned
phil. 2. 25. 2. Cor. 8. 23.) it is apparently used with such reference, 1. Cor.
9. 2. when S. Paul (who was no Bishop over any particular church or Churches)
says, If I be not Apostle unto others, yet doublesse I am unto you. 4. As for
the conclusion which he infers, (viz. that in the Scriptures, the word
Apostolos, is not used to signify Messengers sent from men, nether is it to be
translated otherwise then Apostle) I have already showed (sect. 5.) how much he
wrongeth our own Church governors (besides many other worthy and sound
divines) who have taken the word, for any messenger from men, and so translated
it. Phil. 2. 25. 2. Cor. 8, 23. John. 13. 16. And 2ly. I have sufficiee^tly
discovered the falsehood of his conclusion, having mainteyned against all his
exceptions, the Refuters construction of the 2. former places, and the reasons
which he propounded in that behalf. Neither is it hard to remove that which he
objecteth touching the later all that he says is this, though our Savior do
seem to speak indefinitely John 13. 16. of the Apostle, (he should say any
Messenger) and him and that sends him; yet it is evident, that he means
himself who sent, and the Apostles who were sent. Does he seem only to speak
indefinitely? And is it evident that he means himself only etc? What
seeming reason or evident demonstration, has the Doctor to justifye this?
since he has none, it might be a sufficient answer to tell him, (eadem
facilitate rejicuur, qu^asseritur,) the Refuter may as easily deny it as he
affirm it. But for the Readers satisfaction this I add. The coherence of the
text (both here and elsewhere, where the like speech is used as Cap. 15. 20.
Math. 10 24.) clearly shows, that Christ intends to teach his Apostles,
that they ought to imitate him in subjecting themselves, both to bear the like
afflictions (which is the scope of the other 2. places) and to perform the
like services (which he aymeth at in this place) unto another. To effect this
his purpose, he argues (a genere) in this manner; no servant, disciple, or
messenger, is greater then his L. and Mr. or him that sent him. But ye are my
servantes disciples and messengers; and I am that Lord and Mr. and he that
sends you in Embassage. Ergo, you are not greater then I; and consequently,
you ought to subject your selves, both to do and suffer, what ye have seen in
me. I could allege Interpreters old and new, that thus understand the words of
Christ, in the general and largest sense: but it shall not be needful to them,
that consider how absurd it is to restreine so general a sentence, unto one
only particular. For if I may use the Doct. words, Lib. 1. page 226. who shall
dare to do this without very good warrant? The Doct. conclusion being thus
removed out of the way, I here again infer (as the Ref. did once before) that
he is deceived and seeks to deceive by the equivocation of the word apostolos
which sometimes in a common and general sense, is given to any one, that is
sent as a messenger, though usually ascribed to those, that were employed (as
were the 12. Apostles) in an high and extraordinary Embassage from Christ.

In the next place Mr. D. labor is to remove this objection, that though it
should be admitted, that he was a Bishop, yet it follows not Sect. 11. ad
sect. 15. pa. 70. 71.
that he was a di^cesan Bishop, like to ours in the substance of his office;
and therefore be d^ceyveth his reader with the like equivocation in the word
Bishop, which in the Apostles times (by his own confession) was common to all
Pastors, though afterward appropriated to some special persons (ans. p. 136.)
This is (says the Doct.) as if he should have said, I grant that which here
you prove; but yet that follows not hereon which you intended not: That the
Churches were dioceses and the Bishops diocesan etc: I proved before in the
former part; here I am so far from inferring or proving it that I presupposed
it, as sufficiently proved before. Whereunto, I cannot make him a better
answer, then to return him his own a little before spoken to the Ref. with a
little change. This is written as the most of his 4 volumes, to bleare the eyes
of the simple; For I cannot think that the D. which undertook this course, was
so void of judgment, as here he would show himself to be, if he wrote
syncerely. What is the point (I pray you) which here he had in hand? was it not
to prove that the Apostles themselves ordained Bishops? does not the title upon
the head of every page of this chapter show it? and what Bishops did they
ordeyne in his understanding? were they parish Bishops, or temporary overseers
as were the Evangelists? can he justify the caling of our Bishops to be of
divine or Apostolical institution, unless he prove that the Bishops or
Pastors, to whom the Apostles committed the care of particular Churches were
like to ours for the substance of their office? And, to descend more
particularly to the question, which himself affirms to be debated in all
this discourse (page 65.) viz. whether Bishops be mentioned in the scriptures
under this name, the Apostles of the Churches?) is it not to be understood of
such Bishops as ours are? If he do neither prove this, nor intend it, but
presuppose it, (or rather take it for granted, without proof) and if he prove
no more (in this discourse, touching Epaphroditus) The Doct. trifleth,
deceives and shifteth poorly.
then that which this objection admits (to wit, that he was a Bishop in the
general construction of the word) does he not show himself to be a trifling
deceiver? and what else does he but bleare the eyes of the simple, when he
says, it is sufficiently proved before? But this is the poor shift (to pay
him once again with his own page 71.) which the Doct. usually flies unto.
When he has nothing to justify his assertio^s, he persuades himself (such is
his judgment) that in the question of Dioceses and diocesan Bishops, he has
the upper-hand, (because he has proved, that there were such Bishops and
Churches in the 2. or 3. age after the Apostles) and therefore when he is
foiled in any of his reasons, that should prove the calling of such Bishops, to
be of divine institution, he flies to this, as his refuge, I have already
proved the Churches to be Dioceses and the Bishops Diocesan: and therefore if
you grant that the function of Bishops was instituted of God, and that Bishops
were ordained or approved of the Apostles, then you grant as much as I intend
to prove. This then being his best defense, the reader may see the Doctors
sincerity, and that he was not wronged by his Refuter when he told him, that
he deceives his reader by an equivocation in the word Bishop. But in deed, he
much wrongeth his refuter, and all them whom he calls his consorts, when (for
a requital) he says, that they do deceive their readers, in that they would
persuade them, that because the name Episcopus and Presbyter were confounded,
therefore also the offices were confounded. For where does the refuter or his
consorts thus argue? The objection which he before took notice of, and
pretends in all this discourse to remove, is (as himself sets it down page
65.) that the name Episcopus in the Apostolical writings, is given to
Presbyters, and that Bishops (such as ours) are not mentioned in the
scriptures. For answer whereunto, he said then (and now repeateth it again)
that when Presbyters were called Episcopi, those who afterward (and now) are
called Bishops were then called the Apostles of the Churches. This he first
endeavored to prove by that instance of Epa. phroditus Phil. 2. 25; but his
failing therein, is sufficiently discovered; now, once again he attempteth it,
let us attend whether his success be any better.

For (says he) as I said in the sermon; whiles the episcopal power was in
Sect. 12. ad sect. 16. pa. 71. 72.
the Apostles, and Apostolic men; those who had that power were called the
Apostles. And what then? Will he hence conclude, that therefore Bishops (such
as afterward and now have the name appropriated to them) were then called
Apostles; does it not rather follow (much better) on the contrary, that in the
Apostles times; the name of Apostles, was given to no other, then to the
Apostles themselves, or Apostolic men, which were (as himself acknowledges
page 72) Evangelists? has not the Doct. then spun a saire thread, to strangle
his own cause? But since he pretends to repeat the words of his sermon, why
does he curtoll them? there he said (page 71) whiles the episcopal power was,
for the most part, in the Apostles and Apostolic me^, those who also had that
power, were called Apostles: now he leaves out these words, for the most part,
and also. May I entreat him plainly to inform us, what moved him to make this
change? It seems, he thought these words (at the first) needful to be added;
(as indeed they were) to conclude his purpose; for unless he can make it
appear, that the power of ordination and jurisdiction over Presbyters (which
he calls episcopal power) was in some other besides the Apostles or
Apostolic men of Evangelists; and that those also were called Apostles, (or at
least the Apostles of the Churches) he cannot infer his former Assertion, to
wit, that those who are now called Bishops, were then called the Apostles of
the Churches. And now (it seems) he foresawe, that the testimonies
(afterward alleged) cannot prove, any other then the very Apostles or
Evangelists (whom he calls Apostolic men) to bear the name of Apostles, in
the apostolical writings; though his witnesses speak what they can, and he
make his best advantage of them. 1. he says, that Ambrose, by Apostles in some
places of scripture (as 1. Cor. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 11.) understands Bishops:
but is the Doctor persuaded, that the spirit of God understands such Bishops,
as are now questioned, by the word Apostles in those places? If not, why
leads he his reader into an error, and persuade him to believe The Doct.
leads his reader into that error which him self dissaloweth.
that which himself dissalloweth? If he be, why urges he not those scriptures
to prove the maine quaestion? seeing none can be found more pregnant, then
these (if that be their meaning) to prove the doctrine of his sermon, viz. that
the function of Bishops such as ours, is of divine institution? And why does he
reach the contrary, in saying, as before page 70. that the word, Apostoli,
absolutely used, is a title of those which were sent of God with authority
apostolical? Moreover can the Doctor be ignorant that Ambrose (in Ephesians. 4.
11.) does also say, that the Evangelists are Deacons? and that Pastors are and
may be Lector^, quilectionibus saginent populum audientem; and that Magistri
(so he translateth the word didasca^j, Teachers) exor^ista sunt, quiain
teclesiaipfi compeseunt et verberant inquietos. If therefore the Doct. will have
us to believe, that Diocesan Bishops such as ours, were mentioned in the
Apostolical writings, under the name, (not of Bishops but) of Apostles;
because Ambrose faith, (Apostoli episcopi sunt) the Apostles are Bishops; let
him freely confess, that the functions of Lectors and Exercists (such as the
Papists will have to be sevarall orders of the Clergic) were also established
in the Apostles times, and mentioned in their writings (though not under the
same names, yet) under the names of Pastors and Teachers (or Masters) Ephesians. 4.
11. and that Ambrose testifies the same in the words aaforegoing; for if he
shall refuse to subscribe to this later inference; he must pardon us this once,
for not embracing the former.

2. And seeing he faith Cyprian, speaks to the like purpose. lib. 3. epist. 9.
Apostoles, ideft episcopos and Prapositos Dominus elegin. The L. chose
Apostles, that is, Bishops. Let me again demand of Mr Doct. whether he be
persuaded that the Apostles whom our Lord did choose (and who after our
Saviors ascension chose Deacons, as Cyprian in the same place testifies) were
Diocesan Bishops, such as ours? If not, how will Cyprians words further his
purpose, which is to prove, that in the Apostolical writings such Bishops are
called Apostles? If he be, why is he ashamed (especially seeing he has Bishop
Bilson (perpet. govern. page 226.) alleging both Cyprian and Ambrose and
Bishop Barlow (sermon. in Act 20. 28. fol. 17) urging Cyprian for that purpose to
inrowle the 12. Apostles, among other Bishops, which he affirms to be
ordained of God, in his last argument, hereafter following Cap. 6? Nay, why
affirms he the contrary in this 3. chapt. viz. that some of the Apostles were
not properly Bishops. Yea he there acknowledges, that it is truly affirmed of
the rest of the Apostles, James excepted; that they had not certain Churches
assigned to them, and therefore were not Bishops. To conclude, it is apparent
to them that (with understanding) read Cyprians whole epistle, that to increase
the power and honor of their function who were Bishops in his time, he
presses the pre-eminence, which God gave to the high-prcifts above the rest
(Deuteronomy. 17. and Numb. 16.) much more earnestly, then he does the prerogative of
Christ's Apostles, above the Deacons. Wherefore the Doctor too much abridgeth
the episcopal function of her due antiquity in deriving the original thereof
(at the highest) fro Christ's election of his Apostles. For if this later will
prove the function of Bishops to be mentioned in the new Testament, under the
name of Apostles; then will the former as strongly argue, their function to be
mentioned, in the book of Moses, under the name of that preisthood, which was
given to Aaron and his successors.

But draw we to an end; at the last (and for the winding up of Sect. 13.
adpag. 72.
all the Doctor once again takes hold of Theodoret, but in vain, seeing
himself affirms (as was before observed sect. 6.) the first Bishops, who were
by Theodoret called Apostles, or the Apostles of the Churches; to be no other
then Apostles, or Apostolical men, yt is, Evangelist; for if they were either
Apostles or Evangelists, then were they not properly Bishops; and if properly
Bps, (such as afterward were chosen out of the Presbyters) the they were not
Apostles, nor Evangelists; for otherwise the offices will be confounded, which
ought to be kept distinct, as shall be showed more fully in the examination of
that which he has said in defense of James his Bishopric (in his 3. chap.
sect. 7.) and touching Timothy and Titus in his chap. 4. sect. 11.

As for the question of the time, how long the name of Episcopus and Presbyter
were confounded; and when the Diocesan Bishop, had the name Episcopus
appropriated to him; it is such as the D. might well have overpassed; save that
he cannot endure to be contradicted, in any point of the least moment. The
process of time whereof Theodoret speaks, when the name of Bishops was
appropriated to such, as in his days were usually so called, was in the
Apostles time, as the Doct. gathers (not from any words of Theodoret, but) by
conference of him with Jerome. But Theodorets meaning is best gathered from his
own words, In process of time (says he) they left the name Apostle to those
that are properly called Apostles; and the name of Bishop, they gave to them
that had been called Apostles. Who sees not, that in his opinion the name of
Bishop, was not appropriated to that function, which in his time time enjoyed
it, til the name of Apostle was left to those that were properly so called? But
the Church Governors were called Apostles for many years after their time, as
the refuter showed out of Epiphanius and Isidore. (Answ. page 153.) And the
Doct. himself confesses that the name of Apostle continued in use; so long as
any Evangelists, or Apostolical men remained. But under that Emperor Antonius
Pius (who reigned until the year 152.) many of them remained alive as
Nicephorus testifies. lib. 3. cap. 22. And as for those Bishops which by
Ignatius are distinguished fro Presbyters, and are said by Jerome to have had
their beginning at Alexandria after S. Mark: the Doctor knows well enough, it
is easier for us to deny; then for him to prove that they were Diocesan Bishops
such as ours; neither is it pertinent to the present question, here to debate
that matter: seeing we now wait to hear, what can be alleged from the
scriptures to prove, that such Bishops, had their ordination and original, in
the Apostles times, and that with their approbation.

And though he has insisted long upon this point, being (as he esteems) of
great consequence: yet his maine assertion (that Bishops such as ours were in
the Scriptures, called the Apostles of the Churches) and the instance produced
to prove it (to wir, that Epaphroditus the Philippians Apostle, was such a
Bishop) do lie as naked as at the first; having no shredd of Holy writ, nor
any piece of reason to cloth them. Wherefore the conclusions that he infers
upon these premises (viz that Bishops being then called Apostoli were superior
to other Ministers, who were called Presbyteri and Episcopi; that such Bishops
as were superior to other Ministers, were in the Apostles times, and mentioned
in their writings; and consequently that the offices of such Bishops and of
Presbyters were distinguished, even then when the names were confounded. These
are the conclusions, and what are they, but as walls whose foundation is laid
in the sand, and dawbed with intempered mortar; and therefore how glorious
soever in show, yet can they neither longstand, nor yield any firm habitation,
for our diocesan Prelates to lodge in.

It has bin already showed, that (in the judgment of some of the Doctors own
witnesses) Epaphroditus and others called the Sect. 14.
Apostles (or Messengers) of the Churches, were Evangelists rather then
properly Bishops; now to make the probability of this point the more apparent,
I here tender to Mr Doctor, and the indifferent reader these considerations.
First, touching Epaphroditus; his employment in traveile to and fro, agrees
better to the function of an Evangelist then of a Bishop. 2. and it seems he
was sent rather for an interim, till Timotheus might be spared to come unto
them (Phil. 2. 19. 25.) then to make perpetual residence there. 3. Moreover
there is small likelihood, the chief care and oversight of that Church and
their affairs, was committed to him by the Apostle; seeing he prefers
Timothy therein before him; for of him he says, verse. 20. 22. I have no man
like minded that will naturally care for your matters etc. But ye know the
proof of him etc. him therefore I hope to send etc. which words do cast more
disgrace upon Epaphroditus if he were their Bishop then all the titles of
commendation given him (verse 25.) can wipe away. For what praise can it be to
a Bishop, to be laborious in other places, and faithful in other services;
when in a natural care for the affairs of his own Church, he suffers others
to go before him, and striveth not to excel them? 4. Again, in this epistle
sent (as the Doctor says) by Epaphrodirus, it is plain, he singleth out one,
whom (though he name not, yet) he honors with the title of a natural or
faithful yoakfellowe, cap. 4. 3. and beseeches him to help not only those
weomen, which labored with the Apostle in the gospel, but Clement also, and
the rest of his fellow laborers. If so much had been said for the singular
pre-eminence of Epaphroditus, the D. doubtless would have made his best
advantage of it: wherefore me thinks, it should move him, to make a Quere, why
the Apostles should thus single out an other, if the chief care of that whole
Church, and the oversight of all Bishops or Ministers, that there labored in
the Gospel, were the standing right and singular prerogative of Epaphroditus.
And till the Doctor has yielded some stronger probabilities for his assertion,
then are yet seen; I nothing doubt, but the indifferent reader, will see and
acknowledge, that from the text it self, we have more reason to deny, then he
has to give to Epaphroditus the singular superiority of a diocesan Bishop, in
the Church of Philippi. Secondly concerning those brethren, that were sent with
Titus to the Corinthians; since the principal end of their Embassage, was to
stir up those of Corinthe to make ready their benevolence for the poor
Saints at lerusalem (2. Cor. 8. 6. 24. and 9. 3. 5.) it is not likely, that
the Apostle Paul would be the author, or approver, of applying in this service
any, that were affixed as Bishops, to the selted charge of particular Churches;
especially seeing there was at that time, store of others that accompanied the
Apostle in his traveiles; and might better be spared, as having no settled
employment in any one place. Moreover, it may be probably (if not necessarily)
gathered, from the Apostles description of those men; that they were
Evangelistes, rather then Bishops. Of the one he says (2. Cor. 8. 18. 19.) his
praise is in the gospel, throughout all the Churches, and not that only but
he was chosen also of the Churches to be (suntcdemos bemoon) our
fellow-traveiler, or companion in our journey etc. And of the other (verse. 22.)
We have oftentimes proved him to be diligent (or careful) in many things etc.
But there is not one word, that intimates any band, whereby they were tied to
the selted charge, of any particular Church or Churches; much less can it be
gathered from the Scriptures, that they had the singular pre-eminence of
diocesan Bishops. Wherefore leaving the Doctor to his meditation upon these
considerations; let us proceed to some other particulars, urged by him, to
justifye the title of his 3. chapter, viz. that the Apostles themselves
ordained Bishops.

Chapt. 5. Showing that the supposed Bishopprick of the Apostle James, is not
supported, but contradicted by the scriptures which the Doct. alleges. And
mainteyning the Refuters reasons produced to prove, that he receyved not the
episcopal power or function by any ordinatio^, from his fellows Apostles.
bandled by the D. (sermon. page 62. etc. Def. Lib. 4. Cap. 3. and the Res. page
131. 132: etc.
THe Doct. 3. argument is thus propounded page 65. of his sermon, Sect. 1. ad
cap. 3. sect. 1. page 48. 49.
The Apostles themselves ordained Bishops; and committed the Churoches unto
them Therefore the opiscopall function is (without question) of Apostolical
institution. First, touching the consequence; because the Refuter said, it was
too nere a neighbor to the proving of idem per idim, venlesse by ordination we
understand the deputing of persons to that Church; and by institution, the
appointing of the calling it self: the Doct. thinks he did him wrong, to
think he would commit so gross a fault, as to prove the same, by the same;
seeing he could not but discern, that he argues from the ordination of the
persons, to the institution of the function. But had not the Refuter (trow ye)
reason to doubt of the Doctors meaning? does he not (sermon. page 92.) take both
these assertions for one and the same? viz. that the episcopal function is of
divine institution, and that Bishops were ordained of God. For if they be not
one, in the D. apprehension; how shall the direct proof of the latter, be a
direct proof of the former? But since he now testifies that he argues from
the ordination to the institution; I will so understand him. In that which
follows I cannot but commend his honest and plain dealing; for beholding an
oversight in the Ref; (when in this sense, he acknowledges the consequence to
be good) he himself undertakes to lay open the weakness of it, and confesses
freely that a just exception may be taken against it, viz. that though the
Apostles ordained the persons, yet Chirst instituted the function; for that is
the judgment of many of the Fathers; and among the rest of Cyprian, who (Lib.
3. ep. 9.) says, that our L. himself ordained Apostles, that is to say,
Bishops. Whereto I say, that we are beholding to the Doct. that teaches us to
impugn his own argument and now, since (by his own confession) the
consequence is not good, he must be beholding to us if we permit it to pass
without check; for in deed, it is a clear case, that the ordination of
persons, cannot prove the function it self to be instituted of them, that give
the persons their ordination. And here by the way, the reader may see how
lightly the D. esteems the judgment of the Fathers in this very question
wherein he relieth most upon their testimony. For if al those Fathers (which
affirm the Bps to be the Apostles successors; and that the two degrees of Bps
or Presbyters, do answer to the degrees of the Apostles and 72 disciples etc.)
do hold the episcopal function to be Christ's own ordinance; (as here he
confesses) and if they that thus teach be so many, so ancient, unsuspected and
approved; that it cannot be denied, but the calling and superiority of Bishops,
together with the inferior degree of Presbyters, is of Christ's own
institution (as he concludes lib. 3. p. 32.) how comes it to pass, that the
Doctor has the forehead eo deny it, and mainteyne so stiffly as he does; that
The Doct. contradicts himself.
the episcopal function was instituted by the Apostles? Thinks he to salve
this difference by saying as he he does that of this matter he will not
contend; when as yet he contendeth very earnestly to make good his assertion?
yea he boasts (lib. 3. page 24.) that he has with such evidence demo^strated
the calling of Bishops described in his sermon to be of Apostolical
institution; as he is well assured, his Refuter with all his partakers, will
never be able soundly and substa^cially to confute. Perhaps his best evide^ce
is yet behind; for hitherto we have seen nothing that carries any such weight
with it, that the Refuter should need to call for any help of his partakers to
remove it; let us therefore attend on the proof of his Antecedent, which he
undertakes to effect, by showing the time when, the places where, and the
persons whom, the Apostles ord: yned Bishops.

Concerning the time, the Doctor puts a difference, between Sect. 2. ad
sect. 2. p3. 49. 50.
the Church at Jerusalem and the rest. For there, because shortly after Christ's
passion, a great number were converted to the faith; and because it was the
Mother Church, unto which the Christians from all parts, were afterward to
have recourse: the Apostles, before their dispersion, (statim post passionem
Domini) ordained James the just Bishop of Jerusalem. From whence the Refuter
gathered this argument. James the just was ordained Bishop of Jerusalem,
straightwayes after Christ's passion. Ergo the Apostles ordained Bishops and
committed the Churches to them. Hereat the Doctor is displeased, because one
part of his argumentation is culled out from the rest; for his argument (as he
says) is an induction standing thus. The Apostles ordained Bishops at
Jerusalem and in other Churches (which afterward he does particularly
enumerate) Therefore they ordained Bishops. He adds, that he proves they
ordained Bishops at Jerusalem, because they ordained James the just, and Simon
the son of Cleophas, Bishops of Jerusalem;) the former he proves here, the
other afterward according to the order of the time.

If the D. meaning (when he penned his sermon) was to argue, as he now says,
no merveile, if his Refuter failed in discerning his Analysis, his genesis
being so disordered and confused. For the explayning and proving the former
antecedent, he proposes (as appears in this sect. and sermon. p. 65) these
three things to be showed, 1. the time when. 2. the places where. 3. the
persons whom the Apostles ordained Bishops. He begins with the time, when
the first Bishop was ordained; and withal declares the place and person:
Afterward he shows jointly the places where, and the persons whom the
Apostles ordained Bishops. Now he tells us, his whole reasoning is one
induction, which stands in an enumeration of places or Churches. And the
enumeration of the persons is made a prosyllogisme, to justify that which is
affirmed for the places. As for the discourse of the time, it has no place at
all in his argumentatio^; unless it be to give the Bishops of Jerusalem their
due place. For in order of time Evodias at Antioch, Linus at Rome, and Mark at
Alexandria had possession of their Bishoprics before Timothy was placed at
Ephesus; if the D. be not deceived in his computation, that he delivers.
sermon: page 78. Thus we see what a Crypticall disputer Mr D. is; his
argumentations are as Oracles, or rather riddles. that require an other Oedipus
(rather then such an one as his refut: is) to discover the right order of
disposing the^. For who (besides himself) would have found out the Medius
terminus which he has assigned; and distinguished his first probatio^, from
the ensuing prosyllogism, so as he has done.

But let us see how he justifyeth the parts of his later enumeration, wherein
he coupleth together, the persons with the places. Sect. 3.
First touching James (whom he affirms to be the first Bishop of Jerusalem
ordained by the Apostles, very shortly after the Lords passion;) before he
prove the truth of his assertion, he yields two reasons, why that Church had
a Bishop, assigned unto it, long before any other Church. 1. because a great
number, were within a short time converted to the faith. 2. because it was the
Mother Church; unto which the Christians from all parts were afterward to
have recourse. Touching the former, I grant, the number was greater then can be
showed in any other Church, within so short a time; but that this was any
reason to move the Apostles, to ordeyne them a Bishop, the Doctors bare word in
affirming it; is too bare a proof, to persuade us to enterteyne it;
especially, seeing he will not allow a Bishop to such Churches, as in number
do exceed the converts at Jerusalem, when James in his conceit was ordained
their Superintendent. For there are (as he knows well enough) in some one of
our parishes at this day above twice yea thrice 5000. Moreover, if this number
were any motive to the Apostles to give them a Bishop; then the time of James
his ordination was after their conversion, and not (as elsewhere he says)
i^mediately after Christ's passion. Now touching the later; I confess also,
that Jerusalem was the Mother Church, from which (in some respect) all other
Churches sprung. For the word of the Lord went out from Jerusalem (Isa. 2. 3)
and that by Christ's own appointmt, (Luc. 24. 47) and from thence, the light of
the gospel spread over all the world by the Ministry of the Apostles, and
others, which before the dispersion of that Church were members thereof. Act.
8. 1. 4. 5. and 11. 19. 20. and cap. 1. 8. Neither deny we, but that many
Christians, upon special occasions had recourse thither. (Act. 11. 29. and 15.
2. 15. 25. 27.) but that the Christians of any other Church (as Samaria or
Caesarea etc) were bound to make repair thither, as unto their Mother Church;
to whose jurisdiction they were subject, as children to their Mother, there is
no syllable of scripture to persuade; much less to believe, that the
Christians of all parts, were afterward to have recourse to Jerusalem as the
Mother Church. For this assertion, has no evidence, either of Scripture or
ancient Father, to countenance it; let them therefore believe it that list; we
owe the Doct. no such obedience. But say, there were a truth in this, which he
assumeth without proofl; how shall it stand for a reason, to move the Apostles,
to commit the care of this Church, unto a Diocesan Bishop? Why should it not
rather be a reason there to erect the Sea, of an Oecumenicall or universal
Pope? If by the Christans of all parts, he mean, of all other Churches in the
world; as if seems he does, since afterward he calls that Church, the
Mother Church of Christendom, (page 60. of this def.) for why should any of
the daughter churches, be exempted from the obedience of their Mother, when
others (yea the eldest, if any at all) remaynned under her government? But if
he will limit his speech to the Christians of that one nation (the charge
whereof, he says was assigned to James, page 52.) it must be the Sea (if of a
Bishop then) of a national, and not a Diocesan Prelate. For if the Church of
Jerusalem was never a parish, because it was intended, that as the people of
the city and country were all under one high priest, so) all the Christians of
city and country, should be under the Bishop of Jerusalem; (as the Doctor
argues lib. 2. page 89) then, for the same reason, neither was that Church a
Diocese, or a province; but a national Church, as was the church, over which
the High-preist was set, under the law. Lastly, to grant as much as in any
equity can be demanded, viz. that partly in regard of the multitude of new
converted Christians; and partly for the great recourse thither, of unbeleeving
Jews (as well as of believers) out of all parts; it was meet that some one of
the Apostles, should there abide to feed the converted flock, and to labor the
conversion of others: how can this argue a necessity, of giving this Apostle
a new ordination to the office of a Bishop in that place? but of this more
hereafter.

His testimonies are to be examined, whereby he proves that Sect. 4. ad sect.
4. pa. 52.
James was ordained Bishop of Jerusalem by the Apostles. He begins with
Jerome; and to make him the more gracious, with the Disciplinarians, he says,
it is that Jerome, on whose only authority almost they rely in this cause;
the like words he has p. 61 following, and lib. 3. page 45. and 58; but this
is, (I say not, almost but) altogether a malicious slander. For he is not
ignorant, that his refuter every where calls for proofs from the scripture,
as others have done before him, and that his testimony is then only regarded
of them, when he has the scripture to justify that he affirms. But it well
appears by his citing Jerome so often in his sermon (40. times at least, well
nigh twice as often as he alleges any other) that he relyeth very much on his
authority. To him here he adds Eusebius, Epiphanius, and some others; whose
testimony in his conceit, should suffice to persuade for such a matter, as
this now in question. But his Refuters exception is just, such a joint act of
the Apostles in the beginning of the Church (as the ordeyning of James to the
episcopal charge of Jerusalem) how should it be proved but by the scripture?
and who could better testify it, then the Evangelist Luke, who wrote the
history of their acts? If then he has not recorded it, it is a strong
presumption, he was never Bishop there. The Doct. replyeth saying, as though
the Apostles did nothing, but what is recorded in the Acts; and as though we
should deny credit, to the ancientest writers, and such as he of best credit,
reporting with one consent a matter of fact not registered in the acts. As for
the antiquity and credit of his witnesses, I overpass that consideration to
sect. 15. etc. I am here to advertise the Reader, the poverty of the Doctors
supply here brought, to releeve the weakness of his argument. For unless he can
make sure and certain Proof of this (among other parts of his induction) that
S. James was ordained by the Apostles Bishop of Jerusalem; how shall he justify
his conclusion before set down, to wit, that the episcopal function is without
quaestion of apostolical institution? And how shall certain and sure proof
of James his ordination to the Bishopric of Jerusalem be made from such
witnesses, as the Doctor has produced? Are not the canonical writings of the
new testament, (penned partly by the Apostles, and partly by Evangelists,
which were their companions) best able to testify, what function James and
other faithful servants of Christ did bear and exercise, in the Churches,
that enjoyed their presence? We find many things recorded by Luke, concerning
the Ministry of Paul and Barnabas, Philip and others, by whose labors the
kingdom of Christ was enlarged. Acts 9. 15. 27. and 13. 2. 3. and 14. 14. and
15. 22. 31. and 8. 5. 40. and. 21. 8.) Neither are the scriptures silent
touching James and his employment at Jerusalem, (Act. 1. 13. and 15. 13. and
21. 18. Gal. 1. 9. and 2. 9) why then should this ordinatio^ of James to the
function and charge of a Bishop in that Church, be wholly buried in silence, if
it had been the joynt-act of the Apostles, before their dispersion, and an act
of that moment, wherein they gave the first president of a new function of
greatest use and highest place, for all churches in succeeding ages? Was it not
as worthy and more necessary to be recorded, then the first institution of the
Deacons office. Act. 6. 2. 6? Have we not cause then to hold it for a strong
presumption, that James never had any such ordination; seeing there are no
footsteps of it, in the Apostolical writings? and seeing the Doctors defense is
so slight, as it is; mark it I pray; first, he asks whether the Apostles did
nothing but what is recorded in the Acts; a frivolous question. No man denies,
that as Christ did many things which are not written, (Ioh. 20. 30. and 21. 25)
so also did his Apostles, but will he argue thus, They did something not
recorded in the scriptures, Ergo, they did this, now in question? How does the
Doct. forget himself, thus to open so wide a door unto the Papists, to bring
in all their superstitions under the name of unwritten traditions? Can he give
us any one instance, of an Apostolical ordinance (or of any Apostolic actio^,
of like moment and necessary use for all Churches) that is not mentioned in
their writings; neither can be proved otherwise, then by the stories and and
writings of the Fathers?

And this may serve for answer also unto his second question, whether we
should deny credit to the ancientest Fathers etc. reporting with one consent a
matter of fact, not registered in the acts? In some matters of fact, credit is
not to be denied to their report (as that James the Just was martyred at
Jerusalem; and that Mark the Evangelist preached the gospel at Aleandria) but
there are many matters of fact, testified by many ancients (and those of the
best credit as the D. speaks) which notwithstanding, many worthy me^ (nothing
inferior to the Doctor) esteem worthy of no credit. I will instance only in
Peter's Bishopric first at Antioch and then at Rome, which is contended for,
not only by Papists, but also by some zealous defenders of our Prelacie; let
the testimonies be well weighed, which are brought for the maintenance of Peter's
episcopal chair in both Churches (Rome especially) even by Bishop Bilson
(perpet. govern. page 227. 262. and 264) and they will be found to be neither in
number nor in credit, inferior to those that the D. alleges for James his
Bishopric at Jerusalem: yet as many other men of singular learning and piety
do deny credit to their report: so the Doctor also, (as one nothing moved,
either with the authority of those fathers, or with the judgment of his great
Mr that gave him so good satisfaction in the studying of this controversy)
utterly secludeth the Apostle Peter, from the office of a Bishop, in any of
those Churches, as we may see, sermon. page 81. 82. and in the 7. section of cap.
3. def.

If the Doctor shall say, he has reason to believe the testimony Sect. 5.
of the Fathers for the one, and to deny credit unto them in the other, know
he, that we have reason also to withdraw approbation from this which he
allows. But first listen we to the reasons that sway him in this question.
Although (says he) the act of making James Bishop, be not set down in the
Acts; yet the stori^ so speaks of his continuance at Jerusalem (Acts. 15.
and 21.) of his assistance of presbyters, and of his presidencie in that
Council where Peter and Paul were present; that it may appear, their testimony
is true, and agreeable to the scriptures, who have reported him to be Bishop
there. To the same purpose, afterward (sect. 9. page 61,) he says. That the
same scriptures (together with Gal. 1. and 2.) do show James his continuance
as Jerusalem, as the Superintendent of that Church, not for a short time, but
for the space of 30. years, even to his death) and also plainly prove that he
was Bishop of Jerusalem. Thus he says, and thus, it seems, his meaning is to
argue.

The scriptures which show, that James continued at Jerusalem as the
Superintendent of that Church, from Christ's passion to his own death, do also
plainly prove that he was the Bishop thereof:

But his continuance at Jerusalem for so long space as Superintendent of that
Church, is testified, Act. 15. and 21. and Gal. 1.

Therefore, the same scriptures do plainly prove, that James was the Bishop of
Jerusalem. And consequently their testimony is true, and agreeable to the
scriptures who have reported him to be Bishop there.

A Superintendent and a Bishop (according to the natural construction of the
words in their original) is all one; and both of the^ in a general
signification, may very well be applied to that presidencie and oversight,
which every Apostle, or Evangelist, had in every Church for the time of their
abode there. For, who had the superintendency or government (or, if you will,
the episcopal charge) of the Church at Corinthe, for that space of a year and
six months, which Paul spent there in preaching of the word among them; or of
the Church at Ephesus, during the space of. 3. years, wherein he ceased not to
warn every one night and day, and to teach them both publicly and from house
to house. Acts. 18. 8. 11. and 20. 17. 20. 31. But as this superintendencie,
proves not S. Paul to have been the Bishop, either of Corinthe, or Ephesus (in
the function of a diocesan or provincial Bishop) so neither does the like
superintendencie in James at Jerusalem, argue him, to have the function of a
diocesan Bishop, or Archbishop although it could be proved, that he continued
in such a Superintende^cie there, for that whose space of years before
mentioned. For it is not the continuance of 3. or 30. years, that
distinguishes the function of a Bishop from an Apostle: but an ordination and
assignement, to the perpetual charge of one particular Church. The proposition
therefore of the Doctors argument is not true; unless, he limiteth the
superintendencie, whereof he speaks unto this sense; to wit, that James was
the Superintendent of that Church of Jerusalem, in the special function of a
diocesan Bishop. But then his assumption is false; not only in regard of such
an episcopal superintendencie; but also in respect of that length of time,
which he ascribes to him therein: for the scriptures alleged by him do not
prove, either the one or the other. Sect. 6. ad sect. 6. p. 56 and sect. 8.
page 60.


For, (to weigh the places first severally and then jointly) what
superintendencie, other then Apostolical, can the Doctor discern in Galath.
1? S. Paul there testifies that imediately upon his co^version, he went not up
to Jerusalem, to them that were Apostles before him; but 3. years after he
went up thither to see Peter; and found there no other of the Apostles, save
James the L. brother* verse. 17. 18. 19. behold here a manifest approbation of
his Apostolical function, for he equally honors him, and Peter with the
name of Apostle^; but of any episcopal superintendencie, wherein he should
differ from Peter, there is (altum silentium) no inckling at all) nay rather,
of the two, there reasoning is more probable, which give pre-eminence unto
Peter; because Paul went up to Jerusalem of purpose, to visit (not James, but)
Peter, and abode with him 15. days. 2. As for Gal. 2. he that peruseth the
text may very well think, the Doct. had need to have skill in Alchymistrie,
as well as in Divinity, if he undertake from thence to extract for S. James an
episcopal superintendencie, at Jerusalem, yet behold how he (page 56.)
attempteth it in this manner; James, Peter, and John gave the right hand of
fellowship to Paul and Barnabas, that themselves would be for the circumcision.
Gal. 2. 9. And for as much as Peter and John traveiled to other parts, James
alwaise abiding at Ierusalem^; it is more then probable, that the Church of
Jury was peculiarly assigned unto him. But how proves he, that James did
always abide at Jerusalem, when the rest traveyled abroad^? does it appear in
Gal. 2. that any such agreement, was made between him and them? no, (he says)
it is very probable that so it was; but there is no likelihood, that James was
forbidden to go out of Jerusalem; seeing the rest were not debarred from
returning thither. I but it is more then probable that the Church of Jury was
peculiarly assigned to him; seeing Peter and John traveiled into other parts.
By the Church of Jury he means (as I suppose) all the Churches in Judea,
(mentioned Gal. 1. 22. and 1 Thessalonians. 2. 14.) and perhaps the rest that were in
Galile and Samaria (Acts. 9. 31.) for who fitter then he to have the oversight
of these Churches also. Now I grant that in their absence and during his aboade
in those coasts; it is probable, he undertook the care of those Churches; like
as Peter had the chief oversight of the Jews, that were scattered throughout
Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia etc. (1. Pet. 1. 1.) during the time of his stay in
those parties. But as Peter remeined still the Apostle of the Circumcision, and
became not properly their Bishop. (which the Doctor acknowledges page 57. and
97.) so neither does it follow that James, had any episcopal (but rather
only an Apostolical) Superintendencie over the Churches of Jury. But pass
we forwards, the Doctor adds, it is not for nothing that both in Acts. 15.
he is noted as president, or chief in that Council, and in Gal. 2. 9. Paul
speaking of such Apostles, as were at Jerusalem, he gives the precedence, to
James before Peter and John. I grant that James was President in that Council
held at Jerusalem, Acts 15. and that he has a prioritie in nomination before
Peter and John. Gal. 2. 9. neither are these things recorded for nothing, but
for our learning as well as all other parts of holy writ. Romans 15. 4. But will
the Doct. be pleased to discover unto us the depth of that learning, which he
finds to lie hid in these places? yea he has done it. sermon. page 68. and
Def. page 60. next following; In the former he says, It appears Acts. 15.
that James after his election to the Bishopric, was superior (though not in
degree yet) in order, unto the rest of the Apostles, when and whiles they were
at Jerusalem. And in the later, he quoteth. Acts. 15. and Gal. 2. to show, that
because he was set over the Mother Church of Christendom, to be the Apostle or
Bishop of that people, which had sundry prerogatives above al other nations) in
respect of that place, he had precedence before the other Apostles. In which
words there are some clear truths which must be divided from other more
doubtful points. Of the former sort (not to mention again, the presidence
and priority before acknowledged in S. James) we account these particulars. 1.
that the Jews had in former ages many prerogatives above all other nations; 2.
that the church of Jerusalem was in some respect (as is before showed sect. 3.)
the Mother Church of Christendom. 3. that James was an Apostle principally to
the Jews. 4. and that among the Jews, those of Jerusalem, and the country
round about, did more specially belong unto his oversight, whiles Peter and
John (who were also Apostles, for the Circumcision Gal. 2. 9.) were employed in
other places. 5. lastly, that during his presidency (in the Council Acts 15.)
he was superior in order, but not in degree, unto the rest of the Apostles.
But among things more doubtful, besides the question it self of James his
election or assignement to the function of a Bishop at Jerusalem) I reckon
these positions. 1. that a presidencie in honor, or pre-eminence in order
(such as he speaks of) is intimated by S. Paul, in setting James before Peter
and John. Gal. 2. 2. that this precedence is there given him, in respect of his
episcopal charge at Jerusalem. 3. and that in the same respect, he had the
presidencie in the council Act. 15. 4. that he was always (after the time of
his supposed election to his Bishopric) superior in order to the rest of the
Apostles, when and whiles they remained at Jerusalem. 5. that this continuance
of that superiority in him, appears Act. 15. 6. And that this superiority or
precedence, did grow from the prerogatives, which that Church and people had
above others. To these particulars, if the Doctor will have us to give our free
assent; he must first inform us, by what authority (or consequence of reason)
he is ledd to apprehend a truth in every of them; and remove the probabilities,
which do incline our judgments to the contrary.

For touching Gal. 2. are not the words of the Apostle (ver. 7. Sect. 7.
8.) affirming, that the gospel of the uncircumcision was committed unto Peter)
much more plain for his pre-eminence above James and John in the Apostleship
of the Jews, then the naming of James before them (verse. 9. can be) for his
primacie above all his fellowe-Apostles. Is it not then, much more frivolous
and ridiculous in the Doctor to extract for James a pre-eminence in honor
above Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, from that slender prioritie which
Paul gives him in naming him first; then it is in Bellarmine to ascribe unto
Peter a preheminent dignity above the rest, because he is usually named in the
first place? Why therefore should not that did up the Doctors mouth, that has
dammed up Bellarmines?) Sidrac inter adolescentes qui in ignem coniecti sunt,
primus numeratur; neque tamen Sidrac socijs suis prefuit. Sutclif. de Pont.
lib. 2. p. 105. Quando multi nominantur, necesse est aliquem primum nominari
etc. Gravissime Erasmus (Annot. in Math. 10.) ex ordine recensionis, non
efficaciter intelligitur, quis cui sit preferendus. Whit. de pont. p. 27. l.
Add we harevnto that which is of all observed in their answer to Bellarm.
viz. that one order of names is not always kept. Peter which is first placed,
Mat. 10. 2. Marc. 3. 16. Luc. 16. 14. Act. 1. 13. is set in the last place. 1.
Cor. 1. 12. and 3. 22. and 9. 5. And James here first named, (being one of the
Lords brethren) comes after the greater part of the Apostles. 1. Cor. 9. 5.
when he says, the other Apostles and brethren of the Lord and Cephas.
Levissimum igitur argumentum hoc ordinis est, (as Mr Whit. says, page 274.

2. And if no pre-eminence can soundly be conveyed to James from this
precedence in nomination; is not the D. strangely deluded when he takes it for
a sure truth, that the Apostle intended, (by naming him in the first place) to
teach us, not only that he had a prerogative of honor above the rest of the
Apostles; but also that the same did arise from his episcopal charge at
Jerusalem? for is there any one word in the whole epistle, that gives the
least intimation, of any such difference between him and Peter and John, as
the Doctor fancieth, when he makes him properly a Bishop for some; and them
Apostles for others of the circumcision? Does it not rather appear (by the
right hands of fellowship etc. mentioned verse 9.) that Imaes exercised among
the Jews the same (and no other) Ministry, that Peter and John did; and that
they jointly were Apostles for the Jews; like as Paul and Barnabas were for
the Gentiles?

3. And here by the way observe, that this distribution of persons or places
where these were, (after this agreement) to exercise their Apostolical
function, bred no inequality, or disparitie betwixt them, in precedence or
honor. For if the ancient prerogatives of the Jews, gave any preferment to
their Apostles above those, by whom God wrought among the Gentiles (as the Do.
supposes) then Paul was in this respect inferior to the other; but the whole
scope of his reasoning, tends to mainteyne the contrary; viz. that as
elsewhere he faith, he was meden busterekenai) in nothing inferior to the very
chief Apostles. 2. Cor. 11. 5. and 12. 11. Now if the prerogatives of the
Jews in general, gave not to Peter (who had the Apostleship of the
circumcision) any pre-eminence above Paul, the Apostle and Teacher of the
Gentiles: how should Peter become inferior unto James, by reason of any
pre-eminence, which the Church at Jerusalem, might challenge above other
Christian Churches?

Now concerning Act. 15. as I freely acknowledge, James his presidencie Sect. 8.
to be probably gathered from the text, because he concludes the disputation,
adn the definitive sentence of the whole Assembly. verse. 19. 20. and 28. 29.)
so I can by no means allow this presidencie to grow unto him, as his right
in regard of his episcopal charge in that Church, much less can we take the
presidencie for a sufficient proof of his Bishopric there; although the
Doctor should tell us tentimes, that it proves it. For what strings can knit
the joyntes of this argument together? James was president or Moderator in the
Synod at Jerusalem. Act. 15. Therefore he was the Bishop of that Church. Was S.
Paul the Bishop of Ephesus, because as Bishop Barlow says in his sermon on
Acts 20. 28. page 2. he fate as president in the Convocation, when the Clergy
of Ephesus, were by his call, come together? Or was Peter James his predecessor
in the Bishopric of Jerusalem, because he was president in the choice of
Matthias, to succeed in the room of Judas Act. 1. 15? Surgit Petrus non
Iacobus, vt is cui presidentia discipulorum co^missa erat. Occumenius in Act.
1. 15. Loquitur sane primus tanquam Antistes etc. Whit. de pout. page 288.

2. But to come to that which he says does appear Act. 15. viz. that James
after his election to the Bishopric, was superior in order to the rest of the
Apostles, when and whiles they were at Jerusalem.) May I ask, with what eyes
he discerned in that text, the appearance of this which he affirms? In the
Embassage which was sent from Antioch to Jerusalem, was there any special
respect had unto James above the rest of the Apostles? Or in their
interteynment, is there any intimation, of any singular act performed by him,
that might any way argue any such pre-eminence in him? Does not the text
rather, (in the whole tenor thereof) import the contrary? For, to whom were
Paul and Barnabas sent? to the Apostles and Elders says the text, Act. 15. 2.
to whom did they deliver their Embassage? to the Apostles and Elders and whole
Church, which received them, says the text. verse 4. who summoned the
Assembly, or appointed the time, or place of their meeting? did James? the text
says not so; all the record is, that the Apostles and Elders came together, to
consider of the matter. verse. 6. There is no likelihood therefore, that James
had any standing pre-eminence among the Apostles, before his presidencie in
this Synod. And what presumption can he produce from this text, or any part of
the whole story to show that he remained superior unto his fellow Apostles,
after that meeting was ended? not a syllable out of any text. Wherefore in
urging this place to prove, a continued superiority in order over the rest of
the Apostles; seeing he is as one, who seeks to fetch water not fire, out of a
punish stone, he discovers The Doct. expumice aquam postulat.
his extreme poverty in this case: And (which is worse) injuriously makes
the Holy Ghost the author of his own fond conceits. 3. For is it not a
foolish conceit (to speak no worse of it) to i^magin that the function or
charge of a Bishop, cast upon James, being an Apostle could give him more
honor, then he received of Christ by his Apostolical office? Does not this
overturne that difference of dignity and degree, which God has set in his
Church, among the Ministers of his word and sacraments, giving the first and
highest place (1. Cor. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 11.) unto his Apostles; and subjecting
unto them all other functions, as well of Bishops and Pastors of Teachers, as
Prophets and Evangelists? And does it not strongly favor of their madness, (see
Doct. Reynolds conference with Heart, cap. 2. divis. 3. page 119. and cap. 3.
divis. 1. page 126) who acknowledging the Apostles to be all equal in the
power and honor of the Apostleship; do yet ascribe unto Peter a pre-eminence
above the rest, in regard of pastoral or episcopal jurisdiction?

But to proceed on to the last place; Act. 21. 18. etc. what is there Sect. 9.
in it to be found, that can give the Doctor any releife? when Paul came
Jerusalem and went in unto James, he found the Elders present with him, verse
18. he saluted, (not James alone, but) all that were present; and declared what
things God had wrought among the Gentiles by his Ministry, verse. 19. and upon
the hearing thereof, they all glorified God, and said, Thou see brother, how
many thowsands of Jews there are which believe etc. ver. 20-25. From hence the
Doct. rightly collecteth (I grant) that James had the assistance of the
presbyters (as he says page 52.) in that counsel and advice, which was given
to Paul for the purifying of himself and shaving of his head etc. verse. 23. 24.
But if he shall proceed from this assistance of Presbyters, to infer that
therefore James was their Diocesan Bishop: First I will make so bold as to deny
the consequence; for why should not James his Apostolical function enable him,
to hold a presidencie, or chief place amongst the Presbyters of Jerusalem,
during the time of his abode there? we heard before, that Paul's presidencie, in
the assembly of the Elders of Ephesus, Act. 20. 17. etc, did not make him their
Diocesan Bishop. Who doubts (see Iunius his Animadvers. in Bellarm. Co^t. 3.
lib. 1. cap. 8. not. 25.) but that wheresoever any Apostle or Evangelist made
stay for a time; there he was acknowledged, (in regard of his singular gifts,
and for the prerogative of his calling and authority) worthy to have the
oversight or presidencie, before the rest of his fellow laborers? The
presidencie therefore which James had in the assembly of Elders at Jerusalem,
proves not, that he was their diocesan Bishop, in office or pre-eminence like
to one of ours. 2. Nay rather, we may (upon better grounds) conclude the
contrary; for it is clear, by the words of the text aforesaid, that James
neither spoke nor did any thing in that assembly, of his own head, or by his
sole authority. The Elders were jointly interessed with him, both in receiving
from Paul, the report of things wrought by his Ministry; and in giving him
advice, how to remove the offense, which the believing jews had conceived
against him. But it is otherwise with our Bishops; in their Diocesan
government. They have no such assistance of Elders, by whose advice and assent
their sentences are ratified: neitther do they consult with the rectors of
their parishes, for the ordering of any ecclesiastical causes; but impose
their command on them to execute their decrees. S. James therefore, (though he
were an Apostle yet) exercised not that preemi ne^t authority over the
presbyters at Jerusalem, which our dioces. Prelates do over their presbyters;
and consequently, he was not a Diocesan Bishop, in function and preheminent
superiority like to one of ours.

Thus the Reader may see by special view taken of the places, Sect. 10. ad
sect. 4. pa. 51. 52. also.
which the Doctor alleges for the episcopal superintendencie of James, over
the presbyters and Church at Jerusalem; that there is no warrant from the
scripture, to convey to him any such function. Now to lay them together, let us
try if they will affoard him any better proof, for that 30. years
continuance, which he gives unto James, in his Superintendencie of that
Church. When Paul went to Jerusalem 3. years after his conversion, to visit
Peter, there he found James the Lords brother, Gal. 1. 18. 19. he was present
also and President in the Council held at Jerusalem. Act. 15. (which was the
very time that he mencioneth Gal. 2. 1. as many divines of best note do
judge.) Again at Paul's last coming to Jerusalem, Act. 21. (about the year of
Christ 56. and 7. years before James his death) he was there found among the
Elders of that Church. In a word therefore, this is all that those scriptures
do testify for the Doctor; viz. that in 30. years space Paul coming 3. or 4.
times to Jerusalem, found James the L. brother there. Is he not then strangely
besotted with prejudice, that can persuade himself, that these scriptures do
show his continual residence at Jerusalem, as the superintendent of that
Church for the space of 30. years, that is, from Christ's passion till his own
dying day? What hinders, (save only a prejudicial conceit, of his supposed
Bishopric there) but he might think; that (like as Paul and Peter did, so
also) James might spend many years in other places; and yet have recourse
thither, (as they also had) so long as the Jewish policy remained in force?
Was he not ordained of Christ to the office of an Apostle, as well as the rest,
with an ample commission and charge, to go forth into all the world,
beginning at Jerusalem and so proceeding throughout all Judea and Samaria, and
unto the utmost parts of the earth etc? Mark. 16. 15. Math. 28. 19. Luke 24.
47. and Acts. 1. 8. and does not Mark testify of all without exception (verse.
20.) that (as Christ had commanded them, so) they went forth and preached
every where? I, but the Doctor will here perhaps, urge that (which he has
alleged sect. 4. p. 51. 52.) though our Savior bad his Apostles to go into
all the World, yet his meaning was not that every one should traverse the whole
world, for great inconvenience disorder and confusion would have sollowed
thereof. Therefore the Apostles by the direction of the Holy Ghost, before
their dispersion from Jerusalem, divided the world among themselves in such
sort, that one being assigned to one part and another to an other, every man
walked within his own compass, and did not usually build upon the foundation
of an other etc. 2. Cor. 10. 13.-16. Now as they were careful to provide for
other parts of the world; so would they not all forsake Iewrie and Jerusalem,
but assign one of their company to take charge thereof, who though he were an
Apostle yet being assigned to the peculiar church of one nation, might not
unfitly be called (as he was in deed) the Bishop thereof. And hence is it, that
although the Apostles were commanded to go into all the world, yet James
stayed at Jerusalem until his death. Lo here the Doctors words, but do ye
not see, that his conclusion weakneth the credit of S. Marks testimony, in
like sort, as he does elsewhere (page 116.) one speech of Ieromes. viz. that
until factions arose in the Church (which occasioned the bringing in of
Bishops) the Churches were governed by the common council of presbyters. This,
says he, is vnture, in respect of the Church of Jerusalem; which had James for
her Bishop, before any Presbyters were there ordained. So albeit S. Mark says,
that the Apostles went forth (as Christ commanded them) and preached every
where: yet the Doctor says in effect, It is untrue, in respect of James, for
though he lived. 30. years after Christ, yet he went not forth to preach
abroad, but stayed at Jerusalem until his death. But whether Jerome do
contradict himself or not, (for how truly the Doctor so supposes, we are not
now to examine:) his testimony is too weak to exempt James from partaking with
the rest, in that which Mark affirms of all without exception. And it is no
small wrong both to James and to his fellow-Apostles; to make them all guilty
of transgressing Christ's command, the one in neglecting, and the other in
procuring the neglect of the Apostolic function. in the principal work
thereof: to wit, in traveyling to make disciples, and to constitute Churches
among such as had not yet received the faith. Sect. 11.


True it is, that every one was not to traverse the whole world; this was not
imposed on every one of the Apostles severally but on all jointly: and they
were by the spirit of God directed where to employ their labors,
Notwithstanding, it is no true vision but a deceiptful dream of the Doctors
own heart, to i^magin, that the Apostles before their dispersion from
Jerusalem, by the holy Ghosts direction, divided the world among themselves, as
it were into. 12. provinces, or rather Patriarch-shipps in such sort that none
entered into the line or circuit of an other. For had this been so, then Peter
was too blame, to stay at Jerusalem with James, when the rest were gone into
other parts, Gal. 1. 18. 19. and to make so many years residence as he did in
Judea, Acts. 19. 32-43. and 10. 23-48. and 11. 2. and 12. 3. 2. And by what
right could Paul attempt the planting of the Gospel in so many countries, and
so far dista^t one from an other, as he did; (Act. 26. 18. and 11. 25. 26. and
13. 2. with 14. 26. and chapters following) if all the world had been divided
unto the 12. before their departure from Jerusalem? 3. Or why should Paul and
Barnabas be joined in one commission, as joint traveilers in the same line,
(Act. 13. 2.) if all the rest had a several circuit, allotted to each a part?
4. Again, does not that agreement, Gal. 2. 9. (when a distribution, not of
Countries, but of people (Jews and Gentiles) was made between Paul and
Barnabas; and those 3. pillars James, Peter, and John) argue very probably,
that there was no such distribution of the universal world into several
parts (as the Doctor imagines) formerly ratified by the holy Ghost? 5. Lastly
it is apparent, that Paul, (for the coast into which he traveiled) had not his
whole compass allotted him at once, but was guided by special direction from
one place to an other. Act. 13. 2. 4. and 16. 6.-10. and 18. 9. 11. and 19. 21.
And as in his own affection, he always strived to preach the gospel, where
Christ was not named, least he should build upon an other man's foundation (Romans
15. 19, 20.) so he had from time, to time, the measure of his line, distributed
unto him of God. 2. Corinthians. 10. 13. Wherefore as I freely acknowledge, that
every one walked within the compass of his own measure allotted to him by
God: so I flatly deny, that there was any such general division of the world,
made at once. And concerning James, though (for the reasons before named) I
persuade my self, he spent not all his days in Jerusalem; yet I grant he had
as good warrant, for the stay, which he made there, and the recourse he had
thither, as any the rest of the Apostles had, for their traveile into more
remote parts of the world: to wit, the direction of the holy Ghost, and not an
assignment from his fellow-Apostles only. But as the direction or assignement
which Paul had, to publish the gospel in Macedonia, or at Corinthe (Act. 16.
10. and 18, 9.) made him not the Bishop of those people, or countries; neither
did Peter's portion of the Jews dispersed throughout Pontus, Galatia, Capadocia
etc. 1. Pet. 1. 1.) argue him to be their Bishop: so in like manner, though I
should grant, that James his circuit was for the most part (or altogether if
the D. will) enclosed within the countries of Judea, Galilee and Samaria: yet
this limitation does not prove him to be, the provincial or natonall Bishop of
those Churches. The D. therefore builds upon that weak and sandy foundation
of his own (or other men's) fancy, in affirming, that he might be fitly called,
and was in deed the Bishop of that one nation.

And he is no less deceived, in avouching, that the charge of that one Church
or nation, was peculiarly allotted unto him, i^mediately after Sect. 12.
Christ's passion; or at least about the time of their general dispersion from
Jerusalem: For, besides that, these two cannot stand together, (there being a
good space of time betwixt them, (as many appear Act 1. 14. and 9, 27. and 11,
1. and 12, 2, 3.) he that deligenly observes the tenor of S. Lukes story,
touching the state and government of the Church at Jerusalem shall meet with
many presumptions, which strongly argue, that for many years after Christ's
passion James had no such prerogative; either of superiority in order, above
his fellow Apostles; or of Superintendencie over the presbyters and people of
that Church, as is thought to be annexed to his episcopal function.

The first act of note after Christ's ascension, was the choice of Matthias
into the room of Judas; wherein the text shows, that Peter stood up in the
midst of the Disciples and proposed the matter to the Ass^mblie. Acts. 1. 15.
26. whence as the Fathers (Chrysostom and Oecumen: in Acts 1.) do gather, so
our own writers do acknowledge, that Peter and not James had the presidencie
(Whitak: de Pont. pa. 288. Chamier de Oecum: pont. p. 431. Reynold Conf. cap.
4. Divis. 1.) 2. In like manner, on the day of Pentecost, after they had all
received the Holy Ghost; Peter standing with the eleven, lifted up his voice,
(Acts. 2. 14.) and as the mouth of all, answered for all (see Chrysostom: Oecum:
and Marlorat: on the place) to wype away that infamous slander of drunkenness
wherewith they were all charged. At which time he also poured forth those
gracious words of reprehension and exhortation, which gained in that day 3000
souls to God, Act. 2. 22-41. 3. Within a while after, the taking a new
occasion to preach (Act. 3. 12.) had such success, that many of his hearers
embraced the faith, (cap. 4. 4.) And this he did, when John was in company
with him, (cap. 3. 1. 4. 11.) like as afterward, when they both stood as
prisoners, before the rulers of the Jews; he so clearly maynteined their
innocence, that they were both set at liberty (cap. 4. 8. 21. 4. Likewise,
when the Apostles were (all at once) brought into question, for their preaching
Christ; Peter (as the prolocutor or cheife-speaker) makes the apology for
himself and the rest. (cap. 5. 18. 27. 29.) 5. Moreover, when Ananias and
Saphyra kept back part of the price of the possession sold, and laid down the
remaynder at the Apostles feet; their lying and dissimulation, was discovered,
and punished, not by James, but by Peter: for at his word, they both fell down
dead, to the great terror of all that heard the report thereof (cap. 5. 3-10.)
If therefore this corporal punishment stood then in place of excommunication
(as some affirm. See D. Dove, Def of Church-govern. page 21.) it will follow
that (as before in preaching; so here also) in censuring of offenders, which is
deemed one principal part of episcopal prehemine^ce) Peter as yet carried a
greater stroke, the^ James or any other the Apostles, in the Church at
Jerusalem. 6. Yea he was had in so high estimation, or rather admiration among
the multitude, for many other miracles wrought by his hand, yt they brought
their sick, and laid them down in the streets, that at least, his shadow when
he passed by, might shadow some of them. cap. 5. 15. 7. Add hereunto his
r^sidence at Jerusalem, ^o well known abroad, that Paul 3 years after his
conversion, came thither of purpose to visit Peter, and found him there, Gal.
1. 17. 19. and though after this, he spent some time in other parts of Judea,
as at Li^da, Ioppa and Cesarea, in every place winning many to the faith (cap.
9. 32. 35. 42. and 10. 24. 44.) yet he returned back to Jerusalem (cap. 11. 2.)
and not long after, was there cast into prison, cap. 12. 3. 5. Neither did this
drive him (after his delivera^ce thereout) wholly to forsake Jerusalem: for
though for a time he went into an other place (cap. 12. 17.) yet repaired he
thither again; and was there, before the Synod that determined that
controversy mentioned chapt. 15. 7. Wherefore until this time (which was about
18. years after Christ's passion; see D. Whitak. de pont. page 345) if any of
the Apostles had any standing pre-eminence above the rest, either in the
ordering of their meetings, or in the government of the Church of Jerusalem; we
have better warrant to give it unto Peter; then the Do* can allege for James
or any other. So that if we should take (as the D. does) this superiority or
superintendencie for a sufficient proof of an episcopal function; we might
hence infer that Peter had it (and not James) at least for 12. years after
Christ's passision, (see Doct. Whitak. vbi supra page 341) that is, till the
second year of Claudius the Emperor. But I purpose not to enforce any such
conclusion; it shall suffice from the former premises to conclude, that S.
Lukes story contradicts their testimony, which report James to be ordained
by the Apostles (Peter James and John) Bishop of Jerusalem, imediately after
Christ's passion. For it were absurd to think, that Peter should consecrate him
to the office of a Bishop in that Church, and reteyne in his own hands (for so
many years after such consecration) the chief power and pre-eminence, that is
supposed to belong to that function. Wherefore, as the Refuter had reason to
except against the Doctors evidence first alleged, being altogether humane
and not divine: so I doubt not, but himself will see, (if he wink not too
hard) that he abuses the scriptures, which he cited to grace their testimony
on whom he principally relieth.

But to (pass forwards) let us now see what success the D. has Sect. 13. ad
sect. 4. page 31.
in answering the rest of the refuters exceptions. And first that objectio^
which himself sets down sect. 4. p. 51. in this manner,

If the Apostles ordained James Bishop of Jerusalem; then they gave him the
episcopal power. But they gave him no power, which the Lord had not before
invested in his person, as an Apostle. Therefore they did not ordeyne him
Bishop. With the Doctrs leave I will change the assumption, and distinguish it
from the confirmation thereof, which lies more clear in the Refuters own
words (answ. p. 131.) The argument therefore must stand thus, If the Apostles
ordained James Bishop of Jerusalem; then they gave him the episcopal power.
But they gave him not the episcopal power: Ergo, they did not ordeyn him
Bishop. The assumption as it now stands, is thus fortified;

The power of ordination and jurisdiction, was not given to James by the
Apostles (for both were invested in his person, by the Lord himself; so as he
being an Apostle might use either of them freely as occasion was offered,
wherever he became.) But the episcopal power (in the Doctors understanding,
form. page 32. 69. 73.) is the power of ordination and jurisdiction. Ergo, the
episcopal power was not given to James by the Apostles. Now what is the D.
answer? I answer (says he) by distinction. The power of order, (if I may so
term it) James had before, as those who are Bishops sine titulo: but the power
of jurisdiction was committed to him, when he was designed Bishop of Jerusalem
etc. The edge of this answer, is bent directly against the assumption of the
Refuters objection; and against the proposition of the prosyllogism added for
the confirmation thereof. Only whereas the Refuter affirms, the power both
of ordinatio^ and of jurisdictio^ to be invested in the person of James by
Christ, when he made him an Apostle (and therefore neither of them given him, by
his fellow-Apostles) the Do: tells us that James received from Christ only
the power of order; but the power of jurisdiction was committed to him, when
they designed him the Bishop of Jerusalem. So, in stead of power of ordination
and power of jurisdiction, into which the Refuter distributed all episcopal
power (and that according to the Doctors own direction, as is before showed) he
now yields us a new distribution of episcopal poewr, into power of order and
power of jurisdiction; The D. is driven to make new distributions.
and yet utterly silenceth both the difference and the reason of the change;
which a man that loves plain dealing should not have done; especially, when
he has to deal with such, as are of a very shallow conceit; (as he says,
lib. 3. page 103.) for though they may from henceforth rest persuaded, that he
confounds not the power of order in Bishops, with their power of ordination;
(because he makes the later, but a part of the former, (lib. 3. p. 102. 105.)
yet they may stand in doubt, whether the power of jurisdiction, which now he
opposes to the power of order, be the very same, that before he distinguished
from the power of ordination. If the same; then his answer is both false and
absurd, yea contradicted by himself. For when he reduces all episcopal
power, wherein they excel presbyters, unto the power of ordination and the
power of jurisdiction; he carries the later unto public The Doct.
contradicts himself, and deals absurdly, or deludeth his reader etc.
government, in foro externo, with authority over presbyters and people, both
to guide and direct them as their rulers, and to censure and correct them as
their judge (sermon. gag. 45-51.) Now it James had nothing to do with this
power, by virtue of his Apostleship how should the rest of the Apostles, which
were not made Bishops (as the Doctor avoucheth sect. 7. page 58.) have the same
authority in this behalf; wheresoever they came; that James had at Jerusalem:
or Timothe at Ephesus? as the Doctor confesses cap. 4. page 96.

Again, how often does he tell us, that this power of jurisdiction, (as well as
that other of ordination) was derived unto Bishops from the Apostles, and that
the Bishops are their successors in this power of government? sermon. page 45.
70. and in this defense passim.) yea he says, That the Apostles each of them,
retained this power in their own hands, whiles they continued near unto, or
meant not to be long from the Churches, which they had planted; and for proof
thereof, cites, 2. These. 3. 14. and 1. Cor. 5. (sermon. page 65. Def. page 63.)
I ask therefore whence they had this power, which they retained in their own
hands for a time, and committed to others, when it seemed good to themselves?
he cannot say they received it by any such assignement to some particular
church or Churches, as James is supposed to have to Jerusalem; seeing he denies
them to be properly Bishops. And if he shall say that the power of governmt or
jurisdiction, was enclosed in that Apostolical commission, which they had from
Christ (Mat. 18. 18. and 28. 19. Ioh. 20. 23. and 21. 15. 16.) is it not both
false and absurd, to deny that this power was invested in the person of James
when he was made an Apostle? Now, if (to avoid these inconveniences) he shall
acknowledge that he takes jurisdiction in an other sense; his market is
utterly marred; in as much as he does only in show (to delude his reader)
impugn that which his refuter affirms, whereas in deed he justifyeth him in
his whole argument. For, if both those powers, of ordination and jurisdiction
wherein the D. places the power and superiority of the episcopal function;
were given unto James by Christ; and neither of them, by his f^llowe* Apostles,
the^ he received not the office of a Bp. by their ordinatio^.

Having thus freed the Refuters objection from the force of the Sect. 14.
showing 6. errors in the D. answer.
Doctors answer, the Reader is to be advertised of these errors, which Mr
Doctor has broched therein. 1. that the Apostles received from Christ the
power of order only, and not the power of jurisdiction. 2. and therefore, by
their Apostleship, were but as Bishops sine titulo. For since the D. gives
unto James, in regard of his Apostleship received from Christ, none other power
then that of order, which made him as a Bishop sine titulo; he must acknowledge
that the rest of the Apostles, were also as Bishops sine titulo; and not endued
by Christ, with that power of jurisdiction, distinguished by him from the power
of order; unless, to avoid these rocks; he will fall into the gulf of an other
error, no less absurd, viz. that the Apostles were not all equal in power by
their Apostolical function. And if it be so as he says, that James had power
of jurisdiction given him by his fellowe-Apostles; when they designed him
Bishop of Jerusalem it will follow from hence. 3. that the Apostles gave him a
power which themselves had not: And 4. that those Apostles which were not made
Bishops (as James was) never had that power of jurisdiction, which he enjoyed.
Yea 5. the episcopal charge which James had at Jerusalem, gave him a
pre-eminence above his fellow-Apostles (not only in superiority of order,
while they remained there; as before he affirmed; but also in power of
jurisdiction. 6. And consequently all other Bishops ordained by the Apostles,
were in the like power superior, to the very Apostles, as many as were not
properly Bishops. These are the Doctors absurdities, and the very naming of
them, is sufficient to abate the edge, and weaken the force of his answer: yea
(under correction be it spoken) as it may well make him blush at the reading of
his brag (preface page 17.) where he says, in his conscience he is
persuaded, that no one of his proofs in all his sermon is disproved; nor he
convinced of any one uintruth throughout the body thereof; so it may be a good
motive to him, no longer to strike, against the power of the truth; seeing the
answer which he has framed to oppugn it, is not only evil and absurd; but
(though perhaps against his will and meaning) gives way unto it, for from his
own grant, I thus argue to infringe that assertion, which he labors to
confirm.

1. Whosoever is ordained the Bishop of any Church; he receives the power of
Episcopal order, from the hands that ordeyne him.

But James received not the power of episcopal order from the hands of the
Apostles. Ergo, neither was he ordained by them the Bishop of any Church.

2. Again, Whosoever by his designement to the charge of any Church, receives
only the power of jurisdiction; to execute there that power of order, which
was before invested in his person; he receives no new function by that
designment.

But James the Apostle by his designement to the charge of the Church at
Jerusalem received (in the Doctors opinion) only the power of jurisdiction, to
execute that power of order, which before was invested in his person.

Therefore, he received no new function, by that designement. And consequently,
he was not ordained, to the function of a Bishop in that Church.

To these arguments grounded on his own answer, I add this that follows,
which the Doctor was willing not to see in the Refuters answer;

3. Whosoever by Christ's ordination received all Ministerial power, with ample
authority to execute the same inall places wheresoever he became; he neither
did, nor could receive any new power (either of order or jurisdictio^) by a
designement to the oversight or care of any particular Church.

But James the Apostle by Christ's ordination received all Ministerial power,
with ample authority to execute the same, in all places wherever he became.

Ergo, he neither did nor could receive any new power (either of order, or
jurisdiction) by his designment to the oversight, and care of a particular
Church, such as the Church of Jerusalem.

Thus leaving the Doctor to his best thoughts for his rejoinder in this behalf,
let us proceed to the next exception.

Chapt. 6. Answering the Fathers alleged by the Doctor for James his
Bishopprick Def. lib. 4. Chapt. sect. 4. page 52.
THe next exception concerns the age or antiquity of those Sect. 1. ad sect.
4. pa. 52. and sect. 2. page 55.
Fathers, upon whose testimoney the Doctor builds his faith, for James his
ordination to the office of a Bishop in the Church of Jerusalem. The Refuter
(finding the ancientest of his witnesses to be Eusebius, about the year 320.
etc.) demands (answer p.) whither he had none of the Apostles Disciples,
which lived then to testifye his ordination? the Doctor stops his mouth,
with an other question; what one of them whose writings are extant, he could
have alleged, whom he would not reject as counterfeit? which is a plain
confession, that in deed he has none, that is worth the mentioning. For though
he tell us, that Clement the Disciple of the Apostles; does call James the
Bishop of Bishops, governing the Holy Church of the Hebrews in Jerusalem: yet
(as if his conscience told him that his epistle was but a counterfeit) he
adds, But suppose that none of the Disciples of the Apostles, in those few
writings of theirs which be extant, had given testimoney to this matter: were
not the testimony of Egesippus and Clement, who both lived in the very next age
to the Apostles) sufficient? No verily, their credit is too weak (as shall be
seen sect. 17.) to overweigh the presumptions before alleged, to show that
James received no such ordination from the Apostles, as the Doct. stands for.
It is therefore, but his vain brag, easier to be rejected then justified, to
say as he does, It is not to be doubted, but that James his being Bishop of
Jerusalem, was a thing as notorious and as certeynly known among Christians in
those times; as there is no doubt made among us now, that D. Cranmer was
Archbishop of Canterbury in K. H. the 8. his time; For is it not rather much
to be doubted of; seeing that among all the writings that are extant, of
Ignatius, Irenaeus, Tertullian and sundry others in the first 300. years, the
Doctor cannot find any one testimony fit for his purpose. Rem adeo illustrem
nullum habere autorem sui seculi, aut secundi etc. portento simile est. Sic
Chamierus de Simone. De Oecum. pont. lib. 3. page 456. sic ego de Iacobo. As
for that counterfeyt Clement before named, he rather confuteth then confirms
the Doctors assertion. For I may say of the Doctor as he does of the Pope, how
he can digest that lofty title Bishop of Bishops, (which Clement gives unto
James) I know not. For does not this title (usually ascribed to him as the
Doctor acknowledges) as strongly argue him to be an universal Pope; as the
mention of his governing the Church of the Hebrews, in Jerusalem, can conclude
him, to be their Diocesan Bishop? And since he is said, to govern not only
sanctum Hebraeorum ecclesiam Hierosolymis; sed et omnes ecclesias, quae vbique
Dei providentia funda^^ sunt: if prejudice had not forestalled the Doctors
heart, he would never have forbidden his Refuter (as he does page 55.) to
collect from thence, that he was no otherwise Bishop of Jerusalem, (that is,
not in any other function) then over all other Churches. For, does not the D.
measure the meaning of this phrase by the line and level of that large
jurisdiction, which had no being in any Bishop, for many hundred years after
the Apostles, when he says, that the Bishop of Constantinople though called
universal Patriarch, yet was the Diocesan Bishop of Constantinople alone; and
that the Pope himself though he clume to be universal Bishop, yet is
specially Bishop of Rome? Yet as if he were hired to wrest this testimony out
of their hands, that bend it against the Popes supremacy; he tells us, that
in an edition of that epistle of Clement published by Sichardus at Basil. anno
1526) he reads thus, Sed et omnibus ceclesijs. which signifies that Clemens
directed his epistle, not to James only, but also to all Churches. But this is
to corrupt the text by a false finger, for the former reading does best agree
with the title before given to James, Bishop of Bishops. And if Clement had
meant to join any others with James in the inscription of his epistle, he
would (in all likelihood have said, sed et omnibus episcopis per omnes
ecclesias etc. so joining to him the Bishops of other Churches; rather then the
Churches themselves.

In the next place because the Doctors witnesses are all of them Sect. 2. ad
sect. 4. page 13.
such as lived in the 4. or 5. age after Christ, his Refuter put him in mind
of Bishop Andrews words, who in the like case says (sermon. page 34. preached
at Hampton court 1606.) They wrote things they saw not, and so framed matters
according to their own conceits, and many times were tainted with partial
humors. And though he professed, he would not take upon him to speak so
hardly; yet the Doctor will needs have his reader believe, that the Refuter
sought to discredit all historians in general by the mentioning of that
speech. Therefore, to free his own witnesses from all suspicion in this case,
he says, the most learned Bishop, truly noted, what might be objected against
the historians of later times. But if the Doctor uprightly weigh the intent and
scope of that learned Bishop; he may perhaps discern, that Eusebius, (his
ancientest witness) is not without the compass of those stories, which he
speaks of. And if he (in his learning) judged it, for that reason; more safe
to rely, upon the authentical records of the Conncels and Fathers, that were
eye and eare-witnesses of the things which he urges: had not the Refuter as
good reason to desire also to see James his ordination, justified by the
testimony of S. Luke, or some other Apostolic man that lived in that age?

2. But Eusebius (as the D. supposes) is free from that imputation; and much
more Hegesippus and Clemens. And is not Ierom as free as any other? belike the
Doctor has him in suspicion; though he be, all in all, in the evidence, that
he produces, as appears, sermon. pa. 66. and 69. As for Eusebius, how free
soever the Doctor judges him in this case, his testimony standing him in good
stead; I suppose he will not discharge him of that crime (of framing matters to
his own conceit) in applying that which Philo wrote of the Jewish Essees, to
Christian Monks. lib. 2. Hist. eccles. cap. 17. whereof the reader may see
Reynodes and Hearts Conf. cap. 8. divis. 2. page 488. and 492.

3. Neither is it a cavil (as Mr D. in his quarrelling spirit is pleased to
censure it) to say, that those Fathers (Eusebius. Ierom etc.) finding the name of
Bishop continued in the succession of one Pastor after an other, judged of
those that first governed those Churches, according to them that lived in their
times. For if they speak not improperly, (which the Doct. will not admit, for
then he must yield himself to have played the sophister) what else should move
them to ascribe unto Peter, the place of a Bishop at Rome, and that for 25.
years continuance? (see Eusebius. in Chron. and Ierom de script. eccles. in
Petro) unless the Doctor had rather say of them, as one of great reading, does
of Eusebius in this point, (D. Reynolds Conf. with Heart. cap. 6. divis. 3. page
260-) viz. that the same befell them, which Thucidides (Hist. lib. 1.) says of
the old stories of the Graecia^s. Men receive reports of things done before
their time, from hand to hand, one from an other abasanistons) without
examining and trying of the^: So some through a desire (as it is likely) of
honoring the sees of Antioche and Rome, and hearing that S. Peter had preached
in them both, devised that he sat 7. years in the one, and 25. in the other.
Eusebius fell upon it, and wrote it in his Chronicle: but if he had tried it by
the touchstone of the scripture, he would have cast it off as counteryfeyt.
Thus says Doctor Reynolds of that matter; in like manner we may say without
any wrong to Eusebius, (since we have before disproved by good warrant from the
scripture, that report of his, concerning James his continuance for 30. years
the Bishop of Jerusalem) that his desire to magnify that See among others, made
him also too c^edulous in countenancing those speeches of Egesippus and
Clemens, which by due examination, might have been found unworthy of any credit.

For what probability is there in Egesippus his tale (apud Eusebius. Sect. 3.
lib. 2. cap. 22.) concerning James? that he was a Nazarite from his mothers
womb, and never drunk wine (to grave the tale, he should have excepted the
times of partaking in the sacrament of the Lords supper.) Moreover, that he
absteyned from eating of flesh, from shaving his head; and from anointing his
body with oil, who would not take him by this description, for a pattern of
Monkish perfection, rather then of the episcopal function? specially seeing it
is added, he was wont to enter alone into the temple, and spent there daily so
much time in prayer, that his knees, Cameli instar, tuberculis contractis
obduruerunt. Belike he forgot his Masters doctrine. Mat. 6. 6. Ioh. 4. 21. But
the best is yet behind. Huic vni licebat in sancta sanctorum ingredi etc, he
only had liberty to enter into the most holy place; for he used not any
woollen garments; but only lynnen: if this be true, then as he joined a
Bishopric to his Apostleship; so he had the high-preisthood united to his
Bishopric; unless we may think the use of lynnen garments to be a lawful
dispensation for any man that was no Priest, to usurp the highpriests office
in entering into the most holy place?

2. Now to come unto Clemens, how fabulous (I might say blasphemous) is that
which Eusebius (lib. 2. cap. 1.) reports out of him, that Christ after his
resurrection gave knowledge unto James the just, to John and Peter, and they
delivered the same to the rest of the Apostles? For this tale is flatt
repugnant (as Doctor Reynolds obserserveth. Conf. cap. 3. divis. 2. p. 163) to
the word of truth: wherein we read that knowledge and the holy Ghost, was given
by Christ to all the Apostles jointly. See we Luke 24. 45. John. 14. 26. and
16. 13. Act. 2. 4. and 4. 31. 2. Moreover, in this fable, he contradicts
himself (like as liars are wont to do) forgetting what he had said before; to
wit, that it was an other James, and not James the just, unto whom, together
with Peter and John, Christ gave pre-eminence above the rest of the Apostles.
3. And since we are now in hand, with the reputation of Clemens, and
Egesippus, the first reporters of James his Bishopric, (from whom, either at
the first or second hand, the rest of the witnesses have received their
warrant) it shall not be amiss, hither to draw the examination, of the
Doctors defense (page 60.) of their credit, against the moderate censure of the
Refut: answ. page 133. How unsavorie a speech (says he) is that of Clement
(recorded by Eusebius (lib. 2. cap. 1.) that Peter James and John, would not
arrogate to themselves that glory (to have the Bishopric of Jerusalem) but
chose James the Just unto it? Why? was it a greater glory then their
Apostleship? or can there be any lawful calling in the Church too high for
them, whom Christ vouchsafes to make his Apostles; yea chief among the
Apostles? Such speeches as this in the Fathers, are like black wenns in a fair
body, that have more need of a cover for excuse; then of setting out for
commendation. The like may be said of those he calls good Authors Eusebius
and Egesippus, who allege so carnal a respect of the Apostles in preferring
James, and after him Simon, to that Bishopric, because they were our Saviors
kinsmen according to the flesh. For certainly they had learned better of their
Lord and Master, when he preferred his spiriti^all kindred before his carnal
etc. Ye have heard the Refuter, now listen to Mr Doctor; and weigh the answer.

Thus is he able (says he) as it were with a breath to blow away these worthy
Sect. 4. ad sect. S. p. 60
Authors etc. What is this but a slanderous scoff? for all men may see, the
Refut: endeavored to salve their credit; as far as the love of the truth,
would permit him; neither concealed he the reasons, that lead him so to censure
them as he did; yet as if he had yielded no reason of his censure, the Doctor
asks, why unsavory? and why carnal? and assayeth, by reasons of his own,
to wype away those imputations. 1. was it not (says he) a special honor for
one among the Apostles, without that traveile and wandering whereunto the rest
were subject, to be set over the Mother Church of Christendom; and to be the
Apostle of that people etc. In the Apostleship of the circumcision Peter and
John were joined with him, Gal. 2. 9. and herein if any had pre-eminence or
precedence before the rest; it was Peter verse 7. But since by James his
Apostleship of that people: the D. means his supposed Bishopric at
Jerusalem, I statly deny, that this gave him, any precedence in honor before
his fellow. Apostles. And I have often showed that the prerogatives of that
Church and people, could not convey unto their Bishop, any such prehenmine^ce,
(sect. 7. and 18. near to the end of each) and that he assumeth more then he
can prove, in affirming him to be wholly exempted from that traveile which the
rest endured. See sect. 10. I now add, that his residence at Jerusalem, gave
him only some more ease; but not greater glory; nay the less, if Doctor
Bilsons third interpretation of the Apostles words, 1. Tim. 5. 17. be (as he
says they are) co^fonant to the words and intent of the Apostles. viz. that
those Ministers which labor in the word, that is to say, traveile to and fro
to visit and confirm the Churches, are in honor to be preferred before
resident Pastors. I might ask the Doctor, whether it be the greater honor, to
have the commission that the reverend Judges have, which traveile from one shre
to an other to execute their office; or without such traveile to be the Major
of some one town or city? But since he urges the same reason for James, that
Bellarmin does for Peter; he shall have the same answer that Doctor Whitakers
(de Pont. Romans quest. 2. ca. 9. sect. 10. page 255) yields him. Imo Pauli
videtur multo honorificentius fuisse munus. Latior enim Pauli provincia. Et
Christi regnum erat brevi Iudaeis auferendum etc. By this time, I hope the
Refuter, may have his discharge from wronging Clemens, in saying his speech was
unsavory. Yet is it much more unsavory and absurd; if that reading be
received, which many excellent divines, do approve. Non sibi vendicabat
primatus gloriam, sed Iacobum qui dicitur Iustus (episcopon apostoloon)
apostolorum episcopum statuerunt. They challenge not to themselves the glory
of the primacie; but chose James the Just, to be the Bishop of the Apostles.
See Calvin and Marlor. in Act. 15. 13. Cent. 2. col. 193. Catalog. test. verit.
in fol. col. 89. And if D. Sutcliffe, a great friend of the prelacie be not
deceived (de pontif. lib. 2. cap. 1. page 67. and 68. this reading is to be
preferred. Sed exemplaria (says he) et graeca et latina habent Apostelorum;
quibus potius fidendum est, quam Parisiensibus aut Vaticanis. Et cont extus
Eusebij pro nobis facit. Eus^bio enim propositum erat, Iacobi prerogativas
dicere preterea primatus gloria ipsi tributa, maius quiddam quam vnius vrbis
episcopatum subinsinuat. But although the Doct. give James a precedence in
honor, and for order, above the rest of the Apostles; and that in respect of
his Bishopric: yet he is loath (as it seems) to allow him this title; the
Bishop of the Apostles. Perhaps he conceives, that it had been arrogancy to
receive it, though offered unto him; and that it would have advanced him to an
higher degree of Ministry, which he truly denies to agree with him; seeing
there was none higher then the Apostleship. But I would feign know, how he can
deny him, an higher degree of Ministry, if that precedence in honor, which
he ascribes to him, above his fellow-Apostles, arose from an other function
(that is his Bishopric) which he alone enjoyed? for I hope, he will grant the
functions of an Apostle and of a Bishop, to be different degrees. And I suppose
he knows, that among differing degrees (as Deacons or Presbyters etc.) the
precedence of honor grows from the higher degree, and not from the lower?
But perhaps, he dreameth that James his Bishprick at Jerusalem (though a degree
inferior to the Apostleship) set him notwithstanding in an higher place of
honor above other Apostles; even as at Rome the title of a Cardinal presbyter
or Deacon given to a Bishop (though in it self, it be a degree inferior to the
episcopal function) does yet advance him in dignity and honor above all other
Bishops. But this dream sureth much better with Cardinal Bellarmin, then with
D. D. profession, and so I leave it.

Touching the next imputation, the Doctor asks, whether they Sect. 5.
were not bound in respect of that love and reverence which they did owe to
Christ, topreferre his near kinsmen according to the flesh, being at the least
equal with others? and adds, that it is certain, that James for his
admirable piety was wonderfully honored, etc. Of this admirable piety, who
doubts? But will that prove him, to be every way equal in all spiritual
graces? The Apostle John has this title given him in holy writ; The Disciple
whom Jesus loved, John 13. 23. and 20. 2. and 21. 20, 24. and since the ground
of his love was not kindred in the flesh, ought we not to judge, it was some
pre-eminence in true piety, or some other spiritual grace? It is common saying
and a true, Invidia virtutis comes est. Envy is the companion of virtue.
Wherefore, seeing the envy and malice both of Herod, and the rest of the Jews
seized upon that other James the brother of John, Act. 12. 2. 3. that he became
the first Martyr among the Apostles (as Steven was among the Deacons, Acts. 6.
and 7.) is it not probable, that some preheminent grace occasioned their malice
to break forth into such extremity? S. Peter, (who was at the same time
imprisoned, like as he was before, cap. 4. 3. 8.) has many titles of
pre-eminence given him by the Fathers, which our own divines (Sutcl: de pont.
lib. 2. cap. 7. p. 123. Whit. de pont. quest. 2. cap. 17. sect. 2. page 316. D.
Reynolds Conf. cap. 5. divis. 3. p. 224.) do acknowledge to be in part,
grounded upon an excellency above the rest in virtue and grace. For, Augustine
(de Bapt. cont. Donatist. lib. 2. cap. 1.) says, his primacie was conspicuous
and preheminent with excellent grace. And Eusebius (lib. 2. cap. 13.) calls
him, reliquorum omnium Apostolorum, propter virtutis amplitudinem, facile
principem. Wherefore, if the Doctors meaning be, to equal James, every ways
with his fellow-Apostles, in all spiritual grace, that adorneth the function
of a Minister of Christ; he must be beholding to his Reader, to take it upon
his own word, for it will be hard to make good proof of it. But if he limit
the equality he speaks of, to the power of the Apostolic function (which is
all the equality that he can with reason maintein:) he shall show himself too
absurd to avouch, that only for kindred sake unto Christ; he was worthy to be
preferred before the rest; or that the Apostles were bound to be lead by this
respect, in the distribution of ecclesiastical honors. This is in deed
carnal divinity, and such as argreeth not with the doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles. Mat. 12. 48. 50. Iam. 2. 1. Act. 15. 9. 2. Cor. 5. 16. and 12. 5.

It might be asked, (if in respect of love and reverence to Christ the founder
of the Church at Jerusalem, it were necessary to prefer one of his kindred
to the Bishopric thereof, before the rest, that were otherwise equal:)
whether the like respect ought not to have place, in the choice of such as were
to succeed any of the Apostles in the Churches which were founded by them, and
in such as are at this day, to succeed men of special reputation in any Church
whatsoever? For, S. Paul testifies, of Andronicus and Iunia (Ro^. 16. 7.) that
they were his kinsmen, and fellow prisoners; and (which gives them a singular
note of pre-eminence above many others, they were episemoi en tois apostolois,
famous or of special note, among the Apostles, and before him, in Christ. Yet
we never read that they were preferred to a Bishopric, in any of the Churches
(which were many) that Paul had founded. Is it not a shrewd presumption, that
he was ignorant of any such president, since he had no care to walk by the same
rule? Again, may I ask M. Doctor, why James was not, as well before his
election to his Bishopric as after; for the same reason honored by his
fellow-Apostles, with that precede^ce, which they gave him, when they made him
a Bishop? To conclude, if any such primacie of honor above the rest of the
Apostles, accompanied James his ordination, to that supposed Bishopric; why
should it not, by common consent, be rather cast upon one of those, whom Christ
preferred before the rest? for were not all his disciples bound, to give most
honor to them, whom he most honored? If then Peter, John, and James the
brother of John, were by Christ preferred in honor, before his James (though
for his piety surnamed the Just) was it not an injury (I say not to them,
but) even to Christ their Mr, in controwling that order of prehemine^ce, which
he had set among his Apostles, to give one of their inferiors a place of
dignity above them? Wherefore, as the Refuter wronged not Clemens or Egesippus,
in charging the speech of the one to be vnsavourie, and the respect alleged
by the other to be carnal: so it is no injury to Eusebius (who builds upon
their reports) to say, he was too credulous, in interteyning for truth upon
their words, that which upon due examination, appears unworthy of any credit.
And the same, is the fault of the rest, which in later time without any further
search, gave credit unto their testimony. Which sottish imitation (as one Mr.
Bell calls it, epist. before his trial of new religion, page 1. Survey of
popery. part-3. cap. 7. and page 342.) if it were the cause of many errors,
even in matters of doctrine, (as is for instance showed in the error of the
Chiliasts) I see no reason to the contrary, why it might not also be a cause
of many errors, in matters of fact or history. Yet the Refuter did (and so do
I still) so far tender their estimation, that we withdraw not any assent
from their report; but when there is better warrant, (either of scripture or
sound reason) leading another way.

Now whereas the Refuter says, that James neither was properly Sect. 6. ad
sect. 5.
Bishop of Jerusalem, nor might be, because he continued in his Apostleship, a
distinct office from it; The D. (to make him odious with his Reader) replieth,
that he gives all his witnesses the lie. But (though he be a Doctor he uses a
false finger to justify his suggestio^, thrusting out the word properly (which
the Refuter inserted. page 132. of his answ.) and charging him to say plainly,
that James was not Bishop of Jerusalem, not could be. It is plain, (and the
Doctor acknowledges it) that the Refuter here denies unto James, he does it
(not so much of himself as) from the mouth of some late writers of worthy
account, D. Whitakers, D. Reynoldes, Bishop Jewel and others. In charging him
therefore to give his witnesses the lie; what else does he, but through his
sides, wound their credit; seeing the fault (if any) ligteth on their heads. But
the truth is, neither he nor they do oppose the former denaill to the
testimony of the fathers; but to their assertion, which from the name of a
Bishop, given to James or Peter, in the writings of the Fathers, do infer
that James or Peter, were properly Bishops. For the Refuter (in his words
imediately before going) says, that the Fathers might will call James, by the
name of a Bishop, which then was of greatest dignity; seeing it is certain he
had, (though an higher, yet) the same place in Jerusalem, that afterward
Bishops claimed and possessed in other Churches. And elsewhere (answer page
143.) he explaineth his judgment more plainly in the words of Doctor Whitakers
(de pont. page 303.) who says; that when the Fathers call James or Peter a
Bishop, they take not the name of Bishop properly, but call them Bishops of
those Churches, in which they abode somewhat long, etc. I now add the words of
D. Reynolds (Conf. with Heart Cap. 4. divis. 2.) because the Doctor to finding
the place quoted, thought his name was used only for a show: concerning
James, he says, that he which makes him a Bishop of one city, whom Christ
made an Apostle to all the nations of the earth, brings him out of the hall
(as they say,) into the kitchen. And in answer to Chrysostom, (alleged by
Stapleton, and Heart, (as he is by the D.) to confirm his supposed Bishopric)
he adds. It seems he spoke it upon the word of Clemens apud Eusebius: lib. 2.
cap. 1.) And when Heart says, he should not help him with such shifts against
the Fathers, he replieth, neither shifts, nor against the fathers; but true
defenses in favor of them. For the Apostles being sent to preach the gospel to
all nations, made their chief abode in greatest cities of most resort, as at
Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus, Rome etc. now because this residence, in the
mother cities, was afterward supplied by the Bishops of them; therefore were
the fathers wont to call the Apostles, Bishops of those cities, wherein they
abode most; which they might the rather for that the word episcope, in their
speech, to wit Eusebius. and (^emens) betokens in a general meaning, any charge
or oversight of others etc. It is plain then, that the Doctor (in his former
words) gives his tongue and pen liberty to run out, beyond the bounds of
truth. 1. In carrying unto his witnesses (and to impugn their testimony) that
which was intended only to contradict his own position. 2. in construing that
to be meant of an absolute denial of the name of a Bishop, which was spoken of
the episcopal function, properly taken, for that which now bears the name.
The reader therefore is to be advertised, that although the Refuter
endeavored, (by some exceptio^s against the Doctors witnesses) to show that
their testimony is too weak, to bind the conscience to enterteyne their report,
for an undoubted truth: yet he is so far from giving them all, the lie (as
the Doctor not very christianly charge him), that treading in the stepps of
many other worthies) he salveth their credit, by distinguishing the special
and proper signification of the word Bishop, from that which is more general
and improper. For properly in the phrase of the Apostle, 1. Tim. 3, 1, 2. Tit.
1. 7. it notes him, who by his function is limited and fastened to the
perpetual oversight, of one particular Church: and now (in common speech it is
appropriated to the function of a Diocesan Prelate; but in a more general
construction, as the Apostleship is called episcope a Bishoplike-charge: so the
Apostles were by the Fathers termed Bishops. And some of them, (as James and
Peter) were sAid to be Bishops of thosE Churches, wherein they were reported
to have made their longest residence.

And that the Fathers do use the word in this latter construction, the Refuter
judges it most probable; becausE he is persuaded (not without good reason)
that (in the former signification) James being an Apostle, neither was nor
could be a Bishop. So then, if the Doctor (who holds James to be properly a
Bishop, yea a diocesan Bishop in function like to ours) will justify his
assertion by those fathers whom he alleges, ought he not to have
demonstrated (that which he wholly overpasseth, to wit) that the Fathers which
entitle James the Bishop of Jerusalem, mean thereby, that he had proper
function of a diocesan Bishop? But he thinks it sufficient, to remove the
grounds which his Refut: laid to make good his denial, let us therefore come
to it.

The Refuter says, that James neither was nor could be properly Sect. 7.
a Bishop, seeing he continued in the Apostleship a distinct office from it; The
D. answers, that none of his authors were so simple, but they knew as well as
the refuter that James was an Apostle; neither knew they any reason, which the
Res: would seem to know, why his being an Apostle should binder his being the
Apostle or angel of that Church; for so were the Bps at the first called. Yet
with his leave, some of the^ were so simple, that they thought this James
(called by Paul the L. brother) was the son of Joseph, by an other wife,
before he was espoused to Marie the mother of Christ. (see Eusebius. lib. 2. ca.
1. Cent. 1. lib. 2. cap. 10. col. 579. vbi dicitur Epiphanius idem sentire)
which is in effect to deny him to be one of the 12. whom Christ selected to
that office of Apostleship. For among them there were only two called by the
name of James, the one the son of Zebedaeus and brother of John. Math. 10. 2.
Mark. 3. 17. the other was the son of Alpheus. Mat. 10. 3. Mark. 3. 18. and
brother to that Judas, which was also called Lebbaeus, or Thadd^us. Luke 6. 15.
16. Act. 1. 13. with Mat. 10. 3. 4. and Mark. 3. 17. Ambrose also was so simple
that he accounts this James, (Comment. in Gal. 1. 19.) ^ot only the son of
Joseph; but also one of those brethren of Christ, which continued in unbeleife
(Ioh. 7. 5.) after the 12 were daily attendants on they Master.

2. Neither were they all unacquainted, with that difference between the
functions of an Apostle and a Bishop (properly so called) which the Refuter
makes his reason for the denial of the later office to them that bare the
former. Augustine, distinguishes the Apostleship from a Bishopric, as a
greater office from the lesser. Quis n^scii illum apostolatus principatum,
cuilibet episcopatui preferendum. (de Baptis. lib. 2. ca. 1.) this sentence of
Augustine is alleged by D. Sutcl. (De pont. Romans lib. 2. ca. 10. page 140,
143.) to strengthen this consequence, that if Peter were an Apostle; then he
could not be a Bishop, or Pastor proprie loquendo. Epiphanius (an other of the
Doctors witnesses) is more plain for this purpose. For having said, that Peter
and Paul were both Apostles and Bishops in Rome; he says withal. (Haeres.
27.) that there were other Bishops whiles they lived, because the Apostles went
often into other countries, to preach Christ; and the City of Rome might not be
without a Bishop. What can be more plain to show, that since the Office of an
Apostle requires traveile abroad into diverse countries to preach Christ; and
the office of a Bishop binds to attendance at home, on that one Church,
whereof he is made an overseer; therefore and Apostle cannot be properly a
Bishop. Let me therefore here say to the Doctor, (as Doctor Reynolds did to Mr.
Heart, Conf. cap. 6. Divis. 3. ad finem (you may learn by the Fathers
themselves, that when they termed any Apostle a Bishop, of this or that city,
they meant it in a general sort and signification, because he attended that
Church for a time, and supplied that room in preaching of the gospel, which
Bishops afterward did. And if this satisfy not the Doctor, let him go roundly
to work; and prove by other parts of their writings who are his witnesses in
this question of James his Bishopric; that James his continuance in the
function of an Apostle, was no hindrance to his receiving and holding of a
Bishopr, properly so called. In the mean while let us pass on to the new
writers which concur with the Refuter, not only in denying James, to be
properly a Bishop; but also in that more general assertion; that an Apostle
could not be a Bishop properly.

Chapt. 7. Concerning the new writers that join with the Refuter in denying
James to be a Bishop properly, and whatsoever else the D. has for the
upholding of James his supposed Bishopric.
COncerning the new writers; the Doct. would never so lightly Sect. 1. ad sect.
5. page 53. 54. and sect. 6. p. 55.
esteem their judgment, as he does; were he not highly conceited of himself.
For what protestant is there of any worth, that honoreth not the very name of
Doct. Whitakers, Bishop Jewel, and Doctor Reynolds? I might send him to many
others, which in general deny any of the Apostles, to be properly Bishops and
so judge also of James in speicall. Calvin in Acts. 21. 18. Lubbert. de Papa.
lib. 3. cap.-5. page 209. and Lib. 4. ca. 5. page 296. Chamier de pont. Lib. 3.
page 450. and 453. cum multis alijs. But the Doct. perhaps, will more regard
some of his own society, such as Doct. Sutlif. who (de pont. lib. 2. cap. 11.
page 152.) affirms the same of James that he does of Peter and John, scz.
that he was not properly a Bishop. And (cap 6. pa. 114.) to Bellarmin and
Turrecrem: urging the Fathers, to show that James was ordained Bishops of
Jerusalem he answers. non aliud per ordinationem, intelligitur, quam quod
Episcopi parts peregerit; et ex reliquorum Apostolorum consensu Hierosolymis
mansit. And (cap. 8. page 130.) he directly contradicts our Doctor, in saying
that his ordination, they spoke of, was not a conferring of jurisdiction to
him; seeing he had it by his Apostolical office. The which may serve to stop
the Doct. mouth touching the Fathers which he challenges to be wholly for him
in this question. For till he has proved that James was properly a Bishop; and
that the Fathers ascribed to him, the proper function of a Diocesan Bishop, in
calling him the Bishop of Jerusalem, he shall but prove himself a trifler, to
say as now he does; that without any disparagement to these worthy writers; the
affirmation of so many ancients in a matter of fact, agreeable also with the
scriptures; and proved by the succession of the Bishops of Jerusalem etc. may
overweigh their denial. As for the scriptures, I have showed, they are rather
against it, then with it; and in a like matter of fact (scz. Peter's Bishopric
at Rome) the like evidence may be produced; neither does the Doctor hold it any
heinous crime in himself; by his denial, to overweigh their testimony. 2.
Notwithstanding* it is not the opinioin of Doctor Whitakers, or any other,
which the Refuter commends to the D. consideration; but the reasons rather,
whereby their judgment is swayed. For as he says (answ. page 132.) the same
arguments that prove Peter might not be Bishop of Rome, are as effectual to
conclude, that James might not be Bishop of Jerusalem; seeing they were both
equal in the Apostleship. And what though it were so, as the Doctor says,
(sect. 6. page 55.) that 6. of those 8. arguments which Doctor Whitakers (de
pont. quest. 3. ca. 3. sect. 9.) urges, be such as the Refuter with all his
sophrist^ie cannot with any show of truth apply to S. James? If the other two
be such; as the Doctor withal his sophistry cannot with any show of truth
exe^pt S. James from their reach; is it not sufficient to give him the foil in
the maine controversy now in hand? Yet there are some things avouched for the
removal of those 6. arguments, which are already sufficiently disproved; as
that he says, the story of the Acts does testify S. James his standing
residence at Jerusalem, and that his precedence (in honor) before Peter and
John, is noted, Gal. 2. 9. And somethings do rather make against him, then for
him. For if he were the Apostle of the Jews at large (as may be truly
gathered from his epistle written to the 12. tribes that were scattered abroad,
(Iam. 1. 1.) and that compact made between paul and him, with Peter and John,
Gal. 2, 9.) how was he properly the Bp. of the Ch: at Jerusalem? For as it was
fit, that Peter should have professed the Gentiles to be his charge; if he had
been their Bishop at Rome: so it had been no less fit, that James should have
professed himself to have been the Apostle or Bishop of the Jews in
Jerusalem: or at least in Jury; if he had been by Peter and John, confined to
that one Church or Province.

Again, if he can for his advantage (I mean, to justify his denial of Peter's
Bishopric at Rome) carry the words of all the Fathers that say he was Bishop
there, to this meaning that he was one of the founders of that Church; may not
his Refuter (in defense of his denial of James his Bishopric at Jerusalem)
take the like liberty in construing the Doctors witnesses, to this meaning,
that he taught and governed that Church for the time of his residence there? If
the Refuter in denying the later, give all the D. witnesses the lie; shall the
Doctor go free from the like blame of giving the lie to many ancient Fathers
in denying the former? Let him therefore take home his own words (cap. 2. page
46.) See, see homo homini quantum praestat; that is strong in his hand, which
were weak in an others; the truth belike is so partial, that it is true only
in his mouth.

But join we now in issue with him, in the trial of the 2. first reasons,
whether they will not conclude with the Refuter that James Sect. 2. ad sect. 7.
page 57.
was not properly the Bishop of Jerusalem. The reason is thus framed by the
Doctor.

Bishops have certain churches assigned to them. The Apostles had not certain
churches assigned to them. Ergo the Apostles were not Bishops. But because he
has somewhat abated the force of the argument, in both the premises, I will
deliver them in D. Whitakers own words. Episcopus vnum tantum gregem habet,
quem paescat ut suum. At Apostoli nullam certam provinciam habuerunt; neque
vllas certas ecclesias quibus alligat^ sunt. The Bishop has but one only
flock, which he is to feed, as his own: The Apostles had no certain province,
nor any certain Churches whereto they were tied, The medius terminus (wherein
the strength of the argument lies) is not simply to have a Church or Churches
assigned; but to have one only flock, and to be bound unto it, to feed it as
his own; the reason ergo is thus to be contrived. Every Bishop has one only
flock, whereunto be is bound to feed it as his own. But none of the Apostles
had one only flock, whereunto he was bound to feed it as his own. Ergo, none
of the Apostles was a Bishop.

The Assumption (which was thought most likely to be impugned) was fortified
with a double Bulwark. 1. omnibus Apostolis dixit Christus, Ite in vniversum
mundum; et illi memores legationis suae ita fecerunt. 2. Qut scirent sibi
spiritus sancti ductu^ semper sequendum esse, quocunque ^os ipse vocaret, eo
continu^ profiscendium, ij seeds suas certis quibusdam locis affixas
habuissent? nunquam certe. But of these fortifications the Doct. takes no
notice; only to the assumption, which himself framed, he answers by
distinguishing the times. scz. that though none of the Apostles, had any
provinces or parts of the world allotted to them by Christ, when he gave them
their indefinite commission: yet the holy Ghost (for whose direction they were
willed to stay at Jerusalem directed them to go, not confusedly, but
distinctly some to one part of the world, and some to an other. This is that
which he delivered before (sect. 4. page 52.) and is already answered (sect.
11. of chap. 5.) but what is it to purpose here? For when they were directed to
go, some into one part and some to an other, had they then every one his
peculiar Church assigned to them? and were they bound to feed the same as every
Bishop is to attend his own flock? I suppose the Doctor dares not affirm it;
he rather yields the contrary, in saying, they ceased to traveile in their
old days; and then were reputed Bishops of that place, where they rested.
Well, did they all traveile till they were old? and is that the time whereunto
his distinction of times refers us, for the assigning of Churches unto them?
Not so neither; for he says, James did not traveile at all as the rest, from
one country to another. So then, howsoever he makes a show of answering by a
distinction of times; yet indeed, the very marrow and pith of his answer, is
by a difference in the persons, to contradict the assumption: and to give
Doctor Whitakers the lie (if I may use the Doctors own homely phrase) for in
plain terms he says, herein James differs from the rest; for to him at the
first before their dispersion, the Church of Jerusalem, was assigned. And
again, the assumption therefore, which is true of the rest of the Apostles, is
not true in James; and were to be denied, If the syllogism, were thus framed.
Bishops had certain Churches ^ssigned to them. James had not a certain Church
assigned to him. Ergo, he was not Bishop. This assumption (says he) I have
disproved. But the best is, his disproofe of this assumption (though he has
proportioned it also to his own strength) is sufficiently declared to be
nothing worth: For he neither has nor can prove, that nay, much less many
ancient Fathers, as he has alleged, do affirm James to be a Bishop in that
sense which he imbraceth; sc. properly a Bishop, and ordained to that
function, by his fellow-Apostles. But it shall not be amiss for the Reader to
observe the Doctors cunning in changing the Medius terminus of The Doct.
cun^ingly changes the medius terminus of the obj:
the objection, which he undertaketh to answer. And since he will have it
specially fitted to James, I will do it, and so leave it to all indifferent
judgment, whether it hold not in James as well as in Peter. Every Bishop has
one only flock, to which he is affixed, to feed it as his own.

But James had not any one only flock, to which he was affixed, to feed it as
his own.

Ergo, James was no Bishop.

I hope the Doctor will not say, he has disproved this assumption Section 3.
as it now stands: for this cannot be disproved without proof made of the
contrary, sc. that James had one only flock assigned to him, and was affixed
to it or bound to attend on the feeding thereof. But he is so far from having
confirmed this, that he has See how the Doctor hovereth up and down not
certainly resting any where.
not yet bin heard so much as once to affirm it. And if he mean (in his next)
to make it good, first let him tell us, which was that one only flock that was
assigned to him. Here he says it was the Church of Jerusalem; and his proofs
from the Fathers, make mencio^ of no other; yet elsewhere (page 56.) he says,
it is more then probable that the Church of Jury, was peculiarly assigned to
him; and (p. 52.) he coupleth both together, saying, that the Apostles would
not all forsake Jury and Jerusalem; but assigned one of their own company to
take charge thereof. And in the words i^mediately following, he says, he was
assigned to the peculiar Church of one nation; and therefore was in deed the
Bishop thereof; which argues the whole body of the people of the Jews, as well
those that were scattered in other countries (to whom he wrote his epistle) as
the Inhabitants of Jury, to be his peculiar charge: unless he speak
improperly, in taking the whole for a part only. If therefore the Doctor will
say, that James had one only flock assigned to him; let us know whether the
whole nation or the province of Judea only, or rather the diocese, (for I know,
he will not say, it was the parish Church) of Jerusalem; I give him this
choice, so be that he will be constant in that he chooses, and not hover up
and down as he does, not knowing (as it seems) where to rest. The first is so
repugnant to the testimony of Saint Paul, who testifies Gal. 2. 9. that Peter
and John joined with him in the charge of the Jewish nation, that I think he
will be ashamed to stand forth in defense of it. And if he will mainteyne the
second; he must proclaim to the world, some prerogatives more the^ ever were
knwon in former ages) which this Church had above all other Churches. For
whereas the Churches planted in other Mother cities, were at the first but
Dioceses, (in the Doctors persuasion) and by the co^bination of several
Dioceses, in one Province, each of them became a provincial Church: this
contrariwise, was, at her first establishing, and bringing into order a
province; and upon the multiplying of Churches in Judea; it was distributed
into sundry Dioceses. And whereas other Churches had presbyters, before they
had any Bishop; this had a Bishop who was actually a provincial prelate,
before there were any, either presbyters inthe Diocese, or Diocesan Bps in the
Province; which later is contrary to his Tenent in this defense often avouched.
(lib. 2. page 114. lib. 3. page 20. lib. 4. page 7.) viz. that the Bishops of
Mother cities, were originally but Diocesa^s, and not actually Metropolita^s;
till other ci^ies in the provi^ce were co^verted, and subordinated to him as
their Primate.

Moreover, if the state of Judea, (Jerusalem excepted) be considered* what it
was before the Apostles were dispersed abroad; it will be found to be a body of
people void of Christianity; and therefore no flock for a Bishop to feed; but
rather a charge fit for an Apostle, to work upon, in endeavoring their
conversion. And since Peter bestowed great pains that way in diverse parts of
Judea, for many years after the dispersion of the rest of the Apostles; (as is
before showed from Lukes story, cap. 5. sect. 11. 12.) it will be hard for
the Doctor to prove, tha^ the inhabitants of Judea, were allotted to James as
his peculiar flock to feed and attend upon. The last therefore, will be the
fittest (as it seems) every way for the Doctors purpose; and if he will stick
close unto it; let him recall those speeches of his; which make show of the
other two, and gather his wits together for the confirmation of these
particulars. 1. that James was confined, or restreyned (for the execution of
his ministry) unto so narrow a compass, as the Church of Diocese of
Jerusalem. 2. that he was affixed to that Church; or bound there to abide, and
during life to attend on that flock: For unless he have some sound testimony
or reason, to persuade his heart in these points; he shall show himself to be
lead by self-conceit, rather the^ by sound judgment; in contradicting the
assumption last proposed; for it naturally flows from the assumption of D.
Whitakers argument before delivered in this manner, None of the Apostles had
one only flock, which he was bound to feed as his own peculiar charge. But
James was an Apostle. Ergo, he had no one only flock, which he was bound Sect.
4.
to feed as his own peculiar charge. And now if he will deny the proposition
of this argument, I must recall him to the fortifications before mentioned. The
first concludes the points necessarily and inevitably in this manner;

Whosoever were by Christ commanded, to go into all the world, to preach the
gospel and to make disciples; and being mindful of their imbassage did
according to their charge; they had not, (any of them) one only flock unto
which they were bound, to feed the same as their own.

But all the Apostles, were by Christ commanded to go into all the world, to
preach the gospel and to make disciples; and they all being mindful of their
Embassage, did according to their charge.

None of the Apostles therefore, had one only flock, to which they were bound,
to feed it as their own.

The proposition, is of it self clear enough. The assumption, for the first
part of it; as it is grounded on the words of Christ, Mat. 28. 19. Mark. 16.
15. so it is acknowledged by the Doctor; and we do allow his interpretation of
their commission (page 51. line penult. and 57. line 6.) viz. that Christ's
meaning was not, that every one should traverse the whole world: yet their
commission was indefinite and without any assignement of provinces or parts of
the world to any. Now, if he make question of the latter part of the
Assumption, I refer him to that which is observed, (cap. 5. sect. 10.) out of
Mark, 16. 20; and I wish him to be well advised, least he be found to give that
Evangelist the lie; if he exempt James from that obedience to Christ's charge,
which he testifies of all without exception, viz. that (as Christ had before
commanded so) they went all forth, and preached every where. For who shall dare
without good warrant, to restreyn the general sense of the holy Ghost, in the
one more then in the other? Either therefore, let James be exempted from
partaking with his fellows in their Apostolical commission; or let him
partake with them in the praise which is given them, for obeying the charge
which they received. If he will needs exempt S. James from preaching every
where as the rest did, (that is to say, here and there in diverse provinces, or
countries, without restreynt to any one) because Eusebius and others say, that
James had the charge of Jerusalem, and governed the Church there: then let him
also except S. John, together with Thomas and Andrew; because Eusebius says,
(lib. 3. cap. 1.) that (in the distribution of the world among the Apostles)
Thomas obtained Parthia, Andrew, Scythia, and John, Asia. But though he confine
James to Jerusalem (or at least to Jury) yet of the rest he says, they were
not confined to any one province; but traveyled from one country to an other.
To come then to the 2. fortification, it argues also uncontroulablie in this
sort; None that knew they ought always to follow the direction of the holy
Ghost, and to go forthwith whither soever he should call them, might have
their seats fastened to one certain place or flock.

But all the Apostles knew, that they ought always to follow the direction of
the holy Ghost, and to go forthwith, whither soever he should call them.

Therefore, none of the Apostles might have their seats fastened to one
certain place or flock. And consequently, none of them had one only flock, on
which he was bound continually to attend; For it were a wrong to them to
think, that they or any of them would do, that which they knew was not
lawful for them to do.

Against the proposi^ion, I suppose the Doctor will take no exception; and if
he shall pick any quarrel against the assumption; he must say, either in
general that none, or in particular that some, and namely James knew no such
duty that they did owe to God, as to attend always on his call and direction
for the employment of their ministerial pains. If the former; let him
consider what is already said (cap. 5. sect. 11.) to show that the Apostles
had not before their dispersion, each of them his several circuit, measured
out to him once for all, by the direction of the holy Ghost as he supposes.
For since they were to wayt for the holy Ghosts direction whither to go; (as
the Doctor acknowledges page 57.) if they had not their whole line or compass
laid out at once; must they not of necessity, remain always ready, to go,
whither soever God by his spirit should call them? And if this be apparent in
any one: (as it is in Paul, Act. 13. 2. 4. and 16. 6. 10. and 18. 9. 11. and
19. 21.) ought we not to judge the like of all? For why should any one Apostle
be freed from that attendance, which another is tied unto, and that for the
performance of his Apostolical function? And when the Doctor stretches in
common unto all the Apostles, (page 52.) that which Paul speaks of himself;
and such as assisted him within his Apostolical line; does he not assume it
for an undoubted truth, that in the execution of their Ministry, they all
walked by one rule? It were absurd therefore here to except James from that
continual attenda^ce upon the holy Ghosts direction, whereunto his
fellow-Apostles were bound. And consequently absurd to give him one only
flock, and to affixe him for his whole life, to the service thereof; when the
rest were bound alvvayes to be ready to go, whither soever the holy Ghost
should direct them.

Thus much for the justifying of the first reason, against Peter's Sect. 5. ad
sect. 7. page 58.
Bishopric; the second reason against it, is thus applied by the D. (page 58)
unto James, If James were Bishop; then by the same reason other of the Apostles
were Bishops: But the other Apostles were not Bishops properly; Therefore not
James. The Doctor should have added D. Whitakers conclusion, and applied it to
James in this sort,

If none other Apostle had his seat fixed to any certain place; then neither
had James his seat fixed to Jerusalem. But none other Apostles had his seat
fixed to a certain place. Ergo, neither had James his seat fixed to Jerusalem.
The Doctors answer is, that he has showed sufficient reason, why he should not
grant the consequence, in setting down the difference between James, and the
rest of the Apostles. But are the differences such as he can and will
mainteyne, that they necessarily argue the one to be properly a Bishop; and the
rest nor? otherwise they neither are, nor can be a sufficient reason of his
denial of the cosequence. Let us therefore peruse them. First, he says, that
James herein differs from the rest; that to him at the first, the Church of
Jerusalem was assigned. I answer, that an assignement to the oversight of one
Church; makes not a Bishop, unless he be also confined unto it alone, and
that for perpetuity. But the Doctor can never prove that James was so co^fined
to the charge of the Church of Jerusalem. Moreover we have better evidence for
Paul's assignement, to the Church of Corinth; (Act. 18. 9. 10. 11. 1. Cor. 9. 2.
and 2. Cor. 10. 13.) then can be alleged for James his assigneme^t to
Jerusalem: And (if we may believe the D.) he tells us (page 52.) that at what
time James was assigned to Jerusalem; the rest were assigned also, to their
circuit, one to one part and an other to an other. This first difference
therefore, is either none at all, or not such as can give the function of a
Bishop to the one; and deny it to all the rest. Secondly the Doctor adds,
that James did not traveile as the rest from one country to an other, being not
confined to one province. But it is showed in the former section, that James
was neither confined to Jerusalem, nor debarred from traveil abroad; and that
the grounds whereon the Doctor builds, will confine some others to certain
countries (as Thomas to Parthia, Andrewe to Scythia, and John to Asia,) no
less then James to Jerusalem. And let me ask him, what proof he can make
(worthy of credit) that Matthew, Matthias and James (that was martyred at
Jerusalem, Act. 12. 2.) spent their days in traveil from one country to an
other? And if James be to reckoned a Bishop, because he rested at Jerusalem,
when others traveiled from place to place; why he should deny the rest to be
also properly Bishops, when they took up some special place to rest in, as he
says, John did at Ephesus etc. specially seeing the fathers entitle them
Bishops of those places where they rested. Thirdly, an other difference he
notes. scz. that whereas the other Apostles having planted Churches, when they
saw their time, committed the same to certain Bishops yet James committed the
Church of Jerusalem to no other. But can he tell us, to what Bishops the
Churches of Iconium, Lystra, Derbe, Antioch in Pisidia, and sundry others
planted by Paul, were committed. For why should not he be the Bishop of those
Churches, which being planted by him, received no other Bishop to govern them;
if this reason proves James to be the Bishop of Jerusalem? The consequence
therefore of the argument abovesayd is nothing weakened by the differences,
which the Doctor puts between James and the rest of the Apostles as he
affirms. Notwithstanding, that the reader may see, how grossly he erreth in
combyning these two functions (of an Apostle and a Bishop) in one person I will
here propose some of the reasons, which D. Sutlif (a zealous mainteyner of the
episcopal government) has pressed against Peter's supposed Bishopric at Rome.
De pont lib. 2. cap. 10.

The Apostles (says he) and Pastors or Bishops properly so called, are ^o
distinguished, that an Apostle is one thing; and a Pastor or Bishop is another.
Sect. 6.
He has given us (as says Paul. Ephesians. 4. 11.) some Apostles, some Prophets,
some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers. What can be spoken more clearly?
he has given some Apostles and others Pastors and Teachers. (quosdam dedit
Apostolos, alios autem Pastores et Doctores.) Wherefore (as he concludes
concerning Peter, so do I concerning James) if James were an Apostle, he could
not be a Bishop and Pastor to speak properly; unless we will confound both the
gifts of Christ, and (membra dividentia) the members of the division set down
by the Apostle. 2. The Apostles had this privilege that they were called and
sent by Chrst i^mediately, Mark. 6. 7. Luc. 6. 13. Gal. 1. 1. Acts. 1. 24. But
with Bishops, it is far otherwise; they were not called i^mediately of God,
but by men. Paul prescribes laws unto Timoth^ what manner of men were to be
chosen Bishops, and warns him to lay no hands suddenly upon any man. 1. Tim.
3. 2. and 5. 21. Seeing therefore James was by Christ alone, and not by men,
called chosen and ordained, whence could he have a Bishopric given him? As for
those Fathers which say, that James was by his fellow-Apostles ordained Bishop
of Jerusalem, we have already (Cap. sect. 22.) heard Doctor Sutliffs answer,
this only now I add that the Doct. cannot without contradiction to himself
take it for ordination to the function of a Bishop; seeing he says, that James
receyved the episcopal power of order from Christ as Bishops sine titulo, as
is also before showed cap. 5. sect. 13. 14.

3. The office of Bishops is far inferior to the office of Apostles and after
a sort included in it; for the Apostles ordained Bishops and heard their causes
etc. Moreover they had power to deliver the Canonical scriptures, and for that
cause were lead by the Holy Ghost into al truth. John. 14. 26. and 16. 13. But
Bishops had no such prerogative; for there were none more grievous schisms
raised in the Church, neither any more foul heresies sprang from any, then from
Bishops. Wherefore seeing James was an Apostle, quid opus erat, ut quasi capite
diminutus, ad inferiorem ordinem et dignitatem, velut Patritius ad plebem
transiret? I might add his 4. and 9. arguments, but because they come nere to
things already urged, I pass them over, only that it may appear, he puts
no difference between Peter and James, in the limitation of their ministry as
the D. does; I will close up all with that which he has elsewhere cap. 11. page
52. Immo nec Iohannem, nec Iacobum Apostoluns propri^ dicimus fuisse Episcopum;
ratione^que hanc reddidimus; quia Apostolici officij ^ines null^ eran^,
Episcopi aut em suas habuere certas dioceses et provincias. Yea says he, we
say not that the Apostle John, or James, was a Bishop properly and we have
rendered this reason for it, that there were no bounds or limitts of the
Apostolical function; whereas Bishops had their certain dioces^s and
provinces. Which reason, seeing he says Bellarmin wincked at, as being unable
to answer it, I hope the Doct. will not do him that favor, to oppose himself
therein to D. Sutliffe, specially seeing he has already yielded thus far
(page 58.) that if any be not persuaded of this point, he will be content to
suppose that James was not a Bishop of Jerusalem.

Notwithstanding, as if the whole cause in a manner wholly relied Sect. 7. ad
sect. 8. page 58. and 59.
upon this instance of James; he indeavoreth by it to confute the lear^eder
sort of disciplinarians, who hold that Bishops were not superior to other
Ministers in degree, nor yet for terms of life; and therefore (if we may
believe him) deny that James was superior in degree to the presbyters of the
Church at Jerusalem, or President of the pres^yterie, otherwise then in his
course; and not for any contynuance. Of these conceits he makes Mr. Beza the
Author, and because the Refuter ^ould him, that he wronged Beza, seeing there is
not a syllable, nor a letter at all of him, in the place he quoteth, he says,
all this ado arises from the misprinting of a letter in the margent, c. being
put for p. and therefore now cites a saying of his cap. 3. page 23; which (if
it be not again miscarried by his printer) seems to be foysted in, I know
not how. For in the same Chap. and page (Impress. Anno. 1592. by Ioh. le Preux
there are no such words as he alleges. But say that Beza in some later
edition, (which I have not yet met with) has such a saying (viz. that though
James the brother of our Lord, was in order first, in the church of Jerusalem
yet it follows not that he was in degree, superior either to the Apostles,
or else to his fellow Ministers) what hinders but that the Refuters answer
might stand, to wit, that by his Bishopprick or presidencie he was not
superior to any degree, but in order only? for when he compares together the
differing functions of Apostles, Evangelists and Bishops or Pastors; he does
very often acknowledge in that treatise, an imparitie and difference between
them, not in order only, but also in degree and power. In istis functionibus
(ex Apost: Ephesians. 4. 11. ^^tearepetitis) inter se computatis, non simplicem
tantum ordinem, sed etiam gradum agnosco. cap. 1. page 5. To which purpose also
he speaks cap. 3. page 20. and cap. 9. page 53. But to let the Doctor see how
much he wrongeth him; these words are fittest, page 9. Apostolatus function^
fuisse illos 12. propria, non tantum ordinis, sed etiam potestatis eminnetia
pralatos, absit ut inficiemur; ut mer am calumniam esse omnes intelligant, quum
nobis hoc mendacium tribuunt. In which he calls it no better then a
calumniation, to charge him as the Doctor does. And since he professes to
prove against Mr. Beza, that Bishops were in degree superior to other
Ministers, why puts he not his hand, to remove the objection there urged by
Mr. Beza, to show the contrary? Quant^ majus est et gravius ecclesias plantare
quam rigare; sive fundamentum illarum ponere; quam superstruere et structas
regere: tanto magis istum gradum vtgere inter ipsos Apostolos oportuit. 2. Et
si tum esset (ut nonnulli contendunt) velut ipsa natura precipiente, in omni
sacro caet^, gradus iste, ad servandum inter collegas consensum necessarius;
saltem quam diu simul Hierosolymis congregat^ fuerunt Apostoli (nempe saltem ad
illam dispersionem* quae Stephani mortem est consecuta Act. 8. 1.) v^um
quempiam jam tum supra suos co apostolos extitisse oportuisset. (Whereunto I
will add the assumption and so infer the conclusion.) But among the Apostles
there was no superiority in degree. 2. neither was it necessary for the
preserving of unity and consent among them, that one should hold such a
superiority above his fellow-Apostles, whiles they remained at Jerusalem;
before the scattering that followed the death of Steven.

Wherefore it is not likely that among the Bishops or Pastors of particular
Churches, there was any one superior in degree to the rest. 2. neither can it
be necessary (as some suppose even by the light of nature; that in every
sacred society, for the preservation of consent among colleagues, one should
have such a superiority) in degree among the rest.

But, to leave Mr. Beza, let us see how the Doctor can make good Section 8.
his purpose from this instance of James, vz. that Bishops were superior in
degree to other Ministers, and had a singular pre-eminence over them for term
of life. Why contriveth he not his argument syllogistically that the force
thereof might the better appear? for he is much deceived, if he think to gain
his cause, by such a sophism as this,

James was superior to the presbyters of Jerusalem in degree, and held a
superiority over them during life. But James was a Bishop. Therefore Bishops
were in the Apostles times, superior unto presbyters in degree, and that for
term of life.

For though we should grant the assumption, which is before disproved, the
argument is no better then if a man should argue in this manner, James
Mountague (to whom D. D. dedicated his his sermon) is superior in degree of
Ministry to all the Ministers in the Diocese of Bath and Wells. But James
Mountague is the Deane of the K. Majesty's Chapel. Ergo, the Deanes of the K.
Majesty's chapel are superior to all other presbyters in degree of Ministry.
I doubt not but the Doctor can well discern in this latter a double deceit,
(because it infers a general conclusion, from premises that are but
particular; and assigns a false cause of that superiority above other
presbyters) And, if he winketh not hard, he may well see the same defaults are
to be found in his reasoning. For besides the generality of his conclusion;
there is an evident mistaking of the cause, both of that superiority in
degree, which James had above the Presbyters of Jerusalem; and of his
continuance in and about Jerusalem to his dying day. To begin with the former;
whereas he should show that his Bishopric gave him a superiority in degree
above the Presbyters of that Church; it is apparent, he has no other Medius
terminus to prove it then this, that he was an Apostle and his honor and
degree by his Bishopric not impaired; so that, in effect he reasons thus,
James being an Apostle and a Bishop, was superior in degree to the Presbyters
of Jerusalem. Ergo, all other Bishops, not being Aposteles as he was; have the
same superiority above other Presbyters.

The Doct. proof therefore, which he presupposes to be plain and pregnant
for his purpose, is a plain inconsequence, which with all his skill, he can
never justify. Neither can he easily mainteyne that which he assumeth for a
truth, (viz. that James his honor and degree by his Bishopric was not
impaired) for as (is already showed cap. 6. sect. 1.) the authority of Clemens
is too weak to upholde it: so it will soon appear, that he has made a very
slight answer to the Refuters objection who says, that if James his whole
authority were confined to Jerusalem, it had bin in a sort to clipp his wings
and so an abasement, and not a preferment to him. For what is it? It is not
(says he) a clipping of his wings, more then of the rest of the Apostles; when
by mutual consent, every man's province as it were, or Circuit and charge was
assigned to him. As if the Doct. fault were not increased rather then lessned,
to clipp the wings of all the rest for company, and to testify one vntruthby
another. For as he cannot prove; so I have disproved (cap. 5. sect. 11.) his
fancy of dividing to every Apostle his several Province or circuit by
mutual consent. And if there had bin any such partition of Provinces among
them; why should he deny them to be properly Bishops, every one of them in his
circuit? or how can he deny it to be a great abatement of their authority;
(and so a clipping of their wings) to be confined within one province, or to
one nation; when as by their Apostolical function, they had authority to
preach, and to execute all ministerial duties, in every place and country
wheresoever they should come? ye^ of all the rest, James his share must needs
be by far the least, if he were confined to the charge of one only Church.
Yea this is in deed to make him no Apostle, or at least a Titular Apostle
only; for as he says of titular Bishops. lib. 3. page 130.) that they were
such as had the bare name, but not the authority of a Bishop: so he must also
affirm of James, that he was but a titular Apostle; seeing the authority of an
Apostle (which stands in preaching to all nations as occasion shall be offered;
and in planting Churches, where none were etc.) is denied unto James; if his
whole authority be confined to the episcopal oversight of that Church of
Jerusalem, which was already founded to his hand. And if it were a punishment
to Meletius, and others which returned from schism or haeresy to the Church,
to debar them from their episcopal authority; though they were allowed the
name or title of Bishops; how should it be an enlargement of James his honor;
to have his whole authority confined to one Church, (as other Bishops) although
he retained the name and title of an Apostle?

As for the next point (viz. James his continuance at Jerusalem Sect. 9. ad
sect. 9. page 62. Doct. and Refuter page 134.
for; o years, even till his dying day) to omit what is already said (cap. 5.
sect. 10. and 25.) for the contrary; we are now to examine, whether the cause
of his stay there, was (as the Doctor supposes only to govern that Church,
in the function of a Bishop? The reason of his continuance there (says the
refuter) was not so much the ruling of the Christians, that were converted
(which might have been otherwise performed) as the converting of multitudes,
both of Jews and of other nations that usually flocked thither, which was a
work of the Apostolical function. Whereunto the Doctor replyeth, that it is
nothing to the purpose, to say the Church might have been otherwise governed;
unless he could show that it was otherwise governed. But he is to be
advertised, that if he grant it might have been otherwise governed without an
Apostles residence there; then he shall show himself very void of reason, to
make the government of that Church, either the only or the principal cause,
of his so long remaining in that place. And unless he can assign some other
cause of more weight, then that the Refuter mencioneth; it is but a wrangling
part in him; to make a show of refuting his Refuters assertion, in this case.
Neither is it any thing to the purpose, to urge him to show that the church of
Jerusalem was otherwise governed; unless he had denied that the chief stroke
of the government, rested in his hands for the time of his abode there, after
the dispersion of the rest of the Apostles into other parts.

And where he says, There is no doubt, but that Church had a Pastor assigned
to them by the Apostles etc. either he does but trifle; or (which is worse)
dissembleth his own knowledge; for if by a Pastor, he mean a Diocesan Bishop,
he knows very well, that it is not only doubted of; but flatly denied, that
any such Pastor was assigned to them by the Apostles. But if he take the word
at large, for every or any one that feeds (whether as Peter John 21. 15. in
the function of an Apostle; or as the Bishops of Ephesus in the ordinary
calling of Presbyters, Act. 20. 28.) then he shows himself a mere trifler;
since it nothing advantageth his cause to grant, that James was (in this large
constructio^ of the word) their Pastor, by a temporary assignment; and that
besides him, they had other Pastors, even so many as there were presbyters in
that Church. But when he says, there is no doubt to be made, but the cause and
end The Doct. beggeth.
of his staying there 30. years, was the same, with the cause of the stay of
Simon, and the rest of his successors till their death: he does too apparently
beg the question. For the cause which the Refuter propounded (and the Doctor
contradicted not) ceased before Simons election to the Bishopric of Jerusalem;
for his election was not till Jerusalem was destroyed by Titus as Eusebius
affirms, lib. 3. ca. 10. Wherefore, there was no such recourse, either of
Jews or of other nations unto the Temple there in Simons time, or his
successors; as was all the days of James. And since the time of the Jews
rejection; for the generality of them, took place, after that desolation made
by Titus and his army; there was not the like need (now as before) for one of
the Apostles there to reside to labor the co^version of the Jews and others
that usually frequented that place.

There remains one speech of the Doctor, which (in the Refuters Sect. 10. ad
sect. 8. page 61.
apprehension) blows down this which he so carefully labored to set up, as
was showed by this argument; That charge (says the Doctor, sermon page 68)
which the Apostles had in common, whiles they iountly ruled the Church at
Jerusalem was afterward committed to James (...) particular. But that (says
the Refuter p. 134.) was not the charge of Bishops, but of Apostles. Ergo,
neither was the charge which James had, the charge of a Bishop, but of an
Apostle. Now what answer makes the Doct. in his defense? The proposition is
his own, he loves his credit, and he will not recall it; what then? Does he
contradict the assumption, and say, that the Apostles whiles they governed
jointly the Church of Jerusalem, had the charge not of Apostles, but of
Bishops, in the very function of Diocesan Bishops: such as he supposes James
and his successors to be? no; for then he should throttle his own answer to
Doct. Whitakers first argument (page 57.) where he flatly denies any of the
Apostles (James excepted) to be properly Bishops. And by his distinction of the
times, (both here and page 52) he plainly signifies that the indefinite
commission of the Apostles to go into all the world, received no limitation,
till by the Holy Ghosts direction, they dispersed themselves some into one part
of the world, and some into an other. What then? When plain dealing will not
help; an aequivocating answer must serve the turn. As though (says he) the
charge of the Apostles, is not by the Holy Ghost, called episcope (Act. 1. 20.)
that is, Bishopric. And as though James, who before was an Apostle absolutely;
did not by this designement become the Apostle of the Jews. As though say I,
the holy Ghost does not use the word episcope (when he so entileth the charge
and function of the Apostles, Act. 1. 20.) in a larger sense, for an universal
and unlimited Bishopric, then the word episcope and episcopo^, is taken either
in other parts of the apostolical writings (as 1. Tim. 3. 1. 2. Act. 20. 28.
Phil. 1. 1.) when it is applied to such as had the standing charge of one
Church; or in the Doctors understanding, when the name of Bishop, or Bishopric
is given to James and his successors. And as though James did not receive a
great change, in regard of his charge and function, when being at the first an
Apostle absolutely, he was made the Bishop of one particular Church by his
assignement to Jerusalem. As though also the Doctor did not, at unawares,
justify his refuters assumption; in granting that James before his assignme^t
to the particular charge of Jerusalem, was an Apostle absolutely. For if he
were absolutely an Apostle; whiles he ruled the Church of Jerusalem in common
with the rest of the Apostles; then they also in that time were absolutely
Apostles, and consequently their charge there, was not the charge of Diocesan
Bishops, but of Apostles as the Refuter affirms. Wherefore, unless he will
recall that which as yet he stands forth to mainteyne (viz. that the charge
which James had in particular, for the government of the Church at Jerusalem
was the same (and no other then) that the Apostles before had in common) he
must bear the loss of all his labo^r in pleading for James his Bishopric; for
it will follow necessarily upon the premises of the argument before set
down; that James his charge at Jerusalem, was the charge not of a diocesan
Bishop, but of an Apostle. And thus much shall suffice concerning James; let us
now hear what the D. can say for the Bishoprics of Tim: and Titus.

Chap. 8. Answering the first 8. Sections of the Doctors 4. chap. lib. 4. and
showing that Timothy and Titus were not ordained Bishops, as the Doctor
supposes.
FRom Jerusalem the Doctor traveileth to Ephesus and to Creet, Sect. 1, ad
sect. 1. and page 74. of the Doct.
in hope to show the places where, and the persons whom the Apostles ordained
Bishops. And that first out of the scriptures, for so he promises page 72. of
his sermon. And to make it good, he says; That it is apparent by the epistles
of S. Paul to Timothy and Titus, that he had ordained Timothy Bishop of
Ephesus, and Titus of Creete; the epistles themselves being the very patterns,
and precedents of the episcopal function. For as the Apostles had committed
unto them episcopal authority, both in respect of ordination and
jurisdiction; which in the epistles is pre^upposed: so does he by those
epistles inform them, and in them all Bishops, how to exercise their function,
first in respect of ordination (as Tit. 1. 5. and 1. Tim. 2. 22) and secondly
in regard of jurisdiction, as 1. Tim. 1. 3. and (...) 19. 20. 21. 2 Timothy 2. 16.
Titus 1. 10. 11. and 3. 9. These are his words and the very pith of his
arguments. Where first, let the reader observe, that he binds himself to
mainteyne this assertion, viz. that it is apparent by the epistles of Paul to
Tim. and Tit. that he had ordained the one Bishop of Ephesus, and the other
Bishop of Creete. Which if he had as soundly confirmed, as he did confidently
undertake, actum esset de certamine; the controversy had soon bin ended. But
how should this be made apparent by S. Paul's epistles, when he neither does nor
can produce from thence any one word that sounds that way? Yea it repents
him (as it seems) that he had said, It is apparent by his epistles; for in
his defense, to prove that Timothy and Titus were by S. Paul ordained Bishops
of Ephesus and Creet, he makes this his first reason; (page 74.) because in
his epistles written to them, it is presupposed that they were by him ordained
Bishops of those Churches; and the Antecedent he proves (page 75.) by this
argument, because it is presupposed in the epistles, that the Apostle had
committed to them episcopal authority, both in respect of ordination and
jurisdiction, to be exercised in those Churches. Whereas if he had stuck close
to the words of his sermon; in dissolving (as now he will needs) his first
sentence into a two fold reason; he should have argued thus;

It is presupposed in the epistles to Timothy and Titus that the Apostle had
committed episcopal authority to them both in respect of ordination and
jurisdiction etc. Ergo, it is apparent by those epistles, that he had ordained
them Bishops. But (though he saw it) he was ashamed to be seen to The Doct.
reasons loosely; changes his terms and arguments: and then taxes his
Refuter for not answering his argument.
argue thus loosely, and as we have often done, so again must we give him
leave, to change at his pleasure not only his terms or phrases, but also his
very arguments. But when he takes this liberty, he wrongeth his Refuter
against all equity to tax him (as he does, both here and hereafter page 78.
lin. 16.) for not answering his argument. For who can answer an objection
before he hear it? And who that considers the tenor of his first sentence
before set down, would have dreamed a twofold reason to be infolded therein?
Nay, who would not have judged (as the Refuter did) that the later clause, had
been a confirmation of the former? But to take his arguments as he has now
tendered them, when he says, It is presupposed in the epistles to Timothy and
Titus that Paul had ordained the^ Bishops of Ephesus and Creete; if his meaning
be that their ordination to the episcopal charge of those Churches, is
presupposed by the Apostle in his epistles written to them; I utterly reject
his assertion, as a false presupposall (or rather forgerie) of his own, which
has no warrant from any line or letter in those epistles. And to his proof
thereof (viz. because it is presupposed in those epistles, that the Apostle had
committed to them episcopal authority both in respect of ordination and
jurisdiction to be exercised in those Churches:) I answer, that he mingleth
(and that deceiptfully) truth and falsehood together. For thought it be true,
that the epistles do presuppose a power of ordination and jurisdiction
committed to them: yet is it false, (and he but beggeth the question, in
assuming it for truth) that the authority of ordeyning and censuring, is an
authority episcopal, that is, proper to Bishops only; and that the power and
authority of ordination and jurisdiction, was given them, either then and not
before, when they were appointed to stay in those places; or there and no where
else to be exercised by them. A bare denial of these particulars (falsely
presupposed by the Doctor) is sufficient answer till he prove by some part of
Paul's epistles; that they are by him, presupposed in them.

His second argument (in his own Analysis) is the same which Sect. 2. ad page
75. and sect. 2. p. 75 76. and 57.
his Refuter took to be the first, and it stands thus,

If the epistles written to Tim. and Tit. be the very patterns and precedents
of the episcopal function, whereby the Apostle informs them, and in them all
Bishops how to exercise their function; then Tim. and Tit. were Bishops.

But the Antecedent is true; Therefore the Consequent.

To discover the weakness of the consequence or proposition; the Doct. was told
(answ. page 137.) that the consequent depends not upon the Antecedent; but
with this supposition (which is false) that the Apostle by describing in these
epistles, the rules to be observed in ordination and jurisdiction intended to
inform Tim. and Tit. as Bishops and in them all other Bishops, how to carry
themselves in those matters. And if the Doct. had bin as willing to apprehend
his right meaning, as to pick occasion of quarreling without any just cause
given; he might have discerned that the supposition whereof he speaks is not
of the natural hypothesis of the proposi^ion impugned, but such a limitation
of the Antecedent or Assumption, as is necessary to be supplied if he will have
the proposition or consequence to pass uncontrolled. Wherefore, as he might
have spared his Crocadile-like mourning over his Ref: (Alas good man; you know
not what the supposition of an hypotheticall proposition (...)) so, had he
weighed his own rules (lib. 2. cap. 3. sect. 3.) for the fynding out of that
hypothesis, which in a co^nexive argument is wanting to make a perfect
syllogism; perhaps he might have perceived the weakness of his consequence,
which he would seem not to see. For the true hypothesis; which is employed in
this connexive argument; and must be supplied to make it a perfect simple
syllogism; can be none other then this; They must needs be Bishops and
ordained to that function to whom such epistles are directed as are patterns
and presidents of the episcopal function etc. Or more generally thus, Every
person to whom an epistle or speech The Doct. discerning the weakness of his
arguments exchangeth it.
is directed, which conteyneth the pattern or precede^t of any function or
directions how to exercise it; is undoubtedly invested in the same function.
And why now, I pray you (good Mr. Doct.) may not this proposition be denied or
doubted of? I will spa^e labor in refuting it; for I suppose, your self
perceived the weakness of it, and therefore gave us the exchange of an other
argument, though you pretend another cause of the exchange. And since you will
not argue with T. C. (to whose answerthe Ref: directly pointed, as with the
finger) but are willing to let him rest in peace: neither will I argue against
Doctor Whitgift, but affoard him the like kindeness. Only, whereas you ask
the Refuter, how he could be so ignorant, or without judgment, as to think that
Doct. whitgift in speaking of the office and duty of a Bishop contained in
those epistles, did mean only that description of a Bishop which is set
down. 1. Tim. 3; to requite your kindness, I demand how you could be so
ignorant, or void of judgment, as to think, that (when Doctor whitgift said,
that the whole course of the epistles written to Tim: declares him to be a
Bishop; seeing therein is contained the office and duty of a Bishop; and diverse
precepts peculiar to that function) he meant by the office and duty of a
Bishop, that Ministry which is common to all Ministers? for so you seem to
interpret his words, when you affirm (page 76.) this to be his meaning, that
directions were given to Timothy, throughout the epistles, for the discharge of
his office, either in respect of the Ministry common to all Ministers, or of
his episcopal function, chiefly in regard of ordination and jurisdictio^. And
herein you tender his credit lesS then you would seem when you make him to
argue in this fashion. The epistles written to Timothy do give him directions
for the discharge of his episcopal function, Ergo they do declare, that he was
a Bishop: for this were to make him guilty of your own fault, in begging of
the question The Doct. beggeth the question.
as you do, when you add to your assumption or Antecedent, that supposition
before examined; for if that be (as you say it is) the plain meaning of the
assumption; then your second argument beggeth the question in pitiful manner,
thus; The Apostles intent in his epistles written to Tim: and Tit: was to
inform them as Bishops; how to exercise their episcopal function. Ergo, those
epistles show that they were Bishops. No merveil therefore, if the Doctor were
desirous, to cover the beggary of his reasoning with the Sect. 3. ad page 77.
and 78. sect. 3.
shredds of a new shaped syllogism, which disputes thus, Whosoever describing
unto Timothy and Titus their office and authority as they were governors of the
Churches of Ephesus and Creet, and prescribing their duty in the execution
thereof, to be performed by them and their successors till the coming of
Christ; does pl^inly describe the office and authority, and prescribe the
duty of Bishops: he presupposes them to be Bishops, the one of Ephesus, the
other of Creete. But Paul in his Epistles to Timothy and Titus, describing unto
them their office and authorittie as they were governors of the Churches of
Ephesus and Creet etc. does plainly describe the office, and prescribe the
duty of Bishops. Therefore Paul in his epistles to Timothy and Titus
presupposes them to be Bishops, the one of Ephesus, the other of Creet.


Into this new frame he casts his argument (as he pretends) because the
Refuter had confounded himself, with his own hypotheticall proposition: but
the reader is rather to judge, that a false supposall of confusion in his
Refuter has transported the Doctor into such a maze, that he has confounded
himself in his own The D. co^foundeth himself in his own reasoning.
reasoning. For where he should (according to his own project, sect. 1. of this
chapter) have given us a second reason for his first conclusion; (scz. that
Timothy and Titus were ordained Bishops by S. Paul) he now tendreth us a second
prosyllogisme, to confirm the antecedent of his first argument. But to let him
go free with this fault, I will answer this argument as it stands; and first
to the proposition which (although it never saw the Sun before his defense
came abroad) he takes for granted: because T: C: and his Refuter have
assailed it in vain. So he flattereth himself in his own conceit, but all in
vain. For a meaner Scholar then T. C. or his Refuter either, may easily
discern the inconsequence of his proposition; although he may seem to have
fortified the presupposall which he concludes, with a double bulwark, both of
describing the authority and of prescribing the duty of Bishops. For S. Paul in
his speech to the Elders of Ephesus, Acts. 20. 18. etc. describing his own
office and authority as he was the Superintendent of that church and president
of the presbytery there, plainly describes the office and authority of all
Superintendents or presidents in particular churches; and consequently
prescribes the duty which was to be performed, by all such as should succeed
in the like office, till the coming of Christ. Notwithstanding it were absurd
from hence to infer, that the Apostles speech there, presupposes his
ordination to the office of a superintendent or President of the Presbytery, in
that Church of Ephesus: wherefore neither does it follow, that the Apostle in
his epistles to Tim: and Titus presupposes their ordination to the office of
Bishops in the churches of Ephesus and Creete, though it should be granted,
that in describing their authority, as they were governors of those churches;
and in prescribing their duty (such as was to performed by them and their
successors till Christ's coming) he both described the office, and prescribed
the duty of Bishops. But this which he assumeth for a truth, I reject as an
assertion no less void of truth then the main conclusion now in question; for
it is grounded upon this false suppositio^ that none other then diocesa^
Bishops, had in those times or could have by succession, the government of
particular Churches. Now let us hear what he can say in defense thereof.

The Assumption I prove (says he) by those particulars, wherein the episcopal
Sect. 4. ad sect. 3. pa. 78.
authority does chiefly consist, both in respect of ordination. Tit. 1. 5. 1.
Tim. 5. 22. and also of jurisdiction, they being the censures of other
Ministers doctrine, 1. Tim. 1. 3. 2. Tim. 2. 16. Tit. 1. 10. 11. and 3. 9. and
Judges o^ their person and conversation, 1. Tim. 5. 19. 20. 21. Tit. 3. 10. to
which proofs he answers nothing. Answered nothing! no merveile if he had no
answer to these proofs as they are now fitted to the assumption of his new
shapen argument: if this be his meaning, his best friends (I think) will scarce
commend his honesty or discretion. But if his meaning be, that these proofs
before laid down in his sermon received no answer at all; does he not too
much forget himself? since he takes notice in the next page following, of this
reason yielded for the denial of his assumption, viz. that those instructions
(comprised in the places alleged) were not given to Timothy and Titus as
Bishops; but particularly to them as Evangelists, and in general to the
Presbyters, etc. But since this answer is in his eyes no answer at all; let us
try whether it may not be said with more truth that his proofs whereof he
boasts, are no clear proofs, either of the principal points before denied;
or of those which he now assumeth. He knows full well, that his refuter
flatly denies (that which he acknowledges to be in effect his assumption both
before and now, to wit) that S. Paul had any intention to inform Timothy and
Titus as Bishops; or any other Diocesan Bishops by them, how to demean
themselves in those particulars of ordination and jurisdiction; has he any
argument to prove this? or can he deduce it out of the scriptures before
mentioned? At least if he will needs cleave to his last assumptio^, why are not
the proofs thereof (if he have any) contrived into form of arguments? are his
syllogismes so soon at an end? Me thinks he should not expect any help in this
case from his refuter, whom he judges to be but a very bungler in the art of
Syllogising? Yet if it must needs be done to his hands, I will do my best, to
give it the best coat I can, and that is this, Whosoever describing unto
Timothy and Titus, their office and authority, as they were governors of the
Churches of Ephesus and Creet, and prescribing their duty in the execution
thereof to be performed by them and their succssors till Christ's coming; does
describe their office, and prescribe their duties in those particulars; wherein
episcopal authority chiefly consists: he does (in so describing and
prescribing) plainly describe the office and prescribe the duty of Bishops. But
S. Paul in his epistles to Timothy and Titus describing their office and
authority as they were governors of the Churches of Ephesus and Creete, and
prescribing their duty in the execution thereof to be performed by them and
their successors till Christ's coming; describes their office and prescribes
their duty, in those particulars wherein piscopall authority consists. (For
he describes their office and prescribes their duty in the power of
ordination and jurisdiction, as the places before quoted do show. And in
these particulars of ordination and jurisdiction episcopal authority chiefly
consists.) Therefore S. Paul (in so describing the authority and prescribing
the duty of Timothy and Titus) does plainly describe the office and authority,
and prescribe the duty of Bishops.


Behold here (good Reader) how the Doctor after many windings in and out is
retired back to that which he assumed (as you may see sect. 1.) for the proof
of his first argument. viz. that episcopal authority stands in the power of
ordination and jurisdiction: This was then taken for granted, and so enforced
to prove that Timothy and Titus their ordination to the function of Bishops,
was presupposed by S. Paul in his epistles to them, in as much as they had that
authority committed to them. Here it is again produced to justify the same
conclusion; because if episcopal authority consist in those particulars; the^
S. Paul's describbing of their authority and prescribbing of their duty in the
same particulars, argues the authority and duty of Bishops to be describbed in
those epistles etc. So to make a show of some variety of arguments; one
assertion must come twice upon the stage, for one purpose; and that with an
impudent The Doct. beggeth stoutly.
face to beg, rather then with ^ound reason from Gods word to confirm, what
is well known to be one of the main points controverted.

For his adding the authority of Gregory Nazianzen, Chrysostom, Sect. 5. ad
sect 4. page 78. 79.
Oecumenius, and Gregory, who testify (as he says) that the episles teach
Bishops how to behave themselves in the church of God; is a secret confession
that he knows not how to conclude from Saint Paul's own words, that which he
undertook to make apparent by his epistles to Timothy and Titus.

But because the Doctor will needs fit to this last assumption and the proof
thereof, that answer which was given to another; I will first reduce it to the
parts of his reasoning; and then peruse the forces which he bends against it.
Whereas therefore he says, that episcopal authority, chiefly consists in
those particulars (of ordination and jurisdiction) which Timothy and Titus had
in charge; if by episcopal authority he mean that; which Bishops have now
gotten into their hands, and appropriated to themselves, then the proposition
is false; and the falsehood thereof made plain by that supposed case (of a
Democracie in time changed into an Aristocracy, and afterward into a Monarchy)
laid down by the Doctor in his Refuters words. page 79. but if he understand
by episcopal authority, that which in the Apostles times, and with their
allowance, was seated in the function of diocesan Bishops; then the assumption
and the proof thereof is contradicted by the Refuter; when he says, that the
directions given to Timothy and Titus (for ordination and jurisdiction)
apperteyned not to diocesan Bishops; (for the Apostle dreamed of no such
sovereigntie) but in particular unto Timothy and Titus by an higher power, as
Evangelists: and in general to all the presbyters, as having the charge of
those affairs in their several congregations in the Churches right to
administer them. To impugn this answer, first he labors by two arguments, to
prove that Timothy and Titus did not perform those things by an higher power.
viz. 1. because, they were to be done by a power which was to continue in the
Church until the end. 2. because the power whereby Bishops do the things that
Timothy and Titus had in commission, is so much of the Apostolical power, as
was to continue to the end. But if the Doctor had observed his Refuters
meaning, (who by an higher power, understands that power of office, which was
invested in the persons of Timothy and Titus for being Evangelists, he might
perhaps have perceived the deceit, that lies in his own reasoning. For
although the power of ordeyning and censuring considered simply (and in
general as the Refuter speaks) be such as was to continue in the presbyters,
though now by Bishops appropriated to themselves as he also grants:) yet this
hinders not, but that (as the Apostles, so) Timothy and Titus being
Evangelists, did perform those works by an higher power, that is, a power
seated in an higher office. But if his meaning be, that Timothy and Titus did
those things by virtue of an office that was to continue; and that the power of
doing those works is derived to Bishops by apostolical allowance; what else
does he, but continue his old trade of begging? 2. In like manner he deceives
himself and his Reader, when he fastneth a contradiction on his Refuter in
saying, the Apostles dreamed not of any such sovereigntie, as now is in
Bishops, above Presbyters; when he had before said, that Timothy and Titus did
the same things by an higher power (to wit of their Evangelisticall function)
which Bishops have now appropriated to themselves. 3. And he argues too
loosely, when to prove a falsehood in the refuters assertion (viz. that those
instructions were given to Timothy and Titus as Evangelists) he says, they
were given them as they were particularly assigned governors of the Churches
of Ephesus and Creete. For it was not repugnant (but very agreeable) to the
office of Evangelists to be assigned unto the government of particular Churches
at the pleasure of the Apostles, on whom they attended. 4. In deed, if the
Doctor could give us any one sentence in those epistles to Timothy and Titus,
showing the charge of those affairs to belong properly to Diocesan Bishops; I
would freely confess the Refuter had erred in denying it; and affirming the
charge thereof to belong in general unto the presbyters; but though we have
waited all this while, for the demonstration of this point from the Apostles
writings: yet we hear no news of any argument, that clearly deduceth this
conclusion from any word or phrase, which Paul uses in his epistles; only he
says, he has sufficiently proved this point before, lib. 3. Wherefore that
the reader may see how worthily he disputes there in defense of his Diocesan
Lords; I will pray leave to lay down in open view, what he here refers us
unto.

In his third book cap. 3. sect. 1. he gives a threefold superiority Section 6.
unto Bishops over other Ministers (viz. singularity of pre-eminence during
life, power of ordination and power of jurisdiction) all which he groundeth
upon Tit. 1. 5. And because his Refuter had denied Titus to be a Bishop; he
refers his Reader there, for the proof thereof to that which was to
follow, lib. 4. cap. 4. which we have now to examine. In the mean time he
desires him to take it for granted. In like manner toward the end of that
book (cap. 5. sect. 18.) he argues that Bishops had corrective power over the
presbyters because Timothy and Titus had such power over the presbyters of
Ephesus and Creete, as he proves (if we may believe him) by most evident
testimonies out of Paul's epistles Tit. 1. 5. 1. Tim. 1. 3. and 4. 19-22. And
unto his Refuters answer (viz. that Tim. and Titus were not Bishops and that
he should never prove they were), he returns this reply. I desire the Reader
to suspend his judgment, till he come to the proofs on both sides, and if he
shall not find my proffes (says he) for their being Bishops better then his to
the contrary, let him believe me in nothing. Lo^ here his words, and how
confidently he relieth aforehand upon his proofs, which he meant to produce,
for this assertion, that Timothy and Titus were Bishops. Notwithstanding when
he comes to make this apparent, and that by the scriptures (yea by S. Paul's
epistles written unto them) the maine issue of his whole reasoning, comes at
last to this effect.

Episcopal authority consists chiefly, in the power of ordination and
jurisdiction.

But the authority which Timothy and Titus had in the Churches of Ephesus and
Creet principally consisted in the power of ordination and jurisdiction.

Ergo, their authority was episcopal; And consequently they were Bishops.

Here now if the proposition be doubted of or denied, we are sent back to this
former disputation; where he begged that this conclusion might be taken for
granted. Is there any likelihood (think you) that we shall ever find a good end
put to this controversy, when Sect. 7. ad sect. 5. and 6. p. 80. 81.
we must dance the round after the Doctors pipe, in this fashion?

But leaving the Doctor to the readers sentence therein, let us proceed to that
example or supposall before mentioned; the rather for that he most proudly
insulteth over his Refuter as if he were a Brownist or Anabaptist or had
broached sundry schismatic novelties; as I am not ashamed once again to lay
down his words to the readers view; so I doubt not but to clear him from
those ^oul imputations. Suppose (says he) a Democracy where the common wealth
is governed by the people, it must needs be that in such a place there are
laws, for the choosing, admitting, ordering and consuring of officers; and
directing them how to behave themselves in their offices. What if this
government fall into the hands of the nobility, which continue the same laws
still in the same cases? What if some one mightier then the rest, at the last
make himself sole-governour, still observing those fundamental laws, which
were at the first established is it to be said that those laws were the very
patterns and precedents of the Aristocraticall and Monarchical government,
whereby the first maker of those laws would inform, in the one the nobility;
in the other the Monarchy; and in them all other, how to exercise that
function? The administration of Church matters touching ordination and
jurisdiction, was first in the several Churches or congregatio^s, which by
their Presbyteries had the managing of all Church-busines, in process of time
it came to be restreyned to the Clergy only, the Bishop and his presbytery
of Ministers only; at last as things grow wor^^ and worse, the Bishop like a
Monarch g^^t the reigns into his own hands. Now though the laws of ordi^a^im
and jurisdiction, remeine the same, and the practice also in some sort: yet are
they not patterns and precedents, either of the second or third kind of
government; neither were they given to instruct, the Bishop alone, or the
Bishop and his Clergy together. These are the Refuters words; now the Doct.
having first solaced himself in an idle repetition of the particulars,
(interlaced with scornful gibes) to show the unlearneder sort the trim Idea
(as he pleases to speak) of that discipline, which the Refuter and his fellow
challengers have forged; he comes at his leisure very gravely to refute his
supposed novelties, one after an other in this order.

First, it is here presupposed (says he) that every Church endued with power
of ecclesi^sticall government, was a parish etc. which dotage I have before
refuted. Shall I say, that we have before proved his assertion (that the first
Churches were properly dioceses) to be a mere dotage? I will rather say, he
might well have spared the mencio^ of this controversy; seeing the Refuter does
not once mention the word parish or parishonall. The second supposed novelty he
makes this that the foruse of Church government at first, was democraticall,
or popular; the chief authority being in the people which by the Presbytery
did ordeine and censure all Church Officers. His Refuters words are these. The
administration of Church Matters, was first in the several Churches or
congregations, which by their Presbyters had the managing of all
Church-busynes. And again, the right was in the Church, and the execution in
the Presbytery. But does the Doctor speak as he thinks when he calls this
schismatic novelty; and for this esteems his Refuter a Brownist or
Anabaptist? Knows he whom he wounds in thus censuring him and his opinion?
has he never observed in his reading the Centuries. (cent. 2. Col. 134.) this
saying. Si quis probatos authors huius s^^uli perspiciat, videbit
forma^g^bernationis propemodu^ democratias similem fuisse. Singulae enim
ecclesiae parem habebant potestatem, verbum dei pure decendi, sacramenta
administrandi, absolvendiet excommunicandi, haereticos and sceleratos,
ministros eligendi, ordinandi, and justissimas ob causas iterum deponendi etc.
The same words are recorded also in Catalogo. test. verit. lib. 2. Col. 108.
but more directly to purpose speaks D. Whitgist in his defense page 180. In
the Apostles times the state of the Church was popular, And page 182; I
therefore call it popular (says he) because the Church it self, that is, the
whole multitude had interest almost in everything. Shall he be now with the
Doctor a Brownist, or Anabaptist for so saying? And why shall not Thomas Bell
(a professed enemy to all Brownists, and wholly devoted to the Prelates
service) be taxed of schismatic novelty, for teaching as he does, that
excommunication precisely and chiefly perteyneth to the Church, and that she
has authority to commit the execution thereof, to some special persons fit
for that purpose, and chosen for that end? this he says, and this he proves
by Christ's words Math. 18. 17. 18. dic ecclesiae, tell the Church etc. that
is to say (in his understanding) unto the whole congregation. (see his regiment
of the Church cap. 12. sect. 4.) If his credit be little worth which the
Doctor; yet me thinks, he should be ashamed to justify the Rhemists and
Bellarmin against Doctor Fulk and Doct. Willet, who affirm that the right and
power of the keys and so of excommunication, belongs unto the Church; and
the Pastors and prelates exercise it, as in the name of Christ, so in the name
of the whole Church. see Doctor Fulk, answ. to the Rhem: on 1. Cor. 5. sect;.
and D. Willet Synops. cont. 5. quest. 4. part. 2.

But Mr. Beza (if you will believe the Doct.) making mencio^ of one Morellius,
who pleaded in like manner for the popular government, gives him this style.
Democraticus quidem fanaticus. De Minist. gradibus cap. 23. page 155. But Mr
Bezaes words in that place do show, that he gives that style to Morellius,
for no other cause then this, that he presumed by word and writing to reprehend
that order, which for election of Church Officers is religiously and prudently
observed in the city of Geneva. Which is such as well accords with the
Refuters doctrine; for it allows the Church to be electionum sacrarum conscia
et approbatrix to take notice and give approbation; howsoever a prerogative is
given to the Pastors and Magistrates, to go before the people in the choice.
2. Notwithstanding the Doctor asks if it be not a phrensy to urge the peoples
supremacy in Church government? and whether there be any show in scripture,
or in reason that the sheep should rule their shepherd, or the flock their
Pastor? Say as much should be granted as his questions imply; must he not
first prove that his Refuter gives supremacy of rule unto the sheep or people
over their Pastor before he can conclude him to be led, by a fanaticall
spirit against scripture and reason? But is there not want of judgment rather
in the Doctor, that imagines the Pastor to be ruled, by the sheep or people;
when the Church, (which is the whole body) has the managing of all
Church-affaires, by her Presbyters, which are the principal members? Does not
Cyprian that holy Martyr, say (lib. 1. epist. 4.) plebs ipsa maxim habet
potestatem, vel eligendi dignos sacerdotes vel indignos recusandi, quod et
ipsum videmus de divina authoritate descendere? And how often does Austin say,
that Peter signified the Church, and bare the person of the Church; when Christ
said unto him, Tibi dabo claves etc. Mat. 16. (August. tract. 50. and 124. in
Johan. Item in Psalm. 108, and de agonia Christi cap. 30.) And Gerson Trilog. 8.
quest. Claves (inquit) datae sunt ecclesiae, ut in actu primo; and Petro, ut in
actu secundo. On which words the Bishop of Chichester in his answer to Tortus,
page 65. gives this note; Cum vnum hunc nomino cum illo intellige omnes, qui
Constantiae fuerunt in Concilio, omnes enim idem sentiunt. But to pass by many
others, the words of Ferus (in Act. 11) are worthy of the Doctors observation.
Peter the Apostle, and chief of the Apostles is constreyned to give an account
to the Church; neither does he disdeyne it because he knew himself to be, not
a Lord but a Minister of the Church. The Church is the spouse of Christ, and
Lady of the house; Peter a servant and Minister. Wherefore, the Church may not
only exact an account of her Ministers; but also reject and depose them; if
they be not fit. And in giving this pre-eminence to the Church above Peter,
does he speak against the scripture or against reason? Does not S. Paul
acknowledge the same, touching himself and his fellow Apostles? 1. Cor. 3. 21.
22. 2. Cor. 4. 5. Is it not then an absurd fancy (if not frenzy) to urge as
the Doctor does, lib. 3. passim) the superiority of one Bishop in an whole
Diocese or Province, above all the Presbyters and people thereof?
Notwithstanding as the Refuter does no where say, so neither can it be gathered
from his words, that the form of Church-governme^t was at the first, or now
ought to be wholly democraticall or popular; the Doctor is not ignorant (as
appears l. 3. p. 2. and 3.) that his Ref: pleads for the Aristocraticall
form of government, as that which in his opinion ought to be established in
the several Churches. Neither does he therein cross himself, or any of his
fellows that favor the parish discipline, for they all (as I am persuaded)
do hold the ecclesiastical government to be a mixed form compounded of all
three states, as many worthy divines do confidently mainteyne. P. Martyr in 1.
Cor. 5. see his Com. plac. clas. 4. sect. 9. Baros. de polit. civ. and
ecclesiastica lib. 2. page 42. 43. D. Whitak. de Roman. pontif. page 13. 14.
For as in respect of Christ, who is the head, not only of the whole Church in
general, but also of every particular visible Church (Ephesians. 4. 15. 1. Cor.
12. 27) the Church may be truly reputed a Kingdom or Monarchy: so it has
some resemblance unto a Monarchy, in regard of that pre-eminence which the
Pastor has above other Church Officers. But because no one Pastor or Bishop,
has power to govern, or determine causes ecclesiastical pro suo arbitratu
after his pleasure, but ex consilio compresbyterorum, by the Counsel of his
fellow-Elders: the regiment of the Church more properly resembles an
Aristocracy. And in as much as the peoples consent is not to be neglected, in
causes of greatest moment, it agrees in part with a Democracie:
notwithstanding a mere Democracie, wherein all matters are handled of all
(aequato jure) by an equal right, we do no less detest, then that usurped
Monarchy of Lordly Prelates, which other reformed Churches have abolished.

Wherefore the Doctor dreameth of a dry summer in a dripping Section 8.
year, when he supposes in his third fancy, that we hold the laws of
Church Government prescribed in the epistles to Tim. and Titus, to have bin
provided for such a popular state, wherein the people do rule their leaders.
They were provided for a mixed state, wherein many presbyters under the guidance
of one Pastor or president, do administer and execute all matters, with the
peoples consent and approbation. And in the affirmation as we have the assent
of the most and the best divines of later times (Calvin on Titus. 1. 5. Beza on
Tim. Cap. 5. 19. 22. and Tit. 3. 10. and sundry others) so we have the Apostles
own warrant in the close of his epistles, with these words, grace be with you,
or with you all. 2. Tim. 22. Tit. 3. 15. for by this it appears, that what
was written specially by name to Timothy and Titus, was intended to be of
common use, not only for other Ministers; but also in some sort to all the
Saints, that then conversed in those places. Moreover since the Apostle
charge Titus to observe in the ordination of Elders that order which he had
before enjoined him (Tit. 1. 5.) whence can we better derive that order, then
from his own practice, and his fellow-Apostles who used as well in ordination,
as in other Church-affaires, both the advice and help of other Ministers; and
the approbation of the people; as appears by these scriptures. Acts. 1. 15.
23. 26. and 6. 2. 3. and 14. 23. and 15. 6. 22. 23. 1. Cor. 5. 3. 4. and 2.
Cor. 2. 10. The Doctor therefore is misledd by his own conceit, when he
imagines that the Apostles words unto Timothy and Titus, (Lay not hands
rashly etc. And do thou avoid an Haeretick) did so close up all power of
ordination and jurisdiction in their hands, that neither people nor
presbyters, had or might have any stroke at all in those matters. As for his
gibing objection. Belike the whole Island of Creete was a parish too; it
deserves no other answer then this; when he justifyeth his collection, from
any words in his refuters answer; I will acknowledge him for an honest man:
mean while let the reader take notice of this, that the Doctor (in a few
leaves after page 88) notes this speech of his refuter, that Creet had many
Churches; which argues necessarily; that the whole Island could not be one
only parish.

The last fancy falsely fained by the Doctor is this, that the popular Sect. 9.
state of the several Churches, did first degenerate into an Aristocracie, and
after into a Monarchy; he should have said, that the well tempered Democracie,
did degenerate first into a simple Aristocracie, and after into an absolute
Monarchy. But he endeavoreth to show that the several Churches were at the
first governed Monarchically, to wit, by the Apostles, or Apostolical men
severally. For Apostles he names James that ruled perpetually; and Peter and
Paul etc. for a time. And of Apostolical men that were perpetual governors he
has good store, as Mark, Timothy, Titus, Evodius, Simo^ the son of Cleophas
etc. But where are his proofs that all these or any of them, governed
Monarchically; and by their sole authority. Concerning James it is already
showed, that his government was far short of that sole authority, which our
Bishops carry at this day, in the managing of Church-causes. And by that which
has been now said concerning Timothy and Titus, the same may be affirmed of
their government in the Churches of Ephesus and Creet. But he asks whether
Paul did not co^mitt the ordination of Ministers unto Titus, without mentioning
either of Presbytery or people? And we may ask him, what mention he finds
there, of prayers, or hands-imposition, which ought to concur with
ordination? if he can include them (as being understood) in the word katasteses
Tit. 1. 5; we have as good reason to include the assistance of other
presbyters, and the peoples approbation in the words following, hoos egoo soi
dietaxamen as I have appointed thee: Quis enim credat Paulum etc. who may
believe Paul otherwise to have ordered Titus then he and the rest of the
Apostles themselves had in use? Muscul. loc. co^. de elect. Minist. Again, he
asks or rather argues in this manner. Are not all his precepts for
ordination and Church Government directed only to Titus for Creete, and to
Timothy for Ephesus? and does not this evidently show, that (howsoever they
might use either the presence or consent of the people, or the counsel and
advise of the presbyters in causes of greatest moment, as Princes also do in
co^mon-wealths, yet) the sway of ecclesiastical government was in them? If
there be any evidence or strength of truth in this reason, the^ the like must
be acknowledged in this that follows; Our Savior Christ directs in
singular terms unto Peter only both his whole speech concerning the keys of
his kingdom, and the power thereof; Math. 16. and that precept of feeding his
sheep and lambs, and of confirming his brethren. Ioh. 21. 15. 17. Luke 22. 32.
Wherefore however Peter might use the help The Doct. reasons well for Rome.
and assistance of his fellow-Apostles in all those works; and the presence or
consent of the people, in the administration of the keys; yet the cheef power
and sway of all was in him alone. Good news for Rome, if the Doctor will give
allowance to his argument; but the truth is, such singular speeches directed to
one only, do not argue in that one any such preheminent power, as the
Romanists and Prelatists do from thence gather. So that since the Doct. can
not prove that Timothy and Titus, had any such singular and sole power in
Church Government, as the Doctor judges to be due unto Bishops; it is plain
that he builds upon a vain and false presupposall, when he says, it is
presupposed in the epistles to Timothy and Titus, that they had episcopal
authority; and that the directions given to them were precedents for diocesan
Bishops, in the exercise of their function.

But for the proof of this, he has another argument in store, thus framed,

Those things which were written to inform not Timothy and Titus alone, Sect.
10. ad sect. 7. page 83.
as extraordinary persons, but them and their successors to the worlds end;
were written to inform diocesan Bishops.

But those epistles were written to inform not Timothy and Titus alone as
extraordinary persons; but them and their successors to the worlds end.

Therefore they were written to inform diocesan Bishops.

Unto the Assumption the Refuter answers by distinction thus; that it is true
if understood of successors in authority or power of performing the same works,
but false, if meant of succession in the same office. The Doct. therefore first
indeavoureth to prove what his Refuter denies and yet in the winding up of
all, would persuade his reader, that what the Refuter granted is sufficient for
the truth of his assumption. But he is to be advertized, that unless he make
good what his Refuter denies, he cannot conclude what he undertakes. For
whether we look to his former assertion, which he says is here again proved,
himself does thus explain it. (sect. 3. in the beginning) that in the
epistles to Tim. and Titus, S. Paul intended to inform them as Diocesan
Bishops, and in them all other Diocesans: or whether we look to the nearest
scoape of his words in his sermon (page 74.) it is evident, he there
intends, to prove that which he supposed would be answered to his former
objection (viz. that the things spoken to Timothy and Titus, were spoken to
them as extraordinary persons, whose authority (he should have said office)
should die with them) which cannot be removed unless he prove that they were
spoken to them as persons bearing an ordinary function; wherein their
successors should enjoy the same authority to the worlds end. Neither is this
to deny his conclusion, as he falsely affirms; but to contradict his
assu^ption in that sense, which is necessary to make it good; because
otherwise he argues not ad idem. Let us therefore see how well his proofs are
fitted to the assumption. I prove it, says he, first by testimony both of
Paul and of Ambrose; and after by reason. And first by S. Paul's testimony,
that he streitely charge Timothy that the commandments and directions which
he gave him, should be kept inviolable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus.
1. Tim. 6. 14. Ergo, they were to be performed by such as should have the like
authority (and the same office) to the end. The consequence of this Enthymeme
depends upon this proposition. That the commandments and directions given
in charge unto Timothy, could not be kept inviolable unto the end, without a
succession of such as should have not only the like authority, but also the
same office until the end of the world. The which is ^latly denied, and cannot
be fortifyed by that which follows (scz: that those commandments could not
be performed in the person of Timothy who was not to continue to the end) seeing
the members of his disjunction are insufficient, when he takes it for
granted, that those commandments must be performed either in Timothees own
person, or in such as succeeded him in the same function: for the Doctor cannot
be ignorant, that the commandment which Christ gave to his Apostles (Math. 28.
19, 20.) for preaching and baptizing, was to be kept inviolable unto the
coming of Christ: neither could it be peformed by the Apostles always in their
own persons, or by such as succeeded them in the Apostolic function. It is
performed (as all the world knows) by successors in a different function,
which have authority to do the same works; though neither in the same office,
nor yet with that ample commission for the extent of their jurisdiction. In
like manner the Refuter says, that the commandments given to Timothy and
Titus for ordination and jurisdiction, were continued in the Church by
presbyters, which succeeded them (though in a differing office) according to
that ordinary course, which God had appointed for his Church.

Thus much for S. Paul, whom the Doctor now leaves and craveth help of Mr.
Calvin, T. C. and others to conclude his purpose: Sect. 11. ad sect. 7. page 83.
84.
scz. that the commandments given to Timothy, were to be performed by such as
succeeded him in the same office. Mr Calvin, says he, understands in the
name of the commandment, those things whereof he had hitherto discoursed
concerning the office of Timothy. And do not we also understand the things or
works given in charge, under the name of the commandment? Neither deny we that
those things belonged to the office or ministry of Timothy. Yet we refuse that
succession in the same ministerial function, which the Doct. would wring (if
he could tell how) out of Paul's charge to perform the things so commanded
until Christ's second coming. 2. True it is, that T. C. and others finding
among other precepts in Paul's epistles to Timothy this, that the governing
Elders are to be honored as well as the Teachers, do from thence conclude the
continuance of both functions; and why should they not, since the continuance
of Bishops and Deacons is of all interpreters rightly gathered from the rules
that are laid down concerning their functions. 1. Tim. 3. the former being no
less ordinary, and perpetually necessary, then the later. Yet the continuance
of Timothy his office cannot be concluded upon the same ground, till it may
appear that his function was also perpetual and not extraordinary. 3. As for
the testimony of Ambrose, it nothing helps the Doctor, except it be to show,
how grossly he plaieth the Sophister in thus arguing. S. Paul in his words. 1.
Tim. 6. 14. has regard unto Timothees successors, that they after his example
might continue the well ordering of the Church. So says S. Ambrose. Ergo, in
his understanding (says the Doct.) he meant such as succeeded Timothy in the
same office. As though the Fathers did confound the offices of Apostles and
Evangelists with those Pastors and Bishops, which succeeded them in the rule
and government of the Churches, because they say the later were successors to
the former.

4. His reason follows now to be examined. Whatsoever authority is
perpetually necessary; and such as without which, the Church neither can be
governed, nor yet continued: the same is not peculier to extraordinary persons,
or to die with them: but by an ordinary derivation to be continued in their
successors. But the authority committed to Timothy and Titus, was perpetually
necessary and such as without which, the Church neither can be governed; (as
without jurisdiction), nor continued (as without ordination.) Therefore the
authority committed to them, was not peculiar to them as extraordinary persons,
but by an ordinary derivation to be continued in those that succeeded them.
Whereunto I answer as before; if he speak of succession at large in authority
only; he wandreth from the question: If of succession in the same office; I
disclaim the later branch of the proposition; for all men know by the
perpetuity of Pastoral authority, by which the word and sacraments are still
continued in the Church (whereas the dispensation of these holy things was
first committed by Christ to the Apostles Math. 28. 19. 20.) that the
perpetual necessity of an authority to perform this or that ministerial
work, does not necessarily require any to succeed in the same function that
first enjoyed that authority. And this is so evident a truth, that rather then
the Doctor will contradict it, he will become non-suite in this point; and
persuade his Reader, if he can, that succession in authority only (which was
never denied) is sufficient for his purpose, the contrary whereof is before
sufficiently made manifest.

To follow him therefore in the defense of his proposition he says, Sect. 12.
ad sect. 8. page 85.
it is grounded on this hypothesis; that diocesan Bishops were the successors
of Timothy and Titus; and therefore reasons thus,

If the successors of Timothy and Titus were diocesan Bishops; then those
things which were written to inform their successors; were written to inform
diocesan Bishops.

But the successors of Timothy and Titus, were diocesan Bishops.

Therefore those things that were written to inform their successors, were
written to inform diocesan Bishops.

Here the Doctor is again to be advertised, that the true hypothesis of the
former proposition is this; that diocesan Bishops not only de facto were; but
also de jure ought to have been successors unto Timothy and Titus, in the
exercise of their authority; and therefore the consequence of the later
proposition, which mencioneth their succession de facto only, is too weak;
for unless it were certain that S. Paul intended that diocesan Bishops should
succeed them; his writing of purpose to direct their successors; cannot argue
that he meant by them to inform diocesan Bishops. It had bin fit therefore,
the Doctor had showed from some words of the Apostle in these epistles, or
from some other Scriptures, that the Apostle aimed at the succession of such
Bishops; but this was too hard a task for him; and therefore he persuades his
reader, that their succession de jure cannot be denied, if their succession de
facto be proved. Which he indeavoreth by two arguments.

First by this disjunction. Either diocesan Bishops were their successors, or
the presbyteries, or the whole congregation. But neither the presbyteries, nor
the whole congregation Ergo diocesan Bishops.

As for the last member of this disjunction, it is absurdly added by the
Doctor, howsoever he would seem to have done it to please his Ref: for although
he say that the right was in the church; yet he gives the execution to the
presbytery of each congregation: neither yet is he so to be understood, as if
he denied a pre-eminence for order sake, unto some one to be the mouth of the
rest, in executing that which was by the whole presbytery decreed. Which
pre-eminence as it did by right belong to Timothy and Titus in regard of
their Evangelisticall function during their stay in those places; so it was
devolved after their departure to him that was primus presbyter, or proestoos
president of the presbyters; that is to say, in each congregation, to the
Pastor; and in a Synod or assembly of the Pastors and presbyters of many
Churches to that one which with the consent, and choice of his brethren
moderated the action. If therefore he speak of successors unto Timothy and
Titus, in that special presidencie, which they held at Ephesus and in Creete;
his disjunction is to be disclaimed as insufficient; because it wants the
mention of such a president as we give to each presbytery and Synod. His
second argument, follows in this form;

Those who succeeded Timothy and Titus in the government of the Churches of
Ephesus and Creet, were their successors: But the Bishops of Ephesus and Creet
did succeed Timothy and Titus in the government of those Churches. Therefore
they (viz. Diocesan Bishops) were their successors.

Well may you see, the Doct. would feign be thought to be rich, The Doct. is
poor and proves idem pe^ idem.
when in deed he is poor. For is this argument any better then a beggarly
proving of the point denied by the self same? is it not all one to succeed them
in the government of those Churches; and to be their successors in the like
authority? Perhaps he means now to conclude (though before he said it was
needless) that Diocesa^ Bishops were their successors in office: if so, then
has he somewhat more to do then he expects, he must prove his proposition
which he beggeth. Mean while (till his meaning herein be known) I flatly deny
his assumption, and am ready once again to listen to his proofs of this
proposition, that diocesan Bishops succeeded Timothy and Titus in the like
power of government over the Churches of Ephesus and Creete.

First, touching Timothies successors in Ephesus, whereas he alleges, Sect.
13. ad page 86. and 87.
that the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, Apoc. 2. 1. was one of Timothies next
successors, he was answered, that he does but tediously beg the question in
assuming that the same Angel was a Diocesan Bishop; and now overpassing this
point, (as The D. beggeth.
if he saw it not) he appealeth to his Refuters conscience, whether that Angel
was not the Bishop or governor of the Church of Ephesus, and succeeded Timothy
in the government etc. Wherein if he should gratifye him, with the grant of as
much as he desires, scz. that the Angel was one singular person and a Bishop,
yea and a successor unto Timothy and one of those 27 Bishops mentioned by
Leontius in the Council of Calcedon; yet (the Doctor isnever the near) it will
not follow that he was a diocesan Bishop; for that other branch of the
Refuters answer unto Leontius testimony stands yet unremoved, viz. that
howsoever the later of these 27 Bishops might be Diocesa^s; yet the former were
not. The Doctor says, It is certain that both the later and the former were
not only Diocesan, but also Metropolitan Bishops; but I answer, he is much
deceived, if he think we will take his bare affirmation; It is certain, for a
sufficient confirmation of the matter in question. And if Timothies i^mediate
successors were (for certeinty) Metropolitan Bishops, why is the Doctor so
fearful, as he seems to be (lib. 2. page 114. and lib. 4. page 131.) to
ascribe their original also to the Apostles institution? And why does he by
consequence contradict it, in saying, It is evident and cannot be denied, but
that there were diocesan Bishops, such as ours, before there were any
Metropolitans? lib. 3. page 20. and lib. 4. page 7. for me thinks he should
blush to affirm, that Timothy and Titus were bare Diocesans, if their
i^mediate successors were Metropolitans.

As touching Creet, and succession to Titus in the government thereof, the
Doctor confesses, that he has not any where read of his next successor. The
first that he finds to have that ample government, was Philip mentioned by
Dionysius of Corinth, apud Eusebius. lib. 4. Cap. 21. and 23. Yet between him and
Titus, there is an apparent difference; for Philip had the special charge of
the Church of Gortyna; whereas Titus was equally trusted by the Apostle, with
the oversight of all the Churches in the whole Island. He adds, though there
were no direct proof that Diocesan or Provincial Bishops, were the successors
of Timothy and Titus, yet it might easily be gathered by other Churches from
whose form of government, Ephesus and Creet varied not. After having said,
that Mark at Alexandria, Evodius at Antioche, and Linus at Rome had the same
authority that Timothy and Titus had, he argues demonstratively in this
manner;

It may not be doubted but that each of these had Bishops (he should have said,
Diocesan Bishops) to their successors in the Apostles times. Therefore the
Refuter should not make it so strange, that Diocesan Bishops were successors of
Timothy and Titus.

Whereto I answer. It seems then the Refuter is not to be blamed for
esteeming the later a strange point, if the former may be doubted, and why
should he not make a doubt of it, seeing the D. has no better testimony, or
reason to confirm it, then his own naked affirmation, It cannot be denied.
Thus we have seen the Do. best defense: for that episcopal function, which he
gives to Timothy and Titus, his next labor is to remove the objections made
against his assertion.

Chap. 9. Concerning the first objection against the Bishoprics of Timothy and
Titus handled by the Doctor, lib. 4. cap. 4. sect. 9. and 10. page 89-92.
THe first objection he lays down in these words. That Timothy Sect. 1. ad
sect. 9. p. ^9
and Titus may seem not to have bin appointed Bishops of Ephesus and Creet,
because they did not continue there, but were removed to other places. Wherein,
although the Doctor has omitted the maine point, that should give strength to
the consequence (viz. that they continued there by the band of their office, as
being affixed to the perpetual charge of those Churches:) yet as if the
Refuter had made choice of his own words, and contrived it for his best
advantage; he tells the reader, it is an objection of his own framing. But
it is usual with him, when he would seem to remove our objections, to fit them
to his own strength, that his answer may seem to carry the victory with it.
Otherwise since himself assenteth (page 94) to this difference, between the
function of Evangelists and Bishops, that the former were not tied to any one
place, as the later are; he might (and in upright dealing onght) to have framed
to himself at the first this objection. viz. that Timothy and Titus were not
tied or bound to attend during life, on the charge of those Churches in Ephesus
and Creet; and therefore they were not by Paul ordained Bishops of those
Churches. But then his distinction of perpetual and ordinary residence, would
not have reached to impugn, either the antecedent or the consequence of the
argument. For the consequence implies this proposition, that, all whom the
Apostles ordained Bishops of particular Churches, were affixed or bound to the
perpetual charge of those Churches; This if the Doctor deny, it may easily be
proved by the law of God and man, and by the testimony of the best writers in
all ages; but I will spare this labor, seeing the D himself cannot impugn it
(as I suppose) without contradiction to himself. For how can Bishops enjoy by
the prerogative of their function, (...) singularity of pre-eminence during
life; if their assignment to the charge of the Church which they hold, binds
the^ not to attend on the feeding and oversight thereof, as long as they live?
I grant that Bishops may upon special and extraordinary occasion, not only
traveile to other places; but also be removed unto other Churches: but in their
absence they remain bound to the charge of the Church first committed to them;
till by a lawful calling they be removed, to the settled oversight of an other
church. Wherefore an ordinary residence in Ephesus and Creet, is not sufficient
to prove that they were Bishops of those Churches; unless it may also appear
that they were bound to the perpetual charge thereof; and that the same band
recalled them back, when those extraordinary matters were dispatched, which
called them away for a time. But this is more then he can prove, either by
testimony of scripture, or any other evidence. If he will conclude such a band
of continuance from the Apostles words: 1. Tim. 1. 3. and Tit. 1. 5. he must
argue thus;

Paul requested Timothy prosmenein, to continue still in Ephesus; and appointed
Titus epidiorthosei ta leiponta, to continue to redress what was Sect. 2.
wanting in Creete. Ergo they were bound to make their ordinary residence there
(as having the proper charge of those churches) during life.

If there be any strength in this consequence, then there must be a truth in
this proposition, that men are bound to make their ordinary residence, during
life in those places, where they are either requested prosmeinai, or left
epidiorthosai etc. But the Doctor is not able (with all his skill) to prove a
continuance (or ordinary resiance) during life, much less any band or tie
unto such continuance; in the words of the Apostle before mentioned. For it
appears that a far shorter continuance (and that without any band of office
or calling thereunto) is noted by the word prosmenein, Mat. 15. 32. Mark. 8. 2.
and Act. 18. 18. And Grammarians do teach that the word has sometimes the
signification of expecto, to tarry or wait for an others coming; which
construction, as it does well accord with the Apostles words. 1. Tim. 4. 13.
(till I come give attendance to exhortation etc.) so it was of ancient times
received, as appears by the reading which Augustine (lib. 2. cont. Parmen.)
followed, Rogavi te ut sustineres me; I requested thee to tarry for me at
Ephesus. And certeynly these words Till I come, compared with the former, I
requested thee to abide or stay for me at Ephesus, do argue very strongly that
Paul had no purpose to bind him unto perpetual residence there as a Bishop on
his perpetual charge. Si Timotheus erat episcopus Ephesinus, fuit ne rogandus
ut in sua paraecia maneret etc. Let Mr Doctor read Sadeel to Turrians
sophismes. loc. 12. sect. 8.

And as for the word epidiorthoos^, Tit. 1. 5. it is nothing else with Scapula
(in his Lexico^) then insuper emendo velcorrigo, to ad an ame^deme^t fault, or
correct somewhat already done or spoken, for as there is prodiorthoosis, a
^ore amendment of an evil, by preventing it, before it break out; so is
there also epidiorthoosis, an after amendment of a fault already committed.
(see Aretius in Tit. 1. 5.) Wherefore a continuance in redressing is not
necessarily employed in the Greek word, as the Doctor may further see (for his
learning) not only by the reading, which his Mr (the Bishop of Winchester)
embraces (perpet. gover. page 47. and 299.) but also by that translation,
which the two last Church-bibles do retain. I left thee in in Creta, that
thou should set in order the things that are wanting (or left undone.) True
it is, that some writers of good note, (to express the force of the
preposition epi) do prefer this or the like reading: I l^ft thee in Creta
(ut pergas corrigere) that thou should go forward (or continue) to redress
etc. thereby to signify that Titus succeeded Paul, as one put in trust to
continue the work begun, and to finish that which was left unperfect. But even
they which do urge this signification of the word, do notwithstanding
acknowledge, the time of his continuance in Creta, to be very short; (see
Calvin, Piscator, Beza and others in Titus 1. 5. Wherefore the Doctors
collection (which from the Apostles words infers that Titus was not left
there for a brunt (to set things in order) and so to come away, but to continue
redressing what should be amiss, and still to keep that Church in reparation)
is a false gloss. Which as it has no warrant from the word epidiorthoosai; so
it crosses the true meaning of those words, ta leiponta, things remaining, for
they show that he was left there for the rectifying of those things, which by
the Apostles departure thence, remained out of order: and not for the repairing
of such future defects, as the Doctor conceives might arise, by reason of the
death of Bishops and Presbyters, and many personal corruptions in doctrine,
discipline and manners, whereunto the Church was subject; for that the Apostle
aimed at any such defects, and their redressing, it is more then he will be
able to prove in have.

But though he cannot make good his own collection from the Sect. 3. ad sect.
10. p. ^2.
Apostles words: 1. Tim. 1. 3. and Tit. 1. 5; yet he can easily throw down his
Refuters inferences, which conclude that Timothy and Titus were no Bishops;
because Titus was sent for out of Candy to Rome, and from thence dispatched
into Dalmatia; And Timothy was not at Ephesus, when the second epistle was
written to him; and he stayed for some good time, with Paul at Rome. These
(says the Doctor) are goodly inferences, to oppose to the evidence gathered
out of the epistles. But in vain braggeth he of his evidence gathered out of
the epistles, since it is made manifest, that the epistles have nothing to
further his purpose. And he wrongeth both Refuter and Reader; in concealing the
maine strength of those Inferences, which he mencioneth; for from those
testimonies of Timothy and Titus their removing to diverse places after their
stay in Ephesus and Creta; he first collecteth, That the Apostles took the
same course of implying Timothy and Titus in their Evangelisticall function
which he had before usually done; and thereupon asks, who may be so bold or
unreasonable, as to imagine that Paulhad made the one Bishop of Ephesus; and
the other Arch Bishop of Creet. The Doct. therefore might have seen (if he
would) that his Refuter argues to this purpose.

They whom the Apostles employed in their Evangelisticall function, after their
stay at Ephesus and in Creta like as he had usually done before: they (I say)
were not made Bishops by him, the one of Ephesus, the other of Creet:

But Timothy and Titus were so employed after they had been left in Ephesus
and in Creet. Therefore they were not made Bishops by the Apostle of Ephesus
and Creet.

The proposition; he deemed so plain, that he thought none would be so bold or
unreasonable as to deny it: for could not the Apostle foresee, what use he was
like to have further of them? or could he not find others, which were at
liberty, whom he might send hither and thither etc. The assu^ptio^ he proved by
their removes before mentioned. To all which the Doctor makes no other answer
then a denial of the conclusion, in saying, It is intolerable boldness and
arrogancy not to acknowledge that Paul had made them Bishops. Only he
contradicts him for saying, that Timothy was not at Ephesus when the second
epistle was written to him: which though it may be mainteyned upon better
probability then the Doct. has to impugn it, yet) I willingly overpasse,
seeing for our purpose it is sufficient; that other places of scripture
sufficiently witness, his attendance on Paul, after he was left at Ephesus.
For as he sent for him to come to Rome (2. Tim. 4. 9. 21.) so he was there with
him at the writing of his epistles to the Philippians and Colossians and to
Philemon as their inscriptions (verse. 1. of each epistle) do show* And from
thence he was sent to the Philippians in Macedonia, as may well be conjectured
by Paul's own words, Phil. 2. 19. 23. And to the Hebrews he says, (Cap. 13.
23.) know that our brother Timothy is delivered: with whom (if he come shortly)
I will see you: which argues that he had been a prisoner; and being elsewhere
employed was by the Apostle expected, that he might again use him for a
companion in his traveiles. It is apparent therefore, that (as the Refuter
says) the Apostle still employed him in his Evangelisticall function. And so
he did Titus also seeing he was called to meet him at Nicopolis. (Tit. 3. 12.)
and afterward being at Rome, was sent from thence to Dalmatia. 2. Tim. 4. 10.
which argues plainly (as is before observed) that they were not by Paul
ordained Bishops.

As for that discourse which the Doctor runs into (sermon: page Sect. 4. ad p.
99
76. and. 77.) concerning the time when Timothy was left at Ephesus: it was
overpassed by the Refuter as an idle digression from the present controversy,
of his being affixed to the perpetual charge of the Church of Ephesus. But
since he urges it a fresh, and says, that their opinion which think that
Timothy was required to stay at Ephesus but for a short time, when Paul went
into Macedonia Acts 20. is contrary to S. Paul's former testimony, 1. Tim. 1.
3., I will examine the strength of his objection, which runs thus; In both
those voyages of Paul into Macedonia mentioned Acts 20. 1. 3. Timothy
accompanied him. Therefore the time of his stay at Ephesus after Paul's going
thither recorded 1. Tim. 1. 3. cannot accord with any of those voiages, Act.
20. The Antecedent he labors to prove (in his sermon) as follows. Not the
first which followed the tumult appeased verse. 1. because i^mediately before
the history of the tumult; it is said that he had sent Timothy into Macedonia,
and himself followed (cap: 19. 22. and 20. 1.) not the second, which was from
Graecia, resolved upon to avoid the ambushment of the Jews, ver. 2. and 3.
because it is expressly said, that Timothy accompanied him; and from Philippi,
went before him to Troas and to Assos, from whence he accompanied him to
M^letum verse 4. 5. to 15. For answer to the first, I grant that Timothy was
sent into Macedonia before the tumult was begun at Ephesus, but that the tumult
followed ymediately upon his sending thither, it is the Doctors vain
imagination, refelled rather then confirmed by S. Lukes story. For he
reports (cap. 19. 22.) that after the sending of Timothy and Erastus into
Macedonia, Paul (epesche chronon) stayed for a time in Asia. The like phrase in
other places imports some good space of stay: as 1. Cor. 16. 7. Act. 15. 33.
and 18. 23. (see Aretius in Acts 15. 33. and Calvin on 1. Cor. 16. 7.) yea the
words themselves epesche chronon, eis ten asian, subsistit ad tempus in Asiam,
scz. profecturus. (ad verbum (ut habet Piscator) inhibuit, scz. susceptam
prof^ctionem mentioned verse. 21.) (these very words I say) do show that he
deferred his own foreintended journey into Macedonia, for a time of purpose to
spend some time in Asia, in visiting and strengthening the Churches. And the
Apostles own words (1. Cor. 16. 5. 7. 8. 9.) do plainly import, that he
resolved to return unto Ephesus, there to set forwards the Lords work;
because he saw both an effectual door opened unto him, to do much good; and
a strong opposition of many adversaries, likely to do hurt, if he should have
departed out of those quarters what hinders then, but that Timothy might
dispatch his journey and return thither again in this time of the Apostles
stay at Ephesus and in Asia; which came between his sending them, and that
Tumult; that is recorded afterward? Wherefore, if this cannot be with better
reason impugned then yet I see; it will follow inevitably, that Timothy his
aboade at Ephesus was very short; seeing it is certain he was with Paul in
Grecia. Acts. 20. 2. 3. 4. when he resolved to return from thence through
Macedonia.

Now to answer the second, that which he supposes most certain is altogether
untrue, viz. that Timothy (with the rest that are named Acts. 20. 4.)
accompanied S. Paul into Macedonia, till he came to Philippi, and there parted
from him, to go before unto Troas; The words of the Evangelist, are that
Timothy and others accompanied him (achrites asias) unto Asia; that is, til he
came to the Coasts of Asia; and that there they (parting from him) went before
and tarried for him and Luke, (with others that continued with him) at Troas.
Whereby it appears that they all took shipping in Graecia, (the better to
avoid the ambushme^ts of the Jews) and so passing by the coasts of Asia (as
they must to go into the coasts of Macedonia) there landed Timothy and the
rest, who were to meet with Paul and his company at Troas, after he had
dispatched his affairs in Macedonia. Wherefore the Doctors misconceiving the
tenor of S. Lukes story, is a greater error then their opinion, that refer
the time, both of Timothies stay at Ephesus (enjoined him 1. Tim. 1. 3.) to
Paul's second voyage toward Macedonia recorded Act. 20. 3. And of S. Paul's
writing his first epistle to Timothy; unto his being in Macedonia there
mentioned verse. 6. For what hinders but that Timothy parting from Paul in the
coasts of Asia near to Ephesus might then be requested to stay at Ephesus; and
be saluted also with letters from Philippi, or some other city in Macedonia?
Surely if the Doctor had not been strangely misledd by his own conceit, he
would never have deemed this a strange conceit in Mr Beza.

So then, it being apparent that the Doctor has nothing of any moment to
object against Timothies stay at Ephesus, in one of Sect. 5.
those voyages, which Paul made into Macedonia; is it not much more safe to
ascribe it to one of these; then to dream (as the D. does) of a new voyage
thither after his deliverance from his bonds at Rome? Specially, seeing he has
no warrant, neither from Gods word, nor from any sound historiographer, to
mainteyn his strange conceit; but only a false supposall, that it cannot
fittly be ascribed to any of his journeys mentioned in the Acts. For how can
he prove that which he so confidently avoucheth, touchiug Paul's deliverance
from his bands at Rome, and renewing of his former traveiles for 9. years
after? And when this is proved, how will he demonstrate, either from Paul's
epistles, or any other momuments of antiquity (from whence himself says
(sermon. p. 78) the Acts of those 9. years must be gathered) that Paul made a
new voyage into Macedonia, and in that traveile passing by Ephesus, left
Timothy there? And if he could prove this; is he not singular in his conceit,
that this was the time of placing Timothy in his Bishopric? For did not Paul
himfelse tell the Elders of Ephesus (when he parted from them at Miletum. (Act.
20. 25.) that he knew that they all among who^ he had gone preaching the
kingdom of God; should see his face no more? And has the Doctor forgotten that
himself teaches us (sermon. page 70. and 88.) and page 63. of this defense)
that the Apostles did substitute Bishops in their rooms, when they were to
discontinue, from the Churches, which they had planted; and that for the
avoiding of factions in their absence? No reason therefore he should think
that Paul would neglect to give them a Bishop; at or before so solemn a
departing from the^; specially seeing (as he knew he should see their face no
more, so) he foresawe that after his departing, there should grievous wolves
enter in, and perverse Teachers spring up from amongst themselves. Act. 20. 29.
30. To conclude therefore this question, thus I argue;

If Timothy had any ordination at all to the Bishopprick of Ephesus, the same
must be at one of those journeys, which he took into Macedonia, Acts 20. 1. 3.

But he had no ordination to his Bishopprick at any of those journeys.

Therefore he had none at all.

The consequence of the proposition is apparent by things last touched, viz.
that at Paul's last parting from those coasts, he knew he should see them no
more, and that no monumentes of Antiquity do ascribe this work to any latter
voyage. And in the first, whereof mention is made Acts 16. 10. 12; Timothy was
his companion, as appears verse. 1. 3. etc. neither was the Church at Ephesus
then planted, much less fit to receive and maintain a Bishop, as may be
gathered from Acts 18. 19. 25. 26. and 19. 1. 7. etc. As for the assumption,
though the Doctor acknowledges the truth of it; yet we rely not on his
conceits, but on far surer grounds. For it is also showed, that he was not
affixed, to the permanent charge of that Church; neither did he long stay
there; but followed the Apostles call, as well after as before. To all which I
add this one reason, more peculiarly fitting the time, mentioned in the
assumption.

If Timothy had not as yet received the episcopal charge of the Ephesian
Church, when Paul took his leave of their Elders. Act. 20. 25. 28. then was he
not ordained in any of his iourneyes into Macedonia, mentioned Act. 20. 1. 2.
3.

But the antecedent is true. Ergo, also the consequent.

The assumption, or Antecedent, I prove as follows; At what time the Church
of Ephesus enjoyed many Bishops, to whom the charge of feeding and governing
the whole flock did apperteine in common, by special charge given them by St.
Paul; and that without any intimation of any superior set over them, to whose
direction they should yield obedience: at that time, Timothy had not yet
received such an episcopal charge as gives him a singularity of pre-eminence
above all other ministers in that Church.

But at the time of Paul's taking his leave of the Elders of Ephesus Act. 20.
28. the Church of Ephesus had many Bishops, to whom the charge of feeding and
governing the whole flock did apperteine in common etc.

Therefore at that time Timothy had not received such an episcopal charge etc.

The assumption is manifest by the words of the Apostle Acts 20. 28. and the
proposition is most apparent by the manifest opposition, betwixt the singular
regiment of one Bishop, and the joint charge of many. Moreover, it is justified
by the Doctors secret allowance, (sermon. page 18. and 69.) and very plainly by
him, that gave the Doctor best satisfaction in this whole controversy, perpet.
govern. page 223. There was, says he, a time when the Church was governed by
the co^mon-advice of the Presbyters, as Ierom affirms. In this time spoke
Paul to the Presbyters at Ephesus, Act. 20. 28. Neither let the Doctor think
here to stopp our mouths, with the shifting answer which he elsewhere uses,
viz, that these Presbyters governed only in private, and as under the Apostle;
who kept in his own hands the episcopal authority; for this is to co^tradict
the Apostle himself, who plainly resigneth to them the whole charge of that
Church, as knowing that he should see them no more. verse. 28. 32. with 25. 26.
It is a clear truth therefore, that Timothy not having then any sole
pre-eminence in the government of that Church, was not their Bishop; and
consequently, he was not at all ordained their Bishop, as is before showed.

His allegations follow, from diverse authors, which report of Sect. 6. ad
sect. 10. p. 91.
Timothy and Titus that they lived and died, the one at Ephesus, the other in
Creet. His Refuter told him, that he might credit the report of his authors,
and yet deny them to be diocesan Bishops; and good reason he had so to tell
him; because an episcopal function cannot be concluded from their living and
dying in that place. He now tells us that it suffices his purpose, to wit,
to prove that they held their ordinary residence there, which the objection
denies; therefore again I tell him, that unless he will fit the objection to
his own strength; and so contend with his own shadow, he must prove more then
an ordinary residence; even a band of continuance there, as their proper
charge. For till this be effected, his proofs are to as little purpose as
those that many papists allege for Peter's Bishopric at Rome; because toward
his later time, he there lived for his ordinary residence, and at length there
died. I add this, to provoke the Doctor to a better examination of his own
witnesses; that they do not prove such an ordinary residence, as he would
justify by them. For some of them, are worthy of no great credit, as
Vincentius, Antonius, and Nicephorus, authors, on whom the leaden Leagend is
grounded. And Dorotheus one of the most ancient that he alleges is much
abused. For he reports thus of Timothy in Synopsi; Evangelium Jesus Christi
Ephesi exorsus Illyricum usque, et in vniversa Hellade praedicavit, ubi and
mortuus et honorifice s^pultus est. That beginning at Ephesus he preached the
gospel of Jesus Christ, to Illyricum and through all Greece, where he did and
was honorably buried; does not this directly contradict that, which the Doctor
alleges him for; and plainly argue that he was an Evangelist as we affirm?
Come we now to the second objection.

Chapt. 10. Concerning the second objection against the Bishopriks of Timothy
and Titus handled by the Doctor. lib. 4. cap. 4. sect. 11. and 12. page 93-97.
THe second objection lies thus, Timothy and Titus were Evangelists; Sect. 1.
ad sect. 11. page ^3.
Ergo, they were not ordained Bishops of Ephesus and Creete. This consequence
the Doctor denied, because their being Evangelists did not hinder, but that
when they were assigned to certain Churches, and furnished with episcopal
power, they became Bishops. And to remove this answer, the Refuter proves
first, that their being Evangelists did hinder their assigning to certain
churches without which they could not be Bishops. 2. That when they were left
at Ephesus and in Creete, they received no such new authority, as he calls
episcopal, neither needed any such furnishing as he supposes. The first is
proved (not by 2. reasons as the Doctor imagines, but) by one disiunctive
argument, in this manner,

What could not be done, without either confounding the offices, which God had
distinguished, (Ephesians. 4. 11.) or depriving Timothy and Titus of an higher
calling to thrust them into a lower; that the Apostle Paul neither would nor
could do.

But to make Timothy and Titus Bishops, when they were Evangelists, could not
be done, without either confounding the offices which God has distinguished,
Ephesians. 4. 11. or depriving them of an higher calling, to thrust them into a
lower.

Ergo, the making of Timothy and Titus Bishops, when they were Evangelists, was
a thing which the Apostle neither could nor would do.

The assumption is very scornfully rejected by the Doctor, because in his
imagination, the parts thereof are nice points, which none of the fathers did
ever understand; but his triumph is vain and unseasonable, whiles we are in
examining by the verdict of the scriptures, or by reason grounded thereon, what
to determine of this controversy. Wherefore, to pass by this answerlesse
answer, I will endeavor to draw the reader to the consideration of that I have
to allege in defense of our assumption as follows,

To conioyne the offices of Evangelists and Bishops and Pastors in one person
at one time, is to confound the offices which are distinguished, Ephesians. 4. 11.
And to take from an Evangelist his evangelisticall function, when he is
invested into the office of a Bishop or Pastor, assigned to the charge of one
certain Church, is to deprive him of an higher, and to thrust him into a lower
calling.

But to make Timothy and Titus Bishops, when they were Evangelists, could not
be done without, either conioyning both offices in one person, or taking their
first office from them, when the later is given to them.

Ergo, neither can it be done, without either confounding the offices, which
are distinguished Ephesians. 4. 11; or depriving them of the higher function; to
thrust them into a lower.

Here the proposition is impugned in both the branches thereof, first therefore
for the former thus I argue. It is apparent, by the very text, Ephesians. 4. 11.
and by other scriptures, that the several functions of Ministry there
mentioned, were by Christ distributed to several persons, and not committed
two or more of them to one man at once. Ergo, to conioyne the offices of
Evangelists and Bishops, in one person at one time, is to confound the offices,
which by God are distinguished. For the manifestation of the antecedent, first
let the text be weighed, Ephesians. 4. 11. 12. he gave some to be Apostles; and
some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers. He says
not, he gave some to be Pastors only, and some to be Evangelistes and Pastors:
or that some were Apostles only; and some Apostles and Evangelists, but (as
before) he gave some to be Apostles, and some to be Evangelists etc. thereby
signifying that such as had the calling of Apostles, had not also the office of
Evangelists. Neither did the Evangelists hold therewithal the office of
Pastors. 2. This is further confirmed by the similitude which the Apostle uses
(1. Cor. 12. 14,* 28. of many members in one body, which have (not all one and
the same, but each of them, his several office. The eye is not an ear;
neither does it serve the body in the office of hearing, or smelling etc. in
like manner all are not Apostles, nor all Prophets, etc. but God has ordained,
some to one office, and some to another, as first Apostles, secondly Prophets,
etc.

3. And of this distinction we have examples. For touching the extraordinary
Ministers (of Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists) we find them distributed to
several persons. Luke 16. 13. Act. 1. 26. and cap. 11. 27. 28. and 21. 8. And
for ordinary functions, there were at Jerusalem Deacons and Elders. Act. 6. 3.
6. and 11. 31. at Philippi, Bishops and Deacons, Phil. 1. 1. but of two or more
offices combined in one person at once, there cannot be yielded any one clear
example in holy scripture.

All that the Doct. objecteth to infringe this is of small moment; viz. that as
Apostles might be Evangelists, as we see in Matthew and Sect. 2.
John; so Evangelists might be Bishops, as we se in Mark. (page 95) For the
name of Eva^gelist by ancient or later writers given to Matthew and John,
because they wrote those histories, which are kat hexochen, called Evangelia,
Gospells; proves not, that they had that function of Evangelists, which is
distinguished from the Apostles, Ephesians. 4. 11. The scripture is best expounded
by the scripture; and therefore we must by Evangelists there, understand such
as have the name given them in other parts of the new testament, as Acts. 21.
8. and 2. Tim. 4. 5. And as for Mark, we know him to be an Eva^gelist; not
only because he wrote one of the 4. Gospells; but rather because he was (as
Timothy) a companion and fellow helper to the Apostles: but his Bishopric we
disclaim no less then Timothees; and for the same reason, because he was an
Evangelist by his particular function: neither can the Doct. herein contradict
us, without contradiction as well to himself as to the truth. For he confesses
(as the truth in deed is) that the word Evangelist specially taken, signifies
the extraordinary fu^ctio^, of those in the primitive Church, which went up and
down preaching the Gospel, not being affixed to any certain place. And
particularly, of Timothy and Titus he says, they were Evangelists whiles they
accompanied the Apostle Paul in his traveiles, and were not assigned to any
certain place. From hence therefore I thus frame a 2. argument; to prove, that
the combyning of the functions of Evangelists and Bishops; or Pastors in one
person at once, is a confounding of offices, which by their first institution;
were distinguished;

Whatsoever offices are severed by properties of an opposite nature; they
cannot at once be conjoined in one person, without confounding the functio^s
which by their first institution were distinguished.

But the function of Evangelists and Bishops are severed by properties of an
opposite nature; (for the one is extraordinary, and not bound to any certain
place, the other is ordinary and tied to one certain place.)

Ergo the functions of Evangelists and Bishops or Pastors, cannot be conjoined
at once in one person, without confounding the functio^s, which in their first
institution were distinguished.

And by this it may be seen that the Doctors comparison halteth, when he would
persuade that Timothy and Titus might be Bishops, although they were
Evangelists like as the Apostles Matthew and John, were also Evangelists; for
that Evangelistship given to Matthew and John by that name of Evangelists is
far differing from the Evangelisticall function of Timothy and Titus, neither
is there such an opposition between their Evangelist-ship, and the
Apostleship; as there is between that Evangelistical function, which he gives
to Timothy and Titus; and their episcopal office. For Matthew and John ceased
not to be Apostles, when they became Evangelists: but concerning Timothy and
Titus he plainly affirms, that they laid aside their former office when they
undertook the later. For he says (page 95.) that after they were placed
Bishops, they traveiled not up and down, as in former times, but ordinarily
remeyned with their flocks.

To come then to the latter branch of the Refuters argument, Sect. 3. ad sect.
12. p. 95.
(which affirms, that they were deprived of an higher calling, and thrust
into a lower, if they ceased to be Evangelists, when they were made Bishops)
the truth of it depends upon this assertion, that the Evangelists were in
degree of ministry superior to all ordinary Pastors or Bishops, which is so
generally acknowledged for a truth, that the Reader may well admire at the
Doctors boldness, that shameth not to set an Evangelist in equal rank with
presbyters, and so (in his apprehension) in a degree below his Bishops. For
herein he swarveth not only from the common Tenent of the best, in other
reformed churches, (see Calvin in Ephesians. 4. 11. Beza. de grad: minist: page
133. 134.) which give to all the extraordinary functions, of Apostles, Prophets
and Evangelists, a preheminent degree above all the ordinary offices of Pastors
or Bishops; but also from such as have pleaded the same cause before him. (D.
Dove, Def. of Church Government, page 17. lin. 18. and perpet gover. page 50.
51.) And therefore as the D. will have James to remeine an Apostle, though he
were Bishop of Jerusalem: so will Bishop Bilso^ have Timothy and Titus to be
both Evangelists and Bishops, perpet. gover. page 233. 234. But to leave the
mention of men, however famous for learning and esteemed in the Church; can we
have any better line, whereby to measure out the pre-eminence of each
ministerial function, then that priority of place and order, wherein the
Apostles has set them? Ephesians. 4, 11. from hence therefore, I thus argue.

All the ordinary functions of ministry comprised under the name of Pastors,
and Teachers; are in degree inferior to the extraordinary functions of
Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists; as the order of their standing Ephesians. 4.
11. shows. But the function of Bishops which the Doct. ascribes to Timothy
and Titus, is an ordinary function of ministry and such as himself comprizeth
under the name of Pastors page 95. Ergo, it is also inferior in degree to the
extraordinary function of Evangelists as well as to Apostles and Prophets.

Now to reduce to this argument, the Doctors discourse (page 94. and 95) the
sum is this. First he makes. 4. sorts of Evangelists. viz, such as taught
the Gospel by writing, as the 4. Evangelists, Math. Mark, Luke and John. 2.
any one that does Evangelize or preach the Gospel. 3. the. 72. disciples
imediately called of Christ and sent by him to preach the gospel; of which
number was Philip, Act. 21. 8. 4. Some others assumed by the Apostles to be
their companions in their traveiles, and assistants in the Ministry; and of
this sort were Timothy and Titus, whiles they accompanied Paul in his traveiles
and were not assigned to any certain place. Secondly to apply this
distribution unto the Apostles meaning, Ephesians 4. 11.; he acknowledges no other
there comprised under the name of Evangelists; then the 4. Evangelists, so
called kat hexochen, and perhaps the 72, doubtfully he speaks of them (page
95.) as being loath (it seems) to acknowledge, that they had any pre-eminence
above his diocesan Bishops because the Fathers say of them (as he observes
page 94.) that they also had but the degree of the presbytery. And therefore I
guess, he will award the stroke of the former argument, by this distinction
thus, viz. that the ordinary functions of ministry comprised under the name of
Pastors and Teachers, are not inferior in degree to the later sort of
Evangelists, which attended on the Apostles, but only to the 4. Evangelists,
and perhaps to the. 72. because these only, and not the other, are meant by
the name of Evangelists in that place.

And to join issue with the Doctor, I affirm the contrary, viz. Section (...)
that by Evangelists in Ephesians. 4. 11. we are to understand all those, and those
only, which in an extraordinary function (distinct from the Apostles and
Prophets) traveiled too and fro, preaching the Gospel; whether they were
imediately called of Christ; as Philip is supposed to be; or were assumed by
the Apostles to be their companions and assistants, as Timothy, Titus, Mark and
many others. And first to prove that which he denies, (viz. that the later
sort of Evangelists are comprised under that name in Ephesians. 4. 11. as well as
the former) for brevity sake in stead of larger syllogismes, I tender to him
and to the judicious Reader these several arguments nakedly propounded. 1. the
D. confesses that under the name of Evangelists specially taken, the later
sort, (in which number Timothy and Titus were) are no less comprised, then the
former, because this was common to them all, that they went up and down
preaching the Gospel, not being affixed to any certain place. It seems
therefore, he was not well advised, when he admitted the one sort and denied
the other, to be understood by the word, Ephesians. 4. 11. unless he could yield
(as he cannot) some sufficient reason for the difference he puts between
them. 2. Again, he confesses that the later sort were in an extraordinary
function. Either therefore he must deny all extraordinary functions of
ministry to be comprised Ephesians. 4. 11. or he must refer one sort of
Evangelists to an other name, as of Apostles, Prophets or Pastors etc. both
which are absurd, and I doubt not but to make good the censure, if the Doctor
require it. Now whereas he refers the word Evangelists, Ephesians. 4. 11.
principally to those 4. that wrote the gospels; this is not easily proved, to
accord with the meaning of the Apostle, seeing that work of penning the
Evangelicall history, makes them not to stand in a differing function of
Ministry from all others. For the Ministeries there mentioned are all
distinct functions of preachers; And if the writing of Christ's history made a
different function; why should not the writing of the Apostles Acts make a
second, and the writing of the Evangelicall, or Canonical epistles, a third:
and the receiving and penning of the revelation a 4. And as for the. 72. or
rather 70. (For Luke mencioneth 70. not 72. chosen by Christ. cap. 10. 1.) how
confident soever the Doct. be in assigning to them an Evangelisticall function;
yet we cannot hastily subscribe to him therein; much less can we grant that
which he affirms of Philip, that he laid aside the evangelisticall function,
to take a temporary Deaconship Act. 6. and so returned to it again: but these
are parerga, by-controversies about which we will not contend.

Let us therefore attend to the reason urged by the D. to prove, Sect. (...).
ad page 95. 96.
that Timothy and Titus were advanced and not debased, when they were made
Bishops. For, says he, whereas before they were but Presbyters, though called
Evangelists in a large sense; they were now made the Apostles of those
Churches, and by imposition of hands ordained Bishops. Behold here quot
axiomata, totidem paradoxa, as many paradoxes as axioms. For how will he
prove, 1. that they were before but presbyters, The D. beg geth 3. times
together, and contradicts himself in one sentence. etc.
2. called Evangelists in a larger sense; 3. now made Apostles of those
Churches. 4. and by imposition of hands made Bishops? The two last are nakedly
sent forth, without any one ragge to cover their shame; the second is a
manifest contradiction to the truth before acknowledged by himself page 94.
where he comprizeth Timothy and Titus, no less then Philip and some others,
under the name of Evangelists, specially taken for the extraordinary function
of those that went up and down, preaching the gospel, being not affixed to
any certain place. And this truth thus acknowledged convinces his first
assertion of a palpable falsehood. For how could they be but presbyters, seeing
they stood in the extraordinary function of Evangelists? Forsooth he says,
th^^ what the fathers say of the 72 disciples (that they had but the degree of
the Presbytery) the same may of Timothy and Titus, much more be verifyed. But
does he no^ abuse the fathers, in making them the authors of his own paradoxe?
For, do they match the 72 disciples, or any other Evangelists, with the degree
of Presbyters any otherwise, then they do the Apostles, with the degree or
place of Bishops? Neither is this done to set the Evangelists below Bishops, or
to lift up Bishops above Prophets, but to countenance that superiority, which
in their times Bishops held above Presbyters; by a comparison of the like
difference, which they apprehended between the Apostles, and the 70.
disciples. We have therefore better arguments to prove the contrary assertion.
viz. That Timothy and Titus were in degree superior to all ordinary
presbyters; for (besides that already gathered from Ephesians. 4. 11.) it is
apparent by that honor which the Apostle, and by that obedience, which the
Churches, to which they were sent, gave unto them, whiles they were his
fellow-helpers and companions in his traveiles. 1. Cor. 4. 17. and 16. 10. 16.
2. Cor. 1. 1. and 7. 13. 15. and 8. 23. Philip. 1. 1. and 2. 20. 22. Wherefore
I conclude once again, that to make them Pastors or Bishops; when they were
Evangelists, is (not to advance them but rather) to throw them down from a
higher degree of Ministry to a lower.

In the second place, (whereas the Doctor had said that Timothy and Titus were
furnished with episcopal power, at the time of Sect. 6. (...) page 9^.
their stay in Ephesus and Creet, by S. Paul's appointment; and the Refuter
denied that they received any new authority, which before they had not etc.)
the D. now argues against his Refuter in this manner; If they received no new
authority, why did Timothy receive a new ordination, by imposition of hands
whereof the Apostle speaks (1. Tim. 4. 14. and 2. Tim. 1. 6.) and which the
Fathers understand of his ordination to be Bishop. I grant that Paul
mentions hands-imposition on Timothy and that some of the fathers do thereby
understa^d his ordination to be Bishop. Notwithstanding I say he cannot prove
either from those words, or any of the fathers writings, that the imposition of
hands mentioned by Paul was a second ordination to a new office, or a
furnishing of him, with any new Ministerial authority which before he wanted.
What the Fathers speak of his ordination to be Bishop, may be construed (as is
before noted (concerning James) their speeches are, which say that James was
ordained Bishop of Jerusalem) of a new or differing employment in the work of
the Ministry, for the temporary charge he received, which argues no new
authority or office imposed on him. 2. And whereas he asks whether men were
admitted to the extraordinary function of Evangelists by the ordinary means of
imposing hands? his own pen has given him a direct answer page 94. lin. 32.
where he says, that Timothy and Titus (who were of the later sort of
Evangelists, and therefore in an extraordinary function (lin. 15. of the same
page) were ordained Ministers of the gospel by imposition of hands; which I
would feign know how he can prove, by any testimony divine or humane; unless
he carry those words of Paul (1. Tim. 4. 14. and 2. Tim. 1. 6.) to his first
ministerial function.

3. Again, he asks, may we think that any but the Apostles (being not
assigned as Bishops to several Churches) had that authority wheresoever they
became, which Timothy had at Ephesus and Titus in Creet? And he adds, verily
Philip the Evangelist had not authority to impose hands for the furnishing of
men with graces for the Ministry; but the Apostles Peter and John were sent
to Samaria for that purpose. Act. 8. 5.-17. If it be his drift thus to argue;
Philip the Evangelist had no authority, to give graces fit for the Ministry
by imposition of hands: Therefore besides the Apostles none but Bishops, had
that authority wheresoever they came, which Timothy and Titus had at Ephesus
and in Creet; I answer his reasoning is many ways faulty. For he cannot prove,
either that Bishops have, or that Timothy and Titus had, that authority by
imposition of hands to give such graces. Neither is it true (which his words
import) that the gifts of the holy Ghost given by the hands of Peter and John
(Act 8. 17.) were graces fitting the persons that received them, to the work of
the Ministry. Wherefore although it should be granted, that the Evangelist
Philip had no authority to give those peculiar graces; yet he might have as
great authority, wheresoever he came, as Timothy and Titus had in the Churches
of Ephesus and Creet; so that his assertion employed in his quaestion (viz. that
besides the Apostles, only Bishops had the like authority to that which
Timothy and Titus had) has no color of any sound reason to uphold it. Yea it
is strongly confuted by that which he seems to applaud in Zanchy on Ephesians. 4.
11. (page 95) viz. that the former sort of Evangelists, and the Prophets also
did govern the Churches now one, then an other. For how should Churches be
governed by them, if they had not the like power and authority for government
that Timothy and Titus had?

From the Doctors reasoning, in defense of his own assertion, Sect. 7. ad page
96.
let us pass to the answer yielded by him to his Refut: who argued in this
manner, Timothy and Titus were to exercise their Evangelisticall function in
those places. (For Paul bids Timothy after he had bin at Ephesus to do the
work of an Evangelist) Ergo they receyved no new authority at their placing
there, which they had not before; neither laid they aside but retained still
their Evangelisticall function. The Doctor denies the Antecedent, and
contradicts the proof thereof. Whereas Paul wills Timothy to do the work
of an Evangelist, what is thee, says he, but evaggelizesthai, to preach the
Gospel diligently. etc. the word Evangelist being there taken in the general
sense? Here we are put to prove that the name of an Evangelist is here taken,
not in a general sense; but in a more special for the function of an
Evangelist; which may appear by these circumstances. 1. First the very phrase
it self, to do the work of an Evangelist, cannot in reason be co^strued
otherwise, then q. d. to do the work which an Evangelist is bound unto, by his
particular function; like as in the like phrase, the work of an Apostle, the
signs of an Apostle, the commandment of the Apostles, and the foundation of
the Apostles. 1. Cor. 1. 9. 2. Cor. 12. 12. 2. Pet. 3. 2. and Ephesians. 2. 20. the
name of an Apostle is specially taken for the office of Apostleship. 2. It is
the Apostles purpose (see Mr. Calvin upon the place) by the honorable mention
of his office, to provoke him to use the greater diligence therein, thereby to
gain the greater reverence among those, that should behold his zeal and
faithfulness in his calling. But the special function of an Evangelist, serves
better, then the general name of a preacher of the Gospel, both to animate him
unto watchfulnes, and to procure him authority amongst those, with whom he
conversed. 3. Moreover since it is known and confessed, that he was once an
Evangelist; if either he had ceased so to be, or if he had borne at this time a
more honorable office, (as the Doctor supposes) in all likelihood, the Apostle
would have give^ him some other title, least others should be led into an error
by this name.

4. Lastly, if we look to the use of the word evaggelistes in other places we
shall find it no where carried in the Apostolical writings to a general
signification as the Doctor fancieth; but rather is appropriated to that
extraordinary function of Evangelists, which then was known by that name as
Act. 21. 8. and Ephesians. 4. 11. Wherefore since it is a firm and undoubted axiom
in divinity, that we are to receive that interpretation of any word or phrase,
which best accords with the scope of the place, it self, and the use of the
like in other places, I will hold it for a truth not to be gainsayd, that the
word Evangelist ought here to be taken (not in the general sense but) for the
special function of an Evangelist known by that name.

We now come to Zuinglius his testimony, alleged by the D. Sect. 8. ad page
97.
to prove that their being Evangelists, did not hinder them from being Bishops.
His case is very desperate (it seems) since he is drive^ to crave relief of
one so well known to be a professed enemy to to the Lordly jurisdiction of
Diocesan and Provincial Prelates. But what Zuinglius? forsooth, that Philip the
Evangelist who had been one of the Deacons, was afterward Bishop of Caesarea,
and James the Apostle was Bishop of Jerusalem, and diverse of the Apostles, when
they ceased from their peregrinations, became Bishops of certain Churches.
Which says the D, may be much more verified of the Evangelists; In deed if
this last gloss, had been Zuinglius his words, his evidence had been far
sitter for his purpose then it is, and yet would it have done him no service
till he had proved that Timothy and Titus had given over their Evangelisticall
traveiles, which he will never be able to effect, while he breaths. But now,
all that Zuinglius speaks for him, is such as (if he rightly conceive his
meaning) he will be very loath (I suppose) to subscribe unto. For he is so far
from affirming (as the Doctor intimates to his reader) that Philip after his
Deaconship, was first an Evangelist, and after that became the Bishop of
Caesarea; that he rather cites those words of Luke, Act. 21. 8. (where he is
called an Evangelist) to prove him to be a Bishop: for these are his words (De
ecclesiastica sive ratione et officio co^cionandi. fol. 48.) Quo in loco illud
nobis primo notandum est, Philippum hunc Caesariensis ecclesiae Evangelistam,
episcopum vel pastorem fuisse etc. In which place, that is first of us to be
noted, that this Philip the Evangelist of the Church of Samaria, was Bishop or
Pastor etc. whereby it appears, as also by the words afeerwards remembered by
the Doctor (constat iuxta Pauli sententiam idem esse episcopi, et Evangelistae
officium) and by many other speeches in that treatise, that he confounds the
names of Evangelistes Prophets and Pastors in one office. But let us see how
the D. removes the Refuters answer. First he says that Zuinglius speaks
according to the phrase of histories and other ancient writers, who take not
the name of Bishop properly, when they give it to James or any other Apostle
(as Doct. Whitak. has rightly observed The Doct. reasons from that which is
no cause etc. deceitfully.
de pontif. romans page 303,) the Doctor replyeth. (...). that if Zuinglius spoke
according to the phrase of histories etc. then and (therefore) he spoke
according to the truth: from whence I infer that if Zuinglius have spoken the
truth in this matter, then the Doctor is in an error and reasons deceitfully
a non causa pro causa. For whereas he would persuade that James was properly a
Bishop, because the Fathers so intititle him. Zuinglius says expressly of James
Hunc Hieron: et omnes simul vetusti patres, Hierosol: episcopum nominant non
aliam ab causam, quam quod in ea urbe sedem fixam posuisset. Ierom and with him
all the ancient farhers, call him Bishop of Jerusalem, for no other cause, but
for that he had made his fixed abode in that city.

2. The Doctor asks; Although it be true that the Apostles could not properly
be called Bishops, what is that to Timothy and Titus, whom he has proved to
have been particularly assigned to the Ch: of Ephesus and Creet, where also
they lived and dyed? I answer, has he not by as good proofs showed James his
assignement to the Church of Jerusalem and his living and dying there? If then
(all this notwithstanding) it be true that James was not properly a Bishop,
does he not reason loosely, when from such assignement of Timothy and Titus, he
concludes them to be properly Bishops? The refuters second answer is, that it
is manifest by Zuinglius his writings, he neither thought they were, nor any
other might be a diocesan Bishop. Whereto the Doctor replyeth, belike he spoke
otherwise then he thought, and then adds an other testimony of Zuinglius,
which says, that Timothy was a Bishop and that the office of an Evangelist and
of a Bishop is all one: where behold with what conscience the Doctor wresteth
the words of his own witness from their meaning; for there is nothing more
evident to them that peruse Zuinglius his writings then this; that with him
every preacher of the gospel at this day, has as good right to the name of an
Evangelist, and of a Bishop, as to the title of a presbyter or pastor: vocat ad
se Paulus Act. 20. presbyter^s. i. episcopos, Evangelistas vel ecclesiae
ministros. lib. de ecclesia fol. 48. And Tom. 1. fol. 115. (in his parenesis to
the cities of Helvetia) affirms that the Bishop spoken of 1. Tim. 3. was any
Pastor or Minister of the Church. Quo in loco (says he) discimus omnes
ecclesiarum ministros episcopos esse, et dici, and eiusdem sententia assertorum
habemus Hieromimum. and fol. 117. having cited Tit. 1. 5. 7. to the same
purpose, he adds. Evidenter demonstrat bis locus etc. this place evidently
shows, that a Bishop is no other then a Minister of the Church, whom we use
to call parochum a parish priest or Minister. But that the Reader may see, how
much Zuinglius misliked the large jurisdiction and singular pre-eminence of
Bishops at this day in use, and that he was too great a favorite of the parish
discipline; to be wrested by the Doctor in defense of the monarchical (or
rather in his judgment Tyranicall) government of diocesan Bishops, I pray the
reader to have patience till we come to the first of the Doctors 3. arguments
handled in the third part of this reply.

Chap. 11. Containing an answer to another of the the D. Arguments concerning
the Bishoprics of Timothy and Titus handled sect. 13-16 from page 98. to 104.
FRom these two objections (in the pursuit whereof, the Doctor Sect. 1. ad
sect. 13. page 98.
fedd himself with a vain hope, to gain some advantage) he now returns to
give a fresh onset on his Adversary in this manner;

The supposed Evangelisticall function of Timothy and Titus, was to end with
their persons, and admitted no succession: as being both extraordinary and
temporary. But the function and authority which they had as being assigned to
certain Churches viz. of Ephesus and of Creet (consisting specially in the
power of ordination and jurisdiction) was not to end with their parsons, but
to be continued in their successors. Therefore the function and authority which
Timothy and Titus had, as being assigned to Ephesus and Creet; was not
extraordinary and Evangelisticall.

This argument (laid down, sermon. page 79.) his Refuter took to be opposed
against the Antecedent of that objection which affirms Timothy and Titus to
be Evangelists; and who would not have so judged, seeing the conclusion denies
their function and authority to be Evangelisticall. But he says that the
introduction premised before this argument (hereof we may conclude thus)
shows that he intended not to deny or disprove that Antecedent, but to bring
a new supply of argument to prove that Timothy and Titus were Bishops of
Ephesus and Creet. Which difference I refer wholly to the judgment of the
indifferent reader, not doubting but he will discharge the Refuter from all
blame either of wilful, or of negligent mistaking. And whereas he flatly
denies that he does deny they were Evangelists; that he may not hide himself
under a cloud, I desire him plainly to answer us, whither they remained
Evangelists after that calling, which he supposes they had to be Bishops? If
yea, why does he insinuate the contrary (page 95. lin. 24. etc.) when to
justify this, that they were not Evangelists, but Pastors and Bps, he says,
that after they were placed the one in Ephesus, the other in Creet, they
traveiled not up and down as in former times, when they accompanied the
Apostles, but ordinarily remained with their flocks. If no, why makes he his
Reader believe, that in the conclusion of his argument above mentioned, he
neither does nor did intend to deny that they were Evangelists. But (as often
before so here again) we must and will follow him in his own way, when he
says his purpose was from the former conclusion thus to argue;

The function and authority which Timothy and Titus exercised in Ephesus and
Creet, was either extraordinary and Evangelisticall, as the disciplinarians
teach: or else ordinary, and episcopal as the prelatists affirm: But it was
not extraordinary and evangelisticall. Therefore ordinary and episcopal.

Here the assumption is the conclusion of the former argument; and the
proposition he takes for granted, as if it fully delivered the points of
difference, between us and him with his Associates in the cause he pleads.
Wherefore we must take leave to lay down our own opinion more clearly, which
is this in few words. First we distinguish function from authority; both which
the Doct. co^foundeth; for though we affirm, their function there exercised to
be Evangelisticall and therefore extraordinary; yet we do not so avouch of
their whole authority nor yet of that authority or power of ordination and
jurisdiction, whereof he speaks in the assumptio^ of his former argument; as
the Doct. may perceive by the Refuters words, whereof he took notice page 84.
Again, we distinguish betwixt authority (simply considered and in general) to
perform the works of preaching, and ordeyning etc. And that particular or
personal authority which for the exercise of these works, was invested in
their persons; and gave them allowance in all places where they came to
exercise the works of their calling: And therefore though we grant (as before
is noted) the authority it self in abstracto and simply considered) to be
ordinarily and perpetually necessary: yet we affirm their personal authority
to be Evangelisticall, because all the authority they had did flow from their
Evangelisticall function. For like as the Apostles preached and baptized by the
authority of their Apostleship; so did Timothy and Titus both Preach and impose
hands etc. by virtue of their Evangelistship. So then to make answer, first to
the D. disjunctive argument, 1. as touching the function which Timothy and
Titus exercised in Ephesus and Creet, we affirm it to be extraordinary and
Evangelisticall; and therefore in that respect utterly reject his Assumption.
2. touching their authority (consisting as he says specially in ordinatio^
and jurisdictio^) if he take it personally for that which was invested in them,
by the ministerial function which they there exercised: then I reject the
assumption also in that behalf: but if it be taken simply and at large for any
authority to exercise the like works; either in the same Churches or in any
other; then I disclaim his proposition. For we are so far from affirming
this authority, to be proper unto Evangelists; that we hold it rather common
to every Pastor, in his own congregation. Let the reader see what the Doctor
observes for this purpose page 79. and 84. and what we have added, (cap. 8.
sect. 12) touching their pre-eminence above other Ministers, and the
continuance thereof, in the presidents of Synods.

Now to come to his Argument first set down, (and to pass by that fault, of
mencioning function only in the proposition; whereas Sect. 2. ad page 98. 99.
authority is also joined with it in the assumption and conclusion) the
Assumption which was denied by the Refuter, must (for the clearing of his true
meaning) be divided into two members, the one serving properly for the plain
and natural assumptio^. viz. that the function and authority which they
exercised in Ephesus and Creete, was not to end with their persons; but to be
continued in their successors: the other serving either for the Medius terminus
of a prosyllogism to co^firm the former; or at least for an explication of his
meaning therein. viz. that the function and authority which they had or
exercised in those Churches, was such as assigned them to the particular care
thereof, and consisted specially in the power of ordination and jurisdiction:
the refuter (for brevitie sake omitting, to distinguish these two differing
propositions infolded in one) fitted his answer to the later, affirming (as the
truth is) that therein he does but beg the question; in as much as he assumeth
for The Doct. beggeth.
truth these two points before convinced of falsehood. viz. 1. that they were
assigned to the perpetual charge of those Churches. 2. And that their
authority was such a preheminent power in ordination and jurisdiction, as he
ascribes elsewhere to Bishops. If prejudice (or rather malice as it may be
feared) had not blinded the Doctor, he might have as well discerned this, as
some others have done, that borrowed no light from the Refuter by any private
conference with him, to find out his true meaning, and then he might have
spared that outrageous calumniation He roves and raves as men use to do, which
being at a nonplus would feign seem to answer somewhat. But to answer his
Assumption, as he has now nakedly propounded it, (viz. that the function and
authority which they exercised in Ephesus and Creete, was not to end with
their persons, but to be continued in their successors.) I answer, with the
distinction before used, to wit that their personal authority, perished with
their function; and therefore in that respect the assumption is false;
howsoever there remained unto perpetual succession an authority to perform
the same ministerial works, which they exercised by virtue of their temporary
function. So that, if he will prove the assumption in that sense wherein it is
denied: then must he prove the perpetuity (not only of their authority in
general, and for the works sake which they performed, but also) of their
particular function, and of that personal authority, which they there
exercised; so as neither the one nor the other did end with their persons, but
was continued in their successors; the proof therefore of his assu^ption must
thus run,

That function and authority which is ordinary and perpetually necessary, not
only for the welbeing, but also for the very being of the visible Churches:
was not to end with the persons of Timothy and Titus, but to be continued in
their successors.

But the function and authority which they exercised in Ephesus and Creet, is
ordinary and perpetually necessary, not only for the wel-being, but also for
the very being of the visible Churches.

Therefore the function and authority which they there exercised, was not to
end in their persons; but to be continued in their successors.

Here the Assumption was denied; because however the power of ordination and
jurisdiction be perpetually necessary; yet there is no necessity, that there
should be in every Church an Evangelist (that is to say, one endowed with that
peculiar function and personal authority which Timothy and Titus had) for the
good ordering and executing of that power. The Doctor says, he did not affirm
that which is denied, scz. that there must be an Eva^gelist in every Church:
neither is he willing to see, that his assumption does both in effect affirm as
much; and plainly avouche, what he dares not to justify, to wit, that the
very function which Timothy and Titus exercised, is perpetually necessary, not
only for the wel-being; but also for the very being of the visible Churches.

To avoid this gross absurdity, he will needs now divide their Sect. 3. ad
sect. 14. page 100. 101.
function from their authority; which hitherto he has conjoined. For thus he
explaineth his Assumption. The function which Timothy and Titus exercised was
ordinary; and their authority perpetually necessary etc. of which two points
he says, his Refuter grants the later, and does not touch the former; as if
the former branch could escape his touch, when his whole assumption is rejected
as false; or there were no difference, betwixt that power of ordination and
jurisdiction in general, which the Refuter grants to be perpetually
necessary; and that peculiar authority, which was invested in Timothy and
Titus, by reason of their particular function, which was before denied to be
continued in their successors. But in truth, (as he has O sweet D
now distributed and construed the parts of his assumption,) in the second he
idly affirms, what was never denied; and so leaves untouched the point which
he should have proved: And in the first, he offends more grossly, for he
borrows the conclusion of his first argument, to make good the Assumption of
the same. Before he proved the function of Timothy and Titus to be ordinary and
episcopal; because it was not extraordinary and evangelisticall: And now to
prove that their function was continued in their successors, and therefore not
extraordinary and Evangelisticall, he tells us, that it is an ordinary
function and the same, which the Bishops that succeeded them, did exercise. And
to make a mends for this The Doct. beggeth.
impudent begging, he multiplyeth his default, by heaping up many assertions,
whereof some are apparently false, and the rest no less doubtful, then the
point which he indeavoreth to justify. For first, it is false which he says of
Timothy and Titus; that in them there was nothing extraordinary, but their not
limitation to any certain churches; and so is that which he adds to prove it,
viz. that their calling to the Ministry was ordinary, and their gifts attained
by ordinary means, for himself interprets the Apostles words 1. Tim. 4. 14.
(neglect not the gift that is in thee and was give^ the by prophecy etc. of
his calling to the Ministry, not by humane suffrage; but by divine revelation,
and by the commandment or oracle of the Holy Ghost (lib. 4. p. 141.) his
calling therefore to the Ministry (by his own confession) must be
extraordinary. 2. Neither can it be denied to be extraordinary in Titus, that
the Apostle committed to his Church, the finishing of his own work, for the
first establishing of the Churches in Creta, and furnishing them with Bishops
or Elders to instruct them. For himself confesses that the Churches which were
yet in constituting, and unfurnished with Presbyters to teach them, had no need
of a Bishop to govern them. Lib. 4. page 63. 3. In like manner this large
commission not confined to any one Church or Diocese, but with equal charge
extended over all the Churches in the whole Island, was more then ordinary:
seeing the ordinary Bishops and Elders were restreyned, to the oversight of one
only Church or flock; as appears by Act. 20. 28. and 14. 23. Phil. 1. 1. and
the Doctor that has sought all records he could meet with, for the next
successors of Titus, can find none, that had the like extent of jurisdiction,
till the next age after the Apostles; and yet there is an apparent difference,
between him that the Doct. mencioneth, and Titus as is before observed cap. 8.
sect. 13. next before this. 4. Moreover it was extraordinary that Timothy and
Titus were authorized to command and to speak with commanding authority. 1.
Tim. 1. 3, and 4. 11. and 5. 7. Tit. 2. 15. for the ancient Bishops knew,
that this was rather Apostolic, then suting with the function of Bishops:
(Ignatius in ep: ad Romans knowing his own measure would not command as an
Apostle but exhort etc.) but because these men by their daily conversation with
the Apostle, knew perfectly his doctrine and doings, the Pastors of the
Churches to which they were sent, were to receive direction from them, and to
yield obedience to their instructions. 1. Cor. 4. 17. and 16, 10. 16. 2. Cor. 7
13. 2. Tim. 2. 2. and 3. 10. 5. Yea even in gifts and the way of attayning
them, D. Downames Betters do acknowledge this extraordinary pre-eminence;
that they were endowed with extrordinarie gifts, as the revealing of secrets;
and discerning of spirits; and that they had their knowledge for the most part
infused by revelation. perpet. govern. page 88. Bishop Barlow. sermon. in Act.
20. 28 fol. 6. And since some of these extraordinary preheminences, then
shined most clearly when they were assigned, to the Churches of Ephesus and
Creet, it follows inevitably that their function was even at that time
extraordinary, and therefore not episcopal, but evangelisticall.

Now whereas he says, that their function was the same ordinary function,
which their successors, and all other Presbyters did exercise; because. 1. they
were assigned to certain Churches as the Pastors thereof. 2. ordained thereto
by imposition of hands. 3. and by that ordination, furnished with the power of
ordination and jurisdiction; what else does he then endeavor to justify the
point controverted, by others, no less doubtful, if not apparently false.

To return now to that assumption, which at the first affirmed jointly, that
the very function of Timothy and Titus, as well as their authority Sect. 4.
was both ordinary and perpetually necessary etc. it is most plain, by the
reason added in his sermon (page 79. before he brings in his conclusion) that
he then intended (as his words signified) to justify the perpetuity of their
function for the words of his reason are these; If whiles the Apostles
themselves lived, it was necessary that they should substitute in the Churches
already planted, such as Timothy and Titus, furnished with episcopal power;
then much more after their decease, have the Churches need of such governors.
To this connexive proposition himself adds the assumption, and conclusion
page 104. following. But the former is evident by the Apostles practice in
Ephesus and Creet, and all other Apostolical Churches. Therefore the latter
may not be denied. With what face now, can the Doctor deny, that this argument
aymeth at the perpetual necessity (for all Churches) not only of that
authority or power, which he calls episcopal; but also of the very office or
function of Bishops, such as he affirms Timothy and Titus to have bin? His
complaint therefore is very injurious, (as we have elsewhere showed to the full)
when he charge his Refuter with wronging him in saying, that he makes this
episcopal power perpetually necessary, for the very being of the visible
Churches; and that he contradicts himself in another place, when he
acknowledges that where the episcopal government may not be had, an other may
be admitted.

But albeit the Doctor be loath to confess himself guilty; yet is it a sign
of remorse that he refuses; to maintain that necessity of the episcopal
function, which his argument at first directly concluded. Howbeit he proceeds
in false accusation against his Refuter in saying, he does but elude his reason
with a malepert speech, because he wished him, not to wave and crave, but to
prove the question, for does he not crave rather then prove, that which he
assumeth for an The D. waveth and craveth and daunceth the round.
evident truth; when he gives us no other argument, then his own naked
affirmance (that it is evident etc.) to justify the assumption or Antecedent of
his reason (viz. that it was necessary whiles the Apostles lived to substitute
in the churches already planted men furnished with episcopal power, and
therein like to Timothy and Titus? And does he not wave to and fro, or rather
go back again to the first point controverted in this whole Chapter; when he
avoucheth in the same Assumption; that Timothy and Titus were furnished with
episcopal power; when the Apostle Paul substituted them in the churches of
Ephesus and Creet? Wherefore, if his drift were, in this division, such as he
avoucheth in the entrance thereof (viz. by a new supply of arguments to prove
Timothy and Titus to have been Bishops of Ephesus and Creet) the issue of all
his reasoning is no better then a plain dancing the round, in this fashion.
Their function and authority was episcopal, because it was not
Evangelisticall; for it died not with their persons; and therefore was not
Evangelisticall. It died not with their persons, because it was ordinary and
perpetually necessary etc. for if it were necessary to have men furnished with
episcopal power, whiles the Apostles lived: it was much more necessary, after
their deaths. Now that it was necessary whiles they lived, it is evident by
the Apostles practice in furnishing Timothy and Titus, with episcopal power,
at Ephesus and in Creet. Who sees not (by all this his discourse) that we are
now just where we began? All this waving therefore from one argument to another
in show; is but to dazell the eyes of his reader, that he might not discern
his gross begging. For in effect, this is all he can say, They were furnished
with episcopal power: and therefore their authority was episcopal: or, S.
Paul made them Bishops, and therefore they were Bishops of his ordeyning.

As for those two questions which he debateth Sect. 15. and 16. (viz whether it
be perpetually necessary, that the sway of the ecclesiastical authority
should be in one? and what form of Churchgovernment is to be preferred as the
best? I forbear to follow him in those digressions. His resolution to the
former being negative, does scarce accord with the conclusion of his last
argument; which affirms that such governors, as were Timothy and Titus (in
his opinion) furnished with episcopal power, are much more necessary after
the Apostles death, then in their life time. But his resolution to the later,
is grounded on such a reason, as will put life again into the same; if there
were an undoubted truth in it. For could he prove the Monarchical government
of Bps, to be of divine institution (as he affirms) it would follow, not
only that it is the best form of Church Government; but also necessarily to
be continued. And as I nothing fear to grant him that consequence; so I know
he boasts in vain of warrant in the scriptures for the episcopal function.
He has sought for it, first in the Angels of the 7. chueches; then in Paul's
approbation of Archippus, and Epaphroditus; he proceeded to James his
presidence at Jerusalem; and now he has done all he can to prove it by the
Apostles ordeyning Timothy and Titus to the function of Bishops. In all which
disputations of his, I have clearly showed that the scriptures give him no
color for his assertion. We are therefore now ready to listen to those
testimonies of antiquity; which (if we might believe him) with a general
consent bear witness to his assertion; that Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus and
Titus of Creet.

Chap. 12. Concerning the testimonies of Antiquity alleged by the Doctor, to
prove Timothy to be the Bishop of Ephesus, and Titus of Creet.
FIrst he alleges the subscriptions, annexed to the end of the Sect. 1. ad
sect. 17. pa. 105.
epistle to Titus, and of the second to Timothy; wherein the one is said to
have bin ordained the first Bishop of the Church of the Ephesians; and the
other, the first Bishop of the Church of the Cretans. Being asked by his
Refuter whether he thought them to be of the Canon, or added by the Apostle; he
signifies that he is not of that opinion. Whence I infer that their evidence
can never justify his maine purpose, which is to prove that the function of
diocesan Bishops, is of divine institution. But he says, It is certain they
are of great antiquity, and of better credit then the Refuter; and other
disciplinarians would make them. If it be certain, their antiquity is great,
and their credit very good, why does not the D. give us the proofs whereon he
groundeth his certeinty? First, for their antiquity, they deserve not that
pre-eminence, which he gives them, to be heard before Eusebius and the rest of
the fathers, which he alleges for the authors of the most ancient Syriac;
and the old latin translations found no mention of an episcopal ordination
bestowed on Timothy and Titus in the greek copies which they followed. And yet
the books which the old latin Interpreter embraced, do fully accord in the
subscriptio^ of all the former epistles, with those latter copies, into which
that clause of that Bishopric was foisted in. If therefore their credit have
not some better support, then their antiquity, their evidence is little worth.
The Doct. greatest labor in defense of their credit, is, to remove out of the
way his Refuters objection, who says, The subscription set under the epistle
to Titus (affirming it to be written from Nicopolis) is contrary to Paul's own
words. Titus. 3. 12. because of Paul had been at Nicopolis, when he wrote,
after this charge given unto Titus (Endeavor to come to me to Nicopolis) he
would not have said ^kei gar kek^^ka etc. for there, (but rather entautha here)
I have determined to winter. The Doctor paveth the way to his answer with this
preface: In deed says he if any other learned man that were not a party in
this cause had censured these subscriptions, I would have respected their
censures: but the Cavillations of the disciplinarians against them are to be
rejected. You may see how partial the Doctor is, who yet would seem to hate
partiallity: and how little credit these subscriptions have with the D, who
therefore has resolved to give them what grace he can, because they are
disciplinarians who have disgraced them. The Rhemists may freely controull the
subscriptions of sundry other epistles, because they are not parties in this
cause; (see their Argument. on. 1. Cor. and 2. Cor. Gal. 1. and 2 Thessalonians. and
1. Tim. for the place whence the epistles were sent) But Mr. Beza can have no
indifferent hearing; his reasons are but Cavillations. But hear I pray, how
the Doctor confuteth him. If you will, says he, consider with me that Paul
being, as usually he was, in peregrination, Titus could not tell where he was:
Paul therefore being at Nicopolis wrote as any discreet man would in the like
case. Come to me to Nicopolis, for I mean to winter there. whereas if he had
written as the Refuter would have had him, Titus might have said, where Paul?
as being uncertain where Paul was and whither himself was to go. It seems
the Doctor either did not consider, or would not take notice. 1. that it was
needless for Titus to be informed, where Paul was at the writing of this
epistle; seeing he was not to go presently to him, but to make himself ready
to come upon a new message, as these words declare, when I shall send Artemas
to thee, or Tichicus, be diligent to come to me. 2. that Paul his being then in
peregrination (as the D. conceives) does very probably argue the contrary to
that which he collecteth; to wit, that as yet he was not come to Nicopolis,
were he resolved to spend the winter, and to wait for Titus his coming
thither. But because the Doct. would seem to build upon the common judgment
of such as are discreet; I very willingly submit the trial of this difference
to the discreet reader (which observes in the writings and speeches of them
that are discreet, the different use of these adverbs; hic and illic here and
there) whether it stand with discretion. 1. for the K. Almner which follows
the court, when he is at Greenewich, to send for one of his followers, with the
like words. When I send A. B. or C. D. to thee, then come thou unto me to
Greenewich for there I mean to winter, or rather thus, for here I mean to
winter: 2. for his follower that receyveth his letters, if he say, there I
mean to winter, to conclude for certeinty, that his Mr. was at Greenewich,
when he wrote. 3. And if he say, here I mean to winter, to send to his Mr. for
new direction where to find him.

As for the testimony of Athanasius, Oecumenius and others, which following the
error of him that first i^magined Paul to be at Nicopolis, when he wrote to
Titus, drunk it in without any further examination; it cannot overweight the
force of any just probability to the contrary, for in questions of this nature
(yea of greater event often times) the heedlesse receiving of that which some
one or more of the Ancients have embraced, has bin the cause of many errors.
But if the rest of his witnesses be no more resolute for him, then the authors
of the Centuries; he might well have spared the citing of them, for they leave
it doubtful whether the epistle were sent from Ephesus or Nicopolis.

In the next place, he urges the general consent of the ancient Sect. 2. ad
sect. 18. page 107. etc.
Fathers as Eusebius, Dyonisius, Dorotheus, Ambrose, Hierom, Chrysostom and
others to the number of 16. which testify that Timothy and Titus were Bishops.
To all which, he received a threefold answer. Frst that the fathers in so
calling them, take not the name properly for the function of a Diocesan or
provincial Bishop; but improperlie and in a more general signification; like
as they call some of the Apostles, Bishops, for the work and pre-eminence sake,
wherein Bishops afterward succeeded them. This answer is wittingly mistaken
of the Doctor for a bare denial of that which they affirm: wherefore it shall
suffice to urge him unto the proof of the point denied (and by him wholly
neglected) scz, that the Fathers did so term them properly as giving them the
very function of Diocesan Bishops for which he pleads. Secondly, he was
told, their consent was not so general as he would make us believe; the truth
of which answer is evident by this, that among all the fathers summoned to give
in their evidence; we hear not the names of Ignatius, Irenaeus, Tertullian, or
any other that lived in the first 300. years. For that counterfeyt that
shrowdeth himself under the name of Dyonisius Areopagita, is demonstrated by
many worthy divines, (D. Reynolds Conf. with Heart. cap. 8. divis. 2. page 488.
Cent. 1. lib. 2. de Dyonis. Areopag. Perkins problem page 9. Scult. Medull: de
Dyonis. script. page 484.) to be such a novice that he was unknown to Eusebius
and Hierom or any other of the ancients, before Gregory the great. Wherefore,
it will give the Doct. little relief to grant him, that in his time, it was
generally received, that Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus; especially seeing the
Papists may also from his testimony likewise conclude, that in his time the
Monks were of great credit in the Church, and many of their ceremonies (as
annoyntings, crossings, Incense, co^secrations etc. were in use; and that in
his time it was generally confessed that Bishops only were allowed, divina
ordinatione Chrisma conficere. Hierarch: eccles. Cap. 4. and 5.

And whereas unto that objected out of Ignatius (that he was so far from
esteeming Timothy as a Bishop, that he rather makes him a Deacon. (epist. ad
Trall.) the Doctor answers by distinguishing the times, that he was such an
Evangelist, as first ministered to Paul as a Deacon, afterward was ordained a
Presbyter, and lastly a Bishop; he explayneth not but rather perverteth
Ignatius his meaning, whose purpose is nothing else, but to show what service
Deacons do owe to Bishops, by comparison of that service; which holy Steven
did to blessed James, and Timotheus and Linus unto Paul etc. In which
comparison though he match Tim. with the Deaco^, and not with the Bishop (as
T. C. rightly observes) yet as he gives not to Paul the function of a Bishop;
so neither unto Timothy the office of a Deacon. Nay rather he shadoweth out in
Timothy the office of an Evangelist, in that he makes him, an assistant unto
Paul in his Apostleship. As for that fancy which the Doct. broacheth, of
Timothies serving first in the office of a Deacon, then of a Presbyter, and
lastly of a Bishop; it is not for his credit, to father it upon Ignatius or
Ambrose, It is true, that Ambrose says Timothy was ordained a presbyter and
that he was a Bishop, because he had no other presbyters before him: yet
affirms he withal, that there is but vna ordinatio episcopi and presbyteri,
that there is but one ordination of a Bishop and a Presbyter, vterque enim
Cacerdos est (Com. in 1. Tim. 3.) Wherefore that one ordination whereof Ambrose
speaks, confuteth that thrice ordination, whereof the Doctor dreameth. And
if Ignatius had been acquainted with Timothies ordinatio^ to the Bishopric of
Ephesus; doubtless, in vvriting to the Ephesians, he would not have
associated him with the Apostle Paul, as a joynte Teacher or Mr, by whom they
were instructed in the faith. (Vos ergo t^les estote, a ^alibus magistris
eruditi, Paulo Christifere and Timothe^ fidelissimo). He would rather have
distinguished their functions, like as he does the Pastoral charge of Evodius,
from the Apostolical function of Peter and Paul, who first planted the gospel
at Antioch: as his words (alleged by the Doctor (sermon. page 82. ad Antioch:)
show. In vain therefore braggeth he of a general consent of the ancient
fathers, when, of all that lived in the first 300. years, there cannot any one
be alleged, that gives to Timothy and Titus, the name of a Bishop; much
less the function of a diocesan Bishop.

Here perhaps the Doctor will again put us in mind of Eusebius, Sect. 3.
who reports out of former histories, that Timothy first had the Bishopric
of the Church of Ephesus, and Titus of the Churches in Creet. And because this
his report is the maine foundation, whereon all the rest are grounded, I will
vouchsafe it this particular answer following. It is worth the noting that what
he speaks, he delivers, not as a certain truth grounded on the holy
scriptures; but as a doubtful report derived from other stories; from whence
no sure proof can be drawn in divinity, as before has been observed. But
(not to insist on this exception) why does not the D. fortify the consequence
of this argument? Timothy obtained first (episcopen) the oversight (tes
paroikias) of the Church in Ephesus, like as Titus had of all the Churches in
Creet. Ergo they had each of them the function of a Diocesan Bishop in those
Churches. For Timothyes charge being paroikia en ephesoo the parish in Ephesus;
was too narrow a compass for a Diocese; and Titus having the oversight of all
the Churches in Creta (an Island that had an 100. cities, and therefore called
hekatompolis) had too large a jurisdiction for one province. Moreover, since
there are no records of like authority to show that any one Bishop in the
Apostles days, enjoyed the like superintendencie over all the Churches of any
kingdom or country; we have reason to think that Titus his commission was
extraordinary. In deed Theodoret on 1. Tim. 3. and Chrysostom. Hom. 10. on 2.
Tim. do give as large jurisdiction to Timothy as to Titus, yea far more
large, esteeming him to have the charge of all in Asia, as Titus had in Creta.
But Chrysostom plainly signifies, that this was extraordinary; for of Titus
he shows, that how soever Paul committed so great a charge to him, because he
was one of his companions, a man of whose fidelity he had good proof, and in
whom he put much confidence (Hom. 1. in epist. ad Tit.) yet it was never his
meaning that his burden should lie by continual succession on the shoulders
of any one man. Hom. 2. in Tit. 1. 5. Per civitates inquit: neque enim voluit
Insulam totam vni viro permitti, sed unicuique propriam curam ac solicitudinem
indici etc. If then Titus his commission to Creta was but Temporary; when
Eusebius gives to Timothy at Ephesus, the self-same Overseer-ship (or
Bishopric if you will) (the self same I say, or the like, for his power and
function) with that which Titus had over all the Churches in Creta. When also
Chrysostom and some others do match them in extent of jurisdiction
extraordinary, does not the Doctor argue loosely, in drawing their testimony to
justify that peculiar function of a diocesan Bishop, which he gives unto
Timothy and Titus? Especially, seeing it is evident by Eusebius his own words
(lib. 3. cap. 31. and 32.) that he acknowledges the first and nearest
successors of the Apostles (among whom he reckons Timothy and Titus) to be
for the most part Evangelists, and plainly distinguishes them from others,
which were more properly Pastors or Bishops. And we have before observed out of
Dorotheus, that Timothy had no settled continuance at Ephesus, as Bishops have
on that one Church, whereto they are affixed. Ambrose also makes S. Paul a
fellow Bishop with Timothy; when on 1. Tim. 1. 3. he gives this note: Obsecrat
episcopus coepiscopum suum. And Hierome (though he gave the name of a Bishop
unto Titus) allotteth to him the peregrination of an Evangelist, in saying (if
the Catalogue of ecclesiastical writers in his first tome, be his) that he
preached the gospel as well in the Islands lying round about, as in Creta it
self; and that the Apostle did therefore call him away from Creta, quia eum
haberet necessarium in evangelij ministerium; because he was necessary for him
for the ministry of the gospel. Hieron. in Tit. 3.

The Refuters third answer therefore, (viz. that the scripture calls Sect. 4.
ad page 120.
Timothy an Evangelist, even after he was sent to Ephesus 2. Tim. 4. 5.) is so
far from being contradicted by the fathers, that it receives approbation
from some of those whom the Doctor would draw to his side. And whereas he
adds that if they had generally affirmed him to be a Bishop properly, it
cannot be of force to teach us (contrary to the scriptures) to acknowledge his
episcopal function, he speaks but the truth; neither can the Doctor for
shame, directly contradict him, in so saying; yet rather then he will fail to
make a show of impugning this answer, he perverteth it to an other purpose
then was meant, saying, It is all one with the second objection already
answered (viz that the scripture calls Timothy an Evangelist, and therefore
he was no Bishop) but the best is; if that had been so. I hope the objection is
sufficiently mainteyned against the D. answer.

As for the new writers whom he alleges (page 110.) for a new supply to
concur with the Fathers, for the justifying of that Bishopric, which he
ascribes to Timothy and Titus; his friends may wonder at his impudency, that
can do this without blushing. Mr Calvin, he says, and the authors of the
Centuries do affirm, that Timothy was the Pastor of the Church of Ephesus; he
should have added, and with all proved, that by the name of a Pastor, they
mean a Diocesan Bp, such as ours. But the contrary is manifest, first, by the
cold allowance which the authors of the Centuries give to Timothyes Bishopric.
(Cent. 1. lib. 2. col. 614.) when they say, they can find no certeintie, in
any approved writer, quomodo aut quamdiu, after what manner and how long,
Ephesianae ecclesiae Doctor and gubernator prefuerit; he was teacher and
governor of the Church of Ephesus: But especially by that which Mr Calvin
says, on 2. Tim. 4. 5.) to prove that Paul there speaks of the office of an
Evangelist; 1. that there was such a special function mentioned Ephesians. 4. 11.
between the Apostles and Pastors, that were the second helpers to the
Apostles. 2. that the Evangelists excelled the Pastors in degree and dignity
of office. 3. that it is most probable Timothy was one of them, and not of the
Pastors, 4. that Paull in the honorable mention of that his office, respected
both his encouragement, and the commendation of his authority to others. As
for that presidencie which D. Fulk gives (on Tit. 1. 5.) to Timothy and Titus,
I most freely subscribe unto it; and yet reject that episcopal superiority,
which the Doctor (taking part with the Rhemists in their Annotations)
contendeth for in them. In like manner I say with Beza, that Timothy was the
proestoos; but that a president of a presbytery is according to Bezaes language
a Bishop, that is to say, a Diocesan Bishop, such as ours, as the Doct. would
have the reader to conceive) it is so foul an untruth, that he cannot without
check of conscience avouch it; seeing he cannot be ignorant that Beza every
where disclaimeth, that sole and singular pre-eminence, which the Doctor with
the Romanists ascribe to Timothy and Titus. Yea he flatly impugneth Timothies
Bishopric, and that in most plain terms, in his Annot. on 1. Tim. 3. voluit
eum Paulus, ferente necessitate, Ephesi subsistere, non vt illi ecclesiae,
tanquam episcopus addictus esset; sed vt ecclesia constituta, pseudapostolis
occurrere^; vnde etiam postea revocatus est romam, ab ipso Apostolo. neque
constat an Timotheus postea sit Ephesum reversus, vt qui fuerit Evangelista
etc. Paul would have him (necessity requiring it) to be at Ephesus; not to be
fixed as the Bishop, to that Church, but that the Church being constitute he
might meet with the false Apostles; from whence also he was afterward called
to Rome by the same Apostle: neither is it certain whether Timothy afterward
returned to Ephesus, as he that was an Evangelist etc. Thus having discovered
the Doct. deceitful and dishonest dealing with his own witnesses, and his
weak handling of the whole controversy; I hope I may be bold with the Readers
consent to conclude; that the Doctors assumption touching Tim: and Titus (viz.
that they were ordained to the function of diocesan Bishops by S. Paul, the one
at Ephesus, the other in Creta) has as yet received no firm support, no not
from humane evidence; much less from the holy scriptures.

Chap. 13. Concerning Evodius, Linus, Mark, Simeon and others, whom the D.
says the Apostles ordained Bishops.
THe Doct. now leaving the scriptures searches after other ancient Sect. 1. ad
sect. 20. pa. 112.
records to see if he can find any other places where or persons whom, the
Apostles ordained Bishops, which if we should wholly overpasse in silence, we
should neither wrong him nor the cause; seeing the records of men subject to
error, (and drincking in many errors through oversight or want of judgment)
cannot substantially conclude the question now in hand, as has bin often
observed: But because he glories (though without cause as shall appear in
answer to his next page) that the evidence of truth put his Refuter to silence;
we will enter into a nearer search after the truth, and make no doubt, but we
shall lay open to the conscience of the indifferent Reader, both the falsehood
of some of his records, and his false or deceitful handling of the rest: And
first he begins with Antioche, which (as he says sermon page 81.) had the
first Bishop after Jerusalem ordained by the Apostles Peter and Paul, about the
year of the Lord. 45. witness Eusebius Chron. anno. 45 and Hist. lib. 3. ca.
22. and Iguat. ad Antioche: I answer, there are many parts of S. Lukes sacred
^^ory, that with hold us from acknovvledging any such episcopal superiority
in Evodius as the Doctor ascribes to him: for many matters of great moment are
recorded concerning the Church at Antioch; which fell out after the 45. year
of Christ; and yet there is no mention of Evodius, much less of his
Bishopric. After the death of Herod, which was in the end of the. 3. year
of Claudius (Eusebius: lib. 2. ca. 9. ex Iosepho) and. 45. of Christ (as Eusebius:
accounts in Chron. an. 45.) Paul and Barnabas returned from Jerusalem to
Antioch. Acts. 12. 23. 25; at which time, there were certain Prophets and
Teachers there; by whose imposition of hands, Paul and Barnabas were separated
to the work; whereunto the Holy Ghost called them. Cap. 13. 1. 2. 3. Now if
Evodius had bin the Bishop of that Church at this time, would S. Luke have
overpassed his name in silence, when he rekoneth up the principal Teachers
that then were there? And if Peter had gone after his imprisonment to Antioch,
there to constitute Evodius his successor would not S. Luke have given some
notice of his being there with Paul. Again when Paul and Barnabas came back to
Antioch, they gathered the Church together; and rehearsed all that God had done
by them, and there aboade a long time with the disciples. cap. 14. 27. 28. In
this their stay there, grew that dissension about circumcision, which
occasioned that meeting at Jerusalem to end the question. Cap. 15. 1. 2. etc.
where was Evodius all this while? was he a non-resident from his charge? had he
bin the Bishop of Antioch; and there resident, how is it, that we hear nothing
of his enterteyning Paul and Barnabas at their return, and of their relating
to him, (as Paul did afterward to James at Jerusalem. (Cap. 21. 18. 19.) the
success of their traveiles? why hear we nothing of his partaking in the
controversy, either with or against Paul and Barnabas? and why nothing of his
going up to the Synod at Jerusalem? for who more fit to be employed in such a
busynes, then their Bishop? for which part soever he took, it was necessary,
for the Churches instruction, in all succeeding ages, that (as the Angels of
the Asian churches Apoc. 2. and 3. so) he should have his due praise or
dispraise for resisting or supporting those false Teachers that disturbed the
peace of the Church. To go forwards as the the story leads; after the the
Synod was ended. Judas and Silas were sent with Paul and Barnabas unto
Antioche, and letters were written (not to the Bishop, but) to the brethren of
the Gentiles; and they were accordingly delivered to the multitude assembled,
who rejoiced for the consolation. Cap. 15. 22. 23. 30. 31. Judas and Silas
stayed there for a time, so did Paul and Barnabas till they were so styrred,
that they parted companies. verse. 32. 35. 39. 40; but before Paul and Barnabas
were divided, Peter coming thither, was withstood by Paul to his face, for
that offense which he gave in withdrawing himself from the fellovv-ship of the
Gentiles, as Paul himself relates Gal. 2. 11. 12. 13. In all these events
what did Evodius, worthy the name or place of a Bishop, indovved with such a
singularity of power, and honor above all other Teachers, though of an higher
degree then Presbyters, as long as they are within his Diocese? If we may
believe the Doct, (page 136. lib. 3.) ought not he to have interposed his
episcopal authority in commanding his people to keep the decrees ordained by
the Apostles; and in appeasing those contentions, which arose betvveene Paul
and Peter, and betvveene Barnabas and Paul, vvhiles they conversed within his
jurisdiction? Surely what ever, the D. conceives of these matters; who can
persuade themselves that S. Luke. and S. Paul would have buried in silence, the
name, office, and endeavors of Evodius, if he had bin so long before ordained
by Peter and Paul, to the Bishopric of Antioch?

As for Eusebius his Cronicle, it does too much discredit it self, Sect. 2.
to be credited of us in this case, for it says, that Peter in the last year
of Tiberius (which was the. 39. of Christ) placed his chai^e at Antioch, and
there sat 25. years; and that in the 2. year of Claudius, he removed to
Rome, and there sat also. 25. years. Because both these computations cannot
stand together, the first 25. years is generally esteemed an error; and
reduced to. 7. years. but yet these absurdities remain 1. that Peter's abode
7. years at Antioch, and his remove to Rome in the second of Claudius, cannot
accord with S. Lukes story, for his continuance in Judea, and his imprisonment
by Herod; not long before the death of Herod (see Doctor Reynolds Conf. with
Heart. Cap. 6. divis. 3. and D. Whit. de pont. Romans quest. 3. page 346. 347.) 2.
that Peter's removing from Antioch to Rome in the 2. year of Claudius,
contradicts the D. assertion; scz. that Evodius was ordained Bishop of
Antioch by Peter and Paul in the year of our Lord 45; which was the. 3. year
of Claudius, by Eusebius his own account. Notwithstanding I deny not but there
may be a truth in the main point, avouched by Eusebius and Ignatius; to wit,
that Evodius was the Pastor or Bishop of Antioch there placed before Ignatius.
For a parish-Bishoprick, that is, the function of a Bishop, set over one
particular congregation is granted by the Refuter to be established every where
by the Apostles, but that function of a Diocesan Bishop, which the Doct.
contendeth for, is denied and worthyly; seeing it is before showed (in answ. to
cap. 6. lib. 2. page 105. 106.) that the Church of Antioch in the Apostles
times, was but one ordinary congregation assembled in one place.

Thus much for Evodius; It follows now of Liuus, concerning Sect. 3.
whom, the Doctor tells us, (sermon. page 82.) that Peter and Paul being at
Rome, and there continuing somewhat above two years, about the year of our
Lord 56. ordained him, Bishop of Rome, who continued Bishop there ^0. years
before the death of Paul, and 12. years after; and for proof thereof cites
Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 3. and Eusebius. lib. 3. ca. 13. and 16: In his Margin, he
says that Peter came to Rome in the 2. year of Nero; to oppugn Simon Magus;
and Paul shortly after; from whence after 2. years they both departed. To
begin with this last, can the Doctor be ignorant, that Eusebius, and Hierom
(two of his best witnesses for the antiquity of the episcopal function) do
refer Peter's oppugning Simon Magus at Rome, to the 2. year of Claudius? or
can it be unknown to him that many of our divines (of great reading and sound
judgment) do contradict both branches of his assertion; and show from the
sacred scriptures, that Peter was not at Rome; neither at the time of Paul's
first coming thither; nor yet in the time of his two years imprisonment
there? I forbear to lay down the particulars which are urged to this purpose,
the Doct. may peruse at his leisure, what is written by D. Reynoldes in his
Conf. with Heart, the place before noted. And Doctor Whitak. de pont: Romans page
353.-359. Catal. test: verit; col. 61. last edition, and confute their reasons
if he can. He shall surely therein gratify the Romanists, for Bellarmin
(convinced with the arguments on our side alleged) confesses that Peter was
not then at Rome, when Paul came thither, and from thence wrote so many
epistles (as those to the Colos. Ephesians. Galat. Philip. and others) which make
no mencio^ of Peter: Now if Peter were not at Rome in those two years of Paul's
remaining prisoner there, how could he join with Paul at that time in
ordeyning Linus to the Bishopric of the Church of Rome? Add hereunto those
persuasions, which induce us to think that he had no such function at that
time, with Paul's allowance. For why should he forget his pains, or deny him
that honor (which he affoardeth to others, that were his felow-workmen in the
Ministry of the Gospel) to make mention of his name and labors, at least in
some one of those many epistles, that he wrote from Rome in the time of his
abode there? yea, had he bin the Bishop of Rome, when the Apostle Paul sent so
many epistles from thence to other Churches; would not he rather have made
choice of him to join hands with him, in the Inscriptions of the epistles to
the Philip: and Colossia^s; then of Timothy, who in the D. opinion; was either
yet standing in the degree of a presbyter, or if a Bishop, the Bishop of
Ephesus in another country? In deed his name is remembered among other that sent
salutations to Timothy: (2. Tim. 4. 21.) but since it is without any note of
pre-eminence either in office or labors; it argues strongly that Paul was
ignorant of any such episcopal charge or superiority, as the D. allows him.
10. years before Paul's death.

As for the ancient Fathers and Historiographers, Eusebius (the Sect. 4.
D. best witness for computation of times) expressly says. lib. 3. ca. 2.) Linus
obtained the Bishopric of the Church of Rome after the Martyrdom of Peter and
Paul; which cutteth off the first ten years, which the Doctor gives him, in
the government of that Church. But Damasus, whose report the D. imbraceth as if
it were an oracle (sermon. page 23.) affirms (in pontificali de Petro) that
Linus ended his race in the Consulship of Capito and Rufus; which was more then
one year before the death of Peter and Paul, as D. Whitakers shows de pont:
Rom: page 343. Whereunto Iunius also assenteth. (Animadvers. in Bellar. cont.
3. lib. 2. ca. 5. not 15 and 18. I forbear to prosecute that variety of
opinions in all writers old and new touching the first Bishop of Rome; and the
order of their succession; some giving to Clemens the first place; some
confounding Cletus, and Anacletus, and some severing them; and some conjoyning
Linus and Cletus together in the episcopal charge as does Rufinus: prefat:
recognit: Clement: But since there is such disagreement, and the same so great,
that it perplexeth the learnedest favorites of the Romish succession: it may
give us just cause to affirm; that their testimony can yield no certain
proof of any one (whether Linus, Clemens, or any other) that by the Apostles
appointmt, had the singular and settled pre-eminence of a Bishop in the Church
of Rome.

It follows concerning Mark the Evangelist, whom the Doctor Sect. 5.
affirms to be the first Bishop at Alexandria, by the appointment of Peter;
and that testified, as he says, by Nicephorus, Gregory, Eusebius, Hierom and
Dorotheus. In deed Nicephorus is worthy to be the foreman of the Doctors Jury
in this question, for who fitter to cast a cloak of truth upon a fable, then
one known to be the authorof many fables? Of S. Mark many things are repeated
in the scriptures, that will hardly be brought to accord, with his supposed
Bishopric at Alexandria, or with that which the Doctor affirms of him, to
wit, that he was Peter's disciple, and his perpetual follower. For, to
overpasse his first attendance on Paul and Barnabas (Act. 12 25. and 13. 4. 5.
13) and on Barnabas when he was parted from Paul (Act. 15. 37. 39.) he was with
Paul at Rome, as one of his work-fellowes unto Gods kingdom: (Coloss. 4. 10.
11. Philem. verse. 24.) and departed thence to visit the Saints at Colosse, and
in other Churches adjoining (Col. 4. 10.) and he was with Timothy or near to
him, when Paul wrote his last ep: to him. (2. Tim. 4. 11.) But to overthrow his
Bishopric the very name of an Evangelist, which the Doctors best witnesses,
with one consent, allow him, is sufficient; seeing we have before proved, that
an Evangelist could not assume the office of a Diocesan Bishop. Neither can the
Do: take that exception against Mark, which he does against Timothy and Titus
(scz. that be was but in the degree of a Presbyter; seeing he grants him to be
one of those, that are kat hexochen called Evangelists Ephesians. 4. 11. (cap. 4.
sect. 12. page 95.) Moreover that which Eusebius and Ierom do report of his
writing his gospel at Rome, according to that which Peter had there preached,
and of his carrying it into Egypt, and preaching it in Alexandria, (see Eusebius,
lib. 2. cap. 14. and 15. Hieron. catal. in Marco) this I say, is contradicted
by Irenaeus, more ancient then both, for he (lib. 3. ca. 1.) testifies; that
Mark wrote his gospel after the death of Peter and Paul. And this testimony
contradicts also an other report of his witnesses, Eusebius, Ierom and
Dorotheus, viz. that Anianus succeeded Mark in the government of the Church at
Alexandria, in the 8. year of Nero, as being then and there Martyred. For the
Doct. himself (sermon. page 82.) refers the Martyrdom of Peter and Paul to
the very later end of Nero his reign which was 4. or 5. years after. Again,
howsoever some do give him the name of a Bishop; yet nothing is said by any
one, that can conclude the function of a Bishop, Sect. 6.
as being affixed to the charge of one Church. Yea rather, they all give him
not only the name, but also the right function of an Evangelist; not only in
accompanying the Apostles; but also in traveiling from place to place, to plant
and establish Churches. And among the rest Nicephorus, most fully justifyeth
him to be a right Evangelist. For (lib. 2. cap. 43.) he reports that Mark
published the gospel not only in Egypt, but also in Libia, and in all
Barbaria, also to them of Pentapolis, and Cykue, and that he there co^stituted
Churches and gave them Bishops etc. But the Doctors oversight is most to be
admired in his bringing of Eusebius to witness The D. own witness is against him.
his Bishoprik, at Alexandria. For the contrary appears by the order which he
observes, in setting down the number and names of such as he accounts
Bishops of that Church. For in his account Anianus was the first, and Abilinus
the second. lib. 2. ca. 24. and 3. 12. and Cerdo the third, which after Anianus
the first Bishop, governed that Church. lib. 3. cap. 16. What can be more full
and plain, to show that in Eusebius his judgment, Anianus (and not Mark) was
the first Bishop of Alexandria? As for those words whereon the Doctor builds.
lib. 2. cap. 24. (that Anianus first undertook the publik administration of the
Church at Alexandria, after Mark the Apostle and Evangelist) If prejudice had
not stood in his light, and others in whose stepps he treads: they might have
seen their gross mistaking of his meaning, who distinguishes him from his
successors, by the name of an Apostle and Evangelist. For if Mark must needs be
the first Bishop; because Anianus first obtained Bishopric after him: then let
Peter be acknowledged the first Bishop, also at Rome; because at Antioche
Ignatius was the second Bishop by succession after Peter (Eusebius. lib 3 ca. 30.)
And at Rome, Clemens after Peter governed that church Ieron. lib. 1. cont.
Iovin. Yea let not James any longer be reckoned the first Bishop of Jerusalem;
because he undertook the charge thereof after the Apostles, or rather
i^mediately after Christ's passion. But if the Doctor can discern as he does
(sermon. page 82. and 83.) that Eusebius excludes Peter and Paul from the place
or function of a Bishop at Rome; when he gives the first place to Linus after
them, the second to Anacletus and so forwards; does he not wittingly wrong his
witnesses, and deceive his reader, when he takes their word for a certain
evidence, that Mark was the first Bishop of Alexandria; in saying, that Anianus
did first obtain the government after Mark.

In the fourth place, Simeon the son of Cleophas, is by the Sect. 7. ad p.
112. 113.
Doctor produced, as ordained by the Apostles Bishop of Jerusalem after James,
as Eusebius testifies. lib. 3. cap. 10. But it is little for the credit of the
episcopal function, that it is enforced to crave aid of such fabulous
reports as flying fame scatters, and he must pardon us this fault, that we
can hardly credit the tale for if the Apostles had thought it necessary, that
each Church should be governed by a diocesan Bishop, would they have suffered
Jerusalem to have wanted one for 10. years together after James his death? For
James lived not above 30. years after Christ's passion (as the Doctor
acknowledges. sermon. page 69.) but the destruction of Jerusalem, which happened
before Simeons choice as Eusebius says) fell out in the 40. year after
Christ's death; Cent. lib. 2. col. 664. was there now, imediately after the
cities destruction, more need of a Bishop there, then before? and was the
choice of their Bishop a matter of that moment, that all the Apostles and
Disciples of Christ remaining alive, must needs meet together to make the
election? and must he needs be one of Christ's kindred? yet let it be granted
(since the Doctor will have it so) that Simeon was the next unto James in the
government of the Church of Jerusalem, as Eusebius affirms, and be it granted
also that John ordained Policarpe Bishop of Smyrna; and that he constituted
Bishops in diverse other places, and that the Apostles in every place committed
the Church to Bishops, and left them their successors, as Iren^us and others
testify; how will the Doctor prove that all these were diocesan Bishops,
induced with a singular power of ordination and jurisdiction in many Churches,
or congregations, which is (as his Refuter says) the very soul of a diocesan
Bishop. The Doctor, in his wisdom passes by this point, as if he had not
seen it in his Refuters answer, and falsely charge him to take exception
against the assertion of the Fathers, which affirm Bishops to be the
successors of the Apostles. Whereas it is evident, that he denies only the
Doctors inference, that from the Fathers affirmation concludes diocesan
Bishops, such as ours, to be of Apostolical institution. This arises (says
he) from the mistaking of the word Bishop, which in the first times signified
no more then an ordinary Pastor. Wherefore since the Doctor does nothing else,
but in an idle flourish repeat that, which he had in effect before delivered
(viz. that the Apostles derived their authority, as well for government as for
doctrine unto Bishops) we should but waste words and time in vain, if we
should vouchsafe him any other answer, then that already given and remains
yet untouched.

Chap. 14. Answering the D. 6. chapter, and shows that he has not any one
argument, or testimony, to prove directly, (as he pretends) that the
episcopal function is of divine institution.
HAving answered all that the Doctor brings to prove by consequence the
episcopal function to be a divine ordinance, because Sect. 1. ad sect. 2. cap.
6. page 138. 140.
it was of apostolical institution; we are now to go^ on and examine, what he
can allege in the last place, directly to prove that it is of divine
institution. But before he begin to enter into the lists, he beggeth the change
of the question; propounding The D. beggeth the change of the question
this for the conclusion, which he intends to prove, viz. that Bishops were
ordained of God; which change we can be content to allow; so that he will
acknowledge his error in conceyving these latter proofs to be more direct then
the former: for he fetches a far more large compass, by consequence to
conclude his maine doctrine; seeing there is much more difference, between the
institution of a function, and the ordination of the persons thereunto, then
can be imagined between an Apostolical and divine insitution. Wherefore, (not
to spend time about words, but) to come directly to the pith of his reasoning,
he is content his argument shall pass as his Refuter framed it, thus;

If God ordained Timothy Archippus, and the Angels of the 7. Churches Bishops,
then were Bishops ordained of God.

But God ordained them Bishops: Ergo, Bishops were ordained of God.

To this argument he received this answer (which the Doctor concealeth from
the reader in his defense) viz. that the assumption being understood of
diocesan Bishops (of which his conclusion speaks) is utterly false. We are
therefore once again to see how the particulars of his assumption are proved.

First touching Timothy, his argument must run in this form,

He that was ordained a diocesan Bishop; by prophesy (that is by divine
revelation) he was ordained a diocesan Bishop by God.

But Timothy was ordained a diocesan Bishop by prophesy. 1. Tim. 4. 14.

Ergo, Timothy was ordained a diocesan Bishop by God.

Here again, (as he was told) the assumption fails. Timothy was no Bishop
at all properly; In deed he received his Ministry by prophesy, but it was the
Ministry of an Evangelist, not of a diocesan Bishop. In which answer the
discreet reader may see, that one branch of his assumption is granted, to
wit, that Timothy received his Ministry by prophesy: and the other was and is
denied, scz. that his Ministry was not (as the Doctor says) the function of a
diocesan Bishop. Now what is Mr. Doctors defense? Forsooth, first he repeateth
his proofs out of the fathers, which show that which was before granted,
viz. that by prophesy (1. Ti. 4. 14.) is meant divine revelation; or the holy
Ghosts oracle: but in stead of proving the point denied (scz. that the
ministry which Timothy received by prophesy, was a diocesan Bishopric) he
falsifieth The Doct. falsfyeth his Refut. answer in stead of proving.
his refut: answer, persuading his reader that he only denied Tim: to be a Bp.
And to co^tradict him in this, he urges nothing, but one sentence of Mr
Calvin, who says, that he was chosen by Oralce into the order of Pastars, and
then argues full feebly in this fashion. If he were a Pastor, it is not to be
doubted, but he was a Bishop. For we have before showed, that howsoever Mr
Calvin give Timothy the name of a Pastor, yet he held him to be an Evangelist,
and not properly a Pastor and a Bishop, in that sense, as the words are to be
taken in this quaestion.

To close up this part, that the Doctor may see to how good purpose, he has
bestowed his pains in proving Timothy his ordination Sect. 2.
to proceed from extraordinary revelation; I will retort his own argument,
against the conclusion which he should have mainteyned, in this manner;

Whosoever receyved his Ministry originally (not firm humane election, but) by
prophesy, or divine revelation: he held the fl^ction and degree (not of an
ordinary Bishop, much less of a diocesan Bishop, but) of an extraordinary
Teacher. But Timothy receyved his Ministry, originally (not from humane
election, but) by prophesy or devine revelation.

Therefore, Timothy held the function and degree of an extraordinary Teacher
and not of an ordinary Bishop, much l^ss a diocesan prelate.

The assumption is that, whereon the Doctor raises his own argument. The
truth of the proposition may be cleared by the view of those particulars, whose
calling we find in the Scriptures, to be originally derived from divine
assignement: as (to let pass the Prophets of the old Testament) John Baptist
and Christ himself, his 12. Apostles, and Matthias chosen into the room of
Judas, Paul and Barnabas added to the college of the Apostles, also Philip
among the Evangelistes, and Agabus among the Prophets. For among other notes
whereby we know, they had an extraordinary Ministry, this is not the least,
that their authority to preach the Gospel, was given them from Heaven, or from
God, and not from men. Math. 21. 25. Luke 1. 17. and 3. 2. 4. John. 1. 6. Math.
10. 1.-5. and 28. 18. 19. Acts. 1. 24. 26. Gal. 1. 1. 15. and that God ratified
their Ministry, either by his own voice. Math. 17. 5. Acts. 9. 4. and 13. 2.
or by miracles, Ioh. 3. 2. Acts. 2. 22. and 4. 16. 31. and 8. 5. 6. or by some
other clear evidence. Acts. 11. 19. 21. and verse. 27. 28. and 18. 24. 25. 28.
sufficient to convince the consciences of all that did not wilfully shut their
eyes against the light. But in such as exercised the ordinary functions of
Deacons and Elders or Bishops, we find that they had the original of their
calling from humane election Acts. 6. 3. 5, and 14. 23. Tit. 1. 5. 7. and upon
true trial of their fitnes before taken. 1. Tim. 3. 2.-10. and 5. 22.) If the
Doctor can yield us any one Instance from the Scriptures to the contrary, we
will gladly give him the hearing. Mean while, it makes much both against his
assertion, that holds him to have the ordinary function of a diocesan Bishop:
and for ours, which affirm him to be an Evangelist.

Secondly touching Archippus he allows the argument which Sect. 3. ad page
141.
his Refuter framed, with this explanation, that by episcopal Ministry, he
understands the function of a diocesan Bishop; wherefore his argument, so
explained runs thus,

He that receyved the function of a diocesan Bishop in the Lord, was orderned a
diocesan Bishop by the Lord.

Archippus received the function of a diocesan Bishop in the Lord.

Ergo, he was ordained a diocesan Bishop, by the Lord.

The proposition as it now stands, is taken of the Doctor to be of so
absolute a truth that no exception can be taken against it. notwithstanding, it
is questionable, whether those words of Saint Paul, Colos. 4. 17; in the Lord,
must needs be interpreted, as the Doctor conceyveth by the Lords ordinance? he
should have said ordination, because he thence infers, that the person so
receyving his Ministry, is ordained of God thereunto. For although we can
willingly grant, that the Doctor has received his Ministry in the Lord, and
according to, Gods ordinance; yet, me thinks he should not easily assume to
himself this honor, to hve his ordination from God. And who would not have
conceived by the former argument concerning Timothy, that his meaning (in
saying Bishops were ordained of God) had bin to prove, that the persons in
whom he Instanceth, received their calling to the Ministry, originally from
Gods nomination; and so were ordained of God, by his special, and more then
ordinary direction? Notwithstanding if he will needs have his conclusion thus
construed, that Bishops were ordained of God, that is, that they received their
function with divine approbation: we will contend no longer against the
proposition of his argument: it shall suffice for the overthrowe of his
conclusion, to supplant the Assumption.

And hereunto the less labor will serve, seeing we have already showed, that
Archippus, if he were a Bishop of that Church, yet) could not be a diocesan
Bishop, such as ours. For Epaphras their first Teacher, still continued one of
them, and a faithful Minister of Christ for them. Coloss. 1. 7. and 4. 12. And
Archippus is subjected unto the Churches admonition and censure, (in the very
words whereunto the Doctor sends us.) Coloss. 4. 17. which is palaion in
deed, but nimis apostolicum, too apostolical for our times, as Musculus upon
those words says.) But let us see what releef, the Doctor (foreseeing that
his assumption would be denied) yielded to support it. For proof hereof, says
he, it suffices me, that Archippus was (as Ambrose notes in Colos. 4. 17.
Bishop of Colosse, which was a city; seeing I have manifestly proved before,
that the Bishops of cities, were diocesan Bishops. And must this proof needs
suffice others, because it sufficieth him? knows he not, that we expect he
should yield ^s some clear proof from the holy scripture? why made he show at
the first, as though he would prove, Archippus his Bishopric from Colos. 4.
17. and now falls from those words of Paul, to the testimony of Ambrose, who
lived well nigh 400. years after? Belike (upon his second thoughts) he
discerned, that the same exhortation used to Archippus, which he gave to
Timothy (2. Tim. 4. 5.) does not necessarily argue, that he had the same
office? Or else he thought, he should prevail little in so arguing, with those
which hold Timothy to have bin an Evangelist, and not a Bishop. And surely, it
avails his cause as little, to send us to S. Ambrose, seeing he has not one
word, that can argue a diocesan Bishopric in Archippus, he calls him,
praepositum illorum et rectorem, qui post Epaphram accepit regendam eorum
ecclesiam. Which may argue I grant an episcopal ministry at large; but will
not serve to conclude the preheminent superiority of a diocesan Bishop. Nay
this is rather confuted by Ambrose, who says of Epaphras, that he was (^vis
illoru^, et affectu vnanimitatis charissimus etc. for if he remained Civis
illorum, then also their Teacher and Bishop, though absent for a time, from
them) and nothing inferior to Archippus, but rather in order (at least as in
affection) before him.

His assumption therefore, having no releife, neither from the Sect. 4.
Apostle Paul, nor yet from S. Ambrose; relieth wholly upon this poor
argument, borrowed from some other parts of his defense.

The Bishops of cities were diocesan Bishops: Archippus was Bishop of Colosse
which was a city. Ergo, he was a dioecsan Bishop. I answer first to the
proposition, which he says he has before manifestly proved. Although Bishops
were Diocesans, whence once the whole body of people inhabiting cities became
subject to the oversight of one Bishop; yet the first Bishops of Churches
planted in cities, were not diocesan Bishops; for the Churches whereof they
were Bishops; being but a small handful to a large heap in comparison to the
whole city; could not be properly dioceses, as we have sufficiently showed in
our answer to all his proofs produced to the contrary.

Secondly to his assumpion, I answer, that as it is a known untruth to affirm
the city of Colosse, to have bin under the government of Archippus: so neither
is it true; that he had that sole or singular pre-eminence, over the Church of
Colosse, which apperteyneth to Bishops such as the Do. contendeth for. If
therefore he will hereafter endeavor, to make good the assertion, that
Archippus was a diocesan Bishop, and so ordained of God; he must seek out some
more pregnant proofs, then his study for his sermon, and the defense thereof
has as yet affoarded him.

Lastly as touching the Angels of the 7. Churches, whereas he should conclude
the same, which he had affirmed of Timothy and Archippus, viz. that they were
ordained of God, he alters the conclusion to this, that they had divine
institution and approbation, for their fun^tion. The Doct. changes to the end*
But of this change we have spoken before. His. 3. arguments distinctly
propounded in his sermon (page 93. and 94.) he now reduces to this one
syllogism;

Those who were called by the Holy Ghost Angels of the Church, (he should have
said) of the 7. Churches) and were signified by the 7. stars that were in
Christ's right hand; had divine both institution and approbation. But the
diocesan Bishops of the 7. Churches; were called by the Holy Ghost, the Angels
of the 7. Churches, and were signified by the^. stars that were in Christ's
hand. Ergo they had divine both institution and approbation.

The assumption which he knew would not without good proof be admitted; he
says, he went not about to prove now, because it was proved at large in the
former part of the sermon. And since he has added nothing else for the proof
thereof; but that which is answered to the full already, till some better
evidence come in place; his conclusion must lie in the dust. And we may I hope
with the Readers good allowance conclude; that he has not any one argument,
from any part of the Canonical scripture, to show that that the function of
diocesan Bishops such as ours be; is of divine institution. There remains now
that leaving the scriptures, we examine that first argument of his 3. touching
the government of the Churches, the first. 300. years after Christ, handled by
him. sermon. page 56. 60. and defense lib. 4. cap. 1. where all his humane
testimonies come to be handled, but because this second part is already large
enough, I will here break of; and refer the examination thereof, together
with that first point of his five, which concerns governing Elders, to the
third part.


