A WARNING TO COME OVT OF BABYLON, In a Sermon preached by Master Andrew
Ramsay, Minister at Edinburgh; At the receiving of Mr. Thomas Abernethie,
sometime Jesuit, into the society of the truly reformed Church of SCOTLAND.

LUKE XV. 10. There is joy in the presence of the Angels of GOD, over one
sinner that repents.

IN MY DEFENSE GOD ME DEFEND.



Printed at Edinburgh, in King James his College, by George Anderson. 1638.

REVEL. Chap. XVIII. Verse. 4. And I heard another voice from Heaven, saying,
Come out of her, my People, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues.

AMongst other properties of GOD, whereby He describes himself to Moses,
Exodus 34. He is said to be long suffering: But though he be a patient and long
suffering GOD, yet he is not an Ever-suffering GOD. Long has the Lord
suffered the whoredoms and abominations of that mystic Babylon Rome, but he
is not ever to suffer them, for he has begun to pour out the vials of his
wrath, in that the fall of Rome is begun, and she shall continue in falling
more and more, until the time the Lord has totally and finally destroyed her.
But it is usual with GOD, before he execute his judgments upon any city,
nation, or place, where his own chosen people dwell, to provide first for the
safety and security of his own, before ever he pour out his fierce wrath
and indignation upon his enemies. GOD when he was to destroy the World, Genes.
4. 14.
before he loused the catarects of the Heaven from above, and brake up the
fountains of the waters from beneath, that he might sweep away with the
besome of an universal inundation the wicked from the face of the Earth;
Genes. 19. 2
did remember Noah, and enclosed him in the Arc, prepared for his
preservation. Before the LORD rained fire and brimstone from Heaven, he
delivered Lot out of Sodom. The Christians dwelling in Jerusalem, before the
last destruction by Vespasian, Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 5
were advertised by a voice from Heaven to depart from thence, and go to
Tella, Heerefore is it; that GOD being to destroy Babilon^ a voice is heard
from Heaven, commanding his people to Come out of Babylon, least being
partakers of her sins, they should receive of her plagu^s.

In this Divine Oracle We have a commandment given from Heaven, and reasons
for inforceing obedience to this commandment: In the commandment there be
these three observable; First, The authority of the commandment, which is
Divine, to wit, A voice from Heaven. Next, the persons to whom this
commandment is given, to wit, GODS own people. Third, the commandment it
self, that they come out of Babell: The reasons follow, least being partakers
of her sins, they receive of her plagues. By the authority of this
commandment (being Divine, A Command to come out of Babel.
and a voice from Heaven) We learn what to answer our adversaries, when they
ask us what warrant and authority our Reformers had to depart, and make
secession from the church of Rome: They had (say we) a double authority; one
extraordinare, being furnished with an extraordinary measure of grace, in an
extraordinary time, for the extraordinary work of reformation. They had also
an ordinary authority, and that threefold; Our departure from the church of
Rome.
being Presbyters of the church of Rome; next, persecuted by them: and thirdly,
warned by this Divine Oracle, to come out of Babell.

If it be objected that Christ Jesus did not make a separation from the
corrupt Jewish kirk. I answer, That the outward service in the Jewish kirk
then was free of Idolatry, and might be haunted therefore with a safe
conscience: But the service of the Roman kirk became so idolatrous, that they
were necessitate to forsake her, Why Jesus Christ made not secession from the
Jewish ^ynagogue.
and come out of Babylon. Therefore by the same Oracle (whereby they were
warned to come out of Babell, because of her whoredoms and idolatries) we
cease not daily to warn Gods children to come out of Babell, least being
partakers of her sins, they receive also of her plagues.

The persons to whom this commandment is given, Free election and perseverance
of the Saints.
are Gods people; Come out my people (says the voice from Heaven) etc. They
are Gods people by free grace, singled out of the corrupt mass of Adam,
predestinate through Christ unto life everlasting; against whom the powers of
Hell can never prevail: The infallible consequent hereof is, that they cannot
totally nor finally fall away from grace* for the love of God the Father which
continues to the end, Ioh. 13. 1
and is unchangeable, pleads for this perseverance: Heb. 9. 24
the efficacious intercession of Christ does the same; Ephesians. 1. 13
as likewise the sealing of the holy Spirit, until the day of their full and
final redemption: the chain of salvation proves the same, Math. 24. 4
seeing it is impossible (as Christ says) that the elect shall perish; Romans 11.
29
and that the calling of GOD is without repentance: Romans 8. 30
and justification has an individus all conjunction with glorification: Add
to this, that Faith perishes not, 1 Pet. 5. 7
as says Peter, and hope makes us to rejoice of life everlasting, as a thing
most certain, Romans 5. 2. and charity fails not, and the Godly sin not, 1
Cor. 13. 8
that is, not totally nor finally, for the seed abides in them: 1 Ioh. 3. 9
This seed is the habit of true grace, Ioh. 10. 28
or our habitual renovation, which imports a saving and abiding union with
God. It rests then, that Gods people are so his own, that none is able to
pluck them out of his hands; for the love of God to them is not a general,
but a special love, and because of this special love, this warning is given
to come out of Babylon. It is a mark of Gods special favor, to call
effectually from darkness to light, from dead idols, to the worshipping of
the living GOD. Of this special love GOD called Abraham out of Vr of the
Caldees. Genesis 12. 1
There were many widows in the days of Eliah, 1 King. 17. 8
yet he was sent to none, but to the widow of Sarepta: Many leper^ there were
in the days of Elizeus, but he was sent to none but to Naaman the Syrian: 2
King. 5. 9
There were many covetous customers in the days of Christ, whereof none was
called to be an Apostle of Christ, Mat. 9. 9
but Matthew the Publican: Many persecutors, but none called as Saul, Act. 9. 3
to be a Paul, to carry the name of Christ to the Gentiles; and this of Gods
special love toward them. Therefore it is a mark of GODS special favor to
be called out of Babell, that they be not partakers of her sins, and receive
of her plagues.

This Babylon out of which they are commanded to come, Rome is Babylon, Egypt,
and Sodom.
is not that royal city, situat upon Euphrates, wherein the Kings of Caldea
did reside, but is Rome, that mystic Babylon, as evident by Antiquity and
Scripture. As for Antiquity, I might name many, but I will content me with
Hierome, who in the preface of his exposition of Didymus de Spiritu sancto,
has these words, Cum in Babylon versarer, purpuratae meretricis colonus, and
jure Quiritum viverem, placuit garrire allquid de Spiritu sancto; that is, when
I was in Babylon, being a servant and a tenant of the scarlet whore, etc. And
more clearly to Marcella, in the name of Paula and Eustochium, he inviteth her
to come out of Rome, being that Apocalyptick Babylon; whereby it is clear what
Hierome did esteem of Rome: And in the preceding chapter, the whore is said
to sit clothed in purple, dyeed with the blood of the Saints, with a golden
cup, full of fornications in her hand, having in her forehead A mystery
Babylon. Rome therefore is that mystic Babylon, the city situat upon seven
hills, which did reign over all the kingdoms of the Earth at that time: And
it is observable, that the Popes ordinary vesture is Scarlet, and in the
frontispice of his Mitre (as Joseph Scaliger witnesses in his notes on the New
Testament) is written Mystery: which he learned by the report of Lord
Montmorency, who was certified thereof in his being at Rome. Moreover the same
Scaliger says there, that the Mass in all languages has the name of
Mystery, which (I doubt not) is by Divine providence, for it is full of
mysteries in all the parts, gestures, actions, and rites thereof, in so far,
that for their exposition, they require a voluminous treatise, as Durandus
Rationale, and idle pens of others employed upon that superstitious subject
do testify: Yea, there is no part of their white garments, that wants its
mystery, wherefore the better reformed churches have rejected them, for their
forged operation, and popish mystical signification; The scarlet, the golden
cup, the mystery, the imperial city, situat on seven hills, do evidence,
what that mystic Babylon Rome is, and the pope who resides there.

In this book of Divine Revelation, Rome is branded with three titles and
names, of Egypt, Sodom, and Babylon. It is called Egypt in the XI. Chapter,
because it oppresses the people of God, Revel. 11. 8.
and makes them work in brick and clay of corrupt doctrines, and humane
inventions. It is there also called Sodom, because of idleness, and fullness
of bread, and that filthy and unaturall lust, not to be named, which made GOD
to rain fire and brimstone thereupon; for many idle bellies be there, dumb
dogs that preach not; prodigality and luxury do reign amongst them; and
these unnatural lusts wherewith the Sodomites were infamous, so abounds in
Rome, that Petrus Damianus leaving Rome, and betaking him to the wilderness,
in detestation of this Sodomiticall villainy, published a book, entitled by
him Gomorraeus, which he did dedicat to Leo the ninth. Cardinal Baronius in his
Annals clearly confesses the same. And the Archbishop de la Casa, was not
ashamed to present to the view of the world a treatise, Joan. de la Casa, arch.
bisho^ of Beneventanum.
in the commendation of filthy Sodomie, which was printed, and reprinted at
Venice: O Coelum! ad haec non sadas? O terra! non dehiscis? O Heavens! do ye
not blush? O Earth! do thou not open thy mouth, and swallow such vile and
grievous sinners? But, O LORD, great is thy patience, which the impenitent
abusing, do treasure up to themselves wrath against the day of wrath.

Thirdly, Rome is called Babylon, which signifies confusion (for the confusion
of tongues at the building of Babell) because in Rome, mystic Babylon, there
is a confusion of secular and ecclesiasti^k government distinguished and
divided by GOD himself, in the persons of Moses and Aaron, and from thence (as
is evident) in the reign of Jehosaphat, Chron. 19 19.
except in extraordinary cases, until the days of the Macabees, whose
successors confounding church and policy as a thing ordinare, did loose both
church and policy: And unto Peter the keys of the kingdom of Heaven was
committed, and not keys of the kingdom of the earth. And the Canons of the
Apostles, so called, interdict ecclesiastic persons from meddling with civil
affairs. The prime and purer Antiquity not only condemns the same, but in
the last and corrupt days Bernard. ad Eugenium enveyeth against all secular
government in the persons of Churchmen: Bernar. de Consid. lib. 2.
But Babylon has confounded these, giving in both the plenitude of power to
the Pope, and from him as the source and spring all power to stream forth, and
be derived at his pleasure, in spiritual and temporal government. This is a
great confusion, but there is a greater and worse, in mixing and confounding
truth with error in the worship of GOD, for they have joined with the word
GOD, their traditions, with the two Sacraments of GOD, their five bastard
sacraments, with the bloody sacrifice of CHRIST, their unbloodie sacrifice of
the Mess; with the merit of Christ, the merit of man, with the adoration of
the Creator the adoration of the creature; with the blood of Christ, the blood
of Martyrs: And this way have built up their Babell of confusion: And because
of this double confusion, if they repent not, double confusion in GODS just
judgment is prepared for them. Therefore, that we may eschew this confusion,
and GODS fierce vengance, let us come out of Babell.

To come out of Babylon is not only to come out with the feet of our body, What
it is to come out of Babylon.
but three ways we must come out of Babylon: In mind, affection, and action:
In mind and judgment, disproving and condemning their errors; in heart and
affection hating them; in action, in deed and body forsakeing them, and that
with resolution never to return. And he who in these three forsakes Babel,
may be said truly to come out of Babel: But this coming out of Babel
presupposes a residing and dwelling in Babel; Whereby we may answer to these
who ask us, where our Kirk was before the days of Luther; I ask likewise,
where they who came out of Babel was, The true church in Babylon, but not of
Babylon.
before their coming out of Babel; It must be said that they were in Babel. So
our Church before the reformation (which was three hundred years before
Luther) was in mystic Babylon the Roman church: But though it was in it, it
was not of it; for if it had been of it (as John says) it had not went from
out of it: It was in it, and with it as a mass of metal consolidat of gold,
silver, and tin, wherein though the gold and silver be mixed with the tin,
they are no part of the tin, and by the melting of the skillful founder, are
separate and distinguished one from another. So were the good and the bad mixed
together in the Roman church, till GOD by the Reformers, as so many skillful
founders, did separate and divide his own Elect from the reprobate. If it be
further demanded, who these were of our profession, that did remain in the
Roman church: I answer, they were of three sorts, Three sort of believers in
Babylon.
Public opponents to the Romish errors; Private opponents, and a third who
were neither public nor private opponents: Public opponents I might name
many, but I will content me with some most remarkable: When the Gregorean
Liturgy was obtruded to the Christian Kirk in these Western parts, these of
Millan did oppose the same; being better pleased with the Liturgy of Ambrose:
these of Spain did the same; Roderic. Archiep. Tolet. lib. 6. cap. 25. Beda de
reb. gest. Angl. lib. 2.
lyking better the Mosarabick, and that of Isidorus, then the Roman Liturgy:
The religious Votaries of Bangor resisted the Roman liturgy till blood and
death.

What opposition was made against single life of Churchmen in Germany,
England, and many other places, it is notore to all that are not strangers in
history. When images were received in the Kirk, with a relative worship, about
the seven hundred year of GOD, the German^ and French bishops did resist the
same; and a Council was holden by Charles the great, Melchior Haiminsfild.
Goldast. lib. Imperial. Decret.
in Germany, at Franksurd, where images with their worship were condemned, and
the books yet extant, called Libri Caroli magni, do evidence the same. A little
after this there arose some disputes, about the manner of Christ's presence in
the Sacrament, when the seeds of Transubstantiation were in sowing, Bertram
stirred up by GOD, did oppose the same: The like did Scotus, Erigena, Rabanus,
and after these Beringarius, till Pope Innocentius the third, with his
prevailing faction, in the 1215. year of GOD did determine, that monstrous
error of Transubstantiation. A little before this time, Author vitae Hen. 4.
Aventin. lib. 5. An^^l. Boior.
Hildebrand bishop of Rome, was not only content to liberat himself from the
investure of the Emperors, but also did subject the Imperial crown to this
Priestly mitre, and thereby put the Christian world in a combustion, which he
effectuat not without great opposition even of the Clergy; for the Clergy
of Germany did resist, and many Divines did account him to be the Antichri^^:
And in this his more then sacrilegious jurisdiction, usurped over the Kirk of
Christ in councels, not only the Cardinal of Arles, Sorbonists of Parise, but
the general council holden at Constans, did oppose and condemn. And in late
days Valla, Erasmu^, Beatus Renanus, with many others, though they lived in
the society of the Roman Kirk, did condemn many errors and abuses therein.
Besides these public Opponents, there were many thousand private Opponents,
who were as these seven thousand in the Church of Israel, who bowed not their
knees to Baal, but if not openly, yet secretly did oppose the same; as
Nicodemus lived amongst the Pharisees, and Joseph of Arimathea amongst the
Counselors who condemned Christ: and these who had not defiled themselves,
but followed the Lamb, mentioned, Revel. 14. 4. There were thirdly many, whose
eyes GOD did illighten in the article of death, who not finding any comfort in
the intercession of Saints, and doctrine of merits; and therefore leaving these
impure cisternes, had their recourse to the living fountains of waters, which
did spring out of the intercession and merits of Christ, to the eternal
refreshment of their souls. How an adulterous kirk may beget children to GOD.
If it be replied, how the Roman Kirk being (as we call) an adulterous Church
could beget Children to GOD, as also being a false and corrupt Church, how she
could bring forth Orthodoxe and true professors. I answer, An adulterous woman
may bring surth Children to her Husband and to her Paramours, as is evident.
Hos. chap. 2. verse. 2. Plead with thy mother (says the LORD) That she put
away her whoordomes from betwixt her breasts, etc. Here sons of GOD, and yet
their mother is an adulteress: Sons of GOD they are, because they plead for
GOD against their mother for her adulteries. So an adulterous Kirk may beget
children to GOD, as also a false and corrupt church may beget true professors.
As the Jewish Church in the days of Christ, for the leaven of the Scribes and
Pharisees did infect the same, Matthew. 16. 5. and 23. 2, 3.
and Christ commands his Disciples to beware of that leaven, and yet to obey
the Scribes and Pharisees, as they sat in the chai^e of Moses. By their leaven
Pharisees did poison the souls of many to their destruction, and sitting in
the chair of Moses, teaching the Law of Moses, and not their own inventions,
did beget children to GOD. After this manner the voice of Christ, and the voice
of the Antichrist sounding in the church of Rome, thereby children was begotten
to Christ* and the Antichrist. Thevoice of Christ was heard in holy Scriptures
written for our consolation, the voice of the Antichrist is heard in his
traditions: The voice of Christ is heard in the administration of Baptism and
the Lords Supper, the voice of the Antichrist in the administration of his five
bastard sacraments: The voice of Christ is heard in the saving doctrine of his
merit and righteousness, the voice of the Antichrist is heard in the doctrine
of the merit and righteousness of man: The voice of Christ is heard in the
blood of Christ, that speaks better things then the blood of Abel, the voice
of the Antichrist in the forged satisfactorie blood of Martyrs. If it be
demanded, how in the Roman church the voice of Christ was known and
distinguished from the voice of the Antichrist; I answer, That Gods children
have a discretive judgment given unto them, whereby they know the voice of
Christ from the voice of the Antichrist. Gods children know his voice. John.
10. 3.
My sheep hear my voice (says Jesus Christ) and they follow me. And this
should not seem strange, for if the lamb amongst the bleeting of ten thousand
sheep can discern the voice of her mother, much more the lambs of Christ Jesus
can discern the voice of their Father and Shepherd Christ Jesus. And since
GOD has given by a natural instinct unto the beasts, by smell and taste to
discern what hearhes are wholesome and convenient for their food, and what
noisome; shall we not think, that GOD much more will enable (by his grace and
Spirit) his own children, bought with no less price then the blood of his
Son, to discern what is hurtful, what conduceable for their salvation.
Neither will it follow by any necessare inference, that the Roman kirk is a
true Kirk, because by it children are begotten to God, seeing this falls out
not properly, but accidentally, for Papacy tends not to beget children to
Christ, but to Antichrist. Therefore obey this voice from Heaven, and come out
of Babylon.

The reasons to move us to come out of Babylon here mentioned, Reasons
wherefore we would come out of ^abel.
are two, her sins, and her plagues for her sins. Sins and plagues are
copulative, Who so sins shall be plagued; Therefore if we partake of her
sins, we shall partake of her plagues. If it be asked what be these her sins, I
answer, what sins do not reign in her? But passing the general, I will
mention five sins in special, for the which Babylon shall be plagued and
destroyed, viz. Pride, Cruelty, Deceit, Idolatry, Heresy. Such is her pride,
that although there be besides her the Kirkes of Greece, Syria, Africa, and
Ethiopia, which disclaim her power as Antichristian, yet she arrogantly
usurpeth the title of the Catholic church, as proper and due only to her, when
in effect she is neither the Catholic Kirk, nor a sound member of the same.
Pride also in a high degree possesses all her Clergy: The meanest Priest is
styled as a Knight, and the meanest Nun as a Lady of Honor: Bishops and
Archbishops are as Lords and Princes, and Cardinals above Princes, and the Man
of sin the Pope their head exalts himself not only above Kings and
Emperors, The sins of Babylon wherefore she is destroyed. Math. Paris.
but also above God himself. John the 2. King of England by the Popes tyranny
was forced to do homage upon his knees to Pandulf his Legate, and to resign his
crown. Henry the second was whipped for putting to death Thomas Becket a
Traitor: So also the Earl of Tulloes, Hist. Valdeni.
a Prince in eminent place, was whipped for the death of a priest: And the
French King Henry the fourth, was whipped by a Deputy Cardinal Perron,
Babylons Pride.
before he was accepted in favor with the Pope: The Emperor Henry the fourth
was caused to stand barefooted in the cold winter three days, and three
nights, at the gate of Hildebrand, before he got access. Frederick
Barbarosso was forced to lay down his neck, upon the stairs of the Kirk of
Saint Mark in Venice to be trod upon by that proud Man of sin; and his son
after the Pope had crowned him, was uncrowned, the Pope kicking off his crown
with his foot, signifying thereby that it was in his power to King and unking,
to crown and uncrown at his pleasure. The book called the Book of (...) onies
teaches us, what are the base and servile duties to be performed by Kings and
Emperors to the Pope, that they should inact the part of footgroomes, in
leading his bridle, of supporters, in holding his stirrup, and mounting him
upon his horse; of pyoners in bearing him upon their shoulders; and pages in
holding water to his hands. Neither does he exalt himself above Kings and
Emperors only, but above the Angels, commanding them to transport souls out
of Purgatory. Yea his pride is more then Luciferian and Divellish; for the
Devil when he made an offer of all the Kingdoms of the World to Christ, he
acknowledged that he had received them of GOD to give to whom he pleased, and
in so doing would seem to submit himself to GOD: But the Pope extolleth
himself above GOD, for he dispenses with the Laws of GOD; and to dispense
with Laws is a note and mark of Superiority, for no inferior may dispense
with the Laws of a superior, but a superior may dispense with the laws of
an inferior. This way dispensing with the laws of God, he does lift
himself up above God: Yea more then this, he is daring to repeal the laws
of God, tolerating, and allowing incestuous marriage, condemned in the Word of
GOD, as also lying perjuries, and equivocations, murdering, and killing of
Princes, etc.

Join unto this pride their cruelty; for the Kirk of God may say, Cruelty of
the church of Rome.
that from my youth they have persecute me, and the plowers have plowed on my
back, and drawn long furrows. Whatsoever the Kirk of God suffered by the
Jews and Herod, by the ten persecuting Pagan Emperors, by heretical
Emperors and Heretics, by Julian the Apostate, by the Donatists,
Circumcellians and other Shismaticks^ by Istigerdes and Gornoades Kings of
Persia, for the overthrow of their Pyr^um; Persecution against the Christian
Church.
by the Goths, and Vandals in Africa; by the Saracens after the days of
Heraclius, by Turks and others: whatsoever (I say) the Church has suffered by
these former Persecutors, being paraleled with these her sufferings in the last
days, shall be found not to equiponderat in cruelty the Popish and
antichristian persecution. How many hundredth thousands of the Valdenses have
been murdered by them? How many Hussites and Taborites in Bohemia have
suffered for the name of Christ? How many thousands in France, Germany,
Italy, Pole, Hungary, The Romi^ persecution exceeds all the former.
England, Scotland, and low Countries, since the reformation (begun by Luther
and Zuinglius) have been massacred and mutthered by them? What river have they
not dyed with the blood of the saints? What furnace have they not made to
smoke with their bones? what town and city have they not made a shambles
to boutcher their bodies? If the blood of one Abel cried to heaven for a
vengeance, shall not the blood of so many millions whom they have martyred for
the name of Jesus cry more shrill and loud in the ears of GOD for his just
vengeance upon this mystic Babylon. Therefore come out of Babel, lest being
partakers of her sins ye receive of her plagues.

Add to these former the third sin of mystic Babylon; The deceit and craft of
the Romi^h kirk.
which is deceit, wherein they are so expert, that they exceed all others
mentioned in any history. The Scribes and Pharisees never did compass sea and
land, to gain proselyts more craftily then they do: for these fishers have
baits to catch all sorts of fish; these hunters have nets to ensnare simple
souls. They delude the ignorant with lying miracles, the blind Zelotes with
superstitious rites and ceremonies: they spoil others with Philosophy, or
Sophistry rather: others with pretended antiquity; and that they may gain
what they intend, O what guile and deceit have they used, in falsifying the
writs of the Ancients; by adding, changing, deleting, as their Trent Indices
Expurgatorii do make known to the world? And such is their policy and craft,
that they have found out ways, to make themselves masters of moyens, lives,
secrets, and consciences of men.

What be their emunctorie and chetting arts, to gain moyens and riches to
themselves, Deceit to catch the moyens of men.
it is notore by their pardons, purgatory, messes, merits, indulgences. At
what rate do men buy Heaven, upon the opinion of the merit of good works?
What will any spare to lay out for remission of his sins? And what charges will
any refuse to give who is demented with their superstition, to relieve his own
soul, and the souls of his fathers, friends and familiars, from the parching
flammes of their supposed purgatory?

By these cousenages they have enriched themselves wonderfully. Craft to
ensnair the lives of men.
As they this way catch the moyens of men, they have brought the lives or men
within the compass of their power: for such is their opinion of their Tarpeian
God, the Pope whom they worship, that they esteem it proper to him to
canonize, and make saints whom he pleases, whereby they are emboldned to
adventure upon the killing of Princes; and other such flagitious facts, the
promises being made to them of life everlasting, by the Pope; or in his name by
their superiors. It is therefore most probable, that the monstrous parricides,
committed against the royal and sacred persons of Henry the 3. and 4. Kings
of France, were hatched by the Pope, and some other at his command: For Thu^nus
records, Thua^. hist.
that Pope Sixtus the fifth was so rejoiced at the murder of Henry the third,
that he gave thanks to God in full consistory, for that treacherous and
bloody fact, and was so excessive in extolling it, that he was not affrayed
to compare the same to the mystery of the incarnation of Christ; and was about
to have canonized the Actor of that bloody treason, if he had not been
dissuaded for weighty respects. Such was that Poulder-plot, transcending in
cruelty all other in former ages, conceived in the Consistory of Rome,
extinguished at the hour of the birth, by the mercy of God, and wisdom of
that Prince of blessed memory. Be wise therefore, O Kings, and be not
inebriat with the cup of the fornications of that whoor.

Neither bear they rule over the lives of men, but also over their souls,
Craft to rule over the souls and secrets.
after this life imprisoning them in Purgatory, and enlarging them when they
will; and in this life the deepest thought, and most inward secret of their
soul must be revealed unto them; that if they be sinful, or inclining to sin,
they upon their Confession may receive pardon; and except all even their most
hid sins be confessed to the priest, and pardoned by him, they can have no
mercy from God, nor hope of salvation. By this fond persuasion, as if they
dwelt in the breasts of all men and women, they are made privy to their
thoughts and actions, and nothing is hid from them what has been done,
thought or spoken. Craft to bind the conscience.
By this their fraud also and craft, they dominier, and bear rule over the
consciences of men, ascribing to themselves a power of making laws, to bind
and louse the conscience at their arbitriment. And least their deceit should
be known, they have musted up the Word of God in an unknown tongue, and
lead their blinded disciples whether they will. And this is their craft and
policy, whereby they reign over the lives, moyens, secrets, and consciences
of men. But God who catches the crafty in their craftiness, and delivers
the upright and sincere, will catch with the nets of his justice these
deceitful workers of iniquity in Babylon Therefore come out of Babylon, least
being partakers of her sins, ye partake of her plagues.

These former three vices, Pride, Cruelty and Craft, have ever been esteemed
to be badges and marks of a false and corrupt religion. The Pharisees for
cruelty are called by Christ murderers, for craft serpents; for pride, to
walk in long robes, to covet the first salutations in markets, and first seat
at tables. Of these three pride is not the least and demonstrative of a false
worship, because that where it is, God is robbed of his glory. Eusebius. hist.
Eccles. lib. 7. cap. 24. Bed. de tempor.
Eusebius speaking of Samosatenus an heretic, mentions his pride and
arrogancy. Augustine the Monk sent from Rome, to induce England to the
obedience of the Roman church, not daining himself to rise, being saluted, For
his pride was esteemed of the beholders not to be sent of God. Opt. Mil. lib. 3.
Optatus Milevitan^^s, a learned and godly Bishop, brandeth with pride Donatus
that archschismatick, that he was not so much called Donat bishop of Carthage,
as (out of pride) Donat of Carthage, that is ( stylo novo) lord of Carthage.
With this leaven of pride the doctrine of the Roman church is heeven up, by
their merit of condignitie, works of supererogation, possibility of fulfilling
the Law, with perfection of Faith, and hope in this life. Notwithstanding these
three former, are only outward characters, bewraying a counterfeit religion;
but idolatry and heresy are deadly diseases, destroying the soul, and life of
Gods true worship^ with both these the Romish kirk is deeply infected.

Her idolatry is visible to all whose eyes are not blinded: The idolatry of
the Roman kirk.
For idolatry is an idole-worship, or a false worship: and worship is made up
of three, of the estimation of the mind, subjection of the will, and reverend
gesture of the body: When these are either given to a false God, What idolatry
is.
or to the true God, and an idol, or when the true God is not worshipped
truly, according to the prescript of his Word; the worshippers are guilty of
idolatry: with all these sorts of idolatry the church of Rome is stained. The
sorts of idolatry.
But I in a more popular manner will discover her whooredomes and idolatries,
both in respect of the Creator, and of the creature: As to God the Creator of
all, they show themselves vile idolaters, Romish idolatry in respect of the
Creator.
representing GOD the Father in the similitude of an old man, GOD the Son in
the similitude of a lamb, GOD the holy Ghost, in the similitude of a dove; And
in so doing they are no better, but rather worse than the idolatrous Gentiles,
who (as the Apostle says) did transform the glory of the incorruptible GOD,
into the similitude of corruptible things, as of beasts, fowls, and creeping
things; wherefore the Lord gave them up to unnatural lusts; and finally, to a
reprobate mind: And it is just with GOD so to do with the Roman church, being
guilty of the like idolatry. Aquin 3. part.
As to the creature, they are in many respects idolatrous: for they worship the
images of the Trinity, Romi h^idolatrie in respect of the creatures.
and cross with a Divine worship: and although some would excuse it, to be a
Divire accidental, analogick, or r^ductive worship, yet their prime schoolmen
(who are canonized as Saints, and followed by many) attribute to them a divine
proper worship. And so it appears to be by their prayers, directed unto the
Cross for grace and par^on, in these words, O crux, ave spes unica, auge piis
justi^iam, r^isque da veniam; that is, Hail Cross, our only hope give to the
godly r^ghteousnesse, and to the guilty pardon. What greater worship would
they give to God then this? Do they not also honor with divine worship the
blessed Virgin? The Heretics called Collyridiari did offer cakes unto her,
Epiphan. 1. 3. here is. ^9
and so do the Romanists this day. Has not Bonaventura transformed the
Psalterie of David, to the honor of the Virgin Marie, Bonaventura his
horrible idolatry.
changing GOD in goddess, and Lord in Lady: And where it is said by David,
Praise the Lord by him it is, praise the Lady, and for trust in the LORD,
trust in the Lady: And in his 35. Psalm are these words, Incline the
countenance of GOD upon us, and compel him to have mercy upon us. Suitable
unto this is the Crown composed by him, where this is one of his orations that
is prescribed to be said; O Empress, and our most kind Lady, by the
authority of a mother, command thy most beloved Son, our Lord Jesus Christ,
that he would vou^hafe to list up our minds, from the love of all earthly
things, unto heavenly desires. O blasphemous speeches! But whose speeches are
these? Are they not the speeches of their doctor exalted by them, to the
Seraphick order of angels, a place not fit for an idolater? In adoring the Pope
their head they are no less transcendent idolaters, in acknowledging his
power, not only to dispense with the law of God, but also to repeal the same;
as likewise, in ascribing the final and last resolution of their faith to his
determination. What be their idolatrous absolute subjection to the Pope, who
so like to know, Bellarmins blasphemous speech.
may read it in Bellarmine his fourth book, de Pont. Romans 2. chap. where he
averreth impudently, That the Pope ought to be heard with obedience, whether
he err or err not. And not only impudently, but blasphemously he affirms
in the fifth chapter of the same book toward the end, that if the Pope did
err, commanding vice, forbidding virtue, the Church should be bound to believe
vice to be good, and virtue to be evil, except she would sin against
conscience. Likewise in offering incense to the Saints in general, sweareing
by them, praying, and vowing to them, (which are parts of Divine worship)
Do they not commit vile idolatry? And in worshipping of images (forbidden so
clearlie and frequently in Gods word) whether it be with relative, terminative,
or conterminative worship, in all these they prove idolaters. Further, their
Idolatry does manifest it self in worshipping Saint Christopher, the three
imaginary Kings at Culen, and others who never had life, breath nor being, as
their Saint Longinus, whom ignorance has canonized, transforming the spear
that pierced Christ's side, called in Greek (...) into Longin^^s a religious
Latin Saint. What credit is there to be given to their forged reliquies, let
any man judge, when the heads and bodies of Saints, parcels of the cross,
nails, and spears that pierced Christ, have exceeded, and daily do exceed
their just number and quantity. Neither are they inferior in idolatry to the
profane Gentiles, who were aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, without
GOD, without hope: for as they had tutelarie Gods for the protection of
nations, cities, places, and Gods for averting of evils, and curing of
diseases, as also for conferring all manner of benefits: So also in the Roman
church they have their tutelarie saints for nations, cities, places; for curing
of diverse diseases, and conferring of benefits. Finally as the Samaritans did
worship that which they knew not, and the Athenians, did erect an altar to the
unknown GOD; so also in the sacrament of the Lords body they worship and know
not what they worship, whether bread or the body of the LORD, for seeing the
change of the body of Christ depends upon the Priests intention (as they
affirm) and they being uncertain of his intention, do worship and know not
what they worship, whether bread or the body of Christ. To conclude, one of
their chief schoolmen Vazquez confesses, Vazquez in 3. part. Thomae, tom. 1.
disp. 110. cap. 3. his divellish idolatry.
that they have no Scripture for the worshipping of images, and is further bold
to say, that they may worship lawfully upon ignorance, the devil, lurking under
the crucifixe. Therefore that we be not partakers of her spiritual whoordomes,
and idolatries, and thereby receive of her plagues, let us come out of Babylon?

As to the fifth and last sin moving God to power out the vials of his wrath
upon Rome, is her corrupt doctrines and heresies: for she is laden not with
one heresy only but heaps of heresies. For clearing of this, heresy is to be
considered materially and formally: A material heresy is an erroneous
doctrine^ opposing, and everting the saving grounds of religion. A formal
heresy, when a doctine everting the saving grounds of Truth, is maintained
with obstinacy. Material errors was received into the Church of Corinth,
when the doctrine of the resurrection of the dead was called in question: The
like befell the churches of Galatia when circumcision and the works of the law
was thought necessare supplements to Faith to make up our justification before.
GOD: Yet because these foresaid errors was not defended with obstinacy, the
maintainers were not formally heretics. But in the Roman church doctrines
everting Ground trueths are defended with obstinacy, and the opponents
persecuted with fire and sword; wherefore she is justly charged with
heresies, Heresies against Faith.
and that both against faith, and the duties commanded in the law; as
follows. It is an heretical doctrine maintained in the church of Rome with
obstinacy, that the Scripture is unsufficient for salvation, and is but a
partial rule of our Faith, seeing according to the Divine Apostle Paul, It is
able to make us wise to salvation, and perfect to every good work. 2 Timothy 3.
15, 16, 17^
It is more heretical then this to affirm, that their church traditions
(which are uncertain) shall equal the written Word of God, given by divine
inspiration. 2 Timothy 3. 16.
There is a third heretical doctrine, that surpasses the two former; that the
last resolution of our faith shall not be grounded upon Gods Word, but upon the
church, Ephesians. 2. 20
that is (according to their gloss) upon the Pope, who only (as they
misbelieve) is privileged from all error. It is an heretical doctrine, which
teaches Christ to be offered up (...) in an unbloudie sacrifice, for the
expiation of sin, under the bare speces of bread and wine: being repugnant to
the eternity of Christ's Priesthood, Hebr. 7. 24.
who lives for ever, repugnant to the perfection of his sacrifice, by
reiteration; Heb. 7. 27, 28.
repugnant to his Majesty, who has entered into the heavenly tabernacle in
glory, Heb. 8. 1, 2 and 10. 12
and is not any more Priest on earth: repugnant finally to his merit, which
being in it self infinite, Heb. 9. 12. and 10. 18
is redacted to a finite worth and measure, at the pleasure of every
Messemunging-priest: It is an heretical and arrogant doctrine, which teaches
man by the merit of condignitie to deserve life everlasting, seeing when we have
done all we can, we are unprofitable servants, Luk 17. 10
and when we have suffered what is possible to us, 2 Cor. 4. 1^
these momentanie asslictions are not worthy of that infinite weight of glory,
laid (...) for us in Heaven: And seeing the righteousness of the most just,
Psalm. 44. ^
as David, Esaias, and others, can not stand before God, it is an heretical
doctrine, and prejudicial to salvation, to place our justification before God
in our own maimed inherent righteousness. It is a Divine truth, Act. 4. 12
that there is no name under Heaven to be saved, but by the name of Christ.
Contrare to this is that heretic doctrine of the Roman church, that the
merits, intercession, and blood of Saints and Martyrs, are mixed, as
satisfactorie for our redemption, with the blood, merit, and intercession of
Christ. The Scripture tells us, that man in his creation was made according
to the image of God, perfect in holiness and righteousness: Genesis 1. 27
The doctrine of the Roman church jumpeth with the heresy of Florinus, which
holds, that God made the inferior and sensual part of man's soul, with a
propension and inclination to sin. In the doctrine of Free Will, besides the
fond opinion they have in advancing immoderatly the liberty of the same, they
have fallen upon sundry heretical positions, in extolling the power thereof:
2 Cor. 3. 5
for seeing man (as says the Apostle) has no aptitude in himself, so much as
to think a good thought; Ephesians. 2. 1
and worse then that, We are dead in sins and trespasses by nature; and if
worse can be yet, our hearts are said to be mere stones: Ezech. 11. 19. and 36
26.
Is it not then an heretical assertion, that there is in us any active power to
do good* being in such a miserable condition? Moreover, such being our
corruption, that all the imaginations of our heart are altogether set upon
evil, Genesis 6. 5.
and that without the holy Spirit, we cannot say so much as the Lord Jesus. 1
Cor. 12. 3
Is it not an heretic doctrine, which teaches, that man unregenerat, and
void of the sanctifying Spirit, may inact, and produce a good morale work,
wherein there is no sin? Further to aver, not God, but the will to determine
it self to the accepting of grace, in the article of conversion, is
heretical; in so far as it is contradictorie to the sayings of the Apostle;
Who has separate thee, 1 Cor. 4. 7
what have thou, that thou have not received. A likewise, It is not the runner,
Romans 9. 16
nor the witter, but God that shows mercy. Lastly, the Romanists prove
heretical, in the cooperation of man's will with grace, giving unto it not only
a proper working by it selt, but also the first place, setting God beside the
coushen in the second room; which has a flat opposition to the Apostles
words, Romans 15. 18
I dare not (faith he) speak of any thing which Christ has not worught by me,
to make the Gentiles obedient in word and deed: As also, that every good gift,
and perfect donation is from above, and comes down from the Father of lights.
Iam. 1. 17
I may join to the ro^mer heresies, these of the Semip^lagians of Massilia,
touching conditional predeltination, and free will, mentioned by Prosper and
Hilarious to Augustine, which are now refined by the Jesuits, and go most
curient in the Roman church, as best coin to be laid up in the treasury of
man's merits and rightreousnesse. The meanest of these foresaids heresies
against faith, are of greater moment then the old heresies of the
Quartodecimani etc. recorded by (...) Epiphanius, Heresies against the whole law
and Augustine. Neither have these pes^^erous weeds of heresies spread their
roots to the suppression of Faith, but also to the destruction of the law.
Teach they not that divine worship is to be given to creatures, against the
first Commandment; images to be worshipped, against the second; and
dispensation with perjuries, against the third? Saints days are among them in
greater estimation then the Lords day, contrare to the fourth commandment:
they liberate children from obedience to parents: and Subjects from the oath of
Alleadgance to their native Princes, against the fifth: They yoke Christian
Princes in bloody wars, and persecute the Saints of GOD to death, contrare to
the sixth: They allow incestuous marriages, and tolerat stews, prohibit in the
seventh: they transfer Kingdoms and Empires at their arbitrament, being a
great injustice contrare to the eight: they tolerat lies, equivocations, and
mental reservations, prohibit in the ninth: and lastly they deny concupisence
to be formally sin after baptism, as if in any article of time it might be
said of man, that he is without all sin. Since then this Romish Babylon is so
fraughted with heresies, let us all obey the voice of God from heaven, and come
out of her, least being partakers of her sins, we receive of her plagues.

If it be demanded, when, and how these errors came in, Romish errors and
abuses sinc the reformation.
and what was the cause that being so gross and palpable, they get such
acceptance of the learned. I answer, that many errors and aabuses have creept
in into the Roman church even of late, since the reformation began by the
Valdenses; As that superstitious festivitie of the forged transubstantiat bread
into the body of Christ, jubilees, depriving the laics of the cup, erecting of
images in resemblance of the blessed Trinity, school* divinity, more
Aristotelian; then Scriptur^li, diverse orders of begging Monks, Jesuits; and
others; bowing at the name of Jesus; and now lastly Pelagianisme does prevail
so far, in the doctrine of election, conversion, and freewill, that GODS grace
is made a subservient cause to nature: and the immaculate and pure conception
of the blessed Virgin, without original sin, against reason and Scripture, is
now almost universally maintained. These (I say) are the late cockle and
dornell that have sprung up, sown by that ill One, since the light of
reformation, so that the light of GODS word has been to them, as the Sun to
the clay, to harden them more and more. Romish errors before the reformation
As to the errors before the reformation, though they pretend antiquity, it
shall be found that some of them were unknown to the church for many hundred
years; and the most ancient of them has nothing but an human antiquity,
which being compared with Divine antiquity, is but a mere noveltie. Where was
that doctrine of prayer for the dead, Iren. in fine lib. 5. adversus here is.
in the days of Irenaeus, who lived in the 180. year of God, and some others
about these times; and long after, who thought the souls to rest in
subterranean places, Justin. Mar tyr. l. quaest qu. 76. Tertul. co^ tra Marc l.
4. aug. enchir. c. 41 lib. 8.
till the last Judgment? Where was the antiquity of worshipping the Cross,
when Minucius Felix (who flourished in the 206. year of God) averreth in the
person of Octavius his dialogist, that Christians did neither wish, nor worship
crosses? Where was images in the church, when they were condemned in the
council, holden at Eliberis? And Epiphanius (who lived in the 370 year of God)
seeing a vail, haying in it the Picture of Christ, or some saint (as he
says) hung without the door of the temple of Anablet^a, moved with an holy
indignation, did cut the same in twain, which doing is approven by Hierome.
Was the worship of Angels received in the church, Hieron. tem. 2. ep. 60.
when the council of Laodicea did prohibit the same, and Theodoret (who lived
in the 430. year of God) in his commentar upon the 2 Col^ss. condemns it
likewise? Does not Gregory, Greg. lib. 9. ep. 9.
bishop of Rome, about the 600 year of God, writing to Serenus bisop of
Marsilia, condemn the worship of images? Was the Saints worshipped in the
church, Aug. devera rel. cap. 55. lib. 2. charitate, non servicute.
when Augustine (who was in the 420. year of God) in his book de verarelig
affirms, that they did honor the saints with charity, and with noworship:
And in his 22. book of the City of God, We name the Saints, says he, when we
pray but we do not pray to them. Aug. Nominamus, non invocamus san^ ctos.
Was not these books which now the Roman church accounts to be Canonick
Scripture, esteemed to be Apocryph in the council of Laodicca, and by Hierome,
in his prologue, Laodic. Council. can. ult.
called Gal^atus, and by the Christian church in these days? Was the
imputation of Christ's righteousness unknown to the Ancient church, ^ernard.
sermon. 2^. in Cant. and ^erm. 23. in Cant.
when Augustine in his Enchiridian ad Laurentium clearly averreth the same; as
also Bernard in the larter days. Was the title and power of Oecumenick or
universal bishop received and approved in the church of Christ, when Gregory
the great did aver, that whosoever did assume that style, was either the
Antichrist, or the fore^unn^r of the Antichrist* Eusebius. 1. 5. cap. 23.
Or was the supremacy of the Pope over the church acknowledged, when
Polycrates, with the rest of the eastern bishops did resist Victor, Eusebius. 1.
7. cap. 3.
bishop of Ro^e: The holy Martyr Cyprian did resist St^phanus and Corn^lius,
both bishops of Rome: Council. M^ev. 2. can. 22.
And the bishops of Africa in the Milevitan council (whereat Augustine was
present) did inhibite all transmarine appellations to the Sea of Rome? Was the
doctrine of the substantial changing of the bread in the body of Christ
(nothing remaining of the bread, but naked accidents) received and approved,
Theod dialog. 2. orthou. re^p.
when Theodoret plainly affirms, that the bread does abide in its substance
unchanged? The same does Gelasius bishop of Rome after him, Celas. de 2. nature
in Christ. adverius Euty chen.
Bertrame, and Scotus, one of their chief schoolmen testisyeth, lib. 4.
Senten. that before the Lateran council, which was near twelve hundred years
after Christ, transubstantiation was no article of Faith. In the Roman church,
the innocent person, Cyp^ ep. 6 and ep. 44. edit. Pammel.
whether man or woman, is debarred of the benefit of marriage after divorce.
This was not of old, as is manifest out of Fathers, Ambros. 7. cap. in Deciet.
Gratian. cause. 32. quest. 7. Soc. lib. 5 Chrysostom. ho de po^nit. and confe^.
Renan. in com. Tert de poen. Cassian. lib* 20. Collat. cap. 8.
Councels, and Decrees of the bishops of Rome. Was auricular confession thought
to be of Divine authority, and necessare for salvation, when Nectarius, a
learned and godly bishop of Constantinople, did abrogate the same, which also
Chrysostom his successor did reject as unnecessare? The like did after him
Cassianus, and in these our later ages Cardinal Cajetan, ^. Rhenanus, and
Erasmus. Was the lording power of prelates over Presbyters received, when they
could determine nothing without their consent, as is certain out of Cyprian,
and the fourth council of Carthage* Why are Presbyters now debarred from a
definitive voice in council, which they had and enjoyed in the Christian
church, for many hundred years? As is manifest out of many Councels, as the
second holden at Rome, and these of Eliberis, Sinuessa, the fifth Toletan;
Binnius and Garsius.
and that late Council of Constans, as is related by AEnaeas Sylvius, in that
hot contest which was between Panormitan and the Cardinal of Arels. Do not
this day in the Roman church Archimandritae, do not the generals of religious
orders to this day voice in their Councels? And both of them are but
Presbyters, no Prelates. These and many mo pretended antiquities in the Roman
Church are nothing but mere novelties.

As to the precise periode of time when every error did enter into the Church,
it is not requisite to be known. The precise period of time when many heresies
did enter, unknown.
When the Scribes and Pharisees asked Christ Jesus of unlawful divocre,
pretending antiquity for the same; Christ answers no other thing, but that
it was not so from the beginning. It is sufficient then for us, though we point
not out the precise article of time, when error did creep in into the Church,
that it was not so from the beginning, as we have demonstrate. If they reply
that the precise period of time is known when Arrianisme, Nestorianisme, and
other heresies had their beginning: I answer, though it hold in some, it will
not hold in all. Who can design the precise period of time of unlawful
divorce? Who can design the precise period of time of idolatry* The Jews
against the word sacrifized upon Mountains: but who knows the precise time?
The Saducees believed neither Angel nor spirit, and the beginning of

this damnable doctrine is not agreed upon. The Scribes and Pharisees leavened
the word of God with their traditions and inventions: But the original of
these errors who can tell? Laics were deprived of the cup at the communion,
which is a breach of Christ's institution: The private and solitare communion of
the Priest, without the people, used daily in the Roman church is contrare to
the word of God, practice of the Ancients, and Canons of Councels: and who
knows the beginning thereof? The communion was given unto newborn children
before the use of reason, and was universally received and approven in the
days of Cyprian and Augustine, and who knows the original of the same^ The
custom of the church of old was first to enjoine repentance, and after the
performance of it to give absolution: But now in a preposterous order
absolution is first kept, then penance imposed to be performed afterward: The
beginning of this change who can tell? There was heretics named (...), because
the source and fountain from whence this heresy did spring, was unknown.
Shall we say that a man sick of a consumption, is not diseased because we know
not when his disease began? The mass of errors wherewith the Roman Church is
loadened, is called a Mystery of iniquity, because as a mystery is dark,
they came in d^rkly; And the good seed being sown, the ill One is said to have
sown cockle and darnell in the night. Now as darnell and cockle while they are
in the blade, can hardly, be discerned from wheat but in the fruit they are
discerned of all: so the errors of the Roman Church, came in so ma^ked and
disguised, that they were not perceived, but when they came to the fruit and
maturity, then were they sensible to all that had eyes to see.

For clearing of this it is to be observed, Three ways whereby errors were
introduced in the church: 1. closely, and secretly. Eusebius. lib. 4. histor.
Augustine. lib. 4. Confess. cap. 2. and de civit. Dei. lib. 9. cap. ult. A
custom borrowed from Pagans. look Tertul. de testimonio animae, in the word,
Myttaea, so called by Pammelius, or rather Myttia, by De la Cerda.
that three ways errors have been introduced in the Roman Church: first,
Secretly; next, openly, undercolour of law, thirdly by force and violence.
Secretly invocation of Saints, crosses, images, purgatory, the sacrifice of
the mass, authorizing of Apocryp^ books, and many other corrupt and erroneous
doctrines: these (I say) were brought in secretly and mystically, by certain
degrees unknown at the first, till they did show themselves in their own
colors, when they came to the fruit and maturity. Invocation of Saints had its
original from the festival days dedicat to Saints, first in the church of
Smyrna, for the commemoration of the martyrdom of Polyearpus bishop there; but
it did not stay at a bare commemoration of the death of the martyr, and
thanksgiving to God; but this mystery grew from a commemoration to public
banqueting in the annual festivities of Saints, and from public banqueting to
nomination in Church prayer, from nomination to Rhetoric compellation, and
from that to invocation, and consequently to idolatry. Likewise the sign of
the cross was used for a symbol of gloriation, that Christians were not
ashamed, but did glory in the cross of Christ; then it became impetrative as
a virtuall prayer for sanctification, Bellar. de Cruce.
thereafter operative for expelling of devils and diseases; and from aeriall
crosses they came to material cross, and from a relative worship of them to a
terminative inferior worship, and from that to a divine worship. Images was
also first received as ornaments to beautify the church, thereafter as books
to teach the unlearned, then they became conduits only to convoy worship to the
Samplate, till at last they were adored. Prayer for the dead is not founded
upon scripture, (as Epiphanius against Aerius confesses) but upon tradition,
Chrysostom. hom. 24. in 1 Corin. locum hunc appellat (...).
which often is deceatfull and ever uncertain: It was unknown to the apostles
etc their disciples, and others succeding them, who thought the souls to rest
sequestrat in secret places, Bernard. Apoc. 6. and Psalm. 84. How pleasant
arethy tabernacles, etc.
expecting the second coming of Christ. Afterward, least the soul should seem
to be mortal and the Saints departed to be Gods (as witnesses Epiphanius)
they did broach this superstition, which was advanced by a new conceit, that
the souls: after this life did either reside in the outward porch of heaven
before their entry, Tres inquit esse animarum status: 1. in tabernaculis, 2.
in atriis; 3. in domo Dei, i. in beatitudine co^summata, Aug. confess.l. 9. c. 13
or if they were in heaven, did not attain at the first to the full fruition
of God; which made Augustine to pray for his father Patricius and others, whom
he affirms to be in the heavenly Jerusalem: and if they were in the
heavenly Jerusalem, why does he pray for them, but that they might (as he
thought) come more speedily to the full enjoyment of God. But the foolish
brain of man evanishing in fond speculations did conceive, that the souls not
fully purged from sin. Flitting out of the tabernacles of this mortality,
before they did attain to the fruition of God, behooved to be purged by fire
as most fit for that use: Whereupon was kindled this fire of Purgatory, to wast
and consume the moyens of the simple and credulous, and warm the kitchines of
the Roman church* And it is to be observed, that this error was not
universally received, for the Greek church to this day reject and condemn the
same. Bellar. de Missa, l. 1. c. 17.
As to altars, Bellarmine confesses, that there is no mention either, of
Priest, or altar in scripture in the days of the Apostles; (for that, whereof
is spoken, Heb. 13. 10. is Christ our altar in heaven, upon whom we offer our
prayers) and Minucius Felix, who lived in the 300 year of God, witnesses, that
Christians in his time had no altars nor images: And though Tertullian, who
lived about that same time in the Latin Church, mentions an altar, yet it is
to be understood, that there was then no sacrifice of the body of Christ,
seeing the same author against Marcion calls the bread a figure or
representative sign of the body of Christ; and that kneeling at the altar,
recorded by him in his book, entitled, Of Repentance, imports no ordinare
bowing to the altar, but the humble gesture of a penitent, which was performed
sometimes at the entry of the church without, and sometimes within. With
altars there came in sacrifices, first representative, and commemorative, then
subjective by faith and prayer; then propitiatory; and at last, the offering
of Christ, under the naked speces of bread and wine. The Canonick Scriptures
dyted by Divine inspiration, were first only read in the church, as is evident
out of Justine Martyrs apology, Origin in Exodus
Origin, and the council holden at Laodicea, and other councels: But in the
latter end of the 400 year of God, the reading of Apocrypha, in the kirk did
open a door to the reading of homilies, and they to the reading of the acts of
Martyrs, and thereafter the fabulous legends of Saints (fictitious for the
most part) in stead of Gods word did sound in his church; and (...) last, the
reading of Apocryp^^, and humane writs in the church made, that these books
called Apocrypha were esteemed Canonick, and of no less authority, then if
they had been dyted by the holy Ghost. Whereby we may clearly perceive, how
dangerous it is to give way to wilworship and human (...), such as faiars
days, crossing in baptism, images, altars, reading of Apocrypha in the
church, and the rest of the that Romishrubbish. Neither only after this manner
secretly, but openly errors were obtruded and imposed upon the church, Errors
openly obtruded to the kirk.
under color of law, by a prevailing faction, to the regrate and grief of many
good Christians, who did in private mourn, and according to their power resist
the same; as in the corrupt councels, the second of Nice, Lateran; these of
Constans, Florencs, etc. Besides this, thirdly, Errors enforced upon the
church.
great way was made to superstition and idolatry, when the Gregorean liturgy
by violence, to the effusion of blood of many Saints, was enforced upon the
Christian world. Tha^ have I declared, that the Roman antiquity in religion
is no antiquity, but noveltie; as also when and how errors had their
original, some closely and unknown in the ^owing and spring, till they came to
maturitie; others appearing at the first in th^^r colors, were opposed by the
Godly, which notwithstanding by a prevailing faction were established, some
under pretext of law, others by violence,

It may seem strange, that the Roman religion being contrare to grace, by the
presumptuous merit of man; How absurd Popery is.
contrare to peace, by anxious doubtings, whereby they keep the souls of men in
perpetual suspensions being also contrare to reason and sense, as to maintain
a body without dimension, a subject without accidents, and accidents without a
subject; contrare to all society, by approving lying and equivocation;
Contrare to the light of nature, dispensing with incestuous marriage. Contrare
to magistracy, in freeing subjects from the oath of alleadgeance their native
Prince, and teaching further man to scourge his body, kill his King, and eat
his God: being (I say) such a religion, it may appear strange and admirable*
that men of great learning and understanding, Thould be addicted and devoted
thereto. But there be five reasons why it so falls out: Five reasons why the
romish doctorsare demented.
first, they have transformed (as I said) the glory of (...) Eternal. God
into the similitude of corruptible freatures, and God therefore has infatua^,
and given them over unto a reprobate mind, as he did the, Gentiles for the
like sin; ^ They are drunk with the cup of fornication of the Babylonish whoor,
and as men drunk are bereaved and spoiled of their judgment and understanding,
so are they. ^. They worship images, the worshippers whereof (as says the
Psalmist) by Gods justice are made like (...) of them* and as the images have
eyes and see (...) and hear not, so are they. ^* Because the love of the
Truth is not in them, as the Lord gave over the Jewws to strong delusions, so
has God done with them in Roman church, who are enemies to the word of God,
forbidding the reading, use, and exercise thereof. Finally, God fayeth by Esaias,
because the Jews did worship him after the precepts and traditions of men,
Esai 29. 13 14.
that their understanding should be blinded, that in hearing they should not
hear, and seeing they should not see: To this judgment the Roman church, by
their vain inventions and traditions, have made them selves liable.

For (...) therefore, that we be not carried with the Current of error to
destruction, it is expedient, we beware of these fix rocks, Six rocks causing
the romanists make shipwreck of their faitsi
whereupon many have made shipwreck of their faith, which are mentioned by the
Apostle, Coloss 1. chap. to wit, Philosophy, Traditions, dead and unprofitable
Ceremonies, called, the Rudiments of the world, Wilworship, pretended
humility, and uncertain speculations. The church of Christ has felt the
wounds of all these, and is still bleeding therewith, crying for the help and
hand of a pitiful and skillful Physiciar. The church was first wounded by
Traditionar^s: as by Papia^, the first of that number and others following;
Then by Wilworship, as festivities and holy days to creatures and such like:
Moreover by humane rites and ceremonies in the sacraments, especially in
baptism as crossing, spitle, oil, salt. etc. What errors were brought in by
Platonicke Philosophy in the prime antiquity by Origin and others, and in the
latter ages by the Romish schoolmen; what be the uncertain speculations of
the hierarchy of the Angels, and pretended humility of worshipping of angels,
and mediating by them, Scripture perficerule of faith.
doleful experience does testify. Therefore let us beware of these rocks, and
direct our course by the compass of GODS word, which is of greater authority
by many degrees then the voice of the church, not in it self only, Ioh. 5. 39,
and 47.
but in regard of us: Luke 16. 31
for though the authority of John the baptist, the miracles of Christ, the
testimony of one sent from the dead, Gal. 1. ^8.
the voice of an Angel from Heaven, and the voice of GOD heard of the
disciples in the Mou^^, were of themselves divine and infallible; yet in
respect of us (as testifies Peter) GOD will have his word to be of a more
certain authority. 2 Pet. 1. 19
In it God has judged and determined all contraversies, and his decision
registrate by the Prophets and Apostle^ continues to the end of the world, and
the duty of the Kirk is to search out his decisive sentence, contained in the
holy Scriptures, and apply the same. Our adversaries to ^id this divine
authority of Gods written word, have forged four deceit full rules,
Antiquity, Councels, Traditions, and the voice of the Church, which being
tried shall be found no rules, for the rule of faith must be inf^llible; these
are not so the Pha^^sees pretended Antiquity, which Christ rejected; Matt. 5.
43
tradition, which also he rejected; the voice of the Church, even of the
doctors that sat in Moses chair, Matthew. 15.
the Lord bids the people beware of it, calling it the Leaven of the Pharisees,
which he interprets to be the Doctrine of the Pharisees. Matthew. 16. 6. and 12.
Shall they allege Councels? Christ, His Apostles, and their doctrine were
condemned in them yea, and even by the testimony of our Adversaries, these
rules shall prove no rules. The ancient Doctors and Fathers of the kirk have
erred in many things, which the Adversaries themselves confess. The like they
affirm of Councels. On traditions they never yet could agree: And as for the
voice of the Church, which by their gloss and commentary is the voice of the
Pope, it has been by many of themselves condemned for heresy. Therefore let
us come out of Babel, least we be pertakers of her plagues.

By these plagues is understood her destruction, which shall not be speedy,
but a lent destruction, and by degres (as the word (...), that is, a
consumption imports, a These 2) till at last she be totally and eternally
destroyed. The destruction of Rome by degrees.
For as the mystery of iniquity did grow, and advance by degrees, so shall it
fall by degrees: It was conceived (as holy Scripture witnesses) in the days
of the Apostles, it was quickened in the time of Victor, and did stir more
powerfully under Stephanus and Cornelius, bishops of Rome; The rising of the
Antichrist by degrees.
more yet under Damasus, and others following; most strongly did it move in the
time near the birth, under Leo the first: It was borme, and brought to the view
of the World, by Boniface the third, upon whom the title of universal bishop
was conferred* by Phocas Emperor, as a sythment, and satisfactorie price for
the blood of his Master Mauriti^^, cruelly, and treasonably shed. This bruid of
iniquity did grow, and was advanced much by the decay of the Greek impire,
and donations of the western Emperors, till at last it came to the full hight
and maturitie in Hildebr and, in whom the Antichrist was so visible, that many
of the Clergy in France and Germany, and others, did avow him to be the
Antichrist This destruction GOD shall bring to pass three ways, Three ways
God is to destroy the Antichrist
as We learn out of holy Scripture: First, by the sword of the Spirit, 2
Thess^ chap. 2. verse. 8. Next, by the sword of the Kings on Earth, Revel. 17.
chap. 16, and 17. verse Lastly, by the brightnesseof the Lords coming, 2 Thessalonians.
2. 8. God also has wounded her by the sword of the Spirit, first in raising up
the Valdenses against her, of whom Friar Reinerius who wrote against them, thus
reports, saying, That they were of all the most pernicious s^ct; for
Antiquity, some holding they were from the Apostles time: for generality,
there scarce being any nation where they are not; And tastly, for show of
piety, in that they live justly before men, and believe all things touching GOD
aright, and all the articles of the Creed, only they blaspheme, and hate the
church of Rome. By these Vaidenss the Roman beast got so deep a wound, that
though by all means they labored to cure the same, yet shall it not be
cured, but waxes more and more incurable; for the public and open reformation
begun by them, did not so wound that Beast, as the reformation by Wickleph, who
did more, clearly epsy, and more sharply refure the Mystery of iniquity, The
wou^d of the Apocalyptick beast ineurable.
then others before him; and that reformation by Husse made the wound yet
deeper, and after him by Luther and Zuinglius it was deepest of all; so this
wound is incurable: And as the mystery of iniquity rose by degrees, so does
it fall by degrees.

Neither does the article' O help their cause, as if the Antichrist were one
singular man, seeing it is usual in Scripture under one to comprehend many. The
woman in the Revelation, clothed with the Sun, having the Moon under her
feet, Revel. 12. 1.
though she be but one, represents the Church, which is a collective body,
and comprehends many. So the Angels in every one of the seven Churches is
interpreted by many collectively, Dan. 7. 3
for many Pastors and Messengers of God. And every one of these four beasts
recorded by Daniel, does signify not on^ singular King only, but a race of
many Kings, and Kingdoms, as is clear by the 23. and 24. verses of the seventh
chapter of Daniel: The antichrist not a singular person, but a lineall
succession in that proud hierarchy.
Yea, the Popes of Rome abuse the name of Peter, pretending his name to all
their usurped tyranny. Therefore it is that their large possessionm Italy are
calleds Peter's Patrimony; their Pole Money collected sometimes out of England,
Peter's pence; And their Plen^tude of jurisdiction, they claim over the whole
church Peter's keys; and that one rock in a popish gloss, upon which they
will have the church to be built, is a lawful succession of the Bishops of
Rome, which they affirm to have descended from Peter, the blessed Apostle,
notwithstanding they be as far different from Peter in a doctrinall succession
(which is the only true succession) as Cajaphas that condemned Christ was from
holy Aaron, first high Priest of the Jewish nation. It may be happily objected,
that many Bishops of Rome were godly, and suffered martyredome for the
Christian faith: I answer, that it is the antichrist and the antichristian
Kingdom, and not every person in that line that is appointed for destruction:
for what is recorded of Victor, Lee the first, and others, who being tickled
with the itch of ambition, aspired to a supremacy over the church, does not
argue them to be reprobates, but men compassed with infirmities, Who were
building Babylon, not knowing that they were building Babylon; even as
faithful Gideon* when he was making his Ephod of the ear-ring given him of the
spoil of the Midianites was erecting a monument of idolatry to the
destruction of his house, and knew not he was so doing: So the Bishops in
affecting Soveraignitie, were ignorantly promoving the antichristian Kingdom,
which God appoints to destruction, Therefore Come of Babylon, the mother of
whoredoms and abominations, seated upon the seven imperial mountains, where
the whore does ^eside, eleathed in purple, dye^d in the blood of the Saints,
having in her hand the golden cup of fornications, making the world drunk
therewith, teaching and commanding doctrine of diwels; forbidding the reading
of the holy Scripture; mutilating and depra^ing the Sacraments, mu^^^ting up
the worship of GOD in an unknown language, teaching for the word of GOD the
vain traditions of men, approving lies, equivocations, and mental
reservations, allowing and dispensing with incests* to lerating filthy stewer
and b^^^die houses, depressing grace, extolling nature: dep^sing Kings, and
disposing of their kingdoms, transformaing the glory of the incorruptible GOD,
into the likeness of corruptible things; worsipping images, and de^^ying
creatures and commiting all mann^^ of abomi nations: Come out (I say) from this
Babylon, least being partaker^ of her si^^, ye recet^^ also of her plaguos.
For as there is no fellowship between light and darkness, God and Belial; so
neither between Babylon and Sion; and whosoever do attempt any reconciliation
with Rome, are factors for the Man of Sin, and Panders for the whore of
Babylon, to bring us back to her breasts, and bosom again.

We of this nation are greatly obliedged to God, who as he has given to us, to
be ever free and unconquered to this day, so did he honourus with the first
Christian Kings; for that which is reported of Lucius (with nevernce of the
Authors) seems fabulos, that a tributarie. Kings living under persecuting
Emperors, durst publicly avow the Christian faith, and more also to be so
daring as to change the twenty five chief Pagan Priesthoods of South Britinie,
and three Archpreisthoods, (London then being on of the three) into twenty
five bishoprics, and three archbishopriocks; which had been more then to
disclaim any subjection to the Roman Empire: I say therefore that as God
honored this nation with the first Christian kings, Kings of Scotland most
ancient Christian kings.
(as witnesses Tertullian and Abbas Clunicensis ad Bernardum) so also in the
latter days with the most pure and perfect Reformation, that we did not only
concure with other reformed Churches to burn the flesh of the whore; but to
hate her spotted garments. Our duty therefore is to be thankful to God for
his great mercy, and not to look back again to Babel, and when any is
coming out of Babel (as to Day this straying Sheep now returns to Christ's
sheepfold) to rejoice, as that Shepherd, when the lost sheep was brought
home; and as the Father at the returning of his prodigal son, and as the
Angels of Heven rejoice at the Conversion of sinners; so let Us this Day
rejoice at the conversion of this sinner, and therefore rendering glory unto
God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, We close this present Exhortation, giving
place unto this Convert, by his public confession, in all your presence to
glorify GOD, who has brought him out of Babylon to Sion, where I pray God he
may continue, till he see the Lord in that heavely Sion, and enjoy Him, in
whose presence is the fullness of joy for ever and ever; Amen.

FINIS.

